37
Foreword  
and Preface
Technical 
Summary
TS
39
Technical Summary
Editorial Team: 
Hans-Otto Pörtner (Germany), Debra C. Roberts (South Africa), Valerie Masson-Delmotte 
(France), Panmao Zhai (China), Elvira Poloczanska (United Kingdom/Australia), Katja Mintenbeck 
(Germany), Melinda Tignor (USA), Andrés Alegría (Honduras), Maike Nicolai (Germany), 
Andrew Okem (Nigeria), Jan Petzold (Germany), Bard Rama (Kosovo), Nora M. Weyer (Germany) 
Authors: 
Amro Abd-Elgawad (Egypt), Nerilie Abram (Australia), Carolina Adler (Switzerland/Australia), 
Andrés Alegría (Honduras), Javier Arístegui (Spain), Nathaniel L. Bindoff (Australia), 
Laurens Bouwer (Netherlands), Bolívar Cáceres (Ecuador), Rongshuo Cai (China), Sandra Cassotta  
(Denmark), Lijing Cheng (China), So-Min Cheong (Republic of Korea), William W.  L.  Cheung  
(Canada), Maria Paz Chidichimo (Argentina), Miguel Cifuentes-Jara (Costa Rica), Matthew Collins 
(United Kingdom), Susan Crate (USA), Rob Deconto (USA), Chris Derksen (Canada), 
Alexey Ekaykin (Russian Federation), Hiroyuki Enomoto (Japan), Thomas Frölicher (Switzerland), 
Matthias  Garschagen (Germany), Jean-Pierre Gattuso (France), Tuhin Ghosh (India), 
Bruce Glavovic (New Zealand), Nicolas Gruber (Switzerland), Stephan Gruber (Canada/Germany), 
Valeria A. Guinder (Argentina), Robert Hallberg (USA), Sherilee Harper (Canada), John Hay 
(Cook Islands), Nathalie Hilmi (France), Jochen Hinkel (Germany), Yukiko Hirabayashi (Japan), 
Regine Hock (USA), Elisabeth Holland (Fiji), Anne Hollowed (USA), Federico Isla (Argentina), 
Miriam Jackson (Norway), Hélène Jacot Des Combes (Fiji), Nianzhi Jiao (China), Andreas Kääb 
(Norway), James  G.  Kairo (Kenya), Shichang Kang (China), Md Saiful Karim (Australia), 
Gary Koﬁnas (USA), Roxy Mathew Koll (India), Raphael Martin Kudela (USA), Stanislav Kutuzov 
(Russian Federation), Lisa Levin (USA), Iñigo Losada (Spain), Andrew Mackintosh (New Zealand), 
Alexandre K. Magnan (France), Ben Marzeion (Germany), Valerie Masson-Delmotte (France), 
Robin  Matthews (United  Kingdom), Kathleen McInnes (Australia), Jess Melbourne-Thomas 
(Australia), Michael Meredith (United Kingdom), Benoit Meyssignac (France), Alexander Milner 
(United Kingdom), Katja Mintenbeck (Germany), Ulf Molau (Sweden), Samuel Morin (France), 
Mônica M.C. Muelbert (Brazil), Maike Nicolai (Germany), Sean O’Donoghue (South Africa), 
Andrew Okem (Nigeria), Michael Oppenheimer (USA), Ben Orlove (USA), Geir  Ottersen 
(Norway), Jan Petzold (Germany), Anna Pirani (Italy), Hans-Otto Pörtner (Germany), 
Elvira Poloczanska (United Kingdom/Australia), Anjal Prakash (India), Hamish Pritchard 
(United Kingdom), Sara R. Purca Cuicapusa (Peru), Golam Rasul (Nepal), Beate Ratter (Germany),  
40
Technical Summary
TS
This Technical Summary should be cited as:
IPCC, 2019: Technical Summary [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, 
M. Tignor, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. In: IPCC Special Report on the 
Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H.- O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, 
E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 39–69. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157964.002
Jake Rice (Canada), Baruch Rinkevich (Israel), Evelia Rivera-Arriaga (Mexico), Debra C. Roberts 
(South Africa), Karina von Schuckmann (France), Ted Schuur (USA), Zita Sebesvari (Hungary), 
Martin Sommerkorn (Norway/Germany), Konrad Steffen (Switzerland), Heidi Steltzer 
(USA), Toshio Suga (Japan), Raden Dwi Susanto (Indonesia), Michael Sutherland (Trinidad 
and Tobago), Didier Swingedouw (France), Alessandro Tagliabue (United Kingdom), Lourdes 
Tibig (Philippines), Roderik van de Wal (Netherlands), Phillip Williamson (United Kingdom), 
Rong Yu (China), Panmao Zhai (China)
Review Editors: 
Amjad Abdulla (Maldives), Ayako Abe-Ouchi (Japan), Oleg Anisimov (Russian  Federation), 
Manuel  Barange (South Africa), Gregory Flato (Canada), Kapil Gupta (India), 
Marcelino  Hernández González (Cuba), Georg Kaser (Austria), Aditi Mukherji (Nepal), 
Joy  Pereira (Malaysia), Monika Rhein (Germany), David Schoeman (Australia), Brad Seibel 
(USA), Carol Turley (United Kingdom), Cunde Xiao (China)
Chapter Scientists: 
Maya Buchanan (USA), Axel Durand (Australia), Bethany Ellis (Australia), Shengping He 
(Norway/China), Jules Kajtar (United Kingdom), Pierre-Marie Lefeuvre (Norway/France), 
Santosh Nepal (Nepal), Avash Pandey (Nepal), Victoria Peck (United Kingdom) 
Additional Graphics Support: 
Martin Künstig (Germany), Stefanie Langsdorf (Germany)
41
Technical Summary
TS
Table of contents
TS.0 Introduction   ..............................................................................................   42
TS.1 Framing and Context of the Report   .....................................   43
TS.2 High Mountain Areas   ........................................................................   47
TS.3 Polar Regions   ..........................................................................................   51
TS.4  Sea Level Rise and Implications for  
Low-lying Islands, Coasts and Communities   .................   55
TS.5  Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems,  
and Dependent Communities   ....................................................   58
TS.6  Extremes, Abrupt Changes and Managing Risks   .......   67
TS.7  Low-lying Islands and Coasts  
(Integrative Cross-Chapter Box)   ..............................................   69
42
Technical Summary
TS
TS.0 
Introduction
This Technical Summary of the IPCC Special Report on Ocean and 
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) consists of the Executive 
Summaries of all chapters (1–6) of the Special Report, the Executive 
Summary from the Integrative Cross-Chapter Box on Low-Lying 
Islands and Coasts, and supporting ﬁgures drawn from the chapters 
and the Summary for Policymakers. The Technical Summary follows 
the structure of the Report (Table TS.1).
Section TS.1 (Chapter 1) introduces important key concepts, 
summarizes the characteristics and interconnection of ocean and 
cryosphere and highlights their importance in the earth system and 
for human societies in the light of climate change. TS.2 (Chapter 2) 
assesses changes in high mountain cryosphere and their impacts 
on local mountain communities and far beyond. TS.3 (Chapter 3) 
evaluates the state of knowledge concerning changes and impacts 
in the Arctic and Antarctic ocean and cryosphere systems, including 
challenges and opportunities for societies. TS.4 (Chapter 4) focusses 
on regional and global changes in sea level, the associated risk to 
low-lying islands, coasts and human settlements, and response 
options. TS.5 (Chapter 5) assesses changes in the ocean and marine 
ecosystems, including risks to ecosystem services and vulnerability 
of the dependent communities. TS.6 (Chapter 6) examines extremes 
and abrupt or irreversible changes in the ocean and cryosphere 
in a changing climate, and identiﬁes sustainable and resilient risk 
management strategies. All chapters and their Executive Summaries 
build on ﬁndings since the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) and, 
whenever applicable, outcomes of the IPCC Special Report on Global 
Warming of 1.5ºC (SR15).
SROCC uses IPCC calibrated language1 for the communication of 
conﬁdence in the assessment process (see Chapter 1 and references 
therein). This calibrated language is designed to consistently 
evaluate and communicate uncertainties that arise from incomplete 
knowledge due to a lack of information, or from disagreement about 
what is known or even knowable. The IPCC calibrated language 
uses qualitative expressions of conﬁdence based on the robustness 
of evidence for a ﬁnding, and (where possible) uses quantitative 
expressions to describe the likelihood of a ﬁnding (Figure TS.1). 
1 
Each ﬁnding is grounded in an evaluation of underlying evidence and agreement. The summary terms for evidence are: limited, medium or robust. For agreement, they are 
low, medium or high. In many cases, a synthesis of evidence and agreement supports an assignment of conﬁdence. A level of conﬁdence is expressed using ﬁve qualiﬁers: 
very low, low, medium, high and very high, and typeset in italics, e.g., medium conﬁdence. The following terms have been used to indicate the assessed likelihood of an 
outcome or a result: virtually certain 99–100% probability, very likely 90–100%, likely 66–100%, about as likely as not 33–66%, unlikely 0–33%, very unlikely 0–10%, 
exceptionally unlikely 0–1%. Additional terms (extremely likely 95–100%, more likely than not >50–100%, more unlikely than likely 0–<50%, extremely unlikely 0–5%) 
may also be used when appropriate. Assessed likelihood is typeset in italics, e.g., very likely. This Report also uses the term ‘likely range’ or ‘very likely range’ to indicate 
that the assessed likelihood of an outcome lies within the 17–83% or 5–95% probability range. For more details see Chapter 1, Section 1.9.2 and Figure 1.4. 
Step 2: Evaluate confidence
Step 1: Evaluate evidence and agreement
Observations
Theory
Statistics
Models
Experiments
Process
Evidence (type, amount, quality, consistency) 
Agreement 
High agreement
Limited evidence
(Emerging) 
High agreement
Medium evidence 
High agreement
Robust evidence
(Robust) 
Medium agreement
Robust evidence 
Low agreement
Robust evidence
(Divergent) 
Low agreement
Medium evidence 
Medium agreement
Limited evidence 
Low agreement
Limited evidence
(Limited) 
Medium agreement
Medium evidence 
Confidence 
Language 
Likelihood
Language
>99%
>95%
>90%
>66%
>50%
33–66%
<33%
<10%
<5%
<1%
Statistical Level
(assessing change) 
Statistical Range
(assessing range) 
Virtually certain
Extremely likely
Very likely
Likely
More likely than not
About as likely as not
Unlikely
Very unlikely
Extremely unlikely
Exceptionally unlikely
5–95% range
17–83% range
25–75% range
<17% and >83% (both tails)
<5% and >95% (both tails)
Step 3: Evaluate statistical likelihood
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Very low
Sufficient evidence and agreement to evaluate confidence?
Sufficient confidence and quantitative/probabilistic evidence to evaluate likelihood?
Figure TS.1 |  Schematic of the IPCC usage of calibrated language (for more details 
see Section 1.9.2, Figure 1.4 and Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1).
References to chapter sections, boxes, cross-chapter boxes as well as 
to ﬁgures and tables are provided in curly brackets {} at the end of 
each statement below. 
Table TS.1 |  Structure of the Technical Summary (TS) and Chapters included in the IPCC Special Report on Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC).
TS.1
Chapter 1: Framing and Context of the Report
TS.2
Chapter 2: High Mountain Areas
TS.3
Chapter 3: Polar Regions
TS.4
Chapter 4: Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities
TS.5
Chapter 5: Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems, and Dependent Communities
TS.6
Chapter 6: Extremes, Abrupt Changes and Managing Risks
TS.7
Integrative Cross-Chapter Box: Low-lying Islands and Coasts 
43
Technical Summary
TS
TS.1 
Framing and Context of the Report
This special report assesses new knowledge since the IPCC 5th 
Assessment Report (AR5) and the Special Report on Global Warming 
of 1.5ºC (SR15) on how the ocean and cryosphere have and are 
expected to change with ongoing global warming, the risks and 
opportunities these changes bring to ecosystems and people, 
and   mitigation, adaptation and governance options for reducing 
future risks. Chapter 1 provides context on the importance of the 
ocean and cryosphere, and the framework for the assessments in 
subsequent chapters of the report.
All people on Earth depend directly or indirectly on the 
ocean and cryosphere. The fundamental roles of the ocean and 
cryosphere in the Earth system include the uptake and redistribution 
of anthropogenic carbon dioxide and heat by the ocean, as well as 
their crucial involvement of in the hydrological cycle. The cryosphere 
also ampliﬁes climate changes through snow, ice and permafrost 
feedbacks. Services provided to people by the ocean and/or 
cryosphere include food and freshwater, renewable energy, health 
and wellbeing, cultural values, trade and transport. {1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 
Figure TS.2}
Sustainable development is at risk from emerging and 
intensifying ocean and cryosphere changes. Ocean and 
cryosphere changes interact with each of the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Progress on climate action 
(SDG 13) would reduce risks to aspects of sustainable development 
that are fundamentally linked to the ocean and cryosphere and 
the services they provide (high conﬁdence). Progress on achieving the  
SDGs can contribute to reducing the exposure or vulnerabilities of 
people and communities to the risks of ocean and cryosphere change 
(medium conﬁdence). {1.1}
Communities living in close connection with polar, mountain, 
and coastal environments are particularly exposed to the 
current and future hazards of ocean and cryosphere change. 
Coasts are home to approximately 28% of the global population, 
including around 11% living on land less than 10 m above sea level. 
Almost 10% of the global population lives in the Arctic or high 
mountain regions. People in these regions face the greatest exposure 
to ocean and cryosphere change, and poor and marginalised people 
here are particularly vulnerable to climate-related hazards and risks 
(very high conﬁdence). The adaptive capacity of people, communities 
and nations is shaped by social, political, cultural, economic, 
technological, institutional, geographical and demographic factors. 
{1.1, 1.5, 1.6, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1}
Ocean and cryosphere changes are pervasive and observed 
from high mountains, to the polar regions, to coasts, and into 
the deep ocean. AR5 assessed that the ocean is warming (0 to 
700 m: virtually certain; 700 to 2000 m: likely), sea level is rising (high 
conﬁdence), and ocean acidity is increasing (high conﬁdence). Most 
glaciers are shrinking (high conﬁdence), the Greenland and Antarctic 
ice sheets are losing mass (high conﬁdence), sea ice extent in the 
Arctic is decreasing (very high conﬁdence), Northern Hemisphere 
Glacier mass 
Marine 
heatwaves 
Ocean pH
Sea level
Permafrost
temperature
Sea ice
Continental shelf
Upper ocean
Continental slope
Ice sheet
Sea ice
Ice shelf
Ocean heat content
Snow cover
Sea ice
(Arctic)
Abyssal plain
O2
Ocean oxygen
Ice sheet mass 
(Greenland & Antarctica)
Cryosphere Changes
Ocean Changes 
Deep ocean
Carbon dioxide
Water
Heat
Ocean circulation
Coast
pH
Increase 
Decrease 
Figure TS.2 |  Schematic illustration of key components and changes of the ocean and cryosphere, and their linkages in the Earth system through the global exchange of 
heat, water, and carbon (Section 1.2). Climate change-related effects (increase/decrease indicated by arrows in pictograms) in the ocean include sea level rise, increasing 
ocean heat content and marine heat waves, increasing ocean oxygen loss and ocean acidiﬁcation (Section 1.4.1). Changes in the cryosphere include the decline of Arctic sea 
ice extent, Antarctic and Greenland ice sheet mass loss, glacier mass loss, permafrost thaw, and decreasing snow cover extent (Section 1.4.2). For illustration purposes, a few 
examples of where humans directly interact with ocean and cryosphere are shown (for more details see Box 1.1).
44
Technical Summary
TS
high acidity
low acidity
Historical changes (observed and modelled) and projections under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 for key indicators
Historical (modelled)
Historical (observed)
Projected (RCP2.6)
Projected (RCP8.5)
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
(a)
Global mean surface air temperature
change relative to 1986−2005
−6
−4
−2
0
2
(i)
Ocean oxygen (100−600 m depth)
%
(j)
Arctic sea ice extent
(September)
%
1950
2000
2050
2100
(l)
Near−surface permafrost area
year
1950
2000
2050
2100
year
ºC
%
change relative to 1986−2005
change relative to 1986−2005
change relative to 1986−2005
year
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
(b) Global mean sea surface temperature
ºC
change relative to 1986−2005
01
5
10
15
20
(c)
Marine heatwave days
multiplication factor
factor of change relative to 1986−2005
7.8
7.9
8.0
8.1
pH
(h) Surface ocean pH
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
metres
0
800
1600
2400
(d) Ocean heat content (0−2000 m depth)
1021 Joules
and sea level equivalent (right axis)
change relative to 1986−2005
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(e)
Greenland ice sheet mass loss
as sea level equivalent,
metres
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(f)
Antarctic ice sheet mass loss
as sea level equivalent,
metres
1950
2000
2050
2100
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(g)
Glacier mass loss
as sea level equivalent,
metres
year
change relative to 1986−2005
change relative to 1986−2005
change relative to 1986−2005
1950
metres
*
*
2000
2050
2100
2150
2200
2250
2300
0
1
2
3
4
5
primary drivers
(m) Global mean sea level
change relative to 1986−2005
*
*
−100
−50
0
50
−100
−50
0
50
100
−100
−50
0
50
(k)
Arctic snow cover extent (June)
%
change relative to 1986−2005
0.43 m
0.84 m
Past and future changes in the ocean and cryosphere 
Figure TS.3
45
Technical Summary
TS
Figure TS.3 |  Observed and modelled historical changes in the ocean and cryosphere since 19502, and projected future changes under low (RCP2.6) and high (RCP8.5) 
greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Changes are shown for: (a) Global mean surface air temperature change with likely range. {Box SPM.1, Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1} 
Ocean-related changes with very likely ranges for (b) Global mean sea surface temperature change {Box 5.1, 5.2.2}; (c) Change factor in surface ocean marine heatwave days 
{6.4.1}; (d) Global ocean heat content change (0–2000 m depth). An approximate steric sea level equivalent is shown with the right axis by multiplying the ocean heat content 
by the global-mean thermal expansion coefﬁcient (� ≈ 0.125 m per 1024 Joules3) for observed warming since 1970 {Figure 5.1}; (h) Global mean surface pH (on the total 
scale). Assessed observational trends are compiled from open ocean time series sites longer than 15 years {Box 5.1, Figure 5.6, 5.2.2}; and (i) Global mean ocean oxygen change 
(100–600 m depth). Assessed observational trends span 1970–2010 centered on 1996 {Figure 5.8, 5.2.2}. Sea level changes with likely ranges for (m) Global mean sea level 
change. Hashed shading reﬂects low conﬁdence in sea level projections beyond 2100 and bars at 2300 reﬂect expert elicitation on the range of possible sea level change {4.2.3, 
Figure 4.2}; and components from (e,f) Greenland and Antarctic ice sheet mass loss {3.3.1}; and (g) Glacier mass loss {Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2, Table 4.1}. Further 
cryosphere-related changes with very likely ranges for (j) Arctic sea ice extent change for September4 {3.2.1, 3.2.2 Figure 3.3}; (k) Arctic snow cover change for June (land areas 
north of 60ºN) {3.4.1, 3.4.2, Figure 3.10}; and (l) Change in near-surface (within 3–4 m) permafrost area in the Northern Hemisphere {3.4.1, 3.4.2, Figure 3.10}. Assessments 
of projected changes under the intermediate RCP4.5 and RCP6.0 scenarios are not available for all variables considered here, but where available can be found in the underlying 
report. {For RCP4.5 see: 2.2.2, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2, 3.2.2, 3.4.2, 4.2.3, for RCP6.0 see Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1}
2 
This does not imply that the changes started in 1950. Changes in some variables have occurred since the pre-industrial period.
3 
This scaling factor (global-mean ocean expansion as sea level rise in metres per unit heat) varies by about 10% between different models, and it will systematically increase 
by about 10% by 2100 under RCP8.5 forcing due to ocean warming increasing the average thermal expansion coefﬁcient. {4.2.1, 4.2.2, 5.2.2}
4 
Antarctic sea ice is not shown here due to low conﬁdence in future projections. {3.2.2}
snow cover is decreasing (very high conﬁdence), and permafrost 
temperatures are increasing (high conﬁdence). Improvements 
since AR5 in observation systems, techniques, reconstructions and 
model developments, have advanced scientiﬁc characterisation and 
understanding of ocean and cryosphere change, including in previously 
identiﬁed areas of concern such as ice sheets and Atlantic Meridional 
Overturning Circulation (AMOC). {1.1, 1.4, 1.8.1, Figure TS.3}
Evidence and understanding of the human causes of climate 
warming, and of associated ocean and cryosphere changes, 
has increased over the past 30 years of IPCC assessments (very 
high conﬁdence). Human activities are estimated to have caused 
approximately 1.0ºC of global warming above pre-industrial levels 
(SR15). Areas of concern in earlier IPCC reports, such as the expected 
acceleration of sea level rise, are now observed (high conﬁdence). 
Evidence for expected slow-down of AMOC is emerging in sustained 
observations and from long-term palaeoclimate reconstructions 
(medium conﬁdence), and may be related with anthropogenic forcing 
according to model simulations, although this remains to be properly 
attributed. Signiﬁcant sea level rise contributions from Antarctic ice 
sheet mass loss (very high conﬁdence), which earlier reports did not 
expect to manifest this century, are already being observed. {1.1, 1.4}
Ocean and cryosphere changes and risks by the end-of-century 
(2081–2100) will be larger under high greenhouse gas emission 
scenarios, compared with low emission scenarios (very high 
conﬁdence). Projections and assessments of future climate, ocean 
and cryosphere changes in the Special Report on the Ocean and 
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) are commonly based 
on coordinated climate model experiments from the Coupled Model 
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) forced with Representative 
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) of future radiative forcing. Current 
emissions continue to grow at a rate consistent with a high emission 
future without effective climate change mitigation policies (referred 
to as RCP8.5). The SROCC assessment contrasts this high greenhouse 
gas emission future with a low greenhouse gas emission, high 
mitigation future (referred to as RCP2.6) that gives a two in three 
chance of limiting warming by the end of the century to less than 2oC 
above pre-industrial. {Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1, Table TS.2} 
Characteristics of ocean and cryosphere change include 
thresholds of abrupt change, long-term changes that cannot be 
avoided, and irreversibility (high conﬁdence). Ocean warming, 
acidiﬁcation and deoxygenation, ice sheet and glacier mass loss, and 
permafrost degradation are expected to be irreversible on time scales 
relevant to human societies and ecosystems. Long response times 
of decades to millennia mean that the ocean and cryosphere are 
committed to long-term change even after atmospheric greenhouse 
gas concentrations and radiative forcing stabilise (high conﬁdence). 
Ice-melt or the thawing of permafrost involve thresholds (state 
changes) that allow for abrupt, nonlinear responses to ongoing 
climate warming (high conﬁdence). These characteristics of ocean 
and cryosphere change pose risks and challenges to adaptation.  
{1.1, Box 1.1, 1.3}
Societies will be exposed, and challenged to adapt, to changes 
in the ocean and cryosphere even if current and future efforts 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions keep global warming well 
below 2ºC (very high conﬁdence). Ocean and cryosphere-related 
mitigation and adaptation measures include options that address the 
causes of climate change, support biological and ecological adaptation, 
or enhance societal adaptation. Most ocean-based local mitigation 
and adaptation measures have limited effectiveness to mitigate 
climate change and reduce its consequences at the global scale, but 
are useful to implement because they address local risks, often have 
co-beneﬁts such as biodiversity conservation, and have few adverse 
side effects. Effective mitigation at a global scale will reduce the need 
and cost of adaptation, and reduce the risks of surpassing limits to 
adaptation. Ocean-based carbon dioxide removal at the global scale 
has potentially large negative ecosystem consequences. {1.6.1, 1.6.2, 
Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1, Figure TS.4}
The scale and cross-boundary dimensions of changes in the 
ocean and cryosphere challenge the ability of communities, 
cultures and nations to respond effectively within existing 
governance frameworks (high conﬁdence). Profound economic 
and institutional transformations are needed if climate-resilient 
development is to be achieved (high conﬁdence). Changes in 
the ocean and cryosphere, the ecosystem services that they provide, 
46
Technical Summary
TS
Table TS.2 |  Projected change in global mean surface air temperature and key ocean variables for the near-term (2031–2050) and end-of-century (2081–2100) relative to 
the recent past (1986–2005) reference period from CMIP5. Small differences in the projections given here compared with AR5 reﬂect differences in the number of models 
available now compared to at the time of the AR5 assessment (for more details see Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1). 
Near-term: 2031–2050
End-of-century: 2081–2100
Scenario
Mean
5–95% range
Mean
5–95% range
Global Mean Surface  
Air Temperature (ºC)a
RCP2.6
0.9
0.5–1.4
1.0
0.3–1.7
RCP4.5
1.1
0.7–1.5
1.8
1.0–2.6
RCP6.0
1.0
0.5–1.4
2.3
1.4–3.2
RCP8.5
1.4
0.9–1.8
3.7
2.6–4.8
Global Mean Sea Surface 
Temperature (ºC)b 
(Section 5.2.5)
RCP2.6
0.64
0.33–0.96
0.73
0.20–1.27
RCP8.5
0.95
0.60–1.29
2.58
1.64–3.51
Surface pH (units)b
(Section 5.2.2.3)
RCP2.6
–0.072
–0.072 to –0.072
–0.065
–0.065 to –0.066
RCP8.5
–0.108
–0.106 to –0.110
–0.315
–0.313 to –0.317
Dissolved Oxygen  
(100–600 m) (% change)
(Section 5.2.2.4)b
RCP2.6
–0.9
–0.3 to –1.5
–0.6
0.0 to –1.2
RCP8.5
–1.4
–1.0 to –1.8
–3.9
–2.9 to –5.0
Notes:
a Calculated following the same procedure as the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5). The 5–95% model range of global mean surface air temperature across CMIP5 projections 
was assessed in AR5 as the likely range, after accounting for additional uncertainties or different levels of conﬁdence in models.
b The 5–95% model range for global mean sea surface temperature, surface pH and dissolved oxygen (100–600 m) as referred to in the SROCC assessment as the very likely 
range (see also Chapter 1, Section 1.9.2, Figure 1.4).
Actions to reduce 
Hazards
Risk
Vulnerability
Exposure
Hazard
Actions to reduce 
Vulnerability
Actions to reduce 
Exposure
Limits to Adaptation
• E.g. physical, ecological, technological, 
 economic, political, institutional, 
 psychological, and/or socio-cultural
Examples include:
• Coastal retreat and resettlement
• Risk sensitive land use planning
• Early warning systems and 
 evacuations
Examples include:
•Social protection
• Livelihood diversification
•Insurance solutions
•Hazard-proof housing 
 and infrastructure
Examples include:
• Ecosystem-based measures 
 to reduce coastal flooding
• Mangroves to alleviate coastal 
 storm energy
• Water reservoirs to buffer 
 low-flows and water scarcity
Figure TS.4 |  There are options for risk reduction through adaptation. Adaptation can reduce risk by addressing one or more of the three risk factors: vulnerability, 
exposure, and/or hazard. The reduction of vulnerability, exposure, and/or hazard potential can be achieved through different policy and action choices over time until limits 
to adaptation might be reached. The ﬁgure builds on the conceptual framework of risk used in AR5 (for more details see Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1). 
47
Technical Summary
TS
the drivers of those changes, and the risks to marine, coastal, polar 
and mountain ecosystems, occur on spatial and temporal scales that 
may not align within existing governance structures and practices 
(medium conﬁdence). This report highlights the requirements 
for transformative governance, international and transboundary 
cooperation, and greater empowerment of local communities in 
the governance of the ocean, coasts, and cryosphere in a changing 
climate. {1.5, 1.7, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter 
Box 3 in Chapter 1}
Robust assessments of ocean and cryosphere change, and the 
development of context-speciﬁc governance and response 
options, depend on utilising and strengthening all available 
knowledge systems (high conﬁdence). Scientiﬁc knowledge from 
observations, models and syntheses provides global to local scale 
understandings of climate change (very high conﬁdence). Indigenous 
knowledge (IK) and local knowledge (LK) provide context-speciﬁc and 
socio-culturally relevant understandings for effective responses and 
policies (medium conﬁdence). Education and climate literacy enable 
climate action and adaptation (high conﬁdence). {1.8, Cross-Chapter 
Box 4 in Chapter 1} 
Long-term sustained observations and continued modelling 
are critical for detecting, understanding and predicting ocean 
and cryosphere change, providing the knowledge to inform 
risk assessments and adaptation planning (high conﬁdence). 
Knowledge gaps exist in scientiﬁc knowledge for important regions, 
parameters and processes of ocean and cryosphere change, including 
for physically plausible, high impact changes like high end sea level 
rise scenarios that would be costly if realised without effective 
adaptation planning and even then may exceed limits to adaptation. 
Means such as expert judgement, scenario building, and invoking 
multiple lines of evidence enable comprehensive risk assessments 
even in cases of uncertain future ocean and cryosphere changes. 
{1.8.1, 1.9.2, Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1}
TS.2 
High Mountain Areas
The cryosphere (including, snow, glaciers, permafrost, lake and 
river ice) is an integral element of high mountain regions, which 
are home to roughly 10% of the global population. Widespread 
cryosphere changes affect physical, biological and human systems in 
the mountains and surrounding lowlands, with impacts evident even 
in the ocean. Building on the IPCC’s 5th Assessment Report (AR5), 
this chapter assesses new evidence on observed recent and projected 
changes in the mountain cryosphere as well as associated impacts, 
risks and adaptation measures related to natural and human systems. 
Impacts in response to climate changes independently of changes in 
the cryosphere are not assessed in this chapter. Polar mountains are 
included in Chapter 3, except those in Alaska and adjacent Yukon, 
Iceland and Scandinavia, which are included in this chapter.
Observations of cryospheric changes, impacts, 
and adaptation in high mountain areas
Observations show general decline in low-elevation snow 
cover (high conﬁdence) glaciers (very high conﬁdence) and 
permafrost (high conﬁdence) due to climate change in recent 
decades. Snow cover duration has declined in nearly all regions, 
especially at lower elevations, on average by 5  days per decade, 
with a likely range from 0–10 days per decade. Low elevation snow 
depth and extent have declined, although year-to-year variation is 
high. Mass change of glaciers in all mountain regions (excluding the 
Canadian and Russian Arctic, Svalbard, Greenland and Antarctica) 
was very likely –490 ± 100 kg m–2 yr–1 (–123 ± 24 Gt yr–1) in 2006–
2015. Regionally averaged mass budgets were likely most negative 
(less than –850 kg m–2 yr–1) in the southern Andes, Caucasus and the 
European Alps/Pyrenees, and least negative in High Mountain Asia 
(–150 ± 110 kg m–2 yr–1) but variations within regions are strong. 
Between 3.6–5.2  million km2 are underlain by permafrost in the 
eleven high mountain regions covered in this chapter corresponding 
to 27–29% of the global permafrost area (medium conﬁdence). 
Sparse and unevenly distributed measurements show an increase 
in permafrost temperature (high conﬁdence), for example, by 
0.19ºC ± 0.05ºC on average for about 28 locations in the European 
Alps, Scandinavia, Canada and Asia during the past decade. Other 
observations reveal decreasing permafrost thickness and loss of ice 
in the ground. {2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.2.4, Figure TS.5}
Glacier, snow and permafrost decline has altered the frequency, 
magnitude and location of most related natural hazards (high 
conﬁdence). Exposure of people and infrastructure to natural 
hazards has increased due to growing population, tourism and 
socioeconomic development (high conﬁdence). Glacier retreat 
and permafrost thaw have decreased the stability of mountain slopes 
and the integrity of infrastructure (high conﬁdence). The number 
and area of glacier lakes has increased in most regions in recent 
decades (high conﬁdence), but there is only limited evidence that 
the frequency of glacier lake outburst ﬂoods (GLOF) has changed. In 
some regions, snow avalanches involving wet snow have increased 
(medium conﬁdence), and rain-on-snow ﬂoods have decreased at 
low elevations in spring and increased at high elevations in winter 
(medium conﬁdence). The number and extent of wildﬁres have 
increased in the Western USA partly due to early snowmelt (medium 
conﬁdence). {2.3.2, 2.3.3}
Changes in snow and glaciers have changed the amount and 
seasonality of runoff in snow-dominated and glacier-fed river 
basins (very high conﬁdence) with local impacts on water 
resources and agriculture (medium conﬁdence). Winter runoff 
has increased in recent decades due to more precipitation falling as 
rain (high conﬁdence). In some glacier-fed rivers, summer and annual 
runoff have increased due to intensiﬁed glacier melt, but decreased 
where glacier melt water has lessened as glacier area shrinks. 
Decreases were observed especially in regions dominated by small 
glaciers, such as the European Alps (medium conﬁdence). Glacier 
retreat and snow cover changes have contributed to localized declines 
in agricultural yields in some high mountain regions, including the 
Hindu Kush Himalaya and the tropical Andes (medium conﬁdence). 
48
Technical Summary
TS
There is limited evidence of impacts on operation and productivity 
of hydropower facilities resulting from changes in seasonality and 
both increases and decreases in water input, for example, in the 
European Alps, Iceland, Western Canada and USA, and the tropical 
Andes. {2.3.1}
Species composition and abundance have markedly changed 
in high mountain ecosystems in recent decades (very high 
conﬁdence), partly due to changes in the cryosphere (high 
conﬁdence). Habitats for establishment by formerly absent species 
have opened up or been altered by reduced snow cover (high 
conﬁdence), retreating glaciers (very high conﬁdence), and thawing 
of permafrost (medium conﬁdence). Reductions in glacier and 
snow cover have directly altered the structure of many freshwater 
communities (high conﬁdence). Reduced snow cover has negatively 
impacted the reproductive ﬁtness of some snow-dependent 
plant and animal species, including foraging and predator-prey 
relationships of mammals (high conﬁdence). Upslope migration 
of individual species, mostly due to warming and to a lesser extent 
due to cryosphere-related changes, has often increased local species 
richness (very high conﬁdence). Some cold-adapted species, including 
endemics, in terrestrial and freshwater communities have declined 
in abundance (high conﬁdence). While the plant productivity has 
generally increased, the actual impact on provisioning, regulating and 
cultural ecosystem services varies greatly (high conﬁdence). {2.3.3}
Tourism and recreation activities such as skiing, glacier 
tourism and mountaineering have been negatively impacted 
by declining snow cover, glaciers and permafrost (medium 
conﬁdence). In several regions, worsening route safety has reduced 
mountaineering opportunities (medium conﬁdence). Variability and 
decline in natural snow cover have compromised the operation of 
low-elevation ski resorts (high conﬁdence). Glacier and snow decline 
have impacted aesthetic, spiritual and other cultural aspects of 
mountain landscapes (medium conﬁdence), reducing the well-being 
of people (e.g.,  in the Himalaya, eastern Africa, and the tropical 
Andes). {2.3.5, 2.3.6}
Adaptation in agriculture, tourism and drinking water supply 
has aimed to reduce the impacts of cryosphere change 
(medium conﬁdence), though there is limited evidence on their 
effectiveness owing to a lack of formal evaluations, or technical, 
ﬁnancial and institutional barriers to implementation. In some 
places, artiﬁcial snowmaking has reduced the negative impacts on 
ski tourism (medium conﬁdence). Release and storage of water from 
reservoirs according to sectoral needs (agriculture, drinking water, 
ecosystems) has reduced the impact of seasonal variability on runoff 
(medium conﬁdence). {2.3.1, 2.3.5} 
Future projections of cryospheric changes, their impacts 
and risks, and adaptation in high mountain areas
Snow cover, glaciers and permafrost are projected to continue 
to decline in almost all regions throughout the 21st century 
(high conﬁdence). Compared to 1986–2005, low elevation snow 
depth will likely decrease by 10–40% for 2031–2050, regardless of 
Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) and for 2081–2100, 
likely by 10–40 % for RCP2.6 and by 50–90% for RCP8.5. Projected 
glacier mass reductions between 2015–2100 are likely 22–44% for 
RCP2.6 and 37–57% for RCP8.5. In regions with mostly smaller 
glaciers and relatively little ice cover (e.g., European Alps, Pyrenees, 
Caucasus, North Asia, Scandinavia, tropical Andes, Mexico, eastern 
Africa and Indonesia), glaciers will lose more than 80% of their 
current mass by 2100 under RCP8.5 (medium conﬁdence), and 
many glaciers will disappear regardless emission scenario (very high 
conﬁdence). Permafrost thaw and degradation will increase during 
the 21st century (very high conﬁdence) but quantitative projections 
are scarce. {2.2.2, 2.2.3, 2.2.4}
Most types of natural hazards are projected to change in 
frequency, magnitude and areas affected as the cryosphere 
continues to decline (high conﬁdence). Glacier retreat and 
permafrost thaw are projected to decrease the stability of mountain 
slopes and increase the number and area of glacier lakes (high 
conﬁdence). Resulting landslides and ﬂoods, and cascading events, 
will also emerge where there is no record of previous events (high 
conﬁdence). Snow avalanches are projected to decline in number 
and runout distance at lower elevation, and avalanches involving wet 
snow even in winter will occur more frequently (medium conﬁdence). 
Rain-on-snow ﬂoods will occur earlier in spring and later in autumn, 
and be more frequent at higher elevations and less frequent at lower 
elevations (high conﬁdence). {2.3.2, 2.3.3}
River runoff in snow dominated and glacier-fed river basins 
will change further in amount and seasonality in response to 
projected snow cover and glacier decline (very high conﬁdence) 
with negative impacts on agriculture, hydropower and water 
quality in some regions (medium conﬁdence). The average 
winter snowmelt runoff is projected to increase (high conﬁdence), and 
spring peaks to occur earlier (very high conﬁdence). Projected trends 
in annual runoff vary substantially among regions, and can even be 
opposite in direction, but there is high conﬁdence that in all regions 
average annual runoff from glaciers will have reached a peak that 
will be followed by declining runoff at the latest by the end of the 
21st century. Declining runoff is expected to reduce the productivity 
of irrigated agriculture in some regions (medium conﬁdence). 
Hydropower operations will increasingly be impacted by altered 
amount and seasonality of water supply from snow and glacier melt 
(high conﬁdence). The release of heavy metals, particularly mercury, 
and other legacy contaminants currently stored in glaciers and 
permafrost, is projected to reduce water quality for freshwater biota, 
household use and irrigation (medium conﬁdence). {2.3.1}
Current trends in cryosphere-related changes in high mountain 
ecosystems are expected to continue and impacts to intensify 
(very high conﬁdence). While high mountains will provide new and 
greater habitat area, including refugia for lowland species, both range 
expansion and shrinkage are projected, and at high elevations this 
will lead to population declines (high conﬁdence). The latter increases 
the risk of local extinctions, in particular for freshwater cold-adapted 
species (medium conﬁdence). Without genetic plasticity and/or 
behavioural shifts, cryospheric changes will continue to negatively 
impact endemic and native species, such as some coldwater ﬁsh 
49
Technical Summary
TS
(e.g.,  trout) and species whose traits directly depend on snow 
(e.g., snowshoe hares) or many large mammals (medium conﬁdence). 
The survival of such species will depend on appropriate conservation 
and adaptation measures (medium conﬁdence). Many projected 
ecological changes will alter ecosystem services (high conﬁdence), 
affecting ecological disturbances (e.g., ﬁre, rock fall, slope erosion) 
with considerable impacts on people (medium conﬁdence). {2.3.3}
Cultural assets, such as snow- and ice-covered peaks in many 
UNESCO World Heritage sites, and tourism and recreation 
activities, are expected to be negatively affected by future 
cryospheric change in many regions (high conﬁdence). Current 
snowmaking technologies are projected to be less effective in 
a warmer climate in reducing risks to ski tourism in most parts of 
Europe, North America and Japan, in particular at 2ºC global warming 
and beyond (high conﬁdence). Diversiﬁcation through year-round 
activities supports adaptation of tourism under future climate change 
(medium conﬁdence). {2.3.5, 2.3.6}
Enablers and response options to promote adaptation 
and sustainable development in high mountain areas
The already committed and unavoidable climate change 
affecting all cryosphere elements, irrespective of the emission 
scenario, points to integrated adaptation planning to support 
and enhance water availability, access, and management 
(medium conﬁdence). Integrated management approaches 
for water across all scales, in particular for energy,  agriculture, 
ecosystems and drinking water supply, can be effective at dealing 
with impacts from changes in the cryosphere. These approaches also 
offer opportunities to support social-ecological systems, through the 
development and optimisation of storage and the release of water from 
reservoirs (medium conﬁdence), while being cognisant of potential 
5 
 Marginal seas are not assessed individually as ocean regions in this report.
negative implications for some ecosystems. Success in implementing 
such management options depends on the participation of relevant 
stakeholders, including affected communities, diverse knowledge 
and adequate tools for monitoring and projecting future conditions, 
and ﬁnancial and institutional resources to support planning and 
implementation (medium conﬁdence). {2.3.1, 2.3.3, 2.4}
Effective governance is a key enabler for reducing disaster 
risk, considering relevant exposure factors such as planning, 
zoning, and urbanisation pressures, as well as vulnerability 
factors such as poverty, which can challenge efforts towards 
resilience and sustainable development for communities 
(medium conﬁdence). Reducing losses to disasters depend on 
integrated and coordinated approaches to account for the hazards 
concerned, the degree of exposure, and existing vulnerabilities. 
Diverse knowledge that includes community and multi-stakeholder 
experience with past impacts complements scientiﬁc knowledge to 
anticipate future risks. {Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1, 2.3.2, 2.4}  
International cooperation, treaties and conventions exist for 
some mountain regions and transboundary river basins with 
potential to support adaptation action. However, there is 
limited evidence on the extent to which impacts and losses 
arising from changes in the cryosphere are speciﬁcally 
monitored and addressed in these frameworks. A wide range 
of institutional arrangements and practices have emerged over the 
past three decades that respond to a shared global mountain agenda 
and speciﬁc regional priorities. There is potential to strengthen 
them to also respond to climate-related cryosphere risks and open 
opportunities for development through adaptation (limited evidence, 
high agreement). The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Sendai 
Framework and Paris Agreement have directed some attention in 
mountain-speciﬁc research and practice towards the monitoring and 
reporting on targets and indicators speciﬁed therein. {2.3.1, 2.4} 
Figure TS.5 (next pages) |  Synthesis of observed regional hazards and impacts in ocean5 (top) and high mountain and polar land regions (bottom) assessed in SROCC. The same data 
are shown in different formats in (a) and (b). For each region, physical changes, impacts on key ecosystems, and impacts on human systems and ecosystem function and services are shown. 
For physical changes, yellow/green refers to an increase/decrease, respectively, in amount or frequency of the measured variable. For impacts on ecosystems, human systems and ecosystems 
services blue or red depicts whether an observed impact is positive (beneﬁcial) or negative (adverse), respectively, to the given system or service. Cells assigned ‘increase and decrease’ 
indicate that within that region, both increase and decrease of physical changes are found, but are not necessarily equal; the same holds for cells showing ‘positive and negative’ attributable 
impacts. For ocean regions, the conﬁdence level refers to the conﬁdence in attributing observed changes to changes in greenhouse gas forcing for physical changes and to climate change for 
ecosystem, human systems, and ecosystem services. For high mountain and polar land regions, the level of conﬁdence in attributing physical changes and impacts at least partly to a change 
in the cryosphere is shown. No assessment means: not applicable, not assessed at regional scale, or the evidence is insufﬁcient for assessment. The physical changes in the ocean are deﬁned 
as: Temperature change in 0–700 m layer of the ocean except for Southern Ocean (0–2000 m) and Arctic Ocean (upper mixed layer and major inﬂowing branches); Oxygen in the 0–1200 m 
layer or oxygen minimum layer; Ocean pH as surface pH (decreasing pH corresponds to increasing ocean acidiﬁcation). Ecosystems in the ocean: Coral refers to warm-water coral reefs and 
cold-water corals. The ‘upper water column’ category refers to epipelagic zone for all ocean regions except Polar Regions, where the impacts on some pelagic organisms in open water deeper 
than the upper 200 m were included. Coastal wetland includes salt marshes, mangroves and seagrasses. Kelp forests are habitats of a speciﬁc group of macroalgae. Rocky shores are coastal 
habitats dominated by immobile calciﬁed organisms such as mussels and barnacles. Deep sea is seaﬂoor ecosystems that are 3000–6000 m deep. Sea-ice associated includes ecosystems 
in, on and below sea ice. Habitat services refer to supporting structures and services (e.g., habitat, biodiversity, primary production). Coastal Carbon Sequestration refers to the uptake and 
storage of carbon by coastal blue carbon ecosystems. Ecosystems on Land: Tundra refers to tundra and alpine meadows, and includes terrestrial Antarctic ecosystems. Migration refers to an 
increase or decrease in net migration, not to beneﬁcial/adverse value. Impacts on tourism refer to the operating conditions for the tourism sector. Cultural services include cultural identity, 
sense of home, and spiritual, intrinsic and aesthetic values, as well as contributions from glacier archaeology. The underlying information is given for land regions in tables SM2.6, SM2.7, 
SM2.8, SM3.8, SM3.9, and SM3.10, and for ocean regions in tables SM5.10, SM5.11, SM3.8, SM3.9, and SM3.10. {2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.4, 2.3.5, 2.3.6, 2.3.7, Figure 2.1, 3.2.1, 3.2.3, 
3.2.4, 3.3.3, 3.4.1, 3.4.3, 3.5.2, Box 3.4, 4.2.2, 5.2.2, 5.2.3, 5.3.3, 5.4, 5.6, Figure 5.24, Box 5.3}
50
Technical Summary
TS
Tropical
Indian Ocean
North Atlantic
South Atlantic
South Pacific
Tropical Pacific
North Pacific
Temperate
Indian Ocean
Arctic
Tropical 
Atlantic
EBUS 1
Himalaya, Tibetan Plateau 
and other High Mountain Asia 3
Caucasus
Scandinavia 2
Alaska  4
Western 
Canada and USA
Russian 
Arctic
Iceland
European
Alps and
Pyrenees
Southern 
Andes
Low 
Latitudes 5
New 
Zealand
Arctic Canada
and Greenland
Southern
Ocean
Antarctica
Upper water column
Coral
Kelp forest
Rocky shores
Fisheries
Tourism
Habitat services
Coastal carbon sequestration
Deep sea
Polar benthos
Coastal wetlands
Temperature 
Oxygen
Ocean pH
Sea ice extent
Sea level
Sea ice-associated
Transportation/shipping
Cultural services
Physical changes
Human systems and ecosystem services
Ecosystems
Attribution to
greenhouse gases
Attribution to climate change
Tundra
Forest
Agriculture
Tourism
Infrastructure
Migration 6
Cultural services
Lakes/ponds
Rivers/streams
Human systems and ecosystem services
Ecosystems
Water availability
Flood
Landslide
Avalanche
Ground subsidence
Physical changes
Attribution to cryosphere change
Ocean 
High mountain and 
polar land regions
LEGEND
high
medium
low
Attribution confidence
Physical changes
decrease
increase
increase and decrease
Systems
negative
positive
positive and negative
no assessment
1 Eastern Boundary Upwelling Systems (Benguela Current, Canary 
Current, California Current, and Humboldt Current); {Box 5.3}
2 includes Finland, Norway, and Sweden; 3 includes Hindu 
Kush, Karakoram, Hengduan Shan, and Tien Shan; 4includes 
adjacent areas in Yukon Territory and British Columbia, 
Canada;
5tropical Andes, Mexico, eastern Africa, and 
Indonesia; 6Migration refers to an increase or decrease in net 
migration, not to beneficial/adverse value.
(a)
Figure TS.5 |  a
51
Technical Summary
TS
Upper water column
Coral
Kelp forest
Rocky shores
Fisheries
Tourism
Habitat services
Coastal carbon
sequestration
Deep sea
Polar benthos
Coastal wetlands
Temperature
Oxygen
Ocean pH
Sea ice extent
Sea level
Sea ice-associated
Transportation/shipping
Cultural services
Physical 
changes
Greenhouse
Gases
Climate Change
Attribution
Attribution
Cryosphere Change
Physical changes
Systems
Human systems and 
 ecosystem services
Ecosystems
Physical 
changes
Human systems 
and ecosystem 
  services 
Ecosystems
Tundra
Forest
Agriculture
Tourism
Infrastructure
Migration 6
Water availability
Flood
Landslide
Avalanche
Ground subsidence
Cultural services
Lakes/ponds
Rivers/streams
Ocean 
High mountain and 
polar land regions
(b)
decrease
increase
increase and
decrease
negative
positive
positive and
negative
no 
assessment
LEGEND
high
medium
low
Attribution
conﬁdence
Himalaya, 
Tibetan Plateau 
and other
High Mountain
Asia 2
Caucasus
Scandi-
navia 4
Alaska 5
Western 
Canada
and USA
Russian
Arctic
Iceland
European
Alps and
Pyrenees
Southern 
Andes
Low 
Lati-
   tudes 3
New 
Zealand
Antarctica
Arctic
Canada and
Greenland
2 includes Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Hengduan Shan, and Tien Shan; 3 tropical Andes, Mexico, eastern Africa, and Indonesia; 
4 includes Finland, Norway, and Sweden; 5 includes adjacent areas in Yukon Territory and British Columbia, Canada; 6 Migration refers to an  
 increase or decrease in net migration, not to beneﬁcial/adverse value.
Southern
Ocean
Tropical
Indian
Ocean
North
Atlantic
Tropical 
Atlantic
Temperate
Indian
Ocean
South
Atlantic
South
Paciﬁc
Tropical
Paciﬁc
EBUS 1
North
Paciﬁc
Arctic
1 Eastern Boundary Upwelling Systems (Benguela Current, Canary Current, California Current, and Humboldt Current); {Box 5.3}
Figure TS.5 |  b
TS.3 
Polar Regions
This chapter assesses the state of physical, biological and social 
knowledge concerning the Arctic and Antarctic ocean and cryosphere, 
how they are affected by climate change, and how they will evolve 
in future. Concurrently, it assesses the local, regional and global 
consequences and impacts of individual and interacting polar system 
changes, and it assesses response options to reduce risk and build 
resilience in the polar regions. Key ﬁndings are:
The polar regions are losing ice, and their oceans are changing 
rapidly. The consequences of this polar transition extend to 
the whole planet, and are affecting people in multiple ways.
Arctic surface air temperature has likely increased by more 
than double the global average over the last two decades, with 
feedbacks from loss of sea ice and snow cover contributing to 
the ampliﬁed warming. For each of the ﬁve years since the IPCC 
5th Asesssment Report (AR5) (2014–2018), Arctic annual surface 
air temperature exceeded that of any year since 1900. During the 
winters (January to March) of 2016 and 2018, surface temperatures 
in the central Arctic were 6ºC above the 1981–2010 average, 
contributing to unprecedented regional sea ice absence. These trends 
and extremes provide medium evidence with high agreement of the 
contemporary coupled atmosphere-cryosphere system moving well 
outside the 20th century envelope. {Box 3.1, 3.2.1.1}
52
Technical Summary
TS
The Arctic and Southern Oceans are continuing to remove 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and to acidify (high 
conﬁdence). There is medium conﬁdence that the amount of CO 2 
drawn into the Southern Ocean from the atmosphere has experienced 
signiﬁcant decadal variations since the 1980s. Rates of calciﬁcation (by 
which marine organisms form hard skeletons and shells) declined in the 
Southern Ocean by 3.9 ± 1.3% between 1998 and 2014. In the Arctic 
Ocean, the area corrosive to organisms that form shells and skeletons 
using the mineral aragonite expanded between the 1990s and 2010, 
with instances of extreme aragonite undersaturation. {3.2.1.2.4}
Both polar oceans have continued to warm in recent years, 
with the Southern Ocean being disproportionately and 
increasingly important in global ocean heat increase (high 
conﬁdence). Over large sectors of the seasonally ice-free Arctic, 
summer upper mixed layer temperatures increased at around 0.5ºC 
per decade during 1982–2017, primarily associated with increased 
absorbed solar radiation accompanying sea ice loss, and the inﬂow 
of ocean heat from lower latitude increased since the 2000s (high 
conﬁdence). During 1970–2017, the Southern Ocean south of 30ºS 
accounted for 35–43% of the global ocean heat gain in the upper 
2000 m (high conﬁdence), despite occupying ~25% of the global 
ocean area. In recent years (2005–2017), the Southern Ocean was 
responsible for an increased proportion of the global ocean heat 
increase (45–62%) (high conﬁdence). {3.2.1.2.1, Figure TS.5}
Climate-induced changes in seasonal sea ice extent and 
thickness and ocean stratiﬁcation are altering marine primary 
production (high conﬁdence), with impacts on ecosystems 
(medium conﬁdence). Changes in the timing, duration and intensity 
of primary production have occurred in both polar oceans, with 
marked regional or local variability (high conﬁdence). In the Antarctic, 
such changes have been associated with locally-rapid environmental 
change, including retreating glaciers and sea ice change (medium 
conﬁdence). In the Arctic, changes in primary production have 
affected regional species composition, spatial distribution, and 
abundance of many marine species, impacting ecosystem structure 
(medium conﬁdence). {3.2.1, 3.2.3, 3.2.4} 
In both polar regions, climate-induced changes in ocean 
and sea ice, together with human introduction of non-native 
species, have expanded the range of temperate species and 
contracted the range of polar ﬁsh and ice-associated species 
(high conﬁdence). Commercially and ecologically important ﬁsh 
stocks like Atlantic cod, haddock and mackerel have expanded their 
spatial distributions northwards many hundreds of kilometres, and 
increased their abundance. In some Arctic areas, such expansions have 
affected the whole ﬁsh community, leading to higher competition and 
predation on smaller sized ﬁsh species, while some commercial ﬁsheries 
have beneﬁted. There has been a southward shift in the distribution of 
Antarctic krill in the South Atlantic, the main area for the krill ﬁshery 
(medium conﬁdence). These changes are altering biodiversity in polar 
marine ecosystems (medium conﬁdence). {3.2.3, Box 3.4}
Arctic sea ice extent continues to decline in all months of 
the year (very high conﬁdence); the strongest reductions in 
September (very likely –12.8 ± 2.3% per decade; 1979–2018) 
are unprecedented in at least 1000 years (medium conﬁdence). 
Arctic sea ice has thinned, concurrent with a  shift to younger ice: 
since 1979, the areal proportion of thick ice at least 5 years old has 
declined by approximately 90% (very high conﬁdence). Approximately 
half the observed sea ice loss is attributable to increased atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations (medium conﬁdence). Changes in Arctic 
sea ice have potential to inﬂuence mid-latitude weather on timescales 
of weeks to months (low to medium conﬁdence). {3.2.1.1, Box 3.2}
It is very likely that Antarctic sea ice cover exhibits no 
signiﬁcant trend over the period of satellite observations 
(1979–2018). While the drivers of historical decadal variability are 
known with medium conﬁdence, there is currently limited evidence 
and low agreement concerning causes of the strong recent decrease 
(2016–2018), and low conﬁdence in the ability of current-generation 
climate models to reproduce and explain the observations. {3.2.1.1}
Shipping activity during the Arctic summer increased over the 
past two decades in regions for which there is information, 
concurrent with reductions in sea ice extent (high conﬁdence). 
Transit times across the Northern Sea Route have shortened due 
to lighter ice conditions, and while long-term, pan-Arctic datasets 
are incomplete, the distance travelled by ships in Arctic Canada 
nearly tripled during 1990–2015 (high conﬁdence). Greater levels 
of Arctic ship-based transportation and tourism have socioeconomic 
and political implications for global trade, northern nations, and 
economies linked to traditional shipping corridors; they will also 
exacerbate region speciﬁc risks for marine ecosystems and coastal 
communities if further action to develop and adequately implement 
regulations does not keep pace with increased shipping (high 
conﬁdence). {3.2.1.1, 3.2.4.2, 3.2.4.3, 3.4.3.3.2, 3.5.2.7}
Permafrost temperatures have increased to record high levels 
(very high conﬁdence), but there is medium evidence and low 
agreement that this warming is currently causing northern 
permafrost regions to release additional methane and 
carbon dioxide. During 2007–2016, continuous-zone permafrost 
temperatures in the Arctic and Antarctic increased by 0.39 ± 0.15ºC 
and 0.37 ± 0.10ºC respectively. Arctic and boreal permafrost region 
soils contain 1460–1600 Gt organic carbon (medium conﬁdence). 
Changes in permafrost inﬂuence global climate through emissions of 
carbon dioxide and methane released from the microbial breakdown 
of organic carbon, or the release of trapped methane. {3.4.1, 3.4.3}
Climate-related changes to Arctic hydrology, wildﬁre and 
abrupt thaw are occurring (high conﬁdence), with impacts 
on vegetation and water and food security. Snow and lake 
ice cover has declined, with June snow extent decreasing 13.4 
±  5.4% per decade (1967–2018) (high conﬁdence). Runoff into 
the Arctic Ocean increased for Eurasian and North American rivers 
by 3.3 ± 1.6% and 2.0 ± 1.8% respectively (1976–2017; medium 
conﬁdence). Area burned and frequency of ﬁres (including extreme 
ﬁres) are unprecedented over the last 10,000 years (high conﬁdence). 
There has been an overall greening of the tundra biome, but also 
browning in some regions of tundra and boreal forest, and changes 
in the abundance and distribution of animals including reindeer and 
salmon (high conﬁdence). Together, these impact access to (and food 
53
Technical Summary
TS
availability within) herding, hunting, ﬁshing, forage and gathering 
areas, affecting the livelihood, health and cultural identity of residents 
including Indigenous peoples (high conﬁdence). {3.4.1, 3.4.3, 3.5.2}
Limited knowledge, ﬁnancial resources, human capital and 
organisational capacity are constraining adaptation in many 
human sectors in the Arctic (high conﬁdence). Harvesters of 
renewable resources are adjusting timing of activities to changes 
in seasonality and less safe ice travel conditions. Municipalities 
and industry are addressing infrastructure failures associated with 
ﬂooding and thawing permafrost, and coastal communities and 
cooperating agencies are in some cases planning for relocation 
(high conﬁdence). In spite of these adaptations, many groups are 
making decisions without adequate knowledge to forecast near- and 
long-term conditions, and without the funding, skills and institutional 
support to engage fully in planning processes (high conﬁdence). 
{3.5.2, 3.5.4, Cross-Chapter Box 9}
It is extremely likely that the rapid ice loss from the Greenland 
and Antarctic ice sheets during the early 21st century has 
increased into the near present day, adding to the ice sheet 
contribution to global sea level rise. From Greenland, the 2012–
2016 ice losses (–247 ± 15 Gt yr–1) were similar to those from 2002 
to 2011 (–263 ± 21 Gt yr–1) and extremely likely greater than from 
1992 to 2001 (–8 ± 82 Gt yr–1). Summer melting of the Greenland 
Ice Sheet (GIS) has increased since the 1990s (very high conﬁdence) 
to a  level unprecedented over at least the last 350 years, and 
two-to-ﬁvefold the pre-industrial level (medium conﬁdence). From 
Antarctica, the 2012–2016 losses (–199 ± 26 Gt yr–1) were extremely 
likely greater than those from 2002 to 2011 (–82 ± 27 Gt yr–1) and 
likely greater than from 1992 to 2001 (–51 ± 73 Gt yr–1). Antarctic 
ice loss is dominated by acceleration, retreat and rapid thinning 
of major West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) outlet glaciers (very high 
conﬁdence), driven by melting of ice shelves by warm ocean waters 
(high conﬁdence). The combined sea level rise contribution from both 
ice sheets for 2012–2016 was 1.2 ± 0.1 mm yr–1, a 29% increase on 
the 2002–2011 contribution and a ~700% increase on the 1992–
2001 period. {3.3.1}
Mass loss from Arctic glaciers  (–212 ±  29 Gt yr–1) during 
2006–2015 contributed to sea level rise at a  similar rate 
(0.6 ± 0.1 mm yr–1) to the GIS (high conﬁdence). Over the same 
period in Antarctic and subantarctic regions, glaciers separate from 
the ice sheets changed mass by –11 ± 108 Gt yr–1 (low conﬁdence). 
{2.2.3, 3.3.2}
There is limited evidence and high agreement that recent 
Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) mass losses could be irreversible 
over decades to millennia. Rapid mass loss due to glacier ﬂow 
acceleration in the Amundsen Sea Embayment (ASE) of West 
Antarctica and in Wilkes Land, East Antarctica, may indicate the 
beginning of Marine Ice Sheet Instability (MISI), but observational 
data are not yet sufﬁcient to determine whether these changes mark 
the beginning of irreversible retreat. {3.3.1, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in 
Chapter 3, 4.2.3.1.2}
6 
Projections for ice sheets and glaciers in the polar regions are summarized in Chapters 4 and 2, respectively.
The polar regions will be profoundly different in future 
compared with today, and the degree and nature of that 
difference will depend strongly on the rate and magnitude 
of global climatic change6. This will challenge adaptation 
responses regionally and worldwide.
It is very likely that projected Arctic warming will result in 
continued loss of sea ice and snow on land, and reductions in 
the mass of glaciers. Important differences in the trajectories 
of loss emerge from 2050 onwards, depending on mitigation 
measures taken (high conﬁdence). For stabilised global warming 
of 1.5ºC, an approximately 1% chance of a given September being sea 
ice free at the end of century is projected; for stabilised warming at 
a 2ºC increase, this rises to 10–35% (high conﬁdence). The potential 
for reduced (further 5–10%) but stabilised Arctic autumn and spring 
snow extent by mid-century for Representative Concentration 
Pathway (RCP)2.6 contrasts with continued loss under RCP8.5 
(a further 15–25% reduction to end of century) (high conﬁdence). 
Projected mass reductions for polar glaciers between 2015 and 2100 
range from 16 ± 7% for RCP2.6 to 33 ± 11% for RCP8.5 (medium 
conﬁdence). {3.2.2, 3.3.2, 3.4.2, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2}
Both polar oceans will be increasingly affected by CO2 
uptake, causing conditions corrosive for calcium carbonate 
shell-producing organisms (high conﬁdence), with associated 
impacts on marine organisms and ecosystems (medium 
conﬁdence). It is very likely that both the Southern Ocean and the 
Arctic Ocean will experience year-round conditions of surface water 
undersaturation for mineral forms of calcium carbonate by 2100 
under RCP8.5; under RCP2.6 the extent of undersaturated waters 
are reduced markedly. Imperfect representation of local processes 
and sea ice interaction in global climate models limit the ability to 
project the response of speciﬁc polar areas and the precise timing of 
undersaturation at seasonal scales. Differences in sensitivity and the 
scope for adaptation to projected levels of ocean acidiﬁcation exist 
across a broad range of marine species groups. {3.2.1, 3.2.2.3, 3.2.3}
Future climate-induced changes in the polar oceans, sea ice, 
snow and permafrost will drive habitat and biome shifts, 
with associated changes in the ranges and abundance of 
ecologically important species (medium conﬁdence). Projected 
shifts will include further habitat contraction and changes in 
abundance for polar species, including marine mammals, birds, ﬁsh, 
and Antarctic krill (medium conﬁdence). Projected range expansion 
of subarctic marine species will increase pressure for high-Arctic 
species (medium conﬁdence), with regionally variable impacts. 
Continued loss of Arctic multi-year sea ice will affect ice-related and 
pelagic primary production (high conﬁdence), with impacts for whole 
ice-associated, seaﬂoor and open ocean ecosystems. On Arctic land, 
projections indicate a loss of globally unique biodiversity as some 
high Arctic species will be outcompeted by more temperate species 
and very limited refugia exist (medium conﬁdence). Woody shrubs 
and trees are projected to expand, covering 24–52% of the current 
tundra region by 2050. {3.2.2.1, 3.2.3, 3.2.3.1, Box 3.4, 3.4.2, 3.4.3}
54
Technical Summary
TS
The projected effects of climate-induced stressors on 
polar marine ecosystems present risks for commercial and 
subsistence ﬁsheries with implications for regional economies, 
cultures and the global supply of ﬁsh, shellﬁsh, and Antarctic 
krill (high conﬁdence). Future impacts for linked human 
systems depend on the level of mitigation and especially the 
responsiveness of precautionary management approaches 
(medium conﬁdence). Polar regions support several of the 
world’s largest commercial ﬁsheries. Speciﬁc impacts on the stocks 
and economic value in both regions will depend on future climate 
change and on the strategies employed to manage the effects on 
stocks and ecosystems (medium conﬁdence). Under high emission 
scenarios current management strategies of some high-value stocks 
may not sustain current catch levels in the future (low conﬁdence); 
this exempliﬁes the limits to the ability of existing natural resource 
management frameworks to address ecosystem change. Adaptive 
management that combines annual measures and within-season 
provisions informed by assessments of future ecosystem trends 
reduces the risks of negative climate change impacts on polar 
ﬁsheries (medium conﬁdence). {3.2.4, 3.5.2, 3.5.4}
Widespread disappearance of Arctic near-surface permafrost 
is projected to occur this century as a result of warming (very 
high conﬁdence), with important consequences for global 
climate. By 2100, near-surface permafrost area will decrease 
by  2–66% for RCP2.6 and 30–99% for RCP8.5. This is projected 
to release 10s to 100s of billions of tons (Gt C), up to as much as 
240 Gt C, of permafrost carbon as carbon dioxide and methane to 
the atmosphere with the potential to accelerate climate change. 
Methane will contribute a small proportion of these additional carbon 
emissions, on the order of 0.01–0.06 Gt CH4 yr–1, but could contribute 
40–70% of the total permafrost-affected radiative forcing because of 
its higher warming potential. There is medium evidence but with low 
agreement whether the level and timing of increased plant growth 
and replenishment of soil will compensate these permafrost carbon 
losses. {3.4.2, 3.4.3}
Projected permafrost thaw and decrease in snow will affect 
Arctic hydrology and wildﬁre, with impacts on vegetation and 
human infrastructure (medium conﬁdence). About 20% of Arctic 
land permafrost is vulnerable to abrupt permafrost thaw and ground 
subsidence, which is expected to increase small lake area by over 
50% by 2100 for RCP8.5 (medium conﬁdence). Even as the overall 
regional water cycle intensiﬁes, including increased precipitation, 
evapotranspiration, and river discharge to the Arctic Ocean, decreases 
in snow and permafrost may lead to soil drying (medium conﬁdence). 
Fire is projected to increase for the rest of this century across most 
tundra and boreal regions, while interactions between climate and 
shifting vegetation will inﬂuence future ﬁre intensity and frequency 
(medium conﬁdence). By 2050, 70% of Arctic infrastructure is located 
in regions at risk from permafrost thaw and subsidence; adaptation 
measures taken in advance could reduce costs arising from thaw and 
other climate change related impacts such as increased ﬂooding, 
precipitation, and freeze-thaw events by half (medium conﬁdence). 
{3.4.1, 3.4.2, 3.4.3, 3.5.2}
Response options exist that can ameliorate the impacts of 
polar change, build resilience and allow time for effective 
mitigation measures. Institutional barriers presently limit 
their efﬁcacy.
Responding to climate change in polar regions will be more 
effective if attention to reducing immediate risks (short-term 
adaptation) is concurrent with long-term planning that builds 
resilience to address expected and unexpected impacts (high 
conﬁdence). Emphasis on short-term adaptation to speciﬁc problems 
will ultimately not succeed in reducing the risks and vulnerabilities to 
society given the scale, complexity and uncertainty of climate change. 
Moving toward a  dual focus of short- and long-term adaptation 
involves knowledge co-production, linking knowledge with decision 
making and implementing ecosystem-based stewardship, which 
involves the transformation of many existing institutions (high 
conﬁdence). {3.5.4}
Innovative tools and practices in polar resource management 
and planning show strong potential in improving society’s 
capacity to respond to climate change (high conﬁdence). 
Networks of protected areas, participatory scenario analysis, decision 
support systems, community-based ecological monitoring that 
draws on local and indigenous knowledge, and self assessments 
of community resilience contribute to strategic plans for sustaining 
biodiversity and limit risk to human livelihoods and wellbeing. Such 
practices are most effective when linked closely to the policy process. 
Experimenting, assessing, and continually reﬁning practices while 
strengthening the links with decision making has the potential to 
ready society for the expected and unexpected impacts of climate 
change (high conﬁdence). {3.5.1, 3.5.2, 3.5.4}
Institutional arrangements that provide for strong multiscale 
linkages with Arctic local communities can beneﬁt from 
including indigenous knowledge and local knowledge in the 
formulation of adaptation strategies (high conﬁdence). The 
tightly coupled relationship of northern local communities and their 
environment provide an opportunity to better understand climate 
change and its effects, support adaptation and limit unintended 
consequences. Enabling conditions for the involvement of local 
communities in climate adaptation planning include investments in 
human capital, engagement processes for knowledge co-production 
and systems of adaptive governance. {3.5.3}
The capacity of governance systems in polar regions to 
respond to climate change has strengthened recently, but 
the development of these systems is not sufﬁciently rapid or 
robust to address the challenges and risks to societies posed 
by projected changes (high conﬁdence). Human responses 
to climate change in the polar regions occur in a  fragmented 
governance landscape. Climate change, new polar interests from 
outside the regions, and an increasingly active role played by informal 
organisations are compelling stronger coordination and integration 
between different levels and sectors of governance. The governance 
landscape is currently not sufﬁciently equipped to address cascading 
risks and uncertainty in an integrated and precautionary way within 
existing legal and policy frameworks (high conﬁdence). {3.5.3, 3.5.4}
55
Technical Summary
TS
TS.4 
 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-
lying Is lands, Coasts and Communities
This chapter assesses past and future contributions to global, regional 
and extreme sea level changes, associated risk to low-lying islands, 
coasts, cities, and settlements, and response options and pathways to 
resilience and sustainable development along the coast.
Observations
Global mean sea level (GMSL) is rising (virtually certain) 
and accelerating (high conﬁdence)7. The sum of glacier and 
ice sheet contributions is now the dominant source of GMSL 
rise (very high conﬁdence). GMSL from tide gauges and altimetry 
observations increased from 1.4 mm yr–1 over the period 1901–1990 
to 2.1  mm yr–1 over the period 1970–2015 to 3.2  mm yr–1 over 
the period 1993–2015 to 3.6 mm yr–1 over the period 2006–2015 
(high conﬁdence). The dominant cause of GMSL rise since 1970 is 
anthropogenic forcing (high conﬁdence). {4.2.2.1.1, 4.2.2.2}
GMSL was considerably higher than today during past climate 
states that were warmer than pre-industrial, including the 
Last Interglacial (LIG; 129–116 ka), when global mean surface 
temperature was 0.5ºC–1.0ºC warmer, and the mid-Pliocene 
Warm Period (mPWP; ~3.3 to 3.0 million years ago), 2ºC–4ºC 
warmer. Despite the modest global warmth of the Last 
Interglacial, GMSL was  likely  6–9  m higher, mainly due to 
contributions from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets 
(GIS and AIS, respectively), and unlikely more than 10m higher 
(medium conﬁdence). Based on new understanding about 
geological constraints since the IPCC 5th Assessment Report 
(AR5), 25 m is a plausible upper bound on GMSL during the 
mPWP (low conﬁdence). Ongoing uncertainties in palaeo sea level 
reconstructions and modelling hamper conclusions regarding the 
total magnitudes and rates of past sea level rise (SLR). Furthermore, 
the long (multi-millennial) time scales of these past climate and 
sea level changes, and regional climate inﬂuences from changes in 
Earth’s orbital conﬁguration and climate system feedbacks, lead to 
low conﬁdence in direct comparisons with near-term future changes. 
{Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1, 4.2.2, 4.2.2.1, 4.2.2.5, SM 4.1}
Non-climatic 
anthropogenic 
drivers, 
including 
recent 
and historical demographic and settlement trends and 
anthropogenic subsidence, have played an important role 
in increasing low-lying coastal communities’ exposure and 
vulnerability to SLR and extreme sea level (ESL) events (very 
high conﬁdence). In coastal deltas, for example, these drivers have 
altered freshwater and sediment availability (high conﬁdence). In 
low-lying coastal areas more broadly, human-induced changes can 
be rapid and modify coastlines over short periods of time, outpacing 
the effects of SLR (high conﬁdence). Adaptation can be undertaken in 
the short- to medium-term by targeting local drivers of exposure and 
7 
Statements about uncertainty in Section 4.2 are contingent upon the RCP or other emissions assumptions that accompany them. In Section 4.4, the entirety of information 
facing a decision maker is taken into consideration, including the unknown path of future emissions, in assessing uncertainty. Depending on which perspective is chosen, 
uncertainty may or may not be characterised as ‘deep’.
vulnerability, notwithstanding uncertainty about local SLR impacts 
in coming decades and beyond (high conﬁdence). {4.2.2.4, 4.3.1, 
4.3.2.2,  4.3.2.3}
Coastal ecosystems are already impacted by the combination 
of SLR, other climate-related ocean changes, and adverse 
effects from human activities on ocean and land (high 
conﬁdence). Attributing such impacts to SLR, however, remains 
challenging due to the inﬂuence of other climate-related and 
non-climatic drivers such as infrastructure development and 
human-induced habitat degradation (high conﬁdence). Coastal 
ecosystems, including saltmarshes, mangroves, vegetated dunes and 
sandy beaches, can build vertically and expand laterally in response to 
SLR, though this capacity varies across sites (high conﬁdence). These 
ecosystems provide important services that include coastal protection 
and habitat for diverse biota. However, as a consequence of human 
actions that fragment wetland habitats and restrict landward 
migration, coastal ecosystems progressively lose their ability to adapt 
to climate-induced changes and provide ecosystem services, including 
acting as protective barriers (high conﬁdence). {4.3.2.3}
Coastal risk is dynamic and increased by widely observed 
changes in coastal infrastructure, community livelihoods, 
agriculture and habitability (high conﬁdence). As with coastal 
ecosystems, attribution of observed changes and associated 
risk to SLR remains challenging. Drivers and processes inhibiting 
attribution include demographic, resource and land use changes and 
anthropogenic subsidence. {4.3.3, 4.3.4}
A diversity of adaptation responses to coastal impacts 
and risks have been implemented around the world, but 
mostly as a reaction to current coastal risk or experienced 
disasters (high conﬁdence). Hard coastal protection measures 
(dikes, embankments, sea walls and surge barriers) are widespread, 
providing predictable levels of safety in northwest Europe, East 
Asia, and around many coastal cities and deltas. Ecosystem-based 
adaptation (EbA) is continuing to gain traction worldwide, providing 
multiple co-beneﬁts, but there is still low agreement on its cost and 
long-term effectiveness. Advance, which refers to the creation of 
new land by building into the sea (e.g., land reclamation), has a long 
history in most areas where there are dense coastal populations. 
Accommodation measures, such as early warning systems (EWS) for 
ESL events, are widespread. Retreat is observed but largely restricted 
to small communities or carried out for the purpose of creating new 
wetland habitat. {4.4.2.3, 4.4.2.4, 4.4.2.5}
Projections
Future rise in GMSL caused by thermal expansion, melting 
of glaciers and ice sheets and land water storage changes, is 
strongly dependent on which Representative Concentration 
Pathway (RCP) emission scenario is followed. SLR at the end 
56
Technical Summary
TS
of the century is projected to be faster under all scenarios, 
including those compatible with achieving the long-term 
temperature goal set out in the Paris Agreement. GMSL will 
rise between 0.43 m (0.29–0.59 m, likely range; RCP2.6) and 
0.84 m (0.61–1.10 m, likely range; RCP8.5) by 2100 (medium 
conﬁdence) relative to 1986–2005. Beyond 2100, sea level will 
continue to rise for centuries due to continuing deep ocean heat 
uptake and mass loss of the GIS and AIS and will remain elevated 
for thousands of years (high conﬁdence). Under RCP8.5, estimates 
for 2100 are higher and the uncertainty range larger than in AR5. 
Antarctica could contribute up to 28 cm of SLR (RCP8.5, upper end of 
likely range) by the end of the century (medium conﬁdence). Estimates 
of SLR higher than the likely range are also provided here for decision 
makers with low risk tolerance. {SR1.5, 4.1, 4.2.3.2, 4.2.3.5}
Under RCP8.5, the rate of SLR will be 15 mm yr–1 (10–20 mm yr–1, 
likely range) in 2100, and could exceed several cm yr–1 in the 
22nd century. These high rates challenge the implementation of 
adaptation measures that involve a long lead time, but this has not 
yet been studied in detail. {4.2.3.2, 4.4.2.2.3}
Processes controlling the timing of future ice shelf loss and 
the spatial extent of ice sheet instabilities could increase 
Antarctica’s contribution to SLR to values higher than 
the likely range on century and longer time scales (low 
conﬁdence). Evolution of the AIS beyond the end of the 21st century 
is characterized by deep uncertainty as ice sheet models lack realistic 
representations of some of the underlying physical processes. The 
few model studies available addressing time scales of centuries to 
millennia indicate multi-metre (2.3–5.4 m) rise in sea level for RCP8.5 
(low conﬁdence). There is low conﬁdence in threshold temperatures 
for ice sheet instabilities and the rates of GMSL rise they can produce. 
{Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3, 
and Sections 4.1, 4.2.3.1.1, 4.2.3.1.2, 4.2.3.6}
Sea level rise is not globally uniform and varies regionally. 
Thermal expansion, ocean dynamics and land ice loss 
contributions will generate regional departures of about ±30% 
around the GMSL rise. Differences from the global mean can be 
greater than ±30% in areas of rapid vertical land movements, 
including those caused by local anthropogenic factors such as 
groundwater extraction (high conﬁdence). Subsidence caused by 
human activities is currently the most important cause of relative sea 
level rise (RSL) change in many delta regions. While the comparative 
importance of climate-driven RSL rise will increase over time, these 
ﬁndings on anthropogenic subsidence imply that a consideration of 
local processes is critical for projections of sea level impacts at local 
scales (high conﬁdence). {4.2.1.6, 4.2.2.4}
Due to projected GMSL rise, ESLs that are historically rare (for 
example, today’s hundred-year event) will become common 
by 2100 under all RCPs (high conﬁdence). Many low-lying cities 
and small islands at most latitudes will experience such events 
annually by 2050. Greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation envisioned in 
low-emission scenarios (e.g., RCP2.6) is expected to sharply reduce 
but not eliminate risk to low-lying coasts and islands from SLR and 
ESL events. Low-emission scenarios lead to slower rates of SLR and 
allow for a wider range of adaptation options. For the ﬁrst half of the 
21st century differences in ESL events among the scenarios are small, 
facilitating adaptation planning. {4.2.2.5, 4.2.3.4, Figure TS.6}
Non-climatic anthropogenic drivers will continue to increase 
the exposure and vulnerability of coastal communities to future 
SLR and ESL events in the absence of major adaptation efforts 
compared to today (high conﬁdence). {4.3.4, Cross-Chapter Box 9}
The expected impacts of SLR on coastal ecosystems over 
the course of the century include habitat contraction, loss 
of functionality and biodiversity, and lateral and inland 
migration. Impacts will be exacerbated in cases of land 
reclamation and where anthropogenic barriers prevent inland 
migration of marshes and mangroves and limit the availability 
and relocation of sediment (high conﬁdence). Under favourable 
conditions, marshes and mangroves have been found to keep pace 
with fast rates of SLR (e.g., >10 mm yr–1), but this capacity varies 
signiﬁcantly depending on factors such as wave exposure of the 
location, tidal range, sediment trapping, overall sediment availability 
and coastal squeeze (high conﬁdence). {4.3.3.5.1}
In the absence of adaptation, more intense and frequent ESL 
events, together with trends in coastal development will 
increase expected annual ﬂood damages by 2–3 orders of 
magnitude by 2100 (high conﬁdence). However, well designed 
coastal protection is very effective in reducing expected 
damages and cost efﬁcient for urban and densely populated 
regions, but generally unaffordable for rural and poorer areas 
(high conﬁdence). Effective protection requires investments on the 
order of tens to several hundreds of billions of USD yr–1 globally (high 
conﬁdence). While investments are generally cost efﬁcient for densely 
populated and urban areas (high conﬁdence), rural and poorer areas 
will be challenged to afford such investments with relative annual 
costs for some small island states amounting to several percent of 
GDP (high conﬁdence). Even with well-designed hard protection, the 
risk of possibly disastrous consequences in the event of failure of 
defences remains. {4.3.4, 4.4.2.2, 4.4.3.2, Cross-Chapter Box 9}
Risk related to SLR (including erosion, ﬂooding and 
salinisation) is expected to signiﬁcantly increase by the end of 
this century along all low-lying coasts in the absence of major 
additional adaptation efforts (very high conﬁdence). While 
only urban atoll islands and some Arctic communities are expected 
to experience moderate to high risk relative to today in a low 
emission pathway, almost high to very high risks are expected in all 
low-lying coastal settings at the upper end of the likely range for high 
emission pathways (medium conﬁdence). However,  the transition 
from moderate to high and from high to very high risk will vary from 
one coastal setting to another (high conﬁdence). While a slower 
rate of SLR enables greater opportunities for adapting, adaptation 
beneﬁts are also expected to vary between coastal settings. Although 
ambitious adaptation will not necessarily eradicate end-century SLR 
risk (medium conﬁdence), it will help to buy time in many locations 
and therefore help to lay a robust foundation for adaptation beyond 
2100. {4.1.3, 4.3.4, Box 4.1, SM4.2}
57
Technical Summary
TS
Choosing and Implementing Responses
All types of responses to SLR, including protection, 
accommodation, EbA, advance and retreat, have important 
and synergistic roles to play in an integrated and sequenced 
response to SLR (high conﬁdence). Hard protection and advance 
(building into the sea) are economically efﬁcient in most urban 
contexts facing land scarcity (high conﬁdence), but can lead to 
increased exposure in the long term. Where sufﬁcient space is 
available, EbA can both reduce coastal risks and provide multiple 
other beneﬁts (medium conﬁdence). Accommodation such as ﬂood 
prooﬁng buildings and EWS for ESL events are often both low-cost and 
highly cost-efﬁcient in all contexts (high conﬁdence). Where coastal 
risks are already high, and population size and density are low, or in 
the aftermath of a coastal disaster, retreat may be especially effective, 
albeit socially, culturally and politically challenging. {4.4.2.2, 4.4.2.3, 
4.4.2.4, 4.4.2.5, 4.4.2.6, 4.4.3}
Technical limits to hard protection are expected to be reached 
under high emission scenarios (RCP8.5) beyond 2100 (high 
conﬁdence) and biophysical limits to EbA may arise during 
the 21st century, but economic and social barriers arise well 
before the end of the century (medium conﬁdence). Economic 
challenges to hard protection increase with higher sea levels and will 
make adaptation unaffordable before technical limits are reached 
(high conﬁdence). Drivers other than SLR are expected to contribute 
1/month
1/year
1/decade
1/century 
1/month
1/year
1/decade
1/century
recent past
future
mean sea level
mean sea level
sea 
level
rise
2000
Year
2020
2040
2060
2080
2100
Time
Sea level height and recurrence frequency
HCE
Historical Centennial extreme sea level 
Events (HCEs) become more common 
due to sea level rise
RCP8.5
RCP2.6
Black:
Locations where 
HCEs already
recur annually
White:
Locations where
HCEs recur
 annually after 2100
(b) Year when HCEs are projected to 
recur once per year on average
(a) Schematic effect of regional sea level rise on 
projected extreme sea level events (not to scale)
Difference 
>10 years later
Difference 
<10 years later
(c) Difference between RCP8.5 and RCP2.6
no relative sea level 
rise before 2100
The difference map shows locations where the HCE 
becomes annual at least 10 years later under RCP2.6 
than under RCP8.5.
Figure TS.6 |  The effect of regional sea level rise on extreme sea level events at coastal locations. Due to projected global mean sea level (GMSL) rise, local sea levels that 
historically occurred once per century (historical centennial events, HCEs) are projected to become at least annual events at most locations during the 21st century. The 
height of a HCE varies widely, and depending on the level of exposure can already cause severe impacts. Impacts can continue to increase with rising frequency of HCEs. 
(a) Schematic illustration of extreme sea level events and their average recurrence in the recent past (1986–2005) and the future. As a consequence of mean sea level rise, 
HCEs are projected to recur more frequently in the future. (b) The year in which HCEs are expected to recur once per year on average under RCP8.5 and RCP2.6, at the 439 
individual coastal locations where the observational record is sufﬁcient. The absence of a circle indicates an inability to perform an assessment due to a lack of data but 
does not indicate absence of exposure and risk. The darker the circle, the earlier this transition is expected. The likely range is ±10 years for locations where this transition 
is expected before 2100. White circles (33% of locations under RCP2.6 and 10% under RCP8.5) indicate that HCEs are not expected to recur once per year before 2100. 
(c) An indication at which locations this transition of HCEs to annual events is projected to occur more than 10 years later under RCP2.6 compared to RCP8.5. As the 
scenarios lead to small differences by 2050 in many locations results are not shown here for RCP4.5 but they are available in Chapter 4. {4.2.3, Figure 4.10, Figure 4.12}
58
Technical Summary
TS
more to biophysical limits of EbA. For corals, limits may be reached 
during this century, due to ocean acidiﬁcation and ocean warming, 
and for tidal wetlands due to pollution and infrastructure limiting 
their inland migration. Limits to accommodation are expected to occur 
well before limits to protection occur. Limits to retreat are uncertain, 
reﬂecting research gaps. Social barriers (including governance 
challenges) to adaptation are already encountered. {4.4.2.2, 4.4.2.3, 
4.4.2.3.2, 4.4.2.5, 4.4.2.6, 4.4.3, Cross-Chapter Box 9}
Choosing and implementing responses to SLR presents society 
with profound governance challenges and difﬁcult social choices, 
which are inherently political and value laden (high conﬁdence). 
The large uncertainties about post 2050 SLR, and the substantial 
impact expected, challenge established planning and decision 
making practises and introduce the need for coordination within and 
between governance levels and policy domains. SLR responses also 
raise equity concerns about marginalising those most vulnerable and 
could potentially spark or compound social conﬂict (high conﬁdence). 
Choosing and implementing responses is further challenged through 
a lack of resources, vexing trade-offs between safety, conservation and 
economic development, multiple ways of framing the ‘sea level rise 
problem’, power relations, and various coastal stakeholders having 
conﬂicting interests in the future development of heavily used coastal 
zones (high conﬁdence). {4.4.2, 4.4.3}
Despite the large uncertainties about post 2050 SLR, 
adaptation decisions can be made now, facilitated by using 
decision analysis methods speciﬁcally designed to address 
uncertainty (high conﬁdence). These methods favour ﬂexible 
responses (i.e., those that can be adapted over time) and periodically 
adjusted decisions (i.e.,  adaptive decision making). They use 
robustness criteria (i.e., effectiveness across a range of circumstances) 
for evaluating alternative responses instead of standard expected 
utility criteria (high conﬁdence). One example is adaptation pathway 
analysis, which has emerged as a low-cost tool to assess long-term 
coastal responses as sequences of adaptive decisions in the face of 
dynamic coastal risk characterised by deep uncertainty (medium 
evidence, high agreement). The range of SLR to be considered 
in decisions depends on the risk tolerance of stakeholders, with 
stakeholders whose risk tolerance is low also considering SLR higher 
than the likely range. {4.1, 4.4.4.3}
Adaptation experience to date demonstrates that using a locally 
appropriate combination of decision analysis, land use planning, 
public participation and conﬂict resolution approaches can help 
to address the governance challenges faced in responding to 
SLR (high conﬁdence). Effective SLR responses depend, ﬁrst, on 
taking a long-term perspective when making short-term decisions, 
explicitly accounting for uncertainty of locality-speciﬁc risks beyond 
2050 (high conﬁdence), and building governance capabilities to 
tackle the complexity of SLR risk (medium evidence, high agreement). 
Second, improved coordination of SLR responses across scales, sectors 
and policy domains can help to address SLR impacts and risk (high 
conﬁdence). Third, prioritising consideration of social vulnerability and 
equity underpins efforts to promote fair and just climate resilience 
and sustainable development (high conﬁdence) and can be helped by 
creating safe community arenas for meaningful public deliberation and 
conﬂict resolution (medium evidence, high agreement). Finally, public 
awareness and understanding about SLR risks and responses can be 
improved by drawing on local, indigenous and scientiﬁc knowledge 
systems, together with social learning about locality-speciﬁc SLR risk 
and response potential (high conﬁdence). {4.4.4.2, 4.4.5, Table 4.9, 
Figure TS.7}
Achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) and charting Climate Resilient Development Pathways 
depends in part on ambitious and sustained mitigation 
efforts to contain SLR coupled with effective adaptation 
actions to reduce SLR impacts and risk (medium evidence, 
high agreement).
TS.5 
 Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems,  
and Dependent Communities
The ocean is essential for all aspects of human well-being and 
livelihood. It provides key services like climate regulation, through 
the energy budget, carbon cycle and nutrient cycle. The ocean is the 
home of biodiversity ranging from microbes to marine mammals 
that form a wide variety of ecosystems in open pelagic and 
coastal ocean.
Observations: Climate-related trends, impacts, adaptation
Carbon emissions from human activities are causing ocean 
warming, acidiﬁcation and oxygen loss with some evidence 
of changes in nutrient cycling and primary production. The 
warming ocean is affecting marine organisms at multiple 
trophic levels, impacting ﬁsheries with implications for food 
production and human communities. Concerns regarding the 
effectiveness of existing ocean and ﬁsheries governance 
have already been reported, highlighting the need for timely 
mitigation and adaptation responses.
The ocean has warmed unabated since 2005, continuing the 
clear multi-decadal ocean warming trends documented in 
the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5). The warming trend is 
further conﬁrmed by the improved ocean temperature measurements 
over the last decade. The 0−700 m and 700–2000 m layers of the 
ocean have warmed at rates of 5.31 ± 0.48 and 4.02 ± 0.97 ZJ yr–1 
from 2005 to 2017. The long-term trend for 0–700 m and 700–
2000 m layers have warmed 4.35 ± 0.8 and 2.25 ± 0.64  ZJ  yr–1 
from between the averages of 1971–1990 and 1998–2017 and is 
attributed to anthropogenic inﬂuences. It is likely the ocean warming 
has continued in the abyssal and deep ocean below 2000 m (southern 
hemisphere and Southern Ocean). {1.8.1, 1.2, 5.2.2}
It is likely that the rate of ocean warming has increased since 
1993. The 0−700 m and 700–2000 m layers of the ocean have 
warmed by 3.22 ± 1.61 ZJ and 0.97 ± 0.64 ZJ from 1969 to 1993, and 
6.28 ± 0.48 ZJ and 3.86 ± 2.09 ZJ from 1993 to 2017. This represents 
at least a two-fold increase in heat uptake. {Table 5.1, 5.2.2}
59
Technical Summary
TS
(b) Benefits of responses to sea level rise and mitigation
Risk for illustrative geographies based on mean sea level changes (medium confidence)
Present day
Future
Level of
risk related
to sea level
Risk reduction 
through mitigation
Total risk reduction
(mitigation + responses 
to sea level rise)
Risk delay through 
responses to sea level rise
Risk reduction 
through responses 
to sea level rise
Risk delay 
through mitigation
0.5
1.0
0
In this assessment, the term response refers to in situ responses to sea level rise (hard engineered coastal defenses, restoration of degraded ecosystems, 
subsidence limitation) and planned relocation. Planned relocation in this assessment refers to proactive managed retreat or resettlement only at a local scale, and 
according to the specificities of a particular context (e.g., in urban atoll islands: within the island, in a neighbouring island or in artificially raised islands). Forced 
displacement and international migration are not considered in this assessment.
The illustrative geographies are based on a limited number of case studies well covered by the peer reviewed literature. The realisation of risk will depend on 
context specifities.
Sea level rise scenarios: RCP4.5 and RCP6.0 are not considered in this risk assessment because the literature underpinning this assessment is only available for 
RCP2.6 and RCP8.5.
Arctic
communities
Urban
atoll islands
Resource-rich
coastal cities
Large tropical 
agricultural deltas
Very high
High
Undetectable
Moderate
No-to-moderate
response
Maximum potential
response
Assessment 
data (Chapter 4)
Interpolation
Low emission
scenario
(RCP2.6)
High emission
scenario
(RCP8.5)
Purple: Very high probability of severe impacts/risks 
and the presence of significant irreversibility or the 
persistence of climate-related hazards, combined with 
limited ability to adapt due to the nature of the hazard 
or impacts/risks.
Red: Significant and widespread impacts/risks.
Yellow: Impacts/risks are detectable and attributable 
to climate change with at least medium confidence.
White: Impacts/risks are undetectable.     
Total risk delay
(mitigation + responses 
to sea level rise)
Global mean sea level rise in 2100 (metres)
Relative contribution of response options
to risk reduction (per geography)
(a) Risk in 2100 under different sea level rise and response scenarios
Levels of risk
Schematic illustration of risk reduction and the delay of 
a given risk level through responses to sea level rise 
and/or mitigation. The amount of risk reduction and 
delay depends on sea level and response scenarios 
and varies between contexts and localities. 
= In situ
    responses
= Planned 
    relocation
Figure TS.7 |  a, b
The upper ocean is very likely to have been stratifying since 
1970. Observed warming and high-latitude freshening are making 
the surface ocean less dense over time relative to the deeper ocean 
(high conﬁdence) and inhibiting the exchange between surface and 
deep waters. The upper 200 m stratiﬁcation increase is in the very 
likely range of between 2.18−2.42% from 1970 to 2017. {5.2.2}
Multiple datasets and models show that the rate of ocean 
uptake of atmospheric CO2 has continued to strengthen 
in the recent two decades in response to the increasing 
concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere. The very likely range for 
ocean uptake is between 20–30% of total anthropogenic emissions 
in the recent two decades. Evidence is growing that the ocean 
carbon sink is dynamic on decadal timescales, especially in the 
Southern Ocean, which has affected the total global ocean carbon 
sink (medium conﬁdence). {5.2.2.3}
The ocean is continuing to acidify in response to ongoing ocean 
carbon uptake. The open ocean surface water pH is observed to be 
declining (virtually certain) by a very likely range of 0.017−0.027 pH 
units per decade since the late 1980s across individual time series 
observations longer than 15 years. The anthropogenic pH signal is very 
likely to have emerged for three-quarters of the near-surface open 
ocean prior to 1950 and it is very likely that over 95% of the near 
surface open ocean has already been affected. These changes in pH 
have reduced the stability of mineral forms of calcium carbonate due 
to a lowering of carbonate ion concentrations, most notably in the 
upwelling and high-latitude regions of the ocean. {5.2.2.3, Box 5.1}
There is a growing consensus that the open ocean is losing 
oxygen overall with a very likely loss of 0.5−3.3% between 1970–
2010 from the ocean surface to 1000 m (medium conﬁdence).  
Globally, the oxygen loss due to warming is reinforced by 
60
Technical Summary
TS
Responses
Potential 
effectiveness
Hard 
protection
Coral 
conservation
Coral 
restoration
Wetland
conservation
Wetland
restoration
Sediment-
based 
protection
Advantages
Co–benefits
Drawbacks
Economic
efficiency
Governance
challenges
Coastal 
advance
Coastal
accommodation
in terms of reducing 
sea level rise (SLR) risks 
(technical/biophysical limits)
Often unaffordable for 
poorer areas. Conflicts 
between objectives 
(e.g., conservation, 
safety and tourism), 
conflicts about the 
distribution of public 
budgets, lack of 
finance {4.3.3.2, 
4.4.2.2.6}
Permits for 
implementation are 
difficult to obtain. Lack 
of finance. Lack of 
enforcement of 
conservation policies. 
EbA options dismissed 
due to short-term 
economic interest, 
availability of land 
{4.4.2.3.6}
Often unaffordable for 
poorer areas. Social 
conflicts with regards 
to access and 
distribution of new land 
{4.4.2.4.6}
Very high if land prices 
are high as found in 
many urban coasts 
{4.4.2.4.7}
Groundwater salinisa–
tion, enhanced erosion 
and loss of coastal 
ecosystems and habitat 
{4.4.2.4.5}
Generates land and 
land sale revenues that 
can be used to finance 
adaptation {4.4.2.4.5}
Predictable levels of 
safety {4.4.2.2.4}
Up to multiple metres 
of SLR {4.4.2.2.4}
Early warning systems 
require effective insti-
tutional arrangements 
{4.4.2.6.6}
Very high for early 
warning systems and 
building-scale 
measures {4.4.2.5.7}
Does not prevent 
flooding/impacts 
{4.4.2.5.5}
Maintains landscape 
connectivity {4.4.2.5.5}
Mature technology; 
sediments deposited 
during floods can raise 
elevation {4.4.2.5.5}
Very effective for small 
SLR {4.4.2.5.4}
(Flood-proofing buildings, 
early warning systems for 
flood events, etc.)
Limited evidence on 
benefit-cost ratios;  
Depends on population 
density and the 
availability of land 
{4.4.2.3.7}
Safety levels less 
predictable, 
development benefits 
not realized {4.4.2.3.5, 
4.4.2.3.2}
Long-term 
effectiveness depends 
on ocean warming, 
acidification and 
emission scenarios 
{4.3.3.5.2., 4.4.2.3.2}
Safety levels less 
predictable, a lot of 
land required, barriers 
for landward expan-
sion of ecosystems 
has to be removed 
{4.4.2.3.5, 4.4.2.3.2}
Habitat gain,  
biodiversity,  carbon 
sequestration, income 
from tourism, 
enhanced fishery 
productivity, improved 
water quality. Provision 
of food, medicine, fuel, 
wood and cultural 
benefits {4.4.2.3.5}
Opportunity for 
community 
involvement,
{4.4.2.3.1}
Effective up to 
0.5 cm yr–¹ SLR. 
Strongly limited by 
ocean warming and 
acidification. 
Constrained at 1.5°C 
warming and lost at 
2°C at many places. 
{4.3.3.5.2, 4.4.2.3.2, 
5.3.4}
Effective up to 0.5–1 
cm yr–¹ SLR, 
decreased at 2°C 
{4.3.3.5.1, 4.4.2.3.2, 
5.3.7}
(Marshes, 
Mangroves) 
(Marshes, 
Mangroves) 
High if the value of 
assets behind 
protection is high, as 
found in many urban 
and densely populated 
coastal areas 
{4.4.2.2.7}
Destruction of habitat 
through coastal 
squeeze,flooding & 
erosion downdrift, 
lock-in, disastrous 
consequence in case 
of defence failure 
{4.3.2.4, 4.4.2.2.5}
Predictable levels of 
safety {4.4.2.2.4}
Multifunctional dikes 
such as for recreation, 
or other land use 
{4.4.2.2.5}
Up to multiple metres 
of SLR  {4.4.2.2.4}
Effective but depends 
on sediment availability 
{4.4.2.2.4}
High flexibility 
{4.4.2.2.4}
Preservation of 
beaches for recreation/ 
tourism {4.4.2.2.5}
Destruction of habitat, 
where sediment is 
sourced {4.4.2.2.5}
High if tourism 
revenues are high 
{4.4.2.2.7}
Conflicts about the 
distribution of public 
budgets {4.4.2.2.6}
Conﬁdence levels (assessed for effectiveness):
The table illustrates responses and their characteristics. It is not exhaustive. Whether a response is applicable depends on geography and context.
= Low
= Medium
= High
= Very High
(c) Responses to rising mean and extreme sea levels
Enabling conditions
Generic steps of adaptive decision making
(d) Choosing and enabling sea level rise responses
Implementation
Monitoring and
corrective action 
Stage setting
Dynamic plan
• Long-term perspective
• Cross-scale coordination
• Address vulnerability and equity 
• Inclusive public participation 
• Capability to address complexity 
Identify risks, 
objectives, options, 
uncertainties and 
criteria for evaluating 
options 
Develop initial plan 
(combinations of options over 
time) plus corrective actions 
to be carried out based on 
observed situation
of initial plan and 
monitoring system 
for progressing 
change and success 
Monitor and take 
corrective action upon 
observed situation
Retreat
Ecosystem based adaptation
Planned
relocation
Forced
displacement
Reconciling the 
divergent interests 
arising from relocating 
people from point of 
origin and destination 
{4.4.2.6.6}
Raises complex 
humanitarian questions 
on livelihoods, human 
rights and equity 
{4.4.2.6.6}
Limited evidence 
[4.4.2.6.7}
Loss of social cohesion, 
cultural identity and 
well-being. Depressed 
services (health, 
education, housing), job 
opportunities and 
economic growth 
{4.4.2.6.5}
    
Range from loss of life 
to loss of livelihoods 
and sovereignty 
{4.4.2.6.5}
Access to improved 
services (health, 
education, housing), 
job opportunities and 
economic growth 
{4.4.2.6.5}
Sea level risks  at 
origin can be 
eliminated {4.4.2.6.4}
Effective if alternative 
safe localities are 
available {4.4.2.6.4}
Addresses only 
immediate risk at place 
of origin
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
(beyond risk reduction)
Figure TS.7 |  c, d
61
Technical Summary
TS
Figure TS.7 |  Sea level rise risks and responses. The term response is used here instead of adaptation because some responses, such as retreat, may or may not be 
considered to be adaptation. (a) shows the combined risk of coastal ﬂooding, erosion and salinization for illustrative geographies in 2100, due to changing mean and 
extreme sea levels under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 and under two response scenarios. Risks under RCPs 4.5 and 6.0 were not assessed due to a lack of literature for the 
assessed geographies. The assessment does not account for changes in extreme sea level beyond those directly induced by mean sea level rise; risk levels could increase 
if other changes in extreme sea levels were considered (e.g., due to changes in cyclone intensity). Panel (a) considers a socioeconomic scenario with relatively stable 
coastal population density over the century. {SM4.3.2} Risks to illustrative geographies have been assessed based on relative sea level changes projected for a set of 
speciﬁc examples: New York City, Shanghai and Rotterdam for resource-rich coastal cities covering a wide range of response experiences; South Tarawa, Fongafale and 
Male’ for urban atoll islands; Mekong and Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna for large tropical agricultural deltas; and Bykovskiy, Shishmaref, Kivalina, Tuktoyaktuk and Shingle 
Point for Arctic communities located in regions remote from rapid glacio-isostatic adjustment. {4.2, 4.3.4, SM4.2} The assessment distinguishes between two contrasting 
response scenarios. “No-to-moderate response” describes efforts as of today (i.e., no further signiﬁcant action or new types of actions). “Maximum potential response” 
represents a combination of responses implemented to their full extent and thus signiﬁcant additional efforts compared to today, assuming minimal ﬁnancial, social and 
political barriers. The assessment has been conducted for each sea level rise and response scenario, as indicated by the burning embers in the ﬁgure; in-between risk levels 
are interpolated. {4.3.3} The assessment criteria include exposure and vulnerability (density of assets, level of degradation of terrestrial and marine buffer ecosystems), 
coastal hazards (ﬂooding, shoreline erosion, salinization), in-situ responses (hard engineered coastal defenses, ecosystem restoration or creation of new natural buffers 
areas, and subsidence management) and planned relocation. Planned relocation refers to managed retreat or resettlement as described in Chapter 4, i.e., proactive and 
local-scale measures to reduce risk by relocating people, assets and infrastructure. Forced displacement is not considered in this assessment. Panel (a) also highlights the 
relative contributions of in-situ responses and planned relocation to the total risk reduction. (b) schematically illustrates the risk reduction (vertical arrows) and risk delay 
(horizontal arrows) through mitigation and/or responses to sea level rise. (c) summarizes and assesses responses to sea level rise in terms of their effectiveness, costs, 
co-beneﬁts, drawbacks, economic efﬁciency and associated governance challenges. {4.4.2} (d) presents generic steps of an adaptive decision-making approach, as well as 
key enabling conditions for responses to sea level rise. {4.4.4, 4.4.5} 
other processes associated with ocean physics and biogeochemistry, 
which cause the majority of the observed oxygen decline (high 
conﬁdence). The oxygen minimum zones (OMZs) are expanding by 
a very likely range of 3–8%, most notably in the tropical oceans, but 
there is substantial decadal variability that affects the attribution 
of the overall oxygen declines to human activity in tropical regions 
(high conﬁdence). {5.2.2.4, Figure TS.3, Figure TS.5}
In response to ocean warming and increased stratiﬁcation, 
open ocean nutrient cycles are being perturbed and there 
is high conﬁdence that this is having a regionally variable 
impact on primary producers. There is currently low conﬁdence 
in appraising past open ocean productivity trends, including those 
determined by satellites, due to newly identiﬁed region-speciﬁc 
drivers of microbial growth and the lack of corroborating in situ time 
series datasets. {5.2.2.5, 5.2.2.6}
Ocean warming has contributed to observed changes in 
biogeography of organisms ranging from phytoplankton to 
marine mammals (high conﬁdence), consequently changing 
community composition (high conﬁdence), and in some 
cases, altering interactions between organisms (medium 
conﬁdence). Observed rate of range shifts since the 1950s and its 
very likely range are estimated to be 51.5 ± 33.3 km per decade 
and 29.0 ± 15.5 km per decade for organisms in the epipelagic and 
seaﬂoor ecosystems, respectively. The direction of the majority of 
the shifts of epipelagic organisms are consistent with a response to 
warming (high conﬁdence). {5.2.3, 5.3}
Warming-induced range expansion of tropical species to higher 
latitudes has led to increased grazing on some coral reefs, rocky 
reefs, seagrass meadows and epipelagic ecosystems, leading 
to altered ecosystem structure (medium conﬁdence). Warming, 
sea level rise (SLR) and enhanced loads of nutrients and sediments in 
deltas have contributed to salinisation and deoxygenation in estuaries 
(high conﬁdence), and have caused upstream redistribution of benthic 
and pelagic species according to their tolerance limits (medium 
conﬁdence). {5.3.4, 5.3.5, 5.3.6, 5.2.3}
Fisheries catches and their composition in many regions are 
already impacted by the effects of warming and changing 
primary production on growth, reproduction and survival 
of ﬁsh stocks (high conﬁdence). Ocean warming and changes 
in primary production in the 20th century are related to changes 
in productivity of many ﬁsh stocks (high conﬁdence), with an 
average decrease of approximately 3% per decade in population 
replenishment and 4.1% (very likely range of 9.0% decline to 
0.3% increase) in maximum catch potential (robust evidence, 
low agreement between ﬁsh stocks, medium conﬁdence). Species 
composition of ﬁsheries catches since the 1970s in many shelf seas 
ecosystems of the world is increasing dominated by warm water 
species (medium conﬁdence). {5.2.3, 5.4.1}
Warming-induced changes in spatial distribution and abundance 
of ﬁsh stocks have already challenged the management of 
some important ﬁsheries and their economic beneﬁts (high 
conﬁdence). For existing international and national ocean and ﬁsheries 
governance, there are concerns about the reduced effectiveness to 
achieve mandated ecological, economic, and social objectives because 
of observed climate impacts on ﬁsheries resources (high conﬁdence). 
{5.4.2, 5.5.2}
Coastal ecosystems are observed to be under stress from 
ocean warming and SLR that are exacerbated by non-climatic 
pressures from human activities on ocean and land (high 
conﬁdence). Global wetland area has declined by nearly 50% 
relative to pre-industrial level as a result of warming, SLR, extreme 
climate events and other human impacts (medium conﬁdence). 
Warming related mangrove encroachment into subtropical salt 
marshes has been observed in the past 50 years (high conﬁdence). 
Distributions of seagrass meadows and kelp forests are contracting 
at low-latitudes that is attributable to warming (high conﬁdence), 
and in some areas a loss of 36–43% following heat waves (medium 
conﬁdence). Inundation, coastline erosion and salinisation are 
causing inland shifts in plant species distributions, which has been 
accelerating in the last decades (medium conﬁdence). Warming has 
increased the frequency of large-scale coral bleaching events, causing 
worldwide reef degradation since 1997–1998 with cases of shifts to 
algal-dominated reefs (high conﬁdence). Sessile calciﬁed organisms 
(e.g.,  barnacles and mussels) in intertidal rocky shores are highly 
sensitive to extreme temperature events and acidiﬁcation (high 
conﬁdence), a reduction in their biodiversity and abundance have 
62
Technical Summary
TS
been observed in naturally-acidiﬁed rocky reef ecosystems (medium 
conﬁdence). Increased nutrient and organic matter loads in estuaries 
since the 1970s have exacerbated the effects of warming on bacterial 
respiration and eutrophication, leading to expansion of hypoxic areas 
(high conﬁdence). {5.3.1, 5.3.2, 5.3.4, 5.3.6}
Coastal and near-shore ecosystems including salt marshes, 
mangroves and vegetated dunes in sandy beaches have 
a  varying capacity to build vertically and expand laterally 
in response to SLR. These ecosystems provide important services 
including coastal protection, carbon sequestration and habitat for 
diverse biota (high conﬁdence). The carbon emission associated 
with the loss of vegetated coastal ecosystems is estimated to be 
0.04–1.46  Gt C yr–1 (high conﬁdence). The natural capacity of 
ecosystems to adapt to climate impacts may be limited by human 
activities that fragment wetland habitats and restrict landward 
migration (high conﬁdence). {5.3.2, 5.3.3, 5.4.1, 5.5.1}
Three out of the four major Eastern Boundary Upwelling 
Systems (EBUS) have shown large-scale wind intensiﬁcation 
in the past 60 years (high conﬁdence). However, the interaction 
of coastal warming and local winds may have affected upwelling 
strength, with the direction of changes varies between and within 
EBUS (low conﬁdence). Increasing trends in ocean acidiﬁcation in 
the California Current EBUS and deoxygenation in California Current 
and Humboldt Current EBUS are observed in the last few decades 
(high conﬁdence), although there is low conﬁdence to distinguish 
anthropogenic forcing from internal climate variability. The expanding 
California EBUS OMZ has altered ecosystem structure and ﬁsheries 
catches (medium conﬁdence). {Box 5.3}
Since the early 1980s, the occurrence of harmful algal blooms 
(HABs) and pathogenic organisms (e.g.,  Vibrio) has increased 
in coastal areas in response to warming, deoxygenation and 
eutrophication, with negative impacts on food provisioning, 
tourism, the economy and human health (high conﬁdence). These 
impacts depend on species-speciﬁc responses to the interactive effects 
of climate change and other human drivers (e.g., pollution). Human 
communities in poorly monitored areas are among the most vulnerable 
to these biological hazards (medium conﬁdence). {Box 5.4, 5.4.2}
Many frameworks for climate resilient coastal adaptation 
have been developed since AR5, with substantial variations 
in approach between and within countries, and across 
development status (high conﬁdence). Few studies have assessed 
the success of implementing these frameworks due to the time-lag 
between implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting 
(medium conﬁdence). {5.5.2}
Projections: scenarios and time horizons
Climate models project signiﬁcant changes in the ocean state 
over the coming century. Under the high emissions scenario 
(Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)8.5) the impacts 
by 2090 are substantially larger and more widespread than for 
the low emissions scenario (RCP2.6) throughout the surface 
and deep ocean, including: warming (virtually certain); ocean 
acidiﬁcation (virtually certain); decreased stability of mineral 
forms of calcite (virtually certain); oxygen loss (very likely); 
reduced near-surface nutrients (likely as not); decreased net 
primary productivity (high conﬁdence); reduced ﬁsh production 
(likely) and loss of key ecosystems services (medium conﬁdence) 
that are important for human well-being and sustainable 
development. {5.2.2, Box 5.1, 5.2.3, 5.2.4, 5.4}
By 2100 the ocean is very likely to warm by 2 to 4 times as much 
for low emissions (RCP2.6) and 5 to 7 times as much for the 
high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) compared with the observed 
changes since 1970. The 0–2000 m layer of the ocean is projected to 
warm by a further 2150 ZJ (very likely range 1710–2790 ZJ) between 
2017 and 2100 for the RCP8.5 scenario. The 0–2000 m layer is 
projected to warm by 900 ZJ (very likely range 650–1340 ZJ) by 2100 
for the RCP2.6 scenario, and the overall warming of the ocean will 
continue this century even after radiative forcing and mean surface 
temperatures stabilise (high conﬁdence). {5.2.2.2}
The upper ocean will continue to stratify. By the end of the 
century the annual mean stratiﬁcation of the top 200 m (averaged 
between 60ºS–60ºN relative to the 1986–2005 period) is projected 
to increase in the very likely range of 1–9% and 12–30% for RCP2.6 
and RCP8.5 respectively. {5.2.2.2}
It is very likely that the majority of coastal regions will 
experience statistically signiﬁcant changes in tidal amplitudes 
over the course of the 21st century. The sign and amplitude of 
local changes to tides are very likely to be impacted by both human 
coastal adaptation measures and climate drivers. {5.2.2.2.3}
It is virtually certain that surface ocean pH will decline, by 
0.036–0.042 or 0.287–0.29 pH units by 2081–2100, relative to 
2006–2015, for the RCP2.6 or RCP8.5 scenarios, respectively. 
These pH changes are very likely to cause the Arctic and Southern 
Oceans, as well as the North Paciﬁc and Northwestern Atlantic Oceans 
to become corrosive for the major mineral forms of calcium carbonate 
under RCP8.5, but these changes are virtually certain to be avoided 
under the RCP2.6 scenario. There is increasing evidence of an increase 
in the seasonal exposure to acidiﬁed conditions in the future (high 
conﬁdence), with a very likely increase in the amplitude of seasonal 
cycle of hydrogen iron concentrations of 71–90% by 2100, relative to 
2000 for the RCP8.5 scenario, especially at high latitudes. {5.2.2.3}
Oxygen is projected to decline further. Globally, the oxygen content 
of the ocean is very likely to decline by 3.2–3.7% by 2081–2100, 
relative to 2006–2015, for the RCP8.5 scenario or by 1.6–2.0% for 
the RCP2.6 scenario. The volume of the oceans OMZ is projected to 
grow by a very likely range of 7.0 ± 5.6% by 2100 during the RCP8.5 
scenario, relative to 1850–1900. The climate signal of oxygen loss 
will very likely emerge from the historical climate by 2050 with a very 
likely range of 59–80% of ocean area being affected by 2031–2050 
and rising with a very likely range of 79–91% by 2081–2100 (RCP8.5 
emissions scenario). The emergence of oxygen loss is very likely smaller 
in area for the RCP2.6 scenario in the 21st century and by 2090 the 
emerged area is declining. {5.2.2.4, Box 5.1 Figure 1}
63
Technical Summary
TS
Overall, nitrate concentrations in the upper 100 m are very 
likely to decline by 9–14% across CMIP5 models by 2081–2100, 
relative to 2006–2015, in response to increased stratiﬁcation 
for RCP8.5, with medium conﬁdence in these projections due 
to the limited evidence of past changes that can be robustly 
understood and reproduced by models. There is low conﬁdence 
regarding projected increases in surface ocean iron levels due to 
systemic uncertainties in these models. {5.2.2.5}
Climate models project that net primary productivity will very 
likely decline by 4–11% for RCP8.5 by 2081–2100, relative to 
2006–2015. The decline is due to the combined effects of warming, 
stratiﬁcation, light, nutrients and predation and will show regional 
variations between low and high latitudes (low conﬁdence). The 
tropical ocean NPP will very likely decline by 7–16% for RCP8.5, with 
medium conﬁdence as there are improved constraints from historical 
variability in this region. Globally, the sinking ﬂux of organic matter 
from the upper ocean into the ocean interior is very likely to decrease 
by 9–16% for RCP8.5 in response to increased stratiﬁcation and 
reduced nutrient supply, especially in tropical regions (medium 
conﬁdence), which will reduce organic carbon supply to deep sea 
ecosystems (high conﬁdence). The reduction in food supply to the 
deep sea is projected to lead to a 5–6% reduction in biomass of 
benthic biota over more than 97% of the abyssal seaﬂoor by 2100 
(medium conﬁdence). {5.2.2.6, 5.2.4.2, Figure TS.8}
New ocean states for a broad suite of climate indices will 
progressively emerge over a substantial fractions of the 
ocean in the coming century (relative to past internal ocean 
variability), with Earth System Models (ESMs) showing an 
ordered emergence of ﬁrst pH, followed by sea surface 
temperature (SST), interior oxygen, upper ocean nutrient levels 
and ﬁnally net primary production (NPP). The anthropogenic pH 
signal has very likely emerged for three quarters of the ocean prior to 
1950, with little difference between scenarios. Oxygen changes will 
very likely emerge over 59–80% of the ocean area by 2031–2050 
and rises to 79–91% by 2081–2100 (RCP8.5 emissions scenario). 
The projected time of emergence for ﬁve primary drivers of marine 
ecosystem change (surface warming and acidiﬁcation, oxygen loss, 
nitrate content and net primary production change) are all prior to 
2100 for over 60% of the ocean area under RCP8.5 and over 30% 
under RCP2.6 (very likely). {Box 5.1, Box 5.1 Figure 1}
(c) Maximum fisheries catch potential
(a) Simulated net primary production
(b) Simulated total animal biomass
Percent change
Average by 2081–2100, relative to 1986–2005
RCP2.6
RCP8.5
Value in normalized index (1986–2005)
Value in  mol C m–2 yr–1 (1986–2005) 
0
>25
10
20
Observed values in tonnes* (1986–2005)
model disagreement
0
>275,000
0.15
55
no data
0
> 3
0.5
1
* See figure caption for details
0
10
20
30
40
>50
<–50
–40
–30
–20
–10
Figure TS.8 |  a, b , c
64
Technical Summary
TS
1.5
2
3
4
5
present day
Abyssal
plains
Estuaries
Salt
marshes
Mangrove
forests
Seagrass
meadows
Sandy
beaches
Warm water
corals
Rocky
shores
Kelp
forests
Epipelagic**
Cold water
corals
(d) Impacts and risks to ocean ecosystems from climate change
1
2
3
4
Global mean sea surface temperature (SST) 
change relative to pre-industrial levels (ºC)
Conﬁdence level for transition
= Very high
= High
= Medium
= Low
= Transition range
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) 
change relative to pre-industrial levels (ºC)
1
0
0
**see figure caption for definition
High 
Red: Significant and widespread impacts/risks.
Level of added impacts/risks
Very high
Undetectable 
White: Impacts/risks are undetectable. 
Moderate 
Yellow: Impacts/risks are detectable and attributable to climate change with at least medium confidence.
Purple: Very high probability of severe impacts/risks and the presence of significant irreversibility or the 
persistence of climate-related hazards, combined with limited ability to adapt due to the nature of the hazard 
or impacts/risks.
Figure TS.8 |  Projected changes, impacts and risks for ocean regions and ecosystems. (a) depth integrated net primary production (NPP from CMIP5)8, (b) total animal 
biomass (depth integrated, including ﬁshes and invertebrates from FISHMIP)9, (c) maximum ﬁsheries catch potential and (d) impacts and risks for coastal and open ocean 
ecosystems. The three left panels represent the simulated (a,b) and observed (c) mean values for the recent past (1986–2005), the middle and right panels represent 
projected changes (%) by 2081–2100 relative to recent past under low (RCP2.6) and high (RCP8.5) greenhouse gas emissions scenario (see Table TS.2), respectively. Total 
animal biomass in the recent past (b, left panel) represents the projected total animal biomass by each spatial pixel relative to the global average. (c) *Average observed 
ﬁsheries catch in the recent past (based on data from the Sea Around Us global ﬁsheries database); projected changes in maximum ﬁsheries catch potential in shelf seas 
are based on the average outputs from two ﬁsheries and marine ecosystem models. To indicate areas of model inconsistency, shaded areas represent regions where models 
disagree in the direction of change for more than: (a) and (b) 3 out of 10 model projections, and (c) one out of two models. Although unshaded, the projected change in 
the Arctic and Antarctic regions in (b) total animal biomass and (c) ﬁsheries catch potential have low conﬁdence due to uncertainties associated with modelling multiple 
interacting drivers and ecosystem responses. Projections presented in (b) and (c) are driven by changes in ocean physical and biogeochemical conditions e.g., temperature, 
oxygen level, and net primary production projected from CMIP5 Earth system models. **The epipelagic refers to the uppermost part of the ocean with depth <200 m from 
the surface where there is enough sunlight to allow photosynthesis. (d) Assessment of risks for coastal and open ocean ecosystems based on observed and projected 
climate impacts on ecosystem structure, functioning and biodiversity. Impacts and risks are shown in relation to changes in Global Mean Surface Temperature (GMST) 
relative to pre-industrial level. Since assessments of risks and impacts are based on global mean Sea Surface Temperature (SST), the corresponding SST levels are shown10. 
The assessment of risk transitions is described in Chapter 5 Sections 5.2, 5.3, 5.2.5 and 5.3.7 and Supplementary Materials SM5.3, Table SM5.6, Table SM5.8 and other 
parts of the underlying report. The ﬁgure indicates assessed risks at approximate warming levels and increasing climate-related hazards in the ocean: ocean warming, 
acidiﬁcation, deoxygenation, increased density stratiﬁcation, changes in carbon ﬂuxes, sea level rise, and increased frequency and/or intensity of extreme events. The 
assessment considers the natural adaptive capacity of the ecosystems, their exposure and vulnerability. Impact and risk levels do not consider risk reduction strategies such 
as human interventions, or future changes in non-climatic drivers. Risks for ecosystems were assessed by considering biological, biogeochemical, geomorphological and 
physical aspects. Higher risks associated with compound effects of climate hazards include habitat and biodiversity loss, changes in species composition and distribution 
ranges, and impacts/risks on ecosystem structure and functioning, including changes in animal/plant biomass and density, productivity, carbon ﬂuxes, and sediment 
transport. As part of the assessment, literature was compiled and data extracted into a summary table. A multi-round expert elicitation process was undertaken with 
independent evaluation of threshold judgement, and a ﬁnal consensus discussion. Further information on methods and underlying literature can be found in Chapter 5, 
Sections 5.2 and 5.3 and Supplementary Material. {3.2.3, 3.2.4, 5.2, 5.3, 5.2.5, 5.3.7, SM5.6, SM5.8, Figure 5.16, Cross Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1 Table CCB1}
8 
 NPP is estimated from the Coupled Models Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5).
9 
 Total animal biomass is from the Fisheries and Marine Ecosystem Models Intercomparison Project (FISHMIP).
10 
The conversion between GMST and SST is based on a scaling factor of 1.44 derived from changes in an ensemble of RCP8.5 simulations; this scaling factor has 
an uncertainty of about 4% due to differences between the RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 scenarios. {Table SPM.1}
65
Technical Summary
TS
Simulated ocean warming and changes in NPP during the 21st 
century are projected to alter community structure of marine 
organisms (high conﬁdence), reduce global marine animal 
biomass (medium conﬁdence) and the maximum potential 
catches of ﬁsh stocks (medium conﬁdence) with regional 
differences in the direction and magnitude of changes (high 
conﬁdence). The global biomass of marine animals, including those 
that contribute to ﬁsheries, is projected to decrease with a very likely 
range under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 of 4.3 ± 2.0% and 15.0 ± 5.9%, 
respectively, by 2080–2099 relative to 1986–2005. The maximum 
catch potential is projected to decrease by 3.4% to 6.4% (RCP2.6) 
and 20.5% to 24.1% (RCP8.5) in the 21st century. {5.4.1}
Projected decreases in global marine animal biomass and 
ﬁsh catch potential could elevate the risk of impacts on 
income, livelihood and food security of the dependent human 
communities (medium conﬁdence). Projected climate change 
impacts on ﬁsheries also increase the risk of potential conﬂicts among 
ﬁshery area users and authorities or between two different communities 
within the same country (medium conﬁdence), exacerbated through 
competing resource exploitation from international actors and 
mal-adapted policies (low conﬁdence). {5.2.3, 5.4, 5.5.3}
Projected decrease in upper ocean export of organic carbon 
to the deep seaﬂoor is expected to result in a loss of animal 
biomass on the deep seaﬂoor by 5.2–17.6% by 2090–2100 
compared to the present (2006–2015) under RCP8.5 with 
regional variations (medium conﬁdence). Some increases are 
projected in the polar regions, due to enhanced stratiﬁcation in 
the surface ocean, reduced primary production and shifts towards 
small phytoplankton (medium conﬁdence). The projected impacts on 
biomass in the abyssal seaﬂoor are larger under RCP8.5 than RCP4.5 
(very likely). The increase in climatic hazards beyond thresholds of 
tolerance of deep sea organisms will increase the risk of loss of 
biodiversity and impacts on functioning of deep water column and 
seaﬂoor that is important to support ecosystem services, such as 
carbon sequestration (medium conﬁdence). {5.2.4}
Structure and functions of all types of coastal ecosystems 
will continue to be at moderate to high risk under the 
RCP2.6 scenario (medium conﬁdence) and will face high to 
very high risk under the RCP8.5 scenario (high conﬁdence) 
by 2100. Seagrass meadows (high conﬁdence) and kelp forests 
(high conﬁdence) will face moderate to high risk at temperature 
above 1.5ºC global sea surface warming. Coral reefs will face very 
high risk at temperatures 1.5ºC of global sea surface warming 
(very high conﬁdence). Intertidal rocky shores are also expected 
to be at very high risk (transition above 3ºC) under the RCP8.5 
scenario (medium conﬁdence). These ecosystems have low to 
moderate adaptive capacity, as they are highly sensitive to ocean 
temperatures and acidiﬁcation. The ecosystems with moderate to 
high risk (transition above 1.8ºC) under future emissions scenarios 
are mangrove forests, sandy beaches, estuaries and salt marshes 
(medium conﬁdence). Estuaries and sandy beaches are subject 
to highly dynamic hydrological and geomorphological processes, 
giving them more natural adaptive capacity to climate hazards. In 
these systems, sediment relocation, soil accretion and landward 
expansion of vegetation may initially mitigate against ﬂooding and 
habitat loss, but salt marshes in particular will be at very high risk 
in the context of SLR and extreme climate-driven erosion under 
RCP8.5. {5.3, Figure 5.16}
Expected coastal ecosystem responses over the 21st century 
are habitat contraction, migration and loss of biodiversity 
and functionality. Pervasive human coastal disturbances will limit 
natural ecosystem adaptation to climate hazards (high conﬁdence). 
Global coastal wetlands will lose between 20–90% of their area 
depending on emissions scenario with impacts on their contributions 
to carbon sequestration and coastal protection (high conﬁdence). 
Kelp forests at low-latitudes and temperate seagrass meadows will 
continue to retreat as a result of intensiﬁed extreme temperatures, 
and their low dispersal ability will elevate the risk of local extinction 
under RCP8.5 (high conﬁdence). Intertidal rocky shores will continue 
to be affected by ocean acidiﬁcation, warming, and extreme heat 
exposure during low tide emersion, causing reduction of calcareous 
species and loss of ecosystem biodiversity and complexity shifting 
towards algae dominated habitats (high conﬁdence). Salinisation and 
expansion of hypoxic conditions will intensify in eutrophic estuaries, 
especially in mid and high latitudes with microtidal regimes (high 
conﬁdence). Sandy beach ecosystems will increasingly be at risk of 
eroding, reducing the habitable area for dependent organisms (high 
conﬁdence). {5.3, 5.4.1}
Almost all coral reefs will degrade from their current state, even 
if global warming remains below 2ºC (very high conﬁdence), 
and the remaining shallow coral reef communities will differ 
in species composition and diversity from present reefs (very 
high conﬁdence). These declines in coral reef health will greatly 
diminish the services they provide to society, such as food provision 
(high conﬁdence), coastal protection (high conﬁdence) and tourism 
(medium conﬁdence). {5.3.4, 5.4.1}
Multiple hazards of warming, deoxygenation, aragonite under-
saturation and decrease in ﬂux of organic carbon from the 
surface ocean will decrease calciﬁcation and exacerbate the 
bioerosion and dissolution of the non-living component of cold 
water coral. Habitat-forming, cold water corals will be vulnerable 
where temperature and oxygen exceed the species’ thresholds 
(medium conﬁdence). Reduced particulate food supply is projected 
to be experienced by 95% of cold water coral ecosystems by 2100 
under RCP8.5 relative to the present, leading to a very likely range of 
8.6 ± 2% biomass loss (medium conﬁdence). {5.2.4, Box 5.2}
Anthropogenic changes in EBUS will emerge primarily in the 
second half of the 21st century (medium conﬁdence). EBUS will 
be impacted by climate change in different ways, with strong regional 
variability with consequences for ﬁsheries, recreation and climate 
regulation (medium conﬁdence). The Paciﬁc EBUS are projected 
to have calcium carbonate undersaturation in surface waters 
within a few decades under RCP8.5 (high conﬁdence); combined 
with warming and decreasing oxygen levels, this will increase the 
impacts on shellﬁsh larvae, benthic invertebrates and demersal ﬁshes 
(high conﬁdence) and related ﬁsheries and aquaculture (medium 
conﬁdence). The inherent natural variability of EBUS, together with 
66
Technical Summary
TS
uncertainties in present and future trends in the intensity and 
seasonality of upwelling, coastal warming and stratiﬁcation, primary 
production and biogeochemistry of source waters poses large 
challenges in projecting the response of EBUS to climate change and 
to the adaptation of governance of biodiversity conservation and 
living marine resources in EBUS (high conﬁdence). {Box 5.3}
Climate change impacts on ecosystems and their goods 
and services threatens key cultural dimensions of lives and 
livelihoods. These threats include erosion of Indigenous and 
non-indigenous culture, their knowledge about the ocean and 
knowledge transmission, reduced access to traditional food, loss 
of opportunities for aesthetic and spiritual appreciation of the 
ecosystems, and marine recreational activities (medium conﬁdence). 
Ultimately, these can lead to the loss of part of people’s cultural 
identity and values beyond the rate at which identify and values can 
be adjusted or substituted (medium conﬁdence). {5.4.2}
Climate change increases the exposure and bioaccumulation 
of contaminants such as persistent organic pollutants and 
mercury (medium conﬁdence), and their risk of impacts on 
marine ecosystems and seafood safety (high agreement, 
medium evidence, medium conﬁdence). Such risks are particularly 
large for top predators and for human communities that have high 
consumption on these organisms, including coastal Indigenous 
communities (medium conﬁdence). {5.4.2}
Shifting distributions of ﬁsh stocks between governance 
jurisdictions will increase the risk of potential conﬂicts among 
ﬁshery area users and authorities or between two different 
communities within the same country (medium conﬁdence). 
These ﬁshery governance related risks are widespread under high 
emissions scenarios with regional hotspots (medium conﬁdence), 
and highlight the limits of existing natural resource management 
frameworks for addressing ecosystem change (high conﬁdence). 
{5.2.5, 5.4.2.1.3, 5.5, 5.5.2}
Response options to enhance resilience
There is clear evidence for observed climate change impacts 
throughout the ocean with consequences for human 
communities and require options to reduce risks and impacts. 
Coastal blue carbon can contribute to mitigation for many 
nations but its global scope is modest (offset of <2% of 
current emissions) (likely). Some ocean indices are expected 
to emerge earlier than others (e.g.,  warming, acidiﬁcation 
and effects on ﬁsh stocks) and could therefore be used to 
prioritise planning and building resilience. The survival of 
some keystone ecosystems (e.g., coral reefs) are at risk, while 
governance structures are not well-matched to the spatial and 
temporal scale of climate change impacts on ocean systems. 
Ecosystem restoration may be able to locally reduce climate 
risks (medium conﬁdence) but at relatively high cost and 
effectiveness limited to low emissions scenarios and to less 
sensitive systems (high conﬁdence). {5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5}
Coastal blue carbon ecosystems, such as mangroves, salt 
marshes and seagrasses, can help reduce the risks and impacts 
of climate change, with multiple co-beneﬁts. Some 151 countries 
around the world contain at least one of these coastal blue carbon 
ecosystems and 71 countries contain all three. Below-ground carbon 
storage in vegetated marine habitats can be up to 1000 tC ha–1, much 
higher than most terrestrial ecosystems (high conﬁdence). Successful 
implementation of measures to maintain and promote carbon 
storage in such coastal ecosystems could assist several countries in 
achieving a balance between emissions and removals of greenhouse 
gases (medium conﬁdence). Conservation of these habitats would 
also sustain the wide range of ecosystem services they provide and 
assist with climate adaptation through improving critical habitats 
for biodiversity, enhancing local ﬁsheries production, and protecting 
coastal communities from SLR and storm events (high conﬁdence). 
The climate mitigation effectiveness of other natural carbon removal 
processes in coastal waters, such as seaweed ecosystems and 
proposed non-biological marine CO2 removal methods, are smaller or 
currently have higher associated uncertainties. Seaweed aquaculture 
warrants further research attention. {5.5.1.1, 5.5.1.1, 5.5.1, 5.5.2, 
5.5.1.1.3, 5.5.1.1.4}
The potential climatic beneﬁts of blue carbon ecosystems 
can only be a very modest addition to, and not a replacement 
for, the very rapid reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. 
The maximum global mitigation beneﬁts of cost-effective coastal 
wetland restoration is unlikely to be more than 2% of current  
total emissions from all sources. Nevertheless, the protection 
and enhancement of coastal blue carbon can be an important 
contribution to both mitigation and adaptation at the national scale. 
The feasibility of climate mitigation by open ocean fertilisation of 
productivity is limited to negligible, due to the likely decadal-scale 
return to the atmosphere of nearly all the extra carbon removed, 
associated difﬁculties in carbon accounting, risks of unintended 
side effects and low acceptability. Other human interventions to 
enhance marine carbon uptake, for example, ocean alkalinisation 
(enhanced weathering), would also have governance challenges, 
with the increased risk of undesirable ecological consequences (high 
conﬁdence). {5.5.1.2}
Socioinstitutional adaptation responses are more frequently 
reported in the literature than ecosystem-based and built 
infrastructure approaches. Hard engineering responses are more 
effective when supported by ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) 
approaches (high agreement), and both approaches are enhanced by 
combining with socioinstitutional approaches for adaptation (high 
conﬁdence). Stakeholder engagement is necessary (robust evidence, 
high agreement). {5.5.2}
EbA is a cost-effective coastal protection tool that can 
have many co-beneﬁts, including supporting livelihoods, 
contributing to carbon sequestration and the provision of 
a range of other valuable ecosystem services (high conﬁdence). 
Such adaptation does, however, assume that the climate can be 
stabilised. Under changing climatic conditions there are limits to the 
effectiveness of ecosystem-based adaptation, and these limits are 
currently difﬁcult to determine. {5.5.2.1}
67
Technical Summary
TS
Socioinstitutional adaptation responses, including community-
based adaptation, capacity-building, participatory processes, 
institutional support for adaptation planning and support 
mechanisms for communities are important tools to address 
climate change impacts (high conﬁdence). For ﬁsheries 
management, improving coordination of integrated coastal 
management and marine protected areas (MPAs) have emerged in 
the literature as important adaptation governance responses (robust 
evidence, medium agreement). {5.5.2.2, 5.5.2.6}
Observed widespread decline in warm water corals has led 
to the consideration of alternative restoration approaches 
to enhance climate resilience. Approaches, such as ‘coral reef 
gardening’ have been tested, and ecological engineering and 
other approaches such as assisted evolution, colonisation and 
chimerism are being researched for reef restoration. However, 
the effectiveness of these approaches to increase resilience to 
climate stressors and their large-scale implementation for reef 
restoration will be limited unless warming and ocean acidiﬁcation 
are rapidly controlled (high conﬁdence). {Box 5.5, 5.5.2}
Existing ocean governance structures are already facing 
multi-dimensional, scale-related challenges because of climate 
change. This trend of increasing complexity will continue (high 
conﬁdence). The mechanisms for the governance of marine Areas 
Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ), such as ocean acidiﬁcation, 
would beneﬁt from further development (high conﬁdence). There 
is also scope to increase the overall effectiveness of international 
and national ocean governance regimes by increasing cooperation, 
integration and widening participation (medium conﬁdence). Diverse 
adaptations of ocean related governance are being tried, and some are 
producing promising results. However, rigorous evaluation is needed of 
the effectiveness of these adaptations in achieving their goals. {5.5.3}
There are a broad range of identiﬁed barriers and limits 
for adaptation to climate change in ecosystems and human 
systems (high conﬁdence). Limitations include the space that 
ecosystems require, non-climatic drivers and human impacts that need 
to be addressed as part of the adaptation response, the lowering of 
adaptive capacity of ecosystems because of climate change, and the 
slower ecosystem recovery rates relative to the recurrence of climate 
impacts, availability of technology, knowledge and ﬁnancial support 
and existing governance structures (medium conﬁdence). {5.5.2}
TS.6 
 Extremes, Abrupt Changes  
and Managing Risks
This chapter assesses extremes and abrupt or irreversible changes in 
the ocean and cryosphere in a changing climate, to identify regional 
hot spots, cascading effects, their impacts on human and natural 
systems, and sustainable and resilient risk management strategies. 
It is not comprehensive in terms of the systems assessed and some 
information on extremes, abrupt and irreversible changes, in particular 
for the cryosphere, may be found in other chapters.
Ongoing and Emerging Changes in the Ocean 
and Cryosphere, and their Impacts on Ecosystems 
and Human Societies
Anthropogenic climate change has increased observed 
precipitation (medium conﬁdence), winds (low conﬁdence), 
and extreme sea level events (high conﬁdence) associated 
with some tropical cyclones, which has increased intensity of 
multiple extreme events and associated cascading impacts 
(high conﬁdence). Anthropogenic climate change may have 
contributed to a poleward migration of maximum tropical cyclone 
intensity in the western North Paciﬁc in recent decades related to 
anthropogenically-forced tropical expansion (low conﬁdence). 
There is emerging evidence for an increase in the annual global 
proportion of Category 4 or 5 tropical cyclones in recent decades 
(low conﬁdence). {6.3, Table 6.2, Figure 6.2, Box 6.1}
Changes in Arctic sea ice have the potential to inﬂuence 
mid-latitude weather (medium conﬁdence), but there is low 
conﬁdence in the detection of this inﬂuence for speciﬁc 
weather types. {6.3}
Extreme wave heights, which contribute to extreme sea level 
events, coastal erosion and ﬂooding, have increased in the 
Southern and North Atlantic Oceans by around 1.0 cm yr–1 and 
0.8 cm yr–1 over the period 1985–2018 (medium conﬁdence). 
Sea ice loss in the Arctic has also increased wave heights over 
the period 1992–2014 (medium conﬁdence). {6.3}
Marine heatwaves (MHWs), periods of extremely high ocean 
temperatures, have negatively impacted marine organisms 
and ecosystems in all ocean basins over the last two decades, 
including critical foundation species such as corals, seagrasses 
and kelps (very high conﬁdence). Globally, marine heat related 
events have increased; marine heatwaves, deﬁned when the daily sea 
surface temperature exceeds the local 99th percentile over the period 
1982 to 2016, have doubled in frequency and have become longer-
lasting, more intense and more extensive (very likely). It is very likely 
that between 84–90% of marine heatwaves that occurred between 
2006 and 2015 are attributable to the anthropogenic temperature 
increase. {6.4, Figures 6.3, 6.4}
Both palaeoclimate and modern observations suggest that the 
strongest El Niño and La Niña events since the pre-industrial  
period have occurred during the last ﬁfty years (medium 
conﬁdence). There have been three occurrences of extreme El Niño 
events during the modern observational period (1982–1983, 
1997–1998, 2015–2016), all characterised by pronounced rainfall 
in the normally dry equatorial East Paciﬁc. There have been two 
occurrences of extreme La Niña (1988–1989, 1998–1999). El Niño 
and La Niña variability during the last 50 years is unusually high 
compared with average variability during the last millennium. 
{6.5, Figure 6.5}
The equatorial Paciﬁc trade wind system experienced an 
unprecedented intensiﬁcation during 2001–2014, resulting in 
enhanced ocean heat transport from the Paciﬁc to the Indian 
68
Technical Summary
TS
Ocean, inﬂuencing the rate of global temperature change 
(medium conﬁdence). In the last two decades, total water transport 
from the Paciﬁc to the Indian Ocean by the Indonesian Throughﬂow (ITF), 
and the Indian Ocean to Atlantic Ocean has increased (high conﬁdence). 
Increased ITF has been linked to Paciﬁc cooling trends and basin-wide 
warming trends in the Indian Ocean. Paciﬁc sea surface temperature 
(SST) cooling trends and strengthened trade winds have been linked to 
an anomalously warm tropical Atlantic. {6.6, Figure 6.7}
Observations, both in situ (2004–2017) and based on sea 
surface temperature reconstructions, indicate that the Atlantic 
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) has weakened 
relative to 1850–1900 (medium conﬁdence). There is insufﬁcient 
data to quantify the magnitude of the weakening, or to properly 
attribute it to anthropogenic forcing due to the limited length of the 
observational record. Although attribution is currently not possible, 
CMIP5 model simulations of the period 1850–2015, on average, 
exhibit a weakening AMOC when driven by anthropogenic forcing. 
{6.7, Figure 6.8}
Climate change is modifying multiple types of climate-related 
events or hazards in terms of occurrence, intensity and 
periodicity. It increases the likelihood of compound hazards 
that comprise simultaneously or sequentially occurring events 
to cause extreme impacts in natural and human systems. 
Compound events in turn trigger cascading impacts (high 
conﬁdence). Three case studies are presented in the chapter, 
(i) Tasmania’s Summer of 2015–2016, (ii) The Coral Triangle and 
(ii) Hurricanes of 2017. {6.8, Box 6.1}
Projections of Ocean and Cryosphere Change  
and Hazards to Ecosystems and Human Society  
Under Low and High Emission Futures
The average intensity of tropical cyclones, the proportion 
of Category 4 and 5 tropical cyclones and the associated 
average precipitation rates are projected to increase for a 2ºC 
global temperature rise above any baseline period (medium 
conﬁdence). Rising mean sea levels will contribute to higher 
extreme sea levels associated with tropical cyclones (very high 
conﬁdence). Coastal hazards will be exacerbated by an increase in 
the average intensity, magnitude of storm surge and precipitation 
rates of tropical cyclones. There are greater increases projected 
under RCP8.5 than under RCP2.6 from around mid-century to 2100 
(medium conﬁdence). There is low conﬁdence in changes in the 
future frequency of tropical cyclones at the global scale. {6.3.1}
Signiﬁcant wave heights (the average height from trough to 
crest of the highest one-third of waves) are projected to increase 
across the Southern Ocean and tropical eastern Paciﬁc (high 
conﬁdence) and Baltic Sea (medium conﬁdence) and decrease 
over the North Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea under RCP8.5 
(high conﬁdence). Coastal tidal amplitudes and patterns are projected 
to change due to sea level rise and coastal adaptation measures (very 
likely). Projected changes in waves arising from changes in weather 
patterns, and changes in tides due to sea level rise, can locally enhance 
or ameliorate coastal hazards (medium conﬁdence). {6.3.1, 5.2.2}
Marine heatwaves are projected to further increase in 
frequency, duration, spatial extent and intensity (maximum 
temperature) (very high conﬁdence). Climate models project 
increases in the frequency of marine heatwaves by 2081–2100, 
relative to 1850–1900, by approximately 50 times under RCP8.5 and 
20 times under RCP2.6 (medium conﬁdence). The largest increases 
in frequency are projected for the Arctic and the tropical oceans 
(medium conﬁdence). The intensity of marine heatwaves is projected 
to increase about 10-fold under RCP8.5 by 2081–2100, relative to 
1850–1900 (medium conﬁdence). {6.4}
Extreme El Niño and La Niña events are projected to likely 
increase in frequency in the 21st century and to likely intensify 
existing hazards, with drier or wetter responses in several 
regions across the globe. Extreme El Niño events are projected to 
occur about as twice as often under both RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 in the 
21st century when compared to the 20th century (medium conﬁdence). 
Projections indicate that extreme Indian Ocean Dipole events also 
increase in frequency (low conﬁdence). {6.5, Figures 6.5, 6.6}
Lack of long-term sustained Indian and Paciﬁc Ocean 
observations, and inadequacies in the ability of climate models 
to simulate the magnitude of trade wind decadal variability 
and the inter-ocean link, mean there is low conﬁdence in 
future projections of the trade wind system. {6.6, Figure 6.7}
The AMOC will very likely weaken over the 21st century (high 
conﬁdence), although a collapse is very unlikely (medium 
conﬁdence). Nevertheless, a substantial weakening of the 
AMOC remains a physically plausible scenario. Such a weakening 
would strongly impact natural and human systems, leading to 
a decrease in marine productivity in the North Atlantic, more winter 
storms in Europe, a reduction in Sahelian and South Asian summer 
rainfall, a decrease in the number of TCs in the Atlantic, and an increase 
in regional sea level around the Atlantic especially along the northeast 
coast of North America (medium conﬁdence). Such impacts would be 
superimposed on the global warming signal. {6.7, Figure 6.8}
Impacts from further changes in TCs and ETCs, MHWs, extreme 
El Niño and La Niña events and other extremes will exceed 
the limits of resilience and adaptation of ecosystems and 
people, leading to unavoidable loss and damage (medium 
conﬁdence). {6.9.2}
Strengthening the Global Responses in the Context 
of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Charting 
Climate Resilient Development Pathways for Oceans 
and Cryosphere
There is medium conﬁdence that including extremes and abrupt 
changes, such as AMOC weakening, ice sheet collapse (West 
Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS)), 
leads to a several-fold increase in the cost of carbon emissions 
69
Technical Summary
TS
(medium conﬁdence). If carbon emissions decline, the risk of 
extremes and abrupt changes are reduced, creating co-beneﬁts. 
{6.8.6}
For TCs and ETCs, investment in disaster risk reduction, ﬂood 
management (ecosystem and engineered) and early warning 
systems decreases economic loss (medium conﬁdence), but 
such investments may be hindered by limited local capacities, 
such as increased losses and mortality from extreme winds and 
storm surges in less developed countries despite adaptation 
efforts. There is emerging evidence of increasing risks for locations 
impacted by unprecedented storm trajectories (low conﬁdence). 
Managing the risk from such changing storm trajectories and intensity 
proves challenging because of the difﬁculties of early warning and its 
receptivity by the affected population (high conﬁdence). {6.3, 6.9}
Limiting global warming would reduce the risk of impacts of 
MHWs, but critical thresholds for some ecosystems (e.g., kelp 
forests, coral reefs) will be reached at relatively low levels of 
future global warming (high conﬁdence). Early warning systems, 
producing skillful forecasts of MHWs, can further help to reduce the 
vulnerability in the areas of ﬁsheries, tourism and conservation, but 
are yet unproven at large scale (medium conﬁdence). {6.4}
Sustained long-term monitoring and improved forecasts 
can be used in managing the risks of extreme El Niño and 
La Niña events associated with human health, agriculture, 
ﬁsheries, coral reefs, aquaculture, wildﬁre, drought and ﬂood 
management (high conﬁdence). {6.5}
Extreme change in the trade wind system and its impacts 
on global variability, biogeochemistry, ecosystems and 
society have not been adequately understood and represent 
signiﬁcant knowledge gaps. {6.6}
By 2300, an AMOC collapse is as likely as not for high emission 
pathways and very unlikely for lower ones, highlighting that 
an AMOC collapse can be avoided in the long term by CO2 
mitigation (medium conﬁdence). Nevertheless, the human impact 
of these physical changes have not been sufﬁciently quantiﬁed and 
there are considerable knowledge gaps in adaptation responses to 
a substantial AMOC weakening. {6.7}
The ratio between risk reduction investment and reduction of 
damages of extreme events varies. Investing in preparation 
and prevention against the impacts from extreme events is 
very likely less than the cost of impacts and recovery (medium 
conﬁdence). Coupling insurance mechanisms with risk reduction 
measures can enhance the cost-effectiveness of adapting to climate 
change (medium conﬁdence). {6.9}
Climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction require 
capacity building and an integrated approach to ensure 
trade-offs between short- and long-term gains in dealing 
with the uncertainty of increasing extreme events, abrupt 
changes and cascading impacts at different geographic scales 
(high conﬁdence). {6.9}
Limiting the risk from the impact of extreme events and abrupt 
changes leads to successful adaptation to climate change 
with the presence of well-coordinated climate-affected 
sectors and disaster management relevant agencies (high 
conﬁdence). Transformative governance inclusive of successful 
integration of disaster risk management (DRM) and climate 
change adaptation, empowerment of vulnerable groups, and 
accountability of governmental decisions promotes climate-
resilient development pathways (high conﬁdence). {6.9}
TS.7 
 Low-lying Islands and Coasts  
(Integrative Cross-Chapter Box)
Ocean and cryosphere changes already impact Low-Lying 
Islands and Coasts (LLIC), including Small Island Developing 
States (SIDS), with cascading and compounding risks. 
Disproportionately higher risks are  expected  in the course 
of the 21st century. Reinforcing the ﬁndings of the IPCC 
Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5ºC, vulnerable human 
communities, especially those in coral reef environments and 
polar regions, may exceed adaptation limits well before the 
end of this century and even in a low greenhouse gas emission 
pathway (high conﬁdence). Depending on the effectiveness of 
21st century mitigation and adaptation pathways under all 
emission scenarios, most of the low-lying regions around the 
world may face  adaptation limits beyond 2100, due to the 
long-term commitment of sea level rise (medium conﬁdence). 
LLIC  host around 11% of the global population, generate about 
14% of the global Gross Domestic Product and comprise many 
world cultural heritage sites. LLIC already experience climate-related 
ocean and cryosphere changes (high conﬁdence), and they share 
both commonalities in their exposure and vulnerability to climate 
change (e.g.,  low elevation, human disturbances to terrestrial 
and marine ecosystems), and context-speciﬁcities (e.g., variable 
ecosystem climate sensitivities and risk perceptions by populations). 
Options to adapt to rising seas, e.g., range from hard engineering 
to ecosystem-based measures, and from securing current settings to 
relocating people, built assets and activities. Effective combinations 
of measures vary across geographies (cities and megacities, small 
islands, deltas and Arctic coasts), and reﬂect the scale of observed 
and projected impacts, ecosystems’ and societies’ adaptive capacity, 
and the existence of transformational governance (high conﬁdence) 
{Sections 3.5.3, 4.4.2 to 4.4.5, 5.5.2, 6.8, 6.9, Cross-Chapter 
Box 2 in Chapter 1}.
