Annexes
677
AI
AI
Coordinating Editor: 
Nora M. Weyer (Germany)
Editorial team:
Miguel Cifuentes-Jara (Costa Rica), Thomas Frölicher (Switzerland), Miriam Jackson 
(Norway), Raphael M. Kudela (USA), Valérie Masson-Delmotte (France), J.B. Robin Matthews 
(United Kingdom), Katja Mintenbeck (Germany), Mônica M.C. Muelbert (Brazil), Hans-Otto Pörtner 
(Germany), Elvira S. Poloczanska (Australia/United Kingdom), Debra C. Roberts (South Africa), 
Renée van Diemen (Netherlands), Phil Williamson (United Kingdom), Panmao Zhai (China)
 
Annex I: Glossary
This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2019: Annex I: Glossary [Weyer, N.M. (ed.)]. In: IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. 
Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, 
USA, pp. 677–702. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157964.010.
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Ablation (of glaciers, ice sheets, or snow cover) 
All processes that reduce the mass of a glacier, ice sheet or snow 
cover. The main processes are melting, and for glaciers also calving 
(or, when the glacier nourishes an ice shelf, discharge of ice across 
the grounding line), but other processes such as sublimation and 
loss of wind-blown snow can also contribute to ablation. Ablation 
also refers to the mass lost by any of these processes. See also Mass  
balance/budget (of glaciers or ice sheets).
Abrupt climate change 
Abrupt change refers to a change that is substantially faster than 
the rate of change in the recent history of the affected components 
of a system. Abrupt climate change refers to a large-scale change 
in the climate system that takes place over a few decades or less, 
persists (or is anticipated to persist) for at least a  few decades, 
and causes substantial disruptions in human and natural systems. 
See also Climate change, Human system, Natural systems and 
Tipping  point.
Accumulation (of glaciers, ice sheets or snow cover) 
All processes that add to the mass of a glacier, an ice sheet or snow 
cover. The main process of accumulation is snowfall. Accumulation also 
includes deposition of hoar, freezing rain, other types of solid precipi-
tation, gain of wind-blown snow, avalanching and basal accumulation 
(often beneath ﬂoating ice). See also Avalanche and Mass balance/
budget (of glaciers or ice sheets).
Active layer 
Layer of ground above permafrost subject to annual thawing and 
freezing.
Adaptability 
See Adaptive capacity. 
Adaptation 
In human systems, the process of adjustment to actual or expected 
climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm or exploit beneﬁcial 
opportunities. In natural systems, the process of adjustment to actual 
climate and its effects; human intervention may facilitate adjustment 
to expected climate and its effects. 
Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) The use of ecosystem manage-
ment activities to increase the resilience and reduce the vulnerability 
of people and ecosystems to climate change (Campbell et al., 2009). 
Evolutionary adaptation The process whereby a species or pop-
ulation becomes better able to live in a changing environment, 
through the selection of heritable traits. Biologists usually dis-
tinguish evolutionary adaptation from acclimatisation, with the 
latter occurring within an organism’s lifetime. 
Incremental adaptation Adaptation that maintains the essence 
and integrity of a system or process at a given scale (Park et al., 
2012). In some cases, incremental adaptation can accrue to result 
in transformational adaptation (Tàbara et al., 2018; Termeer et al., 
2017). Incremental adaptations to change in climate are under-
stood as extensions of actions and behaviours that already reduce 
the losses or enhance the beneﬁts of natural variations in extreme 
weather/climate events. 
Transformational adaptation Adaptation that changes the 
fundamental attributes of a social-ecological system in anticipa-
tion of climate change and its impacts; and adaptation responses 
that will be required in the face of a global failure to mitigate the 
causes of anthropogenic climate change and are characterised by 
system-wide change or changes across more than one system, by a 
focus on the future and long-term change, or by a direct question-
ing of the effectiveness of existing systems, social injustices and 
power imbalances. 
Adaptation limits The point at which an actor’s objectives 
(or  system needs) cannot be secured from intolerable risks 
through adaptive actions. 
Hard adaptation limit – No adaptive actions are possible to 
avoid intolerable risks. 
Soft adaptation limit – Options may exist but are currently not 
available to avoid intolerable risks through adaptive action. 
See also Adaptation options, Adaptive capacity, Justice, Maladaptive 
actions (Maladaptation) and Mitigation (of climate change).
Adaptation limits 
See Adaptation. 
Adaptation options 
The array of strategies and measures that are available and appro-
priate for addressing adaptation. They include a  wide range of 
actions that can be categorised as structural, institutional, ecological 
or behavioural. See also Adaptive capacity and Maladaptive 
actions  Maladaptation).
Adaptation pathways 
See Pathways. 
Adaptive capacity 
The ability of systems, institutions, humans and other organisms 
to adjust to potential damage, to take advantage of opportunities 
or to respond to consequences (IPCC, 2014; MA, 2005). See 
also Adaptation.
Adaptive governance 
See Governance. 
Aerosol 
A suspension of airborne solid or liquid particles, with a  typical size 
between a few nanometres and 10 μm, that reside in the atmosphere 
Note: This Glossary deﬁnes some speciﬁc terms as the Lead Authors 
intend them to be interpreted in the context of this Special Report. 
Blue italicisations indicate terms deﬁned in this Glossary. Note that 
subterms are in bold italics beneath main terms.
Glossary 
Annex I
679
AI
for at least several hours. The term aerosol, which includes both the 
particles and the suspending gas, is often used in this Special Report 
in its plural form to mean ‘aerosol particles’. Aerosols may be of either 
natural or anthropogenic origin. Aerosols can inﬂuence climate in 
several ways: directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and 
indirectly by acting as cloud condensation nuclei or ice nuclei, modifying 
the optical properties and lifetime of clouds or upon deposition 
on snow or ice-covered surfaces thereby altering their albedo and 
contributing to climate feedback. Atmospheric aerosols, whether natural 
or anthropogenic, originate from two different pathways: emissions of 
primary particulate matter (PM), and formation of secondary PM from 
gaseous precursors. The bulk of aerosols are of natural origin. Some 
scientists use group labels that refer to the chemical composition, namely: 
sea salt, organic carbon, black carbon (BC), mineral species (mainly 
desert dust), sulphate, nitrate and ammonium. These labels are, however, 
imperfect as aerosols combine particles to create complex mixtures. See 
also Short-lived climate forcers (SLCFs).
Agreement 
In this Special Report, the degree of agreement within the scientiﬁc 
body of knowledge on a particular ﬁnding is assessed based on multiple 
lines of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding, theory, data, models, 
expert judgement) and expressed qualitatively (Mastrandrea et al., 
2010). See also Conﬁdence, Likelihood and Uncertainty. 
Albedo 
The proportion of sunlight (solar radiation) reﬂected by a surface or 
object, often expressed as a percentage. Clouds, snow and ice usually 
have high albedo; soil surfaces cover the albedo range from high to 
low; vegetation in the dry season and/or in arid zones can have high 
albedo; whereas photosynthetically active vegetation and the ocean 
have low albedo. The Earth’s planetary albedo changes mainly through 
varying cloudiness, snow, ice, leaf area and land cover changes.
Alien (non-native) species 
An introduced species (alien species, exotic species, non-indigenous 
species, or non-native species) living outside its native distributional 
range, but which has arrived there by human activity, either deliberate 
or accidental. Non-native species can have various effects on and 
adversely affect the local ecosystem. See also Endemic species and 
Invasive species.
Anomaly 
The deviation of a variable from its value averaged over a reference 
period. 
Anthropogenic 
Resulting from or produced by human activities. See  also 
Anthropogenic emissions. 
Anthropogenic emissions 
Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs), precursors of GHGs, and 
aerosols, caused by human activities. These activities include the 
burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, land use and land use changes 
(LULUC), livestock production, fertilisation, waste management, and 
industrial processes. See also Anthropogenic. 
Anthropogenic subsidence 
Downward motion of the land surface induced by anthropogenic 
drivers (e.g., loading, extraction of hydrocarbons and/or groundwater, 
drainage, mining activities) causing sediment compaction or 
subsidence/deformation of the sedimentary sequence, or oxidation 
of organic material, thereby leading to relative sea level rise. See also 
Anthropogenic and Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) 
See Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC). 
Atmosphere 
The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth, divided into ﬁve layers – 
the troposphere, which contains half of the Earth’s atmosphere, the 
stratosphere, the mesosphere, the thermosphere, and the exosphere, 
which is the outer limit of the atmosphere. The dry atmosphere con-
sists almost entirely of nitrogen (N2, 78.1% volume mixing ratio) and 
oxygen (O2, 20.9% volume mixing ratio), together with a number of 
trace gases, such as argon (Ar, 0.93% volume mixing ratio), helium (He) 
and radiatively active greenhouse gases (GHG) such as carbon diox-
ide (CO2, 0.04% volume mixing ratio) and ozone (O3 ). In addition, the 
atmosphere contains the GHG water vapour (H2O), whose amounts are 
highly variable but typically around 1% volume mixing ratio. The atmo-
sphere also contains clouds and aerosols. See also Climate system, 
Hydrological cycle, Methane (CH4 ) and Radiative forcing. 
Atmosphere-ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) 
See Climate model.
Attribution 
See Detection and attribution. 
Avalanche 
A mass of snow, ice, earth or rocks, or a mixture of these, falling down 
a mountainside.
Benthos 
The community of organisms living on the bottom or in sediments of 
a body of water (such as an ocean, river or lake). The ecological zone 
at the bottom of a body of water, including the sediment surface and 
some sub-surface layers, is known as the ‘benthic zone’.
Biodiversity 
or biological diversity means the variability among living organisms 
from all sources including, among other things, terrestrial, marine 
and other aquatic ecosystems, and the ecological complexes of 
which they are part; this includes diversity within species, between 
species and of ecosystems (UN, 1992). See also Ecosystem service 
and Functional diversity.
Biological (carbon) pump 
A series of ocean processes through which inorganic carbon (as carbon 
dioxide, CO2) is ﬁxed as organic matter by photosynthesis in sunlit sur-
face water and then transported to the ocean interior, and possibly the 
sediment, resulting in the storage of carbon. See also Carbonate pump, 
Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and particulate organic carbon (POC), 
Microbial carbon pump and Solubility pump.
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Biomass 
Organic material excluding the material that is fossilised or embed-
ded in geological formations. Biomass may refer to the mass of 
organic matter in a speciﬁc area (ISO, 2014).
Black carbon (BC) 
A relatively pure form of carbon, also known as soot, arising from the 
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, biofuel and biomass. It only 
stays in the atmosphere for days or weeks. BC is a climate forcing 
agent with strong warming effect, both in the atmosphere and when 
deposited on snow or ice. See also Aerosol, Albedo, Forcing and 
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Blue carbon 
All biologically-driven carbon ﬂuxes and storage in marine systems 
that are amenable to management can be considered as blue carbon. 
Coastal blue carbon focuses on rooted vegetation in the coastal zone, 
such as tidal marshes, mangroves and seagrasses. These ecosystems 
have high carbon burial rates on a per unit area basis and accumulate 
carbon in their soils and sediments. They provide many non-climatic 
beneﬁts and can contribute to ecosystem-based adaptation. If degrad-
ed or lost, coastal blue carbon ecosystems are likely to release most of 
their carbon back to the atmosphere. There is current debate regard-
ing the application of the blue carbon concept to other coastal and 
non-coastal processes and ecosystems, including the open ocean. See 
also Carbon cycle, Coast, Ecosystem service and Sequestration.
Calving (of glaciers or ice sheets) 
The process of mechanical destruction of a mass of ice usually typical 
of marine-terminating glaciers; in the latter case, the ice calving (or 
breaking away) from the glacier edge can lead to the formation of 
icebergs. See also Ice sheet and Marine ice cliff instability (MICI). 
Carbonate pump 
Ocean carbon ﬁxation through the biological formation of carbon-
ates, primarily by plankton that generate bio-mineral particles that 
sink to the ocean interior, and possibly the sediment. It is also called 
carbonate counter-pump, since the formation of calcium carbonate 
(CaCO3) is accompanied by the release of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) to 
surrounding water and subsequently to the atmosphere. See also Bio-
logical (carbon) pump, Blue carbon, Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) 
and particulate organic carbon (POC), Microbial carbon pump and 
Solubility pump.
Carbon budget 
refers to three concepts in the literature: (1) an assessment of carbon 
cycle sources and sinks on a global level, through the synthesis of 
evidence for fossil-fuel and cement emissions, land use change emis-
sions, ocean and land carbon dioxide (CO2 ) sinks, and the resulting 
atmospheric CO2 growth rate. This is referred to as the global carbon 
budget; (2) the estimated cumulative amount of global CO2 emis-
sions that is estimated to limit global surface temperature to a given 
level above a reference period, taking into account global surface 
temperature contributions of other GHGs and climate forcers; (3) the 
distribution of the carbon budget deﬁned under (2) to the regional, 
national, or sub-national level based on considerations of equity, 
costs or efﬁciency. See also Atmosphere, Forcing and Land.
Carbon cycle 
The ﬂow of carbon (in various forms, e.g., as carbon dioxide (CO2 ), 
carbon in biomass, and carbon dissolved in the ocean as carbonate and 
bicarbonate) through the atmosphere, hydrosphere, ocean, terrestrial 
and marine biosphere and lithosphere. In this Special Report, the refer-
ence unit for the global carbon cycle is GtCO2 or GtC (one Gigatonne = 
1 Gt = 1015 grams; 1 GtC corresponds to 3.667 GtCO2 ). See also Atmo-
sphere, Blue carbon and Ocean acidiﬁcation (OA).
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
A naturally occurring gas, CO2 is also a by-product of burning fossil 
fuels (such as oil, gas and coal), of burning biomass, of land use 
changes (LUC) and of industrial processes (e.g., cement production). It 
is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) that affects the 
Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas against which other 
GHGs are measured and therefore has a Global Warming Potential 
(GWP) of 1. See also Global warming, Greenhouse gas (GHG), Land 
and Ocean acidiﬁcation (OA). 
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) 
Anthropogenic activities removing carbon dioxide (CO2 ) from the 
atmosphere and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial, or ocean 
reservoirs, or in products. It includes existing and potential anthropo-
genic enhancement of biological or geochemical CO2 sinks and direct 
air capture and storage but excludes natural CO2 uptake not directly 
caused by human activities. See also Greenhouse gas removal (GGR), 
Mitigation (of climate change) and Negative emissions.
Carbon price 
The price for avoided or released carbon dioxide (CO2 ) or CO2- 
equivalent emissions. This may refer to the rate of a carbon tax, or 
the price of emission permits. In many models that are used to assess 
the economic costs of mitigation, carbon prices are used as a proxy 
to represent the level of effort in mitigation policies. 
Carbon sequestration 
See Sequestration. 
Carbon sink 
See Sink. 
Cascading impacts 
from extreme weather/climate events occur when an extreme 
hazard generates a sequence of secondary events in natural and 
human systems that result in physical, natural, social or economic 
disruption, whereby the resulting impact is signiﬁcantly larger 
than the initial impact. Cascading impacts are complex and multi-
dimensional, and are associated more with the magnitude of 
vulnerability than with that of the hazard (modiﬁed from Pescaroli 
& Alexander, 2015). See also Impacts (consequences, outcomes), 
Natural systems and Risk.
Climate 
in a narrow sense is usually deﬁned as the average weather – or more 
rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of the mean and vari-
ability of relevant quantities – over a period of time ranging from 
months to thousands or millions of years. The classical period for aver-
Glossary 
Annex I
681
AI
aging these variables is 30 years, as deﬁned by the World Meteoro-
logical Organization (WMO). The relevant quantities are most often 
surface variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind. Climate 
in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the 
climate system. 
Climate change 
A change in the state of the climate that can be identiﬁed (e.g., by 
using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability 
of its properties and that persists for an extended period, typically 
decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal 
processes or external forcings such as modulations of the solar cycles, 
volcanic eruptions and persistent anthropogenic changes in the 
composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in 
its Article 1, deﬁnes climate change as: ‘a change of climate which 
is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the 
composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to 
natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods’. 
The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between climate change 
attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric composition 
and climate variability attributable to natural causes. See also Global 
warming, Ocean acidiﬁcation (OA) and Detection and attribution. 
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event) 
The occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above 
(or below) a threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of 
the range of observed values of the variable. For simplicity, both 
extreme weather events and extreme climate events are referred 
to collectively as ‘climate extremes’. See also Extreme weather/
climate event. 
Climate feedback 
An interaction in which a perturbation in one climate quantity 
causes a change in a second and the change in the second quantity 
ultimately leads to an additional change in the ﬁrst. A negative 
feedback is one in which the initial perturbation is weakened by 
the changes it causes; a positive feedback is one in which the 
initial perturbation is enhanced. The initial perturbation can either 
be externally forced or arise as part of internal variability. See also 
Climate variability and  Forcing.
Climate governance 
See Governance. 
Climate model 
A qualitative or quantitative representation of the climate system 
based on the physical, chemical and biological properties of 
its components, their interactions and feedback processes and 
accounting for some of its known properties. The climate system 
can be represented by models of varying complexity; that is, for 
any one component or combination of components a spectrum or 
hierarchy of models can be identiﬁed, differing in such aspects as 
the number of  spatial dimensions, the extent to which physical, 
chemical or biological processes are explicitly represented, or the 
level at which empirical parametrisations are involved. There is an 
evolution towards more complex models with interactive chemistry 
and biology scenarios. Climate models are applied as a research 
tool to study and simulate the climate and for operational purposes, 
including monthly, seasonal and interannual climate predictions. See 
also Climate sensitivity and Earth system model (ESM). 
Climate projection 
Simulated response of the climate system to a  scenario of future 
emissions or concentrations of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and 
aerosols and changes in land use, generally derived using climate 
models. Climate projections depend on an emission/concentration/
radiative forcing scenario, which is in turn based on assumptions 
concerning, for example, future socioeconomic and technological 
developments that may or may not be realised. See also (Model) 
Ensemble, Projection and Radiative forcing.
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) 
Trajectories that strengthen sustainable development and efforts to 
eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities while promoting fair and 
cross-scalar adaptation to and resilience in a changing climate. They 
raise the ethics, equity, and feasibility aspects of the deep societal 
transformation needed to drastically reduce emissions to limit global 
warming (e.g., to well below 2ºC) and achieve desirable and liveable 
futures and well-being for all. See also Equality.
Climate sensitivity 
The change in the annual global mean surface temperature (GMST) 
in response to a change in the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2 ) 
concentration or other radiative forcing. 
Equilibrium climate sensitivity The equilibrium (steady state) 
change in the globally-averaged near-surface temperature fol-
lowing a doubling of the atmospheric CO2 concentration from 
preindustrial conditions. Often estimated through experiments in 
atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (AOGCMs) where 
CO2 levels are either quadrupled or doubled from pre-industrial 
levels and which are integrated for 100–200 years. A related 
quantity, the climate feedback parameter (unit: W m–2 ºC–1) refers 
to the top of atmosphere budget change per degree of globally- 
averaged near-surface temperature change. See also Climate 
model and Global mean surface temperature (GMST).
Climate system 
Global system consisting of ﬁve major components: the atmosphere, 
hydrosphere, cryosphere, lithosphere and biosphere, and the 
interactions between them. The climate system changes in time under 
the inﬂuence of its own internal dynamics and because of external 
forcings such as volcanic eruptions, solar variations, orbital forcing, 
and anthropogenic forcings such as the changing composition of the 
atmosphere and land use change. 
Climate variability 
Deviations of some climate variables from a  given mean state 
(including the occurrence of extremes, etc.) at all spatial and temporal 
scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability may be 
intrinsic, due to ﬂuctuations of processes internal to the climate 
system (internal variability), or extrinsic, due to variations in natural 
or anthropogenic external forcing (forced variability). 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Coast 
The land near to the sea. The term ‘coastal’ can refer to that land 
(e.g., as in ‘coastal communities’), or to that part of the marine environ-
ment that is strongly inﬂuenced by land-based processes. Thus, coastal 
seas are generally shallow and near-shore. The landward and seaward 
limits of the coastal zone are not consistently deﬁned, neither scien-
tiﬁcally nor legally. Thus, coastal waters can either be considered as 
equivalent to territorial waters (extending 12 nautical miles/22.2 km 
from mean low water), or to the full Exclusive Economic Zone, or to 
shelf seas, with less than 200 m water depth. See also Ocean, Ocean 
deoxygenation and Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Co-beneﬁts 
The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed at one objective 
might have on other objectives, thereby increasing the total beneﬁts 
for society or the environment. Co-beneﬁts are often subject to 
uncertainty and depend on local circumstances and implementation 
practices, among other factors. Co-beneﬁts are also referred to as 
ancillary beneﬁts. See also Risk.
Compound events 
See Compound weather/climate events.
Compound weather/climate events 
The combination of multiple drivers and/or hazards that contributes 
to societal and environmental risk (Zscheischler et al., 2018).
Compound risks 
arise from the interaction of hazards, which may be characterised by 
single extreme events or multiple coincident or sequential events that 
interact with exposed systems or sectors. See also Extreme weather/
climate event and Risk.
Conﬁdence 
The robustness of a ﬁnding based on the type, amount, quality and 
consistency of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding, theory, 
data, models, expert judgment) and on the degree of agreement 
across multiple lines of evidence. In this Special Report, conﬁdence is 
expressed qualitatively (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See Section 1.8.3 for 
the list of conﬁdence levels used. See also Likelihood and Uncertainty. 
Coral reef 
An underwater ecosystem characterised by structure-building stony 
corals. Warm water coral reefs occur in shallow seas, mostly in the 
tropics, with the corals (animals) containing algae (plants) that 
depend on light and relatively stable temperature conditions. Cold 
water coral reefs occur throughout the world, mostly at water depths 
of 50–500 m. In both kinds of reef, living corals frequently grow 
on older, dead material, predominantly made of calcium carbonate 
(CaCO3). Both warm and cold-water coral reefs support high biodi-
versity of ﬁsh and other groups, and are considered to be especially 
vulnerable to climate change. See also Ocean acidiﬁcation (OA). 
Cost-beneﬁt analysis 
Monetary assessment of all negative and positive impacts associated 
with a given action. Cost-beneﬁt analysis enables comparison of 
different interventions, investments or strategies and reveal how 
a given investment or policy effort pays off for a particular person, 
company or country. Cost-beneﬁt analyses representing society’s 
point of view are important for climate change decision making, but 
there are difﬁculties in aggregating costs and beneﬁts across different 
actors and across timescales. See also Discounting. 
Cost-effectiveness 
A measure of the cost at which a policy goal or outcome is achieved. 
The lower the cost, the greater the cost-effectiveness. See also  
Private costs.
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) 
A climate modelling activity from the World Climate Research Pro-
gramme (WCRP) which coordinates and archives climate model simu-
lations based on shared model inputs by modelling groups from around 
the world. The CMIP3 multi-model data set includes projections using 
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) scenarios. The CMIP5 
data set includes projections using the Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCP). The CMIP6 phase involves a suite of common model 
experiments as well as an ensemble of CMIP-endorsed Model Inter-
comparison Projects (MIPs). See also Climate projection.
Cryosphere 
The components of the Earth System at and below the land and ocean 
surface that are frozen, including snow cover, glaciers, ice sheets, ice 
shelves, icebergs, sea ice, lake ice, river ice, permafrost and season-
ally frozen ground. See also Climate system.
Cultural services 
See Ecosystem services.
Cumulative emissions 
The total amount of emissions released over a speciﬁed period of 
time. See also Carbon budget.
Deep uncertainty 
A situation of deep uncertainty exists when experts or stakeholders 
do not know or cannot agree on: (1) appropriate conceptual models 
that describe relationships among key driving forces in a system; 
(2) the probability distributions used to represent uncertainty about 
key variables and parameters; and/or (3) how to weigh and value 
desirable alternative outcomes (Lempert et al., 2003). 
Deforestation 
Conversion of forest to non-forest. [Note: For a discussion of the term 
forest and related terms such as afforestation, reforestation, and 
deforestation in the context of reporting and accounting Article 3.3 
and 3.4 activities under the Kyoto Protocol, see 2013 Revised Sup-
plementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the 
Kyoto Protocol].
Detection 
See Detection and attribution. 
Detection and attribution 
Detection of change is deﬁned as the process of demonstrating 
that climate or a system affected by climate has changed in some 
Glossary 
Annex I
683
AI
deﬁned statistical sense, without providing a reason for that change. 
An identiﬁed change is detected in observations if its likelihood of 
occurrence by chance due to internal variability alone is determined 
to be small, for example, <10%. Attribution is deﬁned as the process 
of evaluating the relative contributions of multiple causal factors to a 
change or event with a formal assessment of conﬁdence.
Developed/developing countries (Industrialised/ 
developed/developing countries) 
There is a diversity of approaches for categorizing countries on the 
basis of their level of development, and for deﬁning terms such as 
industrialised, developed, or developing. Several categorisations are 
used in this Special Report. (1) In the United Nations (UN) system, there 
is no established convention for the designation of developed and 
developing countries or areas. (2) The UN Statistics Division speciﬁes 
developed and developing regions based on common practice. In 
addition, speciﬁc countries are designated as least developed countries, 
landlocked developing countries, small island developing states (SIDS), 
and transition economies. Many countries appear in more than one of 
these categories. (3) The World Bank uses income as the main criterion 
for classifying countries as low, lower middle, upper middle, and high 
income. (4) The UN Development Programme (UNDP) aggregates 
indicators for life expectancy, educational attainment, and income 
into a single composite Human Development Index (HDI) to classify 
countries as low, medium, high, or very high human development.
Development pathways 
See Pathways. 
Disaster 
A ‘serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society 
at any scale due to hazardous events interacting with conditions of 
exposure, vulnerability and capacity, leading to one or more of the 
following: human, material, economic and environmental losses and 
impacts’ (UNISDR, 2017). See also Disaster risk management (DRM), 
Exposure, Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability.
Disaster risk management (DRM) 
Processes for designing, implementing, and evaluating strategies, 
policies, and measures to improve the understanding of current 
and future disaster risk, foster disaster risk reduction and transfer, 
and promote continuous improvement in disaster preparedness, 
prevention and protection, response, and recovery practices, with the 
explicit purpose of increasing human security, well-being, quality of 
life, and sustainable development (SD). 
Discharge (of ice) 
Rate of the ﬂow of ice through a vertical section of a glacier 
perpendicular to the direction of the ﬂow of ice. Often used to refer 
to the loss of mass at marine-terminating glacier fronts (mostly 
calving of icebergs and submarine melt), or to mass ﬂowing across 
the grounding line of a ﬂoating ice shelf. See also Mass balance/
budget (of glaciers or ice sheets).
Discounting 
A mathematical operation that aims to make monetary (or other) 
amounts received or expended at different times (years) comparable 
across time. The discounter uses a ﬁxed or possibly time-varying 
discount rate from year to year that makes future value worth less 
today (if the discount rate is positive). The choice of discount rate(s) is 
debated as it is a judgement based on hidden and/or explicit values. 
Discount rate 
See Discounting.
Displacement 
See (Internal) Displacement (of humans).
Dissolved inorganic carbon 
The combined total of different types of non-organic carbon in (seawater) 
solution, comprising carbonate (CO3
2–), bicarbonate (HCO3
–), carbonic 
acid (H2CO3) and carbon dioxide (CO2 ).
Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and particulate  
organic carbon (POC) 
Organic carbon types – for example, in the ocean – operationally 
separated by ﬁltration. Filter pore size typically is 0.45 microme-
tres but may vary between 0.22 and 0.7 micrometres, with small-
er carbon types in the solution (DOC) and larger carbon types 
(POC) being ﬁltered out. In the global ocean, the ratio of DOC and  
POC is approximately 20:1. DOC can be further classiﬁed as labile DOC  
(LDOC) and refractory DOC (RDOC; also known as recalcitrant  
DOC). In the global ocean, DOC is mainly (>90%) comprised of 
RDOC. RDOC can be generated by microbial carbon pump processes, 
and is able to persist for hundreds to thousands of years due to its 
resistance to microbial decomposition. LDOC occurs mainly in surface 
seawaters and is readily available for biological utilisation or decom-
position. See also Carbon cycle.
Downscaling 
A method that derives local- to regional-scale (up  to  100 km) 
information from larger-scale models or data analyses. Two main 
methods exist: dynamical downscaling and empirical/statistical 
downscaling. The dynamical method uses the output of  regional 
climate models, global models with variable spatial resolution, or 
high-resolution global models. The empirical/statistical methods 
are based on observations and develop statistical relationships that 
link the large-scale atmospheric variables with local/regional climate 
variables. In all cases, the quality of the driving model remains an 
important limitation on quality of the downscaled information. The 
two methods can be combined, for example, applying empirical/
statistical downscaling to the output of a regional climate model, 
consisting of a dynamical downscaling of a global climate model.
Driver 
Any natural or human-induced factor that directly or indirectly causes  
a change in a system (adapted from MA, 2005). See also Forcing.
Drought 
A period of abnormally dry weather long enough to cause a serious 
hydrological imbalance. Drought is a relative term; therefore any 
discussion in terms of precipitation deﬁcit must refer to the particular 
precipitation-related activity that is under discussion. For example, 
shortage of precipitation during the growing season impinges on crop 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
production or ecosystem function in general (due to soil moisture 
drought, also termed agricultural drought) and during the runoff 
and percolation season primarily affects water supplies (hydrological 
drought). Storage changes in soil moisture and groundwater are 
also affected by increases in actual evapotranspiration in addition to 
reductions in precipitation. A period with an abnormal precipitation 
deﬁcit is deﬁned as a meteorological drought. See also Heatwave and 
Hydrological cycle.
Early warning systems (EWS) 
The set of technical and institutional capacities to forecast, predict, 
and communicate timely and meaningful warning information to 
enable individuals, communities, managed ecosystems, and organisa-
tions threatened by a hazard to prepare to act promptly and appropri-
ately to reduce the possibility of harm or loss. Dependent upon con-
text, EWS may draw upon scientiﬁc and/or indigenous knowledge, 
and other knowledge types. EWS are also considered for ecological 
applications, for example, conservation, where the organisation itself 
is not threatened by hazard but the ecosystem under conserva-
tion is (e.g., coral bleaching alerts), in agriculture (e.g., warnings of 
heavy rainfall, drought, ground frost and hailstorms) and in ﬁsheries 
(e.g., warnings of storm, storm surge and tsunamis) (UNISDR 2009; 
IPCC, 2012a). See also Disaster, Institutions, Local knowledge and 
Loss and Damage, and losses and damages.
Earth system model (ESM) 
A coupled atmosphere–ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) in 
which a representation of the carbon cycle is included, allowing for 
interactive calculation of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2 ) or com-
patible emissions. Additional components (e.g., atmospheric chemis-
try, ice sheets, dynamic vegetation, nitrogen cycle, but also urban or 
crop models) may be included. See also Climate model. 
Ecosystem 
A functional unit consisting of living organisms, their non-living 
environment and the interactions within and between them. The 
components included in a given ecosystem and its spatial boundaries 
depend on the purpose for which the ecosystem is deﬁned: in some 
cases they are relatively sharp, while in others they are diffuse. 
Ecosystem boundaries can change over time. Ecosystems are nested 
within other ecosystems and their scale can range from very small to 
the entire biosphere. In the current era, most ecosystems either contain 
people as key organisms, or are inﬂuenced by the effects of human 
activities in their environment. See also Ecosystem services. 
Ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) 
See Adaptation.
Ecosystem services 
Ecological processes or functions having monetary or non-
monetary value to individuals or society at large. These are 
frequently classiﬁed as (1) supporting services such as productivity 
or biodiversity maintenance, (2) provisioning services such as food 
or ﬁbre, (3) regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon 
sequestration and (4) cultural services such as tourism or spiritual 
and aesthetic appreciation. See also Ecosystem and Nature’s 
Contribution to People (NCP). 
Elevation-dependent warming (EDW) 
Characteristic of many regions where mountains are located, in 
which past and/or future surface air temperature changes vary  
neither uniformly nor linearly with elevation. In many cases, warming 
is enhanced within or above a certain elevation range.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
The term El Niño was initially used to describe a warm-water 
current that periodically ﬂows along the coast of Ecuador and 
Peru, disrupting the local ﬁshery. It has since become identiﬁed 
with warming of the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean east of the dateline. 
This oceanic event is associated with a ﬂuctuation of a  global-
scale tropical and subtropical surface pressure pattern called the 
Southern Oscillation. This coupled atmosphere-ocean phenomenon, 
with preferred time scales of two to about seven years, is known 
as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). It is often measured by 
the surface pressure anomaly difference between Tahiti and Darwin 
and/or the sea surface temperatures (SST) in the central and eastern 
equatorial Paciﬁc. During an ENSO event, the prevailing trade 
winds weaken, reducing upwelling and altering ocean currents 
such that the SSTs warm, further weakening the trade winds. This 
phenomenon has a great impact on the wind, SST and precipitation 
patterns in the tropical Paciﬁc. It has climatic effects throughout 
the Paciﬁc region and in many other parts of the world, through 
global teleconnections. The cold phase of ENSO is called La Niña. 
See also Climate.
Emission pathways 
See Pathways.
Emission scenario 
A plausible representation of the future development of emissions 
of substances that are radiatively active (e.g., greenhouse gases, 
or aerosols) based on a coherent and internally consistent set 
of assumptions about driving forces (such as demographic and 
socioeconomic development, technological change, energy and land 
use) and their key relationships. Concentration scenarios, derived 
from emission scenarios, are often used as input to a climate model 
to compute climate projections. See also Driver, Forcing, Mitigation 
scenario, Radiative forcing, Representative concentration pathways 
(RCPs, under Pathways), Shared socioeconomic pathways (SSPs, 
under Pathways) and Scenario. 
Endemic species 
Plants and animals that are only found in one geographic region. See 
also Alien (non-native) species, Ecosystem and Invasive species.
Enhanced weathering 
A proposed method to increase the natural rate of removal of carbon 
dioxide (CO2 ) from the atmosphere using silicate and carbonate 
rocks. The active surface area of these minerals is increased by grind-
ing, before they are actively added to soil, beaches or the open ocean. 
See also Carbon dioxide removal (CDR), Geoengineering and Seques-
tration.
Ensemble 
See (Model) Ensemble.
Glossary 
Annex I
685
AI
Equality 
A principle that ascribes equal worth to all human beings, including 
equal opportunities, rights, and obligations, irrespective of origins. 
Inequality Uneven opportunities and social positions, and 
processes of discrimination within a group or society, based on 
gender, class, ethnicity, age and (dis)ability, often produced by 
uneven development. Income inequality refers to gaps between 
highest and lowest income earners within a country and 
between countries. 
See also Equity. 
Equilibrium climate sensitivity 
See Climate sensitivity.
Equity 
The principle of being fair and impartial, and a basis for understanding 
how the impacts and responses to climate change, including costs and 
beneﬁts, are distributed in and by society in more or less equal ways. 
Often aligned with ideas of equality, fairness and justice and applied 
with respect to equity in the responsibility for, and distribution of, 
climate impacts and policies across society, generations, and gender, 
and in the sense of who participates and controls the processes of 
decision making. 
Distributive equity Equity in the consequences, outcomes, costs 
and beneﬁts of actions or policies. In the case of climate change or 
climate policies for different people, places and countries, including 
equity aspects of sharing burdens and beneﬁts for mitigation and 
adaptation. 
Gender equity Equity between women and men with regard 
to their rights, resources and opportunities. In the case of 
climate change, gender equity recognises that women are often 
more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and may be 
disadvantaged in the process and outcomes of climate policy. 
Intergenerational equity Equity between generations that, in  the 
context of climate change, acknowledges that the effects of past 
and present emissions, vulnerabilities and policies impose costs and 
beneﬁts for people in the future and of different age groups. 
Procedural equity Equity in the process of decision making 
including recognition and inclusiveness in participation, equal 
representation, bargaining power, voice and equitable access to 
knowledge and resources to participate.
Evidence 
Data and information used in the scientiﬁc process to establish 
ﬁndings. In this Special Report, the degree of evidence reﬂects the 
amount, quality, and consistency of scientiﬁc/technical information 
on which the Lead Authors are basing their ﬁndings. See also 
Agreement, Conﬁdence, Likelihood and Uncertainty. 
Evolutionary adaptation 
See Adaptation.
Exposure 
The presence of people; livelihoods; species or ecosystems; 
environmental functions, services, and resources; infrastructure, or 
economic, social, or cultural assets in places and settings that could 
be adversely affected. See also Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability. 
Extratropical cyclone 
Any cyclonic-scale storm that is not a tropical cyclone. Usually refers 
to a middle- or high-latitude migratory storm system formed in 
regions of large horizontal temperature variations. Sometimes called 
extratropical storm or extratropical low. 
Extreme event 
See Extreme weather/climate event. 
Extreme sea level 
See Storm surge. 
Extreme weather/climate event 
An extreme weather event is an event that is rare at a particular 
place and time of year. Deﬁnitions of ‘rare’ vary, but an extreme 
weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th 
or 90th percentile of a probability density function estimated from 
observations. By deﬁnition, the characteristics of what is called 
extreme weather may vary from place to place in an absolute 
sense. When a pattern of extreme weather persists for some time, 
such as a season, it may be classiﬁed as an extreme climate event, 
especially if it yields an average or total that is itself extreme 
(e.g., high temperature, drought, or total rainfall over a season). 
See  also Heat wave and Climate extreme (extreme weather or 
climate event). 
Fairness 
Impartial and just treatment without favouritism or discrimination in 
which each person is considered of equal worth with equal opportu-
nity. See also Equity and Equality.
Feasibility 
The degree to which climate goals and response options are considered 
possible and/or desirable. Feasibility depends on geophysical, 
ecological, technological, economic, social and institutional conditions 
for change. Conditions underpinning feasibility are dynamic, spatially 
variable, and may vary between different groups. 
Economic feasibility An indicator of the beneﬁts and costs of 
a climate adaptation or response, often expressed as a ratio of 
the two, used in order to judge whether it is possible or wise to 
proceed with the option. 
Social and institutional feasibility Institutional feasibility has 
two key parts: (1) the extent of administrative workload, both for 
public authorities and for regulated entities, and (2) the extent 
to which the policy is viewed as legitimate, gains acceptance, is 
adopted, and is implemented. 
Feedback 
See Climate feedback. 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Firn 
Snow that has survived at least one ablation season but has not been 
transformed to glacier ice. Its pore space is at least partially intercon-
nected, allowing air and water to circulate. Firn densities typically are 
400–830 kg m–3. See also Cryosphere. 
Flood 
The overﬂowing of the normal conﬁnes of a stream or other water 
body, or the accumulation of water over areas that are not normally 
submerged. Floods can be caused by unusually heavy rain, for 
example during storms and cyclones. Floods include river (ﬂuvial) 
ﬂoods, ﬂash ﬂoods, urban ﬂoods, rain (pluvial) ﬂoods, sewer 
ﬂoods, coastal ﬂoods and glacial lake outburst ﬂoods (GLOFs). See 
also Runoff.
Food security 
A situation that exists when all people, at all times, have physical, 
social and economic access to sufﬁcient, safe and nutritious food 
that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active 
and healthy life (FAO, 2001). [Note: Whilst the term ‘food security’ 
explicitly includes nutrition within it ‘dietary needs … for an active 
and healthy life’, in the past the term has sometimes privileged the 
supply of energy, especially to the hungry. Thus, the term ‘food and 
nutrition security’ is often used (with the same deﬁnition as food 
security) to emphasise that the term food covers both energy and 
nutrition (FAO, 2009).] See also Food system and Malnutrition.
Food system 
All the elements (environment, people, inputs, processes, 
infrastructures, institutions, etc.) and activities that relate to the 
production, processing, distribution, preparation and consumption of 
food, and the output of these activities, including socioeconomic and 
environmental outcomes (HLPE, 2017). [Note: Whilst there is a global 
food system (encompassing the totality of global production and 
consumption), each location’s food system is unique, being deﬁned 
by that place’s mix of food produced locally, nationally, regionally or 
globally]. See also Food security.
Forcing 
The driver of a change in the climate system, usually through an 
imbalance between the radiative energy received by and leaving the 
Earth’s surface. See also Radiative forcing and Short-lived climate 
forcers (SLCF).
Forest 
A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many deﬁnitions of the term 
forest are in use throughout the world, reﬂecting wide differences 
in biogeophysical conditions, social structure and economics. 
[Note: For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as 
afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC Special 
Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000). 
See also information provided by the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2013) and the Report on 
Deﬁnitions and Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions from 
Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of 
Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003)]. 
Fossil fuels 
Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits, including coal, 
oil and natural gas. 
Framework Convention on Climate Change
See United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). 
Frozen ground
Soil or rock in which part or all of the pore water consists of ice. See 
also Permafrost.
Functional diversity 
‘The range and value of those species and organismal traits that inﬂu-
ence ecosystem functioning’ (Tilman 2001). See also Biodiversity.
General circulation model 
See Climate model. 
Geoengineering 
A broad set of methods and technologies that aim to deliber-
ately alter the climate system in order to alleviate the impacts of  
climate change. Most, but not all, methods seek to either (1) reduce 
the amount of absorbed solar energy in the climate system (solar 
radiation management, or solar radiation modiﬁcation, SRM) or 
(2) increase net carbon sinks from the atmosphere at a scale suf-
ﬁciently large to alter climate (i.e., carbon dioxide removal, CDR). 
Scale and intent are of central importance. Two key characteristics 
of geoengineering methods of particular concern are that they use or 
affect the climate system (e.g., atmosphere, land or ocean) globally 
or regionally and/or could have substantive unintended effects that 
cross national boundaries. Geoengineering is different from weather 
modiﬁcation and ecological engineering, but the boundary can be 
unclear (IPCC, 2012b, p. 2). See also Blue carbon.
Glaciated 
State of a surface that was covered by glacier ice in the past, but not 
at present.
Glacier 
A perennial mass of ice, and possibly ﬁrn and snow, originating 
on the land surface by accumulation and compaction of snow and 
showing evidence of past or present ﬂow. A glacier typically gains 
mass by accumulation of snow, and loses mass by ablation. Land 
ice masses of continental size (>50,000 km2) are referred to as  
ice sheets (Cogley et al., 2011). See also Calving (of glaciers or ice 
sheets), Cryosphere, Grounding line and Mass balance/budget (of 
glaciers or ice sheets).
Glacial lake outburst ﬂood (GLOF)/Glacier lake outburst 
A sudden release of water from a glacier lake, including any of the 
following types – a glacier-dammed lake, a pro-glacial moraine-
dammed lake or water that was stored within, under or on the glacier.
Global climate model 
See Climate model. 
Glossary 
Annex I
687
AI
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) 
Estimated global average of near-surface air temperatures over land 
and sea ice, and sea surface temperature (SST) over ice-free ocean 
regions, with changes normally expressed as departures from a value 
over a speciﬁed reference period. When estimating changes in GMST, 
near-surface air temperatures over both land and oceans are also used.
Global warming 
An increase in global mean surface temperature (GMST) averaged over 
a 30-year period, or the 30-year period centred on a particular year or 
decade, expressed relative to pre-industrial levels unless otherwise 
speciﬁed. For 30-year periods that span past and future years, the 
current multi-decadal warming trend is assumed to continue. See also 
Climate change and Climate variability. 
Governance 
In this Special Report, governance refers to the effort to establish, 
reafﬁrm or change formal and informal institutions at all scales to 
negotiate relationships, resolve social conﬂicts and realise mutual 
gains (Paavola, 2007; Williamson, 2000). It refers to how the 
economy and society are governed or regulated; and how collec-
tive interests are deﬁned, reconciled and institutionalised (Peters 
and Pierre, 2001). Governance may be an act of governments  
(e.g., a government restricting resource use), non-governmen-
tal organisation (e.g., issuing green certiﬁcation), private actors 
(e.g., resource users establishing rules or norms for restricting use of 
a common resource) or any combination of these. Governance does 
not only include establishing institutions such as laws or policies, but 
also their implementation, enforcement and monitoring. The term 
‘governance’ is used in diverse and contested ways.
Adaptive governance An emerging term in the literature for 
the evolution of formal and informal institutions of governance 
that prioritise planning, implementation and evaluation of 
policy through iterative social learning; in the context of climate 
change, governance facilitating social learning to steer the use 
and protection of natural resources, and ecosystem services, 
particularly in situations of complexity and uncertainty.
Climate governance includes efforts to share the burden of 
emission reduction amongst countries, sectors and groups of 
society (mitigation), and to resolve conﬂicts involved in, or to 
realise mutual gains through, adapting to climate change. 
Deliberative governance involves decision making through 
inclusive public conversation which allows opportunity for 
developing policy options through public discussion rather than 
collating individual preferences through voting or referenda 
(although the latter governance mechanisms can also be 
proceeded and legitimated by public deliberation processes).
Multi-level governance refers to the dispersion of governance 
across multiple levels of jurisdiction and decision making (Hooghe and 
Marks, 2003), including trans-regional and trans-national, regional, 
national and local levels. The concept emphasises that modern 
governance generally consists in, and is more ﬂexible when there is, 
a vertical ‘layering’ of governance processes at different levels.
Participatory governance favours direct public engagement in 
decision and policy making using a variety of techniques such as 
referenda, community deliberation, citizen juries or participatory 
budgeting. The approach can be applied in formal and informal 
institutional contexts from national to local levels, but is usually 
associated with devolved decision making (Fung and Wright, 2003; 
Sarmiento and Tilly, 2018).
Polycentric governance involves multiple centres of decision 
making with overlapping jurisdictions. While the centres have 
some degree of autonomy, they also take each other into 
account, coordinating their actions and seeking to resolve 
conﬂicts (Carlisle and Gruby, 2017; Jordan et al., 2018; McGinnis 
and Ostrom, 2012).
Gravity Recovery And Climate Experiment (GRACE) 
A pair of satellites to measure the Earth’s gravity ﬁeld anomalies 
from 2002 to 2017. These ﬁelds have been used, among other things, 
to study mass changes of the polar ice sheets and glaciers. See also 
Marine ice sheet instability (MISI) and Mass balance/budget (of   
glaciers or ice sheets).
Green infrastructure 
The interconnected set of natural and constructed ecological systems, 
green spaces and other landscape features. It includes planted and 
indigenous trees, wetlands, parks, green open spaces and original 
grassland and woodlands, as well as possible building and street 
level design interventions that incorporate vegetation. Green 
infrastructure provides services and functions in the same way as 
conventional infrastructure (Culwick and Bobbins, 2016). See also 
Ecosystem and Ecosystem services.
Greenhouse gases (GHG) 
Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropo-
genic, that absorb and emit radiation at speciﬁc wavelengths within 
the spectrum of radiation emitted by the Earth’s ocean and land sur-
face, by the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. This property causes the 
greenhouse effect. Water vapour (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2 ), nitrous 
oxide (N2O), methane (CH4 ) and ozone (O3 ) are the primary GHGs in 
the Earth’s atmosphere. Human-made GHGs include sulphur hexaﬂuo-
ride (SF6), hydroﬂuorocarbons (HFCs), chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) and 
perﬂuorocarbons (PFCs); several of these are also O3-depleting (and are 
regulated under the Montreal Protocol). 
Greenhouse gas removal 
Withdrawal of a greenhouse gas (GHG) and/or a precursor from the 
atmosphere by a sink. See also Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and 
Negative emissions.
Gross domestic product (GDP) 
The sum of gross value added, at purchasers’ prices, by all 
resident and non-resident producers in the economy, plus any 
taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the value of the 
products in a country or a geographic region for a given period, 
normally one year. GDP is calculated without deducting for 
depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation of 
natural resources. 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Grounding line 
The junction between a glacier or ice sheet and an ice shelf; the place 
where ice starts to ﬂoat. This junction normally occurs over a zone, 
rather than at a line. 
Habitability 
The ability of a place to support human life by providing protection 
from hazards which challenge human survival, and by assuring 
adequate space, food and freshwater. 
Hazard 
The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event 
or trend that may cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts, 
as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, livelihoods, 
service provision, ecosystems and environmental resources. See also 
Disaster, Exposure, Loss and Damage, and losses and damages, Risk 
and Vulnerability.
Heat wave 
A period of abnormally hot weather. Heat waves and warm spells have 
various and in some cases overlapping deﬁnitions. See also Climate 
extreme (extreme weather or climate event), Extreme weather event 
and Marine heatwave. 
Holocene 
The current interglacial geological epoch, the second of two epochs 
within the Quaternary period, the preceding being the Pleistocene. 
The International Commission on Stratigraphy deﬁnes the start of the 
Holocene at 11,700 years before 2000 (ICS, 2019).
Human behaviour 
The responses of persons or groups to a particular situation, here 
likely to relate to climate change. Human behaviour covers the range 
of actions by individuals, communities, organisations, governments 
and at the international level. 
Adaptation behaviour Human actions that directly or indirectly 
affect the risks of climate change impacts. 
Mitigation behaviour Human actions that directly or indirectly 
inﬂuence mitigation. 
See also Adaptation.
Human mobility 
The permanent or semi-permanent move by a person for at least one 
year and involving crossing an administrative, but not necessarily 
a national, border. 
Human rights 
Rights that are inherent to all human beings, universal, inalienable, 
and indivisible, typically expressed and guaranteed by law. They 
include the right to life, economic, social, and cultural rights, and the 
right to development and self-determination (UNOHCHR, 2018). 
Procedural rights Rights to a legal procedure to enforce 
substantive rights. 
Substantive rights Basic human rights, including the right to the 
substance of being human such as life itself, liberty and happiness. 
See also Equity, Equality, Justice and Well-being.
Human security 
A condition that is met when the vital core of human lives is 
protected, and when people have the freedom and capacity to live 
with dignity. In the context of climate change, the vital core of human 
lives includes the universal and culturally speciﬁc, material and non-
material elements necessary for people to act on behalf of their 
interests and to live with dignity.
Human system 
Any system in which human organisations and institutions play a 
major role. Often, but not always, the term is synonymous with society 
or social system. Systems such as agricultural systems, urban systems, 
political systems, technological systems and economic systems are all 
human systems in the sense applied in this report. 
Hydrological cycle 
The cycle in which water evaporates from the ocean and the land 
surface, is carried over the Earth in atmospheric circulation as water 
vapour, condenses to form clouds, precipitates over the ocean and 
land as rain or snow, which on land can be intercepted by trees and 
vegetation, potentially accumulating as snow or ice, provides runoff 
on the land surface, inﬁltrates into soils, recharges groundwater, 
discharges into streams, and ultimately, ﬂows into the oceans as 
rivers, polar glaciers and ice sheets, from which it will eventually 
evaporate again. The various systems involved in the hydrological 
cycle are usually referred to as hydrological systems. 
Iceberg 
Large piece of freshwater ice broken off from a glacier or an ice shelf 
during calving and ﬂoating in open water (at least ﬁve metres height 
above sea level). Smaller pieces of ﬂoating ice known as ‘bergy bits’ 
(less than 5 metres above sea level) or ‘growlers’ (less than 2 metres 
above sea level) can originate from glaciers or ice shelves, or from 
the breaking up of a large iceberg. Icebergs can also be classiﬁed by 
shape, most commonly being either tabular (steep sides and a ﬂat 
top) or non-tabular (varying shapes, with domes and spires) (NOAA, 
2019). In lakes, icebergs can originate by breaking off shelf ice, which 
forms through freezing of a lake surface. See also Calving (of glaciers 
or ice sheets) and Marine ice cliff instability (MICI).
Iceberg calving 
See Calving (of glaciers or ice sheets).
Ice core 
A cylinder of ice drilled out of a glacier or ice sheet to gain information 
on past changes in climate and composition of the atmosphere 
preserved in the ice or in air trapped in ice.
Ice sheet 
An ice body originating on land that covers an area of continental 
size, generally deﬁned as covering >50,000 km2, and that has formed 
over thousands of years through accumulation and compaction of 
Glossary 
Annex I
689
AI
snow. An ice sheet ﬂows outward from a high central ice plateau 
with a small average surface slope. The margins usually slope more 
steeply, and most ice is discharged through fast-ﬂowing ice streams 
or outlet glaciers, often into the sea or into ice shelves ﬂoating on 
the sea. There are only two ice sheets in the modern world, one on 
Greenland and one on Antarctica. The latter is divided into the East 
Antarctic Ice Sheet (EAIS), the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and 
the Antarctic Peninsula ice sheet. During glacial periods, there were 
other ice sheets. See also Ablation, Calving (of glaciers or ice sheets), 
Grounding line, Hydrological cycle, Marine ice cliff instability (MICI), 
Marine ice sheet instability (MISI) and Mass balance/budget (of 
glaciers or ice sheets).
Ice shelf 
A ﬂoating slab of ice originating from land of considerable thickness 
extending from the coast (usually of great horizontal extent with a 
very gently sloping surface), resulting from the ﬂow of ice sheets, 
initially formed by the accumulation of snow, and often ﬁlling 
embayments in the coastline of an ice sheet. Nearly all ice shelves are 
in Antarctica, where most of the ice discharged into the ocean ﬂows 
via ice shelves. See also Calving (of glaciers or ice sheets), Glacier, 
Hydrological cycle, Marine ice cliff instability (MICI) and Marine ice 
sheet instability (MISI). 
Ice stream 
A stream of ice with strongly enhanced ﬂow that is part of an ice 
sheet. It is often separated from surrounding ice by strongly sheared, 
crevassed margins. See also Outlet glacier.
Impacts (consequences, outcomes) 
The consequences of realised risks on natural and human systems, 
where risks result from the interactions of climate-related hazards 
(including extreme weather/climate events), exposure, and vulner-
ability. Impacts generally refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, health 
and well-being, ecosystems and species, economic, social and cultur-
al assets, services (including ecosystem services), and infrastructure. 
Impacts may be referred to as consequences or outcomes, and can 
be adverse or beneﬁcial. See also Adaptation, Loss and Damage, and 
losses and damages and Natural systems. 
Incremental adaptation 
See Adaptation. 
Indigenous knowledge (IK) 
The understandings, skills and philosophies developed by societies 
with long histories of interaction with their natural surroundings. 
For many indigenous peoples, IK informs decision making about 
fundamental aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer term 
actions. This knowledge is integral to cultural complexes, which also 
encompass language, systems of classiﬁcation, resource use practices, 
social interactions, values, ritual and spirituality. These distinctive 
ways of knowing are important facets of the world’s cultural diversity 
(UNESCO, 2018). See also Local knowledge (LK).
Industrial revolution 
A period of rapid industrial growth with far-reaching social and eco-
nomic consequences, beginning in Britain during the second half of 
the 18th century and spreading to Europe and later to other countries 
including the United States. The invention of the steam engine was an 
important trigger of this development. The industrial revolution marks 
the beginning of a strong increase in the use of fossil fuels, initially coal, 
and hence emission of carbon dioxide (CO2 ). See also Pre-industrial.
Inequality 
See Equality. 
Institutions 
The ‘prescriptions’, that is the rules, norms and conventions, used by 
humans ‘to organize all forms of repetitive and structured interactions 
including those within families, neighborhoods, markets, ﬁrms, 
sports leagues, churches, private associations, and governments at 
all scales’ (Ostrom, 2005, p. 3). Institutions can be formal, such as 
laws and policies, or informal, such as traditions, customs, norms 
and conventions. Individuals and organisations, such as parliaments, 
regulatory agencies, private ﬁrms, and community bodies, develop 
and act in response to institutions and the incentives they frame. 
Institutions can guide, constrain and shape human interaction through 
direct control, incentives and processes of socialisation. 
Integrated assessment 
A method of analysis that combines results and models from the 
physical, biological, economic and social sciences and the interactions 
among these components in a consistent framework to evaluate the 
status and the consequences of environmental change and the policy 
responses to it.
(Internal) Displacement (of humans) 
The involuntary movement, individually or collectively, of persons from 
their country or community, notably for reasons of armed conﬂict, civil 
unrest, or natural or man-made disasters (adapted from IOM, 2011). 
See also Migration (of humans) and Planned relocation (of humans).
Internal variability 
See Climate variability. 
Invasive species 
A species that is not native to a speciﬁc location or nearby, lacking 
natural controls, and has a tendency to rapidly increase in abundance, 
displacing native species. Invasive species may also damage the 
human economy or human health. See also Alien (non-native) 
species, Ecosystem and Endemic species.
Irreversibility 
A perturbed state of a dynamical system is deﬁned as irreversible 
on a given timescale if the recovery timescale from this state due to 
natural processes is signiﬁcantly longer than the time it takes for the 
system to reach this perturbed state. In the context of this Special 
Report, the recovery time scale of interest is hundreds to thousands 
of years. See also Tipping point. 
Justice 
is concerned with ensuring that people get what is due to them setting 
out the moral or legal principles of fairness and equity in the way 
people are treated, often based on the ethics and values of society. 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Climate justice Justice that links development and human rights 
to achieve a human-centred approach to addressing climate 
change, safeguarding the rights of the most vulnerable people 
and sharing the burdens and beneﬁts of climate change and its 
impacts equitably and fairly (MRFJC, 2018). 
Distributive justice Justice in the allocation of economic and 
non-economic costs and beneﬁts across society. 
Inter-generational justice Justice in the distribution of economic 
and non-economic costs and beneﬁts across generations. 
Procedural justice Justice in the way outcomes are brought 
about including who participates and is heard in the processes of 
decision making. 
Social justice Just or fair relations within society that seek to 
address the distribution of wealth, access to resources, opportunity, 
and support according to principles of justice and fairness. 
See also Equity and Human rights. 
Kyoto Protocol 
The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is an international treaty adopted in 
December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, at the Third Session of the Confer-
ence of the Parties (COP3) to the UNFCCC. It contains legally binding 
commitments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC. Coun-
tries included in Annex B of the Protocol (mostly OECD countries and 
countries with economies in transition) agreed to reduce their anthro-
pogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (carbon dioxide (CO2 ), 
methane (CH4 ), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydroﬂuorocarbons (HFCs), per-
ﬂuorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexaﬂuoride (SF6)) by at least 5% 
below 1990 levels in the ﬁrst commitment period (2008–2012). The 
Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February 2005 and as of May 
2018 had 192 Parties (191 States and the European Union). A second 
commitment period was agreed in December 2012 at COP18, known 
as the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in which a new set of 
Parties committed to reduce GHG emissions by at least 18% below 
1990 levels in the period from 2013 to 2020. However, as of May 
2018, the Doha Amendment had not received sufﬁcient ratiﬁcations 
to enter into force. See also Anthropogenic and Paris Agreement.
Labile dissolved organic carbon (LDOC) 
See Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and particulate organic 
carbon (POC).
La Niña 
See El Niño-Southern Oscillation.
Land 
The terrestrial portion of the biosphere that comprises the natural 
resources (soil, near-surface air, vegetation and other biota, and 
water), the ecological processes, topography, and human settlements 
and infrastructure that operate within that system (FAO, 2007; 
UNCCD, 1994). See also Ecosystem services and Land use.
Land management 
Sum of land use practices (e.g., sowing, fertilising, weeding, 
harvesting, thinning and clear-cutting) that take place within broader 
land use categories (Pongratz et al., 2018). 
Land restoration 
The process of assisting the recovery of land from a degraded state 
(IPBES, 2018; McDonald et al. 2015).
Land use 
The total of arrangements, activities and inputs applied to a parcel of 
land. The term ‘land use’ is also used in the sense of the social and 
economic purposes for which land is managed (e.g., grazing, timber 
extraction, conservation and city dwelling). In national greenhouse 
gas (GHG) inventories, land use is classiﬁed according to the IPCC 
land use categories of forest land, cropland, grassland, wetlands, 
settlements, and other lands (see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for 
National GHG Inventories for details). See also Land management.
Likelihood 
The chance of a speciﬁc outcome occurring, where this might be 
estimated probabilistically. Likelihood is expressed in this Special 
Report using a standard terminology (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See 
Section 1.9.2 in this Special Report for the list of likelihood qualiﬁers 
used. See also Agreement, Evidence, Conﬁdence and Uncertainty. 
Livelihood 
The resources used and the activities undertaken in order for people 
to live. Livelihoods are usually determined by the entitlements and 
assets to which people have access. Such assets can be categorised 
as human, social, natural, physical, or ﬁnancial. 
Local knowledge (LK) 
The understandings and skills developed by individuals and populations, 
speciﬁc to the places where they live. Local knowledge informs decision 
making about fundamental aspects of life, from day-to-day activities 
to longer term actions. This knowledge is a key element of the social 
and cultural systems which inﬂuence observations of and responses to 
climate change; it also informs governance decisions (UNESCO, 2018). 
See also Indigenous knowledge (IK).
Local sea level change 
Change in sea level relative to a datum (such as present-day mean 
sea level) at spatial scales smaller than 10km. See also Regional sea 
level change and Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Lock-in 
A situation in which the future development of a system, including 
infrastructure, technologies, investments, institutions and behav-
ioural norms, is determined or constrained (‘locked in’) by historic 
developments. 
Loss and Damage, and losses and damages 
Research has taken the term ‘Loss and Damage’ (capitalised letters) to 
refer to political debate under the United Nations Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change (UNFCCC) following the establishment of the 
Warsaw Mechanism on Loss and Damage in 2013, which is to ‘address 
Glossary 
Annex I
691
AI
loss and damage associated with impacts of climate change, including 
extreme events and slow onset events, in developing countries that are 
particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.’ The 
expression ‘losses and damages’ (lowercase letters) has been taken to 
refer broadly to harm from (observed) impacts and (projected) risks 
(Mechler et al., 2018). 
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation) 
Actions that may lead to increased risk of adverse climate-related 
outcomes, including via increased greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 
increased vulnerability to climate change, or diminished welfare, now 
or in the future. Maladaptation is usually an unintended consequence. 
See also Adaptation and Adaptive capacity.
Marine heatwave 
A period of extreme warm near-sea surface temperature (SST) that 
persists for days to months and can extend up to thousands of kilo-
metres. See also Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event), 
Extreme weather event and Heat wave. 
Marine ice cliff instability (MICI) 
A hypothetic mechanism of an ice cliff failure. In case a marine-
terminated ice sheet loses its buttressing ice shelf, an ice cliff can be 
exposed. If the exposed ice cliff is tall enough (about 800 m of the 
total height, or about 100 m of the above-water part), the stresses 
at the cliff face exceed the strength of the ice, and the cliff fails 
structurally in repeated calving events. See also Iceberg and Marine 
ice sheet instability (MISI). 
Marine ice sheet instability (MISI) 
A mechanism of irreversible (on the decadal to centennial time scale) 
retreat of a grounding line for the marine-terminating glaciers, in 
case the glacier bed slopes towards the ice sheet interior. See also 
Hydrological cycle, Ice shelf, Marine ice cliff instability (MICI) and 
Sea ice. 
Mass balance/budget (of glaciers or ice sheets) 
Difference between the mass input (accumulation) and the mass loss 
(ablation) of an ice body (e.g., a glacier or ice sheet) over a stated 
time period, which is often a year or a season. Surface mass balance 
refers to the difference between surface accumulation and surface 
ablation. See also Calving (of glaciers or ice sheets) and Discharge 
(of ice).
Measurement, reporting and veriﬁcation (MRV)
Measurement ‘Processes of data collection over time, providing 
basic datasets, including associated accuracy and precision, for 
the range of relevant variables. Possible data sources are ﬁeld 
measurements, ﬁeld observations, detection through remote 
sensing and interviews’ (UN REDD, 2009).
Reporting ‘The process of formal reporting of assessment results 
to the UNFCCC, according to predetermined formats and according 
to established standards, especially the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) Guidelines and GPG (Good Practice 
Guidance)’ (UN REDD, 2009).
Veriﬁcation ‘The process of formal veriﬁcation of reports, 
for example, the established approach to verify national 
communications and national inventory reports to the UNFCCC’ 
(UN REDD, 2009).
Meridional Overturning Circulation (MOC) 
Meridional (north-south) overturning circulation in the ocean 
quantiﬁed by zonal (east-west) sums of mass transports in depth 
or density layers. In the North Atlantic, away from the subpolar 
regions, the MOC (which is in principle an observable quantity) is 
often identiﬁed with the thermohaline circulation (THC), which is a 
conceptual and incomplete interpretation. It must be borne in mind 
that the MOC is also driven by wind, and can also include shallower 
overturning cells such as occur in the upper ocean in the tropics 
and subtropics, in which warm (light) waters moving poleward are 
transformed to slightly denser waters and subducted equatorward 
at deeper levels. 
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) The 
main current system in the South and North Atlantic Oceans. 
AMOC transports warm upper-ocean water northwards, and cold, 
deep water southwards, as part of the global ocean circulation 
system. Changes in the strength of AMOC can affect other com-
ponents of the climate system. 
Methane (CH4) 
One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be mitigated under 
the Kyoto Protocol and is the major component of natural gas and 
associated with all hydrocarbon fuels. Under future global warming, 
there is risk of increased methane emissions from thawing permafrost, 
coastal wetlands and sub-sea gas hydrates. See also Mitigation.
Microbial carbon pump 
Microbial processes that transform organic carbon from rapidly-
degradable states to biologically-unavailable forms, resulting in long-
term carbon storage in the ocean. The unavailable states of organic 
carbon can be due to their intrinsic refractory nature, or to extremely 
low concentrations of each of the diverse individual molecules. The 
microbial carbon pump can take place at any depth in the water 
column and is the principal mechanism generating and sustaining 
refractory dissolved organic carbon (RDOC) in the ocean. See also 
Biological (carbon) pump, Blue carbon and Dissolved organic carbon 
(DOC) and particulate organic carbon (POC).
Migrant 
See Migration (of humans). 
Migration (of humans) 
‘Movement of a person or a group of persons, either across an 
international border, or within a State. It is a population movement, 
encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever its length, 
composition and causes; it includes migration of refugees, displaced 
persons, economic migrants, and persons moving for other purposes, 
including family reuniﬁcation’ (IOM, 2018). 
Migrant ‘Any person who is moving or has moved across an inter-
national border or within a State away from his/her habitual place 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
of residence, regardless of (1) the person’s legal status; (2) whether 
the movement is voluntary or involuntary; (3) what the causes for 
the movement are; or (4) what the length of the stay is’ (IOM, 2018). 
See also (Internal) Displacement (of humans). 
Mitigation (of climate change) 
A human intervention to reduce emissions or enhance the sinks of 
greenhouse gases (GHG). 
Mitigation measures In climate policy, mitigation measures are 
technologies, processes or practices that contribute to mitigation, 
for example renewable energy technologies, waste minimisation 
processes, public transport commuting practices. See also 
Mitigation option. 
Mitigation option A technology or practice that reduces GHG 
emissions or enhances sinks.
Mitigation scenario A plausible description of the future 
that describes how the (studied) system responds to the 
implementation of mitigation policies and measures. 
See also Emission scenario. 
Mobility 
See Human mobility.
(Model) Ensemble 
A group of parallel model simulations characterising historical climate 
conditions, climate predictions, or climate projections. Variation of 
the results across the ensemble members may give an estimate of 
modelling-based uncertainty. Ensembles made with the same model 
but different initial conditions only characterise the uncertainty 
associated with internal climate variability, whereas multi-model 
ensembles including simulations by several models also include the 
impact of model differences. Perturbed parameter ensembles, in which 
model parameters are varied in a systematic manner, aim to assess the 
uncertainty resulting from internal model speciﬁcations within a single 
model. Remaining sources of uncertainty unaddressed with model 
ensembles are related to systematic model errors or biases, which may 
be assessed from systematic comparisons of model simulations with 
observations wherever available. See also Projection. 
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
Mechanisms put in place at national to local scales to respectively 
monitor and evaluate efforts to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and/or adapt to the impacts of climate change with the 
aim of systematically identifying, characterising and assessing 
progress over time. See also Adaptation.
Multi-level governance 
See Governance. 
Narratives (in the context of scenarios) 
Qualitative descriptions of plausible future world evolutions, 
describing the characteristics, general logic and developments 
underlying a particular quantitative set of scenarios. Narratives are 
also referred to in the literature as ‘storylines’. See also Pathways. 
Nationally determined contributions (NDCs) 
A term used under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) whereby a country that has joined the Paris 
Agreement outlines its plans for reducing its emissions. Some countries’ 
NDCs also address how they will adapt to climate change impacts, 
and what support they need from, or will provide to, other countries to 
adopt low-carbon pathways and to build climate resilience. According to 
Article 4 paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall prepare, 
communicate and maintain successive NDCs that it intends to achieve. 
Natural systems 
The dynamic physical and biological components of the environment 
that would operate in the absence of human impacts. Most, if not 
all, natural systems are also now affected by human activities to 
some degree. 
Nature’s contributions to people (NCP) 
‘All the contributions, both positive and negative, of living nature 
(i.e., diversity of organisms, ecosystems, and their associated ecological 
and evolutionary processes) to the quality of life for people. Beneﬁcial 
contributions from nature include such things as food provision, water 
puriﬁcation, ﬂood control, and artistic inspiration, whereas detrimental 
contributions include disease transmission and predation that dam-
ages people or their assets. Many NCP may be perceived as beneﬁts 
or detriments depending on the cultural, temporal or spatial context’ 
(Díaz et al., 2018). See also Biodiversity and Ecosystem services.
Near-surface permafrost 
See Permafrost.
Negative emissions 
Removal of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from the atmosphere by 
deliberate human activities, that is, in addition to the removal 
that would occur via natural carbon cycle processes. See also 
Anthropogenic, Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and Greenhouse gas 
removal (GGR).
Net-negative emissions 
A situation of net-negative emissions is achieved when, as result of 
human activities, more greenhouse gases (GHGs) are removed from 
the atmosphere than are emitted into it. Where multiple GHGs are 
involved, the quantiﬁcation of negative emissions depends on the 
climate metric chosen to compare emissions of different gases (such 
as global warming potential, global temperature change potential, 
and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). See also Greenhouse 
gas removal (GGR), Net-zero emissions and Net-zero CO2 emissions.
Net-zero CO2 emissions 
Net-zero carbon dioxide (CO2 ) emissions are achieved when 
anthropogenic CO2 emissions are balanced by anthropogenic CO2 
removals over a speciﬁed period. See also Carbon dioxide removal 
(CDR), Greenhouse gas removal (GGR), Net zero emissions and Net 
negative emissions.
Glossary 
Annex I
693
AI
Net-zero emissions 
Net-zero emissions are achieved when anthropogenic emissions of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs) to the atmosphere are balanced by anthro-
pogenic removals over a speciﬁed period. Where multiple GHGs are 
involved, the quantiﬁcation of net-zero emissions depends on the 
climate metric chosen to compare emissions of different gases (such 
as global warming potential, global temperature change potential, 
and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). See also Greenhouse 
gas removal (GGR), Net-zero CO2 emissions, Negative emissions and 
Net-negative emissions.
Ocean 
The interconnected body of saline water that covers 71% of the 
Earth’s surface, contains 97% of the Earth’s water and provides 99% 
of the Earth’s biologically habitable space. It includes the Arctic, 
Atlantic, Indian, Paciﬁc and Southern Oceans, as well as their mar-
ginal seas and coastal waters. See also Blue carbon, Coast, Ocean 
acidiﬁcation (OA), Ocean deoxygenation and Southern Ocean.
Ocean acidiﬁcation (OA) 
A reduction in the pH of the ocean, accompanied by other chemical 
changes (primarily in the levels of carbonate and bicarbonate ions), over 
an extended period, typically decades or longer, which is caused primar-
ily by uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) from the atmosphere, but can 
also be caused by other chemical additions or subtractions from the 
ocean. Anthropogenic OA refers to the component of pH reduction that 
is caused by human activity (IPCC, 2011, p. 37). See also Carbon cycle, 
Climate change and Global warming.
Ocean deoxygenation 
The loss of oxygen in the ocean. It results from ocean warming, which 
reduces oxygen solubility and increases oxygen consumption and 
stratiﬁcation, thereby reducing the mixing of oxygen into the ocean 
interior. Deoxygenation can also be exacerbated by the addition of 
excess nutrients in the coastal zone. 
Outburst ﬂood 
See Glacial lake outburst ﬂood (GLOF)/Glacier lake outburst.
Outlet glaciers 
A glacier, usually between rock walls, that is part of, and drains an ice 
sheet. See also Ice stream and Hydrological cycle. 
Outﬂow 
See Discharge (of ice).
Overshoot 
See Temperature overshoot.
Ozone (O3) 
The triatomic form of oxygen, and a gaseous atmospheric 
constituent. In the troposphere, O3 is created both naturally and 
by photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human 
activities (e.g., smog). Tropospheric O3 acts as a greenhouse gas 
(GHG). In the stratosphere, O3 is created by the interaction between 
solar ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric 
O3 plays a dominant role in the stratospheric radiative balance. Its 
concentration is highest in the ozone layer. See also Anthropogenic 
and Radiative forcing.
Paris Agreement 
The Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted in December 
2015 in Paris, France, at the 21st session of the Conference of the  
Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC. The agreement, adopted by 196 Parties 
to the UNFCCC, entered into force on 4 November 2016 and as of 
May 2018 had 195 Signatories and was ratiﬁed by 177 Parties. One of 
the goals of the Paris Agreement is ‘Holding the increase in the global 
average temperature to well below 2ºC above pre-industrial levels 
and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5ºC above 
pre-industrial levels’, recognising that this would signiﬁcantly reduce 
the risks and impacts of climate change. Additionally, the Agreement 
aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with the impacts 
of climate change. The Paris Agreement is intended to become fully 
effective in 2020. See also Kyoto Protocol and Nationally determined 
contributions (NDCs). 
Participatory governance 
See Governance.
Particulate organic carbon (POC) 
See Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and particulate organic carbon 
(POC).
Pathways 
The temporal evolution of natural and/or human systems towards 
a future state. Pathway concepts range from sets of quantitative and 
qualitative scenarios or narratives of potential futures to solution ori-
ented decision making processes to achieve desirable societal goals. 
Pathway approaches typically focus on biophysical, techno-economic, 
and/or sociobehavioural trajectories and involve various dynamics, 
goals, and actors across different scales. 
Adaptation pathways A series of adaptation choices involving 
trade-offs between short-term and long-term goals and values. 
These are processes of deliberation to identify solutions that are 
meaningful to people in the context of their daily lives and to 
avoid potential maladaptation. 
Development pathways Trajectories based on an array of social, 
economic, cultural, technological, institutional and biophysical fea-
tures that characterise the interactions between human and natural 
systems and outline visions for the future, at a particular scale. See 
also Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) and Human 
systems.
Emission pathways Modelled trajectories of global anthropogen-
ic emissions over the 21st century are termed emission pathways. 
Emission pathways are classiﬁed by their temperature trajectory 
over the 21st century: pathways giving at least 50% probability 
based on current knowledge of limiting global warming to below 
1.5ºC are classiﬁed as ‘no overshoot’; those limiting warming to 
below 1.6ºC and returning to 1.5ºC by 2100 are classiﬁed as ‘1.5ºC 
limited overshoot’; while those exceeding 1.6ºC but still returning 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
to 1.5ºC by 2100 are classiﬁed as ‘higher overshoot’. See also Tem-
perature overshoot. 
Representative concentration pathways (RCPs) Scenarios 
that include time series of emissions and concentrations of the 
full suite of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols and chemi-
cally active gases, as well as land use/land cover (Moss et al., 
2008). The word ‘representative’ signiﬁes that each RCP provides 
only one of many possible scenarios that would lead to the spe-
ciﬁc radiative forcing characteristics. The term ‘pathway’ empha-
sises the fact that not only the long-term concentration levels, 
but also the trajectory taken over time to reach that outcome are 
of interest (Moss et al., 2010). RCPs were used to develop climate 
projections in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project CMIP5. 
RCP2.6: One pathway where radiative forcing peaks at 
approximately 3 W m–2 and then declines to be limited at 
2.6 W m–2 in 2100 (the corresponding Extended Concentration 
Pathway (ECP) assuming constant emissions after 2100). 
RCP4.5 and RCP6.0: Two intermediate stabilisation pathways 
in which radiative forcing is limited at approximately 4.5 W m–2 
and 6.0 W m–2 in 2100 (the corresponding ECPs assuming 
constant concentrations after 2150). 
RCP8.5: One high pathway which leads to >8.5 W m–2 in 2100 
(the corresponding ECP assuming constant emissions after 
2100 until 2150 and constant concentrations after 2250). See 
also Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs). 
Shared socioeconomic pathways (SSPs) were developed to 
complement the RCPs with varying socioeconomic challenges 
to adaptation and mitigation (O’Neill et al., 2014). Based on 
ﬁve narratives, the SSPs describe alternative socioeconomic 
futures in the absence of climate policy intervention, comprising  
sustainable development (SSP1), regional rivalry (SSP3), inequal-
ity (SSP4), fossil-fuelled development (SSP5), and a middle-of-the-
road development (SSP2) (O’Neill et al., 2017; Riahi et al., 2017). 
The combination of SSP-based socioeconomic scenarios and RCP-
based climate projections provides an integrative frame for cli-
mate impact and policy analysis. 
Sustainable development pathways (SDPs) Trajectories aimed 
at attaining the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the 
short term and the goals of sustainable development in the long 
term. In the context of climate change, such pathways denote tra-
jectories that address social, environmental, and economic dimen-
sions of sustainable development, adaptation and mitigation, and 
transformation, in a generic sense or from a particular method-
ological perspective such as integrated assessment models and 
scenario simulations. 
See also Emission scenario, Institution, Mitigation scenario and Natu-
ral Systems. 
Pelagic 
The pelagic zone consists of the entire water column of the 
open ocean. It is subdivided into the ‘epipelagic zone’ (<200 m, 
the uppermost part of the ocean that receives enough sunlight to 
allow photosynthesis), the ‘mesopelagic zone’ (200–1000 m depth) 
and the ‘bathypelagic zone’ (>1000 m depth). The term ‘pelagic’ can 
also refer to organisms that live in the pelagic zone.
Permafrost 
Ground (soil or rock, and included ice and organic material) that 
remains at or below 0ºC for at least two consecutive years (Harris 
et al., 1988). Note that permafrost is deﬁned via temperature rather 
than ice content and, in some instances, may be ice-free.
Near-surface permafrost Permafrost within ~3–4 m of the 
ground surface. The depth is not precise, but describes what 
commonly is highly relevant for people and ecosystems. Deeper 
permafrost is often progressively less ice-rich and responds more 
slowly to warming than near-surface permafrost. Presence or 
absence of near-surface permafrost is not the only signiﬁcant 
metric of permafrost change, and deeper permafrost may persist 
when near-surface permafrost is absent.
Permafrost degradation Decrease in the thickness and/or areal 
extent of permafrost. 
Permafrost thaw Progressive loss of ground ice in permafrost, 
usually due to input of heat. Thaw can occur over decades to cen-
turies over the entire depth of permafrost ground, with impacts 
occurring while thaw progresses. During thaw, temperature ﬂuc-
tuations are subdued because energy is transferred by phase 
change between ice and water. After the transition from perma-
frost to non-permafrost, ground can be described as thawed. 
See also Cryosphere and Frozen ground.
Permafrost degradation 
See Permafrost.
Permafrost thaw 
See Permafrost.
pH 
A dimensionless measure of the acidity of a solution given by its con-
centration of hydrogen ions (H+). pH is measured on a logarithmic 
scale where pH = –log10(H+). Thus, a pH decrease of 1 unit corre-
sponds to a 10-fold increase in the concentration of H+, or acidity. See 
also Ocean acidiﬁcation (OA).
Planned relocation (of humans) 
A form of human mobility response in the face of sea level rise and 
related impacts. Planned relocation is typically initiated, supervised 
and implemented from national to local level and involves small 
communities and individual assets but may also involve large 
populations. Also termed resettlement, managed retreat, or managed 
realignment. See also (Internal) Displacement (of humans) and Sea 
level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Glossary 
Annex I
695
AI
Plasticity 
Change in organismal trait values in response to an environmental 
cue, and which does not require change in underlying 
DNA sequence. 
Political economy 
The set of interlinked relationships between people, the state, soci-
ety and markets as deﬁned by law, politics, economics, customs and 
power that determine the outcome of trade and transactions and the 
distribution of wealth in a country or economy. 
Poverty 
A complex concept with several deﬁnitions stemming from different 
schools of thought. It can refer to material circumstances (such as 
need, pattern of deprivation or limited resources), economic conditions 
(such as standard of living, inequality or economic position) and/or 
social relationships (such as social class, dependency, exclusion, lack 
of basic security or lack of entitlement). See also Equality and Poverty 
eradication.
Poverty eradication 
A set of measures to end poverty in all its forms everywhere. See also 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Precursors 
Atmospheric compounds that are not greenhouse gases (GHGs) or 
aerosols, but that have an effect on GHG or aerosol concentrations 
by taking part in physical or chemical processes regulating their 
production or destruction rates.
Pre-industrial 
The multi-century period prior to the onset of large-scale industrial 
activity around 1750. In this Special Report, as in IPCC 2018a, the 
reference period 1850–1900 is used to approximate pre-industrial 
global mean surface temperature. See also Industrial Revolution.
Private costs 
Costs carried by individuals, companies or other private entities 
that undertake an action, whereas social costs include additionally 
the external costs on the environment and on society as a whole. 
Quantitative estimates of both private and social costs may be 
incomplete, because of difﬁculties in measuring all relevant effect. 
Primary production 
The synthesis of organic compounds by plants and microbes, on land 
or in the ocean, primarily by photosynthesis using light and carbon 
dioxide (CO2 ) as sources of energy and carbon, respectively. It can 
also occur through chemosynthesis, using chemical energy, for exam-
ple, in deep sea vents.
Gross primary production (GPP) The total amount of carbon 
ﬁxed by photosynthesis over a speciﬁed time period.
Net primary production (NPP) The amount of carbon 
accumulated through photosynthesis minus the amount lost by 
respiration over a speciﬁed time period.
Projection 
A potential future evolution of a quantity or set of quantities, often 
computed with the aid of a model. Unlike predictions, projections 
are conditional on assumptions concerning, for example, future 
socioeconomic and technological developments that may or may not 
be realised. See also Climate projection, (Model) ensemble, Scenario 
and Pathways. 
Radiative forcing 
The change in the net, downward minus upward, radiative ﬂux 
(expressed in W m–2) at the tropopause or top of atmosphere due to 
a change in an external driver of climate change, such as a change 
in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2 ), the concentration of 
volcanic aerosols or in the output of the Sun. The traditional radia-
tive forcing is computed with all tropospheric properties held ﬁxed at 
their unperturbed values, and after allowing for stratospheric temper-
atures, if perturbed, to readjust to radiative-dynamical equilibrium. 
Radiative forcing is called instantaneous if no change in stratospheric 
temperature is accounted for. The radiative forcing once rapid adjust-
ments are accounted for is termed the effective radiative forcing. 
Radiative forcing is not to be confused with cloud radiative  forc-
ing, which describes an unrelated measure of the impact of clouds 
on the radiative ﬂux at the top of the atmosphere. 
Reasons for concern (RFC) 
Elements of a classiﬁcation framework, ﬁrst developed in the IPCC 
Third Assessment Report, which aims to facilitate judgments about 
what level of climate change may be dangerous (in the language of 
Article 2 of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change, UNFCCC) by aggregating risks from various sectors, 
considering hazards, exposures, vulnerabilities, capacities to adapt, 
and the resulting impacts. 
Reference period 
The period relative to which anomalies are computed.
Refractory dissolved organic carbon (RDOC) 
See Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and particulate organic carbon 
(POC).
Region 
A relatively large-scale land or ocean area characterised by speciﬁc 
geographical and climatological features. The climate of a  land-
based region is affected by regional and local scale features like 
topography, land use characteristics and large water bodies, as well 
as remote inﬂuences from other regions, in addition to global climate 
conditions. The IPCC deﬁnes a set of standard regions for analyses 
of observed climate trends and climate model projections (see IPCC, 
2018a, Figure 3.2; IPCC 2012a). 
Regional sea level change 
Change in sea level relative to a datum (such as present-day mean 
sea level) at spatial scales of about 100 km. 
Relative sea level 
Sea level measured by a tide gauge with respect to the land upon 
which it is situated. See also Coast, Small Island Developing States 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
(SIDS), Local sea level change, Regional sea level change, Sea level 
change (sea level rise/sea level fall), Steric sea level change and 
Anthropogenic subsidence. 
Relocation 
See Planned relocation (of humans).
Reporting 
See Measurement/Measurement, reporting and veriﬁcation (MRV).
Representative concentration pathways (RCPs) 
See Pathways. 
Resettlement 
See Planned relocation (of humans).
Residual risk 
The risk that remains following adaptation and risk reduction efforts.
Resilience 
The capacity of interconnected social, economic and ecological 
systems to cope with a hazardous event, trend or disturbance, 
responding or reorganising in ways that maintain their essential 
function, identity and structure. Resilience is a positive attribute when 
it maintains capacity for adaptation, learning and/or transformation 
(Arctic Council, 2016). See also Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability.
Restoration 
In environmental context, restoration involves human interventions 
to assist the recovery of an ecosystem that has been previously 
degraded, damaged or destroyed.
Risk 
The potential for adverse consequences for human or ecological 
systems, recognising the diversity of values and objectives associated 
with such systems. In the context of climate change, risks can arise 
from potential impacts of climate change as well as human responses 
to climate change. Relevant adverse consequences include those on 
lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, economic, social and cultural 
assets and investments, infrastructure, services (including ecosystem 
services), ecosystems and species.
In the context of climate change impacts, risks result from dynamic 
interactions between climate-related hazards with the exposure 
and vulnerability of the affected human or ecological system to the 
hazards. Hazards, exposure and vulnerability may each be subject to 
uncertainty in terms of magnitude and likelihood of occurrence, and 
each may change over time and space due to socioeconomic changes 
and human decision making.
In the context of climate change responses, risks result from the poten-
tial for such responses not achieving the intended objective(s), or from 
potential trade-offs with, or negative side-effects on, other societal 
objectives, such as the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Risks 
can arise for example from uncertainty in implementation, effective-
ness or outcomes of climate policy, climate-related investments, tech-
nology development or adoption, and system transitions.
See also Adaptation, Human systems, Mitigation and Risk management.
Risk assessment 
The qualitative and/or quantitative scientiﬁc estimation of risks. See 
also Risk, Risk management and Risk perception.
Risk management 
Plans, actions, strategies or policies to reduce the likelihood and/or 
magnitude of adverse potential consequences, based on assessed or 
perceived risks. See also Risk assessment and Risk perception.
Risk perception 
The subjective judgment that people make about the characteristics 
and severity of a risk. See also Risk assessment and Risk management.
Runoff 
The ﬂow of water over the surface or through the subsurface, which 
typically originates from the part of liquid precipitation and/or snow-/
ice-melt that does not evaporate, transpire or refreeze, and returns to 
water bodies. See also Hydrological cycle. 
Scenario 
A plausible description of how the future may develop based on a 
coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions about key driving 
forces (e.g., rate of technological change, prices) and relationships. 
Note that scenarios are neither predictions nor forecasts, but are used 
to provide a view of the implications of developments and actions. See 
also Climate projection, Driver, Emission scenario, Mitigation scenario, 
(Model) ensemble, Pathways and Projection. 
Sea ice 
Ice found at the sea surface that has originated from the freezing of 
seawater. Sea ice may be discontinuous pieces (ice ﬂoes) moved on the 
ocean surface by wind and currents (pack ice), or a motionless sheet 
attached to the coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice concentration is the fraction 
of the ocean covered by ice. Sea ice less than one year old is called ﬁrst-
year ice. Perennial ice is sea ice that survives at least one summer. It may 
be subdivided into second-year ice and multi-year ice, where multiyear 
ice has survived at least two summers. See also Cryosphere.
Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall) 
Change to the height of sea level, both globally and locally (relative 
sea level change) at seasonal, annual, or longer time scales due to 
(1) a change in ocean volume as a result of a change in the mass 
of water in the ocean (e.g., due to melt of glaciers and ice sheets), 
(2) changes in ocean volume as a result of changes in ocean water 
density (e.g., expansion under warmer conditions), (3) changes in the 
shape of the ocean basins and changes in the Earth’s gravitational 
and rotational ﬁelds, and (4) local subsidence or uplift of the land. 
Global mean sea level change resulting from change in the mass 
of the ocean is called barystatic. The amount of barystatic sea level 
change due to the addition or removal of a mass of water is called 
its sea level equivalent (SLE). Sea level changes, both globally and 
locally, resulting from changes in water density are called steric. 
Density changes induced by temperature changes only are called 
thermosteric, while density changes induced by salinity changes 
are called halosteric. Barystatic and steric sea level changes do not 
Glossary 
Annex I
697
AI
include the effect of changes in the shape of ocean basins induced 
by the change in the ocean mass and its distribution. See also 
Anthropogenic subsidence, Local sea level change, Regional sea level 
change and Steric sea level change.
Sea level equivalent (SLE) 
The SLE of a mass of water, ice, or water vapour is that mass, converted 
to a volume using a density of 1000 kg m–3, and divided by the present-
day ocean surface area of 3.625 × 1014 m2. Thus, 362.5 Gt of water mass 
added to the ocean correspond to 1 mm of global mean sea level rise. 
However, more accurate estimates of SLE must account for additional 
processes affecting mean sea level rise, such as shoreline migration, 
changes in ocean area, and for vertical land movements. See also Sea 
level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Sea level rise (SLR) 
See Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Sea surface temperature (SST) 
The subsurface bulk temperature in the top few metres of the ocean, 
measured by ships, buoys, and drifters. From ships, measurements of 
water samples in buckets were mostly switched in the 1940s to samples 
from engine intake water. Satellite measurements of skin temperature 
(uppermost layer; a fraction of a millimetre thick) in the infrared or 
the top centimetre or so in the microwave are also used, but must be 
adjusted to be compatible with the bulk temperature. See also Global 
mean surface temperature (GMST).
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 
outlines seven clear targets and four priorities for action to prevent 
new and reduce existing disaster risks. The voluntary, non-binding 
agreement recognises that the State has the primary role to reduce 
disaster risk but that responsibility should be shared with other 
stakeholders including local government, the private sector and other 
stakeholders, with the aim for the substantial reduction of disaster 
risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the economic, 
physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, 
businesses, communities and countries.
Sequestration 
The long-term removal of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) or other forms of 
carbon from the atmosphere, with secure storage on climatically sig-
niﬁcant time scales (decadal to century). The period of storage needs 
to be known for climate modelling and carbon accounting purposes. 
See also Blue carbon, Carbon dioxide removal (CDR), Sink and Uptake.
Shared socioeconomic pathways (SSPs) 
See Pathways. 
Shelf seas 
Relatively shallow water covering the shelf of continents or around 
islands. The limit of shelf seas is conventionally considered as 200 m 
water depth at the continental shelf edge, where there is usually a steep 
slope to the deep ocean ﬂoor. During glacial periods, most shelf seas 
are lost since they become land as the build-up of ice sheets caused 
a decrease of global sea level. See also Coasts, Glacier and Ice shelf.
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) 
A set of compounds that are primarily composed of those with short 
lifetimes in the atmosphere compared to well-mixed greenhouse 
gases (GHGs), and are also referred to as near-term climate forcers. 
This set of compounds includes methane (CH4 ), which is also a well-
mixed greenhouse gas, as well as ozone (O3) and aerosols, or their 
precursors, and some halogenated species that are not well-mixed 
GHGs. These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at 
decadal to centennial timescales, and so their effect on climate is 
predominantly in the ﬁrst decade after their emission, although their 
changes can still induce long-term climate effects such as sea level 
change. Their effect can be cooling or warming. A subset of exclusively 
warming SLCFs is referred to as short-lived climate pollutants. See also 
Forcing and Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall).
Sink 
Any process, activity or mechanism which removes a greenhouse 
gas (GHG), an aerosol or a precursor of a GHG from the atmosphere 
(United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, UNFCCC, 
Article 1.8). See also Blue carbon, Sequestration and Uptake. 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
as recognised by the United Nations Ofﬁce of the High Representative 
for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries 
and Small Island Developing States, are a distinct group of developing 
countries facing speciﬁc social, economic and environmental 
vulnerabilities (UN-OHRLLS, 2011). They were recognised as a special 
case both for their environment and development at the Rio Earth 
Summit in Brazil in 1992. Fifty-eight countries and territories 
are presently classiﬁed as SIDS by the UN-OHRLLS, with 38 being 
UN member states and 20 being Non-UN-Members or Associate 
Members of the Regional Commissions (UN-OHRLLS, 2018). 
Social costs 
See Private costs.
Social-ecological system 
An integrated system that includes human societies and ecosystems, 
in which humans are part of nature. The functions of such a system 
arise from the interactions and interdependence of the social and 
ecological subsystems. The system’s structure is characterised by 
reciprocal feedbacks, emphasising that humans must be seen as 
a part of, not apart from, nature (Arctic Council, 2016; Berkes and 
Folke, 1998). 
Social learning 
A process of social interaction through which people learn new 
behaviours, capacities, values and attitudes. 
Soil moisture 
Water stored in the soil in liquid or frozen form. Root-zone soil 
moisture is of most relevance for plant activity. See also Drought and 
Permafrost. 
Solar radiation management 
See Solar radiation modiﬁcation (SRM).
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Solar radiation modiﬁcation (SRM) 
The intentional modiﬁcation of the Earth’s shortwave radiative budget 
with the aim of reducing warming. Artiﬁcial injection of stratospheric 
aerosols, marine cloud brightening, and land surface albedo 
modiﬁcation are examples of proposed SRM methods. SRM does not 
fall within the deﬁnitions of mitigation and adaptation (IPCC, 2012b,  
p. 2). Note that in the literature, SRM is also referred to as solar radiation 
management, or albedo enhancement. See also Geoengineering.
Solubility pump 
A physicochemical process that transports dissolved inorganic carbon 
from the ocean’s surface to its interior. The solubility pump is primarily  
driven by the solubility of carbon dioxide (CO2 ) (with more CO2 dis-
solving in colder water) and the large-scale, thermohaline patterns of 
ocean circulation. See also Biological (carbon) pump and Dissolved 
inorganic carbon.
Source 
Any process or activity which releases a greenhouse gas (GHG), an aerosol 
or a precursor of a GHG into the atmosphere (United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, UNFCCC, Article 1.9). See also Sink.
Southern Ocean 
The ocean region encircling Antarctica  that connects the Atlantic, 
Indian and Paciﬁc Oceans together, allowing inter-ocean exchange. 
This region is the main source of much of the deep water of the 
world’s ocean and also provides the primary return pathway for this 
deep water to the surface (Marshall and Speer, 2012; Toggweiler and 
Samuels, 1995). The drawing up of deep waters and the subsequent 
transport into the ocean interior has major consequences for the 
global heat, nutrient, and carbon balances, as well as the Antarctic 
cryosphere and marine ecosystems.
Stabilisation (of GHG or CO2-equivalent concentration) 
A state in which the atmospheric concentration of one greenhouse 
gas (GHG) (e.g., carbon dioxide, CO2) or of a CO2-equivalent basket 
of GHGs (or a combination of GHGs and aerosols) remains constant 
over time. See also Atmosphere.
Steric sea level change 
Change in sea level due to thermal expansion and salinity variations. 
Thermal expansion refers to the increase in volume (and decrease 
in density) that results from warming water. See also Anthropogenic 
subsidence, Coast, Local sea level change, Regional sea level change, 
Relative sea level, Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall) and 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS).
Storm surge 
The temporary increase, at a particular locality, in the height of the 
sea due to extreme meteorological conditions (low atmospheric 
pressure and/or strong winds). The storm surge is deﬁned as being 
the excess above the level expected from the tidal variation alone at 
that time and place. See also Extreme weather/climate event.
Stratiﬁcation 
Process of forming of layers of (ocean) water with different prop-
erties such as salinity, density and temperature that act as barrier 
for water mixing. The strengthening of near-surface stratiﬁcation 
generally results in warmer surface waters, decreased oxygen 
levels in deeper water, and intensiﬁcation of ocean acidiﬁca-
tion (OA) in the upper ocean. See also Ocean deoxygenation.
Subsidence 
See Anthropogenic subsidence.
Sustainability 
involves ensuring the persistence of natural and human systems, 
implying the continuous functioning of ecosystems, the conservation 
of high biodiversity, the recycling of natural resources and, in the 
human sector, successful application of justice and equity. See also 
Natural systems and Sustainable development (SD).
Sustainable development (SD) 
Development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs (WCED, 1987) and balances social, economic and environmental 
concerns. See also Development pathways (under Pathways), 
Sustainability and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
The 17 global goals for development for all countries established by 
the United Nations through a participatory process and elaborated in 
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (UN, 2015), including 
ending poverty and hunger; ensuring health and well-being, 
education, gender equality, clean water and energy, and decent 
work; building and ensuring resilient and sustainable infrastructure, 
cities and consumption; reducing inequalities; protecting land and 
water ecosystems; promoting peace, justice and partnerships; and 
taking urgent action on climate change. See also Resilience and 
Sustainability. 
Sustainable development pathways (SDPs) 
See Pathways.
Teleconnection 
A statistical association between climate variables at widely 
separated, geographically-ﬁxed spatial locations. Teleconnections are 
caused by large spatial structures such as basin-wide coupled modes 
of ocean-atmosphere variability, Rossby wave-trains, mid-latitude 
jets, and storm tracks.
Temperature overshoot 
The temporary exceedance of a speciﬁed level of global warming, 
such as 1.5ºC. Overshoot implies a peak followed by a decline in 
global warming, achieved through anthropogenic removal of carbon 
dioxide (CO2 ) exceeding remaining CO2 emissions globally. See also 
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and Emission pathways (under Path-
ways).
Thermokarst 
Processes, such as collapse, subsidence and erosion, by which char-
acteristic landforms result from the thawing of ice-rich permafrost 
(Harris et al., 1988).
Glossary 
Annex I
699
AI
Time of Emergence (ToE) 
Time when a speciﬁc anthropogenic signal related to climate change 
is statistically detected to emerge from the background noise of 
natural climate variability in a reference period, for a speciﬁc region 
(Hawkins and Sutton, 2012).
Tipping point 
A level of change in system properties beyond which a  system 
reorganises, often in a non-linear manner, and does not return to 
the initial state even if the drivers of the change are abated. For the 
climate system, the term refers to a critical threshold at which global 
or regional climate changes from one stable state to another stable 
state. Tipping points are also used when referring to impact: the 
term can imply that an impact tipping point is (about to be) reached 
in a  natural or human system. See also Abrupt climate change, 
Adaptation, Irreversibility and Natural Systems. 
Transformation 
A change in the fundamental attributes of natural and human 
systems. 
Societal (social) transformation A profound and often deliberate 
shift initiated by communities toward sustainability, facilitated by 
changes in individual and collective values and behaviours, and 
a fairer balance of political, cultural and institutional power in society. 
Transformative change A system-wide change that requires 
more than technological change through consideration of social 
and economic factors that with technology can bring about rapid 
change at scale. 
See also Natural systems.
Transformational adaptation 
See Adaptation. 
Transformative change 
See Transformation.
Transition 
The process of changing from one state or condition to another 
in a given period of time. Transition can be in individuals, ﬁrms, 
cities, regions and nations, and can be based on incremental or 
transformative change. 
Tropical cyclone 
The general term for a strong, cyclonic-scale disturbance that origi-
nates over tropical oceans. Distinguished from weaker systems (often 
named tropical disturbances or depressions) by exceeding a thresh-
old wind speed. A tropical storm is a tropical cyclone with one-minute 
average surface winds between 18 and 32 m s–1. Beyond 32 m s–1, a 
tropical cyclone is called a hurricane, typhoon or cyclone, depending 
on geographic location. See also Extratropical cyclone. 
Uncertainty 
A state of incomplete knowledge that can result from a lack of 
information or from disagreement about what is known or even 
knowable. It may have many types of sources, from imprecision in 
the data to ambiguously deﬁned concepts or terminology, incomplete 
understanding of critical processes, or uncertain projections of human 
behaviour. Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative 
measures (e.g., a probability density function) or by qualitative 
statements (e.g., reﬂecting the judgment of a team of experts) 
(see IPCC, 2004; Mastrandrea et al., 2010; Moss and Schneider, 2000). 
See also Agreement, Conﬁdence, Deep Uncertainty and Likelihood. 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) 
The UNFCCC was adopted in May 1992 and opened for signature at 
the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. It entered into force in March 
1994 and as of May 2018 had 197 Parties (196 States and the European 
Union). The Convention’s ultimate objective is the ‘stabilisation of 
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would 
prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system’. 
The provisions of the Convention are pursued and implemented by two 
treaties: the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. 
Uptake 
The transfer of substances (such as carbon) or energy (e.g., heat) from 
one compartment of a system to another; for example, in the Earth 
system from the atmosphere to the ocean or to the land. See also 
Sequestration and Sink. 
Vulnerability 
The propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected. Vulnerability 
encompasses a variety of concepts and elements including sensitivity 
or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope and adapt. See 
also Adaptation, Exposure, Hazard and Risk. 
Water cycle 
See Hydrological cycle. 
Well-being 
A state of existence that fulﬁls various human needs, including mate-
rial living conditions and quality of life, as well as the ability to pursue 
one’s goals, to thrive, and feel satisﬁed with one’s life. Ecosystem 
well-being refers to the ability of ecosystems to maintain their diver-
sity and quality. See also Biodiversity, Climate-resilient development 
pathways (CRDPs), Human rights and Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs).
References
Arctic Council (2016). Arctic Resilience Report. M. Carson and G. Peterson 
(eds). Stockholm Environment Institute and Stockholm Resilience 
Centre, Stockholm. [Available at: www.arctic-council.org/arr.]. Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
Berkes, F. and C. Folke, 1998: Linking Social and Ecological Systems: 
Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, 
NY, USA, 459 pp. ISBN: 0-521-59140-6.
Campbell, A., Kapos, V., Scharlemann, J.P.W., Bubb, P., Chenery, A., Coad, L., 
Dickson, B., Doswald, N., Khan, M.S.I., Kershaw, F. and Rashid, M. 2009: 
Review of the Literature on the Links between Biodiversity and Climate 
Annex I 
Glossary
s
AI
Change: Impacts, Adaptation and Mitigation. Secretariat of the Convention 
on Biological Diversity (CBD), Montreal. Technical Series No. 42, 124 pp. 
ISBN: 92-9225-135-X.
Carlisle, K. and R.L. Gruby, 2017: Polycentric Systems of Governance: 
A  Theoretical Model for the Commons. Policy Studies Journal, 0(0). 
doi:10.1111/psj.12212.
Cogley, J.G., R. Hock, L.A. Rasmussen, A.A. Arendt, A. Bauder, R.J. Braithwaite, 
P. Jansson, G. Kaser, M. Möller, L. Nicholson and M. Zemp, 2011: Glossary 
of Glacier Mass Balance and Related Terms. IHP-VII Technical Documents 
in Hydrology No. 86, IACS Contribution No. 2, UNESCO-IHP, Paris. 114pp. 
[Available 
at: 
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000192525.]. 
Accessed: 2019/09/30.
Culwick, C. and K. Bobbins, 2016: A Framework for a Green Infrastructure 
Planning Approach in the Gauteng City–Region. GCRO Research Report 
No. 04, Gauteng City–Region Observatory (GRCO), Johannesburg, South 
Africa, 127 pp.
Díaz, S. et al. 2018: Assessing Nature’s Contributions to People. Science, 
359(6373), 270–272. doi:10.1126/science.aap8826.
FAO, 2001: Glossary. In: The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2001. Food 
and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, pp. 49–50, 
ISBN 92-5-104628-X.
FAO, 2007: Land evaluation: Towards a revised framework. Land and water 
discussion paper. Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, 
Rome, Italy, 107 pp. ISSN 1729-0554. 
FAO, 2009: Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security. WSFS 2009/2. 
Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, 
7 pp. [Available at: www.fao.org/wsfs/wsfs-list-documents/en/]. Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
Fung, A. and E.O. Wright (eds.), 2003: Deepening Democracy: Institutional 
Innovations in Empowered Participatory Governance. Verso, London, UK, 
312 pp.
Harris, S.A., French, H.M., Heginbottom, J.A., Johnston, G.H., Ladanyi, B., 
Sego, D.C., van Everdingen, R.O., 1988: Glossary of Permafrost and 
Related Ground-Ice Terms. Technical Memorandum No. 142. Permafrost 
Subcommittee, Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research 
Council of Canada. [Available at: https://ipa.arcticportal.org/publications/
glossary]. Accessed: 2019/09/30. 
Hawkins, E. and Sutton, R. 2012: Time of emergence of climate signals. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 39(1), 6 pp.
HLPE, 2017: Nutrition and food systems. A report by the High Level Panel of 
Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food 
Security, Rome. [Available at: www.fao.org/3/a-i7846e.pdf]. Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
Hooghe, L., Marks, G., 2003: Unraveling the Central State, but How? Types of 
Multi-Level Governance. Am. Political Sci. Rev., 97, 233–243.
IOM, 2011: Glossary on Migration. 2nd Edition. [R. Perruchoud and J. Redpath-
Cross (eds.)]. International Organization for Migration, 114 pp. ISSN: 1813–
2278.
IOM, 2018: Key Migration Terms. International Organization for Migration 
(IOM). [Available at: www.iom.int/key–migration–terms]. Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
ICS, 2019: Formal subdivision of the Holocene Series/Epoch. International 
Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS). [Available at: http://www.stratigraphy.
org/index.php/ics-news-and-meetings/125-formal-subdivision-of-the-
holocene-series-epoch]. Accessed: 2019/09/30.
IPBES, 2018: The IPBES assessment report on land degradation and restoration. 
[Montanarella, L., Scholes, R., and Brainich, A. (eds.)]. Secretariat of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
services, Bonn, Germany, 744 pp.
IPCC, 2000: Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry: A Special Report of the 
IPCC. [Watson, R.T., I.R. Noble, B. Bolin, N.H. Ravindranath, D.J. Verardo, and 
D.J. Dokken (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 375 pp.
IPCC, 2003: Deﬁnitions and Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions 
from Direct Human–induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of 
Other Vegetation Types. [Penman, J., M. Gytarsky, T. Hiraishi, T. Krug, D. 
Kruger, R. Pipatti, L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, K. Tanabe, and F. Wagner 
(eds.)]. Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES), Hayama, 
Kanagawa, Japan, 32 pp.
IPCC, 2004: IPCC Workshop on Describing Scientiﬁc Uncertainties in 
Climate Change to Support Analysis of Risk of Options. Workshop Report. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 
138 pp.
IPCC, 2006: IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. [H.S. 
Eggleston, L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, K. Tanabe (eds)]. Institute for Global 
Environmental Strategies (IGES), Hayama, Kanagawa, Japan, 20 pp. 
IPCC, 2011: Workshop Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change Workshop on Impacts of Ocean Acidiﬁcation on Marine Biology 
and Ecosystems. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, K.J. Mach,  
G.-K. Plattner, M.D. Mastrandrea, M. Tignor, and K.L. Ebi (eds.)]. IPCC 
Working Group II Technical Support Unit, Carnegie Institution, Stanford, 
California, USA, 164 pp.
IPCC, 2012a: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance 
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). [Field, C.B.,  
V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, 
K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 582 
pp.
IPCC, 2012b: Meeting Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change Expert Meeting on Geoengineering. IPCC Working Group III 
Technical Support Unit, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, 
Potsdam, Germany, 99 pp.
IPCC, 2014: Annex II: Glossary [Mach, K.J., S. Planton and C. von Stechow 
(eds.)]. In: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of 
Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, 
R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 
pp. 117–130.
IPCC, 2018a: Hoegh-Guldberg, O., D. Jacob, M. Taylor, M. Bindi, S. Brown,  
I. Camilloni, A. Diedhiou, R. Djalante, K.L. Ebi, F. Engelbrecht, J. Guiot,  
Y. Hijioka, S. Mehrotra, A. Payne, S.I. Seneviratne, A. Thomas, R. Warren, and 
G. Zhou, 2018: Impacts of 1.5ºC Global Warming on Natural and Human 
Systems. In: Global Warming of 1.5ºC. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5ºC above pre-industrial levels and related global 
greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the 
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, 
and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, 
D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A.  Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan,  
R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis,  
E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterﬁeld (eds.)]. In Press.
IPCC, 2018b: Annex I: Glossary [R. Matthews (ed.)]. In: Global warming of 
1.5ºC. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5ºC 
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat 
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty  
[V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla,  
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,  
J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor,  
T. Waterﬁeld (eds.)]. In Press.
ISO, 2014: ISO 16559:2014(en) Solid biofuels – Terminology, deﬁnitions 
and descriptions. International Standards Organisation (ISO). [Available 
at: 
www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:16559:ed-1:v1:en.]. 
Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
Glossary 
Annex I
701
AI
Jordan, A., Huitema, D., Asselt, H. van, Forster, J., 2018. Governing 
Climate Change: Polycentricity in Action? Cambridge University Press. 
doi:10.1017/9781108284646.
Lempert, R.J., S.W. Popper and S.C. Bankes, 2003: Shaping the Next One 
Hundred Years: New Methods for Quantitative, Long-Term Policy Analysis. 
RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 186 pp. ISBN: 0-8330-3275-5.
MA, 2005: Appendix D: Glossary. In: Ecosystems and Human Well–being: 
Current States and Trends. Findings of the Condition and Trends Working 
Group [Hassan, R., R. Scholes, and N. Ash (eds.)]. Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment. Island Press, Washington DC, USA, pp. 893–900. ISBN: 
1-55963-227-5.
Marshall, J., and K. Speer, 2012: Closure of the meridional overturning 
circulation through Southern Ocean upwelling. Nat. Geosci., 5, 171–180, 
doi:10.1038/ngeo1391.
Mastrandrea, M.D. et al., 2010: Guidance Note for Lead Authors of the 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report on Consistent Treatment of Uncertainties. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 
6 pp.
McDonald, T., J. Jonson, and K.W. Dixon, 2016: National standards for the 
practice of ecological restoration in Australia. Restor. Ecol., 24(S1), S4-S32. 
doi:10.1111/rec.12359.
McGinnis, M.D., Ostrom, E., 2012. Reﬂections on Vincent Ostrom, Public 
Administration, and Polycentricity. Pub. Admin. Rev., 72, 15–25. 
doi:10.1111/j.1540-6210.2011.02488.x.
Mechler, R., L.M. Bouwer, T. Schinko, S. Surminski, and J. Linnerooth-Bayer (eds.), 
in press: Loss and Damage from Climate Change: Concepts, Methods and 
Policy Options. Springer International Publishing, 561 pp.
Moss, R.H. and S.H. Schneider, 2000: Uncertainties in the IPCC TAR: 
Recommendations to Lead Authors for More Consistent Assessment and 
Reporting. In: Guidance Papers on the Cross Cutting Issues of the Third 
Assessment Report of the IPCC [Pachauri, R., T. Taniguchi, and K. Tanaka 
(eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, 
Switzerland, pp. 33–51.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2008: Towards New Scenarios for Analysis of Emissions, 
Climate Change, Impacts, and Response Strategies. Technical Summary. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 
25 pp.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2010: The next generation of scenarios for climate change 
research and assessment. Nature, 463(7282), 747–756, doi:10.1038/
nature08823.
MRFCJ, 2018: Principles of Climate Justice. Mary Robinson Foundation For 
Climate Justice (MRFCJ). Retrieved from: www.mrfcj.org/principles–of–
climate–justice.
NOAA, 2019: What is an iceberg? National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration. [Available at: https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/iceberg.
html]. Accessed: 2018/06/25.
O’Neill, B.C. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change 
research: the concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Clim. Change, 
122(3), 387–400, doi:10.1007/s10584–013–0905–2.
O’Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic 
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environ. 
Change, 42, 169–180, doi:10.1016j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
Ostrom, E., 2005. Understanding institutional diversity. Princeton University 
Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 355 pp. ISBN: 978-0-691-12207-6.
Paavola, J., 2007. Institutions and environmental governance: A 
reconceptualization. Ecological Economics 63, 93–103, doi:10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2006.09.026. 
Park, S. E., N.A. Marshall, E. Jakku, A.M Dowd, S.M. Howden, E.K. Mendham 
and A. Fleming, 2012: Informing adaptation responses to climate change 
through theories of transformation. Global Environmental Change, 22(1), 
115–126. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.10.003.
Pescaroli, G. and D. Alexander, 2015: A deﬁnition of cascading disasters and 
cascading effects: Going beyond the “toppling dominos” metaphor. In: 
Planet@Risk, 3(1), 58–67, Davos: Global Risk Forum GRF Davos. [Available 
at: https://planet-risk.org/index.php/pr/article/view/208/355.]. Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
Peters, B.G. and J. Pierre, 2001: Developments in intergovernmental relations: 
towards multi–level governance. Policy & Politics, 29(2), 131–135, 
doi:10.1332/0305573012501251.
Pongratz, J. et al., 2018: Models meet data: Challenges and opportunities in 
implementing land management in Earth system models. Global Change 
Biol., 24(4), 1470–1487, doi: 10.1111/gcb.13988. 
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, 
land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global 
Environ. Change, 42, 153–168, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Sarmiento, H. and C. Tilly, 2018: Governance Lessons from Urban Informality. 
Politics and Governance, 6(1), 199–202, doi:10.17645/pag.v6i1.1169.
Tàbara, J.D., J. Jäger, D. Mangalagiu, and M. Grasso, 2018: Deﬁning 
transformative climate science to address high–end climate change. Reg. 
Environ. Change, 19 (3), 807–818, doi:10.1007/s10113–018–1288–8.
Termeer, C.J.A.M., A. Dewulf, and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational 
change: governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a 
continuous change perspective. J. Environ. Plan. Manage., 60(4), 558–576, 
doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
Tilman, D., 2001: Functional diversity. In: Encyclopedia of Biodiversity 
[Levin, S.A. (ed.)]. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 109–120. ISBN: 
978-0-12-226865-6.
Toggweiler, J.R., and B. Samuels, 1995: Effect of Drake Passage on the 
global thermohaline circulation. Deep-Sea Res. Pt. I, 42, 477–500, 
doi:10.1016/0967-0637(95)00012-U.
UN, 1992: Article 2: Use of Terms. In: Convention on Biological Diversity. 
United Nations (UN), pp. 3–4.
UN, 2015: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. A/RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New 
York, NY, USA, 35 pp.
UNCCD, 1994: United Nations Convention to Combat Desertiﬁcation in 
countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertiﬁcation, particularly 
in Africa. A/AC.241/27, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New 
York, NY, USA, 58 pp. 
UNESCO, 2018: Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems. United 
Nations  Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 
[Available at: www.unesco.org/new/en/natural–sciences/priority–areas/
links/related–information/what–is–local–and–indigenous–knowledge]. 
Accessed: 2019/09/30.
UNFCCC, 2013: Reporting and accounting of LULUCF activities under the 
Kyoto Protocol. United Nations Framework Convention on Climatic Change 
(UNFCCC), Bonn, Germany. [Available at: http://unfccc.int/methods/lulucf/
items/4129.php]. Accessed: 2019/09/30.
UNISDR, 2009: 2009 UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. United 
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva, 
Switzerland, 30 pp. [Available at: https://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/
publications/7817.] Accessed: 2019/09/30.
UNISDR, 2017: Report of the open-ended intergovernmental expert working 
group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction. 
UNISDR. [Available at: https://www.preventionweb.net/ﬁles/50683_
oiewgreportenglish.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/30.
UNOHCHR, 2018: What are Human rights? UN Ofﬁce of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (UNOHCHR). [Available at: www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/
Pages/whatarehumanrights.aspx]. Accessed: 2019/09/30.
UN–OHRLLS, 2011: Small Island Developing States: Small Islands Big(ger) 
Stakes. Ofﬁce for the High Representative for the Least Developed 
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing 
States (UN–OHRLLS), New York, NY, USA, 32 pp.
UN–OHRLLS, 2018: Small Island Developing States: Country proﬁles. Ofﬁce 
for the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked 
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN–OHRLLS). 
[Available at: http://unohrlls.org/about–sids/country–proﬁles]. Accessed: 
2019/09/30.
UN–REDD, 2009: Measurement, Assessment, Reporting and Veriﬁcation 
(MARV): Issues and Options for REDD. Draft Discussion Paper, United 
Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (UN–
REDD), Geneva, Switzerland, 12 pp.
WCED, 1987: Our Common Future. World Commission on Environment and 
Development (WCED), Geneva, Switzerland, 400 pp. doi:10.2307/2621529.
Williamson, O.E., 2000. The New Institutional Economics: Taking Stock, 
Looking Ahead. J. Econ. Lit., 38, 595–613.
Zscheischler, J., Westra, S., Hurk, B.J., Seneviratne, S.I., Ward, P.J., Pitman, A., 
AghaKouchak, A., Bresch, D.N., Leonard, M., Wahl, T. and Zhang, X., 2018: 
Future climate risk from compound events. Nat. Clim. Change, 8, 469–477, 
doi: 10.1038/s41558-018-0156-3.
