 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.1 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION TO NATIONAL GHG 
INVENTORIES 
 
 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
1.2 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Authors 
Justin Goodwin (UK), Michael Gillenwater (USA), Daniela Romano (Italy), Klaus Radunsky (Austria) 
 
 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.3 
Contents 
1     Introduction to National GHG Inventories .................................................................................................... 1.5 
1.1     Concepts ............................................................................................................................................... 1.5 
1.2     Estimation methods .............................................................................................................................. 1.7 
1.3     Structure of the Guidelines ................................................................................................................... 1.7 
1.4     Inventory quality .................................................................................................................................. 1.7 
1.4a   National GHG Inventory Arrangements ............................................................................................... 1.7 
1.4.1     Institutional Arrangements ........................................................................................................... 1.8 
1.4.2     Datasets and data flows .............................................................................................................. 1.16 
1.5     Compiling an Inventory ...................................................................................................................... 1.18 
1.6     GHG inventory management tools ..................................................................................................... 1.18 
1.6.1     Workplans .................................................................................................................................. 1.18 
1.6.2     Data management system .......................................................................................................... 1.19 
1.6.3     Management of QA/QC & documentation material .................................................................. 1.21 
1.6.4     GHG inventory training activities .............................................................................................. 1.21 
1.6.5     Education, awareness raising and public access to the information ........................................... 1.21 
References…………………………………………………………………………………………………. ...... 1.23 
Tables 
Table 1.1 (New) 
An illustrative example structure for capturing and sharing information on the 
objectives of the national GHG inventory .................................................................. 1.10 
Table 1.2 (New) 
Illustrative table constructed around UK GHG inventory objectives ......................... 1.11 
Table 1.3 (New) 
List of common actors and stakeholder types with their general roles and capabilities
 .................................................................................................................................... 1.13 
Table 1.4 (New) 
Examples of metadata for tracking GHG inventory stakeholders............................... 1.14 
Table 1.5 (New) 
Illustrative list of datasets used in the GHG inventory ............................................... 1.17 
Table 1.6 (New) 
Illustrative workplan for the preparation of a GHG inventory including an indicative     
timeline ....................................................................................................................... 1.19 
Table 1.7 (New) 
Suggested information in a standardised data structure for collating GHG inventory    
data ............................................................................................................................. 1.20 
Table 1.8 (New) 
Suggested description of potential, planned and implemented improvements in 
inventory improvement plan ....................................................................................... 1.21 
 
 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
1.4 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Figures 
Figure 1.0 (New) 
Illustrative example of GHG inventory institutional arrangements structuring .... 1.12 
Boxes 
Box 1.0a (New) 
Linkages of GHG inventory activities with other data collection and reporting ..... 1.8 
Box 1.0b (New) 
Illustrative data flow overview diagram example for South Africa ...................... 1.16 
 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.5 
1 INTRODUCTION TO NATIONAL GHG 
INVENTORIES 
Users are expected to go to Mapping Tables in Annex 1, before reading this chapter. This is required to correctly 
understand both the refinements made and how the elements in this chapter relate to the corresponding chapter 
in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. 
No refinement. 
1.1 
CONCEPTS 
Inventories rely on a few key concepts for which there is a common understanding. This helps ensure that 
inventories are comparable between countries, do not contain double counting or omissions, and that the time 
series reflect actual changes in emissions. 
Anthropogenic emissions and removals  
Anthropogenic emissions and removals means that greenhouse gas emissions and removals included in national 
inventories are a result of human activities. The distinction between natural and anthropogenic emissions and 
removals follows straightforwardly from the data used to quantify human activity. In the Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other Land Use (AFOLU) Sector, emissions and removals on managed land are taken as a proxy for anthropogenic 
emissions and removals (Managed Land Proxy), and inter-annual variations in natural background emissions and 
removals, though these can be significant, are assumed to average out over time.  
The 2019 Refinement provides in Chapter 2 of Volume 4 an optional approach for estimation and reporting of 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals resulting from land use, land-use change and forestry with 
the intention to disaggregate the emissions and removals on managed land (i.e., emissions and removals estimated 
using the Managed Land Proxy) into those that are considered to result from human activities and those that are 
considered from natural disturbances (Volume 4, Chapter 2, Section 2.6). Where a country chooses to use this 
voluntary approach, it is good practice to report the total emissions and removals estimated using the Managed 
Land Proxy and the two disaggregated components, and to document the methods and assumptions used.   
There are additional methods for estimating anthropogenic emissions and removals for flooded land that include 
the standard application of the Managed Land Proxy and an optional method to produce indicative estimates of 
anthropogenic component of GHG emissions. For details, see Volume 4, Chapter 70F1. 
Treatment of CO2, CH4 and N2O emissions from combustion of biomass or 
biomass-based products 
The overall IPCC approach to greenhouse gas emissions from combustion of biomass or biomass-based products 
(e.g., ethanol) at the national level allows for complete coverage of emissions and removals, and involves all IPCC 
sectors, including in particular, Energy, AFOLU, and Waste (see e.g. Volume 2, Chapter 2, Section 2.3.3.4; 
Volume 3, Chapter 3, Section 3.11; Volume 4, Chapter 12, Section 12.5; Volume 5, Chapter 5, Section 5.1).   
Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from the combustion of biomass or biomass-based products are captured within 
the CO2 emissions in the AFOLU sector through the estimated changes in carbon stocks, e.g. from biomass harvest, 
even in cases where the emissions physically take place in other sectors (e.g., energy). This approach to estimate 
and report all CO2 emissions from biomass or biomass-based products in the AFOLU was introduced in the first 
IPCC guidelines for national greenhouse gas emissions (IPCC 1995), reflecting close linkages with data on 
biomass harvesting, and for the pragmatic reason to avoid double counting.  
In AFOLU, CO2 emissions from biomass or biomass-based products used for energy purposes are calculated as 
an implicit component of carbon stock changes, e.g. for all forest types and other wood producing land categories, 
as part of carbon stock changes in the HWP pool, or when a country chooses to use more advanced (higher tier) 
methodologies for carbon stock changes in above ground biomass from annual crops.1F2 The CO2 emissions from 
biomass or biomass-based products used for energy purposes are not included in the sectoral total emissions in 
 
1 In the 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (Wetlands 
Supplement), additional methods are applied to the coastal wetlands that do not follow the standard application of the 
Managed Land Proxy. 
2 For annual crops, the IPCC Guidelines assume that biomass carbon stock lost through harvest and mortality equal biomass 
carbon stock gained through growth in that same year and so annual crops involve no net CO2 emissions or removals from 
biomass carbon stock changes when using Tier 1 methods in the remaining categories of the AFOLU sector (see Section 1.2, 
Chapter 1, Volume 1 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines). 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
1.6 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
either the Energy or Waste sectors. This guidance is to avoid the possibility of double counting these emissions in 
two or more inventory sectors.    
In the Energy sector, CO2, methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from combustion of biomass or 
biomass-based products for energy are estimated, but the CO2 emissions are recorded as an information item that 
is not included in the sectoral total emissions for the Energy sector. This provides a complete picture of a country’s 
energy system and avoids double counting of these emissions with those reported in the AFOLU sector. The CH4 
and N2O emissions from the combustion of biomass or biomass-based products for energy are reported and 
included in the sectoral total emissions in Energy sector, as these are not covered by the estimation methods in the 
AFOLU sector. 
Carbon dioxide emissions from waste incineration or burning under the Waste sector can derive from both, fossil 
and biomass materials. When waste is incinerated for energy, the CO2, CH4 and N2O emissions from the biogenic 
part of waste are treated in the same way as emissions from other combustion of biomass or biomass-based 
products for energy (i.e., CO2 emissions are recorded as an information item in the Energy sector). When waste is 
burned without energy recovery, CH4 and N2O emissions from the biogenic part of waste are estimated and 
included in the Waste sector, whereas the corresponding CO2 emissions are not reported to avoid double counting 
with CO2 emissions reported in the AFOLU sector.  
National territory 
National inventories include greenhouse gas emissions and removals taking place within national territory and 
offshore areas over which the country has jurisdiction. There are some special issues that are described in Section 
8.2.1 of Volume 1. For example, emissions from fuel use in road transport are included in the emissions of the 
country where the fuel is sold and not where the vehicle is driven, as fuel sale statistics are widely available and 
usually much more accurate.  
Inventory year and time series  
National inventories contain estimates for the calendar year during which the emissions to (or removals from) the 
atmosphere occur. Where suitable data to follow this principle are missing, emissions/removals may be estimated 
using data from other years applying appropriate methods such as averaging, interpolation and extrapolation. A 
sequence of annual greenhouse gas inventory estimates (e.g., each year from 1990 to 2000) is called a time series. 
Because of the importance of tracking emissions trends over time, countries should ensure that a time series of 
estimates is as consistent as possible. 
Inventory reporting  
A greenhouse gas inventory includes a set of standard reporting tables covering all relevant gases, categories and 
years, and a written report that documents the methodologies and data used to prepare the estimates.  
The 2019 Refinement provides standardised reporting tables, but the actual nature and content of the tables and 
written report may vary according to, for example, a country’s obligations as a Party to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The 2019 Refinement provides worksheets to assist with 
the transparent application of the most basic (or Tier 1) estimation methodology.  
Greenhouse gases 
The greenhouse gases covered in the 2019 Refinement are reported in Chapter 8. 
Other gases 
The 2019 Refinement also provides information for the reporting of the precursors although methods for estimating 
emissions of these gases are not given here. The list of precursors is reported in Chapter 8 of Volume 1. 
Sectors and Categories 
Greenhouse gas emission and removal estimates are divided into main sectors, which are groupings of related 
processes, sources and sinks: 
• 
Energy; 
• 
Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU); 
• 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU); 
• 
Waste; 
• 
Other (e.g., indirect emissions from nitrogen deposition from non-agriculture sources2F3). 
 
3  Estimates include N2O emissions from deposition of anthropogenic nitrogen (N) from NOx/NH3 wherever deposited and 
from whatever source (but not allocated to specific sectors). The reason for this is that emission factors for nitrogen deposited 
are of the same magnitude for agricultural sources as for other nitrogen sources, even when the N is deposited in the ocean. 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.7 
Each sector comprises individual categories (e.g., transport) and sub-categories (e.g., cars). Ultimately, countries 
will construct an inventory from the sub-category level because this is how IPCC methodologies are set out, and 
total emissions calculated by summation. A national total is calculated by summing up emissions and removals 
for each gas. An exception is emissions from fuel use in ships and aircraft engaged in international transport which 
is not included in national totals, but is reported separately. 
In order to calculate a national total it is necessary to choose an approach to include harvested wood products 
(HWP). Countries can select any of the approaches reflected in Chapter 12 of Volume 4 for the AFOLU Sector to 
do this.  
Reporting is generally organised according to the sector actually generating emissions or removals. There are some 
exceptions to this practice, such as CO2 emissions from biomass combustion for energy, which are reported in 
AFOLU Sector as part of net changes in carbon stocks. Where CO2 emissions are captured from industrial 
processes or large combustion sources, emissions should be allocated to the sector generating the CO2 unless it 
can be shown that the CO2 is stored in properly monitored geological storage sites as set out in Chapter 5 of 
Volume 2. 
1.2 
ESTIMATION METHODS 
No refinement. 
1.3 
STRUCTURE OF THE GUIDELINES 
No refinement regarding the structure of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Regarding the structure of the 2019 
Refinement, see the Overview Chapter. 
1.4 
INVENTORY QUALITY 
No refinement. 
1.4A  NATIONAL GHG INVENTORY ARRANGEMENTS 
This section provides guidance on establishing GHG inventory arrangements that support the sustained updating 
and maintenance of high quality and continuously improving national GHG inventories.   
It is considered good practice that countries improve the quality (transparency, accuracy, completeness, 
comparability and consistency (TACCC)) of national GHG inventories on a continuous basis. It is generally 
accepted that GHG inventories are useful to users if they are updated on a regular basis. There should be 
improvement over time to provide increasingly useful information on national GHG trends (including influencing 
factors) and transparent reporting. Establishing sustainable national GHG inventory arrangements will help to 
continuously improve and regularly update national GHG inventories. 
Guidance provided in this section should not be considered prescriptive. It suggests possible approaches and 
examples of national GHG inventory arrangements demonstrated to be useful when developing sustainable GHG 
inventory systems that will improve quality3F4, timeliness, and use of resources. 
National GHG inventory systems could benefit from being developed in cooperation or integration with other 
environmental and sustainability statistical data collection services and reporting activities (see Box 1.0a).  
 
4 Transparency, accuracy, completeness, consistency and comparability. 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
1.8 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
BOX 1.0A (New) 
LINKAGES OF GHG INVENTORY ACTIVITIES WITH OTHER DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING 
The following linkages can be beneficial and could be managed as a wider programme under GHG 
inventory arrangements.  
National Statistical Systems provide a wide range of data that can be relevant for the GHG 
inventory compilation. These statistical systems collect data on a regular basis and establish 
standards for data quality. GHG inventory compilation is a specialised national data collection 
activity that requires the collection of additional data that are not typically in national statistics (e.g. 
emission factors). GHG inventories should use national statistics where possible. Countries may 
integrate their national GHG inventory arrangements, to varying degrees, with their national 
statistical systems.  
Subnational GHG inventory compilation and facility-reporting (e.g. cities, states, provinces, 
territories, and facility emission registries) can bring benefit to and gain from engagement with more 
structured and coordinated national GHG inventory arrangements. This benefit can result from 
interest in and contribution to combined efforts to gather/collate/use geographically resolved data 
such as for regulated sites (including large industrial installations, waste disposal and 
recycling/treatment sites), and diffuse traffic and transport, agriculture and forestry. Use of common 
guidelines, approaches and assumptions and pooled resources/expertise between national and 
subnational estimation activities will also help to improve the efficiency and credibility of GHG 
estimates and decision-making processes associated with them. 
National GHG and air pollutant inventories can be compiled in tandem. This cooperation or 
integration can improve quality across inventories, as a large proportion of the activity data (energy, 
agriculture, transport statistics) are the same for both. It may also improve linkages (through 
consistent use of data) between climate mitigation and air pollution reporting (e.g. to the UNFCCC 
and UNECE) and tracking the impact of air pollution and GHG measures to help decision makers 
understand the co-benefits and potential conflicts. Countries that apply this integrated or cooperative 
approach may pool resources and management systems for both GHGs and air pollutant inventories 
and operate more efficiently. 
Other environmental and sustainability data gathering processes are undertaken in many 
countries. These processes involve the collection, reporting of environmental, and sustainability 
data, including GHG emissions and removals, (e.g., in support of indicators for the UN’s Sustainable 
Development Goals and national statistical environmental economic accounts). These initiatives 
often have a direct links to GHG inventory compilation activities in either using data from the GHG 
inventory or providing inputs to its datasets.  
1.4.1 
Institutional Arrangements 
This section introduces the concept of institutional arrangements. There is a wide diversity in approaches used by 
countries to monitor, report, verify, and respond to review of its GHG estimates on a regular basis. A sustainable 
process for compilation and continuous improvement is an important aspect of institutional arrangements. 
Recognising this, this section presents some common concepts and provides some examples of approaches that 
could be used when setting up or strengthening sustainable GHG inventory arrangements. Guidance provided in 
this section should not be considered prescriptive. 
Institutional arrangements include the interactions between organisations that are involved with the GHG 
inventory inputs, compilation processes, and outputs. This could include environment, energy, transport, 
agricultural, and statistical ministries and/or agencies, academic/research institutions, private organisations and 
career experts and consultants. 
Countries may also consider the need for new or modified laws or directives establishing requirements for data 
collection, archiving, reporting, and quality management to formalize institutional arrangements for national GHG 
inventory compilation in the context of existing national statistical data collection systems. 
 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.9 
1.4.1.1 GHG INVENTORY OBJECTIVES 
A useful concept to help define GHG inventory activities and outputs are a country’s GHG inventory objectives 
and other decision-making needs for the GHG data. The identification of objectives will help define the GHG 
inventory’s data and expertise needs, roles and responsibilities, scope (e.g. sectors, gases, geographies, time-series 
duration), and timeframes (e.g. schedule and updating frequency) for the inventory compilation, reporting, and 
review processes. Identifying and assessing objectives also helps the institutions involved in the compilation 
understand how/if objectives interact/conflict/mesh with IPCC good practice. An illustrative example of a 
simplified format that could be used to characterise objectives is presented in Table 1.1. Such a summary table 
could complement more detailed descriptions when presenting GHG inventory arrangements. An illustrative 
example summary constructed around the United Kingdom’s GHG inventory objectives is presented in Table 1.2. 
 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.10                                                                                                                                 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
TABLE 1.1 (NEW) 
AN ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE STRUCTURE FOR CAPTURING AND SHARING INFORMATION ON THE OBJECTIVES OF THE NATIONAL GHG INVENTORY 
Objective1 
Gases2 
Sectors & 
categories3 
Geographical 
resolution 
Temporal 
resolution of 
estimates4 
Time series span5 
Reporting 
frequency6 
Reporting formats7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. List the objectives that the national GHG inventory supports. 
2. Add gases included e.g. CO2, CH4, N2O, fluorinated GHGs, other gases such as precursor pollutants. 
3. Add sectors included Energy, IPPU, AFOLU, Waste, other sectors. 
4. The temporal resolution is usually annual (e.g. 2010, 2011, 2012). Some GHG inventories have different durations spanning several years or sub-yearly (e.g. monthly data). 
5. Indicate the start and end date of the time series. 
6. How frequently is the data updated? 
7. Highlight any specific reporting formats (e.g. table structures, schemas, variables needed for specific reporting). 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories                                                                                                                                 1.11 
TABLE 1.2 (NEW) 
ILLUSTRATIVE TABLE CONSTRUCTED AROUND UK GHG INVENTORY OBJECTIVES 
Objective 
Gases 
Sectors & 
categories 
Geographical 
resolution 
Temporal 
resolution of 
estimates 
Timeseries span  
Reporting 
frequency 
Reporting formats 
UNFCCC: Annual 
Reporting[a] 
CO2, CH4, N2O, 
Fluorinated gases, 
Precursors (SO2, NOx, 
CO, NMVOC) 
Energy, IPPU, 
AFOLU, Waste 
UK + Overseas 
Territories 
Annual estimates 
Yearly values from 
1990 until two years 
prior to current 
calendar year 
Annual 
NIR and CRF[f] 
National Statistics 
Environmental 
Accounts[e] 
Environmental 
Accounts[e] 
EU Monitoring 
Mechanism 
Regulation[c] 
Regulated installations 
within mainland UK 
NIR and CRF 
National Carbon 
Budgets[d] 
CO2, CH4, N2O, 
Fluorinated gases 
UK 
Carbon Budget 
UNFCCC: Biennial 
Report 
UK + Overseas 
Territories 
Biennial 
CRF: Summary table 2 
UNFCCC: National 
Communication 
Every four year 
 
UNFCCC: Nationally 
Determined 
Contributions[b] 
5 Years 
CRF: Summary table 2 
[a] See decision 24/CP.19 on Revision of the UNFCCC reporting guidelines on annual inventories for Parties included in Annex I to the Convention. (Available at: https://unfccc.int/documents/8105).  
[b] Article 4(9) of the Paris Agreement: http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf. 
[c] UK reporting commitments to the EU valid from 08/07/2013: Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas 
emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union level relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC. (Available at: https://rod.eionet.europa.eu/instruments/652). 
[d] https://www.gov.uk/guidance/carbon-budgets. 
[e] https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts. 
[f] NIR = National Inventory Report, CRF = Common Reporting Format. 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.12 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.4.1.2 STRUCTURING OF INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS 
Clarifying the structure of institutional arrangements can help formalise and communicate the functional roles of 
organisations in the national inventory compilation process. An illustrative structure provides an overview of the 
roles and responsibilities whether institutional arrangements are part of a larger statistical data gathering operation 
or a stand-alone and dedicated GHG inventory activity. An informative structure diagram could also include 
organisation names. An illustrative example structure with optional components is presented in Figure 1.0.  
An overview of the roles and responsibilities within institutional arrangements is elaborated in Section 1.4.1.3. 
Figure 1.0 (New) Illustrative example of GHG inventory institutional arrangements 
structuring 4F5 
 
There are numerous approaches other than use of a Steering committee that can bring outside input into the GHG 
inventory process, such as through a public review period for the GHG inventory. 
1.4.1.3  ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
There are many actors and stakeholders involved with and/or interested in GHG inventory inputs, processes, and 
outputs. Common actors and stakeholder types are presented in Table 1.3. In some countries, a single 
individual/structure may serve in more than one actor role. Understanding the interests, contributions and 
involvement of these actors and stakeholders can help to establish a long-term and well-functioning national GHG 
inventory system.  
 
5 The term “Steering Committee” has been used as a generic term to represent a group of interested stakeholders that have 
influence over the inputs to and development of the GHG inventory. 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.13 
TABLE 1.3 (NEW) 
LIST OF COMMON ACTORS AND STAKEHOLDER TYPES WITH THEIR GENERAL ROLES AND CAPABILITIES  
Actor and Stakeholder 
Type 
Examples of Typical Roles 
Necessary Capabilities 
Single National Entity 
(SNE) /National Focal 
Point (NFP) (see 1.4.1.4) 
Acquisition and allocation of 
resources. 
Development of long-term strategy for 
GHG inventory support to national 
decision makers, climate action and 
reporting.  
Arranging contracts and agreements 
with collaborating entities that 
contribute data, research studies, 
estimate emissions or provide expert 
reviews, etc. 
Responsible for submission of GHG 
inventory.  
Technical and administrative expertise, as 
well as formal government authority. 
Understanding of reporting requirements and 
IPCC good practice concepts. 
Capacity to coordinate and lead the process. 
Authority to engage other government 
departments and non-government 
organisations. 
A group or management 
structure that contributes 
to steering the GHG 
inventory development 
and who is interested in 
its outputs and key 
messages on trends in 
GHGs (e.g. Steering 
committee, see 1.4.1.5) 
Provide input to the planning, 
coordination, management and 
technical facilitation of inputs and 
outputs in the process, advisors to the 
National Focal Point. 
Advice on choice of methods with 
regard to data availability and 
decision-making needs. 
Sectoral, dataset and/or government policy 
involvement, knowledge, and authority over 
data collection, research and national 
strategies. 
Involved with policy and decision making and 
negotiations (e.g. on target setting and 
mitigation implementation) that uses national 
GHG inventory data. 
Inventory 
manager/coordinator (see 
1.4.1.6) 
Management of contracts and delivery 
of workplans. 
Coordination with all actors and 
stakeholders. 
Management of experts. 
Management of data supply and data 
supply agreements. 
Identification of resources necessary to 
improve data flows. 
Coordination of reviews and responses 
to independent review/analysis and 
tracking of recommendations. 
Technical reporting of GHG inventory 
data and formal submission of reports.  
Project management & team management. 
Quality assurance/ Quality control (QA/QC) 
(see Section 1.6.3). 
Technical knowledge of the reporting 
requirements, review processes and IPCC 
methodologies. 
Technical awareness of tools, processes, and 
IT systems for gathering and reviewing data. 
Compilation (sector) 
experts and researchers 
(see 1.4.1.7) 
• 
Energy 
• 
IPPU 
• 
AFOLU 
• 
Waste 
Overall development of methods, data 
sources, data gathering, compilation 
and document management. 
Identify and propose ways to resolve 
cross cutting issues. 
Undertake research, data collection, 
calculations, drafting, quality control, 
archiving, and documentation. 
Coordinate with other sector experts. 
Specialist in a sector, category or 
group of categories. 
Identification of potential 
improvements to estimates. 
Technical knowledge of the reporting 
requirements and IPCC methodologies. 
Technical skills to carry out the work required 
for the GHG inventory calculation (data 
analysis, QA/QC, calculations, 
documentation). 
Familiarity with national statistics. 
Specific national sectoral or sub-sectoral 
knowledge of practices and technologies 
employed, data sources, trade associations, 
networks, policies and key assumptions. 
 
 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.14 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
TABLE 1.3 (NEW) (CONTINUED) 
LIST OF COMMON ACTORS AND STAKEHOLDER TYPES WITH THEIR GENERAL ROLES AND CAPABILITIES  
Actor and Stakeholder 
Type 
Examples of Typical Roles 
Necessary Capabilities 
Data providers (see 
1.4.1.8) 
Timely delivery of input data in 
appropriate format. 
Management of data acquisition, 
processing and reporting systems, 
QA/QC requirements.  
Communication with SNE, the 
Inventory Agency and sector experts, 
as needed. 
Technical skills/knowledge of, legal authority 
to improve and enhance data collection. 
Understanding of the datasets provided. 
Other contributors and 
users 
General interest in the work with 
provision of expertise, independent 
review, research or use of the data for 
other purposes. 
Any 
Policy analyst 
GHG inventory data users that inform 
policies and feed into climate action 
analysis. 
Any 
Each actor/stakeholder contributing to the national GHG inventory may need some form of terms of reference 
(ToR) to facilitate their engagement. Such a ToR can specify functional roles and responsibilities (e.g., inventory 
compilation, expert input, tool development and use, and/or data collection and storage) and the schedule for 
conducting this work. Existing terms of reference for duties such as environmental data gathering or industrial 
reporting may also be revised to address GHG inventory responsibilities.  
The process of engaging actors and stakeholders is likely to vary between different countries and between sectors 
within countries. The development and maintenance of lists of actors and stakeholders, their roles, responsibilities 
and interests are quite common. Table 1.4 provides examples of metadata for listing actors and stakeholders 
involved in the GHG inventory process. 
TABLE 1.4 (NEW) 
EXAMPLES OF METADATA FOR TRACKING GHG INVENTORY STAKEHOLDERS 
1.Name 
2.Organisation 
3.Contact 
4.Mandate 
5.Engagement 
Activities 
6.Sector 
7.Role 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Name: stakeholders name. 
2. Organisation: organisation affiliation. 
3. Contact: contact details. 
4. Mandate: mandate/terms of reference to contribute to the GHG inventory (if any). 
5. Engagement activities (Activities that the stakeholder has been regularly involved with e.g. training, workshops, regular meetings 
attended, data provision etc.). 
6. Sector: sectors/categories involved with (any particular sector or category involvement). 
7. Role: type of involvement (e.g. as a data provider, data user, compilation expert, coordinators, data gathering, QA/QC, review, steering 
committee meetings, training, sectoral workshops, compilation and reporting activities, consultations, and reviews. 
1.4.1.4 THE SINGLE NATIONAL ENTITY 
The term “single national entity” (SNE) is often used to refer to the lead organisation with the responsibility for 
reporting official national GHG estimates. It is often aligned with the national focal point or international point of 
contact on climate reporting. The role of SNE is usually taken on by a government ministry with mandate to 
manage the country’s GHG inventory reporting and response to climate change or may be with a national statistical 
or environmental agency. A key role within the SNE is that of overseeing the GHG inventory activities. A 
designated focal point coordinates the activities needed to ensure that outputs are prepared of sufficient quality to 
meet the country’s commitments. The role of SNE is sometimes delegated by a government ministry, via 
mandates/terms of reference, to a climate change, environmental, or statistical agency with the technical capacity 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.15 
to prepare national reports. The SNE could be the Inventory Agency with a mandate to report the GHG inventory 
data to the ministry or on behalf of the ministry internationally. 
1.4.1.5 NATIONAL GHG INVENTORY TECHNICAL STEERING 
COMMITTEE OR WORKING GROUP 
Countries may find it useful to establish a working group or committee of interested actors and stakeholders to 
participate in national processes for approving GHG inventory developments and estimates.  
This group or committee can consist of actors and stakeholders representing users of (e.g. policy makers) and data 
providers to the national GHG inventory (e.g. research agencies, national statistical organisations, environment 
agencies, academic institutions, industrial trade associations, and consultancies). It can provide a forum for the 
SNE to coordinate and communicate on GHG inventory activities and to secure data provision and independent 
analysis. 
This group of stakeholders can be also convened in support of prioritisation and implementation of inventory 
improvements.  
1.4.1.6 INVENTORY MANAGER/COORDINATOR 
Types of institutions that could serve as inventory manager/coordinator include: 
• A government ministry. Inventory management and coordination can be implemented by a government 
ministry that also serves as the SNE, in which case it should have the appropriate coordination and technical 
capacity.  
• A national institution/agency. Inventory management and coordination can be delegated to a competent 
institution (e.g. statistical, meteorological, or environmental). Such an institution is typically focused on 
providing technical support and analysis to government officials for decision making and reporting. It will 
often have expertise on certain sectors and access to some of the datasets needed for the compilation and will 
then outsource other data gathering and compilation for other sectors (e.g. Forestry and Other Land Use to 
forest agencies or institutions). 
• A private company, university or other non-government organisation. The inventory management and 
coordination can be contractually delegated to an organisation outside of government, such as a university, 
research institute, or a consultancy/private company. This organisation may be selected for its technical 
competency and capacity to coordinate the activities and expertise for the compilation and reporting of the 
inventory. Contracts can be typically set-up with well-defined deliverables and quality objectives5F 6 and 
commitments to engage the organisation preferably over a suitable period (e.g. 4 to 6 years) to promote the 
sustained development and maintenance of the GHG inventory. Whether the inventory is managed within the 
national government or by external organisations, provisions could be in place for the transfer of data, 
documents, calculation and reporting tools and knowledge of the national GHG inventory to a new inventory 
manager/coordinator (e.g., from SNE to a new contracted organisation such as a private company), including 
consideration of adequate training investment. These provisions can help ensure national retention of 
institutional knowledge and capability to ensure that the inventory can continue to be delivered and achieve 
quality standards in the future.  
1.4.1.7 COMPILATION EXPERTS 
A national GHG inventory system can benefit from a committed team of inventory compilation experts. These 
experts understand the requirements for inventory quality (as defined in Chapter 1, Section 1.4 of the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines), IPCC methods, national emission/removal related sectoral processes/practices, and national datasets. 
It is advantageous for experts to have a good understanding of international reporting and review processes, which 
can be developed through participation in international or regional peer review activities. 
As an example, roles and responsibilities for core compilation functions of the GHG inventory team are also 
outlined in a comprehensive templates prepared by the US EPA in the Greenhouse Gas Inventory Toolkit (EPA 
2016). These are not the only examples, but they provide a useful starting point for specifying terms of reference. 
 
6 Linked to the quality principles (TCCCA referred to in Volume 1). 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.16 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.4.1.8 DATA PROVIDERS 
Chapter 2 provides detailed identification of relevant data providers and sources of data. National statistical 
agencies often have a central role in a country's statistical data collection. Further examples for the formalisation 
of agreements with data suppliers are provided in Section 1.4.2.2. 
1.4.2 
Datasets and data flows 
There are numerous datasets needed for GHG inventory compilation and many data providers (including national 
statistical agencies, research institutes, government ministries, etc.) who provide them. Approaches for data 
collection are provided in Chapter 2. Mapping the “flow” of data, in the form of a diagram, from initial data 
collection to final reporting, further documents and highlights importance of data providers for the inventory 
compilation process. An illustrative example of such a diagram is provided in Box 1.0b. 
BOX 1.0B (NEW) 
ILLUSTRATIVE DATA FLOW OVERVIEW DIAGRAM EXAMPLE FOR SOUTH AFRICA 
The diagram below presents a simplified view of the key data flows for South Africa’s GHG 
inventory. This data flow diagram is underpinned by a list of datasets used in the GHG inventory 
which links to the relevant data providers held in a related list in South Africa’s National System for 
GHG Estimation and Reporting6F7. 
 
The diagram illustrates the data flows from industrial reporting, government departments and other 
data sources for South Africa. Industrial reported data are made available to the GHG inventory via 
the National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory Systems (NAEIS). Reporting industries are 
mandated to report certain GHG relevant information into the NAEIS by the GHG Regulation that 
was established in 2016-2017. A number of government departments provide statistical data such as 
the energy balance, mineral resources and traffic statistics. Other organisations provide data such as 
that used for country-specific emission factors derivation, certain agriculture and forestry statistics. 
More detailed data flows for specific datasets, sectors, or categories can help document the process, improve 
transparency and build institutional memory. 
 
7 Own construction based on the South Africa’s 2nd Biennial Update Report. (Available at: 
https://unfccc.int/documents/39835). 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.17 
1.4.2.1 ARCHIVE OF DATASETS 
An important component of institutional arrangements is a systematic approach to data management and the 
collection of data. A first step could be to create and maintain an archive and list of the datasets that are needed 
for the GHG inventory compilation. This archive and list, which can be established for each sector or as a 
centralised entity, can help to build and maintain institutional memory and support efficient and transparent 
compilation of regular updates. An illustrative outline for a list of datasets is presented in Table 1.5. 
TABLE 1.5 (NEW) 
ILLUSTRATIVE LIST OF DATASETS USED IN THE GHG INVENTORY 
1.Name 
2.Status 
3.Description 
4.Reference 
5.Location 
6.Data Provider 
7.Sector/ 
category 
8.Update 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Name: This should be a unique name for the dataset. 
2. Status: Provide a status to indicate if the dataset is received or pending receipt, outdated etc. 
3. Description: A description of the dataset, including version and date. 
4. Reference: A reference or link to a relevant data supply agreement if it exists (see Section 1.4.2.2). 
5. Location: Where the received data are stored within the GHG Inventory archive. 
6. Data Provider: The provider of the data. 
7. Sector/category: The sectors/categories of relevance to the dataset. 
8. Update: The regularity that the dataset is updated. 
1.4.2.2 DATA SUPPLY AGREEMENTS (DSAS) 
Chapter 2 on data collection refers to the establishment of agreements formalising data supply. A data supply 
agreement (DSA) is a document that defines what data, from whom, to whom, and when it will be supplied for 
GHG inventory compilation. Ideally, a DSA is arranged between the GHG inventory SNE and the data supplier. 
A DSA can be beneficial for both an SNE/inventory compiler and data supplier. A DSA can help secure data 
provision in the future. Also, a DSA can assist a data supplying organisations by establishing a formally recognized 
acknowledgement that can promote the allocation resources within the data supplying organisation to deliver high 
quality data on time. 
There are many potential DSA formats. Where there are national laws for data supply, these can be referenced. 
Where data supply is less formal, DSAs act as an informal specification. Suitable examples of DSAs can be found 
in many of the countries that are Annex I Parties to the UNFCCC. Possible contents, taken from examples of 
DSAs,7F8 that could form part of an agreement document between the GHG Inventory SNE and the data supplier 
stakeholder are suggested below: 
• background on the needs/mandate for the GHG inventory compilation; 
• reference to laws/terms of reference and co-operation between the data supplier and the GHG inventory 
representatives; 
• objectives of the agreement with reference to an annex specifying the details; 
• confidentiality provisions and commitments; 
• procedures that enable the receiving party (the data user, e.g., SNE or inventory agency) to provide feedback 
to the data supplier on priorities for future improvement of the data set; 
• signatures of GHG inventory representative and data supplier, if appropriate; 
• technical annex containing details of the data to be supplied, including: 
(i) 
unique title of the dataset (to avoid confusion with other datasets); 
(ii) 
confidentiality flags; 
 
8 There are many countries (e.g., United Kingdom, Austria and South Africa) that are working with and developing DSAs. 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.18 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
(iii) 
description including format (electronic format) and scope (time-series, detail, nomenclature, 
categories, geographies); 
(iv) 
supplying department/service; 
(v) 
deadlines for supply; 
(vi) 
details of QA/QC applied to the data prior to supply; 
(vii) 
uncertainties in the data. 
A generic template for the development of a DSA in the form of a memorandum of understanding with a data 
supplier can be found in the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Templates developed by the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency and United States Agency for International Development hosted by the LEDs 
group (EPA 2016). 
1.5 
COMPILING AN INVENTORY 
No refinement. 
1.6 
GHG INVENTORY MANAGEMENT TOOLS 
The development of GHG inventory management tools will help to ensure efficiency and transparency in the GHG 
inventory compilation activities throughout the steps identified in the compilation cycle in Figure 1.1 of Section 
1.5 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Tools include workplans, improvement plans, data management systems, quality 
systems, training and capacity building and documentation procedures.  
The tools in this section should not be considered prescriptive. The sections below provide some suggested 
approaches and examples demonstrated to be useful when developing sustainable GHG inventory systems that 
will improve quality8F9, timeliness, and use of resources. 
1.6.1 
Workplans 
National GHG inventories compiled/updated on a regular basis can benefit from the development of a clearly 
defined workplan, which clarifies the schedule of steps for generating GHG inventory outputs. An illustrative 
example workplan for a regular inventory update cycle is presented in Table 1.6. Workplans should be reviewed, 
and where necessary, revised prior to the start of a new inventory update cycle. The GHG inventory 
manager/coordinator should maintain these workplans and formalize them with GHG inventory compilation 
contributors through communication of the workplan. 
 
 
 
9 Transparency, accuracy, completeness, consistency and comparability. 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.19 
Table 1.6 is only illustrative. It may require adjustment to the specific national circumstances including the 
timeframes and time period of the GHG inventory cycle which may be more than 1 year (e.g., 2 or 4 years). 
1.6.2 
Data management system 
The process of preparing and updating a national GHG inventory will involve the use of numerous datasets, 
documents, references, as well as the application of a range of assumptions, expert judgements, data conversions, 
and manipulations (e.g., combining data from multiple data sources). Volume 1, Chapter 2 provides guidance on 
documentation for data collection and Volume 1, Chapter 6 provides additional guidance on documentation.   
 
10 Milestones should be specified as specific calendar dates. 
TABLE 1.6 (NEW) 
ILLUSTRATIVE WORKPLAN FOR THE PREPARATION OF A GHG INVENTORY INCLUDING AN INDICATIVE TIMELINE  
Example Activity 
Illustrative 
Milestones9F10 
Illustrative lead 
actor/stakeholder 
Agreement on the scope of work (including stakeholder 
consultation and identified improvements and updates to the 
time-series) and timeframes with stakeholders/steering 
committee 
Week 1 
SNE/Inventory 
manager/coordinator & steering 
committee engaged for 
prioritising improvements 
Appointing/engaging the team of experts to deliver the scope 
of work needed (data collection, compilation, QA/QC, 
documentation and reporting) establishing/revising Terms of 
Reference: 
• 
Roles and responsibilities  
• 
Timelines 
• 
Deliverables 
• 
Time (budgets) allocation 
Week 2-6 
SNE/Inventory 
manager/coordinator 
Sectoral estimation (e.g. Energy, IPPU, Agriculture, FOLU 
and Waste), including: 
• 
Collecting data (engaging with data suppliers) and checking 
data supplied 
• 
Agreeing any new methodologies and/or continuation of 
existing methodologies 
• 
Calculation of estimates 
• 
QC (checking of all estimates) 
• 
QA (peer review of new estimates) 
• 
Documentation 
• 
Finalisation of reporting formats 
Week 3-30 
Compilation experts 
Collation of sectoral estimates into draft final datasets and 
national totals and trends (master summary files or database); 
compilation of uncertainty and key category analysis 
Week 30-34 
Inventory manager/coordinator. 
Compilation experts where 
needed for follow-up 
 
QC of draft final estimates and documentation of changes and 
trends 
Week 32-36 
Drafting (collation of the sectoral documentation on methods, 
data sources and assumptions, key category and uncertainty 
analysis) into the National Inventory Report 
Week 34-40 
Consultation with stakeholders on draft final estimates and 
National Inventory Report and documented changes and trend 
features 
Week 40-46 
(SNE and steering committee 
engaged for stakeholder 
review/consultation on outputs) 
Finalisation of estimates and the National Inventory Report 
and archiving of the GHG inventory material 
Week 46-50 
Reporting and other deliverables to stakeholders and national 
decision-making processes 
Week 50-52 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.20 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
There are many different data management systems used by countries. Some use sophisticated database tools 
connected to the internet and available for users to upload data and to operate from remote locations. However, 
many countries currently operate using a collection of spreadsheets, databases and bespoke software systems for 
calculating GHG estimates. Some key points around the differences between data management systems needed 
for calculating estimates and for aggregating and reporting GHG inventory data are provided below: 
Calculating GHG Estimates: Sector compilation experts need flexibility to compile estimates using tools 
appropriate to national circumstances, including the complexity of their data and methods. Specialised models or 
spreadsheets may be appropriate. Spreadsheets are often used when starting out and for developing methods, as 
they are accessible to a range of experts. More complex methods will often entail use of specialised models or 
databases to facilitate complex calculations and/or the handling of large datasets. Whatever tools are used, applying 
a common practice for documentation within calculation tools including the following points should be considered: 
1. using standard classification and nomenclatures for compilation of estimates (this nomenclature can be based 
on country-specific or IPCC or other recognised classifications (e.g. United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) 
classifications10F11);  
2. including metadata in each file and maintaining a master list of the calculation files, their types, authors, and 
versions; 
3. using a standard file naming convention across categories and inventory cycles; 
4. documentation in tools with evidence of the implementation of QA/QC procedures; 
5. colour coding or other visual formatting to differentiate between areas of data input, calculations, QA/QC 
checks, explanations, and outputs; 
6. documenting where historical data or methods have been revised; 
7. documentation of complex models (see Volume 1, Chapter 6); and 
8. standard output format for all reported data. 
Collation, Aggregation and Reporting: For analysis and reporting, inventory data needs to be collated, from 
what can be in the form of differently formatted spreadsheets or calculation models, into a coherent set of tables 
that can be aggregated to produce detailed reporting formats, national totals, and summary tables. This collation 
of data into a single format also enables general QA/QC to be applied more easily using tools that can identify 
anomalies in trends and missing data points. A suggested standardised structure for collating data within a database 
on emissions, removals, and relevant activity data from the range of categories, gases, fuels and other sub 
categories is presented in Table 1.7. 
 
11 https://unstats.un.org/unsd/classifications/. 
TABLE 1.7 (NEW) 
SUGGESTED INFORMATION IN A STANDARDISED DATA STRUCTURE FOR COLLATING GHG INVENTORY DATA 
1.Year 
2.National 
Nomenclature 
3.Reporting 
Nomenclature 
4.Geography 
5.Gas 
6.Type of 
variable 
7.Value 
8.Units 
9.Notation 
Keys 
10.Referen
ce 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Year (the year of the value in the time-series). 
2. National nomenclature (if relevant the nomenclature used nationally and linked to the statistics, national definitions and/or source data, 
allowing reports for national use in a nomenclature familiar to national actors and stakeholders). 
3. Reporting nomenclature (e.g. IPCC categories and fuels/activities). 
4. Geography (identifying which part of the national geographical area is represented). 
5. Gas/pollutant. 
6. Type of variable (e.g. emission/removal, activity data, implied emission factor). 
7. The variable value. 
8. Variable units. 
9. Notation key (if relevant). 
10. Reference/description of updates since previous compilation; and reference for the source of the value (calculation file). 
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.21 
1.6.3 
Management of QA/QC & documentation material 
Extensive guidance on QA/QC and documentation is presented in Volume 1, Chapter 6. The following components 
could be considered as part of QA/QC management and documentation of the GHG inventory: 
• QA/QC Plan (see Section 6.5 of the QA/QC chapter of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines), including general and 
category-specific QC procedures (see Sections 6.6 and 6.7). 
• A log of implemented QA/QC and verification activities with reference to associated documentation and 
findings (see Sections 6.8 and 6.10 of the QA/QC chapter). 
• An inventory improvement plan containing potential, planned and implemented improvements. This plan 
may include a simple table as illustrated in Table 1.8: 
TABLE 1.8 (NEW) 
SUGGESTED DESCRIPTION OF POTENTIAL, PLANNED AND IMPLEMENTED IMPROVEMENTS IN INVENTORY IMPROVEMENT 
PLAN 
1.Categorisation 
2.Name 
3.Description 
4.Origin 
5.Status 
6.Priority 
7.Owner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. The categorization of the improvement. This could include the sector or categories, and the type of improvement activity (e.g. 
improved QA/QC processes, improved uncertainties or key category analysis, improving activity data, moving to higher tier methods).  
2. A short unique name. 
3. Improvement description including information on timeframes and technicalities for development.  
4. The origin of the improvement (e.g. recommendation or expert suggestion or international review process). 
5. The status (e.g. suggested, proposed, planned, work in progress, implemented) of the improvement.  
6. The priority of the improvement (informed by the key category analysis).  
7. The owner is the person or entity responsible for implementing the improvement. 
• An inventory archive (see Section 6.11 of the QA/QC chapter) that structures and stores data on the latest and 
previous GHG inventory estimates, reports, methodology documents, and calculation files.  
• Country-specific training material addressing country-specific methods and data management tools. 
1.6.4 
GHG inventory training activities 
Suitably trained and/or experienced GHG inventory experts help support the national GHG inventory system to 
efficiently produce high quality outputs. Training and experience development can be focussed in three areas: 
• Training in the methods in the latest IPCC Guidelines available from a number of training services and the 
UNFCCC/IPCC. 
• Training in the application of relevant IPCC Guidelines to the country circumstances. This training may include 
country-specific or international courses and material. 
• Participation in international review processes (e.g. UNFCCC process), which can provide experts with broader 
experience with GHG inventories undertaken by other countries. 
Ready access to training and regular review participation can help build national capacity, understanding of 
international reporting requirements, and enhance sustainability of the national GHG inventory arrangements. It 
may be helpful for the Single National Entity to maintain a roster of identified trainers and archive of training 
material. 
1.6.5 
Education, awareness raising and public access to the 
information 
A national GHG inventory can provide information (e.g. increasing or decreasing trends and sectoral contributions) 
to support stakeholder decision making. Education-related activities aimed at stakeholders (e.g. relevant 
government ministries) can help develop their technical capacity, enhance cooperation, and improve their 
knowledge that can in turn contribute to the continuous improvement of the GHG inventory. 
Volume 1: General Guidance and Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 
1.22 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
There are activities that can be useful in promoting the GHG inventory processes and outputs. Some examples of 
such activities include: 
• Organizing GHG inventory orientated workshops with stakeholders. These can range from technical 
workshops focused on overall inventory results or on specific sectors to awareness raising events for mass 
media. 
• Publication of the GHG inventory data in user-friendly forms using visual tools such as infographics to 
engage with wider stakeholders, students, the press and policy makers.   
• Development of overview and sector specific indicators and factsheets highlighting key stories on the trends 
and progress to targets.   
Chapter 1: Introduction to National GHG Inventories 
 
 
 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1.23 
References 
References copied from the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
IPCC (1997). Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Volumes 1, 2 and 3. 
Houghton, J.T., Meira Filho, L.G., Lim, B., Tréanton, K., Mamaty, I., Bonduki, Y., Griggs, D.J. and Callander, 
B.A. (Eds). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), IPCC/OECD/IEA, Paris, France. 
IPCC (2000). Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
Penman, J., Kruger, D., Galbally, I., Hiraishi, T., Nyenzi, B., Enmanuel, S., Buendia, L., Hoppaus, R., 
Martinsen, T., Meijer, J., Miwa, K. and Tanabe, K. (Eds). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
IPCC/OECD/IEA/IGES, Hayama, Japan. 
IPCC (2003). Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, land-Use Change and Forestry. Penman, J., Gytarsky, M., 
Hiraishi, T., Kruger, D., Pipatti, R., Buendia, L., Miwa, K., Ngara, T., Tanabe, K. and Wagner, F. (Eds). 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), IPCC/IGES, Hayama, Japan. 
References newly cited in the 2019 Refinement 
EPA (2016). National Greenhouse Gas Inventory Toolkit, USEPA & USAID (available at: 
http://ledsgp.org/resource/greenhouse-gas-inventory-system/?loclang=en_gb#ghg-toolkit). 
IPCC (1995). 1994 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Volumes 1, 2 and 3. Houghton, 
J.T., Meira Filho, L.G., Lim, B., Tréanton, K., Mamaty, I., Bonduki, Y., Griggs, D.J. and Callander, B.A. (Eds). 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), IPCC/OECD/IEA, Paris, France. 
IPCC (2014). 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands, 
Hiraishi, T., Krug, T., Tanabe, K., Srivastava N., Baasansuren, J., Fukuda, M. and Troxler, T.G. (eds). 
Published: IPCC, Switzerland. 
 
