 
 
2019 Refinement to the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
Volume 5 
Waste  
 
 
Edited by Calvo Buendia, E., Tanabe, K., Kranjc, A., 
Baasansuren, J., Fukuda, M., Ngarize S.,  
Osako, A., Pyrozhenko, Y., Shermanau, P. and Federici, S. 
 
 
 
Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
 
A report prepared by the Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) of the IPCC and accepted by 
the Panel but not approved in detail. 
 
Whilst the information in this IPCC Report is believed to be true and accurate at the date of going to press, neither 
the authors nor the publishers can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions. Neither 
the authors nor the publishers have any responsibility for the persistence of any URLs referred to in this report and 
cannot guarantee that any content of such web sites is or will remain accurate or appropriate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
© The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2019. 
When using the guidelines please cite as: 
IPCC 2019, 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Calvo 
Buendia, E., Tanabe, K., Kranjc, A., Baasansuren, J., Fukuda, M., Ngarize S., Osako, A., Pyrozhenko, Y., 
Shermanau, P. and Federici, S. (eds). Published: IPCC, Switzerland. 
 
IPCC National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme 
Technical Support Unit 
 
℅ Institute for Global Environmental Strategies 
2108 -11, Kamiyamaguchi 
Hayama, Kanagawa 
JAPAN, 240-0115 
nggip-tsu@iges.or.jp 
www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp 
 
 
ISBN 978-4-88788-232-4 
 
The designations employed and the presentation of material on maps do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
 
 
 
 
VOLUME 5 
WASTE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coordinating Lead Authors 
Deborah M. Bartram (USA) and Sirintornthep Towprayoon (Thailand) 
Review Editors 
Fatma Betül Demirok (Turkey) and Anke Herold (Germany)   
 
Table of Contents 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Waste 
 
 
Contents 
Volume 5 
Waste 
Chapter 2  
Waste Generation, Composition and Management Data 
Chapter 3  
Solid Waste Disposal 
Chapter 5  
Incineration and Open Burning of Waste 
Chapter 6  
Wastewater Treatment and Discharge 
Annex 1  
Mapping Tables 
 
Annex 2  
Worksheets 
