 
 
2019 Refinement to the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
Volume 3 
Industrial Processes  
and Product Use         
 
Edited by Calvo Buendia, E., Tanabe, K., Kranjc, A., 
Baasansuren, J., Fukuda, M., Ngarize S.,  
Osako, A., Pyrozhenko, Y., Shermanau, P. and Federici, S. 
 
 
 
Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
 
A report prepared by the Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) of the IPCC and accepted by 
the Panel but not approved in detail. 
 
Whilst the information in this IPCC Report is believed to be true and accurate at the date of going to press, neither 
the authors nor the publishers can accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions. Neither 
the authors nor the publishers have any responsibility for the persistence of any URLs referred to in this report and 
cannot guarantee that any content of such web sites is or will remain accurate or appropriate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
© The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2019. 
When using the guidelines please cite as: 
IPCC 2019, 2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Calvo 
Buendia, E., Tanabe, K., Kranjc, A., Baasansuren, J., Fukuda, M., Ngarize S., Osako, A., Pyrozhenko, Y., 
Shermanau, P. and Federici, S. (eds). Published: IPCC, Switzerland. 
 
IPCC National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme 
Technical Support Unit 
 
℅ Institute for Global Environmental Strategies 
2108 -11, Kamiyamaguchi 
Hayama, Kanagawa 
JAPAN, 240-0115 
nggip-tsu@iges.or.jp 
www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp 
 
 
ISBN 978-4-88788-232-4 
 
The designations employed and the presentation of material on maps do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concerning the legal status of any 
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. 
 
 
 
 
VOLUME 3 
INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND 
PRODUCT USE         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coordinating Lead Authors 
Deborah A. Ottinger (USA) and Bofeng Cai (China) 
 
Review Editors 
Batouli Said Abdallah (Comoros) and David Glen Thistlethwaite (UK)                                      
 
 
Table of Contents 
2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
IPPU 
 
 
Contents 
Volume 3 
Industrial Processes and Product Use  
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
Chapter 3 
Chemical Industry Emissions  
Chapter 4 
Metal Industry Emissions 
Chapter 6 
Electronics Industry Emissions 
Chapter 7 
Emissions of Fluorinated Substitutes for Ozone Depleting Substances 
Chapter 8 
Other Product Manufacture and Use 
Annex 1 
Worksheets 
Annex 4 
Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
Annex 5 (new) 
Mapping Tables 
Appendix 1 (new) 
Possible Approaches for Estimating Fluorinated Compounds Emissions from Textile, 
Carpet, Leather and Paper Industries: Basis for Future Methodological Development 
 
