5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.41
Tillage
Intensive soil tillage is recognised as a significant factor causing soil organic matter
declines in cultivated soils.  Intensive tillage, particularly with soil inversion (e.g.,
moldboard ploughing), enhances decomposition by releasing organic matter protected
within soil aggregates and by increasing soil temperature.  Reduced tillage, and particularly
no-till practices, have been shown to promote higher levels of organic matter in many
systems, where productivity and organic matter inputs are not adversely affected.  An
analysis of 28 paired comparisons from no-till versus full tillage treatments in 19 long-
term experiments in Canada, Europe and the United States showed mean increases under
no-till of 0-30 % C, with an average of about 10 per cent (Paustian et al., 1997).  The
duration of the experiments ranged from 5 to 20 years.  These data were normalised to
compare equivalent soil mass (to below the depth of ploughing ca. 20-30 cm), in order to
eliminate effects of changes in bulk density and differences in organic matter distribution
with depth.
Experiments in the tropics have also demonstrated the potential for no-till systems to
maintain higher soil carbon levels compared to conventional cultivation (Lal, 1986a).
Reduced soil erosion and lower soil temperatures with surface mulches under no-till are
particularly important attributes of no-till systems in the tropics (Lal, 1986a; Fernandes et
al., submitted).  Higher levels of carbon in no-till compared to cultivated treatments have
been reported in a number of studies (Agboola, 1981; Jou and Lal, 1979; Aina, 1979).  Jou
and Lal (1979) reported nearly two times higher carbon contents in no-till vs. ploughed
treatments in the top 10 cm (and no significant differences below 10 cm) under maize.
Residue inputs, mulching, cover crops
Maintenance of soil carbon depends on an adequate return of organic substrates which
serve as the raw material for organic matter formation.  In most agricultural systems, the
primary sources of new carbon are crop residues, including roots, root exudates, and
unharvested above-ground plant parts (e.g., straw or stover).  The amount of carbon
returned in the form of residues depends on the total biomass yield (including roots and
related materials) and the proportion of that biomass which is exported from the field.
Of the carbon applied to soil in the form of crop residues, about one third typically
remains after one year and about one fifth remains after five years under temperate
conditions (Jenkinson, 1971b).  The remainder is returned to the atmosphere as CO2 via
biological decomposition.  The rate of decomposition, and the proportion of carbon
retained by soil, is influenced by climate, soil conditions, placement (surface versus
buried), and the composition of the residue (Andrén et al., 1989).
Some agricultural soils also receive significant inputs in the form of vegetation grown, at
least in part, to provide additional carbon and other nutrients to the soil.  For example,
legumes are sometimes included in cropping systems as a 'green manure'.  Similar benefits
are derived from vegetative additions in 'alley-cropping' systems.
A third source of carbon is various by-products which are applied as soil amendments.
The most noteworthy of these are animal manure, but some soils also derive appreciable
carbon inputs from sewage sludge and various industrial by-products.  Although such
additions can significantly increase soil carbon, gains in the soil must, from an atmospheric
balance perspective, be compared with alternative uses of the resources.  For example, if
sewage sludge decomposes more rapidly in soil than in storage, the net effect will be an
additional flux of carbon to the atmosphere.
Management practices which promote greater rates of return of crop residues or other
organic amendments will result in increased soil carbon stocks.  According to current
theories of soil organic matter dynamics, there should be a linear relationship between
changes in carbon inputs and soil carbon levels (Greenland, 1995; Paustian et al., 1995);
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.42
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
this relationship is supported by a number of long-term field studies (Paustian et al.,
1997).  In temperate zone cropping systems, carbon inputs can be increased through
residue retention, cover crops, reduced summer (bare) fallow, rotations with perennial
forage crops, and all practices that increase crop production and residue yields.  In the
tropics, these practices and others, including improved fallows, mulching and agroforestry,
can increase carbon additions to soil (Lal, 1986b).
5 . 3 . 6  M a na ge m e nt  C a t e g o ri e s
The estimate of CO2 fluxes is based on inventorying the areas and C stocks for land-use
systems predominating within a particular climatic region.  As described above, the most
significant practices that differentiate land-use and management systems are:
• clearing of native vegetation with conversion to cultivated crops or pasture;
• land abandonment;
• shifting cultivation;
• differing residue addition levels;
• differing tillage systems; and
• agricultural use of organic soils.
Criteria for defining management systems are that the distribution of land
areas between the selected systems have changed over the past 20 years and
that the systems differ significantly in their soil carbon stocks.
The recommended procedure is that country experts define and document an
appropriate classification of systems for use in their inventory.  A classification of land-use
systems is included which can serve as an example for development of country-specific
classifications.  (See Module 5 for detailed description of land-use systems.)  These classes
are intended to be sufficiently general that they may be applicable in most countries and
include systems that are likely to have significantly different C stocks, based on soil C
responses to agricultural practices.  Non-agricultural systems (e.g., forest, grassland)
should be subdivided into categories on the basis of differences in soil carbon stocks (as
well as soil and climate regimes).  Organic soils that have been converted to agricultural
use are considered separately (see Section 5.3.9).
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.43
TABLE 5-9
EXAMPLES OF MAJOR LAND-USE/LAND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS WITHIN
THE MAJOR CLIMATE DIVISIONS
Climate Division
Land-use System
Cold temperate, dry
Rangeland (unimproved)
Small grain with summer-fallow
Small grain with continuous cropping - conventional tillage
Small grain with continuous cropping - no till
Small grain/forage rotations
Hay/improved pasture
Successional grasslands
Irrigated croplands
Cold temperate, moist
Forest
Small grain monocultures
Grain/root crop/perennial forage rotations
Permanent pasture
Forest/grassland set-aside
Warm temperate, dry
Rangeland (unimproved)
Small grain with summer fallow
Small grain/legume rotations with summer fallow
Small grain with continuous cropping - conventional tillage
Small grain with continuous cropping - no till
Small grain/forage rotations
Successional grassland
Irrigated cropland
Warm temperate, moist
Forest
Pasture/hay
Intensive grain production systems, stratified according to:
-  residue return rate (production level, frequency of perennial
   forages in rotation, cover crops)
-  tillage intensity (full inversion, reduced, no tillage)
Speciality crops with low residue return
Forest/grassland set-aside and reverted lands
Tropical, dry
Savanna
Subsistence farming with drought-resistant grain crops Irrigated
cropland
Tropical, moist (includes systems for both short and long
dry season categories)
Forest/woodland
Unimproved/degraded pasture
Improved pasture
Shifting cultivation/fallow rotation
Mixed continuous cropping
Mechanised continuous cropping
Plantations
Irrigated cropland (including rice)
Tropical, wet
Forest/Woodland
Agroforestry/perennial multi-strata systems
Upland food crop production
Perennial monoculture plantations
Shifting cultivation/fallow rotation
Improved pasture
Degraded pasture
Wetland (paddy) rice
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.44
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
5 . 3 . 7  Sugge st e d 
M e t ho do l o gy  
f o r 
C O 2 
Fl ux
f ro m  A gr i c u l t u r a l  So i l s
Three potential sources of CO2 emissions from agricultural soils are included in the
inventory.  These are 1)  net changes in organic carbon stocks of mineral soil associated
with changes in land use and management, 2)  emissions of CO2 from cultivated organic
soils (i.e., Histosols) and 3)  emissions of CO2 from liming of agricultural soils.
5 . 3 . 8  C h a ng e s  i n  M i n e r a l  So i l  C a r b o n  St o c k s
Inventory calculation period
Net carbon fluxes are calculated on the basis of changes in carbon stocks over a twenty-
year period.  For example, to calculate the inventory for 1990, land areas under each
climate/soil/land-use class (Table 5-9) in 1970 and in 1990 are determined.  Soil carbon
values are then assigned to each class, and the summed differences in the total carbon
stocks provide an estimate of the current net soil CO2 flux.  For mineral soils, only the
top 30 cm are considered, which typically has the highest concentration of carbon and the
greatest response to changes in management and landuse.  In most soils, management
effects on soil carbon at depth are minimal compared to changes that occur in the topsoil
(Sombroek et al., 1993) and consequently most information on soil carbon responses to
different management practices are limited to the upper soil horizons (0-30 cm depth).
The choice of a twenty-year period represents a compromise.  The response time of a
system to a change in management will differ according to a number of factors.  Soil
carbon approaches a new equilibrium more rapidly in the tropics compared to temperate
soils.  The rate of response to different practices also varies.  For example, most of the
loss of soil carbon following land clearing occurs within <10 yrs (Davidson and Ackerman,
1993).  A build up of soil carbon, for example following land abandonment (Jenkinson,
1971a) or with increases in residue inputs, tends to occur more slowly, i.e., the approach
to a new equilibrium value is more rapid for degrading systems than for aggrading
systems.  Thus, the longer the inventory period the closer systems will approach new
equilibrium carbon levels.  In general, however, the most rapid changes in soil carbon
occur during the first 10-20 yrs following a significant change in management practices or
land use.  Furthermore, a long inventory period has two disadvantages.  One is that past
land-use information is likely to be less accurate and less available for further in the past.
The second is that the balance approach carries an implicit assumption that the rate of
land-use and management change over the period is constant.  If rates of change are not
linear with respect to time, there will be a bias in the estimates that increases with
increasing the length of the assessment period.  Twenty years was selected as an
appropriate time period to include most of the change in carbon stocks resulting from
land conversions to agriculture and most other management-induced changes in the
tropics.  To account for longer response times, such as for land abandonment in the
temperate zone, it is recommended that one or more 'successional' system, having
different soil carbon stocks, be defined (e.g., abandoned land for <20yrs and abandoned
land >20yrs).
Soil carbon stock estimates
Carbon stock estimates should include the total organic carbon content to a depth of 30
cm as well as the carbon content of the surface litter mat, if present (e.g., in forests,
grasslands, and pastures).  Woody litter resulting from forest clearance should not be
double counted as it is included in the  inventory procedures in Forest and Grassland
conversion (Section 5.2.2).  Fresh crop residue in cultivated systems should not be
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.45
counted.  In no-till cropping systems, the minimum (over the year) surface residue loading
should be included in the organic carbon stock.
The recommended option for assigning carbon stocks according to land management
classes (within one or more of the six soil types) is that these be determined by experts
in the participating countries.  Where available, information from country soil surveys,
field studies and long term agricultural experiments, as interpreted by knowledgeable soil
scientists and agronomists, will provide the best estimates for these values.  However, we
have also provided a default methodology for estimating carbon stocks within predefined
land-use/management categories (see Management Categories above), using estimates for
carbon stocks under native vegetation derived from the FAO/USDA global soil carbon
inventory (Eswaran et al., 1993).
Calculation procedures for mineral soils
The calculations for net CO2-C emissions from mineral soils are straightforward and
examples of their application are given in Table 5-10.  Negative numbers represent a net
decline in soil carbon stocks, hence a net emission or source of carbon to the
atmosphere; positive numbers represent a net sequestration or sink of carbon in soil,
over the 20-yr inventory period.  To derive current net annual emissions the final total
should be divided by 20.  For the example shown, there is a net increase of carbon
storage of 11.9 Tg over the 20-yr inventory period, thus annual net CO2-C emissions for
this example would be -0.595 Tg/yr, or a carbon sink.
Note: It is critical that the total area included in the inventory at time (t) and time (t-20)
be identical.  The area should represent at least all the land area of the country which has
been subject to any significant changes in land-use and/or management practices over the
past 20 years.  An additional check should be made that the total area within each soil
type is constant over the inventory period.
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.46
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
TABLE 5-10
EXAMPLE OF CALCULATIONS FOR NET CHANGE IN CARBON STORAGE IN MINERAL SOILS FOR A
COLD TEMPERATE DRY REGION COUNTRY -
FOR SIMPLICITY ONLY FOUR MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS ARE INCLUDED
Landuse
Soil
type
Soil
Carbon
(t C /ha)
Land Area
(t-20)
(Mha)
Land
Area
(t)
(Mha)
C Stock
(t-20)
(Tg)
C Stock
(t)
(Tg)
Net change
in Soil Carbon
(Tg per 20 yr)
[A]
[B]
[C]
[A X B]
[A X C]
[A X C] - [A X
B]
Grassland
High activity
50
3.5
3.6
175
180
5
(unimproved)
Sandy
10
2.0
2.0
20
20
0
Aquic
70
0.5
0.4
35
28
-7
Grain/summer-fallow
High activity
33
4.0
2.8
132
92.5
-39.6
with conventional
Sandy
7
0.5
0.5
3.5
3.5
0
tillage
Aquic
35
0
0
0
0
0
Grain/continuous
High activity
40
2.4
3.0
96
120
24
with conventional
Sandy
-
0
0
0
0
0
tillage
Aquic
45
0
0.1
0
4.5
4.5
Hay/improved pasture
High activity
50
1.5
2.0
75
100
25
Sandy
-
0
0
0
0
0
Aquic
-
0
0
0
0
0
Total
14.4
14.4
536.5
548.4
11.9
Default calculation procedures
If soil carbon stock estimates according to land-use and soil type are not available we
have provided a procedure for estimating these.  Estimates are based on global soils
information (Table 5-11) compiled by the World Soils Resources division of the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), based on
FAO and USDA soils information (Eswaran et al., 1993).  These values serve as a first
approximation and should not be considered as a preferable substitute for actual country-
level data.  Approximate organic carbon stocks are for the top 30 cm, in tonnes C/ha,
under native vegetation.  Histosols (peat soils) are considered in a separate calculation.
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.47
TABLE 5-11
APPROXIMATE QUANTITIES OF SOIL ORGANIC CARBON
UNDER NATIVE VEGETATION
 (TONNES C /HA TO 0-30 CM DEPTH)
Region
High
activity
soils
Low
activity
soils
Sandy
soils
Volcanic
soils
 (Andisols)
Wetland soils
(Aquic)
Cold temperate,
dry
50
40
10
20
70
Cold temperate,
moist
80
80
20
70
180
Warm temperate,
dry
70
60
15
70
120
Warm temperate,
moist
110
70
25
130
230
Tropical, dry
60
40
4
50
60
Tropical moist
(long, dry season)
100
50
5
70
100
Tropical moist
(short, dry season)
140
60
7
100
140
Tropical, wet
180
70
8
130
180
To estimate soil carbon stocks by different agricultural land-use and management
practices, we have compiled a set of coefficients to scale the carbon contents according
to major management factors (Table 5-12).  Estimates for the scaling factors were based
on information from field studies, where available, and expert opinion.  The database for
these estimates is scanty, particularly from the tropics, and we emphasise that this default
procedure is only intended as a first approximation and not as a substitute for country-
level data where available.  Carbon stock estimates are derived according to the formula:
Soil Carbon managed = Soil Carbon native x Base factor x Tillage factor x Input factors
The base factor represents changes in soil organic matter associated with conversion of
the native vegetation to agricultural use.  Tillage and input factors account for effects of
various management practices of lands in agricultural use.  Thus these later two factors
can be used to capture changes in management trends that have occurred over the
inventory period.  For example, a long-term cultivated high clay activity soil, under
intensive (full) tillage and with low carbon inputs (e.g., straw removal) would be estimated
to have 63 per cent (0.7 x 1 x 0.9) of the carbon content in a comparable uncultivated
(native) soil.  The same soil under no-till with high residue inputs (e.g., cover crops)
would be estimated to have a carbon level equivalent to 85 per cent (0.7 x 1.1 x 1.1) of
the native soil.  Portions of the table where tillage and input factors are not given denote
instances where these factors are not applicable to a particular management system or
where information was deemed insufficient to go beyond estimating a base factor.
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.48
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
TABLE 5-12a
COEFFICIENTS USED IN DEFAULT CALCULATION PROCEDURES FOR ESTIMATING CARBON STOCKS IN MINERAL SOILS
System
SGb
BFc
Tillage Factord
Input Factorse
No-
tillage
Reduced
tillage
Full
tillage
Low
input
Medium
input
High
input
Mature
fallow
Shortened
fallow
Temperate
Long-term cultivated
A,B,C,D
0.7
1.1
1.05
1.0
0.9
1.0
1.1/1.2
Long-term cultivated
E
0.6
1.1
1.05
1.0
0.9
1.0
1.1/1.2
Improved pasture
All soils
1.1
ND
ND
ND
Set aside (<20 years)
All soils
0.8
ND
ND
ND
Set aside (>20 years)
All soils
0.9
ND
ND
ND
Tropical
Long-term cultivated
A,B,C,D
0.6
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.9
1.0
1.1/1.2
Long-term cultivated
E
0.5
1.1
1.0
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1/1.2
Wetland (Paddy) rice
All soils
1.1
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
Shifting cultivation
(including fallow)
All soils
0.8
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
ND
1.0
0.8
Abandoned/
Degraded land
All soils
0.5
Unimproved pasture
All soils
0.7
ND
ND
ND
Improved pasture
All soils
1.1
ND
ND
ND
a   Filled portions of the table, where tillage and input factors  are not given, denote instances where these factors are not applicable to a
management system.  Where tillage or input factors were not determined (ND), information was deemed insufficient to go beyond estimating a
base factor.
SG = Soil Group, BF = Base Factor
b   Soil groups A = High activity, B = Low activity, C = Sandy, D = Volcanic, E = Aquic
c   For temperate cultivated soils, the average loss of 30% (0.7) is based on paired profile comparisons by Mann (1985, 1986) and Davidson and
Ackerman (1993).  Greater losses for cultivation of wet (aquic) soils, relative to other mineral soils, are assumed due to artificial drainage and
enhanced decomposition when cultivated (van Noordwijk et al., submitted).  Conversion to paddy rice is assumed to slightly increase carbon
contents (Greenland, 1985).  Carbon levels in improved pastures can exceed native levels with fertilisation and species selection (Fisher et al.,
1994, Cerri et al., 1994, Grace et al., 1994).  Carbon under shifting cultivation (including the fallow phase) and abandoned degraded lands are
based on estimates from Palm et al. (1986), Tiessen et al. (1992) and Woomer et al. (submitted).
d   Use of no-till is assumed to increase soil carbon by 10% over full tillage (full soil inversion) in temperate systems, based on analysis of long-term
experiments in Australia, Canada, Europe and the United States (Paustian et al., 1997); greater effects, over full tillage, are assumed for tropical
systems (Aina, 1979, Juo and Lal, 1979, Agboola, 1981).  Reduced tillage (i.e., significant soil disturbance but without inversion) is assumed to yield
small increases over full tillage (Paustian et al., 1997).
e   Input factors apply to residue levels and residue management, use of cover crops, mulching, agroforestry, bare fallow frequency in semi-arid
temperate systems.  Low input applies to where crop residues are removed or burned, or use of bare fallow; medium input to where crop
residues are retained; high input applies to where residue additions are significantly enhanced with addition of mulches, green manure, or
enhanced crop residue production (1.1) or regular addition of high rates of animal manure (1.2), relative to the nominal (medium) case.  Based on
temperate zone studies analysed by Grace et al. (1994) and Paustian et al. (1997), and tropical studies by Jones (1971), Wilson et al. (1982), Sidhu
and Sur (1993), Lal et al. (1979, 1980), Mazzarino et al. (1993), Kang and Juo (1986), Inoue (1991), van Holm (1993) and reviews by van
Noordwijk et al. (submitted) and Fernandes et al. (submitted).
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.49
5 . 3 . 9  C a l c u l a t i o n  o f  C O 2  Fl ux e s  f ro m  O rg a ni c
So i l s
Conversion of organic soils to agriculture is normally accompanied by artificial drainage,
cultivation and liming, resulting in rapid oxidation of organic matter and soil subsidence.
The rate of carbon release will depend on climate, the composition (decomposability) of
the organic matter, the degree of drainage and other practices such as fertilisation and
liming.  Unlike the situation with mineral soils, where carbon levels approach some new
equilibrium following changes in land use/management, carbon losses from organic soils
can be sustained over long periods of time, in principle, until the organic soil layer has
been completely lost.  As decomposition proceeds, the more recalcitrant organic matter
fractions, having slower decomposition rates, will accumulate.  This would tend to reduce
CO2 emissions over time.  However, a compensating factor is that with tillage, less
decomposed organic matter from below will be continually incorporated into the surface
layer as it decomposes and the soil subsides.  This process will tend to maintain high rates
of CO2 loss until much of the organic horizon is exhausted.  Because of the variability in
depth of organic soils, which in many cases is poorly known (Eswaran et al., 1993), a
calculation procedure which incorporates the dynamic changes in the depth and the
quality of organic matter in these soils was deemed unfeasible at present.  Existing data on
CO2 emission rates from organic soils are typically given as rates per unit land area and
this approach is used in the current methodology.
Use of organic soils for upland crops (e.g., grain, vegetables) gives greater carbon losses
than for conversion to pasture or forests, due to deeper drainage and more intensive
management practices (e.g., liming, cultivation) (Armentano and Verhoeven, 1990).
Armentano and Menges (1986) estimated annual loss rates under crops to be 2.2
tonne/ha/yr in boreal regions (Finland, Russia), 7.9-11.3 tonne/ha/yr in temperate climates
(USA and Western, Central and Eastern Europe, China, Japan) and 21.9 tonnes C/ha/yr in
Florida and coastal California.  Other data from Russian sources (references V.D.
Skalaban, personal communication) suggest somewhat lower losses from cultivated
organic soils in the boreal zone, on the order of 0.4-1.2 tonnes C/ha/yr.  Estimates for
annual losses under introduced pastures/forests ranged from 15-70 per cent, with most
around 25 per cent, of the rate under crops.  The rates recommended for inventory
purposes are derived from these values.  For tropical systems, there are fewer data
although it is expected that rates should be generally higher compared to temperate zone
soils due to sustained higher temperatures.  The rate used for cropland (20 tonnes
C/ha/yr) is twice that for the warm temperate zone, which is similar to the rates
reported for subtropical Florida (21.9 tonnes C/ha/yr).  We assume that loss rates from
conversions to pasture are 25 per cent of those under cropland within each climate
region.  For the inventory, values are calculated on an annual basis.
5 . 3 . 1 0  C O 2  Em issio ns  f ro m  L i m i ng  A g r i c ul tur a l
So i l s
Liming is commonly used to ameliorate soil acidification.  Among the compounds used are
carbonate containing minerals such as limestone CaCO3 and dolomite CaMg(CO3)2.
When added to acid soil these compounds release CO2 in the bicarbonate equilibrium
reaction.  The rate of release will vary according to soil conditions and the compound
applied.  However, in most instances where liming is practised, repeated applications are
made every few years.  Therefore, for purposes of the inventory, we assume that the
addition rate of lime is in near equilibrium to the consumption of lime applied in previous
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.50
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
years.  Emissions associated with use of carbonate limes can thus be calculated from the
amount and composition of the lime applied annually within a country.
5 . 3 . 1 1  To t a l  C O 2  E m i s s i o ns  f ro m  A g r i c u l t u r a l
So i l s
Total annual emissions of CO2, are calculated from i) net changes in carbon storage in
mineral soil, ii) CO2-C emissions from organic soils and iii) CO2-C emissions from liming.
5.4 
Refinements In Calculations
5 . 4 . 1  Intro duc tio n
There are a number of areas in which the basic calculations could be improved at least
theoretically.  Simplifying assumptions have been made in many places in order to produce
methods consistent with data likely to be available in many countries.  The basic
calculations focus only on the most important categories for emissions of CO2 within a
much larger set of land-use and forest management activities having some impact on
GHG emission fluxes.  Some activities are known to result in GHG fluxes, but cannot be
quantified based on the available scientific research results.  Many of these issues are
summarised below to assist users in considering which, if any, of these possible
refinements could be included in national inventories, either currently, or in the future as
scientific understanding improves.
The first section deals with the subcategories already discussed in the basic calculations,
but highlights a number of ways in which these calculations could be augmented.  The
second section discusses additional categories of land-use change or forest management
which could be added to the categories in the basic calculations.
5 . 4 . 2  P o s s i b l e  
R e f i n e m e n t s  
o r  
A d d i t i o n s  
t o
B a s i c  C a t e g o r i e s
CHANGES IN FOREST AND OTHER WOODY BIOMASS STOCKS
Prescribed Burning of Forests: Non-CO2 Trace Gases
The issue of prescribed forest burning is complex for two reasons.  First, there is the
question of the rate of change that humans have induced and second, there is the
question of releases of trace gas several years after the burning.  Prescribed burning is a
method of forest management by which forests are intentionally set on fire in order to
reduce the accumulation of combustible plant debris and thereby prevent forest fires,
which could possibly be even more destructive.  This activity is primarily limited to North
America and Australia (Seiler and Crutzen, 1980).  Because carbon is allowed to re-
accumulate on the land after burning, no net CO2 emissions occur over time, although
emissions of CH4, CO, N2O, and NOx result from the biomass combustion.
Some of the issues associated with prescribed forest burning, particularly in the
temperate and boreal world, remain important research topics.  Some have suggested
that prescribed forest burning may be increasing carbon stocks in forests and hence
serving as a CO2 sink, but at the same time adding other radiatively important non-CO2
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.51
trace gases to the atmosphere.  An important issue is the change in burning rate because
of human activity.  Is prescribed burning, and its consequent emissions, just a man-made
replacement for what would have occurred naturally?  What is the rate change?  If we
assume that this question, the rate of change, can be answered, then the issue of trace gas
release for prescribed burning is similar to trace gas emissions following forest clearing.
This process is under evaluation in the development of the Guidelines.
The second complicating issue which should be considered is the release of non-CO2
trace gases in years after burning.  This is also discussed under forest and grassland
conversion below.  The same uncertainties apply here, although this may be a less
important area for prescribed burning, because the forests will be regrowing quickly, and
possibly overcoming the conditions which could cause longer term trace gas emissions.
Carbon Stock in Dead Organic Matter (excluding soil) of Forests
The quantity of carbon in litter, woody debris, belowground remains, and dry standing
stems is a significant carbon reservoir in many of the world’s forests.  The present
methodology does not account for any of these components, which could represent
important carbon sink in regrowing forests after abandonment or logging or additional
carbon sources when burned during forest clearing or fires.  The role of dead organic
matter in forest carbon budgets should be considered in future work on inventory
methods.
Forest and Grassland Conversion
Forest clearing is a very complex and diverse set of activities which can have many
interactions with biospheric fluxes of greenhouse gases over long periods of time.  The
components of this set of interactions which are included in the previous section are
those on which there is general agreement among experts of their importance and simple
estimation procedures.  A number of other possible elements have been discussed in the
scientific literature, but are controversial or difficult to calculate at present.
Emissions from Burning of Forests
A number of aspects of emissions due to burning could be treated in more detail.
a. Subsequent burns in years after clearing.  In some cases, where forests are cleared
for agricultural purposes, the land may be partially burned in the year of clearing,
but may also be burned again in later years.  Fearnside (1990b) indicates that
pastures in the Brazilian Amazon are typically burned two or three times over
about a 10 year period.  This would cause a larger fraction of carbon in cleared
biomass to be released to the atmosphere sooner than the approach now included
in the basic calculations, and would certainly increase emissions of non-CO2 trace
gases from biomass burning.
b. Non-CO2 trace gases released after burning.  Basic calculations address the main
issues in trace gas production by burning, however, they do not treat all issues.
For instance, the effect of past burning, particularly of forests, on trace gas
exchanges must eventually be considered.  Specifically, the instantaneous release of
non-CO2 trace gases when forests are burned is included in Land Clearing
calculations.  However, the longer-term release or uptake of these gases following
forest burning is an important research issue and should eventually be included in
refinements of calculations.  The issue of the contemporary release of non-CO2
trace gases associated with past burning is complex.  For example, clearing by
burning may stimulate soil nutrient loss.  Measurements in temperate ecosystems
(e.g., Anderson et al., 1988; and Levine et al., 1988) indicate that surface biomass
burning enhances emissions of N2O and NOx from the soils for up to 6 months
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.52
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
following the burn; however, in other studies measurements of N2O emissions at a
cleared and burned tropical forest site in Brazil, begun five months after the burn
and continuing for a year, were not significantly different from those taken from a
nearby intact forest site (Luizão et al., 1989).  The "historical" issue is obviously
complex and further research is needed before an adequate methodology for
emissions calculations can be proposed.
Delayed Release of Non-CO2 Trace Gases after Land Disturbance.
Even when no burning is involved there may still be a release of trace gases.  An
experiment in a temperate forest in the north eastern United States found that
clearcutting resulted in enhanced N2O flux to the atmosphere via dissolution of N2O in
the soil water, transport to surface waters, and degassing from solution (Bowden and
Bormann, 1986).  An experiment in Brazil found that N2O emissions from newly clearcut
tropical forests were about three times greater than those from adjacent undisturbed
forests (Keller et al., 1986).  Conversion of tropical forests to pasture also has been
found to result in elevated N2O emissions relative to the intact forest soils (Luizão et al.,
1989; and Matson et al., 1990).  Another example involves the loss of a sink for CH4
which, in effect, adds to the atmospheric burden of CH4.  Specifically, the loss of forest
area (tropical or temperate) may also result in increased net CH4 emissions to the
atmosphere.  Soils are a natural sink of CH4 (i.e., soils absorb atmospheric CH4), and
various experiments indicate that conversion of forests to agricultural lands diminishes
this absorptive capacity of soils (Keller et al., 1990; and Scharffe et al., 1990).
Conversion of natural grasslands to managed grasslands and to cultivated lands may affect
not only the net emission of CO2 but CH4, N2O, and CO emissions as well.  For
instance, the conversion of natural grasslands to cultivated lands has been found in the
semi-arid temperate zone to also decrease CH4 uptake by the soils (Mosier et al., 1991).
It is not clear what the effect on N2O would be, unless of course nitrogen fertilisation
occurs.  The effect of conversion of natural grasslands to managed grasslands on trace gas
emissions has not been evaluated in the field, except for the effect of associated nitrogen
fertilisation on N2O emissions.  Nitrogen fertilisation on managed fields may increase
carbon accumulation on land, relative to the unfertilised system, and grazing by domestic
animals may also affect trace gas fluxes.  CO fluxes may be affected due to changes in soil
temperature and moisture.  These effects on trace gas fluxes, however, are highly
speculative and remain a research issue.
Methane from Termites Attributable to Biomass Left to Decay
When forests are cleared, a portion of the cleared biomass may be left to decay on the
ground.  Frequently some of the biomass decay is accomplished by termites which emit
both CH4 and CO2 during this process.  Fearnside (1990b) estimates that 75 per cent of
the unburned carbon is decomposed by termites, and of this 75 per cent, 99.8 per cent is
released as CO2 and 0.2 per cent is released as CH4.  Fearnside suggests that forest
clearing results in increased termite populations and thereby enhances natural termite
CH4 emissions.  However, as discussed by Collins and Wood (1984), data from Malaysia,
Nigeria, and Japan indicate that clearing and cultivation in some forests reduces termite
populations.  The only incidence of termite abundance increase following clearing cited by
Collins and Wood was entirely due to a fungus-growing termite, a type of termite which
is unlikely to produce CH4.  Because of the uncertainty of the effect of clearing on
termite populations and associated CH4 release, no guidance on calculation of this
component is included in the methodology.
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.53
Fate of Roots in Cleared Forests
The basic calculation ignores the fate of living belowground woody biomass (roots) after
forest clearing.  The amount of belowground biomass affected, and its fate, need to be
considered as work continues beyond the basic calculations.  This belowground biomass
could be treated as slash but with perhaps a longer (for coarse roots) or shorter (for fine
roots) decay times.  Alternatively, it might be more reasonable to deal with the
belowground biomass in conjunction with soil carbon calculations.  This is an area for
further development by the relevant expert groups, and also by national experts in
individual countries who are encouraged to carry out experimental calculations.  See
Box 8 for further information on the estimation of the amounts of belowground biomass.
Aboveground biomass after conversion
In the basic calculation, a single default value (10 tonnes dm/ha) is recommended for
aboveground biomass which regrows after forests are cleared for conversion to crops or
pastures.  This may be somewhat variable depending on the type of crop or other
vegetation which regrows.  National experts carrying out more detailed assessments may
wish to account more precisely for this variability, especially when perennial tree crop are
planted.
Abandoned Lands
The basic calculations account only for the portion of abandoned lands which regrow
toward a natural state.  There may be additional releases of carbon from abandoned lands
which continue to degrade, e.g., because of erosion.  Where data are available, analysts
doing detailed assessments may wish to account for this phenomenon.
5 . 4 . 3  O t h e r  P o s s i b l e  C a t e g o r i e s  o f  A c t i v i t y
Several other land-use activities affect the flux of CO2 and other trace gases between the
terrestrial biosphere and the atmosphere.  Shifting cultivation may now be reducing the
storage of carbon in forests, because of shorter fallow periods, and thereby becoming a
net source of CO2 to the atmosphere.  Furthermore, lands under shifting cultivation may
be converted to permanent agriculture which, of course, affects the biomass assigned to
the land being converted.  The changing areas and distribution of wetlands may be adding
to or reducing the CH4 burden of the atmosphere.  These issues are complex; often the
sign of the flux is not even known, and simple models may not give reasonable results.  In
this section, some of the issues and possible methodological approaches are recorded;
however, an agreed-upon methodology is not yet at hand.
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.54
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
BOX 8
BELOWGROUND BIOMASS
For forest clearing, carbon in belowground (root) biomass is ignored in the
basic calculations, but should be considered.  There are large uncertainties
concerning the time horizon over which this biomass would oxidise.  As
noted in the text, it could be considered with decay of slash left
aboveground from forest conversion.  There is no recommended step-by-
step methodology for calculating the carbon released from this source in
the current guidelines.  However, interested national experts are
encouraged to carry out such calculations and report them to the IPCC
using their own methods.
The following information about multipliers (root-to-shoot ratios -  R/S,
average and range of R/S) can be applied to total aboveground biomass to
estimate the belowground biomass.
Tropical forests
moist forest growing on spodosols  
1.5   (0.7 - 2.3)
lowland very moist forests          
0.13 (0.06 - 0.33
montane moist forest
0.22 (0.11 - 0.33)
deciduous forests 
0.47 (0.23 - 0.85)
(e.g., tropical dry and seasonal moist forests)
Temperate forests
coniferous
0.20
broadleaf
0.25
Boreal forests
coniferous
0.25 (0.20 - 0.30)
broadleaf
0.20 (0.15 - 0.25)
forest-tundra
0.35 (0.30 - 0.50)
Sources: Brown, (1996) for tropical forests; Cooper, (1983) for temperate
forests; and Bazilevich, (1993) and Isaev et al., (1993) for boreal forests:
Estimation of CO2 emissions from belowground biomass after clearing has
been identified as an area of future work.
Shifting Cultivation
Shifting cultivation, or slash-and-burn agriculture, is a common agricultural practice in the
tropics in which short periods of cultivation (usually about 1 - 3 years) alternate with
longer periods of fallow (about 10 to 30 years).  Clearing occurs by initial cutting and
felling, followed by a series of burns.  When practised in the traditional manner, shifting
cultivation produces some net CO2 emissions because the forest is allowed to return
part-way to its original biomass density during the fallow period.29 However, increasing
                                                  
     29 Following the first clearing (i.e., clearing of primary forests), the forest biomass may
not recover fully to its original density during the fallow period, but instead reaches a
reduced level, referred to as a secondary forest.
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.55
population pressure has reduced the lengths of fallow periods so that currently much of
the fallow land recovers very little and higher net CO2 emissions are believed to result
(Myers, 1989; and Houghton, 1991).  Loss of soil carbon also may occur during shifting
cultivation, although the loss is certainly far less than for permanent cultivation.
Calculation of net emissions due to shifting cultivation requires calculation of average
annual emissions due to clearing of forests for cultivation, and calculation of average
annual uptake due to abandonment of cultivated lands in the fallow period of the shifting
cultivation cycle.  This involves monitoring a large number of small parcels of land over
time and probably requires a model to do the book keeping.
The basic concepts are not difficult.  The carbon calculations would proceed almost
exactly like the conversion and abandonment terms in the basic methodology; however,
the difficulty is that the abandonment period may be shorter, and this may only be
apparent by using a cohort-based model and a finite stock of forest.  In other words the
increasing rate of shifting cultivation (the likely data) will force a shorter fallow period and
hence less regrowth, and this dynamic may only become apparent when one models the
shifting cultivation cycle within a specific area of available forest.
One intermediate simple approach is to split the calculation into the two logical
components.  The initial conversion component would be treated similarly to the basic
calculations; namely, convert the above ground dry biomass30 to carbon (multiply by 0.50)
and assume 90 per cent of this material is released as CO2 less the amount taken upon by
the replacing crops (default value of 10 tonnes dm per hectare). To calculate the uptake
of carbon by the regrowing forest during the fallow cycle, simply estimate the amount of
land in abandonment (but not yet in steady-state) and the average rate of carbon
accumulation per unit area in these fallow lands.  The difference would be the net flux of
CO2 associated with shifting cultivation.  For the biomass burned in shifting cultivation,
non-CO2 gases (N2O, CH4, NOx, CO) should be calculated as described in the Forest
and Grassland Conversion section above.
Flooding and Wetland Drainage
Land Flooding
Flooding of lands due to construction of hydroelectric dams, or other activities, results in
emissions of CH4 due to anaerobic decomposition of the vegetation and soil carbon that
was present when the land was flooded, as well as of organic material that grows in the
floodwater, dies, and accumulates on the bottom.  The CH4 emissions from this source
are highly variable and are dependent on the ecosystem "type", and the status of the
ecosystem, that is flooded (i.e., above- and below-ground carbon, plant types, whether
any pre-flooding clearing occurred, etc.) and on the depth and length of flooding (some
regions may only be flooded for part of a year)31.  Rates of CH4 emissions from
freshwater wetlands are also strongly dependent on temperature, and therefore vary
                                                  
     30 Generally, shifting cultivation is practised in secondary forests, since the least dense
and most accessible forest areas are most susceptible to this form of clearing.
Aboveground biomass density estimates for secondary forests are highly uncertain, and
vary significantly both within and among countries because of varying ecosystem types as
well as varying intervals between clearings.
     31 A detailed analysis of CO2 and CH4 emissions from hydroelectric reservoirs in the
Amazon has been made and is a significant issue in this and other regions because of the
vast areas of forest submerged for the construction of the reservoirs (Rosa and Schaeffer,
1994, 1995).
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.56
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
seasonally, as well as daily.  Net emissions of N2O and CO also may be affected by this
activity, although these fluxes are not well determined.
A straightforward CH4 flux calculation can be based on the area of land flooded, due to
hydroelectric production or other human-made causes, an average daily CH4 emission
coefficient, and the number of days in the year that the area is flooded.  Since
measurements of CH4 emissions from freshwater wetlands are so variable, both spatially
and temporally, the area should be divided into groups based on characteristics such as
length of flooding, vegetation type, and latitude.  Then appropriate emission coefficients
can be chosen for each group, rather than choosing one emission coefficient for the
entire area of flooding.  Table 5-13 presents average daily CH4 emission rates for natural
wetlands, derived from measured emission rates in field experiments, and average CH4
production periods based on data on monthly mean temperatures and inundation lengths.
These rates and production periods can be used if countries do not have more
appropriate estimates.
TABLE 5-13
AVERAGE METHANE EMISSIONS AND PRODUCTION PERIODS OF NATURAL WETLANDS
Wetland Categories
(mg CH4/m2.day)
Emission Rate
(mg CH4-C/m2.day)
Production Period
or Length of Time Flooded
(days)
Bogs
11
(1-38)
178
Fens
60
(21-162)
169
Swamps
63
(43-84)
274
Marshes
189
(103-299)
249
Floodplains
75
(37-150)
122
Lakes
32
(13-67)
365
Source: A.selmann and Crutzen, 1989.
Note: Average daily emission rates are derived from measured emission rates in field experiments (the
range in measured emission rates is in parentheses after the average), and average production periods
are based on monthly mean temperature data and lengths of inundation.
Wetland Drainage
Freshwater wetlands are a natural source of CH4, estimated to release 100-200 Tg
CH4/yr due to anaerobic decomposition of organic material in the wetland soils
(Cicerone and Oremland, 1988).  Destruction of freshwater wetlands, through drainage
or filling, would result in a reduction of CH4 emissions, and an increase in CO2 emissions
due to increased oxidation of soil organic material (Moore and Knowles, 1989).  The
magnitude of these effects is largely a function of soil temperature and the extent of
drainage (i.e., the water content of the soil).  Also, since dryland soils are a sink of CH4,
drainage and drying of a wetland could eventually result in the wetland area changing from
a source to a sink of CH4 (e.g., Harriss et al., 1982).
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.57
Loss of wetland area could also affect net N2O and CO fluxes, although both the
direction and magnitude of the effect is highly uncertain.  Natural dryland soils are a
source of N2O, believed to emit 9-28 Tg N2O/yr (3-9 Tg N2O-N) as a result of
nitrification and denitrification processes (Seiler and Conrad, 1987).  This emission
estimate is highly uncertain, however, as emission measurements vary both temporally
and spatially by up to an order of magnitude.  Moreover, the measurements are not
consistently correlated with what are believed to be controlling variables such as soil
temperature, moisture, and composition, and vegetation type.  Dryland soils both
produce and consume CO.  Carbon monoxide production, estimated at 2-32 Tg CO/yr
(1-14 Tg CO-C), is an abiotic process due to chemical oxidation of humus material (Seiler
and Conrad, 1987).  It is strongly dependent on soil temperature, moisture, and pH.
Destruction of CO is a biological process believed to be due to micro-organisms present
in the soil.  Carbon monoxide destruction (250-530 Tg CO/yr, or 107-227 Tg CO-C/yr)
increases with increasing temperature, although it is independent of soil surface
temperature and requires a minimum soil moisture (Seiler and Conrad, 1987).  Desert
soils have always been found to be a net source of CO, as have savanna soils, at least
during the hottest parts of the day.  CO destruction outweighs production in humid
temperate soils; humid tropical soils are believed to also be a net sink of CO because of
their higher soil moisture and lower soil temperature than deserts and savannas.
To calculate the reduction of CH4 emissions due to wetland drainage, the area drained is
multiplied by the difference in the average daily CH4 emission rate before and after
draining, and is multiplied by the number of days in a year that the wetland was emitting
CH4 prior to drainage.  The number of days of CH4 emissions prior to drainage can be
approximated by using the number of days in the year that the wetland was flooded.
In summary, the difference in CH4 emissions before and after drainage will vary
depending on factors such as soil temperature, extent of drainage, and wetland type.
The direction and magnitude of the effects on these gases are highly uncertain and
significant advances in our understanding of the biological processes as well as
determination of the area extent of the activities will be required before these
calculations can be adequately accomplished.  It may be possible to include CH4
calculations associated with land flooding in early refinements of the calculations, but the
N2O and CO calculations are more difficult and as yet of uncertain importance.
Surface Waters
Some national experts have pointed out that changes in surface waters due to human
activities can result in sequestration of carbon, and presumably other emissions or
removals.  An example is pollution of lakes due to run off, which can cause
eutrophication, increasing the carbon content of waters.  Pollution of coastal waters
could also have similar effects.  No data have been obtained thus far to indicate whether
the carbon sequestration effects of such changes are large enough to be significant.
However, it is possible that some countries may want to carry out preliminary
calculations and report these as part of the ongoing methods development effort.
These changes in surface waters are generally a result of combined effects including land-
use changes, agricultural practices, wastewater treatment, etc. in the surrounding area.
Thus, they do not fit neatly into any of the broad economic sectors which form the
fundamental structure of these Guidelines.  If national experts consider the changes in
surface waters to be primarily a function of land-use changes, the results of preliminary
calculations could be reported in the ”Other” subcategory within the Land-Use Change
and Forestry category.  Alternatively, they could be reported under Waste, Agriculture,
or the newly created general “Other” category.
5
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories:  Reference Manual
5.59
T5
Technical Appendix: Deforestation
Data
Data on rates of deforestation32 are essential for calculating the fluxes of CO2 and other
trace gases between terrestrial systems and the atmosphere.  When arranged on a
country-by-country basis, these data provide the forcing function for computation of
country-specific emissions from forest clearing.  Recognising that such data sets are not
yet available for many countries with the accuracy needed for these computations, this
technical appendix provides suggestions for utilising the available global and national
sources of data, while bringing new or better sources of information into the calculations
when and where they are available.
T5.1
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
Published Data
Currently, the most comprehensive international source of data on rates of deforestation
broken down to the country level is maintained by the FAO in the following forms:
1.
Source data, preferably in the form of a time series, collected in co-operation with
member countries, including data on: forest cover, ecofloristic zone and sub-national
boundaries, biomass, plantations and conservation, collected and compiled in the
form of a geographic information system.
2.
Standardised estimates of forest cover, rate of deforestation, afforestation, and
biomass/ha at the country level.  Standardisation is done by FAO because of
variations from country to country in:
•
the definitions of "forest", "deforestation" and "afforestation"
•
the reference years for forest cover and deforestation measurements
The standardisation is intended to bring country data to common definitions of
forest cover and reference data, and to make the country information useful for
regional and global studies.  The basis for standardisation is adjustment functions by
ecological zones based on time-series data on forest cover of countries.
3.
Data from a global sample survey of forest cover state and change during 1980 and
1990 based on a limited sample of high resolution satellite images using common
definitions and measurement techniques.  The main aim of this survey is to calibrate
regional and global estimates and provide comprehensive information on various
types of on-going forest cover changes, in the form of change matrices (1980 and
1990).  It should be noted that the sample survey is not intended to check or
replace country estimates, but only to provide reliable estimates (i.e., with standard
error) of forest cover and rate of change at regional/global levels.  This is being done
taking into account the inherent limitations of aggregating heterogeneous country
data at regional/global levels.
                                                  
     32 This appendix is limited to discussion of current and future international sources of
data on rates of deforestation at the national level.  It is understood, however, that other
types of input data are also key sources of uncertainty in calculations and are also the
subject of a great deal of ongoing activity.  These include other types of land-use change
and land cover data as well as more detailed information on growth rates and biomass
densities for different types of forests and other ecosystems.
LAND-USE CHANGE & FORESTRY
5.60
Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Ga s In ventories: Reference Manual
The survey is based on a sampling design covering all tropical countries.  The World
Reference System 2 (WRS2) for the LANDSAT satellites is used as the sampling frame.
LANDSAT scenes covering approximately 3.4 million ha serve as sampling units.
In view of cost-benefit considerations, the sampling units were selected from all
LANDSAT scenes with a minimum land area of 1 million ha and a forest cover of 10% or
more, estimated on the basis of existing vegetation maps.  This has restricted  the area
surveyed to some 62% of the total tropical land area but containing some 87% of the
total tropical forest.
This first survey round is based on a 10% sample consisting of 117 sampling units
randomly selected.  The distribution of the selected sampling units by region is 47 in
Africa, 30 in Asia and 40 in America.  This sample size was chosen to estimate forest
cover at global level with standard error less than ±5%.  At each simple location, satellite
images of the best quality and appropriate season, separated by an approximate ten-years
interval, were selected for observation.  The image close to 1990 provides assessment of
the current state; whereas the area in common between “1990” and “1980” images
provides the assessment to be made of the changes over time.
The interpretation was implemented at selected regional and national forestry and/or
remote sensing institutions, which have a good knowledge of the sample locations and are
traditionally involved in forest resources assessment activities.  With the two-fold
objective of improving national capacities for forest monitoring and the quality of image
interpretation, the FAO Project organised three regional workshops and eight training
sessions with national institutions, benefiting 27 countries and 81 participants.
The result and quality of the interpretation undertaken by local institutions were centrally
reviewed and evaluated.  The first result of the survey is its set of transition matrices, one
for each Sampling Unit, that describe in detail the class-to-class changes for the land cover
classes (see Box below).
LAND COVER CLASSES
Closed Forest
Open Forest
Long Fallow (forest affecting by shifting cultivation)
Fragmented Forest (mosaic of forest/ non-forest)
Shrubs
Short-Fallow (agricultural areas with short fallow period)
Other Land Cover
Water
Plantations (agricultural and forestry plantations)
The matrices associated with the sampling units can be aggregated at various levels
following the standard statistical procedure.  Mean transition matrices can be produced
and subsequent change analysis has been carried out for the three regional and by three
ecological zones (Wet and Very Moist, Moist, Dry).
