 
This is the final Report of Working Group II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, which is sponsored jointly by the World Meteorological Organization and the 
United Nations Environment Programme. The report considers the potential impacts of 
climate change. Several hundred working scientists from many countries have participated 
in the preparation and review of the scientific data. The result is a unique statement on 
impacts of climate change with a breadth not previously achieved by the international 
scientific community. The impact assessments cover: agriculture and forestry, natural 
terrestrial ecosystems, hydrology and water resources, human settlement and socio-
economic activities, oceans and coastal zones and the cryosphere. 
The information 
presented here is the best available at present. It will inform the necessary scientific, 
political and economic debates and negotiations that can be expected in the immediate 
future. Appropriate strategies in response to the issue of climate change can be based on 
the scientific foundation that the Report provides. The Report is, therefore, an essential 
reference for all who are concerned with climate change and its consequences. 
 
Climate Change 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment 
i 
i 
iii 
 
Climate Change 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment 
Edited by 
WJ. McG. Tegart, G.W. Sheldon and D.C. Griffiths 
Australian Government Publishing Service 
Canberra 
© Commonwealth of Australia 1990 
ISBN 0 644 13497 6 
This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the Copyright Act 
1968, no part may be reproduced by any process without written permission from 
the Australian Government Publishing Service. Requests and inquiries concerning 
reproduction and rights should be addressed to the Manager, AGPS Press, 
GPO Box 84, Canberra, ACT 2601. 
Published for the Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment, Tourism and 
Territories by the Australian Government Publishing Service. 
Printed in Australia by 
vi 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Climate Change 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment 
Report prepared for IPCC by Working Group II 
Edited by 
W.J. McG. Tegart, G.W. Sheldon and D.C. Griffiths 
WMO 
UNEP 
vii 
 
Acknowledgments 
This report is a unique example of international cooperation over a wide 
range of disciplines in a relatively short time frame. 
While literally 
hundreds of scientists in a large number of countries have contributed 
information and peer-reviewed the material, the major task has fallen on 
the principal authors of the various chapters. The authors are identified 
at the start of each chapter. 
The compilation and editing of the overall report has been carried 
out by Mr C. Griffiths, Mr G.W. Sheldon and Dr WJ.McG. Tegart from 
Australia. 
We believe that the process of working together to gain a better 
understanding of the potential of global climate change on regions and 
nations has been important in building a basis for continuing international 
cooperation and we wish to offer our sincere thanks to all who have 
participated. 
Professor Yu. A. Izrael (USSR) Chairman 
Dr M. Hashimoto (Japan) Co-Vice-Chairman 
Dr WJ.McG. Tegart (Australia) Co-Vice-Chairman 
ix 
 
Foreword 
In making its Impacts Assessment, Working Group II has built on the available country 
assessments, taking into account significant work undertaken more recently. By its very 
nature, such work is distributed over many fields. There are many uncertainties in them, 
and some results have yet to be published. 
While some countries have produced 
assessments of the impact of climate change on their economic, industrial and social 
structure, there has not been a comprehensive assessment on a global scale. 
In the preparation of the Assessment, many of the active scientists working in the 
industrialised countries have been involved. Because of lack of sufficient funding, the 
contribution from the developing countries has been less than hoped for, and it is clear 
that much further work needs to be carried out to develop a better framework for 
economic decisions in a number of countries, notably in Africa and South America. Over 
200 contributors are identified in the report, but they have been supported by many 
others. Because of the diversity of the topics, it has been difficult to carry out a full peer 
review of the whole report. Chapters have been reviewed by selected organisations, both 
national and international, and five meetings of lead authors and major contributors, over 
a period of one and a half years, have helped to shape the final report. An extensive 
technical review was carried out by the US National Climate Program in early 1990 and 
helped to ensure a high degree of consensus among authors and reviewers regarding the 
results presented. Joint Soviet American research in the area of climate change provided 
a significant input. Thus the Assessment is an authoritative statement of the views of the 
majority of the international scientific community at this time. 
The accompanying Policymakers' Summary, based closely on the conclusions of the 
Assessment, has been prepared particularly to meet the needs of those without a strong 
background in science who need a clear statement of the present status of scientific 
knowledge and the associated uncertainties. It is clear from the report that comprehensive 
estimates of the physical and biological effects of climate change at the regional level are 
difficult. Confidence in regional estimates of critical climate factors is low, particularly 
of precipitation and soil moisture. Much more research is needed to refine the estimates 
of potential impacts and I urge Governments to continue and increase their support of 
research on climate change. 
It gives me pleasure to acknowledge the contributions of so many, in particular the lead 
authors, who have given freely of their expertise and time in the preparation of this 
report. I also acknowledge the contribution of the core team at the State Committee for 
Hydrometeorology who were responsible for organising meetings in the USSR. Particular 
acknowledgement is due to Dr Greg Tegart, my Co-Vice Chairman from Australia, who 
together with Mr Colin Griffiths and Mr Gordon Sheldon were responsible for the 
compilation and editing of the overall report in Australia. Thanks are also due to Dr M 
Hashimoto, my other Co-Vice-Chairman from Japan. 
I am confident that the assessment and its summary will provide a sound basis for the 
forthcoming discussions and negotiations on the appropriate strategy and action regarding 
the issue of climate change which is potentially the greatest global environmental 
challenge facing humankind. 
Prof Yu A Izrael 
Chairman, IPCC Working Group II 
Chairman, USSR State Committee for Hydrometeorology 
Moscow 
October 1990 
xi 
 
Contents 
Foreword 
xi 
Preface 
xv 
Policymakers' summary 
1 
I 
Scenarios used in the report 
1-1 
II 
Agriculture and forestry 
2-1 
III 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
3-1 
IV 
Hydrology and water resources 
4-1 
V 
Human settlement; the energy, transport and industrial 
sectors; human health; air quality and changes in 
Ultraviolet-B radiation 
5-1 
VI 
Oceans and coastal zones 
6-1 
VII Seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
7-1 
xiii 
 
Preface 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was jointly established by us in 1988. 
Professor Bert Bolin is the Chairman of the Panel. 
The Panel's charge was to: 
a. 
assess the scientific information that is related to the various components of the climate 
change issue, such as emissions of major greenhouse gases and modification of the Earth's 
radiation balance resulting therefrom, and that needed to enable the environmental and 
socio-economic consequences of climate change to be evaluated; 
and 
b. 
formulate realistic response strategies for the management of the climate change issue. 
The Panel began its task by establishing its Working Groups I, II and III respectively to: 
a. 
assess available scientific information on climate change; 
b. 
assess environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate change; 
and 
c. 
formulate response strategies. 
The panel also established a Special Committee on the Participation of Developing Countries to 
promote, as quickly as possible, the full participation of developing countries in its activities. 
The Panel has completed its First Assessment Report (FAR). The F A R consists of 
* 
the overview 
* 
the policymakers summaries of the IPCC Working Groups and Special Committee on the 
participation of Developing Countries 
* 
the reports of the IPCC Working Groups 
The Overview and the policymakers summaries are to be found in a single volume. 
The reports 
of the Working Groups are being published individually. 
The present volume is based upon the findings of Working Group II. 
It should be read in the 
context of the full IPCC first assessment report. 
The Chairman of Working Group II, Professor Yuri Izrael, and his Secretariat, have succeeded in 
mobilising the co-operation and enthusiasm of hundreds of scientists from all over the world. 
They have produced a volume of unique breadth, and a Policymakers Summary which translates 
these complex scientific issues into language understandable to the non-specialist. 
We take this opportunity to congratulate and thank the Chairman and his Co-Vice-Chairmen, 
Dr W J M c G Tegart and Dr M Hashimoto, for a job well done. 
G O P Obasi 
Secretary-General 
World Meteorological Organization 
M K Tolba 
Executive Director 
United Nations Environment Programme 
XV 
 
Policymakers' summary 
The IPCC Working Groups on scientific analysis 
(Working Group I), impacts (Working Group II) 
and response strategies (Working Group III) were 
established in November 1988 and proceeded to 
work in parallel under instructions from IPCC. 
The responsibility of Working Group II is to de-
scribe the environmental and socioeconomic impli-
cations of possible climate changes over the next 
decades caused by increasing concentrations of 
greenhouse gases. 
The report of Working Group II is based on the 
work of a number of subgroups, using independent 
studies which have used different methodologies. 
Based on the existing literature, the studies have 
used several scenarios to assess the potential im-
pacts of climate change. 
These have the features 
of: 
(i) 
an effective doubling of C 0 2 in the atmos-
phere between now and 2025 to 2050 for a 'busi-
ness-as-usual' scenario; 
(ii) 
a consequent increase of global mean tem-
perature in the range of 1.5°C to 4°-5°C; 
(iii) an unequal global distribution of this tem-
perature increase, namely a smaller increase of 
half the global mean in the tropical regions and a 
larger increase of twice the global mean in the 
polar regions; and 
(iv) 
a sea-level rise of about 0.3-0.5 m by 2050 
and about 1 m by 2100, together with a rise in the 
temperature of the surface ocean layer of between 
0.2° and 2.5°C. 
These scenarios pre-date, but are in line with, the 
recent assessment of Working Group I which, for 
a 'business-as-usual' scenario (scenario A in Work-
ing Group I Report) has estimated the magnitude 
of sea-level rise at about 20 cm by 2030 and about 
65 cm by the end of the next century. Working 
Group I has also predicted the increase in global 
mean temperatures to be about 1°C above the 
present value by 2025 and 3°C before the end of 
the next century. 
Any predicted effects of climate change must be 
viewed in the context of our present dynamic and 
changing world. 
Large-scale natural events such 
as El Nino can cause significant impacts on agri-
culture and human settlement. 
The predicted 
population explosion will produce severe impacts 
on land use and on the demands for energy, fresh 
water, food and housing, which will vary from 
region to region according to national incomes and 
rates of development. In many cases, the impacts 
will be felt most severely in regions already under 
stress, 
mainly 
the 
developing 
countries. 
Human-induced climate change due to continued 
uncontrolled emissions will accentuate these im-
pacts. For instance, climate change, pollution and 
ultraviolet-B radiation from ozone depletion can 
interact, reinforcing their damaging effects on 
materials and organisms. Increases in atmospheric 
concentrations of greenhouse gases may lead to 
irreversible change in the climate which could be 
detectable by the end of this century. 
Comprehensive estimates of the physical and bio-
logical effects of climate change at the regional 
level are difficult. 
Confidence in regional esti-
mates of critical climatic factors is low. This is 
particularly true of precipitation and soil moisture, 
where there is considerable disagreement between 
various general circulation model and palaeo-
analog results. Moreover, there are several scien-
tific uncertainties regarding the relationship be-
tween climate change and biological effects and 
between these effects and socioeconomic conse-
quences. 
This report does not attempt to anticipate any 
adaptation, technological innovation or any other 
measures to diminish the adverse effects of climate 
change that will take place in the same time 
frame. 
This is especially important for heavily 
managed sectors, eg agriculture, forestry and pub-
lic health. This is one of the responsibilities of 
Working Group III. 
Finally, the issue of timing and rates of change 
need to be considered; there will be lags between: 
i) emissions of greenhouse gases and doubling of 
concentrations; 
ii) doubling of greenhouse gas concentrations and 
changes in climate; 
iii) changes in climate and resultant physical and 
biological effects; and 
iv) changes in physical and ecological effects and 
resultant socioeconomic (including ecological) 
1 
consequences. 
The shorter the lags, the less the 
ability to cope and the greater the socioeconomic 
impacts. 
There is uncertainty related to these time lags. 
The changes will not be steady and surprises can-
not be ruled out. The severity of the impacts will 
depend to a large degree on the rate of climate 
change. 
Despite these uncertainties, Working Group II has 
been able to reach some major conclusions, which 
are: 
Agriculture and forestry 
Sufficient evidence is now available from a variety 
of different studies to indicate that changes of 
climate would have an important effect on agricul-
ture and livestock. 
Studies have not yet conclu-
sively determined whether, on average, global 
agricultural potential will increase or decrease. 
Negative impacts could be felt at the regional level 
as a result of changes in weather and pests associ-
ated with climate change, and changes in ground-
level ozone associated with pollutants, necessitat-
ing innovations in technology and agricultural 
management practices. 
There may be severe ef-
fects in some regions, particularly decline in 
production in regions of high present-day vulnera-
bility that are least able to adjust. These include 
Brazil, Peru, the Sahel Region of Africa, Southeast 
Asia, the Asian region of the USSR and China. 
There is a possibility that potential productivity of 
high and mid latitudes may increase because of a 
prolonged growing season, but it is not likely to 
open up large new areas for production and it will 
be mainly confined to the Northern Hemisphere. 
Patterns of agricultural trade could be altered by 
decreased cereal production in some of the cur-
rently high-production areas, such as Western 
Europe, southern US, parts of South America and 
western Australia. 
Horticultural production in 
mid-latitude regions may be reduced. 
On the 
other hand, cereal production could increase in 
northern Europe. 
Policy responses directed to 
breeding new plant cultivars, and agricultural man-
agement designed to cope with changed climate 
conditions, could lessen the severity of regional 
impacts. On balance, the evidence suggests that in 
the face of estimated changes of climate, food 
production at the global level can be maintained at 
essentially the same level as would have occurred 
without climate change; however, the cost of 
achieving this is unclear. 
Nonetheless, climate 
change may intensify difficulties in coping with 
rapid population growth. An increase or change 
in U V - B radiation at ground level resulting from 
the depletion of stratospheric ozone will have a 
negative impact on crops and livestock. 
The rotation period of forests is long and current 
forests will mature and decline during a climate in 
which they are increasingly more poorly adapted. 
Actual impacts depend on the physiological ad-
aptability of trees and the host-parasite relation-
ship. Large losses from both factors in the form 
of forest declines can occur. Losses from wild-fire 
will be increasingly extensive. 
The climate zones 
which control species distribution will move pole-
ward and to higher elevations. 
Managed forests 
require large inputs in terms of choice of seedlot 
and spacing, thinning and protection. They pro-
vide a variety of products from fuel to food. The 
degree of dependency on products varies among 
countries, as does the ability to cope with and to 
withstand loss. 
The most sensitive areas will be 
where species are close to their biological limits in 
terms of temperature and moisture. This is likely 
to be, for example, in semi-arid areas. 
Social 
stresses can be expected to increase and conse-
quent anthropogenic damage to forests may occur. 
These increased and non-sustainable uses will 
place more pressure on forest investments, forest 
conservation and sound forest management. 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems could face signifi-
cant consequences as a result of the global in-
creases 
in the 
atmospheric concentrations 
of 
greenhouse gases and the associated climatic chan-
ges. 
Projected changes in temperature and pre-
cipitation suggest that climatic zones could shift 
several hundred kilometres towards the poles over 
the next fifty years. 
Flora and fauna would lag 
behind these climatic shifts, surviving in their pres-
ent location and, therefore, could find themselves 
in a different climatic regime. These regimes may 
be more or less hospitable and, therefore, could 
increase productivity for some species and de-
crease that of others. Ecosystems are not expect-
ed to move as a single unit, but would have a new 
structure 
as 
a consequence 
of alterations 
in 
distribution and abundance of species. 
The rate of projected climate changes is the major 
factor determining the type and degree of climatic 
impacts on natural terrestrial ecosystems. 
These 
rates are likely to be faster than the ability of 
some species to respond and responses may be 
sudden or gradual. 
Some species could be lost owing to increased 
stress leading to a reduction in global biological 
2 
diversity. Increased incidence of disturbances such 
as pest outbreaks and fire are likely to occur in 
some areas and these could enhance projected 
ecosystem changes. 
Consequences of C 0 2 enrichment and climate 
change for natural terrestrial ecosystems could be 
modified by other environmental factors, both 
natural and man-induced (eg by air pollution). 
Most at risk are those communities in which the 
options for adaptability are limited (eg montane, 
alpine, polar, island and coastal communities, 
remnant 
vegetation, 
and 
heritage 
sites 
and 
reserves) and those communities where climatic 
changes add to existing stresses. 
The socioeconomic consequences of these impacts 
will be significant, especially for those regions of 
the globe where societies and related economies 
are dependent on natural terrestrial ecosystems for 
their welfare. Changes in the availability of food, 
fuel, medicine, construction materials and income 
are possible as these ecosystems are changed. 
Important fibre products could also be affected in 
some regions. 
Hydrology and water resources 
Relatively small climate changes can cause large 
water resource problems in many areas, especially 
arid and semi-arid regions and those humid areas 
where demand or pollution has led to water scarci-
ty. Little is known about regional details of green-
house gas-induced hydrometeorological change. It 
appears that many areas will have increased pre-
cipitation, soil moisture and water storage, thus 
altering patterns of agricultural, ecosystem and 
other water use. 
Water availability will decrease 
in other areas, a most important factor for already 
marginal situations, such as the Sahelian zone in 
Africa. 
This has significant implications for agri-
culture, for water storage and distribution, and for 
generation of hydroelectric power. 
In some 
limited areas, for example, under the assumed 
scenario of a 1°C to 2°C temperature increase, 
coupled with a 10% reduction in precipitation, a 
40-70% reduction in annual runoff could occur. 
Regions such as Southeast Asia, that are depend-
ent on unregulated river systems, are particularly 
vulnerable to hydrometeorological change. On the 
other hand, regions such as the western USSR and 
western United States that have large regulated 
water resource systems are less sensitive to the 
range of hydrometeorological changes in the as-
sumed greenhouse scenario. 
In addition to changes in water supply, water de-
mand may also change through human efforts to 
conserve, and through improved growth efficiency 
of plants in a higher C O z environment. Net socio-
economic consequences must consider both supply 
and demand for water. 
Future design in water 
resource engineering will need to take possible 
impacts into account when considering structures 
with a life span to the end of the next century. 
Where precipitation increases, water management 
practices, such as urban storm drainage systems, 
may require upgrading in capacity. 
Change in 
drought risk represents potentially the most seri-
ous impact of climate change on agriculture at 
both regional and global levels. 
Human settlements: the energy, 
transport, and industrial sectors; 
human health; air quality and 
changes in ultraviolet-B radiation 
The most vulnerable human settlements are those 
especially exposed to natural hazards, eg coastal or 
river flooding, severe drought, landslides, severe 
wind storms and tropical cyclones. 
The most 
vulnerable populations are in developing countries, 
in the lower income groups, residents of coastal 
lowlands and islands, populations in semi-arid 
grasslands, and the urban poor in squatter settle-
ments, slums and shanty towns, especially in mega-
cities. In coastal lowlands such as in Bangladesh, 
China and Egypt, as well as in small island 
nations, inundation due to sea-level rise and storm 
surges could lead to significant movements of 
people. Major health impacts are possible, espe-
cially in large urban areas, owing to changes in 
availability of water and food and increased health 
problems due to heat stress spreading of infec-
tions. 
Changes in precipitation and temperature 
could radically alter the patterns of vector-borne 
and viral diseases by shifting them to higher lati-
tudes, thus putting large populations at risk. 
As 
similar events have in the past, these changes 
could initiate large migrations of people, leading 
over a number of years to severe disruptions of 
settlement patterns and social instability in some 
areas. 
Global warming can be expected to affect the 
availability of water resources and biomass, both 
major sources of energy in many developing count-
ries. These effects are likely to differ between and 
within regions with some areas losing and others 
gaining water and biomass. Such changes in areas 
which lose water may jeopardise energy supply and 
materials essential for human habitation and ener-
gy. Moreover, climate change itself is also likely 
3 
to have different effects between regions on the 
availability of other forms of renewable energy 
such as wind and solar power. 
In developed 
countries some of the greatest impacts on the 
energy, transport and industrial sectors may be 
determined by policy responses to climate change 
such as fuel regulations, emission fees or policies 
promoting greater use of mass transit. In develop-
ing countries, climate-related changes in the avail-
ability and price of production resources such as 
energy, water, food and fibre may affect the com-
petitive position of many industries. 
Global warming and increased ultraviolet radiation 
resulting from depletion of stratosphere ozone 
may produce adverse impacts on air quality such 
as increases in ground-level ozone in some pollut-
ed urban areas. An increase of U V - B radiation 
intensity at the earth's surface would increase the 
risk of damage to the eye and skin and may dis-
rupt the marine food chain. 
Oceans and coastal zones 
Global warming will 
accelerate 
sea-level 
rise, 
modify ocean circulation and change marine eco-
systems, with considerable socioeconomic conse-
quences. 
These effects will be added to present 
trends of rising sea-level, and other effects that 
have already stressed coastal resources, such as 
pollution and overharvesting. A 30-50 cm sea-level 
rise (projected by 2050) will threaten low islands 
and coastal zones. 
A i m rise 
by 2100 would 
render some island countries uninhabitable, dis-
place tens of millions of people, seriously threaten 
low-lying urban areas, flood productive land, con-
taminate fresh water supplies and change coast-
lines. A l l of these impacts would be exacerbated if 
droughts 
and 
storms 
become 
more 
severe. 
Coastal protection would involve very significant 
costs. Rapid sea-level rise would change coastal 
ecology and threaten many important fisheries. 
Reductions in sea ice will benefit shipping, but 
seriously impact on ice-dependent marine mam-
mals and birds. 
Impacts on the global oceans will include changes 
in the heat balance, shifts in ocean circulation 
which will affect the capacity of the ocean to ab-
sorb heat and C 0 2 , and changes in upwelling 
zones associated with fisheries. 
Effects will vary 
by geographic zones, with changes in habitats, a 
decrease in biological diversity and shifts in marine 
organisms and productive zones, including com-
mercially important species. 
Such regional shifts 
in fisheries will have major socioeconomic impacts. 
Seasonal snow cover, ice and 
permafrost 
The global areal extent and volume of elements of 
the terrestrial cryosphere (seasonal snow cover, 
near-surface layers of permafrost and some masses 
of ice) will be substantially reduced. These reduc-
tions, when reflected regionally, could have signifi-
cant impacts on related ecosystems and social and 
economic activities. 
Compounding these impacts 
in some regions is that, as a result of the associat-
ed climatic warming positive feedbacks, the reduc-
tions could be sudden rather than gradual. 
The areal coverage of seasonal snow and its dur-
ation are projected to decrease in most regions, 
particularly at mid-latitudes, with some regions at 
high latitudes possibly experiencing increases in 
seasonal snow cover. 
Changes in the volume of 
snow cover, or the length of the snow cover seas-
on, will have both positive and negative impacts on 
regional water resources (as a result of changes in 
the volume and the timing of runoff from snow-
melt); on regional transportation (road, marine, air 
and rail); and on recreation sectors. 
Globally, the ice contained in glaciers and ice 
sheets is projected to decrease, with regional re-
sponses complicated by the effect of increased 
snowfall in some areas which could lead to accu-
mulation of ice. Glacial recession will have signifi-
cant implications for local and regional water 
resources, and thus impact on water availability 
and on hydroelectric power potential. Glacial re-
cession and loss of ice from ice sheets will also 
contribute to sea-level rise. 
Permafrost, which currently underlies 20-25% of 
the land mass of the Northern Hemisphere, could 
experience significant degradation within the next 
40-50 years. Projected increases in the thickness of 
the freeze-thaw (active) layer above the permafrost 
and a recession of permafrost to higher latitudes 
and altitudes could lead to increases in terrain 
instability, erosion and landslides in those areas 
which currently contain permafrost. 
As a result, 
overlying ecosystems could be significantly altered 
and the integrity of man-made structures and 
facilities reduced, thereby influencing existing 
human settlements and development opportunities. 
Future action 
The results of the Working Group II studies high-
light our lack of knowledge, particularly at the 
regional level and in areas most vulnerable to 
climate change. Further national and international 
research is needed on: 
4 
• regional effects of climate change on crop 
yields, livestock productivity and production 
costs; 
• identification of agricultural management prac-
tices and technology appropriate for changed 
climate; 
• factors influencing distribution of species and 
their sensitivity to climate change; 
• initiation and maintenance of integrated moni-
toring systems for terrestrial and marine eco-
systems; 
• intensive assessment of water resources and 
water quality, especially in arid and semi-arid 
developing countries and their sensitivity to 
climate change; 
• regional predictions of changes in soil moisture, 
precipitation, 
surface 
and subsurface runoff 
regimes and their interannual distributions as a 
result of climate change; 
• assessment of vulnerability of countries to gain 
or loss of energy resources, particularly biomass 
and hydroelectric power in developing countries; 
• adaptability of vulnerable human populations to 
heat stress and vector-borne and viral diseases; 
• global monitoring of sea-level changes, particu-
larly for island countries; 
• identification of populations and agricultural 
and industrial production at risk in coastal areas 
and islands; 
• better understanding of the nature and dynam-
ics of ice masses and their sensitivity to climate 
change; 
• integration 
of 
climate 
change 
impact 
information into the general planning process, 
particularly in developing countries; and 
• development of methodology to assess sensitivi-
ty of environments and socioeconomic systems 
to climate change. 
• Some of these topics are already being covered 
by existing and proposed programs and these 
will need continuing support. 
In particular, 
there 
are 
three 
core 
projects 
of 
the 
International 
Geosphere-Biosphere 
Program, 
namely: 
Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal 
Zone 
Biosphere Aspects of the Hydrological 
Cycle 
Global Change Impact on Agriculture and 
Society 
that will provide valuable data in the coming 
years. 
5 
 
Chapter 1 
Scenarios used in the Report 
Any changes which take place as the results of 
increasing emissions must be viewed against a back-
ground of changes which are already occurring and 
which will continue to occur as a result of other 
factors such as: 
• 
Natural changes - these include long-term 
changes which are driven by solar and tectonic 
factors, and short-to-medium term changes 
which are driven by ocean and atmospheric 
circulation patterns. 
• 
Population increase - the latest UN figures show 
that current world population is 5.3 billion, with 
a predicted growth to 8.5 billion by 2025 and 
then stabilising at more than 11 billion in the 
late 21st century; this growth will be unevenly 
distributed on a regional basis and will impact 
on already vulnerable areas, particularly in 
Africa and the Middle East. 
• 
Land use changes - the clearing of forests for 
new agricultural production, together with more 
intensive use of existing agricultural land, will 
contribute to land degradation and increase 
demands for water resources. 
In an ideal world, Working Group I would have had 
the time to produce scenarios for emission-induced 
climate change which could have been used as a 
basis for the analyses of this Working Group. 
However, this was precluded because work proceed-
ed in parallel. As a result, and in order to complete 
its work in time, Working Group II has used a 
number of scenarios based on existing models in the 
literature. 
The scenarios generally have the following features: 
(i) an effective doubling of C 0 2 in the atmosphere 
over pre-industrial levels between now and 2025 to 
2050 for a 'business-as-usual' scenario, with no 
changes to present policy; 
(ii) an increase of mean global temperature in the 
range 1.5°C to 4.5°C corresponding to the effective 
doubling of C 0 2 ; 
(iii) 
an unequal global distribution of this tempera-
ture increase, namely half the global mean in the 
tropical regions and twice the global mean in the 
polar regions; 
(iv) 
a sea-level rise of about 0.3 to 0.5 m by 2050 
and about 1 m by 2100, together with a rise in 
temperature of the surface ocean layer of between 
0.2° and 2.5°. 
These scenarios can be compared with the recent 
assessment of Working Group I which, for a 'busi-
ness as usual' scenario, has predicted the increase in 
global temperatures to be about 1°C above the 
present value by 2025 and 3°C before the end of 
next century. However, it has estimated the magni-
tude of sea-level rise to be about 20 cm by 2030 and 
about 65 cm by the end of next century. Neverthe-
less, the impacts based on 1-2 m rise serve as a 
warning of the consequences of continued uncon-
trolled emissions. 
The smaller rise docs not lessen the anxiety, for 
their continued existence, of the small island count-
ries, particularly the Pacific and Indian Oceans and 
the Caribbean, or of the larger populations in 
low-lying coastal areas such as Bangladesh. It is 
difficult to predict the regional effects of sea-level 
rise with any certainty. Significant variations of sea-
level already occur for a variety of reasons, while 
there are considerable shifts in land levels associated 
with tectonic plate movements which can also lead 
to rises and falls. 
The scenarios of Working Group II are derived both 
from General Circulation Models and from palaeo-
analog techniques. Palaeoclimate analogs are pro-
posed by Soviet scientists as a means by which 
climate changes can be assessed. The methodology 
assumes that past warm geologic intervals provide 
insight into possible future climate conditions. The 
General Circulation Models, developed by Western 
scientists, are based on three-dimensional math-
ematical representations of the physical processes in 
the atmosphere and the interactions of the atmos-
phere with the earth's surface and the oceans. 
There is considerable scientific debate about the 
merits and demerits of each of these, as discussed in 
the report of Working Group I. 
The palaeoclimate scenarios used by Soviet scientists 
are based on three warm geological periods with 
estimated future levels of concentration of C 0 2 
1-1 
applied to them. The details of these are shown in 
Table 1.1. While these are superficially similar to 
the predictions of the General Circulation Model 
approach for different C0 2 concentrations, the 
factors which caused the climate changes in geologic 
times are not clear. Nevertheless, they have been 
used to make predictions of climate change of 
regions in the USSR. 
The General Circulation Models are, in their current 
state of development, comparatively crude in their 
description of many of the processes involved. 
However they can be used to simulate regional 
changes resulting from a range of concentrations of 
CO; in the atmosphere. 
Working Group I has 
favoured the General Circulation Model approach in 
producing its predictions of temperature rise and 
precipitation changes. In its report, estimates for 
2020 have been given for central North America, 
southern 
Asia, 
Sahel, 
southern 
Europe 
and 
Australia. These are reproduced in Table 1.2 and 
are broadly similar to those used by Working Group 
II. 
Despite the current uncertainties, both techniques 
have been used by Working Group II in the develop-
ment of regional impacts to assist policy makers. 
There are problems with prediction of regional 
precipitation since there is disagreement between 
various General Circulation Model outputs as a 
result of simplifications to the representation of 
complex physical processes. 
Current research is 
seeking to improve the General Circulation Model 
approach and to increase resolution to enable better 
regional predictions. There are also problems with 
the palaeoanalog approach which yields differing 
scenarios for precipitation from the General Circu-
lation Model approach. 
This leads to different 
assessments of impact on water resources and 
agriculture. Soviet scientists are working to validate 
their techniques and improve regional scenarios. 
It should be noted that, in many situations, the 
overall impact is determined more by the changes in 
the magnitude and frequency of extreme events than 
by changes in the average. This is especially the 
case for tropical storms and droughts. The assess-
ment of Working Group I of possible climate chan-
ges suggests a low probability of increased frequency 
of extreme events. However, it is entirely possible 
that shifts in climate regimes will result in changes 
in frequency in certain regions. 
An issue of importance not considered in any detail 
is the impact of possible response strategies (devel-
oped by Working Group III) on the scenarios used 
here. Thus, a major change in energy production 
from fossil fuel to nuclear or renewable energy 
sources could drastically alter our assessments. 
Further, changes in agricultural practice could 
dramatically alter yields of particular crops in certain 
regions. 
These impacts of response strategies 
require much additional work. 
Despite all these uncertainties, it is possible to make 
assessments of potential impacts of climate change 
by considering the sensitivity of natural systems to 
significant variations. These are summarised in the 
following sections under: agriculture and forestry, 
terrestrial ecosystems; 
hydrology and water re-
sources; human settlement, energy, transport, indus-
try, human health and air quality, world ocean and 
coastal zones; seasonal snow cover, ice and perma-
frost. 
Table 1.1 Palaeoclimate analogs used by Soviet scientists 
Period 
Holocene Optimum 
Eemian Interglacial 
Pliocene Optimum 
Analog 
(year) 
2000 
2025 
2050 
Temperature 
(difference from 
present) 
+ 1 
+2 
+4 
Past CO, concn. 
(ppm) 
280 
280 
500-600 
Assumed CO, 
concn. (ppm) 
380 
420 
560 
1-2 
Table 1.2 Estimates for regional changes by Working Group I 
(IPCC Business-as-Usual scenario; changes from pre-industrial) 
The estimates arc based on high resolution models, scaled to give a global mean warming of 1.8°C consistent with 
the best estimate (2.5"C) of climate response to greenhouse gases. With the low estimate value of 1.5°C, these 
values should be reduced by 30%; with a high estimate of 4.5°C, they should be increased by 50%. Confidence 
on these estimates is low. 
Central North America (35°-50°N 85°-105°W) 
The warming varies from 2° to 4°C in winter and 2° to 3°C in summer. Precipitation increase range from 0% to 
15% in winter, whereas there are decreases of 5% to 10% in summer. Soil moisture decreases in summer by 15% 
to 20%. 
Southern Asia (5°-30°N 70°-105°E) 
The warming varies from 1° to 2°C throughout the year. Precipitation changes little in winter and generally 
increases throughout the region by 5% to 15% in summer. Summer soil moisture increases by 5% to 10%. 
Sahel (10°-20°N 20oW-40oE) 
The warming ranges from 1° to 3°C. Area mean precipitation increases and area mean soil moisture decreases 
marginally in summer. However, there arc areas of both increase and decrease in both parameters throughout the 
region, which differ from model to model. 
Southern Europe (30o-50°N 10°W-45°E) 
The warming is about 2°C in winter and varies from 2° to 3°C in summer. There is some indication of increased 
precipitation in winter, but summer precipitation decreases by 5% to 15%, and summer soil moisture by 15% to 
25%. 
Australia (12°-45°S HO'-ISS'E) 
The warming ranges from 1° to 2" in summer and is about 2°C in winter. Summer precipitation increases by 
around 10%, but the models do not produce consistent estimates of the changes in soil moisture. The area averages 
hide large variations at the subcontinental level. 
1-3 
 
Chapter 2 
Agriculture and forestry 
Co-Chairmen: 
M.L. Parry (UK), G.V. Mendzhulin (USSR), S. Sinha 
(India) 
Lead author: 
M.L. Parry, UK 
Section authors: 
Agriculture 
Forestry 
Associate authors: 
Direct effects on agriculture 
Effects on pests 
Effects on prices and trade 
Effects on sea-level 
Data Collection 
Expert Contributors 
B. Acock (USA); M. Beran (UK); M. Boko (Benin); D. Bond Canada); 
W. Degefu (Ethiopia); T. Farago (Hungary); J. Hales (Australia); M. Harwell 
(USA); 
J. Hayes (USA); 
R. Heathcote (Australia); 
T. Keane (Ireland); 
L. Kettunen (Finland); 
J. Kindler (Poland); 
R. Kintanar (Philippines); 
D. Linforth 
(Australia); 
J. Lomas 
(Israel); 
A. Magalhaes 
(Brazil); 
G. Mendzhulin (USSR); P. Mosley (New Zealand); J. Muller (East Germany); 
N. Nicholls 
(Australia); Nguyen Hu Ninh (Vietnam); L. Ogallo (Kenya); 
J. Oguntoyinbo (Nigeria); 
S. Panturat (Thailand); 
B. Pittock (Australia); 
P. Ramirez (Costa Rica); 
J. Reilly (USA); 
V. Richter (Czechoslovakia); 
C. Rosenzweig (USA); J. Salinger (New Zealand); A Sastri (India); S. Sinha 
(India); 
O. Sirotenko (USSR); 
B. Smit (Canada); 
Z. Uchijima (Japan); 
J. Williams (UK); M. Yoshino (Japan); Jia-cheng Zhang (China) 
M.L. Parry, UK 
P.N. Duinker, Canada 
J.I.L. Morison, UK 
J.H. Porter, UK 
J. Reilly, USA 
L.J. Wright, UK 
L.J. Wright, UK 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction 
2-1 
1.1 
Objectives and approach 
2-1 
1.2 
Assumptions 
2-1 
1.2.1 
Climatic scenarios 
2-1 
1.2.2 
Assumptions concerning technology and management 
2-1 
2 
Potential impacts on agriculture and land use 
2-1 
2.1 
Introduction 
2-1 
2.2 
Critical types of climatic change 
2-2 
2.2.1 
Climatic extremes 
2-2 
2.2.2 
Warming in high latitudes 
2-2 
2.2.3 
Poleward advance of monsoon rainfall 
2-2 
2.2.4 
Reduced soil water availability 
2-2 
2.3 
Present-day vulnerability to climate 
2-3 
2.4 
Regions of risk 
2-3 
2.5 
Critical vulnerabilities in food trade 
2-3 
2.6 
Potential effects on agriculture and land use 
2-4 
2.6.1 
Types of effect 
2-4 
2.6.2 
'Direct' effects of elevated C 0 2 and other greenhouse gases . . . . 
2-4 
2.6.3 
Effects of changes in climate 
2-7 
2.7 
Likely adjustments in agriculture 
2-17 
2.7.1 
Introduction 
2-17 
2.7.2 
Changes in land use 
2-17 
2.7.3 
Changes in management 
2-18 
2.7.4 
Changes in policies of agricultural support 
2-20 
2.8 
Effects of changes in sea-level 
2-20 
2.8.1 
Scenarios 
2-20 
2.8.2 
Vulnerability 
2-20 
2.8.3 
Vulnerable regions 
2-20 
2.8.4 
Direct impacts on agriculture 
2-21 
2.8.5 
Indirect impacts on agriculture 
2-21 
3 
Potential impacts on managed forests and the forest sector 
2-22 
3.1 
Introduction 
2-22 
3.2 
Managed and unmanaged forests 
2-22 
3.3 
World forest sector and managed forests 
2-23 
3.3.1 
World forest sector 
2-23 
3.3.2 
Managed forests 
2-23 
3.4 
Potential biophysical responses of forests to climate change 
2-23 
3.4.1 
Forest protection 
2-23 
3.4.2 
Shifts in climatic zones affecting forest ecosystems 
2-25 
3.4.3 
Forest production and renewal 
2-26 
3.5 
Role of forest management in potential forest responses to climatic 
changes 
2-27 
3.5.1 
Managed forests 
2-27 
3.5.2 
Agroforestry - managed forests with agriculture 
2-27 
3.5.3 
Urban forests 
2-28 
3.5.4 
Summary assessment of forest sensitivity to projected climatic 
changes 
2-28 
3.6 
Socioeconomic implications of climatic changes on forests and the forest 
sector 
2-30 
2-ii 
4 
Summary and conclusions 
2-32 
4.1 
Agriculture 
2-32 
4.1.1 
Effects on food security 
2-32 
4.1.2 
Magnitudes of possible dislocation 
2-32 
4.1.3 
The most vulnerable regions and sectors 
2-33 
4.1.4 
The effect of altered climatic extremes 
2-33 
4.1.5 
Effects on crop growth potential, land degradation, pests and 
diseases 
2-33 
4.1.6 
Regional impacts 
2-33 
4.1.7 
Rates of adaptability 
2-34 
4.1.8 
Future tasks 
2-34 
4.2 
Forestry - future deliberations 
2-35 
Tables 
Table 2.1 
Forest land in area in 1980. Hectare and percaput data from 
Peck (1984) 
2-24 
Table 2.2 
Summary of forest resources 
2-25 
Table 2.3 
Yields from hybrid plantation species 
2-28 
Table 2.4 
Performance of 15 species at Kaunamano, Ka'u, Hawaii Island, 
evaluated after 23 months (Schubert adn Whiteshell, 1989) 
2-29 
Table 2.5a 
Summary of forest resources and forest management species 
(1986) 
2-31 
Table 2.5b 
Roundwood production, imports, exports and their value 
2-32 
Figure 
Figure 2.1: 
Sensitivity of world agricultural prices to yield changes 
2-37 
References 
2-38 
2-iii 
Agriculture and forestry 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Objectives and approach 
The purpose of this chapter is fourfold: 
first, to 
identify those systems, sectors and regions of agricul-
ture and forestry that are most sensitive to anticipat-
ed changes of climate;
1 second, to summarise the 
present knowledge about the potential socioecono-
mic impact of changes of climate on world agricul-
ture and forestry; third, to consider the adjustments 
in agriculture and forestry that are most likely to 
occur (even if no policy responses were implement-
ed);
2 
finally, to establish research priorities for 
future assessments of impact. 
This chapter gathers together many different types 
of information. 
It is a synthesis of all available 
published material, as well as unpublished govern-
ment and non-government reports. It also draws on 
summaries of expert judgment concerning impacts in 
many regions that resulted from contact made with 
more than 100 scientists in 50 different countries. 
1.2 
Assumptions 
1.2.1 Climatic scenarios 
The scenarios used in the estimates of global warm-
ing effects on agriculture and forestry were based on 
both General Circulation Model (GCM) simulations 
at 2 x C 0 2 climate and palaeoclimatic reconstruc-
tions. The G C M scenarios are described in detail in 
Working Group I Report. The analog scenarios 
used in Soviet studies at mid-latitude Northern 
Hemisphere agriculture impacts are based on 
climate reconstructions of three past warm epochs as 
discussed in Chapter 1. 
Where reference is made to an equivalent doubling 
of atmospheric C 0 2 , this is taken to be 460 ppm in 
about the year 2030 (which is the current best 
estimate, Working Group I). This represents a ca 
60% increase over pre-industrial levels because C 0 2 
comprises about 60% of estimated greenhouse gas 
(GHG) forcing. 
1.2.2 Assumptions concerning technology 
and management 
Since the effects of changes in climate will be felt 
progressively over time, though not necessarily in 
linear increments, it is necessary to assess these 
against an exposure unit that is itself changing 
(irrespective of climate change). The nature of this 
'moving target' is difficult to describe with accuracy, 
primarily because of the relatively long time scales 
involved (eg 50-100 years). Changes in technology 
and management may, over that length of time, alter 
some aspects of agriculture and commercial forestry 
beyond recognition. 
A common approach to this problem is, first, to 
estimate impacts as they might occur in the future, 
assuming technology and management as it is now; 
for example, assuming the extent of irrigation and 
fertiliser application to be as at present. Subsequent 
assessments then allow for possible developments in 
technology and management, identifying those 
adjustments necessary either to obviate major 
negative effects or to exploit positive ones. 
This 
distinction between 'impact experiments' and 'adjust-
ment experiments' has been made in a number of 
previous impact assessments (see Parry and Carter, 
1988). 
In the present report, and unless otherwise stated, 
data on estimated impacts relate to changes in 
productive potential against a baseline of present-day 
base technology and management. However, likely 
(actual) effects on production must be measured 
against a realistic future reference base. In order to 
characterise this baseline certain assumptions must 
be made about changes in food and timber demand 
(on the basis of changes in population and per 
capita income), in use of inputs (particularly amount 
of fertiliser), in extent of the farmed and forested 
area and in many other aspects of agriculture and 
forestry which are likely to alter in the future even 
if climate did not change. These assumptions are 
consistent with UN and World Bank projections. 
2 Potential impacts on agriculture 
and land use 
2.1 Introduction 
Owing to the many remaining uncertainties about 
possible future changes of climate (particularly 
changes in regional precipitation patterns and the 
rate of climate change over time) no forecast can be 
1 Note 
impacts on fisheries are considered in Chapter 6 of 
IPCC Working Group II 
2 Note 
technical adjustments which can reasonably be pres-
umed to occur as a result of changes of climate are con-
sidered in this report Policy responses at the national and 
international level are evaluated in the report of the IPCC 
Working Group 
2-1 
made in this report concerning any specific impact 
on agriculture. It is possible, however, to identify 
what types of impacts might occur under a number 
of possible changes of climate and thus, by infer-
ence, what types of climate change could constitute 
a significant risk or benefit for agriculture. Four 
approaches can be adopted to achieve this end: (i) 
the identification a prion of the types of climate 
change most critical for agriculture; (ii) the identifi-
cation of regions most at risk from such changes of 
climate; (Hi) the consideration of types of impact 
likely to result from climatic change; and, (iv) the 
evaluation of adjustments that are likely to occur in 
agriculture in response to such impacts or to the 
perception of their risk of occurrence. These four 
approaches will be followed, in turn, in this report. 
2.2 Critical types of climatic change 
The potentially most important changes of climate 
for agriculture, upon which there is some agreement 
by G C M s , include changes in climatic extremes, 
warming in the high latitudes, poleward advance of 
monsoon rainfall, and reduced soil water availability 
(particularly in mid latitudes in midsummer, and at 
low latitudes). 
2.2.1 Climatic extremes 
It is not clear whether temporal variances in tem-
perature or precipitation will occur as a result of 
climatic change. However, even if variances remain 
the same as under the present climate, an increase 
in monthly or annual average temperatures will 
result in the increased frequency of occurrences of 
days with temperatures above particular thresholds. 
Changes in the frequency of distribution of precipi-
tation is not as certain, but the combination of 
elevated temperatures and drought constitutes the 
greatest risk to agriculture in many regions from 
global climatic change. 
2.2.2 Warming in high latitudes 
There is relatively strong agreement among G C M 
predictions that warming will be greater at higher 
latitudes. This will reduce temperature constraints 
on high-latitude poleward agriculture, increase the 
competition for land here, and result in the north-
ward retreat of the southern margin of the boreal 
forest (these possible effects are discussed in detail 
in Section 3.4.1). Warming at low latitudes, although 
less pronounced, is also likely to have a significant 
effect on agriculture. 
2.2.3 Poleward advance of monsoon 
rainfall 
In a warmer world the intertropical convergence 
zones (ITCZs) would be likely to advance further 
poleward as a result of an enhanced ocean-continent 
pressure gradient (itself the result of more warming 
of the land surface in the pre-monsoon season). If 
this were to occur - and it should be emphasised 
that this conclusion is based on G C M equilibrium 
experiments, and that the transient response could 
be different - then total rainfall could increase in 
some regions of monsoonal Africa, monsoonal Asia 
and Australia, though there is currently little agree-
ment between G C M s on which regions these might 
be. 
Rainfall could also be more intense in its 
occurrence, so flooding and erosion could increase. 
2.2.4 Reduced soil water availability 
Probably the most important consequences for 
agriculture would stem from higher potential évapo-
transpiration, primarily due to the higher tempera-
tures of the air and the land surface. Even in the 
tropics, where temperature increases are expected to 
be smaller than elsewhere, the increased rate of loss 
of moisture from plants and soil would be consider-
able. 
It may be somewhat reduced by greater 
humidity and increased cloudiness during the rainy 
seasons, but could be pronounced in the dry seasons. 
At present we cannot be certain about the regional 
pattern of soil water changes that may occur. There 
are, however, regions in the world where the G C M 
predictions are in some agreement regarding such 
changes. 
The following is a summary of those 
regions where current 2 x C 0 2 experiments by three 
G C M s (GISS, G F D L and N C A R ) all project de-
creases in soil water (Kellogg and Zhao, 1988; Zhao 
and Kellogg, 1988; Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1985). 
It should be emphasised that coincidence of results 
for these regions is not statistically significant and 
that the evidence available at present is extremely 
weak. Moreover, the significance of decreases in 
soil water will vary considerably from region to 
region according to whether they occur during the 
growing or non-growing season. 
i) Decreases of soil water in December, January and 
February 
Africa: 
Horn of Africa
1, southern Africa
1, western 
West Africa
2 
Asia: western Arabian Peninsula, Southeast Asia 
1 Note 
it should be emphasised that recent (and, in some 
cases, unpublished) G C M experiments do not produce drying 
in these regions 
2 Note changes over western West Africa are small 
2-2 
Australasia: eastern Australia 
North America: southern United States 
South America: northern Argentina 
ii) Decreases in soil water in June, July and August: 
Africa: Maghreb, West Africa, Horn of Africa
1 
Europe: parts of Western Europe 
Asia: 
north and 
central 
China, 
(including 
Mongolia); Soviet central Asia and parts of 
Siberia 
North America: 
southwestern United States, and 
central America 
South America: eastern Brazil 
Australasia: western Australia 
The regions identified above are those where soil 
water may decrease in an equilibrium climate for 
doubled equivalent C 0 2 . 
But different latitudes 
could approach equilibrium at different rates of 
change in temperature and rainfall because they 
include different amounts of land, which warms up 
faster than ocean. Thus the time-evolving patterns 
of soil water change could vary significantly from the 
equilibrium simulation. Moreover, the effects of 
climatic changes on agriculture are likely to be 
greater during periods of rapid change, before 
equilibrium is reached and before farming systems 
have had time to adapt to their altered environment. 
Despite these important caveats, we may conclude 
that there may be some regions where significant 
reductions in agricultural potential occur due to 
decreases in crop water availability. 
There is at 
present, however, little agreement as to which 
regions these will be. 
2.3 Present-day vulnerability to climate 
In addition to the unequal regional pattern of critical 
types of climatic change, there are important in-
equalities in the distribution of present-day vulnera-
bility to climate. Since climate is the major factor 
limiting potential productivity at the global level, 
changes of climate are likely to have substantial 
effects on such limits. Insufficient temperature and 
rainfall are the main climatic limits which operate 
largely through the curtailment of the growing 
period. Overall, 63% of the land area of developing 
countries is climatically suited to rain-fed agriculture, 
but this endowment varies considerably between 
regions (FAO, 1984). It amounts to as much as 
85% in South America, 84% in Southeast Asia, but 
is limited to 64% in Central America and 53% in 
Africa. The severest climatic limitations to rain-fed 
agriculture are to be found in Southwest Asia where 
17% is too mountainous and cool, and 65% is too 
dry, leaving only 18% as potentially productive 
(FAO, 1984). 
These climatic limits to agriculture, in combination 
with soil constraints (particularly shallowness, poor 
drainage and salinity) mean that the potential base 
for rain-fed agriculture is quite limited in certain 
regions. Any further curtailment of potential owing 
to changes of climate could severely strain the ability 
of many developing countries to feed their popula-
tion. 
Certain regions stand out as particularly vulnerable 
as a result of climatic and soil constraints on then-
land base and their population requirements where, 
even with high levels of inputs, land resources 
cannot meet the needs of local populations. These 
occupy as much as 22% of the global land area and 
contain 11% of the population. Areas under great-
est pressure, where there is a high degree of imbal-
ance between population and land potential, are the 
cool and cold tropics (eg the Andean region, the 
Maghreb, the mountain regions of Southwest Asia), 
the Indian subcontinent, and parts of mainland and 
insular Southeast Asia. 
2.4 Regions of risk 
One means of identifying regions most at risk from 
climate change is to combine the two preceding 
analyses, noting those regions which (i) are regions 
where preliminary projections indicate decreases in 
soil water under equilibrium 2 x C 0 2 climates and 
also which (ii) are regions identified as critically 
vulnerable in terms of their resource ability to 
support existing population. These regions at risk 
are: 
Africa: 
Maghreb, West Africa, Horn of Africa, 
southern Africa 
Asia: western Arabia, southeast Asia 
North America: Mexico and Central America 
South America: parts of eastern Brazil 
2.5 Critical vulnerabilities in food trade 
An additional set of regions that deserves particular 
attention includes the food-exporting countries, 
which are the source of most of the world's traded 
cereals. Here, substantially adverse or beneficial 
changes of climate could markedly affect the amount 
of traded food and its price. A key role in the world 
food system is played by a few food-exporting 
countries, with only 21 out of 172 countries in the 
world currently being net exporters of cereals. In 
1987, 77% of all traded cereals derived from only 
three countries. 
The major food-producing countries, because of 
their key role as holders of large food stocks, are 
doubly important to the world food system. In 1988-
2-3 
89 the US, Canada and European Community held 
almost one-third of the world's stock of wheat and 
coarse grain (mainly maize, sorghum and barley). 
The US held 17% of wheat and 47% of maize. 
In addition, it should be noted how sensitive world 
food security remains to variations in weather. To 
illustrate, in 1987-88 world wheat and coarse grain 
stocks stood at 353 million tonnes (mt), but fell to 
248 mt in 1988-89 and are estimated to be 249 mt in 
July 1989 (International Wheat Council, 1989). 
Most of this fall is attributable to reductions in stock 
in North America due to the 1988 heatwave and 
drought in the Great Plains and Corn Belt. Closing 
stocks of wheat in the US fell from 49 mt in 1986¬
87, to 34 mt in 1987-88 and to 17 mt in 1988-89. 
Thus factors affecting stocks in North America also 
affect world food stocks and prices. 
These 'breadbasket' countries are critical to the 
world food system, being regions where relatively 
small percentage changes in production due to 
changes of climate could have severe impacts on the 
quantity, price and type of food products bought and 
sold on the world food market. 
The following list summarises those regions and 
countries which are both net food exporters and for 
which there is some agreement between G C M s re-
garding reductions in soil water under 2 x C 0 2 
climates: 
Europe: parts of Western Europe 
North America: southern US 
South America: northern Argentina 
Australasia: western Australia. 
2.6 
Potential effects on agriculture and 
land use 
2.6.1 Types of effect 
Three types of effect of climatic change on agricul-
ture are considered in this report: (i) the physiologi-
cal ('direct') effect of elevated levels of atmospheric 
C 0 2 on crop plants and weeds, (ii) the effect of 
changes in parameters of climate (eg temperature, 
precipitation and solar radiation) on plants and 
animals, and (iii) the effects of climate-related rises 
in sea-level on land use (considered in section 2.8) 
2.6.2 'Direct' effects of elevated C02 and 
other greenhouse gases 
Considerable basic physiological information is now 
available from a large number of studies showing 
that increases in ambient C 0 2 have diverse and 
profound effects on plant growth. These effects of 
elevated C 0 2 can be experimentally demonstrated 
with concentration increases in the upper end of the 
range expected to occur by the middle of next 
century. The major effects are on photosynthesis and 
respiration and thereby on growth (the accumulation 
of dry matter), and there are additional effects of 
increased C 0 2 on development, yield quality and 
stomatal aperture and water use (see Gifford, 1988; 
Morison, 1989). 
i) Photosynthesis, respiration and growth 
In general, as photosynthesis is the net accumulation 
of carbohydrates formed by the uptake of C 0 2 , 
increased C 0 2 results in increased photosynthesis. 
A doubling of C 0 2 increases the instantaneous 
photosynthetic rate by 30% to 100%, depending on 
the other environmental conditions (Pearcy and 
Bjorkman, 1983). The balance between the photo-
synthetic gain and loss of carbohydrate from plants 
by respiration is the resultant growth. Unfortunate-
ly, the response of respiration to C 0 2 has been little 
studied and there are suggestions that respiration 
could be lower rather than higher owing to a 
changed carbohydrate status (Bunce, 1989). 
This 
process may underlie some of the unexpectedly high 
responses of growth to increased C 0 2 that have been 
observed. Within single species there are differences 
in responsiveness between different varieties and 
genotypes, differences that offer the possibility of 
breeding for optimum advantage with increased C 0 2 . 
In order to take full advantage of such opportunities 
these varieties and genotypes must be identified 
now. 
In the overwhelming majority of cases the effect of 
C 0 2 on productivity has been shown to be beneficial 
- if all other factors are maintained constant - and a 
10-50% increase in dry matter accumulation can 
occur in most species with a doubling of ambient 
C 0 2 concentration. In a summary of 770 studies the 
mean mature yield increase for C3 crops (see below) 
was 26% but the extremes ranged from a decrease 
of 20% to an increase of 200% (Kimball, 1983). For 
temperate cereals the mean increase observed in 
grain yield was 36%. The large range in effect of 
C 0 2 can, to some extent, be attributed to species 
differences, however few realistic studies under 
comparable conditions have been made. 
Part of the variation in results can also be attributed 
to interaction with other environmental conditions, 
which is clearly of importance as increased C 0 2 will 
occur in combination with changes in temperature, 
rainfall etc. A doubling of C 0 2 , for example, in 
addition to increasing net photosynthesis in C3 
plants at a fixed temperature, also increases the 
optimum temperature for photosynthesis by about 
2-4 
4°-6°C (Acock and Allen, 1985; 
Osmond et al., 
1980; Jones, 1986). 
This may appear to be of 
considerable advantage in warmer climates, but the 
optimum range of temperature for photosynthesis 
also narrows. In present conditions temperature has 
relatively little effect over a broad range for most 
plants growing in the habitats to which they are 
currently adapted. Under elevated levels of C 0 2 , 
photosynthesis and, by inference, growth rate, may 
therefore become more variable as temperature 
conditions vary. 
The interactions with other environmental conditions 
are critical in determining the net effect of increased 
C 0 2 . In particular, it has been demonstrated that in 
adverse conditions (eg nutrient limitation, water 
shortage, salinity, cool temperatures and air pollu-
tion) the relative effect of increased C O z is larger 
than under optimal conditions (Morison, 1988; 
Warrick et al., 1986). Indeed, increased C 0 2 could 
improve growth sufficiently to make saline and 
polluted environments more productive though, as 
with all of these interactions, insufficient data exist 
to produce quantitative predictions. Another envi-
ronmental interaction for which few, if any, studies 
have been completed is the combined effect on 
agriculture of acidic depositions and GHG-induced 
changes. 
ii) C3 and C4 plants 
Two groups of plants differ in their fundamental 
carbon fixation biochemistry - the C3 and C4 groups. 
It is widely accepted that the response of growth to 
elevated C 0 2 in C3 plants (eg wheat, rice, barley, 
root crops, legumes) is larger than that of C4 plants 
(eg maize, sorghum, millets, sugarcane). It has been 
estimated that the average effect of doubled C 0 2 
concentration on wheat grain yield is an increase of 
35% (from eight studies, Cure, 1985) while that on 
maize has not been adequately quantified (Cure, 
1985). 
Most crops grown in cool, temperate or 
moist habitats are C3 plants, as are all trees. The 
C3 group therefore accounts for most of the world's 
plant biomass. 
Although C4 crops account for only about one-fifth 
of the world's food production they are a particularly 
important source of world food in the tropical 
regions. Maize alone accounts for 14% of world 
food. Moreover, many pasture and forage grasses 
worldwide are C4 including important prairie grasses 
in the US and in the subtropics and tropics 
(Edwards and Walker, 1983). 
In addition, 14 of the world's most troublesome 17 
terrestrial weed species are C4 plants in C3 crops 
(Morison, 1989). The difference in response to C 0 2 
may make such weeds intrinsically less competitive, 
but the final outcome will depend on the relative 
response of crop and weed to climatic changes as 
well. 
C3 weeds in C4 crops may increase as a 
problem. 
Changes in relative crop performance may force 
changes in areas sown, for example increasing areas 
of soybean and reducing areas of maize. This may 
accelerate the existing trend in the third world 
countries to replace C4 crops with C3 as a response 
to the promise of high-yielding varieties of wheat, 
rice and barley. For example, in the last 20 years in 
India there has been a reduction in the production 
of C4 crops from 40% to only 23% of the total 
cereal production. Conversely, it may counteract the 
current poleward expansion in the temperate zone of 
grain maize which would otherwise follow increases 
in global temperature. Similarly, it may reverse the 
current trend away from perennial rye-grass (C3) 
towards silage maize as the major forage product in 
temperate zones (Jones, 1986). Another probable 
area of impact will be on sugar production, reducing 
further the value of the sugar-cane crop (C4) in 
tropical countries relative to the success of sugar 
beet in the temperate zone. 
A third biochemical group of plants that is locally 
important in the arid zone are those with C A M 
metabolism (Crassulacean Acid Metabolism), which 
includes many plants in the cactus family, the Crass-
ulaceae and desert succulents. The species in this 
group of major commercial importance are sisal and 
pineapple. 
These plants will show little or no 
response to increased C 0 2 , thus eroding their 
competitive advantage over common C3 weeds and 
reducing yields relative to C3 crops. 
Hi) Plant development 
Some developmental processes such as flowering 
have also been shown to be affected by elevated C 0 2 
in both positive and negative directions, although 
this has not yet been widely studied (Morison, 1989). 
If the developmental process is affected then the 
progress of the crop through the different stages of 
the life cycle is altered, thus potentially shortening or 
lengthening the required growing period. 
In 
temperate zones this may mean decreases or in-
creases in yield, respectively, but in seasonally arid 
areas any lengthening of the required growing 
season is generally associated with increased drought 
risk. Since many of the advances in cropping in such 
areas have been due to the introduction of shorter 
duration varieties, the developmental response of the 
crops of these areas urgently needs to be examined. 
As with the other processes affected by C 0 2 , genetic 
variation in responsiveness is evident and could 
2-5 
prove amenable for selection by traditional and 
modern breeding methods. 
iv) Yield quality 
The amount of information available on the effect of 
increased C 0 2 on quality is very small compared to 
that on dry matter production. 
Some changes in 
composition of crop tissue have been noted, though 
much remains to be done. Generally, there is a rise 
in the total non-structural carbohydrate content 
(starch and sugars) with increase in C 0 2 concentra-
tion (Bazzaz et al., 1985; Strain, 1985). 
This is 
particularly the case at low temperatures. For fruits, 
grains and vegetables this change in carbohydrate 
status may affect palatability, nutritional value and 
taste, as well as storage qualities. 
Nitrogen content of leaf, stems and fruits is general-
ly reduced by high C 0 2 . 
This has been clearly 
demonstrated in species as diverse as white oak, 
soybean, Echinochloa (a C4 grass), wheat, cotton, 
lettuce and cucumber. This implies reduced protein 
levels and reduced nutritional value for livestock, 
pests and disease organisms and humans. Over the 
last 40 years there has been a 1-to-l relationship 
between nitrogen applied to wheat crops in the UK 
and the nitrogen taken off in the grain and straw 
(Austin, 1988). With increased C 0 2 the same yield 
may be produced with less nitrogen fertiliser applica-
tion. 
However, the bread-making quality of the 
grain may be diminished unless there are changed 
management and varieties to counteract this effect. 
Further, in the very few experimental studies carried 
out, pest herbivory was altered under conditions of 
high C 0 2 : more leaves were eaten but individuals 
were smaller with probable reductions in population 
growth. Changing the carbon to nitrogen and car-
bon to phosphorus ratio of plant material also has 
consequences on the decomposition processes in 
agricultural and forest soils, leading to reductions in 
decomposition rates and decreases in ecosystem pro-
ductivity (Dahlman et al., 1985). 
v) Stomatal aperture and water use 
Increases in atmospheric C 0 2 reduce the water 
requirements of plants by reducing transpiration (per 
unit leaf area) through reductions in stomatal aper-
ture. A doubling of C 0 2 causes partial stomatal 
closure in both C3 and C4 plants (approximately a 
40% decrease in aperture, Morison, 1987). In many 
experiments this results in reductions of transpira-
tion of about 23% to 46% (averages compiled by 
Cure and Acock, 1986; Kimball and Idso, 1983). 
However, there is considerable uncertainty over the 
magnitude of this effect in natural conditions. Many 
calculations of evaporation have relied on the 
Penman-Monteith model for evaporation which in-
cludes meteorological and vegetation variables in a 
sound mechanistic framework. However, its use in 
predictions is limited as the variables are not inde-
pendent of each other. At the level of single leaves 
the evaporation rate affects the leaf temperature, 
which affects the net radiation, to an extent depend-
ent on the degree of 'coupling' of leaf to the air 
around it (Morison, 1985 and 1989). 
There is 
additional feedback in whole canopies between the 
humidity in the canopy and the evaporation rate 
from the plant and the soil surface (Morison, 1989; 
McNaughton and Jarvis, 1983; Goudriaan, 1989). 
Further, at the regional scale, the temperature and 
humidity conditions in the mixed planetary boundary 
layer are also dependent on the heat and vapour 
transfer from the vegetation surface. The extent of 
these feedbacks varies with the microclimatic and 
vegetation conditions so that predictions of changes 
in evaporation rates with changed climate and 
increased C 0 2 vary considerably both in magnitude 
and sign. In addition, increased growth results in 
greater leaf area so the total water use per plant in 
high C 0 2 may be similar to that in present concen-
trations (Gifford, 1988), although for complete 
vegetation stands the changes in leaf area index may 
change the whole pattern of energy exchange at the 
surface. 
The net effect is likely to be small for 
short, dense, extensive crops and more important in 
sparse and tall vegetation in semi-arid areas. 
vi) Effect on biological nitrogen fixations 
Increased levels of C 0 2 
can enhance nitrogen 
fixation by leguminous species, through increased 
rates of photosynthesis. Many C4 species harbour 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria such as Axospirullum and 
Azatobactor in their rhizosphere which contribute to 
nitrogen fixation and support growth at low nitrogen 
contents of the soil. The direct effects of C 0 2 on 
nitrogen fixation could be advantageous in grass and 
legume pastures. 
However, increased temperature 
can reduce nitrogen fixation and also increase the 
energy cost of nitrogen fixation. At what tempera-
ture the beneficial effects of C 0 2 would be counter-
acted is difficult to predict, but the existing strains of 
Rhizobium which are adaptable at low temperature 
may require replacement for deriving the potential 
benefits of enhance C 0 2 . This would also apply to 
many tree species which fix nitrogen through rhizo-
bial and non-rhizobial symbiosis. However, limiting 
water conditions could impair these effects. More 
research in this important area is needed. 
2-6 
vii) Effects of increases in other greenhouse gases 
The other G H G contributing to the greenhouse 
effect are methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 20), tro-
pospheric ozone (0 3) and halocarbons (CFCs). Car-
bon monoxide is also involved as it exerts strong 
control over the chemistry of the troposphere and 
lower stratosphere and affects the concentration of 
the G H G . 
Methane and nitrous oxide are both products of 
agricultural systems, the former from anaerobic 
respiration in rice paddies and animal rumens, and 
the latter from denitrification (oxidation) of soil 
nitrate by bacterial respiration. However, there is 
no evidence that atmospheric concentrations of these 
gases will lead to direct effects on animals or plants. 
Other pollutant oxides of nitrogen (NO and N 0 2 
occur at lower concentrations and can cause crop 
damage at concentrations in the ppb range such as 
typically arise from local sources of fossil fuel 
combustion. 
Carbon monoxide does not affect plants, and a 
major sink for carbon monoxide produced by fossil 
fuel burning is soil uptake and microbial oxidation. 
In humans and presumably in other mammals used 
in agriculture the concentrations at which health is 
affected start at 10-50 ppm, whereas atmospheric 
concentrations are in the range of 100 ppb, ie 
100-500 times lower (Wellburn, 1988). 
Halocarbons have no direct effects on plants or 
animals at atmospheric concentrations. 
Ozone is a potent inhibitor of plant growth and has 
effects on animal health. The US Health Standard 
requires that an hourly mean of 120 ppb should not 
be exceeded more than once a year. 
In practice 
during photochemical smog episodes in industrial 
areas, concentrations exceed these levels frequently, 
for several days at a time. However, these are local 
episodes related to strong local sources of pollutants 
and are not global means. 
Surface monitoring 
stations suggest annual average background concen-
trations of 15-30 ppb (Penkett, 1988) in the tropo-
sphere. A large amount of experimental evidence 
has shown that filtering air of normal pollutant 
concentrations of 0 3 can enhance crop growth. For 
example, removal of mean seasonal concentrations 
of 80 ppb in the southeast US can enhance crop 
yield by 10-50% (Heck et al., 1982). Any further 
increases in troposphere 0 3 will there-fore add to 
this damage. 
2.6.3 Effects of changes in climate 
i) Introduction 
This section discusses those effects on agriculture 
that may occur as a result of GHG-induced changes 
of climate. Consideration is given, in turn, to (i) 
effects on agroclimate, (ii) effects on pests and 
diseases, (iii) effects on other aspects of the 
agricultural environment such as soils, (iv) effects on 
crop yields and livestock and (v) 
effects on 
agricultural production. 
ii) Effects on agroclimate 
Shifts of thermal limits to cropping 
Increases in 
temperature can be expected to lengthen the grow-
ing season in areas where agricultural potential is 
currently limited by insufficient warmth, resulting in 
a poleward shift of thermal limits of agriculture. 
The consequent extension of potential will be most 
pronounced in the northern hemisphere because of 
the greater extent here of temperate agriculture at 
higher latitudes. 
An indication of the extent of shift is given by the 
relocation of critical levels of effective temperature 
sums (accumulated temperatures) for cropping in 
northern regions. Taking 1300 day-degrees (above 
a base of 5°C as the southern limit of the boreal 
zone, and thus as a proxy northern limit of arable 
agriculture, this limit shifts about 500-1000 km 
northwards under the 2 x C 0 2 equilibrium climate 
simulated by the GISS G C M (Kauppi and Posch, 
1988). 
There may, however, be important regional varia-
tions in our ability to exploit this shift. The greater 
potential for exploitation of northern soils in Siberia 
than on the Canadian Shield, may mean relatively 
greater increases in potential in northern Asia than 
in northern North America (Jager, 1988). 
A number of estimations have been made concern-
ing the northward shift in productive potential in 
mid-latitude northern hemisphere countries. These 
relate to changes in the climatic limits for specific 
crops under a variety of climatic scenarios, and are 
therefore not readily compatible (Newman, 1980; 
Biasing and Solomon, 1983; Williams and Oakes, 
1978; Parry and Carter, 1988; Parry et al., 1989). 
They suggest, however, that a 1°C increase in mean 
annual temperature would tend to advance the 
thermal limit of cereal cropping in the mid-latitude 
northern hemisphere by about 150-200 km; and to 
raise the altitudinal limit to arable agriculture by 
about 150-200 m. 
2-7 
While warming may extend the margin of potential 
cropping and grazing in mid-latitude regions, it may 
reduce yield potential in the core areas of current 
production, because higher temperatures encourage 
more rapid maturation of plants and shorten the 
period of grain filling. 
An important additional affect of warming, especially 
in temperate and mid-latitudes, is likely to be the 
reduction of winter chilling (vernalisation). Many 
temperate crops require a period of low tempera-
tures in winter to either initiate or accelerate the 
flowering process. Low vernalisation results in low 
flower bud initiation and, ultimately, reduced yields. 
A 1°C warming would reduce effective winter 
chilling by between 10% and 30%, thus contributing 
to poleward shift of temperate crops (Salinger, 
1989). 
Increases in temperature are also likely to affect the 
crop calendar in low-latitude regions, particularly 
where more than one crop is harvested each year. 
For example, in Sri Lanka and Thailand a 1°C 
warming would probably require a substantial 
rearrangement of the current crop calendar which is 
finely tuned to present climatic conditions. (Kaida 
and Surareks, 1984; Yoshino, 1984). 
Shifts of moisture limits to agriculture There is much 
less certainty about GHG-induced changes in rainfall 
than there is about temperature - not only concern-
ing the magnitude of change, but also its spatial 
pattern and its distribution through the year. For 
this reason it is difficult to identify possible rainfall-
induced shifts in the climatic limits to agriculture. 
This is particularly so because relatively small 
changes in the seasonal distribution of rainfall can 
have disproportionately large effects on the viability 
of agriculture in tropical areas, largely through 
changes in growing period when moisture is suffi-
cient and thus through the timing of critical episodes 
such as planting etc. 
However, regions where 
changes in average rainfall may have the most 
pronounced effect have been outlined in Section 2 
(above). 
Regions affected by drought, heat stress and other 
extremes Probably most important for agriculture, 
but about which least is known, are the possible 
changes in measures of climatic variability, such as 
the magnitude and frequency of drought, storms, 
heatwaves and severe frosts. 
Some modelling 
evidence suggests that hurricane intensities will 
increase with climatic warming (Emanuel, 1987). 
This has important implications for agriculture in 
low latitudes, particularly in coastal regions. 
Since crop yields often exhibit a non-linear response 
to heat or cold stress, changes in the probability of 
extreme temperature events can be significant 
(Mearns et al., 1984; Parry, 1976). In addition, even 
assuming no change in the standard deviation of 
temperature maxima and minima, we should note 
that the frequency of hot and cold days can be 
markedly altered by changes in mean monthly 
temperature. To illustrate, under the GISS 2 x C 0 2 
scenario the number of days in which temperatures 
would fall below freezing would decrease from 39 to 
20 in Atlanta, Georgia (US), while the number of 
days above 90°F would increase from 17 to 53 
(EPA, 1989). The frequency and extent of area over 
which losses of agricultural output could result from 
heat stress, particularly in tropical regions, is there-
fore likely to increase significantly. Unfortunately, 
no studies have yet been made of this. The appar-
ently small increases in mean annual temperatures 
in tropical regions (ca I
o to 2°C under a 2 x C 0 2 
climate) could sufficiently increase heat stress on 
temperate crops such as wheat that these are no 
longer suited to such areas. 
Important wheat-
producing areas such as Northern India could be 
affected in this way. 
There is a distinct possibility that, as a result of high 
rates of evapotranspiration, some regions in the 
tropics and subtropics could be characterised by a 
higher frequency of drought, or a similar frequency 
of more intense drought than at present. 
Current 
uncertainties about how regional patterns of rainfall 
will alter, mean that no useful prediction of this can 
at present be made. However, it is clear in some 
regions that relatively small decreases in water 
availability can readily produce drought conditions. 
In India, for example, lower-than-average rainfall in 
1987 reduced food grains production from 152 mt to 
134 mt, lowering food buffer stocks from 23 to 9 mt. 
Changes in the risk and intensity of drought, espe-
cially in currently drought-prone regions, represent 
potentially the most serious impact of climatic 
change on agriculture both at the global and the 
regional level. 
Hi) 
Effects on the distribution of agricultural pests 
and diseases 
Studies suggest that temperature increases may 
extend the geographic range of some insect pests 
currently limited by temperature (EPA, 1989; Hill 
and Dymock, 1989). 
As with crops, such effects 
would be greatest at higher latitudes. The number 
of generations per year produced by multivoltine 
pests (such as the European red mite and two-
spotted mite in New Zealand) would increase, with 
earlier establishment of pest populations in the 
growing season and increased abundance during 
2-8 
more susceptible stages of growth (Salinger, person-
al communication, 1989b). An important unknown, 
however, is the effect that changes in precipitation 
amount and air humidity may have on the insect 
pests themselves and on their predators, parasites 
and diseases. 
Climatic change may significantly 
influence interspecific interactions between pests and 
their predators and parasites. 
Under a 2 x C 0 2 climate there would be an increase 
in the over-wintering range and population density 
of a number of important agricultural pests in the 
US, such as the potato leafhopper which is a serious 
pest of soybeans and other crops (EPA, 1989). 
Assuming planting dates did not change, warmer 
temperatures would lead to invasions earlier in the 
growing season and probably lead to greater damage 
to crops. In the US Grain Belt increased damage to 
soy-beans is also expected due to earlier infestation 
by the corn earworm. 
Examination of the effect of climatic warming on the 
distribution of livestock diseases suggests that those 
at present limited to tropical countries, such as Rift 
Valley fever and African swine fever, may spread, 
causing serious economic losses (EPA, 1989). The 
geographic distribution and activities of other 
diseases already important in the US may also 
expand. The horn fly, which currently causes losses 
of $730.3 million in the US beef and dairy cattle 
industries might extend its range under a warmer 
climate leading to reduced gain in beef cattle and a 
significant reduction in milk production (Drummond, 
1987; E P A , 1989). In the 1960s and 1970s a combi-
nation of the increased resistance of ticks to insecti-
cides and the high costs of dipping threatened the 
profitability of the Australian beef industry. Pro-
longed summer rainfall and an extended develop-
mental season, or conversely prolonged dryness 
leading to increased nutritional stress in the host, 
are likely to cause heavy infestations (Sutherest, 
1987). If such climatic conditions were to prevail in 
the future it is likely that ticks could become an 
increasing problem. 
'New* or migrant pests may become established as 
climatic conditions become more favourable for 
them. In New Zealand there is the possibility of 
incipient swarming of locusts now developing in the 
Northland (Messenger, 1988) which may be an 
indication of climatic changes (Hill and Dymock, 
1989). 
Indeed favourable climatic conditions in 
1986-88 led to locust swarms reaching new limits in 
southern Europe (Pedgley, 1989). 
In temperate regions, where insect pests and 
diseases are not generally serious at present, damage 
is likely to increase under warmer conditions. In 
Iceland, for example, potato blight currently does 
little damage to potato crops, unlike in warmer 
regions, being limited by the low summer tempera-
tures. However, under a 2 x C O z climate that may 
be 4°C warmer than at present, crop losses to 
disease may increase to 15% (Bergthorsson et al., 
1988). 
Most agricultural diseases have greater potential to 
reach severe 
levels under warmer conditions. 
Fungal and bacterial pathogens are also likely to 
increase in severity in areas where precipitation 
increases (Beresford and Fullerton, 1989). Under 
warmer and more humid conditions cereals would 
be more prone to diseases such as Septoria. Also, 
increases in population levels of disease vectors may 
well lead to increased epidemics of the diseases they 
carry. An example would be increases in infesta-
tions of the Bird Cherry aphid (Rhopalosiphum 
padi) or Grain aphid (Sitobian avenae) leading to 
increased incidence of Barley Yellow Dwarf virus in 
cereals. 
iv) Indirect effects on agriculture through effects on 
other environmental processes 
There are numerous other paths by which changes 
in climate can have an indirect but important effect 
on agriculture, largely through concurrent effects on 
other physical systems. 
Probably the most important, but about which we 
currently know little, is the effect on water resources 
for irrigation, particularly through changes in snow 
fall, spring snowmelt and groundwater recharge. In 
mid-latitude, mid-continental areas there are indica-
tions that reduced amounts of rainfall and snow fall 
could significantly reduce rates of groundwater 
recharge thus increasing rates of groundwater 
depletion. This could be the case, for example, with 
the Ogallala aquifer in the central US (EPA, 1989). 
In tropical regions, particularly areas of monsoon 
rainfall, increased intensity of rainfall could result in 
more runoff, but no increase in percolation or less 
available water in spite of increases in total rainfall 
amount. 
A similar effect could occur in some 
currently maritime mid-latitude regions, such as 
northwest Europe, where higher temperatures may 
result in a larger proportion of the total rainfall 
occurring from convective thunderstorms, with 
consequent increased intensity of rainfall, increased 
runoff and reduced percolation (Beran and Arnell, 
1989). 
Changes in the intensity of rainfall may affect rates 
of soil erosion and desertification. 
In addition, 
higher rates of évapotranspiration could, in some 
regions, lead to more frequent spells during which 
2-9 
topsoils are dry and therefore prone to erosion by 
wind. In Saskatchewan, for example, the frequency 
of moderate and extreme droughts is estimated to 
increase threefold under the GISS 2 x C 0 2 scenario, 
with significant changes in the potential for wind 
erosion (Williams et al., 1988). 
In major parts of the world where rain-fed agricul-
ture is practised, the premium on soils with a large 
available water capacity may increase, because of the 
expected change to higher ET rates and greater 
variability in rainfall. This emphasises the need for 
sound land husbandry practices incorporating effec-
tive soil conservation. 
A third, and more long-term, consequence of chan-
ges in rainfall may be changes in soil fertility resul-
ting from changes in soil base status. 
In regions 
where rainfall increases, there may be an increased 
tendency for soil leaching and consequent reductions 
of fertility. For example, it has been estimated that 
soil fertility in the Leningrad region of the USSR 
could fall by more than 20% by the year 2035 as a 
result of rainfall increases and in spite of assumed 
trended increases in fertiliser application (Pitovranov 
et al., 1988a). 
v) 
Potential effects on crop yields and livestock 
productivity 
The following is a summary of current estimations, 
both published and unpublished, of the potential 
effects of climate change on crop and livestock 
productivity for different regions of the world. It 
should be emphasised that such potential effects are 
those estimated assuming present-day management 
and technology. They are not the estimated actual 
effects, which depend on how farmers and govern-
ments respond to the altered potential through 
changes in management and technology. 
Unless otherwise stated the following estimates are 
for climates described by 2 x C 0 2 G C M experi-
ments. Also, unless otherwise stated, they are based 
on quantitative results from experiments with crop 
response models, not qualitative estimations derived 
from expert judgment. 
North America 
US: warming of 3.8° to 6.3°C, with soil moisture 
reduced by 10% (which is consistent with the GISS 
and G F D L 2 x C 0 2 climate) is estimated to de-
crease potential yields of maize allowing for the 
limited beneficial fertilising effect of enhanced C 0 2 
on this C4 plant, by about 4-17% in California, 16 to 
25% on the Great Plains (assuming irrigation), and 
by 5-14% in the southeast (also assuming irrigation) 
(EPA, 1989). In the Great Lakes region there could 
be a small increase in potential yields, depending on 
available moisture. Potential wheat yields decrease 
in the southern and central Great Plains, even with 
the beneficial direct effects of enhanced C 0 2 . Some 
northward shift of productive potential is evident. 
On average, over the region, dryland wheat yields 
decrease by 2-3%, and irrigated yields increase by 5 
to 15% (EPA, 1989). Dryland soybean yields show 
a wide range of decreases from -3% in the Great 
Lakes region to between -24% to -72% in the 
southeast. 
Irrigation could offset much of these 
potential losses. 
Canada: 
a warming of 3°-4°C, accompanied by 
reduced soil moisture consistent with the GISS 2 x 
C 0 2 climate, is estimated to decrease yields of 
spring wheat nationally by about 19%, with regional 
variations from ca 18% in Saskatchewan, to ca 10% 
in Manitoba, to a small increase near the current 
northern limit of production (Williams et al.,1988; 
Smit, 1989). An expansion of wheat into the Peace 
River District might be possible, though elsewhere 
soils and terrain would continue to limit agriculture. 
Winter wheat would probably be better able to 
withstand an increased frequency of spring and early 
summer drought and might expand its area at the 
expense of spring varieties (though its yield is also 
expected to decline by about 4%). Yields of grain 
corn, barley, soybeans and hay are expected to 
decline in all but the northern part of Ontario (Smit, 
1989). There would also be a decrease in yields of 
potatoes and forage crops in most regions of 
Canada. 
Central and South America 
Mexico and Central America: a warming of 3.3° to 
5.4°C (consistent with 2 X C 0 2 G C M projections) 
combined with either increases or decreases in 
rainfall (-23% to +3% depending on G C M ) are 
likely to produce warmer, drier conditions and 
reductions in soil moisture of 10-20%. This could 
result in decreases in yields of maize and other rain-
fed crops (of 5% to 25%), and, combined with heat 
stress and irrigation water scarcity, decreases in 
yields of major irrigated crops such as wheat (-
Liverman, personal communication, 1990). If there 
were increases in rainfall, particularly rainfall in-
tensity, this could lead to enhanced rates of soil 
erosion and consequent long-term loss of productive 
potential (Ramirez, personal communication, 1989). 
Brazil: in the most vulnerable region of Brazil, the 
northeast, much depends on whether increases in 
precipitation are sufficient to compensate for in-
creased potential évapotranspiration due to higher 
temperatures. An insufficient increase in rainfall is 
likely to lead to a serious decline in yield potential. 
For example, short-term rainfall decreases in the El 
2-10 
Nino years 1982-83 reduced total agricultural pro-
duction in northeast Brazil by almost a quarter 
(Magalhaes, et el., 1988). 
More precipitation in the centre-west would prob-
ably increase productivity in soybeans and, in the 
south, of wheat. A reduction in the frequency of 
frosts would decrease the risks in citrus and coffee 
production in the south (Magalhaes, personal com-
munication, 1989). 
Argentina, Chile and north Andean region: accord-
ing to 2 x C 0 2 G C M experiments, rainfall is project-
ed to increase in currently moist areas and decrease 
in the semi-arid areas in the rain shadow of the 
Andes. 
Increases of 2°-4°C would increase évapotran-
spiration by at least 10%, possibly leading to a 
drying of the Pampas. Cattle raising might become 
less productive (Salinger, 1989a). 
In the more 
maritime climate of Chile, increased winter precipi-
tation could counter the small increases in évapo-
transpiration more than in Argentina. Grass pro-
duction and cattle raising would probably stand to 
gain most in the centre and south. At high levels in 
the Andes, where cultivation limits are constrained 
by winter minimum temperatures, a 1°C warming 
would raise limits by ca 200 m (3800 m to 4000 m in 
central Ecuador) (Bravo et al., 1988). Increases in 
rainfall would probably lead to decreases in yields of 
barley but increases in those of potatoes. 
Europe 
Northern Europe: 
agriculture in Fennoscandia 
stands to gain from global warming more than 
perhaps any other region of the world. For exam-
ple, in Finland, where the equilibrium 2 x C 0 2 
climate is projected to be ca 4°C warmer and also 
wetter than at present, yields of adapted cultivars of 
spring wheat are estimated to increase by about 10% 
in the south, up to 20% in central Finland, and more 
near the current northern limit of wheat. Yields of 
barley and oats are raised by 9-18%, depending on 
the region in Finland (Kettunen et al., 1988). In 
Iceland the carrying capacity of improved grassland 
for sheep is estimated to increase by about two-and-
a-half times, and on unimproved rangeland by more 
than a half (Bergthorsson et al., 1988). 
Northwest Europe: in the more maritime areas of 
this region (eg Ireland, U K , northern France, 
Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark) yields of indeter-
minate crops such as grass and potatoes would tend 
to increase under higher growing season tempera-
tures, assuming sufficient increases in precipitation 
to counter higher rates of évapotranspiration. To 
illustrate, under a warming of ca 3°-4°C, grass yields 
in the Netherlands may increase by about 10% 
(Klijn et al., 1987) and potato yields in the UK by 
50-75% (Squire and Unsworth, 1988). In addition, 
some crops which are now barely profitable to grow 
because of inadequate summer warmth (such as 
grain maize in the southern U K ) may extend their 
profitable range several hundred kilometres further 
north (Parry et al., 1989). The yields of determinate 
crops such as wheat would, however, decrease with 
increasing temperatures - though in C3 crops these 
would be partly compensated by the direct effect of 
enhanced C O z . In the UK it is estimated that the 
beneficial direct effect of doubled ambient atmos-
pheric C 0 2 on yields of winter wheat would be 
completely offset by the adverse effect of a mean 
annual temperature increase greater than 4.5 °C 
(Squire and Unsworth, 1988). 
Southern Europe: 
in the Mediterranean region 
quite substantial decreases in productive potential 
could occur if the G C M s are correct in predicting 
decreases in soil moisture in the summer, and 
possibly also in the winter months. Under a warm-
ing of 4°C and with annual rainfall reduced by 
> 10% (the B M O 2 x C 0 2 climate), biomass poten-
tial in Italy and Greece is projected to decrease by 
5% and 36% respectively (Santer, 1985). In general 
there is a quite striking contrast between the in-
creases in biomass potential in northern Europe and 
decreases in southern Europe that are implied by 
current G C M projections of GHG-induced changes 
in temperature and rainfall. This suggests an im-
portant northward shift of the balance of agricultural 
potential in the European Community. 
Alpine Europe: in the European Alps a 1°C warm-
ing can be expected to raise climatic limits to culti-
vation by ca 150 m, (Balteanu et al., 1987) and a 
4°C warming of the order projected for a doubling 
of atmospheric C 0 2 , would probably raise climatic 
zones in the Alps by 450-650 m, which would then 
be similar to the levels of those today in the 
Pyrenees which lie 300 km south of the Alps 
(Balteanu et al., 1987). 
USSR and mid latitudes, Northern Hemisphere: 
Previous studies using the 2 x C 0 2 GISS scenario 
assessed impacts on winter wheat, maize, rye, barley, 
oats, potatoes and green vegetables (Pitovranov et 
al., 1988a; Pitovranov et al., 1988b), but the most 
detailed current assessment is based on palaeo-
climatic analogs. 
The impact on potential crop productivity of three 
palaeoclimatic 
scenarios 
(Holocene 
Optimum, 
Eemian Interglacial, and Pliocene Optimum) was 
gauged including estimates of the direct effect of 
increased C 0 2 concentration (Koval et al., 1983; 
2-11 
Mendzhulin et al., 1987; Mendzhulin, personal 
communication, 1989). The results of these studies 
for the mid latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere 
indicate that with 1°C of warming (ca 2000) there 
would be regional differences in moisture conditions, 
leading to a decrease in potential productivity in the 
drier parts of the mid-latitudes. 
This decrease in 
potential productivity may well be within the current 
limits of agricultural adaptation to climate variations. 
The Eemian and Pliocene palaeoanalog studies 
indicate improved moisture conditions which to-
gether with the beneficial effects of C 0 2 enhance-
ment were estimated to result in increased potential 
productivity of C3 crops. 
A further set of calculations was made based on an 
empirical analysis of historical yield data to estimate 
the year-to-year variability of wheat yields for the 
three palaeoanalogs (Mendzhulin et al., 1985,1987), 
This study showed that in the Holocene analog 
(through the early part of the next century) a small 
increase in yield variability may occur in a number 
of mid-latitude regions. With global warming of 
1°C yield variability for less favourable North 
American grain regions was estimated to be equiva-
lent to the present-day yield variability of the most 
favourable grain region of the USSR (the Krasnodar 
region). With further warming corresponding to the 
Eemian Interglacial (+2°C by 2030) and subse-
quently the Pliocene Optimum ( + 3° to 4°C by late 
in the 21st century) the year-to-year yield variability 
was estimated to decrease in all mid-latitude grain 
regions of the Northern Hemisphere. 
A regional study by Abashina and Sirotenko (1986) 
and Sirotenko et al. (1984 and in press) for each 
administrative unit of the European USSR used a 
dynamic model of productivity for various crops 
(Sirotenko, 1981). 
These studies considered the 
changes in surface biomass and the yield of some C3 
grain crops for several levels of soil fertility for the 
Holocene and Eemian scenarios. For warming up 
to 1°C (up to 2000) there were regional variations in 
agroclimatic potential: a decrease of 5-10% was 
estimated for the steppe and forest-steppe zones of 
the USSR and an increase of up to 8% was found 
for the non-chernozem zone. With further warming, 
agroclimatic potential was estimated to increase by 
5-10% in all but two regions of the European USSR 
for a warming of 1°C (after 2000) and by 10-20% 
with warming of 2°C (ca 2030). 
Middle East 
Few estimations of possible impacts have been 
completed for this region. 
Projected changes in-
clude an increase in temperature of ca 3.5 °C and 
possible decreases in rainfall (of perhaps 0.5 mm per 
day, although this is very uncertain). Evidence from 
experiments in Israel indicate that under these 
changes of climate wheat yields would be reduced by 
up to 40% (Van Diepen et al., 1987). 
Smaller increases in temperature (eg of 1°C) are 
estimated to decrease barley yield by ca 5% and any 
corresponding reduction in rainfall could result in 
decreases in excess of 20% without additional 
irrigation (evidence for Cyprus from Pashiardis and 
Michaelides, 1989). 
Africa 
Maghreb: assuming an increase in annual tempera-
ture of 1.5 °C, évapotranspiration would increase by 
more than 10%, leading (without) any change in 
rainfall) to a decrease in river flow of more than 
10% (Salinger et al., 1989a). The likelihood is that 
the irrigable area will contract, requiring a shift from 
arable farming to cattle ranching. 
West Africa and northeast Africa: a northward shift 
of the ITCZ, which is implied by G H G warming, is 
expected to increase summer precipitation (Working 
Group I Report). 
However, evaporation also increases, so that there 
are both increases and decreases of crop-water 
availability over the region, and it is at present 
uncertain how these differences will be geographi-
cally distributed. 
Where precipitation exceeds 
évapotranspiration this could reduce current con-
straints on agriculture by increasing crop-water 
availability. It could also be expected, however, to 
encourage the northward extension of locusts and 
other pests (Boko, 1988). 
Where increases in precipitation were insufficient to 
compensate for increases in évapotranspiration 
under high temperatures, this would reduce crop-
water availability. 
Although no specific impact 
assessments have yet been completed for this region, 
studies of analogous individual dry years in Benin 
and Nigeria such as those of 1973 and 1978, imply 
substantial reductions in agricultural output (Boko, 
1988; Oguntoyinbo, personal communication, 1989). 
Any decreases in rainfall or its concentration into a 
shorter rainy period could reduce yields of maize 
and the carrying capacity of rangeland for cattle. 
Erosion and flooding could become more trouble-
some in mountain regions such as in Ethiopia 
(Haile, 1989) 
East Africa and southern Africa: estimated increas-
es in temperature for an equivalent doubling of 
atmospheric C 0 2 are around 1.5°C to 3.5°C for this 
region, depending on latitude. This would lead to 
rates of évapotranspiration being increased by ca 5% 
2-12 
to 15% (Schulze, personal communication, 1989). 
Much depends on changes in precipitation, which 
would profoundly affect maize yields and grass 
growth (and thus carrying capacity) of rangelands. 
In Kenya, the driest 10% of years occurring at 
present lead to reductions of maize yield by ca 30% 
to 70% and of forage yield by 15-60% (Akong'a et 
al., 1988). Any changes in the frequency of such 
years would clearly substantially affect the average 
output of agriculture in the region. 
Improved 
knowledge of possible GHG-induced changes in the 
probability distribution of rainfall in this and other 
semi-arid regions is thus a matter demanding a high 
priority in future research. 
Asia 
China: 
there are indications that global warming 
would lead to a weaker winter but stronger summer 
monsoon. Rainfall receipt could thus increase in 
already rainy areas, and would extend further west-
ward and northward than at present. If this were to 
occur then the risk of flooding in southern China, 
which is already serious in wet years, might be 
significantly increased. Under a 1°C warming and 
with precipitation increases of 100 mm yields of rice, 
maize and wheat are estimated to increase by about 
10% overall nationally, though there may be modest 
decreases in the north and east (Zhang, 1989). 
Without increases in available moisture, however, 
maize yields in the eastern and central regions 
decrease on average by 3% per 1°C increase 
(Terjung et al., 1984). 
India: in Northern India a temperature increase of 
0.5°C is estimated to reduce wheat yields by about 
10% (Sinha, personal communication, 1989). Simi-
lar increases in central India would probably lead to 
larger percentage reductions from a lower base 
yield. However, given sufficient increases in rainfall, 
rice yields may increase perhaps ca 7% with +2.5°C 
and +0.75 mm rainfall per day (Van Diepen et al., 
1987). The fertilising effect of C O z could enhance 
this increase to over 20%. Sorghum yields in central 
southern India are estimated to decrease in response 
to higher temperatures during the rainy season, 
owing to premature development and reduced grain 
filling (Jodha et al., 1988). During the post rainy 
season, however, when moisture is currently in short 
supply, increases in temperatures may lead to 
increases in yield because the period of moisture 
stress would be reduced by a shortened growing 
period. 
SE Asia: 
intensification of the SE Asia monsoon 
would tend to lead to increased summer but reduced 
winter rainfall. Preliminary indications are that with 
rainfall changes of +5% (summer) and -11.4% 
(winter) (which equate to a GISS 2 x C 0 2 climate), 
irrigation requirements in northern Thailand would 
decrease by ca 3% in summer and increase by ca 
30% in winter (Panturat and Eddy, 1989). Resulting 
potential rice yields would decrease by 1-7%, al-
though the direct C 0 2 effect could enable increases 
of 4-13%. Increases in temperature expected under 
an equilibrium 2 x C 0 2 climate are +0.3° to +0.5°, 
which could lead to reduced rice and maize yields 
(due to more rapid crop growth) and to an increase 
in losses to pests (Nguyen Huu Ninh, personal 
communication, 
1989). 
Experiments 
in 
the 
Philippines indicate that increased summer rainfall, 
with small increases in temperature combined with 
the effect of elevated C 0 2 could raise rice yields by 
up to 30% (Van Diepen et al., 1987). 
Japan: 
under a warming of 3°-3.5°C and a 5% 
increase in annual precipitation (the GISS 2 x C 0 2 
climate), rice yields are expected to increase in the 
north (Hokkaido) by ca 5%, and in the north-central 
region (Tohoku) by ca 2%, if appropriate techno-
logical adjustments are made (Yoshino et al., 1988). 
The average increase for the country overall is ca 
2-5%. Cultivation limits for rice would rise about 
500 m and advance ca 100 km north in Hokkaido. 
Yields of maize and soybeans are both estimated to 
increase by about 4%. Sugarcane yields in the most 
southern part of Japan could decrease if rainfall was 
reduced. 
The northern economic limit of citrus 
fruits would shift from southern Japan to northern 
Honshu Island (Yoshino, personal communication, 
1989). Net primary productivity of natural vegeta-
tion is expected to increase by ca 15% in the north, 
ca 7% in the centre and south of Japan (Yoshino et 
al., 1988). 
Oceania 
New Zealand: grassland production is estimated to 
increase by 6%, 9% and 18% under a 1°, 2° and 
3°C warming. There may be a decrease in the area 
under wheat, barley and oats and an increase in the 
area under maize and vegetables (though a decrease 
of the latter in North Island - Salinger et al., 1989b). 
Maize yields would increase, as would those of 
potatoes and other vegetables (except in North 
Island). The area under pipfruit would shift further 
southwards in South Island; berry fruit would shift 
south to South Island. Kiwi fruit yields may increase 
15-20%, but the major growing areas may also shift 
south, as would viticulture. 
Australia: there are indications that G H G forcing 
will lead to increases in summer rainfall where there 
is at present a summer rainfall maximum, and more 
uncertainly to decreases in winter rainfall where 
there is at present a winter rainfall maximum 
(Pittock, 1989). Under a 40% increase in summer 
2-13 
rainfall and 20% decrease in winter rainfall, and 
with increases in mean annual temperature of 1°C 
at 10°S, 2°C at 20°S, 3°C at 30°S and 4°C at 40°S, 
net primary productivity increases by about 30% at 
10-20°S, 25% at 20-30°S and 10-15% at 30-40°S 
(Pittock and Nix, 1986). There would be increases 
in wheat yields in the eastern wheatbelt, but a 
decrease in Western Australia (Pittock, personal 
communication, 1989). Present marginal areas of 
wheat production, 
particularly in southwestern 
Western Australia, northwestern Victoria and 
western South Australia could decrease. 
Experi-
mental work suggests that spring wheat yields could 
increase by about 20% and 27% under a 2°C and 
3°C warming respectively, provided there was 
sufficient water for full irrigation. Dryland wheat 
yields would decrease unless there occurred a sub-
stantial increase in rainfall (Gifford, 1988). 
The 
area under maize and sorghum may increase at the 
expense of wheat, barley and oats, particularly in 
northern New South Wales. 
There would be an 
increase in yields of sugarcane and tropical fruits, 
with a tendency for a southward shift of these from 
Queensland 
into northern 
New South Wales 
(Pittock, personal communication, 1989; Linforth, 
personal communication, 1989). However, yields of 
temperate fruits (apples, pears etc) would decline 
and areas of production would be pushed into 
southern Victoria and Tasmania (Pittock, personal 
communication, 1989). 
Increased grass growth 
would allow greater cattle production, but problems 
of heat stress in sheep would increase. Cattle might 
therefore increase their range at the expense of 
sheep (Pittock, personal communication, 1989). 
Potential benefits from increased grass growth will 
unfortunately more than likely be offset by the poor 
nutritive value of tropical as compared with 
temperate species. This, together with (a) loss of 
the Mediterranean-type climatic zones of Victoria 
and Western Australia, which are the prime lamb 
and wool producing areas, and (b) increased heat 
stress of both sheep and cattle, means that livestock 
productivity will very probably decrease. 
Pacific Islands: 
the most important impacts on 
agriculture in this region stem from rises in sea-
level. 
In Fiji, for example, islands such as Moala 
and Vatulele would lose 8.8% and 6.2% respectively 
of the land area with a 1.5 m rise in sea-level 
(though this is not currently estimated to occur 
before 2100). As a consequence, there could be a 
decrease in the productive potential for subsistence 
crops, such as yams, and for commercial crops, 
particularly those such as copra for which production 
is concentrated on the coastal fringe (Nunn, 1988; 
New Zealand Intelligence Assessments Committee, 
1988). Any increases in frequency of tropical storms 
could have a detrimental effect on copra production. 
vi) Higher order effects on economy and society 
The various effects that climatic changes could have 
on crop yields and the carrying capacity of grassland 
can, through a web of reinforcing and countervailing 
circumstances, have a number of higher order effects 
on (for example) farm incomes, rural employment, 
national food production, national food security and 
exports. 
The latter, in turn, may influence the 
pattern of international food trade and food prices. 
This section summarises the range of possible higher 
order effects and illustrates these by reference to 
results from recent impact assessments. It does not 
purport to be a comprehensive statement of such 
effects, which are bound to be specific to the local 
economic and political environment, to the technical 
and management characteristics of particular farm-
ing types, and to the rates and magnitudes of 
climatic change - all of which will vary from region 
to region. Moreover, the few studies thus far com-
pleted are limited to the developed countries and it 
is important to emphasise that the magnitude of 
these higher order effects will depend greatly on the 
technical adjustments and policy responses to climat-
ic changes. The data presented below are therefore 
simply illustrative of the type of possible effects 
rather than of their specific nature. 
Effects on production costs Some changes in costs of 
inputs can be expected to flow directly from altered 
management requirements. In the US, for example, 
irrigation requirements have been estimated to 
increase by 20-25% in the southern Great Plains and 
Corn Belt under a warming of 4.5°C and with 
precipitation reduced by about 12.5% (95 mm), at a 
time when groundwater depiction is likely to accel-
erate as a result of reduced recharge rates from 
snowmelt in the Rocky Mts (EPA, 1989). The costs 
of operations to reduce pest damage may also alter 
(EPA, 1989). 
In centrally planned economies, where production 
targets tend to be fixed and where inputs are often 
adjusted to counter climate-related variations of 
yield, it is possible to estimate the extent to which 
production costs may alter in relation to altered 
yield potential. In the Central (Moscow) Region of 
the USSR, for example, a 1°C temperature increase 
may reduce production costs of winter wheat and 
corn by 22% and 6%, respectively, while increasing 
production costs of cool-summer crops such as 
barley, oats and potatoes (Parry and Carter, 1988; 
Pitovranov et al., 1988a). 
Other, possibly more significant, cost increases may 
derive from changes in prices of agricultural inputs 
due to changes in government policy, particularly 
those policies that may be designed to mitigate the 
2-14 
greenhouse effect (for instance, by increasing energy 
and fertiliser prices). These indirect effects are con-
sidered in Working Group III Report. 
Effects on net returns, profitability and farm incomes 
These will depend, among other things, on changes 
in costs of inputs and the prices of outputs (and no 
adequate estimation of these is currently feasible). 
Recent regional impact assessments have considered 
price responses only within a national, rather than 
international, context (cf E P A , 1989). 
Assuming, unrealistically, that prices and input costs 
remain constant, then changes in farm profitability 
and incomes are estimated to alter in sympathy with 
changes in yield potential. 
To illustrate, in 
Saskatchewan (Canada) where spring wheat yields 
are estimated to decrease by 18% under a warming 
of 3°-4°C with reduced soil moisture and where 
yields of other cereals and oilseed are assumed to 
decline by the same proportion, farm incomes are 
projected to decline by 7% and farm expenditures 
on goods from other sectors by ca 0.5% (Williams et 
al., 1988). 
In contrast, in southern Finland, in-
creased yield potential is estimated to raise net 
returns to barley cultivation by about three-quarters 
(Kettunen et al., 1988). It should be emphasised, 
however, that these assessments take no account of 
changes in the worldwide supply, demand and price 
of agricultural products. 
Effects on rural employment, society and settlement 
Very little attention has been given to these, and 
such current estimates as exist are based on present-
day statistical relationships with farm income, which 
are likely to change in the future. For example, in 
Saskatchewan, the reduced farm incomes described 
above are projected to lead to reductions of 0.8% 
and 0.5% in agricultural and provincial employment 
respectively (Williams et al., 1988). 
Effects on regional and national production 
These 
are strongly dependent on the many adjustments in 
agricultural technology and management that un-
doubtedly will occur in response to any climate 
change. So numerous and varied are these adjust-
ments likely to be, however, that it is extraordinarily 
difficult to evaluate their ultimate effect on aggre-
gate production. 
In this part of the report we 
consider the effects on production that are likely to 
stem directly from changes in yield, unmodified by 
altered technology and management. 
Adjustments 
in technology and management will be discussed 
later (Section 2.7). 
Unless otherwise stated the 
following estimates are for impacts under G C M 2 x 
C 0 2 scenarios of altered climate. 
The large regional differences in estimated altered 
production in the US typifies the complexity of the 
issue: 
the largest reductions under a range of 
possible 2 x C 0 2 climates are projected for sorghum 
(-20%), maize (-13%) and rice (-11%) (EPA, 1989). 
Overall, production is estimated to be sufficient for 
domestic needs, but the potential for export is 
reduced. 
In Canada, production is estimated to 
decrease in Alberta and Saskatchewan, but perhaps 
increase in Manitoba and Ontario (Smit, 1987; 
Arthur, 1988). In northern Europe cereal produc-
tion might increase in the order of 15%, and live-
stock production would be greater as a result of the 
higher carrying capacities of pasture (Bergthorsson 
et al., 1988, Kettunen et al., 1988; Koster et al., 
1987). In Western Europe, production may increase 
in the Low Countries, UK and Denmark (if available 
moisture levels are maintained), but decrease in 
France and F R G (if there is reduced available 
moisture 
resulting 
from 
higher 
temperatures) 
(Santer, 
1985; Parry et 
al., 
1989). 
In the 
Mediterranean region production may fall substan-
tially if G C M projections of reduced rainfall prove 
to be correct (Santer, 1985). There is currently no 
agreement between G C M s as to how moisture levels 
may change in eastern Europe, but reductions in 
moisture would tend to reduce production (Farago, 
personal communication, 1989; Parry et al., 1987). 
In the USSR warming would enable production to 
be increased near the present northern limit of 
commercial winter wheat cultivation. Further south, 
in the current major producing regions of Ukraine 
and Kazakhstan, increases in moisture (which are 
most uncertain) would also enable output of winter 
wheat and maize to be increased (Pitovranov et al., 
1988b; Nikonov et al., 1988; Mendhzulin, personal 
communication, 1989; Sirotenko, personal communi-
cation, 1989). 
Our limited knowledge of the implications of climate 
change for overall production, together with great 
uncertainties about future regional patterns of 
comparative advantage, make hazardous any assess-
ment concerning effects on patterns and quantities 
of exports. 
A few estimates have, however, been 
made. Exports of some crops in the US are project-
ed to decline by up to 70% under the most adverse 
climatic changes simulated for a doubling of G H G 
(EPA, 1989). 
Exports of maize and wheat may 
increase for Canada, but decrease for barley (Land 
Evaluation Group, 1987). 
Sweden and Finland 
could probably export more cereals (Koster et al., 
1987), as could Denmark, the Low Countries, UK 
and F R G (Santer, 1985). However, the countries 
around the Mediterranean might experience reduced 
possibilities for export as a result of reduced produc-
tive potential (Santer, 1985). 
2-15 
Implications for food supply and food security 
In 
high mid-latitude countries, where warming tends to 
reduce climatic constraints on agriculture, increases 
in productive potential would, if current price and 
policy incentives continue, be likely to lead to 
increases in surplus production. 
In regions where productive potential is reduced, 
which is possible in the low mid latitudes and low 
latitudes as a result of decreased water availability, 
there could occur a reduction of levels of food se-
curity. The most vulnerable regions are probably 
Africa and South America. 
Smaller nations are 
likely to be affected more than large ones because of 
the smaller opportunity for risk pooling across 
climatic regions (Sinha et al., 1988). Overall, there 
is no compelling evidence that global food supplies 
will be radically diminished (Crosson, 1989), but of 
greater concern is the possibility that inherently 
vulnerable regions may have their already limited 
productive capacity further reduced by warming and 
drying. 
This is considered in greater detail in 
Section 2.4 of this report. 
Effects on prices and trade 
Since the effects of 
changes in climate will occur on a global agricultural 
system that is, itself, constantly changing and since 
possible climate-induced changes in production in 
one region will almost certainly affect changes 
elsewhere. 
At present it is merely possible to consider, in a very 
simple manner, the effect that future climatic change 
would have on present-day agriculture, if it were to 
occur now under present technology, management 
and trade structures. The following is a preliminary 
analysis based on estimates of generalised climate-
induced changes in production, inferred from the 
changes in productive potential outlined above 
(Section 2.6.3 above). 
It should be emphasised that these estimates do not, 
for two reasons, represent a forecast of impacts. 
First, they do not take into account the spontaneous 
adjustments that will occur within agriculture and 
which will markedly affect how production responds 
to climate change. 
Second, they are based on a 
most imperfect understanding of those changes in 
climate that may occur and of their effect on crop 
yields, soils, pests, diseases etc (Smit, 1989). 
Under the estimate of changes in productive poten-
tial outlined in this report, prices of some mid-
latitude crops such as maize and soybean could 
increase in the order of 10%, reflecting a small net 
decrease in the food production capability of the 
world. Rice production could, however, increase if 
available moisture increased in Southeast Asia. The 
average global increase in production costs due to 
climate could thus be small (perhaps a few per cent 
of world agricultural GDP). This accords with esti-
mates that, worldwide, average agricultural produc-
tion could increase by 10-20% (Schelling, 1983), 
result of the greenhouse effect. 
Much depends, however, on how beneficial are the 
effects of increased C 0 2 on crop yield. If produc-
tivity is substantially enhanced and more moisture is 
available in some major production areas, then 
world production of staple cereals could increase 
relative to demand with food prices reduced as a 
result. If, on the contrary, there is little beneficial 
direct C 0 2 effect and climate changes are negative 
for agricultural potential in all or most of the major 
food-exporting areas, then the average costs of world 
agricultural production could increase significantly. 
These decreases or increases in production potential 
could result in decreases or increases in costs 
equivalent to perhaps over 10% of the value of 
world agriculture. It should be emphasised, how-
ever, that even larger changes in costs are likely to 
stem from non-climatic factors such as population, 
income and technology. 
These estimations of the average effect of world 
production do not include the short-term impacts 
that might occur as a result of the increased risk of 
a concurrent downturn of production due to global 
warming. If, for example, higher temperatures and 
évapotranspiration rates led to a single concurrent 
drought in the major producing regions, the implica-
tions for world prices in the short term could be 
substantial. 
Figure 2.1 illustrates the change in 
commodity prices that could occur as a result of 
concurrent yield reductions of between 10% and 
50% in the US, European Community and Canada. 
Assuming there were no other climatic effects on 
production elsewhere, agricultural prices would 
increase by about 10%, and by a third for a 50% 
fall. 
If there were concurrent yield decreases of 
25% in Africa and Southeast Asia, agricultural prices 
would increase by a fifth and a half respectively 
(Kane et al, 1989). 
While it is certain that regional agricultural changes 
will result from climatic change, it remains highly 
uncertain which specific region will actually experi-
ence yield gains or losses because (i) regional 
climate scenarios remain imprecise, (ii) capability of 
farmers to respond to climate change remains 
uncertain and may vary across regions and (iii) the 
tolerance of crops to the range of climate conditions 
under altered climate have not been fully assessed. 
Agricultural trade will play a significant role in 
determining the direction of regional impact because 
changing world agricultural prices will present 
2-16 
opportunities and costs for producers and consumers 
of agricultural products. 
Thus, a nation's farm 
sector may benefit from improved yields and higher 
commodity prices while its population may be 
adversely affected by higher prices for food. These 
changes would be reversed if the world generally 
benefits from climate change and world commodity 
prices fall. 
2.7 
Likely adjustments in agriculture 
2.7.1 Introduction 
The 
foregoing 
analyses 
have 
assumed 
that 
technology and management in agriculture do not 
alter significantly in response to climate change, and 
thus do not alter the magnitude and nature of the 
impacts that may stem from that change. 
It is 
certain, however, that agriculture will adjust and 
although these adjustments will be constrained by 
economic and political factors, it is likely that they 
will have an important bearing on future impacts. 
There are two broad types of adjustment that may 
occur. 
Those at the farm level that flow from 
decisions as a result of farmers' perception of 
altered conditions; and those at the regional, 
national and international levels that flow from 
changes in government policy. This report considers 
only those farm-level adjustments that are likely to 
occur in an intuitive and spontaneous manner as a 
result of perceived changes of climate, and do not 
require explicit changes in government policy. 
Consideration of the latter falls within the responsi-
bilities of Working Group III. 
Because of the very wide array of potential adjust-
ments, which will vary according to type of climate 
change, type of farming, and many other factors, it 
is not profitable (even if sufficient information on 
likely changes of climate were available) to general-
ise at length about them. More specific discussion 
is needed at the regional case study level than is 
appropriate here. In this report we simply list and 
illustrate the various types of adjustment and their 
likely efficacy under different types of climate 
change. 
Three broad types of adjustment may be expected: 
changes in land use, management and infrastructure. 
2.7.2 Changes in land use 
Three types of land use change may be considered: 
changes in farmed area, crop type and crop location. 
i) Changes in farmed area 
Where warming tends to reduce climatic constraints 
on agriculture, such as in high latitude and high 
altitude areas, an extension of the farmed area can 
be expected if other environmental factors and 
economic incentives permit. Expansion may be most 
marked in the USSR and northwest and northern 
Europe, where terrain and soils would permit 
further reclamation (Pitovranov et al., 1988a; Squire 
and Unsworth, 1988). It may be limited in much of 
Canada, with the exception of the Peace River 
region in northern Alberta and parts of Ontario 
(Arthur, 1988; Smit, 1987). 
There may also be 
potential for high latitude reclamation in some of 
the valleys of central Alaska, in northern Japan and 
in southern Argentina and New Zealand (Jager, 
1988; Salinger et al., 1989). 
Warming may also tend to induce an upward exten-
sion of the farmed area in upland regions. 
As 
indicated in Section 2.6.3 (above) a 1°C warming in 
the European Alps can be expected to raise climatic 
limits to cultivation by ca 150 m. Similar upward 
shifts are estimated to increase the farmed area 
significantly in high mid latitude mountain environ-
ments such as northern Japan and South Island New 
Zealand (Yoshino et al.,1988; Salinger et al.,1989). 
These shifts of the limit of the farmed area imply 
major impacts on the semi-natural environment and 
on extensive rangeland economies in mountain 
regions, such as Alpine pastures, which may come 
under pressure both from the upward advance of 
more intensive agriculture and from afforestation 
(Balteanu et al., 1987). 
In regions where reduced moisture availability leads 
to decreased productive potential, particularly where 
current agriculture is only marginally productive, 
there may occur a significant decline in acreage 
under use. This may occur, for example, in parts of 
the eastern Mediterranean if projected decreases in 
rainfall are correct, and also possibly in western 
Australia (Santer, 1985; Pittock, personal communi-
cation, 1989). In the southeast US, increased heat 
stress and evaporation losses may reduce profit-
ability to the point where commercial cropping 
becomes non-viable. 
For example, the cropped 
acreage in the southern Great Plains of the US is 
estimated to decline by between 5% and 23% under 
a warmer and drier 2 x C 0 2 climate, but is partially 
compensated by increases in cultivated area in the 
Great Lakes region (EPA, 1989). 
ii) Changes in crop type 
Changes to crops with higher thermal requirements In 
regions where there are substantial increases in the 
2-17 
warmth of the growing season (and where output is 
currently limited by temperature rather than by 
rainfall) it is logical that substitution by crops with 
higher thermal requirements, that would make fuller 
use of the extended and more intense growing 
season, should allow higher yields. Recent impact 
assessments have considered this as a predictable 
response in the US, U K , Japan and New Zealand 
(EPA, 1989; Rowntree et al., 1989; Yoshino et al., 
1988; Salinger et al., 1989). To illustrate, yields of 
present-day quick-maturing rice varieties in northern 
Japan would probably increase by about 4% with the 
35% increase in growing degree-days estimated 
under the GISS 2 x C 0 2 scenario (Yoshino et al., 
1988). However, the adoption of late-maturing rice 
(at present grown in central Japan) might increase 
yields by 26%. 
Changes in annual crops can be made relatively 
swiftly, but a switch in perennials (such as from 
temperate to citrus tree crops) will require more 
time. 
Change to more drought tolerant crops 
Where 
moisture rather than temperature is more generally 
the current climatic constraint on output, or where 
increases in temperature could well lead to higher 
rates of évapotranspiration and thus to reduced 
levels of available moisture, there may occur a 
switch to crops with lower moisture requirements. 
Once again the lack of information on likely changes 
in rainfall makes further speculation on this un-
profitable, particularly at lower latitudes. However, 
there is some evidence that, at high mid-latitudes, a 
switch from spring to winter varieties of cereals 
would be one strategy for avoiding losses in more 
frequent dry spells in the early summer. This might 
be the case in Scandinavia and on the Canadian 
Prairies (Koster et al., 1987; Williams et al., 1988). 
Hi) Changes in crop location 
The switch of crops considered above implies chan-
ges in the allocation of land to given uses. 
In 
general, land uses which show a greater productivity 
per unit area than others are likely to increase their 
comparative advantage over competing uses; and 
given sufficient change in the pattern of comparative 
advantage, then decisions may follow which involve 
a change in use. The amount of land use change is 
likely to depend on how finely land uses in a given 
area are currently tuned to economics and climate, 
and much will depend on the changes in price that 
are largely determined by changes in potential in 
other areas. The response is therefore likely to be 
complex and extremely difficult to predict. 
As a 
much simplified illustration, consider the effect that 
a 1°C warming may have on land use in the area 
around Moscow, USSR. Yields of winter wheat and 
silage maize may increase because they are currently 
limited by temperature, but yields of temperate-zone 
crops such as barley and oats are reduced. Experi-
ments suggest that the optimal reallocation of land 
under these circumstances would be a 30% and 5% 
increase in land under winter wheat and maize, and 
a 20-30% decrease in land under barley and oats 
(Parry and Carter, 1988; Pitovranov et al., 1988a). 
The broad-scale changes in crop location imply a 
general poleward shift of present day agricultural 
zones. This is likely to be most pronounced in mid-
and high- latitudes, partly because warming will be 
most marked here, but largely because it is in these 
regions that latitudinal zoning is most evident as a 
result of differences in available warmth for crop 
maturation. 
In the U K , northern limits of sunflower production, 
which are at present located in the extreme south of 
the country, would shift about 300 km northwards 
for each degree ca rise in mean annual temperature 
(Parry et al., 1989). 
Broadly similar shifts are 
projected for southern Scandinavia where maize, 
soybeans, oilseeds and a wider range of fruits and 
vegetables would be viable (Koster et al., 1987). In 
southern Europe, higher temperatures imply a more 
northerly location of present limits of citrus, olives 
and vines (Imeson et al., 1987). 
In central North America zones of farming types are 
estimated to shift ca 175 km northwards for each °C 
of warming, resulting in reduced intensity of use in 
the south, and increased intensity in the north where 
soils and terrain permit (EPA, 1989). In Canada up 
to 4m ha of currently unused northern soils may be 
suitable for cultivation in a warmer climate (Smit et 
al., 1989) A northward movement of production 
would suggest that a sizeable area of output current-
ly located in the northern Great Plains of the US 
would relocate in the southern Canadian Prairies. 
Similar southward shifts of land use have been 
suggested for the Southern Hemisphere, perhaps up 
to 6° of latitude (670 km) under a 2 x C 0 2 climate 
(Salinger et al., 1989). 
It should be emphasised, 
however, that these broad-scale effects will be much 
affected at local levels by regional variations in soils 
etc, by the competitiveness of different crops and 
their environmental requirements and, most import-
antly, by regional patterns of rainfall, none of which 
can adequately be projected at the present. 
2.7.3 Changes in management 
It is reasonable to expect that a large number of 
changes in management, adopted over time as the 
2-18 
effects of climate change arc perceived, will modify 
these effects outlined above. As a unit exposed to 
impact, agriculture is thus a moving target, contin-
ually adjusting itself both to perceived non-climatic 
and climatic conditions. 
The following summary 
covers only those adjustments that are likely to occur 
without the stimulus of change in national or 
international government policy on agriculture. The 
latter are considered in Working Group III Report. 
i) Changes in irrigation 
There are likely to occur very substantial increases 
in the need for and the costs of irrigation, in order 
to substitute for moisture losses due to increased 
evapotranspiration. The most detailed estimates yet 
available are for the US, where irrigation require-
ments may increase by about 25% in the southern 
and 10% in the northern Great Plains under a 2 x 
CO? climate. 
Given the likely increased rate of 
groundwater depletion, this will probably lead to 
significantly higher costs of production, with conse-
quent shifts to less water-demanding uses in the 
most affected areas (EPA, 1989). 
Substantially increased irrigation needs are also 
projected for most of western and southern Europe 
(Imeson et al., 1987). Elsewhere, although data are 
not available, it is probable that effects will be 
similar where available water is reduced. 
Where 
there are substantial rainfall increases changes in 
management may be needed to tackle soil erosion, 
etc (see below). 
Irrigation is practised mostly in arid or semi-arid 
regions where there is already a strain on available 
resources. Most of the irrigated land of the world is 
in Asia with a rapidly increasing population and not 
much latitude for increases in use of land and water 
resources. To counter the increased water demand 
due to climate change, tighter water management 
practices should lead to higher irrigation efficiency. 
ii) Changes in fertiliser use 
More use of fertilisers may be needed to maintain 
soil fertility where increases in leaching stem from 
increased rainfall, such as in New Zealand (Salinger 
et al., 1989). In other regions, warming may in-
crease productive potential to the extent that current 
levels of output can be achieved with substantially 
lower amounts of fertilisers. In Iceland, for example, 
fertiliser use could possibly be halved under a 2 x 
C02 climate while maintaining present day output 
(Bergthorsson et al., 1988). 
Much will depend on other factors, for example how 
far higher CO, will make nutrients more limiting, 
thus requiring more use of fertilisers, and how 
future changes in energy prices affect the cost of 
fertilisers. 
Hi) Control of pests and diseases 
The costs of these are likely to alter substantially, 
although it is quite impossible to specify them with 
any degree of detail. Possibly most important for 
global cereal production may be the costs of control-
ling the spread of subtropical weed species into the 
current major cereal-producing regions (EPA, 1989). 
iv) Soil drainage and the control of erosion 
Adjustments in management are likely to be neces-
sary in tropical regions, particularly those character-
ised by monsoon rainfall, where there is an overall 
increase, or at least increase in the intensity of 
rainfall. 
Recent assessments in the USSR have 
indicated that, over the longer term, reduced soil 
fertility, increased salinity and the costs of erosion 
control may more than offset the beneficial effects 
of a warmer climate, leading ultimately to reduced 
yields and higher production costs (Pitovranov et al., 
1988a). 
v) Changes in farm infrastructure 
Regional shifts of farming types and altered irriga-
tion requirements imply major changes in types of 
capital equipment, in farm layout and in agricultural 
support services (marketing, credit etc). In the US 
it has been estimated that these will be substantial 
(EPA, 1989). 
Because of the very large costs 
involved only small, incremental adjustments may 
occur without changes in government policies. 
vi) Changes in crop and livestock husbandry 
The adjustments summarised above imply a plethora 
of small, but important changes in farm husbandry. 
In particular there are likely to occur very many 
alterations to the timing of various farm operations 
such as of tillage (ploughing, sowing, harvesting etc), 
of fertilising and of pest and weed control (spraying 
etc), because the timing of these in the present 
farming calendar, though of course different for 
various parts of the world, is frequently affected by 
present climate. Particular aspects of husbandry are 
also likely to be affected, such as the density of 
planting, the use of fallowing and mulching and the 
extent of inter-cropping. These aspects are, today, 
frequently part of a package of strategies designed to 
mitigate the adverse effects (and exploit the benefi-
cial effects) of present-day climate. Thus a change 
of climate implies a retuning of these strategies to 
harmonise with the new set of climatic conditions. 
2-19 
An illustration of this is the management of double 
cropping (of summer rice and winter barley) in 
Japan. 
At present the northern limit of double 
cropping is located at 37°N. Under the increased 
temperatures projected for an equivalent doubling of 
C 0 2 , double cropping would be viable 150 km 
further north, though, the response to this northward 
shift of potential would depend greatly on crop 
prices and input costs (Yoshino, personal communi-
cation, 1989). 
An indication of the impact on animal production 
systems is given by preliminary work in Ireland. 
Here livestock production is currently dominated by 
the effects of high rainfall and wet soils (Brereton, 
1989). A high proportion of grassland in Ireland is 
affected by high water tables. Total feed production 
might not be greatly affected but the low-cost 
grazing system would not be sustainable and there 
would be a shift to indoor feeding systems, with a 
consequent increase in the problem of waste dispos-
al (Keane, personal communication, 1990). 
2.7.4 Changes in policies of agricultural 
support 
In most countries agriculture is currently affected in 
many different ways by a wide range of government 
policies that influences product prices, costs of farm 
inputs, marketing arrangements, the cost of credit 
and even the levels of production of specific com-
modities. 
Relatively minor alterations to these 
policies can have a marked and quite rapid effect on 
agriculture. In large countries, and in supranational 
organisations such as the European Community, a 
few decisions of policy can affect production over 
large areas. 
It is likely, then, that changes in 
government policy resulting from changes in climate 
would have a marked influence on how agriculture 
ultimately responds. These issues are discussed in 
Working Group III Report. 
2.8 
Effects of changes in sea-level 
2.8.1 Scenarios 
Sea-level change 
Global warming as a result of 
increased concentrations of G H G is likely to cause 
an acceleration of the slow sea-level rise already in 
progress. 
This expected acceleration will be the 
consequence of thermal expansion of oceanic surface 
layers and melting of glaciers and polar icecaps. 
It is generally accepted that global sea-level has 
risen by 10-15 cm over the last century but it is not 
certain if this is entirely attributable to the green-
house effect. 
Current estimates suggest a further 
rise of 10-30 cm by 2030 (Working Group I). 
2.8.2 Vulnerability 
Vulnerability studies frequently take an assumed 
sea-level rise as the major, and often only, factor. 
Impacts are assessed usually in terms of vulnerability 
to inundation and its probable consequences for land 
management and agriculture. Coastal regions of low 
elevation can be identified by reference to contoured 
maps and remote sensing sources. However, con-
tour information is inadequate worldwide and 
remote sensing insufficiently accurate. Therefore to 
date a coastal lowland morphological categorisation 
has been used for broad global investigations 
(UNEP, 1989). 
Categories of high vulnerability 
include deltas, polders, areas subject to marine flood 
damage, areas with certain soil types (eg young 
fluviosols, gleysols), small islands and atolls, and 
wetlands including mangrove swamps and marshes 
(UNEP, 1989). 
2.8.3 Vulnerable regions 
The draft ISOS (Impact of Sea Level Rise on 
Society) Report (UNEP, 1989) provides a global 
inventory of high risk areas using information on 
terrestrial topography as the key determinant. Areas 
with more than 100 persons per km
2 were given 
priority consideration. Most countries in the world 
are vulnerable to some extent since fewer than 30 
are entirely landlocked. 
Over 50 million people 
could be forced to relocate with the scale of sea-
level change considered (+1.5 m). 
Inundation of 
important agricultural lands supporting such a 
population is implied unless protective measures are 
implemented. A master checklist of 27 vulnerable 
countries was compiled, omitting developed nations 
regarded capable of protective action. 
The 27 
nations can be grouped regionally, scores indicating 
an ascending scale of vulnerability (1 to 10) based 
on the votes of experts who were asked to select 
what they considered to be the ten most vulnerable 
countries to sea-level rise. Four countries/ regions 
received no votes for the ten most vulnerable list, 
although they are still identified as being among the 
27 most likely to experience serious impacts. The 
groups and scores are: 
Asia Bangladesh (10), Burma (1), China (8), India 
(2), Indonesia (4), Malaysia (-), Pakistan (2), 
Philippines (2), Sri Lanka (1), Taiwan (1), 
Thailand (9), Vietnam (2) 
South America Argentina (4), Brazil (7), Colombia 
(-), Ecuador (-), Surinam (1), Venezuela (2) 
Africa 
Egypt (9), Kenya (1), Mozambique (2), 
Nigeria (2), Senegal (2), The Gambia (1) 
Islands Caribbean (-), Maldives (1), Pacific Islands (1) 
2-20 
To these may be added major regions in developed 
countries: 
Europe 
Southern North Sea coasts (eastern 
England, 
northern 
Belgium, 
Netherlands, 
northern Germany (FDR), western Denmark (7); 
eastern North Italian Plain (3); head of Gulf of 
Finland (mainly USSR) (1); western Black Sea 
coasts of U S S R (1) 
Asia Japan (Pacific coastlands of Honshu) (1) 
North America Gulf Coast of Mexico (1), Louisiana 
(6), Florida and US East Coast States (1) 
2.8.4 Direct impacts on agriculture 
Direct impacts refer to the effects of inundation. 
Agricultural lands could be flooded permanently, 
some lost by increased marine erosion and some fre-
quently inundated as a result of disrupted river and 
tidal regimes together with greater storm and high 
wave incidence. The nature of acceleration of sea-
level change is crucial because many environments 
have so far kept pace with the slow rise (eg through 
coral, silt or peat accretion) but may not be able to 
do so in the near future. 
The most significant impacts can be summarised by 
reference to the 27 countries designated vulnerable 
(2.8.3 above): 
Asia 
Southeast Asia would be seriously affected 
because of the extreme vulnerability of several large 
deltaic regions with dense populations supported by 
paddy rice cultivation. 
For example Bangladesh 
would have 15% of land inundated with a 1.5 m rise, 
with another 6% below 3 m made vulnerable. Alto-
gether 21.3% of agricultural production could be 
lost, mainly rice, sugarcane and jute ( U N E P , 1989). 
Thailand and China are regarded as also being 
especially vulnerable to large farmland losses. 
South America Losses through inundation would 
occur in the districts of the Pampas of Argentina 
bordering the Plate estuary with consequent reduced 
cereal (wheat/maize) and cattle production. Some 
sections of the Brazilian coastlands and the Amazon 
delta are vulnerable with losses of tropical agricul-
ture (sugarcane, citrus fruits, oilpalm, cocoa etc). 
Coastal regions of Venezuela and Surinam would 
lose rice, banana and sugarcane lands. 
Africa Assuming a 1.5 m sea-level rise, most losses 
would be in the large delta areas of The Gambia, 
Senegal, Nigeria, Mozambique and Egypt. Of these 
the Nile Delta/lower Nile Valley in Egypt is the 
most intensively cultivated so that 17% of national 
agricultural production and 20% of farmland could 
be lost with severe impacts on food supplies (espe-
cially of rice, wheat, vegetables) and non-food crops 
(eg cotton). 
Islands Many coral atolls and small islands have 
very limited relief above present sea-level and so 
could have the greatest proportional losses of 
farmland in the world. As an example of an atoll 
group, the Maldive Islands in the Indian Ocean 
would have 50% of all land inundated with a 2 m 
rise (Delft Hydraulics Lab, 1986). An additional 
danger is that sea defences might not be effective 
owing to coral porosity and underground seawater 
flow. Even islands with higher terrain, such as Fiji, 
would lose much of their farmland, Vatulele losing 
6.2% of agricultural land with a 1.5 m rise and 31% 
with a 3.5 m change. Moala would lose 8.8% and 
15% of farmland respectively (Nunn, 1988). 
Developed countries 
Not all developed countries 
have the resources for works to counteract inunda-
tion especially where rapid sea-level rises occur in 
regions of coastal downwarping. For example a i m 
downwarping has occurred over the last hundred 
years in the Mississippi Delta region of the US. 
Land is being lost here at a rate of 250 km
2 per year 
and 35% of the estimated national dryland loss from 
a 0.5 m sea-level rise would be in Louisiana (EPA., 
1989). Consequent loss of subtropical agriculture in 
the US would be considerable. 
The north and west of The Netherlands is reclaimed 
polder land with protective dykes and artificial 
drainage, representing some of the most intensively 
farmed land in the world. 
Defences constructed 
after the serious inundation of 1953 are designed to 
withstand a 10,000 year surge event, but even here a 
1 m sea-level change would reduce that safety 
margin by an order of magnitude (Hekstra, 1986). 
The southern North Sea coastlands are also subject 
to crustal downwarping that would exaggerate any 
change. 
2.8.5 Indirect impacts on agriculture 
In many coastal regions indirect or secondary 
impacts of rising sea-level may have far-reaching 
significance for agriculture. Costs of protection of 
vulnerable farmland would escalate. In addition to 
improvement of coastal defences, the higher level of 
rivers approaching the sea would necessitate adjust-
ment of dykes, sluices and pumping systems. This is 
especially so where the general land level is no 
longer rising because flood protection schemes 
prevent any further silt accumulation. In developed 
nations decisions have to be made concerning 
expenditure for protection of relatively low-value 
farmlands compared with urban land. 
Measures 
may be more essential for subsistence agriculture in 
2-21 
a developing country. Modifications of land drain-
age systems would require further resources where 
they need to be adapted to rivers with higher levels 
and inhibited outflow. 
Saltwater intrusion into surface water and ground-
water could have deleterious effects. Deeper tidal 
penetration could increase the danger of flooding 
causing salinisation of farmlands and reducing the 
value of river water for irrigation. Aquifers could be 
recharged with sea water if abstraction occurs to 
below sea-level. 
Rising sea-levels could raise 
underground saltwater levels to reduce the depth of 
overlying fresh groundwater. In areas of low relief, 
such as atolls, freshwater reservoirs of less than 1 m 
depth could disappear in dry seasons, as water tables 
fall to saltwater levels, leaving no useful irrigation 
supply. 
Threats of inundation could lead to relocation of 
farming and farming employment. If this is feasible 
there are obvious implications for land acquisition, 
land preparation, infrastructural changes and farm-
ing modifications. But relocations could be prohibi-
tively large scale as in Bangladesh where some 20% 
of farmland and population could be affected by a 1 
m sea-level rise (UNEP, 1989). Often relocation 
could be difficult as in Egypt where irrigation is 
feasible in the delta and flood plain areas only. 
Sometimes, relocation would be impossible, as in the 
Maldives where half the land would be lost as a 
result of a 1 m sea-level rise and the remaining half 
would he within a vulnerable 1 m of sea-level (Delft 
Hydraulic Lab, 1986). Out-migration of population 
would be the only solution for many small oceanic 
islands. 
3 Potential impacts on managed 
forests and the forest sector 
3.1 Introduction 
The social, economic and environmental aspects of 
major forest ecosystems are significant, but often 
neglected, attributes of forest policies (Shea and 
Carlson, 1984). Forests and woodland cover roughly 
one-third of the land surface of the world, and 
therefore deserve serious consideration in assess-
ments of socioeconomic implications of climatic 
changes. 
Monitoring, evaluation and feedback 
concerning the social, economic and environmental 
aspects of forestry need to be accounted for in 
planning forest-related programs. A comprehensive 
international effort is necessary to assess objectively 
the socioeconomic impacts, given the variety of 
languages, customs, social and political systems. 
International bodies such as F A O , W M O , U N E P , 
I U F R O and I U C N are examples of basic structures 
used to foster these global assessments. The predic-
tion of changes and consequences fifty years or more 
into the future, with large elements of risk and 
uncertainty, is a challenging and necessary effort. 
The need to develop proactive, not reactive, strat-
egies will be one of forestry's greatest challenges. 
3.2 Managed and unmanaged forests 
Although the distinction between 'unmanaged' and 
'managed' forests is seldom clear (Warrick et al., 
1986), this report considers managed forests to have 
some degree of planned or actual physical interven-
tion and include the following levels of intervention: 
• Extensive silviculture with attention to harvest 
design to promote natural regeneration, and 
subsequent protection. 
• Basic silviculture with plantations established after 
harvesting, followed by more intensive protection. 
• Intensive management with multiple inputs, 
including site preparation, planting, competition 
control, pre-commercial or commercial thinning 
and protection from insects and fire. 
• Elite management regimes dedicated to short 
rotations using many of the above methods plus 
fertilisers to promote growth. 
It is particularly difficult to determine how much of 
the world's forests are under each level of manage-
ment. Therefore, this report incorporates all forests 
in which some harvest takes place, with particular 
emphasis on forests where there is some degree of 
management. 
The definition excludes protected 
forests, forest parks and wilderness areas. 
In many forests around the world, stands on sites of 
superior productivity and with desired species type 
are managed more intensively, while other stands on 
sites of marginal productivity, or with non-com-
mercial species composition, receive little or no 
physical intervention. 
Thus, within a managed 
forest, there can be found a mosaic of 'managed' 
and 'unmanaged' stands. 
This report focuses on the effects of climatic chan-
ges induced by higher atmospheric concentrations of 
G H G such as C O z , rather than on the direct effects 
of C 0 2 enhancement (see Working Group I, Eco-
systems, for a detailed discussion of the direct effects 
of C 0 2 enhancement). It is accepted that important 
forest ecosystem effects, particularly enhanced 
photosynthetic rates and increased efficiency of 
water use, may result from increased concentrations 
of atmospheric C 0 2 but there is no consensus on the 
effects on mature forest trees (Eamus and Jarvis, 
1982; Jarvis, 1989). 
In particular, Jarvis (1989) 
concluded that short-term experimental results on 
young, pot-bound trees cannot be used to assess 
long-term responses of forest stands to direct C 0 2 
enrichment. Extrapolation to stand level effects is 
also not possible (Jarvis, 1989). Models for effects 
of climatic changes on forest stands have been 
constructed, however, and are being used to gener-
ate scenarios of potential forest responses to climatic 
changes. 
3.3 
World forest sector and managed 
forests 
3.3.1 World forest sector 
In 1980, forests covered about 31% of the land 
surface of the world (Table 2.1). Within the devel-
oped regions, the USSR and Japan have significantly 
higher than average areas under forest. As a group, 
Australia, Israel, South Africa and New Zealand are 
considerably below average with only 13% of their 
combined land areas forested. 
Likewise, within 
developing regions, the Near East and China are 
below average, whereas Latin America as a whole is 
much above average (Table 2.1). Regions with large 
shares of the world area of forests include North 
America (particularly Canada), the USSR (especially 
in Siberia), equatorial Africa and tropical Latin 
America. 
3.3.2 Managed forests 
Climatic changes will affect the managed forest 
resources of the global community to different 
degrees as a result of the existence of a variety of 
social systems and levels of political and economic 
development. The intensity of forest management 
does not necessarily parallel the level of national 
development. 
Frequently where high intensity of 
forest management prevails, exotic species are widely 
planted. 
The amount of managed forest land varies widely 
between and within the developed and less devel-
oped countries (LDC). This suggests that impacts 
from climate change will affect people differently. 
In developed countries, the fear will be that living 
real fear that subsistence could be threatened. It is 
not possible from these data to conclude what 
proportion of the population relies on forests and to 
what degree, but there are similarities for all count-
ries. A l l countries use fuelwood for heating and 
cooking to some extent. If the availability of wood 
is altered, the impacts will be most severe where 
alternative energy supplies are limited. 
Trees also supply food for many people: date palms 
in tropical areas, nut pines and sugar maple in 
boreal and temperate areas. The forests may there-
fore be critical for survival, useful to augment diets 
or economically valuable. 
Depending on the economy/environment combina-
tion, different species provide economic value to the 
population. 
In the boreal countries, populations rely on the 
spruce/pine 
group, 
mostly 
of 
native 
origin. 
Temperate and tropical countries tend to rely to a 
greater degree on exotics such as radiata pine in 
New Zealand and Eucalyptus in Brazil. 
Selected data from 13 nations representing all 
continents, Northern and Southern Hemispheres, 
and nations in various stages of development are 
illustrated in Table 2.2. The statistics in this table 
are based on different time periods and were col-
lected under different methods and standards. 
Nevertheless, attempts have been made to base them 
on one currency and to relate total inventoried 
forest land to intensively managed forests. 
For 
example, intensively managed forests is high in New 
Zealand and Germany, but smaller in China and 
Canada. 
3.4 
Potential biophysical responses of 
forests to climate change 
3.4.1 Forest protection 
Many trees display a surprisingly large ability to 
acclimatise after long geographic transfers of seed 
such as occurs in provenance trials (Hall, 1989). 
However, each genetic unit has its ultimate limits 
and species are quite limited in this respect. Quanti-
fied characteristics are so far very few; 
some of 
these could be derived from the large number of 
seed source/provenance trials which have been 
established by forest research agencies over the last 
80 years. This information is urgently needed for 
elaboration of realistic vegetation response models. 
Mortality due to physical stresses is expected to 
increase as enhanced degrees of stand decline are 
experienced 
(Solomon, 1986; 
Solomon and 
West,1985; 1986; Auclair, 1987). If climate changes 
abruptly compared to the normal longevity of most 
tree species, many trees may not be able to survive 
the associated stress and consequently, competitive 
and pest/disease relationships could be altered. 
According to Smith and Tirpak (1988), climate 
induced declines may be seen as early as 30-60 years 
from now in the US Great Lakes States, 60-70 years 
2-23 
Table 2.1 Forest land in area in 1980. Hectare and per-caput data from Peck (1984) 
Region 
World total 
Developed regions 
North America 
Western Europe 
Eastern Europe 
USSR 
Japan 
Other* 
Developing regions 
Africa 
Near East 
China 
Other Asia/Pacific 
Latin America 
Other** 
* Australia, Israel, 
Total land 
area (million 
ha) 
13075 
5485 
1835 
373 
100 
2227 
37 
913 
7591 
2331 
1192 
931 
1028 
2020 
88 
Forest land 
area (million 
ha) 
4094 
1829 
611 
126 
29 
920 
25 
118 
2264 
642 
98 
116 
356 
1015 
37 
New Zealand, South Africa 
Forest area 
proportion of 
total land 
region 
1 in the 
(%) 
31.3 
33.3 
33.3 
33.8 
29.0 
41.3 
67.6 
12.9 
29.0 
27.5 
8.2 
12.5 
34.6 
50.2 
42.0 
Forest area 
proportion of 
total world 
forests 
(%) 
100.0 
44.7 
14.9 
3.1 
0.7 
22.5 
0.6 
2.9 
55.3 
15.7 
2.4 
2.8 
8.7 
24.8 
0.9 
Forest land 
area per caput 
(ha/person) 
** Mainly Pacific Islands and Greenland 
0.9 
1.6 
2.4 
0.3 
0.3 
3.5 
0.2 
2.3 
0.7 
1.7 
0.5 
0.1 
0.3 
2.8 
7.2 
in the southeastern US and 30 years in the dry areas 
of central and western US. 
Species native to cool temperate regions have been 
adapted to alternation ofseasons. After an active 
period, they become dormant and resistant to frost 
and drought. 
After a chilling period above 0°, 
ambient temperatures are the main driving force of 
dormancy release. If early winter is mild, trees may 
deharden and be damaged by frost in late winter. 
Paradoxically, a milder climate may increase the risk 
of frost damage. In general, the survival rhythm of 
trees may be broken, particularly in the far north 
where photoperiod is very long during the growing 
season. 
Interactions between anthropogenic climatic changes 
and air pollution are particularly stressful to trees. 
As air pollution increases, enhanced ozone concen-
trations along with increased temperatures are 
expected to cause greater stress on plants than 
previously experienced. Forest degradation caused 
by a changing climate, enhanced ozone and other air 
pollution may also damage watersheds. The decline 
of red spruce forests in the New England states of 
the US over the past 100 years has been attributed 
to climate warming (Hamburg and Cogbill, 1988). 
This decline has been further exacerbated by concur-
rent increases in anthropogenic changes in atmos-
pheric chemistry. In Europe where managed forests 
occupy a much larger portion of forest land than in 
North America, acidification of sensitive soils has 
occurred over several decades. These effects can be 
extrapolated from the damage already occurring on 
managed forests in Europe from anthropogenic air 
pollution. 
Susceptibility to and infestations of insects and 
diseases is expected to increase (Pollard, 1987; 
Winget, 1987; Woodman, 1988; Harrington, 1989; 
Zoltai, 1989). For example, diseases may increase in 
Pinus radiata plantations in Australia where tem-
peratures and precipitation increase (Booth and 
McMurtric, 1989). Infestations of spruce budworm 
in eastern Canadian forests (Winget, 1987) and bark 
beetles 
in 
northwestern 
American 
forests 
(Pollard,1985) are expected to increase as tempera-
tures rise. 
Managed forests require that a higher level of 
protection be given their investment; insects and 
diseases cause significant losses in these forests. 
Distribution of insects, pests and their associated 
predators is closely related to climate. Damage to 
the northern forests by spruce budworm and bark 
beetles has already been attributed to recent occur-
rences of warmer weather (Pollard, 1985). Managed 
2-24 
Table 2.2 Summary of forest resources 
Forest land (million ha.) 
Productive forest land (million ha.) 
Managed forest (thousand ha.) 
Remarks 
Forest land (million ha.) 
Productive forest land (million ha.) 
Managed forest (thousand ha.) 
Remarks 
Forest land (million ha.) 
Productive forest land (million ha.) 
Managed forest (thousand ha.) 
Remarks 
Indonesia 
122 
45 
1,918* 
China 
135 
122 
12,733* 
Zambia 
29.5 
4.1 
38* 
Canada 
452 
244 
450 
(1987) 
Regeneration 
annual mean 
India 
67 
45 
2.062* 
* FAO, 1988a 
Finland 
23.3 
18.2 
145/ann. 
Regen. is a 
mean 
USA 
265 
210 
917 
(1980) 
Brazil 
565 
350 
3.855* 
New Zealand 
10.6 
2.8 
1200 
(20/1987) 
Austria 
3.2 
3.0 
25 
(1980) 
Kenya 
3.7 
1.1 
181* 
Chile 
15.5 
4.7 
817* 
Germany 
7.3 
7.3 
70/ann. 
Regeneration 
annual mean 
forests consisting of monocultures are expected to be 
even more susceptible to a particular insect or 
disease infestation because of the reduced genetic 
diversity in these forests. 
The ability to respond to damage from insects and 
diseases varies widely from country to country. 
Consequently the levels of damage and loss to the 
various economics will be variable. Nations which 
rely on hard currency acquired from the sale of high 
quality wood could be particularly sensitive. 
Fire damage is expected to increase with the sus-
ceptibility of forests (Fosberg, 1989; Street, 19S9). 
Even if precipitation remains roughly the same, 
increased temperatures will lead to increased evapo-
transpiration and thus drier sites (sec Manabc et al., 
1981; Manabc and Wctherald, 1986, for supportive 
views, and Mitchell and Warrilow, 1987 for a con-
trary view). Warmer drier sites could have a higher 
incidence of severe fires, especially where stands arc 
in a state of decline because of climatic changes. 
Likewise, the potential increases in blocking high 
pressure patterns, more lightning strikes and in-
creased fuel loadings are a dangerous combination 
causing more and larger fires. 
The ability to detect and control fires varies greatly 
around the world. 
In Canada, where prevention, 
detection and suppression strategies are well devel-
oped, large fires still occur. During the decade of 
the 1970s in Canada, the average anraal area 
burned was one million hectares, but during the 
warmer 1980s this has doubled to over two million 
hectares. In 1989, over 6.4 million hectares of forest 
land were burned; 
fortunately, little of this was 
intensively managed forest. There have been sug-
gestions that this change in the level of fire activity 
is the result of climatic changes in this portion of the 
boreal forest. It is, of course, too early to make an 
assumption of this type; however, the coincidence 
has been noticed by forest managers. 
3.4.2 Shifts in climatic zones affecting 
forest ecosystems 
Major climatic zones which govern species ranges 
arc projected to shift under current global warming 
scenarios. Under a 2 x CO: atmosphere, conditions 
currently supporting boreal forests could shift north 
into the current tundra zone. 
This would then lead to a reduction in area poten-
tially supporting boreal forests of approximately 
37%. Under this scenario, the area of subtropical 
forest conditions would decrease by 22%, but the 
rain, wet, moist, and especially dry areas of tropical 
forest conditions would increase by 28%. 
Under conditions of rapid climatic change, existing 
species in their habitats will be stressed as some are 
better able than others to cope. There may be a net 
mortality in existing species, but now well adapted 
and intensively managed species will become more 
prominent in managed forested ecosystems. Because 
many habitats are isolated from the surrounding 
environment and species need continuity of habitat 
to move, many species may be unable to survive in 
their current habitats. 
As climate continues to 
change in response to human activities, the species 
in any given area will be increasingly asynchronous 
with their environment. 
Shifts in tree species ranges could be important for 
several reasons (Moomaw, 1988). First, climate is 
expected to change faster than tree species can 
respond through migration. Second, new sites may 
not be edaphically hospitable, having evolved over 
thousands of years in a different environment. 
Finally, future forest climate zones leading to new 
forest ecosystems will not be related to current 
administrative boundaries which are used to defined 
wood supply areas, ownership, parks and nature 
reserves. Forests in areas of projected large climatic 
changes over the next 50 years will require massive 
readjustments, with consequent increases in the area 
of stressed forests (Smith and Tirpak, 1988). 
For each 1°C of warming, tree ranges have the 
potential to expand 100 km northward while 
southern boundaries retreat, a process which has 
been tracked quite accurately since the last glaci¬
ation (Davis, 1989). The asynchrony will be greatest 
in the disturbed plant communities. These lags will 
persist a decade or two at most, then logging or fire 
or both, will cause a rapid adjustment to the pre-
vailing climate. 
Intensively managed forests can 
respond to actual changes in the environment, but 
these could be out of synchrony with the environ-
ment unless proactive strategies are adopted that 
capitalise on our knowledge of anticipated climates. 
Depending on the rates of climatic change, stresses 
could increase as the environment changes, and 
without careful species-climate planning and alloca-
tion, the intensively managed forests could become 
more and more out of tune with its environment. 
Miller et al. (1987) projected significant shifts in the 
climate suitable for loblolly pine, to the north and 
northeast of the current range in southeastern US. 
The current range may expand by almost 20% by 
the year 2080, with large decreases in the south and 
large increases to the north. The climatic habitats 
suitable for Pinus radiata and Eucalyptus regnans, 
could disappear from the Australian continent 
(Eckersley, 1989). 
Managed forests incorporate high levels of invest-
ment with the expectation of concomitant economic 
returns. 
These forests have been established for 
superior quality products: 
teak and mahogany in 
tropical areas, radiata pine and Douglas fir in 
temperate areas, and Scots pine and black spruce in 
boreal forests. 
Impacts of climatic changes are 
expected to be significant on these forests and 
consequently on the associated economic and social 
systems of the dependent regions. Countries with a 
secure economic infrastructure will be less affected 
economically than those which may depend to a 
higher degree on forest products and have econo-
mies which are less resilient to large-scale biological 
damage. 
3.4.3 Forest production and renewal 
A variety of effects on forest productivity has been 
discussed (Warrick et al., 1986; Booth and 
McMurtrie, 1989). Increases are proposed in some 
cases (Kauppi and Posch, 1985; 1987) and decreased 
in others (eg Solomon and West, 1986). In stands 
where a favourable combination of climatic changes, 
site conditions, and stand composition and develop-
ment stage exists, productivity could be enhanced. 
This would occur in a boreal stand on a wet site in 
the northern part of the boreal climate. However, 
productivity could decrease where moisture or 
nutrients are strongly limiting, or where species are 
already at their upper temperature or lower mois-
ture limits. 
In northern boreal forests, large areas of forested 
land are harvested in winter to minimise site dam-
age. 
Shorter winters and/or higher temperatures 
will reduce the opportunity to continue this harvest-
ing technique with consequent reduction in employ-
ment and wealth in rural communities. 
Managed forests provide a variety of products (eg 
biomass, veneer and pulp) over a range of harvest-
able periods (1-2 to 100+ years). The most critical 
time for any plantation is during the establishment 
phase. During this phase, the availability of mois-
ture controls whether or not the plantation can be 
established. While virtually all projections show a 
rise in temperature there is a greater degree of 
2-26 
uncertainty as to the magnitude of the change and 
the seasonal distribution of precipitation. Changes 
in the amount or in the seasonal distribution of 
precipitation would be severe, depending on the 
current availability of moisture. 
There are uncertainties concerning the implications 
of climatic changes on forest renewal because of the 
uncertainties in the prediction of regional climate 
(Woodman, 1987). It could be enhanced for species 
with both seed and vegetative reproductive strategies 
(Maini, 1988). Success rate of plantation establish-
ment could be reduced because of increased harsh-
ness of site conditions and increased competition 
from other vegetation (Wheaton et al., 1987). 
Marked changes in species composition could occur 
in the absence of intervention (Solomon et al., 
1984); however, these would be determined largely 
by stand-level factors such as site, current stand 
composition and development stage, and local 
climatic changes. Thus, species are less limited by 
water availability, and near the higher latitude limit 
of their ranges could increase their frequency 
(Andrasko and Wells, 1989). 
3.5 
Role of forest management in 
potential forest responses to 
climatic changes 
3.5.1 Managed forests 
Managed stands are different in many ways from 
'unmanaged' or 'less managed' stands. For example, 
forest land in Vietnam comprises more than 20 
million hectares. On average, annual growth of the 
natural forest is only 1-2 m
3/hectare although pine 
shows a growth of 3-5 m
3/hectares. The calculation 
of potential productivity shows that with the same 
forest trees the productivity would be 10-15 x greater 
if the forests where intensively managed (Ngo-Si-
Giai, 1989). 
There are concerns in tropical America and Africa 
that afforestation is largely out of proportion with 
deforestation. Arguments for improving high-yield 
forest plantations, intensively managed on suitable 
land, have never been more justified than now (de 
las Salas, 1989). 
Understanding future climates 
coupled with short-rotation forestry, should make 
managed stands less susceptible to undesirable 
effects of climatic changes. 
Intensive management is characterised by one or 
more of: species/provenance selection, planting 
spacing control, stand tending, one or more 
thinnings, protection from insects, diseases and fire 
and, possibly, irrigation and fertilisation. 
Known 
production 
forest 
examples 
are 
those 
from 
Venezuela (200,000 hectares of Pinus caribaea on 
lowland) and Brazil (more than 2 million hectares of 
Eucalyptus managed for pulp production), both on 
savannah landscapes (de las Salas, 1989). 
There is considerable pressure to expand and 
intensify agricultural land in the humid tropics 
which, in turn, increases the demand for forest land. 
For example, a complete supply of wood for the 
production of 1 million tons of bleached short-fibre 
pulp a year from Eucalyptus, using the forest 
technology of Aracuz (Brazil), will take 90,000 
hectares of forest land (Brandao, 1984). 
In other countries the need for alternative energy 
and forest products led to the successful develop-
ment of hybrid varieties and, at the same time, 
preserved and enhanced diversity within the gene 
pool of forest trees. Short-rotation forestry can fall 
back to a certain extent on the methods technology 
and experience gained from conventional plantation 
forestry, but under a changing climate, time is more 
pressing. 
The need for proactive management 
strategies within future climatic scenarios are needed 
to mitigate negative socioeconomic impacts of 
climatic changes on the forest sector. Examples of 
some of these accomplishments for elite plantations 
are particularly noteworthy (Table 2.3), including the 
flexibility of movement within the global environ-
ment (Table 2.4). 
Intensive forest management usually entails the use 
of sophisticated inventory practices and forecasting 
tools for planning and scheduling of forest interven-
tions compared to those employed in unmanaged 
forests. 
However, if we are unable to harvest 
managed stands before they become overmature, or 
if inadequate attention is paid to thinning schedules 
(Kuusela, 1987), these stands will be more suscep-
tible to decline caused by climatic changes. 
3.5.2 Agroforestry - managed forests with 
agriculture 
The combination of livestock with trees planted for 
fuel, shelter and shade, fodder or fence posts is 
usually an ecologically sound procedure. 
Many 
successful examples exist in the American tropics. 
In hilly locations, however, this combination can lead 
to severe soil erosion. There are reports of such 
damage under Eucalyptus in East Africa and 
Ethiopia and the same can be seen in the Andean 
countries of South America (de las Salas, 1989). 
Results from the International Research Institute for 
the Semi-Arid Tropics (IRISAT), India, suggest that 
inter-cropping can provide substantial yield increases 
2-27 
where the shared crops compliment each other 
(Huda and Ong, 1989). 
Table 2.3 Yields from hybrid plantation species 
Location 
Pennsylvania, 
USA 
Ontario, 
Canada 
Ontario, 
Canada 
W. Kentucky, 
USA 
Sweden 
Kansas, USA 
United 
Kingdom 
Hybrid 
species 
poplar 
poplar 
willow 
black alder 
willow 
silver 
maple 
willow 
Yield 
(oven dry 
tonnes/ha/yr) 
8.5 
7.0 
20.0 
7.2 
22.0 
6.7 
14.0 
Source: Christopherson et al., 1989 
In the central Ethiopian highlands, farmers derive 
multiple uses from their intercropping. They pro-
duce coffee beans, seeds, vegetables, loppable 
browse for their cattle and fuelwood from the 
branches of trees (Negah, 1989). 
Budawski (1981) comments that for at least 80 years, 
a local alder species (Alnus acuminata) has been 
successfully planted at elevations between 1300 and 
2500 m above sea level with high rainfall (200-300 
mm) on good soils in the dairy region of Costa Rica. 
The trees are planted at wide spacings within pas-
tures that are grazed or cut. 
As populations continue to increase, there will be a 
greater need for integrated land use strategies to 
accommodate the multiple benefits of producing 
agricultural and forestry crops on the same shared 
land base. 
3.5.3 Urban forests 
Longridge and Mcwilliams (1989) suggest that 
temperature becomes increasingly important as a 
determinant in the survival and distribution of plants 
the further a plant deviates from its biological norm. 
Carbon partitioning to shoots and roots in response 
to root temperature is species dependent (Ingram et 
al, 1986). 
Trees growing in urban areas have already spent the 
last 50-100 years growing under conditions of in-
creased warming trends caused by the 'urban heat 
island' effect. This means that they have developed 
under different conditions from those same species 
in the natural forest. Today's urban forests, there-
fore, can serve as appropriate observatories for 
tomorrow's rural forests under a changing climate. 
In temperate climates, species of Acer, Platnus and 
the Ginkgo are favoured as ornamentals because of 
their tolerance to the urban stresses. This know-
ledge has been gained by observation and selection, 
a process which may reflect the apparent tolerance 
to industrial pollutants, automobile exhausts, soil 
compaction and cultural disturbances. 
The American Forestry Association (1989) estimates 
that planting '100 million trees could 
affect 
America's CO: emissions by 18 millions tons a year, 
saving consumers (energy conservation with shading 
and wind breaks) $US4 billion each year'. 
3.5.4 Summary assessment of forest sensi-
tivity to projected climatic changes 
The degree to which managed forest stands arc 
sensitive to future climatic changes depends on: 
• the characteristics of the new temperature re-
gimes. Forest ecosystems will be more sensitive 
with large overall increases in temperature in the 
northern latitudes with boreal forests and where 
there are temperature Auctions/extremes, or a 
greater frequency of non-seasonal frosts; 
• the characteristics of precipitation 
patterns. 
Stands will be more sensitive if there are large 
changes in precipitation, especially decreases in 
areas currently arid and semi-arid. 
• the characteristics of forest soils. Forest ecocsys-
tems will be more sensitive on more rapidly 
drained sites which limit tree survival and growth, 
such as the Mediterranean regions and North 
Africa; the southern boreal forest; and sites that 
are currently temperature-limiting on tree surviv-
al and growth such as the northern limits of 
boreal forest. Also at risk are forests at high 
elevations in North America, Europe and USSR 
and elsewhere. 
2-28 
Table 2.4 
Performance of 15 species at Kaunamano, Ka'u, Hawaii Island, evaluated after 23 months (Schubert and 
Whiteshell, 1989) 
Species and source 
Eucalyptus salignia 
Hawaii Island, Hawaii 
Eucalyptus grandis 
New South Wales, Aust. 
Eucalyptus globulus 
Hawaii Island, Hawaii 
Eucalyptus viminalis 
Victoria, Australia 
Eucalyptus urophylla 
Flores, Indonesia 
Eucalyptus nitens 
Victoria, Australia 
Eucalyptus tereticornis 
Nigeria, West Africa 
Eucalyptus camaldulensis 
New South Wales, Australia 
Eucalyptus robusla 
Queensland, Australia 
Eucalyptus citriodora 
Queenland, Australia 
Albizia falcataria 
Sri Lanka 
Acacia confitsa 
Taiwan 
Acacia auriculaeformis 
India 
Acacia mangium 
Queenland, Australia 
Mimosa scabrella 
Parana, Brazil 
Mean 
8.1a 
7.8a 
7.3ab 
6.6abcd 
6.4abcde 
7.1abc 
5.6bcde 
S.ldef 
5.4cde 
4.6efg 
4.8def 
2.8h 
2.9gh 
2.9gh 
3.4fgh 
Growth (ht m) 
Range 
2-10 
2-11 
2-11 
3-11 
2-10 
3-10 
2-8 
2-8 
2-8 
2-8 
3-6 
2-4 
2-4 
2-4 
2-5 
Annual 
4.2 
4.1 
3.8 
3.4 
3.3 
3.7 
2.9 
2.7 
2.8 
2.4 
2.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.5 
1.8 
Dbh (cm) 
6.7a 
6.7a 
6.3ab 
5.7abc 
5.6abc 
7.0a 
4.5bcd 
3.8cde 
5.1abcd 
3.7ode 
6. lab 
2.2c 
2.1c 
3.3de 
2.4e 
Survival 
(percent) 
94a 
92a 
81ab 
81ab 
90a 
65abc 
91a 
66abc 
93a 
66abc 
85ab 
69abc 
56bc 
47cd 
18d 
144 trees per species initially planted. Means with the same letters are not significantly different (5% 
level). 
• the characteristics of the age of the forest. 
Stands in the establishment and late maturity 
phases will be most impacted. At the time of 
establishment, moisture is critical for seedlings to 
develop deep roots to withstand future dry pe-
riods. Juvenile stands that arc free of non-tree 
competition, and immature and young mature 
stands, are more vigorous and hence resilient to 
environmental stress. Stands at maturity are less 
able to stand stress of any type and are therefore 
at a high risk in Canada (Woodbridge, Reed and 
Associates, 1988), USSR (Barr and Braden, 1988) 
and central Europe (Kuusela, 1987; Nilsson et al., 
1989). 
Also susceptible to damage are those 
composed of species at or near the limit of their 
natural ranges such as the temperate deciduous 
forests in North America. If climatic changes are 
more severe for specific age classes with a stand, 
the chances of the stand maintaining some sem-
blance of continuity are greater if it is an all-aged 
stand rather than an even-aged stand. Managed 
even-aged forests may have an additional risk in 
this respect. 
The above factors do not take into account the 
degree to which human intervention has and can 
ameliorate or exacerbate stand sensitivity to climatic 
changes. For the moment, ignoring human interven-
tion in forests, the forests that would seem to be 
most sensitive to future climatic changes include: 
• boreal forests, where stands are mainly even-aged 
and often temperature limited, and where tem-
perature changes are expected to be large, 
positive effects are probable; and 
• forests in arid and semi-arid regions where 
increased temperatures and stable or decreasing 
precipitation could render sites inhospitable to 
continued existence of current forest stands, 
negative effects are probable. 
3.6 Socioeconomic implications of 
climatic changes on forests and the 
forest sector 
Forest products data are based largely on round-
wood production, which is a common industrial 
output from the forest. In northern countries most 
of this goes to pulp and paper, whereas in the 
tropics the pulp and paper market is shared with the 
high-quality lumber market. Tropical countries rely 
on teak/mahogany and other valuable hardwoods. 
There have been few studies of the socioeconomic 
effects and implications of projected climatic change 
on forests and the forest sector. In a recent study it 
would increase substantially, that growth rates in 
other forests of the world would increase marginally, 
and that Canada, Finland, Sweden and USSR would 
all experience increases in total exploitable forest 
area (Binkley, 1988). With larger inventories in 
northern forests, harvest rates would increase, 
timber prices would fall, industrial profitability in 
those areas would increase and new investments in 
production capacity would be channelled there. This 
would lead to an overall drop in timber prices 
everywhere. In general, most countries with boreal 
forests would witness a net increase in timber 
income, while most other countries would experience 
net decreases due to both declining harvest volumes 
and lower prices. 
Higher costs, however,have been predicted for 
management interventions, especially stand establish-
ment, in the US southeast and Pacific northwest 
(Regens et al., 1989). 
In addition, higher raw 
material costs have been estimated in the US south-
east if climatic changes result in lower wood density 
of pulping timber. Other projections include: 
• Significant costs associated with flooding (due to 
sea-level rise) of southeast US coastal loblolly 
pine forests and pulp/paper mills; 
• lower quality and quantity of lumber yields of 
southern pines; 
• massive costs if processing infrastructure must 
follow the northward and inland movement of the 
range of southern pines, or if log-hauling dis-
tances increase; and 
• major disruptions to employment in forest sector 
communities, but would lie outside the southern 
pine range with climatic change. 
Overall, Regens et al. (1989) conclude that, even 
though there are many opportunities for compensa-
tory responses (ie mitigative action), the effects of 
climatic changes on US forest products would be 
negative. 
Van Kooten and Arthur (1989) found that despite 
assumed increases in forest productivity in the 
boreal forests of western Canada under 2 x C O z 
climates, the welfare of Canadian forest-products 
producers would be reduced more than the welfare 
of Canadian forest-products consumers would 
increase. The economic benefits of the increased 
productivity of western Canadian forests would 
accrue mainly to Canada's trading partners. Con-
trary to these findings for Canada are the specula-
tions of Babcock (1989) who stated that with climat-
ic change influences on North American forests, 
there would be net undesirable socioeconomic 
impacts in the US and net desirable socioeconomic 
impacts in Canada. 
The socioeconomic consequences of climatic changes 
for the world forest sector could be severe, especial-
ly where the Gross National Product has a high 
forestry component (Table 2.5). This conclusion is 
reach under a great deal of uncertainty; however, 
intensively managed forests have the potential to 
mitigate many of the anticipated undesirable impacts 
of climate changes. No doubt they also have the 
potential to intensify the effects if they are poorly 
designed and implemented. 
2-30 
Table 2.5a Summary of forest resources and forest management species (1986) 
Canada 
244 
506 
1.59 
16.87 
USA 
210 
415,000 
15.44 
8.73 
Austria 
3.0 
95 
1.1 
2.48 
FRG 
7.3 
898 
8.9 
4.98 
Indonesia 
45 
85 
0.22 
2.00 
China 
122 
260 
3.38 
0.68 
India 
45 
246 
0.22 
0.2 
Brazil 
350 
250 
0 
1.22 
Chile 
4.7 
16.4 
0.16 
0.48 
Productive forest land (million ha) 
Impact of forestry on economy 
GNP 
(Sbillion Cdn) 
impoit 
Export 
Managed species: 
Canada: Picea spp., Pinus spp., Abies balsamea, Populus 
USA: 
Picea spp., Pinus spp., Quercus, Carya, Acer, Fagus, Betula, Ulmus 
Austria: Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, Larix decidua, Abiel alba, Fagus sylvatica 
Federal Republic of Germany: Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, Abies alba, Pseudotsuga menziesii, Larix decidua, 
Fagus sylvatica, Quercus robur 
Productive forest land (million ha) 
Impact of forestry on economy 
GNP 
(Sbillion Cdn) 
import 
Export 
Managed species: 
Indonesia: Meranti romin, Tectonia grandis, Pinus merkusii, Pterocarpus indicans, Eucalyptus deglupta, Acacia 
decurrens 
China: 
Dawn redwood, Cathay a, Golden Larch, Chinese swamp cypress, folkiena cedar, larches, Chinese fir, 
Korean pine 
India: 
Dipterocarpus spp., Shore a rubusta, Cedrus deodar a, Pinus raxburghii, Abies densa, Picea smithiana 
Brazil: 
Eucalyptus spp., Tectonia grandis, Khaya spp., Swietenia macrophyUa 
Chile: 
Pinus radiata. Eucalyptus spp., Populus, Pinus 
Productive forest land (million ha) 
Impact of forestry on economy 
GNP 
(Sbillion Cdn) 
import 
Export 
Managed species: 
Kenya: 
Ocotea spp., Myrica salicifolia. Acacia labai. Acacia abyssinica, Podocarpus gracilis, Juniperus 
procera 
Zambia: 
Brachyslegia spp., Jubernardia angelensis, Eucalyptus grandis, Pinus kesiyia 
Finland: 
Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, Betula pendula 
New Zealand: 
Pinus radiata, Podocarpus totara, Rimu compressinum, Kanaki, Rata 
Kenya 
1.1 
1.7 
0.02 
0.004 
Zambia 
4.1 
2.1 
0.09 
0 
Finland 
18.2 
96.9 
0.4 
7.15 
New 
Zealand 
2.8 
23.2 
0.16 
0.55 
2-31 
Table 2.5b Roundwood production, imports, exports and their value 
Roundwood production (thousand m3) 
Roundwood imports (thousand m3) 
Value (CdnSOOO) 
Roundwood exports (thousand m3) 
Value (CdnSOOO) 
Roundwood production (thousand m3) 
Roundwood imports (thousand m3) 
Value (CdnSOOO) 
Roundwood exports (thousand m3) 
Value (CdnSOOO) 
Roundwood production (thousand m3) 
Roundwood imports (thousand m3) 
Value (CdnSOOO) 
Roundwood exports (thousand m3) 
Value (CdnSOOO) 
Indonesia 
159,768 
0 
0 
404 
15,984 
Kenya 
33,763 
0 
0 
34 
1,274 
Chile 
16,364 
0 
0 
1,169 
54,021 
China 
268,835 
12,310 
1,310,400 
44 
9,644 
Zambia 
Canada 
180,419 
5,269 
230,132 
5,068 
371,860 
9,946 
9 
1,453 
0 
0 
USA 
484,551 
1 
2,842 
32,904 
20,410 
1,973,704 
India 
237,774 
27 
4,314 
16 
1,213 
Finland 
41,297 
5,258 
223,037 
1,523 
157,791 
Austria 
13,622 
4,756 
281,899 
768 
76,468 
Brazil 
33,763 
64 
10,305 
9 
1,538 
New Zealand 
9,341 
3 
1,321 
997 
54,146 
FRG 
30,411 
3,182 
405,908 
4,176 
308,674 
Our ability to cope with the projected impacts will 
depend on the near-term acquisition of knowledge 
through focused research and assessment and on 
prudent timely and proactive forest management 
policies and strategies. 
4 
Summary and conclusions 
4.1 Agriculture 
4.1.1 Effects on food security 
Sufficient evidence is now available from, a variety 
of different studies, to indicate that changes of 
climate would have an important effect on agricul-
ture. Yet the fact that there are major uncertainties 
regarding likely effects in specific reasons should be 
a cause for concern. Studies have not yet conclu-
sively determined whether, on average, global 
agricultural potential will increase or decrease. 
On balance, the evidence is that food production at 
the global level can, in the face of estimated changes 
of climate, be maintained at essentially the same as 
would have occurred without climate change, but the 
cost of achieving this is unclear. Moreover, there 
may well occur severe negative effects at the region-
al level, particularly in regions of high present-day 
vulnerability least able to adjust technically to such 
effects. Increases in productive potential at high mid 
latitudes and high latitudes, while being of regional 
importance, are not likely to open up large new 
areas for production. 
The gains in productive 
potential here due to climatic warming are unlikely 
to balance large-scale reductions in potential in 
some major grain-exporting regions at mid-latitude. 
4.1.2 Magnitudes of possible dislocation 
Under the estimate of changes in productive poten-
tial for a 2 x C02 climate outlined in this report 
prices of some mid-latitude crops such as maize, 
soy-bean and wheat could increase, reflecting a small 
net decrease in the global food production capability 
of these crops. Rice production could, however, 
increase if available moisture increased in Southeast 
Asia. The average global increase in overall produc-
tion costs due to climate could thus be small (per-
haps a few per cent of world agricultural GDP). 
Much depends however, on how beneficial are the 
so-called 'direct' effects of increased CO: on crop 
yield. If plant productivity is substantially enhanced 
and more moisture is available in some major 
production areas, then world productive potential of 
staple cereals could increase relative to demand and 
food prices could be reduced as a result. If, on the 
contrary, there is little beneficial direct C0 2 effect 
and climate changes arc negative for agricultural 
potential in all or most of the major food-exporting 
areas, then the average costs of world agricultural 
production due to climate could increase significant-
2-32 
ly, these increased costs amounting to perhaps over 
10% of world agricultural G D P . 
4.1.3 The most vulnerable regions and 
sectors 
On the basis both of limited resource capacity in 
relation to present day population and of possible 
future diminution of the agricultural resource base 
as a consequence of reduced crop-water availability, 
two broad sets of regions appear most vulnerable to 
climatic change: 
(i) some semi-arid tropical and 
subtropical regions (viz 
western Arabia, the 
Maghreb, western West Africa, Horn of Africa and 
southern Africa, eastern Brazil) and (ii) some humid 
tropical and equatorial regions (viz southeast Asia, 
Central America). 
In addition, certain regions that are currently net 
exporters of cereals could also be characterised by 
reduced crop-water availability and thus reduced 
productive potential as a result of climatic changes. 
Any decrease in production in these regions could 
markedly affect future global food prices and pat-
terns of trade. 
These regions include: 
southern 
Europe, southern US, parts of South America, 
western Australia. 
4.1.4 The effect of altered climatic 
extremes 
Relatively small changes in the mean values of 
rainfall and temperature can have a marked effect 
on the frequency of extreme levels of available 
warmth and moisture. For example, the number of 
very hot days which can cause damaging heat stress 
to temperate crops could increase significantly in 
some regions as a result of 1° or 2°C increase in the 
mean annual temperatures. Similarly, reductions in 
average levels of soil moisture as a result of higher 
rates of évapotranspiration could increase substan-
tially the number of days with a minimum threshold 
of water availability for given crops. 
Although at present we know little about how these 
frequencies of extreme events may alter as a result 
of climatic change, the potential impact of concur-
rent drought or heat stress in the major food-export-
ing regions of the world could be severe. In addi-
tion, relatively small decreases in rainfall or 
increases in évapotranspiration could markedly 
increase both the risk and the intensity of drought in 
currently drought-prone (and often food-deficient) 
regions. Change in drought risk represents poten-
tially the most serious impact of climatic change on 
agriculture both at the regional and the global level. 
4.1.5 Effects on crop growth potential, land 
degradation, pests and diseases 
Higher levels of atmospheric C 0 2 are expected to 
enhance the growth rate of some staple cereal crops 
such as wheat and rice, but not of others such as 
millet, sorghum and maize. The use of water by 
crop plants may also be efficient under higher C 0 2 
levels. However, it is not clear how far these poten-
tially beneficial 'direct' effects of enhanced atmos-
pheric C 0 2 will be manifested in the farmers field 
rather than in the experimental glasshouse. 
Warming is likely to result in a poleward shift of 
thermal limits of agriculture, which may increase 
productive potential in high latitude regions. But 
soils and terrain may not enable much of this 
potential to be realised. Moreover, shifts of mois-
ture limits in some semi-arid and subhumid regions 
could lead to significant reductions of potential here, 
with serious implications for regional food supplies 
in some developing countries. 
There are indications that precipitation in a warmer 
world would be received in more intense storms at 
the expense at the expense of more widespread and 
less intense showers. This would tend to encourage 
higher rates of soil erosion, especially if higher rates 
of evaporation lead to greater differences in soil 
moisture between dry periods and wet periods of the 
year. 
Temperature increases may extend the geographic 
range of some insect pests and insect diseases, 
allowing, for example, the expansion of those pests 
at present limited to tropical countries to current 
subtropical and temperate regions. 
4.1.6 Regional impacts 
Impacts on potential yields are likely to vary greatly 
according to types of climatic change and types of 
agriculture. 
In the northern mid-latitude regions 
where summer drying may reduce productive poten-
tial (eg in the south and central US and in southern 
Europe) studies have estimated yield potential to fall 
by ca 10-30% under an equilibrium 2 x C 0 2 climate. 
Towards the northern edge of current core produc-
ing regions, however, warming may enhance produc-
tive potential in climatic terms. When combined 
with direct C 0 2 effects, increased climatic potential 
could be substantial - though in actuality it may be 
limited by soils and terrain. 
There are indications that warming could lead to an 
overall reduction of cereal production potential in 
North America, and to reduced potential in southern 
Europe but increased potential in northern Europe. 
2-33 
Warming could allow increased agricultural output 
in regions near the northern limit of current produc-
tion in the USSR, but output in the Ukraine and 
Kazakhstan could only increase if corresponding 
increases in soil moisture were to occur, and this is 
at present uncertain. 
Under the estimates of changes in climate outlined 
in this report, reduced output in North America, 
particularly of maize and soybean, would lead to 
increases in world prices in these crops and resultant 
increases in costs of livestock food and livestock 
products. The prices of wheat, rice and other staples 
would, however, depend on changes in yield poten-
tial in other major producing regions, and insuffi-
cient is known at present about possible changes of 
climate in these areas. 
Little is known about likely impacts in semi-arid and 
humid tropical regions, because production potential 
here largely depends on crop water availability and 
the regional pattern of possible changes in precipita-
tion is unclear at present. It is wise, however, to 
assume that crop water availability could decrease in 
some regions. 
Under these circumstances there 
could be substantial regional dislocation of access to 
food supply. 
4.1.7 Rates of adaptability 
In some parts of the world climatic limits to agricul-
ture are estimated to shift poleward by 200-300 km 
per degree of warming (or 100 km per decade under 
a scenario) of a 3°C global warming by 2060. The 
warming-induced upward shift in thermal zones 
along mountain slopes would be in the order of 120¬
200 m. 
There are indications that agriculture has an ability 
to adjust, within given economic and technological 
constraints, to a certain, limited rate of climatic 
change. 
This capability probably varies greatly 
between regions and sectors but no thorough 
analysis of adaptive capacity has yet been conducted 
for the agricultural sector. 
In some currently highly variable climates, farmers 
may be more adaptable than those in regions of 
more equable climate. But in less developed econo-
mies, and particularly in some marginal types of 
agriculture, this intrinsic adaptive capability may be 
much less. It is important to establish in more detail 
the nature of this adaptability, and thus help deter-
mine critical rates of climatic change that would 
exceed those that could be accommodated by within-
system adjustments. 
4.1.8 Future tasks 
This report has emphasised the inadequacy of our 
present knowledge. It is clear that more information 
on potential impacts would help us identify the full 
range of potentially useful responses and assist in 
determining which of these may be most valuable. 
Some priorities for future research may be summa-
rised as follows: 
• Improved knowledge is needed of effects of 
changes in climate on crop yields and livestock 
productivity in different regions and under varying 
types of management. To date, less than a dozen 
detailed regional studies have been completed, 
and these are insufficient as a basis for generalis-
ing about effects on food production at the re-
gional or world scale. 
• Improved understanding is needed of the effects 
of changes in climate on other physical processes, 
for example on rates of soil erosion and salinisa-
tion; on soil nutrient depletion; on pests, diseases 
and soil microbes, and their vectors; on hydro-
logical conditions as they affect irrigation water 
availability. 
• An improved ability is required to 'scale-up' our 
understanding of effects on crops and livestock to 
effects on farm production, on village production, 
and on national and global food supply. This is 
particularly important because policies must be 
designed to respond to impacts at the national 
and global levels. Further information is needed 
on the effects of changes in climate on social and 
economic conditions in rural areas (eg employ-
ment and income, equity considerations, farm 
infrastructure, support services etc). 
• Further information is needed on the range of 
potentially effective technical adjustments at the 
farm and village level (eg irrigation, crop selec-
tion, fertilising 
etc) and on the economic and 
political constraints on such adjustments. 
In 
particular, it is recommended that international 
centres of agricultural research consider the 
potential value of new research programs aimed 
at identifying or developing cultivars appropriate 
for altered climates. 
• Further information is needed on the range of 
potentially effective policy responses at regional, 
national and international levels (eg reallocations 
of land use, plant breeding, improved agricultural 
extension schemes, large-scale water transfers 
etc). 
2-34 
4.2 Forestry - future deliberations 
Countries must develop and perfect technologies to 
attain sustainable production from trees in all 
aspects, food, fodder, shelter, fuelwood and soil 
protection. 
Policy makers at all levels must be 
aware of the local perceptions of the use of trees, 
choice of species and the attitudes on management 
and protection of natural forest resources. 
Two observations may be made. First, the problems 
of forest ecosystems are usually region-specific; 
therefore, analyses of the impacts must be region-
specific. Universal issues include the conversion of 
all-aged multispecies, natural closed forests to high-
yielding, intensively managed, mono-specific forests 
or to other uses including; 
non-forest land use, 
inadequately regenerated natural forest, or low-yield 
managed plantations. The latter three conversions 
often fall short of local needs in developing countries 
and make forest product industries vulnerable to 
fibre shortages while at the same time biodiversity is 
reduced, wildlife habitat is degraded and carbon 
emissions to the atmosphere increase. 
The second observation concerns the uncertainty as 
to whether fifty years hence, these same issues will 
affect world forest ecosystems. The future of these 
forestry problems like the effects of climatic changes 
on the forest sector is largely dependent on society's 
successes or failures in addressing and solving them. 
Nevertheless, if these issues and tensions continue 
over the next 50-100 years, climatic changes might 
relieve or aggravate them (Table 2.5). 
An initial assessment leads to the conclusion that 
climatic changes are more likely to exacerbate these 
issues and tensions than to reduce them. 
This 
finding depends on the assumption that during the 
next 30-50 years in response to climatic changes, 
forests everywhere in the world will be sensitive to 
some decline. If, forests in some regions are largely 
unaffected by climatic changes, or subject to inten-
sive forest management resulting in increased growth 
rates, then many of the statements in Table 2.5 will 
not occur. As future climatic changes become more 
apparent the necessity for strong and proactive 
intensive forest management, agroforestry and urban 
forestry programs will become obvious. 
The following research and assessment initiatives 
should be developed or pursued in the near future 
to reduce the level of these uncertainties. 
• Studies on biological responses to various rates 
and magnitudes of change to obtain reliable 
parameters for simulation models. The genetic 
variability needs to be investigated simultaneous-
ly. Earlier established experiments are of special 
value because the final response may occur after 
several years of variable weather. 
• Detailed regional climate scenarios are needed 
for the development of forest impact studies (eg 
see Gibbs and Hoffman, 1987; Cohen, 1989). 
Studies of impacts must be global in scope, 
international in organisation, institutional in focus 
and historical in breadth. 
• Studies at the stand-level are a prerequisite for 
credible socioeconomic assessments of forest-
sector responses to climate. 
Stand-response 
studies require regional climate scenarios as 
input, and should employ suitable stand-dynamics 
simulators (eg Pastor and Post, 1985; 1986; 1988). 
• Better understanding of the relationship between 
species and sites is required. Progress is being 
made in identifying and mapping the climatically 
suitable and sustainable areas for a wide variety 
of tree species (eg Booth et al., 1989). 
• Improved knowledge is required concerning the 
potential role of forest management at the man-
agement unit scale, in mitigating undesirable 
impacts and capitalising on desirable impacts due 
to climatic change. In industrial forests, manage-
ment units are composed of several thousand 
stands and cover 10
5-10
6 ha. Forest-level analyses 
require inputs from stand-scale models employing 
suitable forest-dynamics simulators (eg Attebring 
et al., 1988; Wang et al., 1987). 
• Analyses are required at the regional-scale (10
5 
ha +) of the possible effects on wildlife habitat 
and recreational potential resulting from climate-
induced forest-structure changes. These studies 
require scenarios of the dynamics of wildlife 
habitat, which can be developed using forest 
simulators as noted above. 
• Analyses are required at the regional scale (10
7 
ha +) of the potential socioeconomic repercus-
sions on rural communities, industrial concerns, 
markets and trade in forest products, and on 
governments, resulting from timber-supply fluctu-
ations due to climatic change. 
• Socioeconomic impacts should focus on the 
transitional climate that may occur over the next 
several decades, rather than on a single future 
long-term 'equilibrium' climate. 
• In the face of great uncertainties about rates and 
magnitudes of climatic changes, forest responses 
to potential climatic change and socioeconomic 
repercussions of climate induced forest changes, 
2-35 
it is prudent to prepare for severe undesirable 
impacts to ensure that viable and flexible options 
are implemented to maintain sustainable forest 
ecosystems. 
• The relationships between rates of biophysical 
processes, 
socioeconomic and technological 
processes must be known in order to understand 
and respond satisfactorily to socioeconomic 
impacts of climatic changes on the forest sector. 
Examining biogeochemical changes on a global scale 
is so complex that adding humans as an additional 
variable further complicates the issue; nevertheless, 
humans are the critical element in the study of 
ecological systems. We must consider the institu-
tional imperatives, and the economic and political 
influences on people in different nations with the 
cultural diversity that distinguishes and may domi-
nate our actions. 
2-36 
References 
Abashina, E.V. and Sirotenko, O.D. 1986, 'An applied 
dynamic model of crop yield for the simulation system of 
agrometeorological service'. Transactions All Union 
Institute of Agricultural Meteorology 21, pp. 13-33. [In 
Russian] 
Acock, B. and Allen, L.H. 198S, 'Crop responses to 
elevated carbon dioxide concentrations'. 
In: 
Direct 
Effects of Increasing Carbon Dioxide on Vegetation, B.R. 
Strain and J.D. Cure (eds). US Department of Energy. 
DOE/ER/-0238. pp. 33-97. 
Akong'a, J., Downing, T.E., Konijn, N.T., Mungai, D.N., 
Muturi, H.R. and Potter, H.L. 1988, 'The Effects of 
Climatic Variations on Agriculture in Central and Eastern 
Kenya'. In: 
The Impact of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture Vol. 2 Assessments In Semi-Arid Regions, 
M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands 
American Forestry Association 1989, Global Relief 
Program, Washington DC. 
Anderson, R.S. and Huber W., 1988, The Hour of the 
Fox: Tropical Forests, the World Bank, and Indigenous 
People in Central India. University of Washington, 
Seattle, 158pp. 
Andrasko, K. and Wells, J.B. 1989, 'North American 
forests during rapid climate change: overview of effects 
and policy response options'. In: Coping with Climate 
Change - Proceedings of the Second North American 
Conference on Preparing for Climate Change: A 
Cooperative Approach, J.C. Topping Jr. (ed.). The 
Climate Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 282-291. 
Anonymous 1987. A Review of Forestry and Forest 
Industries in the Asia-Pacific Region. 
Asian 
Development Bank, Manila, Philippines. 
Arthur, L . M . 1988, 'The implications of climate change 
for agriculture in the prairie provinces'. Climate Change 
Digest, CCD 88-01, Environment Canada. 
Attebring, J., Nilsson, S. and Sallnaes, O. 1987, 'A model 
for long-term forecasting of timber yield - a description 
with special reference to the Forest Study at HAS A'. 
Unpublished manuscript, International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Auclair, A.N. 1987, 'The climate change theory of forest 
decline: 
concept 
paper 
and 
research 
proposal'. 
Unpublished manuscript. Atmospheric Environment 
Service, 
Canada 
Department 
of 
Environment, 
Downsview, Ontario, Canada, 25pp. plus appendices. 
Austin, R.B. 1988, 'Breeding for increased yield in wheat: 
prerequisites, achievements and prospects'. Aspects of 
Applied Biology 17, pp. 289-295. 
Babcock, H.M. 1989, 'Economic implications to forestry 
of future climate predictions. Climate Applications'. In: 
Forest Renewal and Forest Production - Proceedings of 
Forest Climate '86, D.C Maclver, R.B. Street and A.N. 
Auclair (eds). Supply and Services Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, pp. 209-211. 
Balteanu, D., Ozende, P., Huhn, M., Kerschner, H., 
Tranquillini, W. and Bortenschlager, S. 1987, 'Impact 
analysis of climatic change in the central European 
mountain ranges'. Vol. G. In: European Workshop on 
Interrelated Bioclimatic and Land Use Changes. 
Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands, October 1987. 
Barr, B.M. and Breden K.E. 1988, The Disappearing 
Russian Forest. Rowman & Littlefield, Totowa, New 
Jersey, 252pp. 
Bazzaz, F.A., Garbett, K. and Williams, W.E. 1985, 
Effect of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide on plant 
communities. In: Direct Effects of Increasing Carbon 
Dioxide on Vegetation, B.R. Strain and J.D. Cure (eds). 
US Department of Energy. DOE/ER/0238, Washington. 
Chapter 7. 
Beran, M.A. and Arnell, N.W. 1989, Effect of Climatic 
Change on Quantitative Aspects of United Kingdom Water 
Resources. Report for Department of Environment Water 
Inspectorate. Institute of Hydrology, United Kingdom. 
Beresford, R.M. and Fullerton, R.A. 1989, 'Effects of 
climate change on plant diseases'. Submission to Climate 
Change Impacts Working Group, May 1989, 6pp. 
Bergthorsson, P., Bjomsson, H., Dyrmundsson, O., 
Gudmundsson, B., Helgadottir, A. and Jonmundsson, 
J.V. 1988, 'The effects of climatic variations on 
agriculture in Iceland'. In: 
The Impact of Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture, Vol. 1 Cool Temperate and 
Cold Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. Konijn 
(eds). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Binkley, C.S. 
1988, 'A case study of the effects of 
C02-induced climatic wanning on forest growth and the 
forest sector: B. Economic effects on the world's forest 
sector'. In: 
The Impact of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture. Volume I. Assessments in Cool Temperate 
and Cold Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter, and N.T. 
Konijn (eds). Reidel, Dordrecht, the Netherlands, pp. 
197-218. 
Biasing, T.J. and Solomon, A . M . 1983, Response of North 
American Corn Belt to Climatic Warming, prepared for 
the US Department of Energy, Office of Energy 
Research, 
Carbon 
Dioxide 
Research 
Division, 
Washington, DC, DOE/N88-004. 
Boko, M. 1988, Climats et Communautés rurales du Benin: 
Rythmes climatiques et rythmes de dévelopement, 
Doctorat 
d'Etat-et-Lettres 
thesis, 
Universite 
de 
Bourgogne. 
Booth, T.H., Stein J.A., Nix H.A. and Hutchinson M.F. 
1989. 
'Mapping regions climatically suitable for 
particular species: an example using Africa'. Forest 
Ecology and Management 28, pp. 19-31. 
Booth, T.H. and McMurtrie R.E. 1988, 'Climatic change 
and Pinus radiata plantations in Australia'. 
In: 
Greenhouse: Planning for Climate Change, G.I. Pearman 
(ed.). CSIRO, East Melbourne, Australia, and E.J. Brill, 
Leiden, the Netherlands, pp. 534-545. 
Brandao, L.G. 1984, The New Eucalyptus Forest, The 
Marcus Wallenburg Foundation, Sweden. 
Bravo, R.E., Canadas Cruz, L., Estrada, W., Hodges, T., 
Knapp, G., Ravelo, A.C., Planchuelo-Ravelo, A.M., 
Rovere, O., Salcedo Solis, T. and Yugcha, T. 1988, 'The 
effects of climatic variations on agriculture in the Central 
2-38 
Sierra of Ecuador'. 
In: 
The Impact of Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture Vol. 2. 
Assessments in 
Semi-Arid Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. 
Konijn (eds). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Brereton, A.J. 1989, 'Analysis of the effects of watertable 
on grassland farming systems'. In: Land Water Use, 
V.A. Dodd and P.M. Grace (eds). Balkema, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands, pp. 2685-2690. 
Brewer, G.D. 
1986. 
'Methods for synthesis: policy 
exercises'. 
In: 
Sustainable Development of the 
Biosphere, W.C. Clark, R.E. Munn (eds). International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria, and Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, pp. 455-473. 
Budawski, G. 1981, 'Agroforestry in Central America'. In: 
Agroforestry: Proceedings of a Seminar held in CATIE, 
Turricalba, Costa Rica. 
Bunce, J.A. 1989, 'Short and long term inhibition of 
respiratory carbon dioxide efflux by elevated carbon 
dioxide'. Annals of Botany, in press. 
Christopherson, N.S., Barkley, B., Leden, S. and 
Mitchell, P. 1989, Production Technology for short-
rotation forestry. IEA Information Report, 89:1. 
Ciborowski, P. and Abrahamson, D.E. 1988, 'The role of 
uncertainty'. 
In: 
The Greenhouse Effect: Policy 
Implications of a Global Warming, D.E. Abrahamsonand 
P. Ciborowski, (eds). Center for Urban and Regional 
Affairs, 
University 
of 
Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, pp. 295-358. 
CIDA 1985, 
Sustaining the Forest: An Ecological 
Challenge. Canadian International Development Agency, 
Hull, Quebec. 16pp. 
Cohen, S.J. 1989, Bringing the Global Warming Issue 
Closer to Home: The challenge of regional impact 
studies. 
Unpublished manuscript, Canadian Climate 
Centre, Downsview, Ontario. 15pp. 
Colinaux, P.A. 1989, 'The past and future Amazon'. 
Scientific American (May 1989), pp. 102-108. 
Crosson, P. 1989 
'Greenhouse warming and climate 
change: Why should we care?'. Food Policy, Vol. 14, 
No. 2 (May 1989), pp. 107-118. 
Cure, J.D. 1985, 'Carbon Dioxide Doubling Responses: a 
crop survey'. In: Direct Effects of Increasing Carbon 
Dioxide on Vegetation, B.R. Strain and J.D. Cure (eds). 
US DOE/ER-0238, Washington, USA, pp. 100-116. 
Cure, J.D. and Acock, B. 1986, 
'Crop responses to 
carbon dioxide doubling: 
a literature survey', 
Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 38, pp. 127-145. 
Dahlman, R.C., Strain, B.R. and Rogers, H.H. 1985, 
'Research on the Response of Vegetation to Elevated 
Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide'. Journal of Environmental 
Quality 14, pp. 1-8. 
Davis, M.B. 1989, Lags in vegetation response to global 
warming.' Climatic Change 15, pp. 75-82. 
Delft Hydraulics Laboratory 1986, Impact of Sea Level 
Rise on Society, Proceedings of Workshop, August 1986. 
Initiated by J.E. Prins, 21pp. 
Drummond, 
R.O. 
1987, 
'Economic 
Aspects 
of 
Ectoparasites of Cattle in North America'. 
In: 
Symposium, The Economic Impact of Parasitism in Cattle, 
XXIII World Veterinary Congress, Montreal, pp. 9-24. 
Duinker, P.N., Antonovsky M.Ja. and Solomon A . M . 
1989, 'Final Report: Task-Force Meeting - Impacts of 
Changes in Climate and Atmospheric Chemistry on 
Northern Forest Ecosystems and Their Boundaries: 
Research Directions'. Working Paper WP-89-14. 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 
Laxenburg, Austria. 
Duinker, P.N., Toth F. and Nilsson S. 1989, 'Policy 
Exercises in the IIASA Forest Study: A Methodological 
Review'. Draft in preparation for an IIASA Working 
Paper, International Institute or Applied Systems 
Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Duinker, P.N. 
1986, 
A Systematic Approach for 
Forecasting in Environmental Impact Assessment: A 
Deer-habitat Case Study. Unpublished PhD Thesis, 
Faculty of Forestry, University of New Brunswick, 
Frederickton, New Brunswick. 
Duinker, P.N. 1989, 'Biota: Forest Decline'. In: Toward 
Ecological Sustainability in Europe. A Study on the 
Future Environments of Europe: Climate, Water 
Resources, Soils and Biota, A . M . Solomon and L. 
Kauppi (eds). Draft Final Report to Bundesministerium 
fuer Forschung und Technology, Federal Republic of 
Germany, and Draft Research Report, International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria, pp. 105-136. 
Eamus, D. and Jarvis, P.G. 1989, Advances in Ecological 
Research 19, pp. 1-55. 
Eckersley, 
R. 
1989, 
Regreening Australia: 
The 
Environmental, Economic and Social Benefits of 
Reforestation. Occasional Paper No. 3, CSIRO, East 
Melbourne, Australia. 28pp. 
Edwards, G.E. and Walker, D.A. 1983, C3, C4: 
Mechanisms and cellular and environmental regulation of 
photosynthesis, Blackwell, Oxford, 542pp. 
Emanuel, W.R., ShugartH.H. and Stevenson M.P. 1985a, 
'Climatic change and the broad-scale distribution of 
terrestrial ecosystem complexes'. Climatic Change 7, pp. 
29-43. 
Emanuel, W.R., ShugartH.H. and Stevenson M.P. 1985b, 
'Response to comment: climatic change and the 
broad-scale 
distribution 
of 
terrestrial 
ecosystem 
complexes'. Climatic Change 7, pp. 457-460. 
Emanuel, K.A. 1987, 'The dependence of hurricane 
intensity on climate: 
mathematical simulation of the 
effects of tropical sea surface temperatures'. 
Nature, 
326, pp. 483-485. 
Environmental Protection Agency 1989, The Potential 
Effects of Global Climate Change on the United States. 
Report to Congress. 
Environmental Protection Agency 1988, The Potential 
Effects of Global Climate Change on the United States, 
Volume I: Regional Studies. Draft Report to Congress, 
US Environmental Protection Agency. 
FAO Undated, The Tropical Forestry Action Plan. Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
Rome. 32pp. 
FAO 1984, Land, Food and People, Rome, 96pp. 
FAO 1987, Trade Yearbook, Vol. 41, Rome. 
FAO 1988a, The state of forest resources in developing 
countries. FAO Misc. 88: 7. 
FAO 1988b, Forestry Action Plan for Latin America and 
the Caribbean: Executive Summary. 
Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
21pp. 
2-39 
Farago, T. 1989, On research of climatic variability, 
regional aspects of climatic change and their impacts on 
agriculture, forestry and land-use in Hungary. Personal 
communication. 
Fernandes, W. and Kulkarni S. 1983, Towards a New 
Forest Policy: People's Rights and Environmental Needs. 
Indian Social Institute, New Delhi, India. 155pp. 
Firor, J.W. and Portney P.R. 1982, 'The global climate'. 
In: Current Issues in Natural Resources Policy, P.R. 
Portney and R.B. Haas, eds). Resources for the Future, 
Washington, DC, pp. 179-215. 
Flowers, P.J., Brickell J.E., Green A.W., Hyde J.F.C. Ill, 
Jackson D.H., Raettig T.L., Schuster E.G. and Wood 
W.L. 1987,. Montana's Timber Supply: An inquiry into 
possible 
futures'. 
Resource 
Bulletin 
INT-40, 
Intermountain Research Station, USDA Forest Service, 
Ogden, Utah. 22pp. 
Fosberg, M.A. 1989, 'Climate change and forest fires'. 
In: Coping with Climate Change - Proceedings of the 
Second North American Conference on Preparing for 
Climate Change: A Cooperative Approach, J.C. Topping 
Jr., (ed.). The Climate Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 
292-296. 
Gibbs, M.J. and Hoffman J.S. 1987, 'An approach for 
generating climate change hypotheticals given limitations 
in current climate models'. In: The Greenhouse Effect, 
Climate Change, and U.S. Forests, W.E. Shands and J.S. 
Hoffman, 
(eds). 
The Conservation Foundation, 
Washington, DC, pp. 91-111. 
Gifford, R.M. 1988, 'Direct effect of higher carbon 
dioxide levels concentrations on vegetation'. 
In: 
Greenhouse: 
Planning for Climate Change, G.I. 
Pearman, (ed.). CSIRO, Australia, pp. 506-519. 
Ilaile, T. 1989, Estimated impacts of climatic change on 
Ethiopia (National Meteorological Services Agency, 
Addis Ababa). Personal communication. 
Hall, J. Peter 1989, 'A proposal for the development of a 
land race of Sitka spruce in Newfoundland'. In; Can. 
J.For. Res. 19, pp. 939-941. 
Hamburg, S.P. and Cogbill, C.V. 1988, 'Historical decline 
of red spruce populations and climatic warming'. In: 
Nature 331, pp. 428-431. 
Harrington, J.B. 1989, 'Climate change and the Canadian 
forest'. In: Coping with Climate Change. Proceedings 
of the Second North American Conference on Preparing 
for Climate Change: A Cooperative Approach, J.C. 
Topping Jr., (ed.). The Climate Institute, Washington, 
DC, pp. 297-302. 
Heck, W.W., Taylor, Q.C., Adams, R., Bingham, G., 
Miller, J., Preston, E. and Weinstein, L. 1982, 
'Assessment of crop loss from ozone'. Journal of the Air 
Pollution Control Association 32, pp. 353-61. 
Hekstra, G.P. 1986, 'Will climatic changes flood the 
Netherlands? Effects on agriculture, land use and well-
being'. Ambio 15, pp. 316-326. 
Hill, M.G. and Dymock, J.J. 1989 'Impact of climate 
change: 
agricultural/horticultural systems'. 
DSIR 
Entomology Division, submission to New Zealand 
Climate Change Programme, Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, New Zealand, 16pp. 
Hoffman, J.S. 1984, 'Carbon dioxide and future forests'. 
Journal of Forestry (March 1984), pp. 164-167. 
Houghton, R.A. 1989, 'Greenhouse gases released to the 
atmosphere from deforestation for farmland'. 
In: 
Coping with Climate Change - Proceedings of the Second 
North American Conference on Preparing for Climate 
Change: A Cooperative Approach,} .C. ToppingJr., (ed). 
The Climate Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 219-223. 
Huda, A.K.S. and Ong, C.K. 1989, 'Crop simulation 
models and some implications for agroforestry systems'. 
In: 
Meteorology and Agroforestry, Reifsnyder and 
Darnofer (eds). International Council for Research in 
Agroforestry, ICRAF House, Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 115¬
125. 
I meson, A., Dumont, H. and Sekliziotis, S. 1987, Impact 
Analysis of Climatic Change in the Mediterranean 
Region, Volume F, European Workshop on Interrelated 
Bioclimatic and Land Use Changes, Noordwijkerhout, 
The Netherlands, October 1987. 
Ingram, D.L., Ranilaran, C. and Neil, T. 1986, 'Response 
of container-grown banana, ixora, citrus and dracaiena to 
elevated root temperatures'. In: Hort. Science 21, pp. 
254-255. 
International Wheat Council 1989, Market Report, 
London, 10 July 1989. 
Jarvis, P.G. 1989, 'Atmospheric carbon dioxide and 
forests*. Phil. R. Soc. B, 324, pp. 369-392. 
Jodha, N.S., Gadgil, S., Huda, A.K.S., Singh, R.P. and 
Virmani, S.M. 1988, 'The effects of climatic variations 
on agriculture in dry tropical regions of India'. In: The 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture, Vol. 2., 
Assessments in Semi-Arid Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. 
Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands. 
Jones, M.B. 1986, 'The effects of elevated carbon dioxide 
levels on the growth of crop plants: an attempt to predict 
the consequences for grassland and maize production in 
Europe'. In: Current Issues in Climate Research, A. 
Ghazi and R. Fantechi (eds). CEC, Reidel, Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands. 
Kaida, Y. and Surarerks, V. 1984, 'Climate and 
agricultural land use in Thailand.' In: Climate and 
Agricultural Landuse in Monsoon Asia, M . M . Yoshino, 
(ed.). University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, pp. 231-253. 
Kauppi, P. and Posch, M. 1985, 'Sensitivity of boreal 
forests to possible climatic warming'. Climatic Change 
7, pp. 45-54. 
Kauppi, P. and Posch, M. 1988, 'A case study of the 
effects of COj-induced climate wanning on forest growth 
and the forest sector: 
A. Productivity reactions of 
northern boreal forests'. In: The Impact of Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture: Volume 1, Assessments in 
Cool Temperate and Cold Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. 
Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, pp. 183-15. 
Kauppi, P. 
1987, 'Forests and the changing chemical 
composition of the atmosphere'. In: The Global Forest 
Sector: An Analytical Perspective, M. Kallio, D.P. 
Dykstra and C.S. Binkley, (eds). John Wiley and Sons, 
Chichester, UK, pp. 32-56. 
Kellogg, W.W. and Zhao, Zong-ci. 1988, 'Sensitivity of 
soil moisture to doubling of carbon dioxide in climate 
model experiments. Parti: North America'. Journal qf 
Climate 1, pp. 348-366. 
2-40 
Kellomaeki, S., Haenninen H. and Kolstroem T. 1988, 
'Model computations on the impacts of the climatic 
change on the productivity and silvicultural management 
of the forest ecosystem'. Silva Fennica 22, pp. 293-305. 
Kettunen, L., Mukula, J., Pohjonen, V., Rantanen, O. and 
Varjo, U. 1988, 'The Effects of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture in Finland'. In: The Impact of Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture: Volume 1, Assessments in 
Cool Temperate and Cold Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. 
Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds.). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, pp. 511-614. 
Kimball, B.A. and Idso, S.B. 
1983, 'Increasing 
atmospheric co2 effects on crop yield, water use and 
climate'. Agricultural Water Management 7, pp. 55-72. 
Kimball, B.A. 1983, Carbon Dioxide and Agricultural 
Yield: 
An assemblage and analysis of 770 prior 
observations. Water Conservation Laboratory Report 
No. 14, November 1983. USDA, Agricultural Research 
Service, Phoenix, Arizona. 
Khjn, J.A., Bannick, M.H. and Van Lanen, H.A.J. 1987, 
'C02-induced climatic changes: Impact on soil moisture 
deficit and grass yield in a sample area in The 
Netherlands: 
perspectives for extrapolation to larger 
areas'. 
In: 
European Workshop on Interrelated 
Bioclimatic and Land Use Changes, Noordwijkerhout, 
The Netherlands. 
Koster, E.A., Dahl, E., Lundberg, H., Heinonen, R., 
Koutaniemi, 
L., 
Torssell, 
B.W.R., 
Heino, 
R., 
Lundmark, J.E., Stronquist, L., Ingelog, T., Jonasson, 
L. and Eriksson, E. 1987, 'Impact analysis of climatic 
change in the Fennoscandian part of the boreal and 
sub-arctic zone'. European Workshop on International 
Bioclimate and Land 
Use 
Change, Vol. 
D, 
Noordwijkerhout, The Netherlands. 
Koval, L.A., Mendzhulin, G.V. and Sawateyev, S.P. 
1983, 'The principles of developing parameterized crop 
productivity models'. Transactions State Hydrological 
Institute 280, pp. 119-129. [In Russian] 
Kuusela, K. 1987, Silvicultural Regimes in the Cause and 
Effect Relationships of the Forest-Damage Situation in 
Central Europe. WP-87-31, International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Land Evaluation Group 1987, Implications of Climatic 
Warming for Canada's Comparative Position in 
Agricultural Production and Trade. LEG-27, University 
School of Rural Planning and Development, University of 
Guelph. 
Lave, L.B. 
1988, 
'The greenhouse effect: 
the 
socioeconomic fallout'. 
In: The Greenhouse Effect: 
Policy Implications of a Global Warming, 
D.E. 
Abrahamson and P. Ciborowski (eds). Center for Urban 
and Regional Affairs, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, pp. 287-294. 
Layser, E.F. 1980, 'Forestry and climate change'. Journal 
of Forestry (November 1980), pp. 678-682. 
Leverenz, J.W. and Lev, D.J. 1987, 'Effects of carbon 
dioxide-induced climate changes on the natural ranges of 
six major commercial tree species in the Western United 
States'. In: The Greenhouse Effect, Climate Change, and 
U.S. Forests, W.E.Shands and J.S. Hoffman (eds). The 
Conservation Foundation, Washington, DC, pp. 123-155. 
Londridge, J. and McWilliams, J.R. 1967, 'Heat response 
of higher plants'. In: Thermobiology A.H. Rose (ed). 
Academic Press Inc. London, pp. 231-292. 
Magalhaes, A.R., Filho, H.C., Garagorry, F.L., Gasques, 
J.G., Molion, L.C.B., Neto, daS.A., M . , Nobre, C.A., 
Porto, E.R. and Reboucas, O.E. 1988, "The effects of 
climatic variations on agriculture in Northeast Brazil'. In: 
The Impact of Climatic variations on Agriculture: 
Volume 2, Assessments in Semi-Arid Regions, M.L. 
Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Maini, J.S. 1988, 'Forests and atmospheric change'. In: 
Conference Proceedings - The Changing Atmosphere: 
Implications for Global Security. WMO - No. 710, 
World 
Meteorological 
Organization, 
Geneva, 
Switzerland, pp. 194-209. 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R.T. 1986, 'Reduction in 
summer soil wetness induced by an increase in 
atmospheric carbon dioxide'. Science 232, pp. 626-628. 
Manabe, S., Wetherald, R.T. and Stouffer, R.J. 1981, 
'Summer dryness due to an increase of atmospheric C 0 2 
concentration'. Climatic Change 3, pp. 347-386. 
McNaughton, K.G. and Jarvis, P.G. 1983, 'Predicting 
Effects of Vegetation Change on Transpiration and 
Evaporation'. In: Water Deficits and Plant Growth, 
T.T. Kozlowski (ed), Vol. 7:1-47, Academic Press. 
Maini, J.S. 1988, 'Forest and atmospheric change'. In: 
Conference Proceedings - the Changing Atmosphere; 
Implications for Global Security .Pp. 194-209. WMO-No 
710, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland. 
Mearns, L.O., Katz, R.W. and Schneider, S.H. 1984, 
'Extreme high temperature events: 
changes in their 
probabilities with changes in mean temperatures'. 
Journal of Climatic and Applied Meteorology 23, pp. 
1601-13. 
Mendzhulin, G.V. 1989, Impact of climate change on crop 
yields. Personal communication, 28pp. 
Mendzhulin, G.V. andNikolaev, M.V. 1987, 'Methods for 
study of year-to-year variability of cereals crops yields'. 
Transactions State Hydrological Institute 327, pp. 113¬
131. [In Russian] 
Mendzhulin, G.V., Koval, L.A., Nikolaev, M.V. and 
Sawateyev, 
S.P. 
1987, 
'The 
estimates 
of 
agrometeorological consequences of global climate 
changes. Scenario for North America'. Transactions 
State Hydrological Institute 327, pp. 132-146. [In 
Russian] 
Messenger, G. 1988, 
'Migratory locusts in New 
Zealand?'. The Weta 11 (2), p. 29. 
Michaels, P.J. 1989, 'The Greenhouse Effect: Chicken 
Little and our response to "global warming'". Journal of 
Forestry 87 (7), pp. 35-39. 
Miller, W.F., Dougherty, P.M. and Switzer, G.L. 1987, 
'Effect of rising carbon dioxide and potential climate 
change on loblolly pine distribution, growth, survival, 
and productivity'. In: The Greenhouse Effect, Climate 
Change, and U.S. Forests, W.E. Shands and J.S. 
Hoffman 
(eds). 
The 
Conservation Foundation, 
Washington, DC, pp. 157-187. 
Ministry of Forestry, PRC. 1984, A Brief Account of 
China's Forestry. 
Ministry of Forestry, People's 
Republic of China, Beijing. 20pp. 
2-41 
Mintzer, I.M. 1987, A. matter of degrees; the potential for 
controlling the greenhouse effect. Research Report, 5, 
World Resources Institute, Washington, DC. 60pp. 
Mitchell, J.F.B. and Warrilow, D.A. 1987, 'Summer 
dryness in northern mid-latitudes due to increased C0 2'. 
Nature 330, pp. 238-240. 
Moomaw, W.R. 
1988, 
Testimony of William R. 
Moomaw before the Senate Agriculture Committee, 
December 1, 1988. World Resources Institute, New 
York, NY. 13pp. 
Morison, J.I.L. 1989, 
'Plant growth in increased 
atmospheric C 0 2 \ 
In: 
Carbon Dioxide and other 
Greenhouse Gases: Climatic and Associated Impacts, R. 
Fantechi and A. Ghazi (eds.). CEC, Reidel, Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands, pp. 228-244. 
Morison, J.I.L. 1987, 'Intercellular C 0 2 concentration and 
stomatal response to C0 2.. In: Stomatal Function, E. 
Zeiger, I.R. Cowa and G.D. Farquhar (eds.). Stanford 
University Press, ch. 10, pp. 229-251. 
Morison, J.I.L. 1985, 'Sensitivity of stomata and water 
use efficiency to high C0 2'. Plant Cell and Environment 
8, pp. 467-475. 
Myers, N. 
1989, 'Tropical forests and climate'. 
In: 
Coping with Climate Change - Proceedings of the Second 
North American Conference on Preparing for Climate 
Change: A Cooperative Approach,] .C. Topping Jr. (ed.). 
The Climate Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 310-312. 
Negah, M. 1989, 'The need for meteorological information 
to plan agroforestry on steep slopes in Ethiopia'. In: 
Meteorology and Agroforestry, Reifsnyder and Darnofer 
(eds). International Council for Research in Agroforestry, 
ICRAF House, Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 181-191. 
New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs (External 
Intelligence Bureau) 1988, 
The Impact of Global 
Warming on South Pacific Islands Countries, New 
Zealand Intelligence Assessments Committee, July 1988. 
Newman, J.E. 1980, 'Climate change impacts on the 
growing season of the North American corn belt' 
Biometeorology 7 (Part 2), pp. 128-142. 
Newman, R.L. and Salmon, M.C. 1989, Pressures and 
Responses Concerning Forest Land Use in Australia. 
Unpublished manuscript, R.L. Newman & Partners Pty. 
Ltd., Sydney, Australia. 81pp. 
Ngo-Si-Giai 1989, 'Climatic resources for agroforestry in 
Vietnam'. In: Meteorology and Agroforestry, Reifsnyder 
and Darnofer (eds). International Council for Research in 
Agroforestry, ICRAF House, Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 281¬
289. 
Nikolaev, M.V., Menzhulin, G.V. and Savveteyev, S.P. 
1985, 'Variability of cereals productivity in the USSR 
and the USA'. Transactions State Hydrological Institute 
339, pp. 61-81. [In Russian] 
Nikonov, A. A., Petrova, L.N., Stolyarova, H.M., 
Levedev, V.Yu, Siptits, S.O., Milyutin, N.N. and 
Konijn, N.T. 1988, 'The effects of climatic variations on 
agriculture in the semi-arid zone of the European USSR: 
A. The Stavropol Territory'. In: The Impact of Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture: Volume 2, Assessments in 
Semi-Arid Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. 
Konijn (eds). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Nilsson, S., Sallns, O. and Duinker, P.N. 1989, Potential 
Futures for the Forest Resources of Western and Eastern 
Europe: Base Cases, Forest Decline, and Conversion of 
Agricultural Land. Volume I, Draft Report of the Forest 
Study Timber Assessment. 
International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Nilsson, S. and Duinker, P.N. 1987, 'The extent of forest 
decline in Europe: a synthesis of survey results'. 
Environment 29 (9) pp. 4-9, 30-31. 
Nilsson, S. 1988, Factors Affecting Future Investments in 
Pulp Capacity. WP-88-75. International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 33pp. 
Nilsson, S. 1989, Future Development of the European 
Softwood Lumber Industry. WP-89-11. International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria. 33pp. 
Ninh, N.H. 1989, Impacts on agriculture in Vietnam. 
Personal communication, 4pp. 
Nunn, P.D. 1988, 'Future sea-level rise in the Pacific, 
University of the South Pacific'. In: School of Social 
and Economic Development Working Paper No. 12., Fiji. 
Oguntoyinbo, J.T. 1989, 
Effects of climate change on 
agriculture and 
forestry 
in 
Nigeria. 
Personal 
communication, 3pp. 
Osmond, C.B., Bjorkman, O. and Anderson, D.J. 1980, 
'Physiological processes in plant ecology: towards a 
synthesis with Atriplex'. In: Ecological Studies, Volume 
36, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Panturat, S. and Eddy, A. 1989, Some Impacts on Rice 
Yield from Changes in the Variance of Regional 
Precipitation, AIR Interim Report to UNEP, University 
of Birmingham, 43pp. 
Parry, M.L. and Carter, T.R. 1988, 'The assessments of 
the effects of climatic variations on agriculture: aims, 
methods and summary of results'. In: The Impact of 
Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture, 
Volume I, 
Assessments in Cool Temperate and Cold Regions, M.L. 
Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Parry, M.L., Carter, T.R. and Porter, J.H. 1989, 'The 
Greenhouse Effect and the future of UK agriculture'. 
Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England, pp. 
120-131. 
Parry, M.L. 1976, Climatic Change, Agriculture and 
Settlement, Dawson, Folkestone, England. 
Parry, M.L. and Carter, T.R., Kindler, J., Csoba, P., 
Kerenyi, A. and Pinczes, Z. 1987, 'Impact Analysis of 
Climatic Change in Central European Lowlands: Case 
Studies', Volume E., European Workshop on Interrelated 
Bioclimatic and Land Use Changes, Noordwijkerhout, 
The Netherlands. 
Pashiardis, S. and Michaelides, S. 1989, 'Modelling the 
Growth and Development of Hordeum Vulgare L.: "A 
Dynamic Simulation Approach for Practical Applications 
in a Semi-Arid Mediterranean Environment"'. 
The 
agro-meteorology ofbarley-basedfarming systems, Tunis, 
6-10 March 1989. 
Pastor, J. and Post, W.M. 1985, Development of a linked 
forest productivity/soil process model. ORN L/TM-9519, 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee. 
Pastor, J. and Post W.M. 1986,. 'Influence of climate, 
soil moisture, and succession on forest carbon and 
nitrogen cycles'. Biogeochemistry 2, pp. 3-27. 
Pastor, J. and Post, W.M. 1988, 'Response of northern 
forests to C02-induced climate change'. Nature 334, pp. 
55-58. 
2-42 
Pearch, R.W. and Bjorkman, O. 1983, Physiological 
Effects, CO] and Plants: The Response of Plants to 
Rising Levels of Atmospheric C02, E.R. Lemon (ed). 
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pp. 65-105. 
Peck, T. 
1984, 
"The world perspective'. In: Forest 
Policy: A Contribution to Resource Development, F.C. 
Hummel (ed.). Martinus Nijhoff/Dr W. Junk Publishers, 
The Hague, pp. 21-66. 
Pedgley, D.E. 1989, 'Weather and the current desert 
locust plague*. Weather, 44 (4), pp. 168-171. 
Penkett, S.A. 1988, 'Indications and causes of Ozone 
increase in the Troposphere'. 
In: 
The Changing 
Atmosphere, F.S. Rowland and I.S.A. Isaksen (eds). 
Dahlem Workshop Report, 1988, Wiley-Interscience. 
Persson, R. 
1987, 'Forest resources of the world and 
their future'. 
In: Forest Decline and Reproduction: 
Regional and Global Consequences, L. Kairiukstis, S. 
Nilsson and A.Straszak (eds). WP-87-75, International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria, pp. 453-462. 
Pitovranov, S.E., Iakimets, V., Kislev, V.E. and 
Sirotenko, O.D. 1988b, 
'The effects of climatic 
variations on agriculture in the semi-arid zone of the 
USSR'. In: The Impact of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture: 
Volume 2, Assessments in Semi-Arid 
Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter, N.T. Konijn (eds). 
Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Pitovranov, S.E., Iakimets, V., Kislev, V.I. and Sirotenko, 
O.D. 
1988a, 'The effects of climatic variations on 
agriculture in the subarctic zone of the USSR'. In: The 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture: Volume 1, 
Assessments in Cool, Temperate and Cold Regions, M.L. 
Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Pittock, A.B. and Nix, H.A. 1986, 'The effect of 
changing climate on Australian biomass production - a 
preliminary study'. Climatic Change 8, pp. 243-255. 
Pittock, A.B. 1989b, 'The Greenhouse Effect, regional 
climate change and Australian agriculture'. 
Paper 
presented to Australian Society of Agronomy, 5th 
Agronomy Conference, Perth, September 1989. 
Pittock, A.B. 1989a, Potential impacts of climatic change 
on agriculture, 
forestry and land use. 
Personal 
communication, 5pp. 
Pollard, D.F.W. 1985, 'A forestry perspective on the 
carbon dioxide issue'. The Forestry Chronicle (August), 
pp. 312-318. 
Pollard, D.F.W. 1987, 'Forestry and climate change: 
facing uncertainty'. E.B. Eddy Distinguished Lecture at 
Faculty of Forestry, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, November 1987. 
Qureshi, A. 1989, 'Mitigating climate change: strategies 
to finance retention of tropical forests'. In: Coping with 
Climate Change - Proceedings of the Second North 
American Conference on Preparing for Climate Change: 
A Cooperative Approach, J.C. Topping Jr. (ed.). The 
Climate Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 313-319. 
Ramirez, O. P. 1989 
Impact of climate change on 
agriculture and forests in Costa Rica. 
Personal 
communication. 
Regens, J.L., Cubbage, F.W. and Hodges, D.G. 1989, 
'Climate change and U.S. forest markets'. In: Coping 
with Climate Change - Proceedings of the Second North 
American Conference on Preparing for Climate Change: 
A Cooperative Approach, J.C. Topping Jr. (ed.). The 
Climate Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 303-309. 
Repetto, R. and Gillis, M . 1988, Public Policies and the 
Misuse of Forest Resources. World Resources Institute, 
Washington, DC, and Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK., 432pp. 
Rose, D.W., Ek, A.R. and Belli, K.L. 1987, 'A conceptual 
framework for assessing impacts of carbon dioxide 
change on forest industries'. In: The Greenhouse Effect, 
Climate Change, and U.S. Forests, W.E. Shandsand J.S. 
Hoffman eds). The Conservation Foundation, Washing-
ton, DC, pp. 259-275. 
Rosenzweig, C. 1988/89, 
'Climate Change and U.S. 
Agriculture', US Senate Committee on Agriculture, 
Nutrition and Forestry and US House of Representatives 
Committee on Agriculture. 
Rosenzweig, C. 1985, 'Potential C02-induced effects on 
North American wheat producing regions'. 
Climatic 
Change 7, pp. 367-389. 
Rowntree, P.R., Callander, B.A. and Cochrane, J. 1989, 
'Modelling climate change and some potential effects on 
agriculture in the UK.' Journal of the Royal Society of 
England, forthcoming. 
de las Salas, G. 
1989, 'Agroforestry systems: a 
production/protection land use strategy for steep land in 
the tropics'. In: 
Meteorology and Agroforestry, 
Reifsnyder and Darnofer (eds). International Council for 
Research in Agroforestry, ICRAF House, Nairobi, 
Kenya, pp. 131-141. 
Salinger, M.J. 1989b, C 0 2 and climate change: impacts 
on New Zealand agriculture. Personal communication, 
5pp. 
Salinger, M.J., Williams, J.M. and Williams, W.M. 1989, 
C02 and Climate Change: Impacts on Agriculture, New 
Zealand Meteorological Service, Wellington, New 
Zealand, 29pp. 
Salinger, M.J. 1989a, 
'The effects of greenhouse gas 
warming on forestry and agriculture'. Draft report for 
WMO Commission of Agrometeorology, 20pp. 
Santer, B. 1985, 'The use of General Circulation Models 
in climate impact analysis - a preliminary study of the 
impacts of a C02-induced climatic change on Western 
European Agriculture'. Climatic Change 7, pp. 71-93. 
Sargent, N.E. 
1988, 
'Redistribution of the Canadian 
boreal forest under a warmed climate'. Climatological 
Bulletin 22 (3), pp. 23-34. 
Schelling, T. 1983, 'Climate change: 
implications for 
welfare and policy'. In: Changing Climate: Report of 
the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee, National 
Academy of Sciences, Washington DC. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and Mitchell, J.F.B. 1985, 'Model 
projections of equilibrium response to increased C 0 2 
concentration'. In: Projecting the climatic effects of 
increased C02, M.C. MacCracken and F.M. Luther 
(eds). DOE/ER-0237, US Department of Energy, 
Washington DC, pp. 81-148. 
Schubert, T.H. and Whiteshell, C. 1989, Species trials for 
biomass plantations in Hawaii; a first appraisal. IEA 
Information Report, 89:1. 
Schulze, R.E. 1989, Hydrological response to long term 
climatic change. Personal communication, 9pp. 
2-43 
Sedjo, R.A. and Solomon, A . M . 1989, 'Climate and 
forests'. In: Greenhouse Warming: Abatement and 
Adaptation, N.J. Rosenberg, W.E. Easterling III, P.R. 
Crosson and J. Darmstadter (eds). 
Resources for the 
Future, Washington, DC, pp. 105-119. 
Shea, K.R. 
and Carlson, L.W. 
1984, Increasing 
productivity of multipurpose tree species: a blueprint for 
action. IUFRO Planning Workshop for Asia, 16-28 Juoy, 
Kandy, Sri Lanka. 
Shugart, H.H., Antonovsky, M.Ja., Jarvis, P.G. and 
Sandford, A.P. 1986, 'C0 2, climatic change and forest 
ecosystems'. In: The Greenhouse Effect, Climatic Change 
and Ecosystems, B. Bolin, B.R. Doos, J. Jager and R.A. 
Warrick (eds). 
SCOPE 29, John Wiley and Sons, 
Chichester, UK, pp. 475-521. 
Sinha, S.K. 1989, Impact of climate change on agriculture 
in India. Personal communication, 10pp. 
Sinha, S.K., Rao, N.G. and Swaminathan, M.S, 1988, 
Food Security in the Changing Global Climate, Toronto 
Conference Proceedings, The Changing Atmosphere: 
Implications for Global Security. WMO, Geneva, pp. 
167-192. 
Sirotenko, O.D. 1981, Mathematical Modelling of Moisture 
and Heat Regime and Productivity of Agricultural 
Ecosystems. 
Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat, 167pp. [In 
Russian] 
Sirotenko, O.D. 1989, Impact of climate wanning caused 
by growing concentration of greenhouse gases on forests 
and agriculture. Personal communication. 
Sirotenko, O.D., Abashina, E.V. and Pavlova, V.N. 1984, 
'An estimate of possible climate changes impact on 
agriculture productivity'. Izvestiya of the USSR Academy 
of Science, Atmospheric and Oceanic Physics Seria, 20, 
(no. 11), pp. 1104-1110. [In Russian] 
Sirotenko, O.D., Velichko, A.A. and Dolgy-Trach, V.A. 
'The estimates of the agroclimatic resources of the 
Russian Plain and their possible changes during global 
warming obtained by paleoclimatic scenario'. In press. 
[In Russian] 
Smit, B, Brklacich M . , Stewart R.B., McBrideR., Brown 
M. and Bond D. 1989, 'Sensitivity of crop yields and 
land resource potential to climate change in Ontario, 
Canada'. Climatic Change 14, pp. 153-174. 
Smit, B., Ludlow, L. and Brklacich, M. 1989, 
'Implications of a global climatic warming for agriculture 
- a review and appraisal'. In: Agriculture, Forestry and 
Global Climate Change - A Reader. US Library of 
Congress, April 1989, pp. 196-204. 
Smit, B. 1987, 
'Implications of climatic change for 
agriculture in Ontario'. In: Climate Change Digest, 
CCD 87-02, Environment Canada. 
Smit, B. 
1989, 
'Climate warming and Canada's 
comparative position in agriculture'. 
In: 
Climate 
Change Digest CCD 89-01, Environment Canada, pp. 
1-9. 
Smith, J.B. and Tirpak, D.A. 1988, The Potential Effects 
of Global Climate Change on the United States. Draft 
Report to Congress. 
Volume 2: National Studies. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. 
Solomon, A . M . and West, D.C. 1985, 'Potential responses 
of forests to C02-induced climate change'. 
In: 
Characterization of Information Requirements for Studies 
of C02 Effects: Water Resources, Agriculture, Fisheries, 
Forests and Human Health, M.R. White (ed.). 
DOE/ER-0236, US Department of Energy, Washington, 
DC, pp. 145-169. 
Solomon, A . M . and West, D.C. 1986, 'Atmospheric 
carbon dioxide change: agent of future forest growth or 
decline?' In: Effects of Changes in Stratospheric Ozone 
and Global Climate; Volume 3: Climate Change, J.G. 
Titus (ed.). 
United Nations Environment Programme, 
and US Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, 
DC, pp. 23-38. 
Solomon, A . M . , Tharp M.L., West D . C , Taylor G.E., 
Webb J.W. and Trimble J.L. 
1984, 
Response of 
unmanaged forests to C02-induced climate change: 
available information, initial tests, and data requirements. 
DOE/N BB-0053, US Department o f Energy, Washington, 
DC. 93pp. 
Solomon, A . M . 1986, 'Transient response of forests to 
C02-induced climate change: 
simulation 
modeling 
experiments in eastern North America'. Oecologia 68, 
pp. 567-579. 
Squire, G.R. and Unsworth, M.H. 1988, 'Effects of C0 2 
and Climatic Change on Agriculture', Contract Report to 
Department of the Environment, 
Department of 
Physiology and Environmental Science, University of 
Nottingham. 
Strain, B.R. 1985, 'Physiological and Ecological Control 
on Carbon Sequestering in Terrestrial Ecosystems'. 
Biogeochemistry 1, pp. 293-332. 
Street, R.B. 1989, 
'Climate change and forest fires in 
Ontario'. 
Unpublished manuscript, Canadian Climate 
Centre, Downsview, Ontario. 9pp 
Sutherst, R.W. 1987, 'The role of models in tick control'. 
In: Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Veterinary Preventive Medicine and Animal Production, 
K.L. Hughes (ed.), Australian Veterinary Association, 
Melbourne, Australia, pp. 32-37. 
Terjung, W.H., Ji, H-Y., Hayes, J.T., O'Rourke, P.A. 
and Todhunter, P.E. 1984, 'Actual and potential yield 
for rain fed and irrigated maize in China'. International 
Journal of Biometeorology, 28, pp. 115-135. 
Toth, F.T. 1989, Policy Exercises. RR-89-2, reprinted 
from Simulation and Games, Volume 19 (1988). 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 
Laxenburg, Austria. 
UNECE/FAO 1986, 
European Timber Trends and 
Prospects to the Year 2000 and Beyond. 2 Volumes. 
Secretariat, Agriculture and Timber Division, United 
Nations Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva, and 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 
Rome. 
UNEP 1989, Criteria for Assessing Vulnerability to Sea 
Level Rise: A Global Inventory to High Risk Areas. 
UNEP and the Government of the Netherlands. Draft 
report, 57pp. 
Van Diepen, C.A., Van Keulen, H., Penning de Vries, 
F.W.T., Noy, I.G.A.M. and Goudriaan, J. 
1987, 
'Simulated variability of wheat and rice yields in current 
weather conditions and in future weather when ambient 
2-44 
C0 2 has doubled'. In: Simulation Reports CABO-TT, 
14, Wageningen. 
Van Kooten, G.C. and Arthur, L . M . 1989, 'Assessing 
economic benefits of climate change of Canada's boreal 
forest'. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 19, pp. 
463-470. 
Wang, E., Erdle, T. and Roussell, T. 1987, FORMAN 
Wood Supply Model User Manual. N.B. Executive 
Forest Research Advisory Committee Inc., and N.B. 
Department 
of 
Natural 
Resources 
and 
Energy, 
Frederickton, New Brunswick. 61pp. 
Warrick, R.A., Shugart, H.H., Antonovsky, M.Ja, 
Tarrant, J.R. and Tucker, C.J. 1986, 'The effects of 
increased C 0 2 and climatic change on terrestrial 
ecosystems'. 
In: The Greenhouse Effect, Climatic 
Change and Ecosystems, B. Bolin, B.R. Doos, J. Jager 
and R.A. Warrick (eds). SCOPE 29, John Wiley and 
Sons, Chichester, UK, pp. 363-390. 
Warrick, R.A., and Gifford, R. with Parry, M.L. 1986, 
'C0 2 climatic change and agriculture'. 
In: 
The 
Greenhouse Effect, Climatic Change and Ecosystems, B. 
Bolin, B.R. Doos, J. Jager and R.A. Warrick (eds). 
SCOPE/ICSU, Wiley, Chichester, pp. 393-473. 
Wellburn, A. 1988, Air Pollution and Acid Rain: the 
Biological Impact, Longman, UK, 274pp. 
Wheaton, E.E., Singh, T., Dempster, R., Higginbotham, 
K.O., Thorpe, J.P., Van Kooten, G.C.and Taylor, J.S. 
1987, An Exploration and Assessment of the Implications 
of Climatic Change for the Boreal Forest and Forestry 
Economies of the Prairie Provinces and Northwest 
Territories: Phase 1. SRC Technical Report N. 211, 
Publication No. E-906-36-B-87, Saskatchewan Research 
Council, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 282pp. 
Wigley, T.M.L. 1989, 'The Greenhouse Effect: Scientific 
Assessment of Climatic Change': Lecture presented at 
the Prime Minister's Seminar on Global Climate, 12 
Downing Street, London, 26 April, 1989. 
Williams, G.D.V., Fautley, R.A., Jones, K.H., Stewart, 
R.B.and Wheaton, E.E. 1988, 'Estimating Effects of 
Climatic Change on Agriculture in Sasketchewan, 
Canada'. In: The Impact of Climatic Variations on 
Agriculture: Volume 1, Assessments in Cool, Temperate 
and Cold Regions, M.L. Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. 
Konijn (eds.). Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 
219-379. 
Williams, G.D.V. 1971, 'Wheat Phenology in Relation to 
Latitude, Longitude and Elevation on the Canadian Great 
Plains'. Canadian Journal of Plant Science 51, pp. 1-2. 
Williams, G.D.V. and Oakes, W.T. 1978, 'Climatic 
resources for maturing barley and wheat in Canada'. In: 
Essays on Meteorology and Climatology: In Honour of 
Richard W. Longley, K.D. Hayeand E.R. Reinelt (eds), 
Studies in Geography Mono No. 3, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, pp. 367-385. 
Winget, C.H. 1987, 'Forest management strategies to 
address climate change'. 
In: Preparing for Climate 
Change: A Cooperative Approach. Proceedings of the 
First North American Conference on Preparing for 
Climate Change. The Climate Institute, Washington, 
DC, pp. 328-333. 
Woodbridge, Reed and Associates 1988, Canada's Forest 
Industry. The Next Twenty Years: Prospects and 
Priorities. 
Volume I - Strategic Analysis. 
Report 
prepared for Economics Branch, Canadian Forestry 
Service, Ottawa. 223pp. 
Woodman, J.N. 
1987, 
'Potential impact of carbon 
dioxide-induced climate changes on management of 
Douglas-fir and western hemlock'. In: The Greenhouse 
Effect, Climate Change, and U.S. Forests, W.E. Shands 
and J.S. Hoffman (eds). The Conservation Foundation, 
Washington, DC, pp. 277-283. 
Woodman, J.N. 1988, 'Potential effects of global climate 
change on North Carolina forests'. Paper presented at 
Greenhouse Effect Conference: Potential Impact of 
Climate Change on North Carolina Agribusiness, October 
1988, Wake County Office Park, Raleigh, North 
Carolina. 3pp. 
Yoshino, M . M . 1984, 'Ecoclimatic systems and agricultural 
land use in Monsoon Asia'. In: Climate and Agricultural 
landuse in Monsoon Asia, M . M . Yoshino (ed.). 
University of Tokyo Press, Tokyo, pp. 81-108. 
Yoshino, M . M . 1989, 
Report on the impacts on 
agriculture, forestry and land use in Japan. Personal 
communication, 7pp. 
Yoshino, M . M . , Horie, T., Seino, H., Tsujii, H., 
Uchijima, T.and Uchijima, Z. 1988, 
'The effect of 
climatic variations on agriculture in Japan'. In: The 
Impact of Climatic Variations on Agriculture: Volume 1, 
Assessments in Cool, Temperate and Cold Regions, M.L. 
Parry, T.R. Carter and N.T. Konijn (eds). Kluwer, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 723-868. 
Zhang, Jia-cheng, 1989, 'The C 0 2 problem in climate and 
dryness in North China'. Meteorological Monthly 15 
(No.3), pp. 3-8. 
Zhao, Zong-ci, and Kellogg, W.W. 1988, 'Sensitivity of 
soil moisture to doubling of carbon dioxide in climate 
model experiments. 
Part II: 
The Asian Monsoon 
Region'. Journal of Climate 1, pp. 367-378. 
Zoltai, S.C. 1989, 'Impact on forestry in central Canada'. 
In: Report on the First U.S.-Canada Symposium on 
Impacts of Climate Change on the Great Lakes Basin. 
Joint Report No. 1, US National Climate Program Office, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
Rockville, Maryland, and Canadian Climate Centre, 
Downsview, Ontario, pp. 185-187. 
2-45 
 
Chapter 3 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
Co-Chairmen: 
R.B. Street, Canada 
S.M. Semenov, USSR 
Lead authors: 
Unmanaged forests and vegetation 
Biological diversity and endangered 
species 
Wildlife 
Wetlands 
Heritage sites and Reserves 
W. Westman, USA 
R. Peters and A. Janetos, USA 
H. Boyd and J. Pagnan, Canada 
M. Bardecki, Canada 
R. Wein and N. Lopoukhine, Canada 
Expert contributors: 
R.S. de Groot (The Netherlands); 
L. Menchaca (Mexico); 
J.J. Owonubi 
(Nigeria); D.C. Maclver (Canada); B.F. Findlay (Canada); B. Frenzel (FRG); 
P.R. Jutro (USA); 
A A. Velitchko (USSR); 
A M . Solomon (JJASA); 
R. Holesgrove (Australia); 
T.V. Callaghan (UK); 
C. Griffiths (Australia); 
J.I. Holten (Norway); P. Mosley (New Zealand); A. Scott (UK); L. Mortsch 
(Canada); O.J. Olaniran (Nigeria) 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction 
3-1 
1.1 
Reasons for concern 
3-1 
1.2 
Sensitive species and ecosystems 
3-3 
1.3 
Analytical methodologies 
3-3 
1.4 
Historical evidence 
3-4 
2 
Direct impacts of elevated C 0 2 
3-5 
3 ' 
Changes in the boundaries of vegetation zones 
3-6 
3.1 
Global overview 
3-9 
3.2 
Specific vegetation zones 
3-10 
3.2.1 
Boreal and tundra 
3-10 
(i) Global warming of 2°C 
3-10 
(ii) Global warming of 1°C 
3-10 
3.2.2 
Montane and alpine 
3-13 
3.2.3 
Temperate 
3-13 
3.2.4 
Semi-arid and arid 
3-14 
4 
Changes within ecosystems 
3-14 
4.1 
Water balances in terrestrial ecosystems 
3-14 
4.2 
Ecological interactions 
3-16 
4.3 
Biological diversity and endangered species 
3-17 
4.4 
Pests and pathogens 
3-18 
4.5 
Disturbance variables 
3-19 
4.5.1 
Fire 
3-19 
4.5.2 
Soil and surface stability 
3-20 
4.6 
Sea-level rise 
3-21 
5 
Socioeconomic consequences 
3-23 
5.1 
Unmanaged vegetation and forests 
3-23 
5.2 
Biological diversity and endangered species 
3-25 
5.3 
Wetlands 
3-26 
5.4 
Wildlife and 
fish 
3-27 
5.5 
Heritage sites and reserves 
3-28 
6 
Future deliberations 
3-28 
Table 
Table 3.1 
Current relative surface area and net primary productivity of 
various vegetation zones 
3-12 
Figures 
Figure 3.1a: 
Changes in climate zones currently associated with specific 
vegetation (Leemans, 1989) - Western Hemisphere 
3-31 
Figure 3.1b: 
Changes in climate zones currently associated with specific 
vegetation (Leemans, 1989) - Eastern Hemisphere 
3-32 
Figure 3.2a: 
Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as 
a result of projected increases in temperature in the European 
part of the USSR along a transect at 50°E longitude (Velichko 
et al., 1990) -increase in global mean temperature of 0.8°-l°C . . 
3-33 
Figure 3.2b: 
Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as 
a result of projected increases in temperature in the European 
part of the USSR along a transect at 50°E longitude (Velichko 
et al., 1990) -increase in global mean temperature of 1.8°-2°C . . 
3-34 
3-ii 
Figure 3.3a: 
Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as 
a result of projected increases in temperature in Canada along a 
transect at 100°W longitude (Velichko et al., 1990) - increase in 
global mean temperature of 0.8°-l°C 
3-35 
Figure 3.3b: 
Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as 
a result of projected increases in temperature in Canada along a 
transect at 100°W longitude (Velichko et al., 1990) - increase in 
global mean temperature of 1.8°-2°C 
3-36 
References 
3-37 
3-iii 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
1 Introduction 
This report examines the ecological impacts of 
climate change on natural ecosystems (land areas 
and associated flora and fauna which are not inten-
sively managed) and the socioeconomic conse-
quences of these impacts. 
For this report, the 
definition of natural terrestrial ecosystems includes 
unmanaged forests and other natural vegetation 
systems, wetlands, deserts, freshwater lakes, alpine 
regions and protected areas such as natural heritage 
sites and reserves. It does not include intensively 
managed ecosystems such as agricultural areas and 
forest plantations (Chapter 2, Agriculture and 
forestry) nor does it include components of the 
terrestrial cryosphere (Chapter 7, Seasonal snow 
cover, ice and permafrost). 
The changes to climate are considered to be those 
resulting from increased atmospheric concentrations 
of greenhouse gases ( G H G ) . The climate change 
scenarios that form the base reference for this 
report are generally those decided at the workshop 
held in Villach during 1987 ( W M O , 1988). 
The 
illustrative examples of the environmental impacts 
and socioeconomic consequences, however, may be 
based on different scenarios. 
Generally accepted vegetation zones (eg warm 
desert, tropical forest, boreal forest and tundra) have 
been used to stratify the discussions. Use of these 
zones recognises the spatial resolution limitations of 
the current understanding of global climate change 
and the likely responses of ecosystems and their 
components. Further stratification is achieved by 
focusing discussion on major and sensitive compo-
nents of natural terrestrial ecosystems: biodiversity 
and endangered species, unmanaged forests and 
vegetation, wetlands, freshwater fisheries, wildlife 
and heritage sites and reserves. Although the focus 
will be on the larger scale (approximately 1000 km), 
where available, local analyses will be used to 
illustrate specific environmental impacts and socio-
economic consequences. 
1.1 
Reasons for concern 
Climate is naturally subject to long-term changes 
(glacial and interglacial periods) and short-term 
fluctuations. Scientific and technological progress, 
however, appears poised to accelerate climate 
evolution significantly by increasing the atmospheric 
concentration of radiatively active gases. 
The 
associated enhancement of the greenhouse effect has 
reached the level at which these anthropogenic 
increases in G H G gases have the potential to affect 
global climate. 
The increases in the atmospheric concentrations of 
G H G and the projected changes in climate resulting 
from these increases pose a serious threat to natural 
terrestrial ecosystems and associated socioeconomic 
systems. It must be recognised that the temperature 
changes suggested by climate scenarios would 
present natural systems with a warmer climate than 
has been experienced at least during the past 
100,000 years (Schneider and Londer, 1984), and 
that there is no equivalent during the period of 
recent development of the present vegetation. 
Moreover, a global temperature rise of 4°C above 
the present norm, for example, would make the 
earth its warmest since the Eocene, 40 million years 
ago (Barron, 1985; Webb, 1990). 
Such warming would not only be greater than recent 
natural fluctuations, but it would occur 15 to 40 
times faster than past natural changes (Schneider, 
1989; Gleick et al., 1990). Such a rate of change 
may exceed the ability of many species to adapt or 
disperse into more 
favourable regions and many 
plant and animal species may become extinct (Lester 
and Myers, 1989; Pain, 1988). 
For widespread, 
abundant species, such as the loblolly pine (Pinus 
taeda) (Miller et al., 1987), even a substantial range 
retraction might not threaten extinction; however, 
rare localised species, whose entire ranges become 
unsuitable, would be extinguished unless migration 
or human interventions were successful. 
On the 
other hand, some species, rare or abundant, may 
thrive under a new climate regime. Even for widely 
distributed species, major losses of important eco-
types and associated genetic material is likely (Davis 
and Zabinski, 1990). 
Temperature changes will be important for animals 
and also insects. Mean temperature, for example, 
influences the ratios of males to females in some 
reptiles. Changes in extreme temperatures, such as 
freezing versus no freezing, or extreme high tem-
peratures, can significantly effect the dynamics and 
distribution of animals and, in particular, insects 
(Waller et al., 1989). 
Ecological stress will not be caused by temperature 
changes alone. Global precipitation characteristics 
are also expected to change (Hansen et al., 1981; 
Kellogg and Schware, 1981; Manabe and Wetherald, 
3-1 
1987; Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987) and for many 
species, precipitation and soil moisture are more 
important determinants of survival than temperature. 
Indeed, except at the treeline, where minimum 
temperature is often the dominant limiting factor, 
precipitation plays a major role in determining the 
distribution of vegetation with trees occurring mainly 
where annual amounts are in excess of 300 mm 
(Woodward, 1990). Complicating this response is 
the fact that enhanced levels of atmospheric C 0 2 
increases the water use efficiency of plants (Gifford, 
1979). Therefore, although precipitation character-
istics are expected to change, plants' efficiency in the 
use of the available moisture will also change. 
The breeding success of birds and small mammals 
(eg muskrats, beavers, weasels, reptilia, and amphi-
bians) are often linked to seasonal precipitation, 
snow cover and snowmelt (eg Campbell, 1968; Davis 
and Cook, 1983). Small alterations in the amount, 
timing and intensity of precipitation events can 
dramatically affect regional water balances, with 
significant impacts on flora and fauna (Pain, 1988; 
Kushlan, 1986). 
Other factors, important in determining species 
distribution and health, are expected to change in 
response to the proposed global warming. 
Soil 
chemistry could change (Kellison and Weir, 1987) as 
a result of both climatic changes and of associated 
changes in storm patterns that could alter soil 
process, including leaching and erosion rates (Harte 
et al., 1990). Sea-levels may rise, inundating coastal 
biological communities (NRC, 1983; Hansen et al., 
1981; Hoffman et al., 1983; Titus et al., 1984). 
Projected changes in fire frequency and severity, 
particularly during ecosystem transitional periods, 
could alter the structure of ecosystems and play a 
dominant role in species dispersal. 
In addition, many wildlife species have become 
increasingly dependent on habitats modified by 
people. Their responses to climatic changes, there-
fore, will, in many cases, be reactions to human 
responses (eg changes in land use and urban devel-
opment) which are also affected by climatic changes 
(Burger, 1984). Moreover, encroachment, barriers 
and habitat destruction by humans, with no analog 
to past periods of climate change, would probably 
place populations of many species in jeopardy. 
Topping and Bond (1988) and Lester and Myers 
(1989) maintain that the direct physical and physio-
logical effects of an increase in air and water tem-
perature on wildlife will be less significant than the 
indirect effects such as habitat transformation, 
wetland loss, salt marsh intrusion, estuarine changes 
and loss of food sources. 
An important point in understanding species' re-
sponse to climate change, is that weather is variable 
and extreme events, like droughts, frosts, floods, 
blizzards, the frequency of hot or cold spells and 
associated fires and pest outbreaks, may have more 
effect on species distributions than average climate 
(eg Knopf and Sedgwick, 1987). Animals can adapt 
their behaviour during droughts and heatwaves by 
timing activity to cooler parts of the day, restricting 
their movements to conserve energy and water, or 
migrating to more favourable areas. 
Increased 
frequency or persistence of these conditions, how-
ever, can significantly influence an animal's health 
and survival either directly or indirectly through loss 
of habitat, food and water. 
Increasing concentrations of G H G in the atmos-
phere pose two different sorts of stresses on natural 
terrestrial ecosystems. In addition to causing chan-
ges in climate, G H G can directly affect ecosystem 
processes, thereby influencing ecosystem health and 
composition. Primarily affected are biological and 
geomorphological processes (eg photosynthesis and 
decomposition) which alter nutrient availability, 
reproduction and biomass productivity. Changes in 
these basic ecosystem processes alone can have a 
significant impact on the composition and health of 
the ecosystem through changes in competition, 
habitat conditions and food availability. 
Another factor to be taken into consideration when 
examining the impacts of climate change on natural 
terrestrial ecosystems is the manner by which chan-
ges to ecosystems can affect the climate (ie through 
feedback mechanisms). There are at least two such 
feedback mechanisms. One relates to the fact that 
changes in ecosystems can alter the albedo and 
hydrological characteristics of an area, thereby 
affecting the local energy and water balance. The 
second mechanism is a result of the manner in 
which gases are exchanged between the biosphere 
and the atmosphere. Ecosystems can either enhance 
the greenhouse effect by increasing their emissions 
of certain gases (eg methane), or decreasing their 
effectiveness as a sink for these gases (Steudler et 
al., 1989). 
These feedback mechanisms are dealt 
with in detail by Working Group I, Subgroup X. 
Although changes to natural terrestrial ecosystems 
as a result of climate change are often viewed 
negatively, many areas could benefit ecologically, 
socially and/or economically from the suggested 
changes. 
Recognising and responding to these 
'positive' effects, however, will pose some problems. 
Difficulties will arise when trying to identify whether 
or not a particular change (or combination of 
changes) is having, or will have, beneficial effects on 
an ecosystem. In addition, identifying the appropri-
3-2 
ate action and being able and willing to take advan-
tage of the opportunity and promote the change(s) 
will also be problematic. 
1.2 Sensitive species and ecosystems 
Those species which are particularly sensitive (ie 
those which are most at risk and which could be the 
first to be affected) to climatic changes (Peters and 
Darling, 1985) are: 
• species at the edge of (or beyond) their 'optimal' 
range; 
• geographically localised species (eg those found 
on islands, on mountain peaks, in remnant vegeta-
tion patches in rural areas, and in reserves and 
parks); 
• genetically impoverished species - specialised 
organisms with highly specialised niches (less 
tolerant of ecological changes (Kirkham, 1988)); 
• poor dispersers; 
• species which reproduce more slowly; and 
• localised populations of annual species (failure to 
reproduce one year could result in their extinc-
tion). 
This would suggest that montane, alpine, polar, 
island and coastal communities, remnant vegetation, 
and heritage sites and reserves may be particularly 
at risk. Their component species may not be able to 
survive or adapt to climatic changes because of the 
limited number of options available to them. 
Island ecosystems, because of the barrier provided 
by surrounding water and with their higher ratio of 
endemism, are at risk of disruption as a result of 
projected climatic changes. Small oceanic islands 
are particularly at risk since recovery could be slow 
and, in some cases, may require massive human 
interventions. The effect on individual species would 
depend on their specific climatic tolerances and 
other factors, such as the existence of prey and 
predators. 
The artificial boundaries and isolation of heritage 
sites and reserves may enhance their sensitivity. 
These areas are scattered throughout the world and 
range from isolated wilderness to areas that are 
heavily used by visitors and residents in many cases. 
The philosophy of managing these areas varies 
widely and the level of management currently ranges 
from monitoring to massive intervention. Heritage 
sites and reserves are already subject to many types 
of stress and pressures. 
For instance, Connelly 
(1982) identified 73 different types of stress. Half of 
these arise from sources outside the parks. Current 
threats include aesthetic degradation, air and water 
pollution, fire, insects and diseases, industrial impact, 
removal of resources, exotic species encroachment 
and even park operations. The effects of climate 
change on these pressure is not known. 
Migratory birds and animals present an intriguing 
and complex set of problems in terms of assessing 
the impacts of global climate change. Through their 
seasonal movements, they often cover vast areas and 
cross a number of major biomes. Climate-induced 
changes in any of the critical habitats along their 
migration routes will have important consequences 
which may escape explanation until events over all 
parts of their range have been observed. 
1.3 Analytical methodologies 
Inferences about the impacts of elevated G H G and 
an altered climate on natural terrestrial ecosystems 
have come from four sources: (i) analysis of the 
current bioclimatic distributions of vegetation types 
and their possible future distributions as climatic 
patterns change (direct transfer function approach); 
(ii) analyses of historical vegetational changes under 
past 
climatic 
conditions 
(palaeoreconstruction 
approach); (iii) simulation modelling of ecosystems 
at a stand level; and (iv) reasoning from a know-
ledge of the ecophysiology of dominant plant species 
and associated growth-chamber experiments and 
knowledge of the ecological requirements of animal 
species. Each of these methods of inferring impacts 
has its strengths and weaknesses. What would be 
useful but is lacking, however, are long-term obser-
vations of the response of ecosystems to altered 
G H G (Oechel, 1989) and climatic conditions outside 
the controlled research environment. 
This also 
includes field experiments involving transplanting of 
intact vegetation mats from colder to warmer vege-
tation zones and in areas with high topographical 
diversity. 
In the absence of such information, 
scientists are left with very imperfect means of 
assessments, particularly of the secondary and 
combined influences of several stressors (eg climate, 
fire and air pollution) on the interacting components 
of ecosystems (vegetation, wildlife, pests and patho-
gens, soil nutrients, and water and air quality). 
The direct transfer function approach has several 
shortcomings: (i) species respond to climatic change 
according to their individual tolerances; consequently 
vegetation assemblages as we currently know them 
will not move as a unit to new locations as climate 
changes (Davis et al., 1986; Huntley and Webb, 
1989; Westman and Malanson, in press); (ii) the 
3-3 
response of species to the combined effects of 
altered climate and altered G H G are not con-
sidered; most notably and direct CGyfertilisation 
effect will probably alter vegetation responses to 
temperature, precipitation and other climatic fea-
tures; (iii) interactive effects of climate change on 
other factors such as wildfire frequency, air pollu-
tion, herbivory and pathogenicity are not considered 
(these interactive effects may be particularly critical 
during periods of rapid ecosystem transition); (iv) 
the impacts of barriers to migration, including 
urbanisation and topographical barriers and differing 
substrate (ie soil) types in the new locations, are not 
considered; and (v) differing rates of species dispers-
al and migration can result in shifting assemblages. 
In this last case, key pollinators, symbiots, or other 
critical link species, may be absent, resulting in 
impoverished and possibly less stable communities. 
The use of palaeoreconstruction scenarios to infer 
potential responses is limited since (i) the projected 
amount and rate of climate change are unprecedent-
ed, (ii) C 0 2 variations, although occurring in the 
past, were not the causes of these past climatic 
changes; (iii) given dating uncertainty, data from the 
Hypsithermal are from a 2000-year or longer time 
interval; and (iv) the actual mean global temperature 
6000 years bp, 125,000 years bp or in the Pliocene of 
1°C, 2°C and 3°C are only rough estimates at this 
time. Furthermore, the suggested climatic changes 
will occur along with other pressures (eg air and 
water pollution, and human population growth) that 
are unprecedented in earlier periods of climate 
history. This suggests that palaeo-based scenarios 
for species migration may give relevant indications 
of the mechanisms and patterns of dispersal but not 
of the rate. 
Simulation models are a limited tool because they 
are vastly simplified representations of ecosystem 
processes involved. In addition, they generally do 
not examine interactions at a landscape level (eg 
migration, dispersal, fire, pest and pathogen spread, 
substrate change), nor do they incorporate interac-
tive effects of changing fire frequency, air quality, 
elevated G H G and pest potential on a multispecies 
perennial community. Some research has begun to 
move in that direction (eg Pastor and Post, 1988; 
Malanson and Westman, in press), but results of 
sophisticated models are some years away. Further-
more, full validation of model results cannot be 
achieved until the results of long-term studies in a 
field setting are available. 
Reasoning from ecophysiological understanding is 
limited because (i) the long-term effects of elevated 
G H G and elevated temperature on many natural 
terrestrial ecosystems are not known; and (ii) such 
an approach cannot account for interactive effects in 
ecosystems (eg competition and herbivory). 
These shortcomings help to explain why assessing 
the ecological and socioeconomic consequences of 
climatic changes for natural terrestrial ecosystems is 
currently a highly speculative endeavour, despite the 
research conducted to date. 
1.4 Historical evidence 
The response of biota to climate change can be 
inferred by observing present and past distributions 
of plants and animals, which are sensitive to critical 
levels of heat and moisture (Colinvaux, 1986). For 
example, one race of the dwarf birch (Betula nana) 
can grow only where the temperature never exceeds 
22°C (Ford, 1982), suggesting that it would disap-
pear from much of its range when global warming 
causes temperatures to exceed this limit. 
Recent 
historical observations of changes in range of species 
dominance, such as observations of the gradual 
replacement of red spruce (Picea rubens) by decidu-
ous species during the past 180 years in the eastern 
US (Hamburg and Cogbill, 1988), can be used to 
suggest future responses of the observed species to 
changes in climate. It must also be recognised that 
over the long term, climatic change may trigger 
genetic responses, creating divergent races of species 
to respond to newly evolving niches. 
Insight into long-term responses to large climatic 
changes can be gleaned from studies of fossil distri-
butions of, particularly, pollen (Davis, 1983) and 
small mammals (Graham, 1986). Such observations 
tell us that plants and animals are sensitive to 
climate. 
Their ranges move when the climate 
patterns change - species die out in areas where they 
were once found and colonise new areas where the 
climate becomes more suitable. Based on palaeo-
reconstruction scenarios, however, future changes in 
climate will have strongly diverging impacts on 
natural terrestrial ecosystems rather than unequivo-
cal tendencies. 
The manner and the intensity in which ecosystems 
respond to changes in climate differ from ecosystem 
to ecosystem and from species to species. Some 
species will benefit and others will risk extinction 
(Topping and Bond, 1988). 
Historical evidence 
suggests that in those situations where the changes 
in climate were dramatic (ie changes were large, 
long lasting or occurred relatively quickly), the 
responses of ecosystems were relatively well defined. 
Less pronounced changes in climate have caused 
regionally different, sometimes retarded, reactions by 
ecosystems, and in still other cases, had no impact at 
all (eg the responses of ecosystems in northern 
3-4 
central Europe relative to the lack of response in 
southern central Europe as a result of the cold spell 
of the so-called Younger Dryas of 11,000 to 10,300 
bp). 
Responses similar to those mentioned above can be 
expected during the next 50-100 years as an early 
response to projected climatic changes, including 
disruption of natural community and extinction of 
population and species. Even many animal species 
that are currently widespread could experience large 
range changes. Efficient dispersers may be able to 
shift their ranges to take advantage of newly suitable 
habitat, but most species will at best experience a 
time lag before extensive colonisation is possible, 
and hence in the short term may shown range 
diminishment. At worst, many species will never be 
able to recover without human intervention since 
migration routes are cut off by development (eg 
farm fences, fields, highways and other barriers) or 
other human-caused habitat loss (Lewis, 1987). 
2 Direct impacts of elevated C 0 2 
Carbon, an element essential to life, is primarily 
available to terrestrial plants (and other organisms) 
in the form of atmospheric C 0 2 . Increased concen-
tration of atmospheric C 0 2 , especially where it is a 
limiting factor can modify the physiological behav-
iour of plants. 
The nature of plant responses to 
enhance ambient C 0 2 concentration is quite complex 
(see Working Group I Report, Ecosystems, for 
detailed discussions) with first-order and second-
order effects. First-order effects include (Strain and 
Cure, 1985) potential impacts on photosynthesis, 
respiration, water use efficiency, reproduction, 
tolerance to salinity, and growth rates ( C 0 2 fertilisa-
tion) and form. The second-order effects include 
plant-to-plant interactions (eg competition and 
symbiosis), 
plant-to-animal 
interactions 
(eg 
herbivory, pollination and shelter) and plant-to-
microbial interactions (eg disease and decomposi-
tion). 
A wide range of possible responses by natural 
terrestrial ecosystems to enhance ambient C 0 2 
concentrations have been hypothesised including, for 
some plants and organisms, increased photosynthesis 
rates, growth rates, productivity and water use 
efficiency. When the ambient C 0 2 concentration 
changes, the physiological responses of plants and 
organisms to other factors, including climatic chan-
ges can be modified. Improved water and nutrient 
use efficiency of some species of trees due to elevat-
ed C 0 2 in the atmosphere, for example, may amelio-
rate their projected decline and mortality. 
These 
responses, however, will not be universal, with their 
degree and nature dependent not only on plant 
species and variety, but also on location, nutrient 
and water status, and development stage. 
The use of the existing hypotheses to predict eco-
system responses is limited because of the small 
database on which they are founded. No study of 
plant responses to enhanced ambient C 0 2 concentra-
tion have used domestic species with the results 
extrapolated to natural species and a length of 
exposure limited to days or one growing season. 
Recent studies (eg Oechel, 1989, working in the 
tussock tundra at Toolik Lake in Alaska) have found 
that vegetation may rapidly adjust to elevated C 0 2 
with the initial increases in photosynthetic rate 
decreasing and returning to near-normal levels over 
time. 
Further limiting the applicability of experimental 
results to natural terrestrial ecosystems is the fact 
that, so far, the majority of the experiments are 
conducted in artificial environments with herbivores 
and pathogens excluded, extremes of temperature 
and light avoided, and water and nutrients not 
limited (except in those experiments where these are 
intentionally varied). Furthermore, in most experi-
ments, only one species and only juvenile specimens 
of these (eg seedlings) are studied. 
The potential positive effects of C 0 2 enrichment 
may be reduced by other anthropogenic-caused 
changes in atmospheric chemistry (eg ozone), 
ecosystem feedbacks, competition for limited nutri-
ents and/or water, and the influence of temperature 
on photosynthesis and respiration. 
Izrael and 
Semenov (1990), for example, found that observed 
increases in productivity as a result of enhanced C 0 2 
concentrations cannot be suppressed only by en-
hanced levels of ozone (ozone pollution levels used 
are similar to those currently found in industrial 
areas of North America and Europe) but also could 
override their projected increases and result in 
significant decreases in productivity. 
Potential influences of elevated C 0 2 on natural 
terrestrial ecosystems that may impact on ecosystem 
structure and process and thus also influence the 
ecosystems responses to other forcing factors such as 
climatic changes include: 
• net primary productivity, particularly the potential 
differential responses of associated and invading 
species; 
• time for plant species to reach maturity and the 
implications for reproduction; 
3-5 
• relative responsiveness of herbaceous weed and 
fast-growing hardwood (Pollard, 1989) as com-
pared with traditionally more 'desirable' species; 
• reduction in nutrient quality of vegetation and the 
resulting need for herbivores, especially insects to 
consume more; 
• ratio of seed to vegetative growth; and 
• soil processes. 
3 Changes in the boundaries of 
vegetation zones 
One response of natural terrestrial ecosystems to 
changes in climate and G H G concentrations is to 
change the distribution of flora and fauna. This is 
essentially a two-step process; first, the climate zone 
will shift, and conditions for species may become 
more or less favourable; second, the species may 
follow the climatic region. The time lags in each of 
the two steps between cause and effect could be 
short or long, ranging from a few years or decades 
to a century. The shorter the lag, the less ability 
species will have to adapt and the greater the 
potential impacts and associated socioeconomic 
consequences. It should be understood that abiotic 
factors such as climate, are not the only determinant 
of whether or not a species exists at a particular 
location. Such factors as how well as a species is 
established, competition, predators and prey, and the 
viability of invading species, and how these are also 
influenced by climatic change need also to be 
considered. Not surprisingly, species tend to track 
their climatic zones, retracting their ranges where 
conditions become unsuitable while expanding them 
where conditions improve (Peters and Darling, 1985; 
Ford, 1982). Even very small temperature changes 
within this century have been observed to cause 
substantial range changes for certain species (Ford, 
1982; Kullman, 1983). 
Changes in the geographical distribution of climatic 
zones associated with ecosystems and in their com-
position are complicated by the fact that supporting 
data are limited or, in the case of many species, 
non-existent. Some vegetation types will be able to 
adapt to change more than others depending, among 
other factors, on the strength of the controlling 
climatic factor relative to other controlling factors; 
on the relative status of each vegetation type in the 
local dynamic sequence, their stability and resilience; 
and on the impact of human activities and interven-
tions. The ability of species to move in response to 
a changing climate depends on their ability to 
disperse (eg their reproductive capability, seed 
dispersal, availability of migration corridors and 
mobility), the mobility of accompanying species (eg 
food, competition, and predator-prey relationships), 
the frequency of disturbances (eg fire) and the 
availability of suitable habitat. Knowledge of a 
species' natural history, particularly its climatic 
range, is often insufficient for an accurate prediction 
of a change in geographic range in response to 
climatic changes. Because of the complexity of the 
determining factors, species' and their ecosystems' 
responses will not be simple. They will vary from a 
progressive, uniform dispersion to sudden spurts 
with great leaps forward (Mooney and Drake, 1989). 
Interspecific interactions altered by climatic change 
will have a major role in determining new species' 
distributions. Temperature, for example, can influ-
ence predation rates (Rand, 1964), parasitism (Aho 
et al., 1976) and competitive interactions (Beau-
champ and Ullyott, 1932), disturbances and disease 
incidence, all of which play a significant role in 
determining ecosystem structure. 
Past vegetation regions have shifted in response to 
temperature changes of a similar magnitude as that 
which is expected to occur during the next 100 years 
or less (Baker 1983; Bernabo and Webb, 1977; 
Butzer, 1980; Flohn, 
1979; Muller, 
1979; Van 
Devender and Spaulding, 1979; C O H M A P members, 
1988). These migrations, however, occurred over 
thousands of years rather than within a few decades 
as projected climatic changes may necessitate. In 
the past, as the earth warmed, species tended to 
migrate to higher latitudes, colonising new habitats 
closer to the poles (Payette and Filion, 1985), often 
while their ranges contracted away from the equator 
as conditions there became unsuitable and other 
species migrated to these areas. Studies indicate, 
however, that species can spread in any direction 
once they become established in a particular region 
(Birks, 1989). 
During several Pleistocene interglacials, the mean 
annual temperature in North America was apparent-
ly 2°-3°C higher than now. 
Sweet gum trees 
(Liquidambar) grew in southern Ontario (Wright, 
1971); 
Osage oranges (Madura) and papaws 
(Asimina) grew several hundred kilometres north of 
their present distributions; manatees swam in New 
Jersey; and tapirs and peccaries foraged in North 
Carolina (Dorf, 1976). 
During the last of these 
interglacials, which ended more than 125,000 years 
bp, vegetation in northwestern Europe, which is now 
taiga, 
was 
predominantly 
temperate 
forest 
(Critchfield, 1980). 
Other significant changes in 
species' ranges have been caused by altered precipi-
tation accompanying past global warming, including 
expansion of prairie in the American Midwest during 
3-6 
the hypsithermal approximately 7000 years bp 
(Bernabo and Webb, 1977). 
While individual species tend to shift in the same 
general direction, entire biological communities do 
not move in synchrony. 
On the contrary, since 
species shift at different rates in response to climate 
change, communities often disassociate into their 
component species. Recent studies of fossil packrat 
{Neotoma spp.) middens in the southwestern US 
show that during the wetter, warmer climate of 
22,000-12,000 years bp, there was no concerted shift 
of plant communities as a whole. Instead, species 
responded individually to climatic change, forming 
stable but, by present-day standards, unusual assem-
blages of plants and animals (Van Devender and 
Spaulding, 1979). In eastern North America, too, 
post-glacial communities were often ephemeral 
associations of species, changing as individual ranges 
changed (Davis, 1983; Graham, 1986). 
Another aspect of species response is that species 
may shift altitudinally as well as latitudinally. When 
the climate warms, species may shift to higher 
elevations. Generally, a short rise in altitude corres-
ponds to a major shift in latitude (3°C cooling over 
500 m in elevation equals roughly 250 km in latitude 
(MacArthur, 1972)). 
Thus, during the middle 
Holocene (hypsithermal) 6000 years bp, when 
temperatures in eastern North America were 2°C 
warmer than at present, hemlock {Tsuga canadensis) 
and white pine (Pinus strobus) were found 350 m 
higher on mountains than they are today (Davis, 
1983). 
In plants, excessive heat and associated decreases in 
soil moisture may impair chances for survival and 
reproduction. Coniferous seedlings, for example, are 
injured by soil surface temperatures over 45°C, 
although other types of plants can tolerate much 
higher temperatures (Daubenmire, 1962). 
Many 
plants have their northern limits determined by 
minimum temperature isotherms below which some 
key physiological process does not occur. 
For 
instance, 
the 
grey 
hair 
grass 
(Corynephorus 
canescens) is largely unsuccessful at germinating 
seeds below 15°C and is bounded to the north by 
the 15°C July mean isotherm (Marshall, 1978). 
Some species in Western Europe are distinctly 
coastal owing to their sensitivity to winter frost. The 
most typical are holly {Ilex aquifolium), bell-heather 
{Erica cinerea) and slender St John's wort 
{Hypericumpulchrum), all having eastern boundaries 
in Europe well correlated with the position of the 
January isotherms. Frost-sensitive species are likely 
to have a general expansion under climatic change 
(Holten, 1990a,b). Other plant species in the same 
region seem to be disfavoured by mild winters, 
avoiding the lowlands of Western Europe. These 
species very often have a complementary distribution 
to 
the 
above-mentioned 
frost-sensitive 
species. 
Many of them belong to the dark taiga of western 
Siberia. These species which in Scandinavia, include 
Norway spruce {Picea abies) and tall herb species 
like Aconitum septentrional 
will probably move 
eastward if winter temperatures increase 3°-4°C. 
Moisture extremes exceeding physiological toleran-
ces also determine species' distributions. 
The 
European range of the beech tree {Fagus sylvaticd) 
ends in the south where rainfall is less than 600 mm 
annually (Seddon, 1971). Dog's mercury {Mercurialis 
perennis), a herb restricted to well-drained sites in 
Britain, cannot survive in soil where the water table 
reaches as high as 10 cm below the soil surface 
(Ford, 1982). 
Since the biogeographical distributions of many 
wetland species are temperature-limited (eg Spartina 
and mangrove species in coastal wetlands), any 
increase in average temperature would, in principle, 
permit the migration of such species into new areas, 
thus altering the structure and composition of many 
wetland areas. In some cases this might be viewed 
as a benefit, in others a detriment. Noxious weeds, 
such as water hyacinth {Eichhornia crasspipes), water 
lettuce {Pistia stratiotes), purple loosestrife {Lythrum 
salicaria) and African pyle {Salvinia molestd), infest 
many wetland areas. 
Where these species are 
temperature-limited, expansion of their ranges can 
be expected in response to climate change with 
detrimental impact to the species diversity and value 
of many wetlands. 
Many animals have the potential to react quickly to 
environmental changes; however, the responses of 
associated plant communities can be relatively slow, 
causing loss and fragmentation of habitat (Peters 
and Darling, 1985; Arnold, 1985) with existing 
problems of habitat loss becoming more serious 
(Topping and Bond, 1988). Natural physical barriers 
such as mountain ranges, large bodies of water and 
deserts can also restrict movement of species. 
In 
these cases migration is not a viable alternative. For 
example, the Yucatan Peninsula is essentially a 
biogeographical trap in which extinction rates could 
be abnormally high should suggested changes in 
climate occur. Suggested wetter conditions over the 
Yucatan Peninsula (Menchaca and Byrne, 1990) 
would effectively eliminate areas of seasonally dry 
woodlands and scrub. This trend towards a wetter 
climate could also lead to the extinction of the more 
drought-adapted species of the disjunct desert basins 
of Hidalgo and Puebla in Mexico, as these desert 
3-7 
areas are separated from each other and from the 
deserts of the north by intervening mountain ranges. 
From a biogeographical point of view, the Fenno-
scandian Peninsula is an 'island' as far as the migra-
tion of some southern and thermophilous species of 
plants and animals are concerned. On their migra-
tion northward, they will meet both physical barriers 
(seas, fjords, mountains) and anthropogenic barriers 
(cultivated fields, forest plantations and clearcut 
areas) (Holton, 1990 a,b), and some may not reach 
the Fennoscandian Peninsula before their extinction, 
if climate changes too rapidly. 
If a species' intrinsic colonisation ability is low, or if 
barriers to dispersal are present, extinction may 
result if present habitats becomes unsuitable. Most 
likely to survive are those animals and plants which 
normally disperse over relatively long distances or 
those that can survive in a wide range of habitats. 
This includes animals that migrate great distances on 
land or in the air, those animals (such as ticks) and 
seeds carried by animals (Cubberly, 1989) and light, 
wind-carried seeds. 
Non-migrating species with 
restricted distribution and narrow ecological require-
ments may be more vulnerable (Bean, 1989) unless 
climate change favours their habitat. 
There are many cases where complete or local 
extinction has occurred because species were unable 
to disperse rapidly enough when climate changed 
over a long period of time. For example, a large 
diverse group of plant genera, including water-shield 
(Brassenia), sweet gum (Liquidambar), tulip tree 
(Liriodendron), magnolia (Magnolia), moonseed 
(Menispermum), hemlock (Tsuga), arbor vitae 
(Thuja), and white cedar (Chamaecyparis), had a 
circumpolar distribution in the Tertiary (Tralau, 
1973). During the Pleistocene ice ages, they became 
extinct in Europe while surviving in North America, 
presumably because of the east-west orientation of 
such barriers as the Pyrenees, Alps, and the 
Mediterranean, which blocked southward migration 
(Tralau, 1973). 
Although in theory many animals may be highly 
mobile, the distribution of some is limited by the 
distributions of particular plants needed for food or 
shelter. Behaviour may also restrict dispersal even 
of animals physically capable of large movements. 
Dispersal rates below 2 km/year have been meas-
ured for several species of deer (Rapoport, 1982), 
and many tropical deep-forest birds simply do not 
cross even very small unforested areas (Diamond, 
1975; Peters and Darling, 1985). On the other hand, 
some highly mobile animals may shift rapidly, as 
have some European birds (Edgell, 1984). 
Other species of plants and animals thrived in 
Europe during the cold periods, but could not 
survive conditions in post-glacial forests (eg large 
antlered ungulates). A previously widespread dung 
beetle (Alphodius hodereri) is now extinct through-
out the world except in the high Tibetan plateau 
where conditions remain cold enough for its survival 
(Cox and Moore, 1985). 
Other species, like the 
Norwegian mugwort (Artemisia novegica) and the 
springtail (Tetracanthella árctica) now Uve primarily 
in the boreal zone but also survive in a few cold, 
mountaintop refugia in temperate Europe (Cox and 
Moore, 1985). 
Although some species, such as plants propagated by 
spores or 'dust' seeds, may be able to match these 
rates (Perring, 1965), many species probably could 
not disperse fast enough to compensate for the 
proposed climate change without human assistance 
(Rapoport, 1982), particularly given the presence of 
dispersal barriers. Contrary to migration of species 
during previously warm periods, modern species' 
migration may be severely restricted by human land 
uses which have created significant barriers. 
An 
additional factor is that suitable habitat are infre-
quent and fragmented for many rare species charac-
teristic in areas of low productivity as a result of 
surrounding agricultural land. It is unlikely, there-
fore, that many of the species in these areas will be 
able to migrate naturally, even though climatic 
changes may increase their vigour and reproductive 
capability. 
Velichko et al. (1990) review estimates of migration 
rates for a number of northern species and suggest 
that for the thermophilic species (generally favoured 
by suggested climate change), the expected rates of 
migration will be between 100-200 m/year. 
In 
Britain during the Holocene, tree-species migration 
reached 700 m/year with minimal dispersal distances 
up to 10 km per generation (Birks, 1989). In the 
current context of scenarios of rapid climatic chan-
ges, rates of migration of up to figures 80 km/year 
would be required and only invasive weed species 
with short generation time and large dispersal 
distances may be able to achieve this rate. 
In the rainforests of Veracruz, for at least two 
species Trichilia martiana and Dendropanax arboreus, 
most seeds fall within 25 m of the parent tree (Van 
Dorp, 1985). Obviously, species such as these will 
be unable to migrate the distances necessitated by 
changes in climate (approximately 200-300 km) in 
only a hundred years unless assisted. 
Even 
wind-assisted and animal-assisted dispersal may fall 
short of the mark for many species. For example, 
for Engelmann spruce (Picea engelmannii), a tree 
with light, wind-dispersed seeds, fewer than 5% of 
3-8 
seeds travel more than 200 m downwind. 
This 
dispersal distance would lead to an estimated migra-
tion rate of 1-20 km per century (Seddon, 1971) 
which reconciles well with rates derived from fossil 
evidence for trees of between 10 and 45 km per 
century (Davis and Zabinski, 1990; Roberts, 1989). 
3.1 Global overview 
Several authors (eg Emanuel et al., 1985a, 1985b; 
Shugart et al., 1986; Sargent, 1988; Solomon, 1989; 
Rizzo and Wiken, 1989) have examined potential 
broad-scale impacts of climate change on major 
vegetation types using a direct transfer function 
approach. These analyses show that based on the 
relationships between climate and vegetation zones, 
significant changes are possible under the suggested 
climate change scenarios. It is important to remem-
ber when interpreting these types of analyses that 
the areas defined as decreases or losses are actually 
vegetation zones and geography which, as a result of 
the changed climate, no longer have a climate which 
is considered optimum for the current vegetation 
type. These areas, therefore, are those which would 
be most vulnerable to disruption as a result of the 
projected climatic changes. As such, considerable 
care should be given to development of management 
strategies for these areas (eg establishment of 
biosphere reserves). 
The Holdridge Life-Zone Classification system 
(Holdridge, 1964) has been used by a number of 
authors to analyse the impacts of a changing climate 
on global vegetation distribution. These analyses 
assume that the variance in geography of climate 
controls is equal to the variance in geography of 
vegetation. It should be noted that the estimate of 
changes in global forests especially in tropical 
forests, are quite sensitive to scenarios and forest 
models used. Moreover, the rate at which changes 
in actual species ranges will occur is not estimated. 
Emanuel et al. (1985a, 1985b) modified the 
Holdridge Life-Zone Classification based on current 
climate by introducing temperature changes (without 
precipitation or C 0 2 changes) as projected by the 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL, 
1980 version) scenario. This analysis showed the 
following impacts on the global ecosystems: 
• global forest area decreases by 6%; 
• the world's grasslands increase by 25% and 
deserts by 7%; 
• the largest areal changes occur in polar latitudes 
with a 37% decrease in boreal forest and a 32% 
decrease in tundra; 
• the boreal forest zone shifts poleward to replace 
about 42% of the tundra and the tundra itself 
shifts further poleward; 
• some of the former boreal forest zone is replaced 
with other forest types (eg cool temperate or 
boreal moist forest) or by shrublands (eg cool 
temperate steppe); 
• in temperate regions, forest types change from 
wetter to drier types; and 
• in the tropics, subtropical forest areas decrease by 
22% while 
subtropical thorn woodland and 
subtropical desert areas increase 
by 37% and 
26% respectively and tropical forest areas in-
crease by 28%. 
In an alternative approach using stand simulation 
modelling, Solomon (1986) reported that when 
precipitation as well as temperature changes derived 
from the G F D L (1980) model were incorporated, 
changes to forest and tundra in eastern North 
America were qualitatively similar to the results of 
Emanuel et al. (1985b) above; except that forests in 
the temperate zone decreased, resulting in a net 
decline in forest biomass in eastern North America. 
Solomon's findings are consistent with those based 
on other modelling and palaeo-based studies report-
ed by the US E P A (1990). The E P A studies also 
conclude that forests in the western US might 
become progressively more xeric in composition, 
with a resulting biomass reduction of about 40%. 
A subsequent analysis (Leemans, 1989), using both 
temperature and precipitation scenarios to define life 
zone changes, examined the impacts of climate 
change on 12 vegetation zones (Holdridge life zones 
combined into 12 vegetation zones) which were 
developed to correspond roughly to the vegetation 
classification of Udvardy (1975). Under the 2 x C 0 2 
climate scenario the following changes in vegetation 
distribution patterns were observed (see Figure 3.1): 
• greatest vegetation losses were seen in high 
latitudes, where the amount of land classified as 
polar deserts, tundra and boreal forest decline by 
about 7 million square kilometres (20%); 
• the greatest increases are experienced in the 
warm savannas primarily from losses of subtropi-
cal forests, warm desert and tropical rainforest in 
that order; 
• of the 57 million square kilometres classified as 
closed forest life zones under the current climate, 
35% are projected to be located in regions in 
which will become inappropriate; and 
3-9 
• losses of areas conducive to closed forest are 
approximately balanced by new areas which could 
support closed forests. 
These analyses indicate that tropical forests also 
appear 
to 
be 
susceptible 
to 
climate 
change 
(Solomon, 1989). Since tropical species have ev-
olved in areas where seasonal variations in rainfall 
and temperature are slight, they generally have very 
narrowly prescribed physiological requirements. 
Solomon (1989) found that certain critical areas of 
the tropical forest that today cover Central Africa 
and Brazil would die back as a result of changes in 
the amount and annual distribution of available 
water. Other factors that need to be considered are 
that the accelerated decomposition of organics in the 
soil as a result of higher temperatures (see Working 
Group I Report, Ecosystems) and accelerated 
erosion in these areas will also hamper the migra-
tion of tropical species. 
An important factor in the response of tropical 
forests is the current domination of land use con-
siderations over those of the natural ecosystems. 
The ability of tropical forests to take advantage of 
expanded climatic ranges would be severely curtailed 
by human demands in these regions for land and 
fuelwood. Although this interaction is also prevalent 
in other regions, development pressures in those 
areas in and around tropical forests are, and will be, 
particularly acute. 
These proposed changes can be put into perspective 
by examining the relative surface area and net 
primary productivity of various vegetation zones. 
3.2 
Specific vegetation zones 
3.2.1 Boreal and tundra 
Sargent (1988) used GFDL-based climate-change 
scenarios (1980) to examine the possible climate 
response of the Canadian Boreal forest zone to a 
doubling of C 0 2 . 
The procedure for identifying 
environmental limits as proposed by Box (1981) was 
used to define and model the response of, the 
domain of the Boreal forest zone. 
This analysis 
suggests that under the 2 X C 0 2 climate scenario, 
the area climatically suitable for non-transitional 
boreal forest would 
suitable for boreal forest in 
northern Canada is approximately 70 million hec-
tares versus a loss on the southern margin of ap-
proximately 170 million hectares. 
The impacts of a 1°C and a 2°C increase in mean 
annual global temperature on boreal and tundra 
ecosystems can also be examined through palaeo-
reconstruction techniques. Velichko et al. (1990) 
suggest that the warming of 1°C by the turn of the 
century corresponds to that experienced during the 
optimum of the Holocene (5000-6000 years bp) and 
a warming of 2°C (by the 2020s) corresponds to that 
experienced during the Mikulino (Eemian, Sanga-
mon) Interglacial (approximately 125,000 years bp). 
Based on these reconstructions, the climatic zones 
which currently support particular vegetation types 
in the USSR and North America could shift in the 
following manner (based on equilibrium models): 
(i) Global warming of 2°C 
Both coniferous and broadleaved thermophilic tree 
species may find favourable environments much 
further north than their current limits. 
In the 
northern parts of the Asian USSR the boundary of 
the climatic zone currently associated with the taiga 
could move northward 4°-5° of latitude (500-600 
km). That associated with the tundra could disap-
pear from the north of Eurasia. 
Projected changes in precipitation may allow some 
species to expand their boundaries southward. As a 
result, broadleaved species range may expand and 
these ecosystems may be more maritime in terms of 
species composition. The climatic zone associated 
with the forest steppe in the European USSR will 
move southward 500-600 km and could occupy most 
of the steppe zone. In the southern portions of 
western Siberia the forest-steppe boundary could 
move up to 200 km. 
(ii) Global warming of 1 °C 
Impacts on the climatic zones associated with 
current vegetation cover relative to the present 
situation are similar to those described above, except 
smaller in amplitude. 
That associated with the 
current tundra zone is expected to become signifi-
cantly narrower than at present. 
These palaeogeographical reconstructions cannot be 
used as direct analogs of the expected impacts on 
natural terrestrial ecosystems at the beginning and 
middle of the 21st century, since they represent a 
quasi-stationary state and occurred in the absence of 
the prior C 0 2 concentration increase, which itself is 
likely to have profound effects. To achieve this state 
will take at least several centuries. The probable 
non-equilibrium response at the turn of the century 
and the middle of the 2020s is suggested by the 
analysis of several meridional transects conducted by 
Velichko et al. (1990). Discussed here are a north-
east Europe transect (50°E) and a North American 
transect (100°W). 
3-10 
Under global warming of 2°C shifts in the associat-
ed climatic zonal boundaries are approximately 550 
km for coniferous broadleaved forests and 220 km 
for coniferous forests (Figure 3.2). 
Under an 
increase of 1°C in global mean temperature, expect-
ed shifts of boundaries are less significant. Conifer-
ous forest would almost reach the coast. This will 
not happen, however, primarily because of the time 
limitation at the rates of migration of the existing 
tree species. Actual shifts in the areas inhabited by 
these tree species are suggested to be no more than 
10 km. It will be only birch (betula spp.) (pioneer 
species) that will be able to expand its range by 1 
km/year. 
Warming will increase the competitiveness of oak 
and other broadleaved species and they will become 
more abundant. 
By the beginning of the century, 
however, this may be evident only in the composition 
of the undergrowth. 
At the same time, one can 
expect higher numbers of pioneer species (eg birch) 
since the cold-resistant tree species will probably 
have lower tolerance against diseases and pests and 
thus will suffer losses in their numbers as climate 
warms. 
Along the North American transect (Figure 3.3) 
potential shifts in the zonal boundaries could be 2.5° 
of latitude under a 1°C increase in mean global 
temperature and approximately 5° of latitude under 
a 2°C warming. Unlike Eurasia, the tundra zone 
may remain in North America under the suggested 
climate change. In reality, the shifts in the ranges of 
tree species and ecosystems could reach only several 
kilometres. Even elm, with its high seed dispersal 
capabilities, may not be able to advance beyond its 
current boundaries by more than 5 km by the turn 
of the century and 17 km by the middle of the 2020s. 
If the proposed GHG-induced warming occurs, 
species shifts similar to those in the Pleistocene 
would occur, and climatic zones would move hun-
dreds of kilometres toward the poles (Davis and 
Zabinski, 1990; Frye, 1983; Peters and Darling, 
1985). A 300-km shift in the temperate climate zone 
is a reasonable minimum estimate for a 3°C warm-
ing, based on the positions of vegetation zones 
during analogous warm periods in the past (Dorf, 
1976; Furley et al., 1983). Vegetation would take 
decades to follow these zonal changes. 
With a 
poleward shift of forests, bird and mammal popula-
tions unique to the tundra will decline and/or be 
replaced by those from lower latitudes, thereby 
experiencing a significant reduction in their ranges 
of the tundra species (Lester and Myers, 1989). It 
has also been suggested that tundra nesting habitat 
for migratory shore birds might be reduced by high 
arctic warming (Myers, 1988). 
Additional support that vegetation boundary shifts of 
this magnitude or greater may occur comes from 
estimating ecological requirements of some species. 
For example, the forest industry is concerned about 
the future of commercially valuable species, such as 
the loblolly pine (Pinus taeda). 
This species is 
limited on its southern border by moisture stress on 
seedlings. Based on its physiological requirements 
for temperature and moisture, Miller et al. (1987) 
projected that the southern range limit of the species 
would shift approximately 350 kilometres northward 
in response to a global warming of 3°C. 
Davis and Zabinski (1990) have projected possible 
northward range movements among several North 
American tree species, including sugar maple (Acer 
saccharum) and beech (Fagus grandifolia), from 600 
kilometres to as much as 2000 kilometres in re-
sponse to the warming caused by a doubled C 0 2 
concentration. Beech would be the most responsive, 
withdrawing from its present southern extent along 
the Gulf Coast, and retreating into Canada. Chan-
ges in species composition of forest stands in Poland 
during the past two centuries have shown a close 
correspondence with climate shifts. 
Based on 
climate-vegetation associations, suggested G H G -
induced changes in climate will favour the succession 
of broadleaf species and increase the stresses on 
needle-tree species (Kowalski, 1989). 
Kauppi and Posch (1985), using calculated tempera-
ture sums to define the current boreal zone in 
Finland, recalculated these sums based on tempera-
ture data from the Goddard Institute for Space 
Studies (GISS) scenario and suggested the possible 
effects on forestry resources within Finland. Their 
analysis indicates that the defined boreal zone 
domain will be displaced northward by 500-1000 km 
by the suggested climatic warming. 
Forest production in Sweden is projected to increase 
as a result of a 3°C increase in mean annual tem-
perature (Boer et al., 1990). 
For pine, projected 
increases in production range from 16-43% with the 
largest values expected in the mid-latitudes of 
Sweden. 
In general, the greatest forest growth 
changes within the boreal forest zone of Fenno-
scandia are expected to occur in the northern 
maritime regions. 
Many forest stands in the boreal zone and in alpine 
regions were formed hundreds of years ago under 
climate regimes different from those of today. They 
can tolerate today's climate even though it may not 
optimal for regeneration and growth. Changes in 
climate on top of these less-than-optimal conditions 
could adversely affect these forest stands as both the 
direct effects of the changed climate on growth and 
3-11 
Table 3.1 Current relative surface area and net primary productivity of various vegetation zones 
Vegetation zone 
Forests 
Temperate woodlands 
Chaparral, maquis, brush 
Savanna 
Temperate grasslands 
Tundra Arctic/alpine 
Desert and semi-desert scrub 
Extreme desert 
Perpetual ice 
Lakes and streams 
Swamps and marshes 
Bogs 
Cultivated land 
Human area 
Surface area 
(%) 
21.0 
1.3 
1.7 
15.1 
8.4 
6.4 
14.1 
6.0 
10.4 
1.3 
1.3 
1.0 
10.7 
1.3 
Annual production 
36.6 
2.3 
1.5 
29.6 
7.3 
1.6 
2.3 
0.1 
0.0 
0.6 
5.5 
1.1 
11.3 
0.3 
Relative productivity 
(1000 tonnes/km]) 
1.6 
1.5 
0.8 
1.7 
0.8 
0.2 
0.1 
0.01 
0.0 
0.4 
3.6 
1.0 
0.9 
0.2 
reproduction and the indirect effects such as poten-
tial increases in fire and pests and pathogens, come 
into play. 
The regeneration phase of forests is probably the 
most sensitive part of the cycle and where effects of 
climate change may be felt first. Some impacts on 
forests due to changes in climate will be positive (eg 
suggested increases in growth rate and range) for 
some species in some areas. The actual impact, 
however, will depend on the combined effects of 
changes in the climate and related ecosystem as well 
as pressures from outside of the ecosystem (eg 
anthropogenic). The fact that there is a wide range 
of ages of forest stands over the landscape could 
provide a degree of resilience to the landscape since 
sensitivity to change will probably vary with stand 
age. 
A possible ecological consequence of the projected 
increased thermic oceanicity in western Norway is 
that frost-sensitive species will expand considerably 
eastward along the fiords, and upwards (Holten, 
1989). Owing to the projected higher summer 
temperatures, the vertical vegetation zones in south 
Norway could move 200-300 m upwards in the fiord 
district and possibly 300-400 m in the continental 
parts of southern Norway. 
A poleward shift of fish and marine mammal popu-
lations are likely owing to shifts in warm ocean 
currents (Dunbar, 1955). Harington (1986) specu-
lates on the fates of several species from changing 
climate in the Canadian Arctic. Harp seals {Phoca 
groenlandica), harbour seals (P. vitulina), white 
whales {Delphinapterus leucas) and bowhead whales 
{Balaena mysticetus) would spread further north and 
increase in numbers. 
In contrast, ringed seals 
{Phoca hispida) and bearded seals (Erignathus 
barbatus) would shift further north into the coldest 
water and shrink in number and range. 
Arctic mammals and birds which use sea-related 
biological communities as a food source and also as 
a substrate will be impacted by projected climatic 
changes. For example, changes in the abundance 
and location of polynyas and leads may adversely 
impact on many arctic mammals and birds, including 
whale populations. Polar bears use ice for travelling 
and feeding with their range determined by the 
maximum seasonal extent of sea ice in any one year. 
Although adaptable, loss of sea ice and ice seals 
would place the survival of polar bears at risk. 
Walruses' {Odobenus rosmarus) responses to climat-
ic changes are more complex. 
Because of their 
wider ranges of habitat and food they would appear 
to be less susceptible to adverse impacts. On the 
other hand, reduced ice cover would leave walruses 
more vulnerable to hunting pressures and would 
allow other species such as the sea otter to extend 
their ranges northward increasing 
competition 
pressures. 
3-12 
3.2.2 Montane and alpine 
Busby (1988) examined the geographical implications 
of climate change for alpine vegetation in Australia. 
The present alpine vegetation is restricted to disjunct 
mountain tops and high plateaux in southeastern 
Australia. According to this analysis, the climatic 
areas capable of supporting the current alpine 
vegetation will retreat to a very small number of 
isolated mountain peaks, thereby threatening the 
survival of the majority of the present alpine species. 
Similar results were also suggested for a number of 
alpine species in the Alps and East African 
mountains. In Mexico, Menchaca and Byrne (1990) 
hypothesise that a 2°C increase in temperature 
could increase the vulnerability of extinction of 
disjunct populations near the summits of isolated 
mountain ranges. 
Since mountain peaks are smaller than bases, as 
species shift upward in response to warming, they 
typically occupy smaller and smaller areas, have 
smaller populations, and may thus become more 
vulnerable to genetic and environmental pressures 
(Korner, 1989; Murphy and Weiss, 1990). Species 
originally situated near mountain tops might have no 
habitat to move up to, and may be entirely replaced 
by the relatively thermophilous species moving up 
from below. Examples of past extinctions attributed 
to upward shifting include alpine plants once living 
on mountains in Central and South America, where 
vegetation zones have shifted upward by 1000-1500 
m since the last glacial maximum (Flenley, 1979; 
Heusser, 1974). 
In Mexico, the potentially most vulnerable eco-
systems are the high elevation alpine grasslands or 
'Paramo' (Menchaca and Byrne, 1990). This vegeta-
tion type is currently restricted to the highest volcan-
ic peaks (elevations > 4000 m). A vertical shift of 
200 m (ie temperature increase of ca 2°C) would be 
sufficient to reduce drastically the extent of the 
paramo, and in some cases may even result in local 
extinctions. 
Migration of wildlife in more heavily populated 
alpine regions such as the Alps could become more 
restricted since a more favourable climate would 
expand the area of land claimed for agriculture to 
include that at higher elevation (Eybergen, 1989). 
Some bird species which currently find a niche in the 
alpine climate areas may face more competition and 
be more vulnerable to predation as other species 
migrate upwards unless they can also shift upwards. 
One of the long-term impacts of climatic changes in 
montane and alpine regions is the potential for 
speciation. 
As populations which have moved 
upward become disjunct, environmental and other 
pressures may lead to the creation of new species. 
This process would, however, require many genera-
tions. 
3.2.3 Temperate 
In Norway (Holten, 1990b), the alpine region will 
have a marked retreat from the current 30% of the 
total land area, to 7%. 
On the mountain plateau, 
Hardangervidda in southern Norway, Finmarksvidda 
in northern Norway, middle boreal coniferous forest 
is likely to invade, mainly Norway spruce (Picea 
abies) and Scots pine (Pinus sylvestries), possibly 
with severe consequences for the reindeer stock. 
The impact of climatic change on the present 
temperate rainforest is uncertain. 
For example, 
almost all of Tasmania is expected to become, at 
best, climatically 'marginal' in terms of temperate 
rainforests (Busby, 1988), largely due to a rise in 
winter temperatures suggested by climate scenarios. 
This increase in temperature is unlikely to have a 
significant direct effect on the forest, but may 
facilitate the invasion of less frost-tolerant species. 
In Australia, the Mediterranean-type ecosystem is at 
the southern edge of the continent. 
As the biota 
cannot migrate south, this is one of the biomes 
where under the projected climatic changes, signifi-
cant adverse changes and loss of species would occur 
(Australian Government Publication, 1989). 
Forest and grassland productivity in temperate 
regions of Australia may increase, under the influ-
ence of GHG-induced global warming, as may the 
number of rodents and their predators. 
Species 
limited by wet, cold conditions may increase where 
the climate becomes drier or warmer. With specific 
reference to New Zealand, Keys (1989) suggests that 
a number of introduced species of insects and fish 
could spread to higher latitudes with warmer tem-
peratures, and rabbit problem areas could expand in 
eastern New Zealand. 
Manabe and Wetherald (1987) and Kellogg and 
Schware (1981), inferred from precipitation patterns 
ascribed to past warming periods, that substantial 
decreases over North America's Great Plains are 
possible - perhaps being as much as 40% by the 
early decades of the next century. 
Forest simulation models and ecological response 
surfaces have been employed to examine the pos-
sible effects of global change on temperate forest 
ecosystems. 
Forest decline, possibly within 30-80 
years, and mortality is suggested for southeastern, 
northeastern and Lake states regions of the US. 
3-13 
With declining forests, the incidence of disease, fire 
and insects may be exacerbated and large-scale 
forestation will be needed to ameliorate the poten-
tial negative impacts (quality of biotic habitat, water 
quality and quantity, soil erosion, and recreation 
opportunities. 
Temperate 
forests 
are 
likely 
to 
increase 
in 
Scandinavia; Norway (Holton, 1990b) could experi-
ence an increase in the temperate forest area, 
mainly oak (Quercus robur) and beech (Fagus 
sylvatica) from current 0.7% to 13%, thus being a 
significant new vegetation type in most areas. 
Projected increases in winter temperatures could 
lead to a reduction in the range of many perennial 
woody species of the temperate zone. 
Forested 
areas which currently support vigorous growth of 
such species as white spruce, Douglas fir, Norway 
spruce and Scots pine, may become too warm in the 
winter months to satisfy their chilling requirements 
(Lavender, 1987) and will eventually no longer be 
part of the species' ranges (see Working Group I 
Report, Ecosystems). 
Climatic warming may bring about early budburst, 
for some species, increasing the length of the grow-
ing season with possible positive ramifications for 
productivity. Earlier budburst, however, could lead 
to increased risk of frost damage (although the 
possibility of late spring frosts is expected to be 
reduced with warmer conditions) and thus would 
have negative impacts on productivity. 
3.2.4 Semi-arid and arid 
The response of semi-arid and arid regions of the 
world is also uncertain at this time. The large-scale 
vegetation models mentioned above give some 
indication of the possible changes in these regions; 
however, the uncertainty associated with the impact 
of climate change on the monsoon wind systems of 
Africa, Asia and Australia, and the vital role climate 
variability plays in developing and maintaining these 
regions makes it difficult to provide any plausibility 
to semi-arid and arid ecosystems scenarios. 
Graetz et al. (1988) looked at the impacts of climate 
change on ecosystems of arid Australia and found 
that vegetation changes were primarily influenced by 
changes in available plant moisture and only secon-
darily by temperature. 
This was reflected by an 
increase in the areal coverage of trees and shrubs in 
those areas where precipitation is suggested to 
increase and a decline in those areas where precipi-
tation decreases. This pattern was modified some-
what by temperature since, in the model used, a 
20% increase in precipitation was compensated for 
by a temperature increase of 3°-4°C (ie a net 
decrease in available moisture). Owing to the effect 
of elevated C 0 2 on increased water efficiency, the 
large increase in C 0 2 concentrations is expected to 
have a particularly profound impact on water-limited 
vegetation. 
In the semi-arid, arid and hyper-arid ecoclimatic 
zones of the Mediterranean, analyses suggest that 
GHG-induced climate change will reduce plant pro-
ductivity and result in desertification of the North 
African and Near Eastern steppes (Le Houerou, 
1989) due to increased évapotranspiration. 
The 
upper limit of the deserts would migrate under the 
influence of climate change and most likely extend 
into the area that currently corresponds to the lower 
limits of the semi-arid zone (ie foothills of the High, 
M i d and Tell Atlas and Tunisian Dorsal in Northern 
Africa and of the main mountain ranges of the 
Near-Middle East - Taurus, Lebanon, Alaoui, 
Kurdistan, Zagros, and Alborz). 
Bryson (1973) suggests that Sahelian drought may be 
due to changes in the world distribution of tempera-
ture consequent upon an increase in the concentra-
tion of atmospheric G H G . He calculated the in-
crease of temperature at the earth's surface as a 
result of an increase in C 0 2 to be of the order of 
0.1°C since 1940 and showed this as being capable 
of displacing the latitude of the subtropical high 
pressure zone over the Sahara equatorward by 15 
km. A rise in global temperature of the magnitude 
envisaged over the next 10-50 years could lead to a 
greater equatorward penetration of the aridity in-
fluence of the Sahara desert and consequently 
equatorward displacement of the vegetation belts in 
West Africa. 
4 Changes within ecosystems 
Projected climatic changes will have impacts on the 
different components and processes within eco-
systems. These factors, which may be additive with 
the direct effects of climatic change, include changes 
in soil processes, hydrology, disturbance variables 
(eg fire, and soil and surface instability), pests and 
pathogens, and competition. 
In some cases, eco-
systems will be more sensitive to changes in these 
factors than directly to changes in climate. 
4.1 Water balances in terrestrial eco-
systems 
Suggested GHG-induced climatic change will pro-
foundly affect hydrologie relationships in natural 
terrestrial ecosystems, both directly by altering 
inputs of precipitation, runoff, soil moisture, snow 
cover, snowmelt and évapotranspiration outputs, as 
3-14 
well as indirectly by transforming sea and lake levels, 
which influence water levels in coastal and shoreline 
ecosystems. 
Significant increases in évapotran-
spiration could reduce soil moisture and have 
adverse effects on forests. Even small alterations in 
the annual pattern of hydrological fluctuations may 
have dramatic impacts. 
For example, work by 
Kushlan (1986) in the Florida Everglades has dem-
onstrated that subtle changes in hydrology have 
profound effects on population stability of wading 
birds, which in turn may affect energy flow and 
ecosystem functioning. Artificial drainage of bogs 
has shown that minor changes in hydrology have a 
marked impact on bog vegetation. 
Sphagnum 
species with their key role in the accumulative 
processes in bogs appear very sensitive. Bottomland 
hardwood forests in the southern US are susceptible 
to changes in duration, timing and depth of inunda-
tion (Teskey and Hinkley, 1977; DeLaune, 1987). 
Certain species of wetland plants need a period of 
low water in order to allow reproduction (Markham, 
1982). A change in the seasonality of precipitation 
could adversely affect such species. 
The seasonality of rainfall also affects its impact. A 
lengthening of the dry season, or conversely an 
increase in groundwater table levels, could both 
accentuate salinisation problems. In Mediterranean 
and semi-arid climates, where évapotranspiration 
exceeds precipitation for long periods and increased 
percolation from vegetation clearing or excessive 
irrigation may have raised the water table, surface 
soil salinisation can be a major problem. 
Such 
salinisation can kill all but the most halophytic 
vegetation, increase soil erosion and reduce water 
quality. Salinisation is already a problem in many 
Mediterranean and semi-arid regions (eg coastal 
Western Australia, the Mediterranean, subtropical 
Africa), and is a major cause of increased desertifi-
cation. This is particularly common in parts of the 
Southern Hemisphere where forests have been 
cleared for rangeland or agriculture. 
Relatively small changes in precipitation regimes 
may have major impacts on runoff, especially in arid 
and semi-arid areas. Seasonal floodplains of tropical 
areas (eg the Pantanel of Brazil, the Inner Niger 
Delta in West Africa, the Okavango Swamp of 
Botswana, and the Grand Lac of the Lower 
Mekong) all provide large areas of important wet-
land habitat. Such areas are subject to sedimenta-
tion (Maltby, 1986). They could be further altered 
by any change in sediment inputs caused, for exam-
ple, by increased intensity or duration of precipita-
tion events. 
There is a number of secondary impacts to be 
considered. 
For example, if agricultural areas 
become drier and hotter during the summer growing 
season, the demand for water for irrigation may 
have negative effects on wetlands, either through 
direct losses or indirectly through lowering of local 
and regional groundwater tables. In addition, there 
is evidence for concern over the potential for in-
creased impacts from acid deposition and other 
forms of pollution as water tables are drawn down 
in wetland areas (van Dam, 1988). 
Increased surface water flooding, either from melt-
ing permafrost, or from increased precipitation and 
surface runoff in lower latitudes, can cause cata-
strophic effects in vegetation not adapted to surviv-
ing low soil oxygen levels. In California, for exam-
ple, spring runoff is predicted to increase as a result 
of earlier snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada, induced 
by higher temperatures (Gleick, 1987). Forest and 
shrub stands not normally subjected to flooding can 
be killed within weeks if subjected to prolonged 
surface flooding. Even a below ground rise in the 
water table can kill sensitive species. 
Lowland 
(Podocarpus) forests on the west coast of the south 
island of New Zealand, for example, are particularly 
vulnerable to this phenomenon ( N Z climate impact 
document, 1989). 
The functioning of wetlands will be affected by the 
proposed GHG-induced climate change. For exam-
ple, decomposition in wetlands appears tied closely 
to temperature (Brinson et al., 1981). Generally it 
may be expected that the results of climatic change 
will invoke substantial variations in the fluxes from 
wetland areas. 
Sediment output, methane produc-
tion, denitrification and similar fluxes will be affect-
ed. Predicting precise effects is difficult, particularly 
since there will be a period of transition during 
which fluxes will be somewhat variable. A draw-
down of water levels in wetlands would permit the 
exposure of wetland sediment and increase aerobic 
activity. 
In addition to the oxidation of organic 
matter, this could permit the export of sequestered 
nutrients, at least in the short term. Although it is 
not clear if wetlands more effect or reflect hydrol-
ogy, regional hydrologic relationships involving 
wetlands would be altered, potentially reducing 
quality and quantity of water supplies. 
It is an axiom that biological productivity increases 
with increasing temperatures (to a certain threshold) 
in some species and declines with increasing tem-
perature in others. For example, the productivity of 
Phragmites communis (reed) has been shown to vary 
directly with summer warmth (Spence, 1964). 
However, the productivity of many wetlands is 
nutrient-limited or limited by the water regime. 
Wetlands in continental climates may undergo large 
variations from year to year in their productivity 
3-15 
largely owing to water availability. For example, 
over a five-year period, Van der Valk and Davis 
(1978) found an 18-fold difference in primary pro-
ductivity in a prairie marsh in the United States due 
to water level changes. Increased salinisation of 
wetlands in more arid areas, or the concentration of 
other toxics, may result from increased rates of 
évapotranspiration, thereby adversely affecting 
productivity. 
Wetlands along inland lake shores are a somewhat 
special case, being dependent upon lake levels. 
They provide many of the same benefits as do 
coastal wetlands. Certainly, should water levels rise 
or the seasonal cycle of lake levels change, similar 
impacts to those anticipated for coastal wetlands 
may be expected. However, it is suggested that in 
many lakes one impact of climate change may be to 
change mean, maximum and minimum levels, and 
seasonal patterns of lake levels (Cohen, 1986; 
Croley and Hartmann, 1989). Unsuitable substrates 
or bathymetry may limit wetland adaptation to lower 
water levels as well. In the Great Lakes of North 
America, modelling of different scenarios of falling 
water levels suggests major impacts on shoreline 
wetlands (Kolasa et al., 1988). 
With a warming climate at higher latitudes, some 
lakes supporting large fisheries could be desiccated, 
large areas of permafrost would melt, increasing 
turbidity and organic loading in streams and lakes 
and the arctic pack ice would recede northward, 
thereby affecting the fisheries and the food chains 
supporting them. 
Climatic warming in the worst 
case could initiate a complex series of migrations 
and extinctions of fish species over broad inland 
areas. 
At a minimum it could alter the present 
pattern of species abundance. Compensatory effects 
such as the possible northward extension of the 
ranges of other species may be slow because 
freshwater habitats are not always continuous. 
Ecosystem adjustment to a climatic warming may be 
rapid in the lower trophic levels, but negative im-
pacts are likely to occur for decades in fish commu-
nities before positive adjustments are realised 
(Hecky, 1987). 
Gorham (1988) suggests that climatic warming may 
threaten severe biotic impoverishment of northern 
peatlands. In areas of permafrost, melting may lead 
to substantial drawdown of peatland water tables 
and increased oxidation. Similarly, further south, 
peatlands may be subject to drying. The net effect 
would be an increase in C 0 2 emissions, for all 
northern peatlands perhaps equivalent to 18% of the 
carbon released by fossil fuel consumption. These 
impacts may be offset since lowering water tables 
would most likely reduce emissions of methane, and 
thermokarst erosion could lead to renewed peat 
accumulation (although peatlands do tend to be 
thermally conservative (Roulet, 1989)). Moreover, 
with climatic warming, more northern peatlands may 
become more active, sequestering carbon from C 0 2 
but releasing methane (Morrissey et al., 1988). The 
net effect remains uncertain. 
Changes in the water balance in peatlands towards 
less lateral and vertical outflow can increase concen-
tration of nutrients and other minerals. This in turn 
would affect species composition and succession of 
ombrotrophic wetlands by promoting the growth of 
species characteristic of more eutrophic environ-
ments (van Dam, 1989). 
For some peatlands with a critical water balance, 
reduced water tables will 
result in shrinking and 
mineralisation of the peat with a consequent alter-
ation of drainage patterns and species composition. 
Changes in climate would likely affect the process of 
paludification. Certainly, drier environments would 
inhibit the initiation of peat growth (although, with 
lesser impacts on existing peatlands (Roulet, 1989)). 
In areas where bogs are already degrading, the 
results could be quite severe. 
4.2 Ecological interactions 
The suggested changes in climate may induce a 
change in the structure and composition of natural 
terrestrial ecosystems. The actual impact depends 
on a number of factors including the response of 
major components of the ecosystem, level of compe-
tition, relative location of potential immigrants and 
human interference. The interplay of these factors 
could lead to one or more of the following scen-
arios: 
• One of the dominant species is unable to survive 
under the new climate, disappears and is replaced 
by more thermophilic members of the same 
community. 
An example is the spruce broad-
leaved forest of eastern Europe in which the 
spruce requires temperatures at or below zero for 
some period of the year. If temperatures rise and 
these low temperatures no longer occur, spruce 
would disappear from eastern Europe over a 
period of 50 to 100 years and be replaced by 
broadleaved forests. 
• The main dominant is unable to survive, disap-
pears and is replaced by rapidly spreading pioneer 
species (eg birch and aspen) initially, and thermo-
philic immigrants eventually. 
Duration of this 
process depends on how far these potential 
immigrants must disperse and on their rates of 
dispersal. 
3-16 
• Climatic change is supportive for less dominant 
species and the dominant species is unable to 
oppose the immigration of more competitive 
species. This scenario is indicative of the process 
of the advance of forests into areas previously 
occupied by tundra and steppe. 
Given the new associations of species that could 
occur as climate changes, many species will face 
'exotic' competitors for the first time. Local extinc-
tions may occur if climate change causes increased 
frequencies of droughts and fires, which favours 
invading species. 
One species that might spread, 
given such conditions, is Melaleuca quinquenervia, & 
bamboo-like Australian plant. 
This species has 
already invaded the Florida Everglades, forming 
dense monotypic stands where drainage and frequent 
fires have dried the natural marsh community 
(Courtenay, 1978; Myers, 1983). 
Annual exotic weeds, particularly at the edge of 
species ranges, are likely to be favoured in competi-
tion with woody perennials within ecosystems under 
the effects of a changing climate. The favouring of 
annual exotics, however, will be further enhanced by 
(i) the increased mortality of natives, creating gaps 
for colonisation of sun-loving annuals; and (ii) the 
relative lack of native herbivores, which already gives 
exotics an advantage. In general, exotic species have 
been shown to thrive in disturbed landscapes 
(Orians, 1986). The myriad sources of disturbance 
to landscapes (fire, climatic intolerance, erosion and 
soil slip etc) will create enhanced opportunities for 
colonisation by exotic weeds. Migration of weedy 
species may also be enhanced by human land use. 
For example, areas along corridors formed by roads, 
railways etc, and in open ground created by human 
disturbances, promote the growth and spread of 
weedy species, including aliens which are fast grow-
ing and fecund. 
Soil moisture is a critical factor in mediating com-
petitive interactions among plants, as is the case 
where the dog's mercury (Mercurialis perennis) 
excludes oxlip {Primula elatior) from dry sites (Ford, 
1982). 
Decreased soil moisture could adversely 
effect existing plant species, reducing their vigour 
and competitive capabilities. This could allow more 
aggressive and less moisture-demanding plants to 
move into the affected areas. In addition to annual 
grasses and forbs, another category of exotic that is 
likely to increase is symbiotic nitrogen-fixing shrubs. 
These have an enhanced ability to colonise relatively 
bare ground, and to arrest further succession for 
some decades (eg Vitousek, 1986; Braithwaite et al., 
1989). 
A reduction in precipitation as is projected for some 
regions can change the floristic composition of the 
affected ecosystems. 
Diarra (1988) examined the 
changes in vetiveria nigritiana and eragrostic bareri 
grasslands in the Niger floodplain, Central Mali, as 
affected by prolonged periods of reduced rainfall. 
Diarra reported that a major change in the plant 
composition of the Niger floodplain grasslands 
followed the drought of 1980-86. 
Perrenials that 
previously dominated the eragrostic grassland (era-
grostis barteri) gave way to annual species (eg pani-
cum subalbidum, Seteria pallidetuska and borreria 
choetociphala). 
He also found that the vetiveria 
grassland which in the pre-drought period was 
dominated by tussock grasses (including vetiveria 
nigritiana and sorghum trichopus) was in the post-
drought period invaded by annual grass species. 
4.3 Biological diversity and endangered 
species 
The loss of biological diversity is increasingly being 
recognised as one of the most critical environmental 
issues of the 1990s. Estimates of the annual global 
rate of species extinction range from 1000 to 10,000 
times that before human intervention. 
The basic 
issue that drives all concerned about biological diver-
sity is the accelerated and irreplaceable loss of 
genetic material, species, population and ecosystems. 
Associated with this loss is the loss of products 
obtained from nature (presently and potentially), 
possible disruption of essential ecological processes 
and service, and loss of options for biological and 
cultural adaptation to an uncertain future. 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems such as forests and 
lakes are a rich source of global biological diversity. 
Forests include herbaceous plants, bryophytes, 
hepatophytes, algae, fungi, protists, bacteria and 
many groups of vertebrates and invertebrates, as 
well as tree species. In addition to this 'composi-
tional' or taxonomic diversity, these ecosystems also 
can be characterised in terms of structural (physical 
habitat) and functional (ecological and evolutionary) 
diversity. 
Much of the current discussion on loss of biological 
diversity is centred on the destruction of tropical 
forests and the subsequent conversion to agricultural 
land. The greatest concentration of species diversity 
in the world is found in tropical rainforests. These 
forests account for only 7% of the land area, yet 
contain at least 50% of all species. Current esti-
mates indicate that annually, approximately 1% of 
this biome is being deforested and another 1% is 
being degraded. 
Temperate and boreal forests are also important 
sources of global biological diversity. Temperate 
3-17 
forest zones have been extensively and uniformly 
altered by human activity. Most remaining areas are 
fragmented and highly modified, making those 
remaining relict areas even more crucial in the 
maintenance of biological diversity. 
Loss of species, particularly those previously identi-
fied as being sensitive, will reduce biological diversi-
ty. Loss of key species such as primary producers 
which play a critical role in the support of other 
species, could begin a domino effect leading to 
further extinctions and perhaps demise of an eco-
system. 
Lester and Myers (1989) suggest that if 
keystone herbivores or their functioning counterparts 
in other ecosystems become extinct due to global 
warming, then a chain of extinctions could be set off. 
As evidence of the importance of key species they 
report that in the 100 years following the disappear-
ance of elephants in the Hluhluwe Game Reserve in 
Natal, several species of antelope have been extirpat-
ed and populations of open country grazers such as 
wildebeest and waterbuck have been greatly reduced. 
Pain (1988a) describes the potential ecological 
damage in the Arctic, 
where sea ice is vital to 
walruses, seals and polar bears that migrate across 
it. The ice also supports the arctic food web (algae 
grows on its undersurface), providing the basis of 
most arctic food chains. This raises the question of 
what will happen if the base of the food web disap-
pears with melting ice. 
The problems of altered biological diversity are 
particularly acute for heritage sites and reserves. 
Optimal management of a worldwide system of 
heritage sites for maintenance of biological diversity 
requires a clear understanding of the global pattern 
and control of diversity and rarity (Soule, 1986; 
Currie and Paquin, 1987). Optimal management of 
biological diversity within individual reserves must 
involve efforts both to maximise and then maintain 
diversity. 
Computer algorithms can be used to 
generate designs that maximise species and habitat 
diversity in a reserve system (eg Margules et al., 
1988) and explicit strategies based on analysis of 
rare and endangered species distribution patterns 
(Miller et al., 1987), or synthetic conservation value 
(Rapoport et al., 1986) can help integrate economic 
and other constraints into the diversity optimisation 
process (Schonewald-Cox and Bayless, 1986). 
An important result for design of heritage areas with 
maximal diversity is the discovery that inclusion of 
environmental variability in classical demographic 
models drastically reduces population persistence 
times. 
Consequently, extremely large population 
sizes may be necessary to confer long persistence 
times on populations (Soule 1987). Modelling of 
extinction in relation to body size, population size, 
and reserve area (Belowsky, in Soule, 1987) indicates 
that large-bodied animals require smaller population 
sizes but larger reserve areas than small-bodied 
animals. 
Belowsky concludes that present reserve 
sizes are adequate for persistence of some large 
herbivores, but no large carnivores, for up to 1000 
years. 
One of the most ominous results in light of global 
climatic change comes from the modelling of cata-
strophes and demographic minimum viable popula-
tion sizes by Evens et al. (in Soule, 1987). Median 
extinction times were dependent on the logarithm of 
the initial population size and largely insensitive to 
initial population size (ie very large initial sizes are 
required to substantially lengthen persistence times). 
Shaffer (in Soule, 1987) provides a startling synthe-
sis of these results and emphasises that the size and 
number of current reserves are inadequate for 
long-term protection of some large and rare animals. 
The message is that species with high variance in 
population growth rate require very large reserves or 
intermittent human intervention to reduce the 
variance in growth rate (especially the tendency to 
low growth rates). 
Not surprisingly, there are different predictions from 
various experts concerning the impacts on migratory 
birds. Some believe that migratory birds may, in 
general, expand their ranges, and breeding success 
may increase owing to warmer temperatures, al-
though sea-level rise will further diminish the essen-
tial coastal flyway marshes which are already threat-
ened by shoreline development (Breckenridge, 1988; 
Harington, 1986). 
Other researchers, however, 
suspect that the impacts on bird population could be 
calamitous, as finely calibrated hatching and nurtur-
ing patterns may no longer be synchronised. For 
example, the emergence of young must be closely 
timed with the availability of food (Lester and 
Myers, 1989; Pain, 1988b). Disruption of feeding 
patterns could affect survival of the next generation 
(Topping and Bond, 1988). 
The US Fish and 
Wildlife Service (1988) foresees losses among Arctic 
nesting shore birds, due to disruption of hatching 
which is currently timed to the availability of food, 
but notes the possibility of population gains for 
nesting geese and seabirds responding to more 
favourable temperatures and increases in their food. 
4.4 Pests and pathogens 
Some pests and pathogens are likely to increase 
their ranges as a result of the projected changes in 
climate and, in the case of insects, increase their 
population densities. This could place at risk the 
3-18 
health of ecosystems and thereby play an important 
role in determining future vegetation (Winget, 1988) 
and animal distributions. As warmer temperatures 
enable the invasion of tropical pests and pathogens 
into higher latitudes, mid-latitude hosts may be 
exposed for the first time to many tropical pathogens 
with which they have had no previous evolutionary 
history, and hence no opportunity to develop resist-
ance. With the expansion in the range of insects or 
rodents, the range of associated disease-causing 
viruses and bacteria may expand (Liehne, 1988; 
Miller, 1989). 
Locusts and moths are more active in warmer 
climates and could have further deleterious effects 
on natural vegetation. 
Temperature is the most 
important climatic factor controlling mountain pine 
beetle populations (Safranyik, 1981) with proposed 
milder winters having less of a devastating effect on 
over-wintering larvae. GHG-induced climate change 
will allow these populations to extend their range to 
higher latitudes and increase the hazard in areas 
currently experiencing outbreaks of the mountain 
pine beetle. 
Population dynamics of spruce bud-
worm are also influenced by climate (Ives, 1974; 
Wellington et al., 1950; Greenbank, 1956) with 
temperature being the dominant climate factor. 
Since wetlands, particularly seasonal wetlands in 
warmer regions, provide habitat for the breeding and 
growth of vectors of a number of serious diseases 
such as malaria, filariasis and schistosomiasis 
(Gopal, 1988), an increase in average temperature or 
any change in the distribution of seasonal wetlands 
will alter the temporal and spatial distribution of 
these diseases. Increases in rainfall and temperature 
in tropical regions of Australia could increase 
receptivity and hence vulnerability to malaria, 
increase the incidence of epidemic polyarthritis, and 
extend the geographical area of endemicity of 
Murray Valley encephalitis virus and possibly the 
frequency of Australian encephalitis outbreaks, 
particularly at the southern boundary of the mon-
soonal influence (Liehne, 1988). 
Health threats to wildlife may also occur under 
different climates. 
The spores of the botulism 
bacterium (Clostridium botulinum) occurs naturally 
in soils and mud. 
Increasing temperatures along 
with low concentrations of oxygen favour the growth 
of the organism and production of toxin. 
Their 
development is clearly tied to warm, dry weather 
and degradation of wetlands by eutrophication, 
conditions which may be enhanced by climate 
change. This would be detrimental for wildfowl and 
other susceptible populations in northern and prairie 
wetlands. 
Pest outbreaks may result because of the increased 
stress and mortality of standing vegetation resulting 
from a combination of climate-driven stressors. An 
example from New Zealand concerns hard beech 
(Nothofagus truncatd). A 3°C rise in temperature 
would increase annual respiratory carbon losses by 
30%; such a loss exceeds the total annual amount 
allocated to stem and branch growth for this species 
(Benecke and Evans, 1987). 
With insufficient 
reserves to replace current tissue, the tree is weak-
ened, and becomes more susceptible to pathogens 
and insects. Following physiological drought epi-
sodes, several (Nothofagus) species succumbed to 
death 
from 
defoliating 
insects 
(Hosking 
and 
Kershaw, 1985; Hosking and Hutcheson, 1986). A 
similar insect-induced dieback following two years of 
drought is currently affecting large areas of mixed 
conifers in the western Sierra Nevada of North 
America. 
Introduced animals, such as rabbits and foxes in 
Australia, can have a significant impact on indigen-
ous flora and fauna. The projected climatic changes 
are likely to favour the introduced species. 
In 
Australia, for example, projected increases in rainfall 
are likely to lead to higher survival rates of intro-
duced species as drought-induced instability is 
reduced (Main, 1988). 
4.5 
Disturbance variables 
4.5.1 Fire 
Numerous authors (eg Wheaton et al., 1987; UK 
Department of Environment, U K , 1988; Fosberg, 
1988; 
Street, 1989) state that changes in the fre-
quency and seasonal distribution of forest fires are 
likely as a result of GHG-induced climate change. 
Wildfire frequency and severity is expected to 
increase throughout most of the unmanaged lands 
because of the projected increases in available fuel 
as primary productivity increases and because of the 
increased amount of dead fuel accumulating as a 
result of increased mortality. 
In those forested areas where there is a decrease in 
soil moisture, 
drying of forest fuels will be en-
hanced, thereby increasing the amount of available 
fuel. Fried and Torn (1988) compared the changes 
in area burned under the current and a 2 X C 0 2 
climate in the California Sierra Nevada. They found 
that under the changed climate there would be a 
twofold increase in modest-sized fires (a few hun-
dred hectares) and a threefold increase in fires 
greater than 1000 hectares. Street (1989) examined 
the effects of GHG-induced climate change on fire 
severity in Ontario, Canada. The projected changes 
in temperature and precipitation may not only 
3-19 
habitats, for example, may accrete sediment at a rate 
keeping pace with gradual changes in sea-level, but 
the expected rise being discussed here may be too 
much. Destruction by increased salinity, subsidence 
and erosion may result. As an example, Rampino 
and Sanders (1981) believe that the < 4000-year age 
of coastal marshes in the eastern US reflect a rise in 
sea-level 4000-7000 bp during which existing marshes 
could not sustain themselves. 
Additionally, Stevenson et al. (1986) have shown that 
a significant rise in sea-level (due to subsidence) in 
the Blackwater Wildlife Refuge in Maryland (US) 
has led to a loss of one-third of the total marsh area 
(over 2000 ha) between 1938 and 1979. 
In 
Chesapeake Bay region on the US east coast, the 
declining numbers of wintering waterfowl have been 
attributed to erosion of wetlands due to subsidence 
(Stotts, 1985). In Louisiana, a complex set of effects 
including land subsidence, a loss of sediment input 
and channelisation through wetland areas has led to 
substantial losses of wetland (Meo, 1988; Baumann 
et al., 1984). It has been estimated that a rise in 
sea-level of about 1 m could lead to a near total loss 
of marsh and a reduction of 30% to 50% in the area 
of mudflats in Essex, UK ( U K Department of 
Environment, 1988; see also Harmsworth and Long, 
1986). 
Boorman et al. (1988) provide a series of predictions 
for Britain's coastal areas with climate change and 
associated sea-level rise. In salt marshes, vegetation 
will be directly affected by more frequent and longer 
submersion. There will also be indirect effects from 
a more severe wave climate in deep areas. Most salt 
marsh birds nest on the ground and thus will be 
vulnerable to flooding. 
Many species feed on 
intertidal mudflats, where water levels affect the 
availability of food. 
Modelling studies and field surveys of sites in the 
United States have illustrated that major losses of 
wetlands would be expected given a rise in sea-level. 
For example, under the scenario of a 16.8 mm 
annual rise in sea-level (ie 1.59 m in 95 years) by 
2075, 84% of low marsh, 71% of high marsh and 
45% of tidal flats would be lost in the Charleston, 
South Carolina, area without protection (Kana et al., 
1986,1988a). The results are highly dependent upon 
the specific scenario of sea-level rise and location 
(Kana et al., 1988b). 
It is clear from this example and other modelling 
exercises 
which 
have been 
undertaken 
(eg 
Armentano et al., 1988; Park et al., 1986, 1989) that 
considerable variation would occur from site to site 
and given different scenarios of sea-level rise. The 
consistent element among all published studies is 
that, overall, wetland loss will occur and that major 
changes may be expected in the distribution and type 
of wetlands. 
Based on the assumption that wetlands could mi-
grate inland and new wetlands would form in areas 
not flooded previously, Park et al. (1986) hypothesise 
that a 'high' sea-level rise (ie 1.6 m) could result in 
the loss of 45% of the 485,000 ha of coastal wetlands 
in the United States by 2100. A sea-level rise of 0.9 
m could result in a loss of 22% of the wetlands. 
However, even assuming a sufficient sediment supply 
to enable wetlands to accrete quickly enough to keep 
pace with a change in sea-level, wetlands' inland 
migration may be thwarted. In many areas through-
out the world wetlands have evolved in concert with 
gradually changing sea-levels by accreting sediment 
into basins that otherwise would be open water. 
They now lie at the base of rising slopes which may 
limit inland migration. 
In addition, human 
settlement (eg seawalls and other shoreline protec-
tion structures, fish ponds, rice paddies and urban 
areas) immediately landward of coastal wetlands is 
common. This too would restrict the capability of 
wetland areas to migrate inland. 
Other changes may have significant impacts on 
coastal wetlands. 
The sediment supply may be 
increased because of shore erosion, thus providing 
an additional source of material to wetlands. In-
creases of suspended sediment could, of course, 
reduce wetland productivity. As marshes erode with 
higher sea-levels, the sediments will be transported 
into the estuary, deteriorating habitats for traditional 
estuarine species (Kearney and Stevenson, 1988). 
The increased metabolism of cold-blooded animals 
due to warmer temperatures would increase their 
demand for oxygen. Since the area already has low 
02 in summer, the threat to sensitive species could 
worsen. 
More significant, however, are likely changes in the 
erosive power of tidal currents due to changes in 
bathymetry and increased wave energies close to 
shore. 
Protective structures such as spits, barrier 
islands, baymouth bars and man-made structures are 
likely to be breached with rising sea-levels, thus 
allowing extensive erosion of coastal areas. 
The 
impact may be intensified if any increase occurs in 
the frequency or strength of storms. Indeed, chan-
ges in storm severity may have a most significant 
effect on coastal natural terrestrial ecosystems 
(Ramcharan, 1989). 
Many tropical coasts are fringed by mangrove 
swamps which act as a buffer between the sea and 
inland areas. The swamps trap sediment and absorb 
3-22 
wave and storm energy, thus fostering accretion 
which promotes the development of salt marshes. 
Mangroves are being planted in some areas for 
storm protection (Saenger et al., 1983). However, in 
many regions mangroves are disappearing on a large 
scale because of land reclamation, fish pond con-
struction, mining and waste disposal (eg Soegiarto, 
1985). Under natural conditions one would expect 
a landward migration of mangroves in response to a 
rise in sea-level. 
However, fish ponds and rice 
paddies are now often found landward of the man-
groves; these may not be voluntarily abandoned to 
make room for the mangrove swamps (Rosenberg et 
al, 1989). 
Increased sea-levels could imperil certain species 
with limited distributions in coastal areas. North 
Sea tidal floods in 1953 caused the extinction of the 
sole English colony of the damselfly (Coenagrion 
scitulum) from a low-lying site in Essex (Corbet et 
al, 1960). Given the potential for substantial losses 
of coastal natural terrestrial ecosystems, the num-
bers of any species limited in distribution to such 
areas could be adversely affected by a rise in sea-
level. Many species of birds depend upon coastal 
wetlands, especially in the case of waterfowl and 
wading birds, many of which use coastal wetlands for 
feeding, wintering and staging areas. The loss of any 
substantial amount of coastal wetland could affect 
their populations and adversely affect use of the 
resource. 
5 Socioeconomic consequences 
Assessing 
the 
socioeconomic 
consequences 
of 
climatic changes for natural terrestrial ecosystems 
must consider not only the implications for man-
made goods and services but all functional relation-
ships between these ecosystems and human needs 
and activities (de Groot, 1988). This includes the 
capacity of natural and semi-natural ecosystems to 
provide goods and services that contribute to human 
welfare, directly or indirectly, through: 
• their capacity to regulate and maintain essential 
ecological processes and life-support systems (eg 
climate regulation, watershed protection, storage 
and recycling of human waste, maintenance of 
biological diversity, biological control and provi-
sion of habitat); 
• their capacity to provide resources (water, food 
and fabrics; building, construction and manufac-
turing material; fuel, medicinal, biochemicals, 
ornamental etc); 
• their capacity to provide space and suitable 
substrate/medium for human activities (habita-
tion, agriculture and husbandry, recreation, nature 
conservation etc); and 
• their capacity to provide opportunity for cognitive 
development (eg aesthetic, spiritual/religious, 
educational and scientific information, and cultur-
al and artistic inspiration ). 
The total socioeconomic value of a given ecosystem 
represents only the annual return from the respec-
tive functions. Since ecosystems can provide envi-
ronmental goods and services in perpetuity through 
sustainable utilisation, the total annual value should 
be transformed into a capital value to reflect the 
true economic value of the ecosystem as a producer 
of goods and services (de Groot, 1988). 
Local or regional loss of these environmental func-
tions through ecosystem disruption could cause 
environmental damage which may have considerable 
economic consequences. 
Many environmental 
functions, especially the 'free services', provide 
considerable economic benefits which do not show 
up in economic accounting procedures until they are 
damaged or no longer available. Mitigation costs to 
respond to losses of these functions could be exces-
sive or impossible to mitigate and include increased 
dependence on water and air purification faculties, 
enhanced rehabilitation programs (eg reforestation) 
and artificial erosion prevention projects. 
When attaching market prices to certain goods and 
services, it must be realised that there exist many 
different market-places with different value stand-
ards. So-called minor forest products may have a 
very low value (or no value at all) on the 
international (export) market, although they are 
valuable to the national economy or to local commu-
nities, notably indigenous people. 
5.1 Unmanaged vegetation and forests 
Unmanaged vegetation and forest areas have great 
value since significant portions of the world's econ-
omy (eg forestry and tourism) are built on their 
sustainability, despite the fact that many of these 
areas are not used sustainably. Tropical forests of 
the Asian region produce approximately 500 million 
m
3 of fuelwood and 100 million m
3 of industrial 
wood annually generating more than $5 billion in 
foreign exchange earnings. Numerous communities 
throughout the forested regions of the world rely 
solely on the forest and the income derived from 
forest products for their existence (eg approximately 
350 communities in Canada alone). 
In addition, 
other sectors of the population rely on these areas 
for their recreation, aesthetic and wildlife value. 
3-23 
The value of 'minor' forest products provides a 
major source of income for many developing count-
ries; disruption of the ecosystems which provide the 
required resources could result in local and possibly 
regional socioeconomic problems. 
In Indonesia 
during 1975, exports of minor forest products includ-
ing fruits, nuts, birds' nests and feathers, had a 
market value of $26 million (Jacobs, 1982). The 
worldwide sale of rubber is estimated at $2.6 billion 
annually (Oldfield, 1984) and for rattan approxi-
mately $1.2 billion annually (Jacobs, 1982). 
In Canada, the area of continuous boreal forest is 
estimated to be 148 million ha of which 80 million 
ha are currently economically accessible. It is of 
concern that this estimate is smaller that the 100 
million ha which are projected to become climatical-
ly unsuitable for boreal forests under the proposed 
climate change {Sargent, 1988). 
Consideration will have to be given to the potential 
impacts of climate change on forested ecosystems 
when considering the appropriate harvesting tech-
niques for a particular stand (ie clearcutting vs 
selective cutting). 
In those areas targeted for 
harvesting and where forest (and ecosystem) health 
is suffering, clearcutting followed by appropriate 
reforestation (eg an alternative species or mix) may 
be a viable option for some species (not for hard-
woods). In those situations where the current forest 
stand continues to be healthy (ecologically, socially 
and economically), consideration should be given to 
restricting harvesting to selective cutting. This would 
help maintain the existing forest climate, reduce the 
disruption caused by stresses imposed by climatic 
change, and maintain the ecosystem, especially for 
some hardwood species. In addition, the likelihood 
of fires and fire intensity should be considered in 
managing debris and removal of deadwood. 
The carrying capacity of rangeland in arid and desert 
areas of Africa (Le Houerou and Popov, 1981; 
Kassam and Higgins, 1980) has already been exceed-
ed and is being approached in semi-arid regions. 
Consequently, the amount and distribution of rainfall 
and other changes in productivity under proposed 
climate change becomes a critical variable in deter-
mining the viability of pastoral societies in arid areas 
of Africa (Le Houerou, 1985). 
Some tree species in China will be adversely affected 
by projected changes in climate, thus causing some 
difficulties for its timber industry, especially at the 
regional level (Rugiu, 1990). 
Larix gmelini and 
Larixolgensis do not appear to be susceptible. Pinus 
Korajensis, which currently can be found in the 
southwestern portion of northeast China, however, 
will be negatively affected both as a result of in-
creased climatic stress and owing to increased 
disruption from fire. Lanceotata, which represents 
approximately one-fifth of the national output of 
commercial timber, will suffer as a result of higher 
summer temperatures. 
Productivity will decrease 
and death is projected. 
Pinus Masoliona, which 
accounts for approximately one-half of the forest 
reserve of southern China would retreat southward 
and productivity of those forests remaining would 
decline. 
Pinus Yunnanensio, the major timber 
species of southwestern China could decline con-
siderably with its habitat changing over to nonpro-
ductive, hot or warm shrubs and grasses. 
A n acceleration in the rate of perturbation will 
increase the vulnerability of marginal lands already 
experiencing pressures from various sources. In the 
case of Aboriginal lands of Australia, changes to 
these ecosystems as a result of proposed climatic 
changes threaten the conservation value of the lands 
and a subsistence component of the Aboriginal 
economy, which is valued in the order of tens of 
millions of dollars per annum. Many Aboriginal 
people receive over 50% of their income from 
natural resources and any reduction in the availabili-
ty, amount or quality of these will push these people 
below the poverty line. 
Changes in wildfire intensity and frequency within 
unmanaged vegetation and forest areas will have 
significant socioeconomic consequences. 
Within 
Mediterranean communities, forest and shrubland 
wildfires would grow exponentially (4.7% annually) 
(Le Houerou, 1989) putting a heavy burden on these 
communities. 
Around the Mediterranean Basin, 
650,000 ha burnt on an annual average between 
1980-86 at a total cost of $1.2 billion. In Italy during 
1988, a particularly dry and hot summer, about 
13,500 fires burned an area of 186,000 ha (60,000 ha 
forested lands) with losses in forest production 
estimated at $46 million, six people killed and 80 
injured. 
Significant losses within boreal and temperate forests 
are commonly the result of infestations by pests such 
as the spruce budworm, pine mountain beetle and 
tent caterpillar. In 1980, over 5 million lodgepole 
pine trees covering 156 000 ha were killed by 
mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) in 
the province of British Columbia, Canada. This is a 
twofold increase in the area over that recorded in 
the previous year. 
Increased soil erosion will result in increased costs 
of clean-up of sediments from urban infrastructure. 
The cost of clean-up of erosion sediments as a result 
of the decline or death of 2000 ha of conifers from 
ozone pollution in the San Bernardino Mountains of 
3-24 
California was estimated at $27 million annually 
(Westman, 1977). 
About 80% of the forest production in developing 
countries (47% worldwide) is currently used as fuel. 
The principal, and sometimes only, source of fuel for 
perhaps one-quarter of the world's population is 
fuelwood and fuelwood consumption in the tropics 
alone is estimated at more than 1 billion m
3/year. 
By the turn of the century, 3 billion people may live 
in areas where wood is cut faster than it grows or 
where fuelwood is scarce. Suggested changes in the 
forests of these areas could reduce the availability of 
fuelwood, especially in those areas where climate 
change will cause a shift in species. During the 
transition period, damage caused to the ecosystem 
by over-grazing and over-harvesting will result in 
disruption of the substrate, exacerbating the fuel-
wood situation as new species will find it difficult to 
become established in these nutrient- and moisture-
impoverished areas. 
Fuelwood-gathering opportunities could increase in 
forests subject to increased mortality, but since the 
concomitant risk of fire increases, it seems likely 
that a substantial fraction of potential fuelwood 
could be combusted in wildfires and hence be lost to 
domestic uses. 
In the southern portions of the 
Mediterranean Basin most of the forest and shrub-
land would be cleared for cropping, or destroyed by 
heavy overgrazing and fuel collection (Le Houerou, 
1989). 
Northern latitudes are likely to experience an in-
crease in tourism as the duration of their summer 
climates will be extended, and visitors from lower 
latitudes seek cooler locations for recreation. 
Similar ramifications are likely for higher elevations 
in alpine environments. 
Opportunities for grazing activities in lower latitudes 
could expand, based on the expected expansion of 
grassland areas (Emanuel et al, 1985). Where fire 
frequency increases, the opportunity to convert 
recently burned forest or shrubland to rangeland will 
increase, further accentuating the tendency for 
rangeland to expand. 
Supporting many local communities are incomes 
associated with the cc" lection and trade for orna¬
'.?'. =>nd decorative purposes of biotic resources 
(eg certain minerals) a id many plants and animals 
(eg orchids, butterflies, aquarium fish). In addition, 
forested and natural vegetation areas provide many 
types of materials for handicraft (eg wood and other 
carving materials, hemps, leaves and other materials 
used for weaving and basket making) and objects for 
worship, such as products associated with cultural, 
tribal and religious ceremonies. 
5.2 Biological diversity and endangered 
species 
There are multiple social and economic conse-
quences of changes in biological diversity and status 
of endangered species. Currently, experts estimate 
that the number of species on earth is between 5 
and 30 million (Wilson, 1988) with only 1.5-1.7 
million species known to science. In the course of 
history, people have utilised about 7000 kinds of 
plants for food (Myers, 1984); predominantly wheat, 
barley, rye, oats, rice, maize and about a dozen 
other highly domesticated species. Yet there are at 
least 75,000 edible plants in existence, and many of 
these could be superior to the crop plants in widest 
use. 
The following examples give an indication of the 
social and economic consequences of the impacts of 
the proposed GHG-induced climate change on 
biological diversity and endangered species. 
Native plant species supply about 50% of the raw 
materials for pharmaceutical manufacturers and 
continue to play an important role as reservoir of 
potential new drug sources. 
The World Health 
Organization estimates that 80% of the people in 
developing countries rely on traditional medicine for 
their primary health care needs, and 85% of tradi-
tional medicine involves the use of plant extracts. 
This means that approximately 3.5-4.0 billion people 
rely on plants as a source of drugs (Farnsworth et 
al, 1985). 
Estimations of annual sales of drugs and other 
pharmaceutical products derived from, or containing 
products of plants and animals range between $8 
and $20 billion per year (de Groot, 1988). Several 
currently used drugs for the H I V virus associated 
with AIDS, for example, are from natural sources: 
castanospermine from a Queensland rainforest tree; 
tricosanthin from the root of a Chinese cucumber 
plant; vincristine and vinblastine from the African 
periwinkle. In 1985, total domestic and international 
sales of these two drugs alone were approximately 
$100 million (Wilson, 1988). Species extinctions 
expected as a result of climate change could threaten 
important sources of new drugs. 
Endemism is a feature of a wide variety of wetland 
animals (Maltby, 1986). As a result many of these 
species are rare, threatened or endangered. 
Since 
the morphology of many endangered or rare plant 
species in wetlands is indicative of poor competitive 
ability (Moore and Keddy, 1989), even climate 
3-25 
change to more amenable conditions may put some 
existing wetland species at a comparative disadvan-
tage. 
Changes in habitat and the availability of food and 
water will increase pressures on animals and may 
lead to many animals having to migrate and/or 
disperse over larger areas. 
In the case of endan-
gered species, dispersal could be disastrous. 
For 
those species for which numbers are already low, 
reproductive potential will decline as the number of 
times that males and females meet during periods 
when fertilisation is possible decreases. In the case 
of herding animals, dispersal could lead to tradition-
ally non-dominating males fertilising the females, 
thereby reducing the genetic health of the population 
(Cubberly, 1989). Clearly, anything which adversely 
affects the already threatened species such as the 
African elephant (population 400-600 thousand) and 
the black rhino (population less than 3000) are of 
great economic concern. McNeely (1989) estimates 
that an elephant herd in a Kenyan national park 
provides over $600,000 per year to the nation's 
economy through the associated tourist industry. 
The projected reduction in Norway (from 30% to 
7%) of the area classified as alpine (Holten, 1990b) 
could result in substantial changes in, and possible 
losses of, habitat for alpine plant and animal species. 
It is estimated that plant species currently above 
1300-1400 m would be threatened by climate change 
owing to invading forest combined with low dispersal 
capacity for many mountain plant species, eg Cam-
panula uniflora, Knutsh0 Poa (Poa stricta) and 10-15 
other middle-to-high alpine species. 
The total 
reduction of grazing areas and the possible change 
of species composition of the lichen-dominated 
vegetation in the continental areas of Scandinavia 
could have adverse effects on the reindeer and 
indirectly on the wolverine. 
Habitat loss will also affect many bird species 
through loss of nesting locations (eg Arnold, 1988). 
Species that could be affected include the red-tailed 
black cockatoo (Calyptorhynchus magnificus), the 
regent parrot (Polytelis anthapeplus) and boobook 
owl (Ninax novaeseelandiae) all of which nest in tree 
hollows in Australia. 
Agriculture has reaped the benefits of the genetic 
resources of natural species. 
A wild wheat plant 
from Turkey provided genetic material that im-
proved disease resistance to commercial wheat 
varieties worth $50 million annually to the US alone. 
A wild variety of corn (maize) from Mexico when 
crossed with modern corn varieties will, based on 
estimates, provide a potential saving of $4.4 billion 
annually worldwide. 
Major cultivars of crops, 
improved by genes from natural species have a 
combined farm sales value of $6 billion annually in 
the US. The projected impacts on species diversity 
will affect the genetic base required for the con-
tinued improvement and maintenance of currently 
utilised species and deprive the world of the poten-
tial to develop new ones. 
5.3 Wetlands 
Changes in wetland numbers, type and distribution 
can affect the social and economic values based on 
these areas. Several studies have provided economic 
analyses of wetland values (eg Morzer-Bruijns and 
Westhoff, 1968; Gosselink et al., 1974; Raphael and 
Jaworski, 1981; Thibodeau, 1981; Farber and 
Costanza, 1986). Despite methodological problems, 
without exception these have demonstrated not only 
the significant magnitude of, but also the variety of, 
benefits derived from wetland areas. The values are 
often remarkably high; for example, the capitalised 
values for mangrove wetlands have been given as 
$US212,507/ha (Thorhaug and Miller, 1986) and 
$US81,975/ha (Logo and Brinson, 1979). Values 
calculated for other wetlands have even been higher 
(eg Gosselink et al., 1974; Logo and Brinson, 1979). 
In any case, the potential for economic loss may be 
substantial. 
Perhaps the most significant aspect of potential 
impacts of climate change in wetlands is that these 
will take place in the context of consistent losses of 
these areas globally. It has been estimated that 50% 
of the world's wetlands have already been lost 
(Maltby, 1986). The primary causes have been as a 
result of drainage and agricultural developments, 
projects for flood control, inundation in dam reser-
voirs, disease eradication ventures, channelisation, 
peat mining, deforestation etc. 
In many instances 
these undertakings are subsidised. 
Among wetland organisms potentially affected by 
climate change are those of economic importance 
including: food fish, shrimp, oysters, waterfowl and 
fur-bearing animals, as well as plant species of value 
for lumber, food and fibre. Some of these are 
probably sensitive to changes in climate. For exam-
ple, decreases in wet season rainfall in northern 
Australia have been interpreted as the cause of a 
substantial reduction in optimal nursery habitat for 
the important food fish, barramundi, and a reduced 
survival for young-of-the-year fish (Griffin 1985). 
The loss of coastal wetlands imperils many values. 
Of particular concern is the dependency of many 
marine fisheries on the nursery habitat provided by 
wetland areas. A direct relationship has been shown 
to exist between the extent of tidal wetlands and 
3-26 
estuaries and the productivity of shrimp fisheries 
(Turner, 1977). Many coastal wetlands which are 
highly productive in support of fisheries may be 
affected by higher sea-levels. On the positive side, 
New Zealand (1989) and Stokoe (1988) predict that 
a warming trend could benefit the aquaculture 
industry which could expand to higher latitudes. In 
addition, warmer sea temperatures should allow 
faster growth of fish, less risk of fish mortality 
during over-wintering as well as reduce energy costs 
in shore-based facilities. 
Unfortunately, warmer 
waters may also be more conducive to outbreaks of 
algae and bacteria that render molluscs unfit for 
human consumption. 
Some examples may serve to illustrate the value of 
wetland dependent fisheries. 
Mangrove forests in 
Thailand are estimated to have an annual worth of 
$US130/ha in fisheries as compared to $US30 for 
charcoal production (Christensen, 1983). In 1976 
the value of wetland-dependent commercial fish 
caught in the US was appraised in excess of $US700 
million (Peters et al, 1978). Shrimp exports from 
developing countries earn $900 million annually 
(Maltby, 1986). 
The loss of substantial wetland 
areas potentially imperils these values. 
The value of the loss of one mile of oceanfronting 
wetland has been estimated as $US69,857 as meas-
ured in increased damage potential from hurricanes 
(Farber and Costanza, 1986). Although wetlands do 
not tend to develop along high wave/current energy 
shores, the potential loss of coastal wetlands' protec-
tion is of concern. 
The numbers of birds may be great for certain 
wetlands. 
For example, the intertidal areas of 
Mauritania's Banc d'Arguin harbour 30% of Atlantic 
flyway shorebirds and about 3 million migrants use 
the Senegal delta (Maltby, 1986). 
5.4 Wildlife and fish 
Wildlife and fish have both social and economic 
value. From a social perspective and beyond that 
already mentioned under biological diversity, wildlife 
and fish have recreational and aesthetic value as well 
as contributing to the preservation of aboriginal 
lifestyles. From an economic perspective, wildlife 
and fish provide sustenance and income (food, furs 
and tourism) for many communities in the world. 
While there will be winners as well as losers among 
wildlife and fish subjected to climatic change, it is 
important to keep in mind the economic values 
which are at stake. Wild species provide the base 
for a worldwide, multibillion tourism and recreation 
industry - the most important source of foreign 
income in Kenya and Ecuador. 
Canadians spend 
more than $5 billion annually on wildlife-related 
activities, and in some areas of Botswana, animal 
protein provides more than 90 kg of protein per 
person annually (McNeely, 1989). 
These living 
natural resources are essential to the cultural and 
economic well-being of aboriginal peoples around 
the world, and they enrich the lives of all of us. 
Wildlife harvest continues to be a livelihood for 
some, a sport for others. Since most natural eco-
systems, excluding grasslands and deserts, could 
experience increased mortality and associated short-
or long-term losses in productivity, wildlife and fish 
will be affected, with many species initially suffering 
a decline in numbers as habitat and food availability 
is disrupted. In many countries, there is still a great 
dependence on wild resources as a source of food, 
trade, medicine and construction materials. 
Sale 
(1983) indicates that in many African countries, 
there is an economic dependence on wild resources 
and that loss of access to wild animals and plants 
would result in a complete collapse of the traditional 
economy. 
Russell et al. (1988) indicate a potential threat to the 
Porcupine River Caribou Herd, presently numbering 
some 165,000 animals in Alaska, the Yukon and the 
Northwest Territories. In summer, the herd moves 
northward beyond the treeline, in part to escape 
biting insects. A northward expansion of the boreal 
forest could leave the caribou without a refuge from 
the insects. Caribou agitated by biting insects may 
reduce their feeding and run until exhausted. Since 
this is one of the largest concentrations of free-
ranging mammals on earth, 
providing sustenance 
for thousands of aboriginal North Americans, the 
effect on the health of the Porcupine herd could be 
significant. 
Loss of breeding, staging and wintering habitat for 
waterfowl and shorebirds could be significant. 
Major areas of significant waterfowl and shorebird 
production, for example, lie in the continental 
climate areas of North America and Central Asia 
(Boyd, 
1982; 
Isakov 
and 
Shevareva, 
1968; 
Henderson, 1989). Historically, the loss of prime 
breeding habitat during drought periods has caused 
significant decreases in populations of waterbirds (eg 
CSIRO, 1987; Boyd, 1989). 
Changes in these wetland areas can have significant 
impacts on waterfowl populations (eg Skinner, 1989; 
Whitman and Meridith, 1987). This will compound 
the existing threats from agriculture and other 
intrusions on a wildlife resource which provides 
recreational opportunities for millions of hunters and 
birdwatchers (the US and Canada have committed 
3-27 
themselves to spending $1.5 billion to protect these 
threatened 
habitats under the North American 
Waterfowl Management Plan). Recreation, com-
merce and subsistence dependent upon these species 
would then be altered. 
In northern latitudes, salmonoid species, such as 
lake trout and lake whitefish could be adversely 
affected and, in some areas, become extinct in 
shallow lakes as the cool bottom waters warm up 
(Hecky, 1987). Glacial residual elements in food 
chains could be eliminated from much of their 
present habitat. 
5.5 Heritage sites and reserves 
Socioeconomic consequences of the impacts of 
climate change on heritage sites and reserves are 
mainly related to increased pressures for alternative 
use of these areas and their resources and loss or 
disruption of these areas, with implications for 
changes in management strategies and recreation 
and tourism opportunities. 
Areas currently set aside as parks, sanctuaries and 
reserves may eventually prove not to be adequate to 
protect specific ecosystems and species as climatic 
changes come into play, either because of their 
geographic location or size. 
As climate changes, 
resource abundance may decrease, causing economic 
stress and forcing local peoples to intrude on pro-
tected areas in order to acquire basic essential 
needs. 
The Sunderban forest in southwestern 
Bangladesh is a 580,000 ha tract of mangrove. In 
addition to being managed for timber, the area also 
produces fish, honey, wax and thatch. But it is as a 
wildlife reserve that it is best recognised around the 
world. There is considerable potential for tourism 
based on wildlife (Munshi, 1985). 
Global warming may alter recreational opportunities. 
Heritage sites that encompass wetlands may be 
particularly affected. If fresh water levels drop, the 
character and recreation potential of shorelines will 
change. In some cases, there may be a reduction in 
recreation potential as waters recede and in others, 
wetlands may migrate with water levels (Wall, 1988). 
In northern climates, participation in dry terrain 
summer activities such as hiking and camping will 
probably benefit from an extended season. How-
ever, risk of environmental deterioration will also 
increase as heritage sites experience more uses for 
longer periods (Wall et al, 1986). 
Winter recreational activities will be influenced by a 
shorter season. 
Opportunities for skiing may be 
reduced or eliminated in some areas (Wall 1988), 
implying a possible expansion of this activity into 
more northern areas. 
The economic impact to 
existing ski operators could be substantial. Invest-
ment in high-capital costs for snow-making devices, 
high operating costs and a shortened ski season may 
greatly reduce the feasibility of some operations 
(Wall, 1988; More, 1988). A decrease in the length 
of the ski season will result in recreationists reducing 
expenditures in local economies (Wall, 1988; 
Lamothe and Periard 1988; More, 1988). 
Public attitudes to the environment in heavily indus-
trialised countries are changing, with a shift from a 
'consumer' to a 'conserved society. Associated with 
this is a shift from consumptive recreational activi-
ties (eg fishing and hunting) to appreciative activities 
(eg hiking, biking, canoeing). A shift to pro-environ-
mental attitudes would increase demand for heritage 
sites in which to recreate, and increase tourism in 
those areas that can supply pristine environments. 
As sea-levels rise, prime agricultural land in low-
lying coastal areas such as Bangladesh, Vietnam, 
China, Iraq and Egypt may be lost (Harrison, 1984). 
This may result in increased pressure to shift or 
expand agricultural production into existing or 
potential heritage sites to feed the world's growing 
population. In northern climates, the world's major 
grain belts of Canada, the US and Russia will 
experience longer, dryer growing seasons. 
These 
areas, while still capable of supporting agricultural 
production, will require more irrigation (Arthur, 
1988; Harrison, 1984), putting increased pressure on 
already diminishing fresh water supplies. Pressure 
to divert water directly from heritage sites or inter-
fere with flow to the sites will probably increase. 
6 
Future deliberations 
While the specific impacts of global warming on any 
one region or a single species are still matters of 
conjecture, there are some clear conclusions that can 
be made. Natural terrestrial ecosystems will change 
in make up as composite species shift in location, 
and those species which can adapt will survive. The 
more sensitive ones, especially those for which 
options are limited, will dwindle or disappear. The 
best solutions to the ecological upheaval resulting 
from climatic change are not yet clear. In fact, little 
attention has been paid to the problem. 
What is 
clear, however, is that these climatological changes 
would have tremendous impact on communities and 
populations isolated by development and by the 
middle of the next century may dwarf any other 
consideration. 
Examination of the environmental impacts of climate 
change on natural terrestrial ecosystems and the 
3-28 
associated socioeconomic consequences is in its 
infancy. The number of studies that have been done 
are limited with only specific regions and sectors 
having been examined. 
Further limiting these 
studies is that, for the most part, existing studies 
have taken a narrow view of the problem and have 
not looked at it from a multidisciplinary perspective. 
In addition, most of these have examined climate 
change effects on current social, economic and 
environmental systems and not considered social and 
economic adjustments nor impacts and consequences 
during ecosystem transitional periods. 
These limitations need to be addressed to provide 
more realistic answers regarding the possible im-
pacts and, thereby, to allow the development of 
viable and effective response strategies. This can be 
achieved through various means including: 
• Assembly of relevant inventories of species and 
ecosystems on a regional and international basis. 
A consistent baseline must be established in order 
to reach consensus on resources at risk. 
• Integrated monitoring programs including biologi-
cal, physical and meteorological parameters on a 
regional, national and global basis. These data 
should be archived in such a manner that they 
could be readily accessible. Heritage sites and 
reserves are excellent benchmarks against which 
to monitor the impacts of climate change and, 
therefore, should be considered as a priority for 
establishing a network 
of benchmark sites. 
Monitoring of more sensitive ecosystems and 
species (as described in section 1.2 above) should 
be given priority since they would provide early 
indication of impact of climatic change. Also to 
be considered as a priority are those ecosystems 
and species which have significant social and/or 
economic value. This would suggest that concur-
rent social and economic data should also be 
collected and archived in an accessible manner. 
• More information is needed on the relative 
sensitivities of species and ecosystems to climate 
and climate change. This is especially true for 
wildlife for which very little information is avail-
able. 
The correlative relationships between 
climate and plant and animal species need to be 
experimentally evaluated 
to 
establish 
causal 
relationships and the relative impacts of changes 
in climate compared to other controlling factors. 
Also of interest is information on the combined 
effect of both direct and indirect impacts on 
species and ecosystems. Examining the impact of 
a particular variable on a static environment and 
society, although interesting, is limited in its 
applicability. More realistic would be examining 
the impacts and consequences with fixed societal 
and environmental changes or, better still, with a 
responsive society and environment. 
• Impacts programs capable of these latter types of 
analyses would need to be multidisciplinary 
involving not only physical and biological scientists 
but also representatives from the social sciences 
and economics. 
National and international 
research funding programs should be capable of 
recognising and supporting this type of research. 
Research 
programs 
at 
the 
national 
and 
international level which examine the impacts of 
climate change and the socioeconomic conse-
quences of these changes should be established 
where they do not exist and, should receive 
sufficient funding. The Climate Impacts Program 
of the U N E P should be strengthened. 
Efforts 
need to be directed towards identifying sensitive 
ecosystems or components thereof both from an 
environmental and socioeconomic perspective, 
determining the likely impacts and possible 
response strategies. One possible mechanism for 
carrying out these programs would be the estab-
lishment of regional programs or task forces 
which would promote and coordinate the develop-
ment of regional impacts and consequences 
research, and the development of problem specific 
response strategies. 
This type of activity could 
build on already existing structures within W M O 
and U N E P . 
• Comprehensive strategies and measures for the 
maintenance of biological diversity should be 
established on a global, regional and national 
basis. Natural terrestrial ecosystem managers and 
those involved in making decisions that affect 
these ecosystems must be aware of the potential 
risk that these systems are under due to climate 
change, the likely changes to these systems, the 
implications of their decisions, and options for 
responding and associated risks. 
This can be 
accomplished 
by 
various 
education 
and 
information programs. Foremost, however, is the 
involvement of these people in the assessment of 
the impacts, consequences and response options. 
Managers and decision makers need to be aware 
that policies and procedures should be flexible to 
accommodate the implications of climate change 
and the dynamics of this change as they are the 
ones who must decide on whether or not inter-
vention is needed. 
• Involving local peoples in the discussions on the 
future and in the development and maintenance 
of natural terrestrial ecosystems has far-reaching 
benefits. 
Initially societies respond at the local 
and regional levels of government through the 
3-29 
actions of coalitions of local people. Support for 
establishment and maintenance of sites may be 
the highest at the grass roots level, involving local 
peoples. Fostering this involvement can provide 
social 
(eg 
the 
Elephant 
Action 
Campaign, 
Namibia) and economic benefits as it provides an 
alternate source of income (Lusigi, 1981; Penfield, 
1989) and at the same time creates a better 
understanding of, and higher level of commitment 
to, developing and maintaining natural terrestrial 
ecosystems. 
Local and regional levels of 
government should be encouraged to become 
involved in protecting natural terrestrial eco-
systems especially heritage sites and reserves. 
• The more fragmented and the smaller populations 
of species are, the less resilient they will be to the 
new stresses brought about by climatic changes. 
Thus, one direction in the short term is to mini-
mise further encroachment of development upon 
existing natural ecosystems. Meanwhile, efforts to 
improve techniques for managing communities 
and ecosystems under stress, and also for restor-
ing them when necessary, must be carried forward 
energetically. 
• In the near term, the critical needs of natural 
terrestrial ecosystems which face the most delet-
erious impacts should be addressed. 
Humans 
must be prepared to intervene where vital eco-
systems or species are in jeopardy. 
Priority 
should be given to considering the various re-
sponse options available and associated unknowns 
and risks. Consideration should also be given to 
reducing major human-caused stresses such as 
logging, subsistence domestic animal grazing and 
pollution-causing activities. 
Often, once these 
stresses, which may originate outside the boundar-
ies of the ecosystem, are reduced, the elasticity of 
the affected ecosystem increases, possibly decreas-
ing the impacts of climate change. 
• In some cases, intensive (costly) management may 
be required to mitigate the effects of climatic 
changes. These could include transplanting key 
species and assemblages; the expansion or reloca-
tion of heritage sites and reserves; the establish-
ment and maintenance of travel corridors (Peters, 
1988) to allow dispersal of the inhabitants of 
restricted areas; and mitigating measures for 
wetlands (Titus, 1985; Louisiana Wetland Protec-
tion Panel, 1987) such as artificially nourishing 
marshes with sediment, preventing coastal devel-
opments from impeding the inland movement of 
wetlands, dyking, artificially controlling water 
levels and restoring barrier islands. Establish-
ment of adequate reserves in selected areas which 
consider the implications of climatic changes so as 
to provide protected areas for ecosystem re-
establishment. 
A l l of these possible solutions 
have major problems related to cost and long-
term effectiveness. 
Intervention of this type, 
however, needs to be based on sound and com-
prehensive information in order that it be con-
structive rather than destructive. 
3-30 
Figure 3.1a Changes in climate zones currently associated with specific vegetation (Leemans, 1989) -
Western Hemisphere 
Figure 3.1b Changes in climate zones currently associated with specific vegetation (Leemans, 1989) -
Eastern Hemisphere 
3-32 
Figure 3.2a Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as a result of projected increases 
in temperature in the European part of the USSR along a transect at 50°E longitude (Velichko 
et al., 1990) - increase in global mean temperature of 0.8-1 °C 
Global mean temperature 
change 0.8
0Cto1
0C 
2 C > 
A 
1
6
-
Species 
/ 
tamperature^rr^ 
limits 
Vegeta tional 
(climate-based) 
Zones 
potential 
3-33 
Figure 3.2b Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as a result of projected increases 
in temperature in the European part of the USSR along a transect at 50 °E longitude (Velichko 
et al., 1990) - increase in global mean temperature of 1.8-2°C 
Global mean temperature 
change 1.8°Cto2°C 
20- -
Species 
temperature.) 6" 
limits 
X S 
12l 
Larix sukaczewii 
Picea 
obovata 
current 
Vegetational 
(climate-based) 
Zones 
potential 
60° 
T
" 
65° 
—
I
— 
70° 
Latitude 
3-34 
Finure 3 3a Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as a result of projected increases 
g 
temperature in Canada along a transect at 100°W longitude (Velichko et al., 1990) - increase 
in global mean temperature of 0.8-l°C 
Global mean temperature 
change 0.8°C to 1°C 
Species 
^ QA 
temperature' 
limits 
12H 
Picea mariana 
Vegetational 
(climate-based) 
Zones 
Latitude 
3-35 
Figure 3.3b Potential changes in the distribution of the main tree species as a result of projected increases 
in temperature in Canada along a transect at 100 °W longitude (Velichko et al., 1990) - increase 
in global mean temperature of 1.8-2°C 
t°C 
July 
28 n 
24H 
Species 
^
1
f
i
J 
temperature— 
limits 
12 
Real shif 
Ulmus 
t: 
Abies 
Picea 
8.5km 
m 
8.5km 
Global mean temperature 
change 1.8°C to 2°C 
Ulmus americana 
Abies balsamea 
Picea 
mariana 
Vegetational 
(climate-based) 
Zones 
t°C 
January 
-24-
-28-
-32-
-36-
Latitude 
3-36 
References 
Aho, J.M.M., 
Gibbons, 
W., 
Esch, 
G.W. 
1976, 
'Relationship between thermal loading and parasitism in 
the mosquito fish'. In: Thermal Ecology II, G.W. Esch 
and R.W. McFarlane (eds). 
Technical Information 
Center, 
Energy 
Research 
and 
Development 
Administration, Springfield, VA, pp. 213-218. 
Armentano, T.V., Park, R.A. and Cloonan, C.L. 1988, 
'Impacts on coastal wetlands throughout the United 
States'. In: Greenhouse effect, sea level rise and coastal 
wetlands, J.G. Titus (ed.). US Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, pp. 87-149. 
Arnold, G.M. 1988, 'Possible effects of climate change on 
wildlife in Western Australia'. In: 
Greenhouse: 
preparing for climate change, G.I. Pearman (ed.). 
CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia, pp. 375-386. 
Arthur, L. 1988, 'The implication of climate change for 
agriculture in the prairie provinces'. In: Climate Change 
Digest (CCD 88-01). Environment Canada, Ottawa. 
Australian Government 1989, Prime Minister's Science 
Council, Climate Change - Issues for Australia. 
Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, 
Australia. 
Baker, R.G. 1983, 'Holocene vegetational history of the 
western 
United 
States'. 
In: 
Late-Quaternary 
Environments of the United States, H.E. Wright, Jr. (ed), 
Volume 2, The Holocene. University of Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis, pp. 109-125. 
Barlow, E.W.R. and Conroy, J. 1988, 
'Influence of 
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide on the productivity 
of Australian forestry plantations', In: 
Greenhouse: 
Planning for Climate Change, G.I. Pearman (ed.). 
CSIRO Australia, pp. 520-533. 
Beauchamp, R.S.A. and Ullyott, P. 1932, 'Competitive 
relationships between certain species of freshwater 
triclads'. J. Ecol. 20, pp. 200-208. 
Baumann, R.H., Day, J.W. and Miller, C.A. 1984, 
'Mississippi deltaic wetland survival: sedimentation versus 
coastal submergence'. Science 224, pp. 1093-1095. 
Bean, M.J. 1989, 'Waterfowl and climate change. A 
glimpse into the twenty-first century'. The Orion Nature 
Quarterly Vol. 8, No. 2 (Spring 1987), pp. 23-27. 
Benecke, U., and Evans, G. 1987, 'Growth and water use 
in hard beech {Northofagus truncata) in temperate high 
country, Nelson, New Zealand'. In: LTE Symp. no. 20, 
pp. 131-140. 
Bernabo, J.C., and Webb, T. Ill 1977, 'Changing patterns 
in the Holocene pollen record of northeastern North 
America: a mapped summary'. Quat. Res. 8, pp. 64-96. 
Birks, H.J. 1989, 'Vegetation and climate change during 
the Holocene', presented at European conference on 
Landscape Ecological Impact of Climatic Change 3-7 
December 1989, Lunteren, The Netherlands. 
Boer, M.M., Koster, E.A. and Lundberg, H. 1990, 
'Greenhouse Impact in Fennoscandia. 
Preliminary 
findings of a European workshop on the effects of climate 
change'. Ambio 19 (1). 
Boor man, L.A., Cross-Custard, J.D. and McGroty, S. 
1988, Climatic Change, Rising Sea Level and the British 
Coast. 
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, Natural 
Environment Research Council. 
Box, E.O. 1981, Macroclimate and plant forms: an 
introduction to predictive modelling in phytogeography. 
Dr. W. Junk (Publ.). The Hague. 
Boyd, H. (ed.) 1982, First Western Hemisphere Waterfowl 
and Waterbird Symposium. Canadian Wildlife Service, 
Ottawa. 
Boyd, H. (ed.) 1989. 
Flyways and Special Reserves 
Networks. IWRB Special Publication 9. 
Braithwaite, R.W., Lonsdale, W.M. and Estbergs, J.A. 
1989, 'Alien vegetation and native biota in tropical 
Australia: the impact of {Mimosa pigra)'. Biological 
Conservation 48, pp. 189-210. 
Breckenridge, R.P. 1988, 'Assessment of climate changes 
on fish and wildlife resources'. January, 1988. Climate 
Institute, Washington, DC (draft). 
Brinson, M . M . , Logo, A.E. and Brown, S. 1981, 'Primary 
productivity, decomposition and consumer activity in 
freshwater wetlands'. Annual Review of Ecological 
Systematics, 12, pp. 123-161. 
Bryson, R.A. 1973, Climatic modification by air pollution, 
II, the Sahelian effect. 
Report No. 9, Institute of 
Environmental Studies, University of 
Burger, J. 1984, 'Abiotic factors affecting migrant 
shorebirds'. In: Behavior of Marine Animals, J. Burger 
and B.L. OUa (eds), Vol. 6. Plenum Press, New York, 
pp. 1-72. 
Busby, J.R. 1988, 'Potential implications of climate change 
on Australlia's flora and fauna', In: 
Greenhouse: 
Planning for climate change, G.I. Pearman (ed.). CSIRO 
Australia, pp. 387-398. 
Butzer, K.W. 1980, 'Adaptation to global environmental 
change'. Prof. Geogr., 32 (3), pp. 269-278. 
Christensen, B. 1983, 'Mangroves - what are they worth?' 
Unasylva 35 (139), pp. 2-15. 
Cohen, S. 1986, 'Impacts on water resources in the Great 
Lakes', Climate Change 8. 
COHMAP Members 1988, 'Climatic changes of the last 
18,000 years: Observations and model simulations'. 
Science 241, pp. 1043-1052. 
Colinvaux, P. 1986, 'Climate and Bio geography'. Chapter 
14 in: Ecology. John Wiley and Sons, New York, 725pp. 
Corbet, P.S., Longficld, C. and Moore, N.W. 1960, 
'Dragonflies'. In: Collins New Naturalist, London. 
Courtenay, W.R. Jr. 1978, 'The introduction of exotic 
organisms'. In: Wildlife and America, H.P. Brokaw 
(ed.). Council on Environmental Quality, US Government 
Printing Office, Washington, DC, pp. 237-252. 
Cox, B.C. and Moore, P.D. 1985, Biogeography: An 
Ecological And Evolutionary Approach. 
Blackwell 
Scientific Publications, Oxford. 
Critchfield, W.B. 1980, 'Origins of the eastern deciduous 
forest'. In: Proceedings, Dendrology in the Eastern 
Deciduous Forest Biome, September 11-13, 1979. 
Virginia Polytech. Inst, and State Univ. School of 
Forestry and Wildlife Resources. Publ. FWS-2-80, pp. 
1-14. 
3-37 
Croley, T.E. and Hartmann, H.C. 1989. 
'Effects of 
climate changes on the Laurentian Great Lakes levels'. 
In: Appendix A - Water Resources, the Potential Effects 
of Global Climate Change on the United Stales, J.B. 
Smith and D.A. Tirpak (eds). US EPA, Washington, 
DC. 
CSIRO 1987, Conservation and the Environment. CSIRO 
Research for Australia 15. Canberra. 
Cubberly, P.S. 1989, 'The consequences of global 
warming for biological diversity'. In: Focus World 
Wildlife Federation Newsletter No. 5. 
Currie, D.T. and Paquin, V. 
1987, 'Large-scale 
biogeographical patterns of species richness of trees'. 
Nature 329, pp. 326-327. 
Daubenmire, R.F. 1962, Plants and Environment: A 
Textbook of Plant Autecology. John Wiley and Sons, New 
York. 
Davis, M.B. 1983, 'Holocene vegetational history of the 
eastern United States'. In: Late-Quaternary Environments 
of the United States, H.E. Wright, Jr. (ed.). Volume 2. 
The Holocene. 
University of Minnesota Press, 
Minneapolis, pp. 166-181. 
Davis, M.B. and Zabinski, C. 1990, 'Changes in 
geographical range resulting from greenhouse warming 
effects on biodiversity in forests'. In: Proceedings of 
World Wildlife Fund's Conference on Consequences of 
Global Warming for Biological Diversity, R.L. Peters 
and T.E. Lovejoy (eds). Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
Davis, M.B., Woods, K.D., Webb, S.L. and Futyma, R.P. 
1986, 'Dispersal versus climate: expansion of Fagus and 
Tsuga into the Upper Great Lakes region'. Vegetatio 67, 
pp. 993-104. 
de Groot, R.S. 1988, Environmental functions: 
an 
analytical framework for integrating environmental and 
economic assessment, prepared for the workshop on 
'Integrating Environmental and Economic Assessment: 
Analytical and Negotiating Approaches'. 
17-18 
November 1988, Vancouver, Canada. 
DeLaune, R.D., Patrick, W.H. and Pezeshki, S.R. 1987, 
'Foreseeable flooding and death of coastal wetland 
forests'. Environmental conservation 14, pp. 129-133. 
Department of Environment, UK 1988, Possible Impacts 
of Climate Change on the Natural Environment in the 
United Kingdom, Romney House, London. 
Diamond, J.M. 1975, 'The island dilemma: lessons of 
modern biogeographic studies for the design of natural 
preserves'. Biol. Conserv., 7, pp. 129-146. 
Diarra, L. 1988, 'Changes in Vetiveria nigritiana and 
Eragrostis barteri grasslands in the Niger flood plain, 
central Mali'. International Livestock Centre for Africa 
(ILCA) Bulletin 31, pp. 14-18. 
Dorf, E. 1976, Climatic changes of the past and present'. 
In: Paleobiogeography: Benchmark Papers in Geology 
31, C.A. Ros (ed.). Dowden, Hutchinson, and Ross: 
Stroudsbury, PA, pp. 384-412. 
Dunbar, M. 1955, 'Marine life'. In: Geography of the 
Northlands, 
G.H.T. Kimble and D. Good (eds). 
American Geographic Society and John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc., New York, pp. 119-138. 
Edgell, M.C.R. 1984, 'Transhemispheric movements of 
Holarctic Anatidae: the Eurasian wigeon (Anas penelope 
L.)' North America. J. Biogeogr., 11, pp. 27-39. 
Emanuel, W.R., Shugart, H.H. and Stevenson, M.P. 
1985a, 'Climatic change and the broad-scale distribution 
of terrestrial ecosystem complexes'. Climatic Change, 7, 
pp. 29-43. 
Emanuel, W.R., Shugart, H.H. and Stevenson, M.P. 
1985b, 'Response to comment: climatic change and the 
broad-scale 
distribution 
of 
terrestrial 
ecosystem 
complexes'. Climatic Change, 7, pp. 457-460. 
Eybergen, F.A. 1989, 'Possible effects of climatic change 
on biotic and abiotic processes operating in natural and 
semi-natural 
environments'. 
Draft 
contribution to 
Working Group II of the IPCC. A summary of 
preliminary conclusions of papers contributed to the 
European Conference on landscape-ecological effects of 
climatic change. Lunteren, The Netherlands, 3-7 
December, 1989. 
Farber, S. and Costanza, R. 1986, 'The economic value of 
wetlands systems'. Journal ofEnvironmental Management 
24, pp. 41-51. 
Farnsworth, N.R., Akervele, O., Bingel, A.S., Soejonto, 
D.D. and Gno, S.G. 1985, 'Medicinal plants in therapy'. 
Bull. WHO, 63, pp. 965-981. 
Flenley, J.R. 1979, The equatorial rain forest. 
Butterworths, London. 
Flohn, H. 1979, 'Can climate history repeat itself? Possible 
climate warming and the case of paleoclimatic warm 
phases'. In: Man's Impact on Climate, W. Bach, J. 
Pankrath and W.W. Kellogg (eds). Elsevier Scientific 
Publishing, Amsterdam, pp. 15-28. 
Ford, M.J. 1982, The Changing Climate. George Allen and 
Unwin, London. 
Fosberg, M.A. 1988, 'Climate change and fires'. In: 
Coping with Climate Change, Proceedings of the Second 
North American Conference on Preparing for Climate 
Change: A Cooperative Approach, J.C. Topping (ed.). 
Climate Institute Washington, DC, pp. 292-296. 
Fried, J.S. and Torn, M.S. 1988, 'The altered climate fire 
model: simulating the effects of climate change on the 
effectiveness of a wildland fire initial attack program' 
(manuscript in preparation, U. of California, Berkely). 
Frye, 
R. 
1983, 
'Climatic 
change 
and fisheries 
management'. Nat. Resources J. 23, pp. 77-96. 
Furley, P.A., Newey, W.W., Kirby, R.P. and Hotson, J. 
McG. 1983, Geography of the Biosphere. Butterworths: 
London. 
Gifford, R.M. 1988, 'Direct effects of higher carbon 
dioxide concentrations on vegetation'. In: Greenhouse: 
Planning for Climate Change, G.I. Pearman (ed.). 
CSIRO, Melbourne, pp. 506-519. 
Gleick, P.H. 1987, 'Global climatic changes and regional 
hydrology: impacts and responses'. In: The Influence of 
Climate Change and Climate Variability on the 
Hydrologic Regime and Water Resources, S.I. Solomon, 
M. Beran and W. Hogg (eds). 
Proceedings of the 
Vancouver Symposium, August, 1987, IAHS Publ. No. 
168, pp. 389-402. 
Gleick, P.H., Mearns, L. and Schneider, S.H. 1990, 
'Climate change scenarios for impact assessment'. In: 
Proceedings of World Wildlife Fund's Conference on 
Consequences of the Greenhouse Effect for Biological 
Diversity, R.L. Peters and T.E. Lovejoy (eds). Yale 
Univ. Press, New Haven, Connecticut. 
3-38 
Gopal, B. 1988, 'Wetland management and conservation in 
India'. Water Quality Bulletin 13, pp. 3-6, 29-30. 
Gorham, E. 1988, 'Canada's peatlands: their importance 
for the global carbon cycle and possible effects of 
"greenhouse" climatic warming'. Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Canada (series 5), III, pp. 21-23. 
Gosselink, J.G., Odum, E.P. and Pope, R.M. 1974, The 
value of the tidal marsh. Center for Wetland Studies, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge. 
Graetz, R.D., Walker, B.H. and Walker, P.A. 1988, 'The 
consequences of climatic change for seventy percent of 
Australia'. In: Greenhouse: Planning for Climate Change, 
G.I. Pearman (ed.). CSIRO, Australia, pp. 399-420. 
Graham, R.W. 1986, 'Plant-animal interactions and 
Pleistocene extinctions'. In: Dynamics of Extinction, 
Wiley & Sons, Somerset, NJ, pp. 131-154. 
Greenbank, D.O. 1956, 'The role of climate and dispersal 
in the initiation of outbreaks of the spruce budworm in 
New Brunswick'. In: The role of climate, Can. J. Zool., 
34, pp. 453-476. 
Griffin, R.K. 1985. 'The importance of mangrove/coastal 
wetland to three commercial fisheries in the Northern 
Territory, particularly for Barramundi (Lates calcarifer)'. 
In: Coastal and Tidal Wetlands of the Australian Monsoon 
Region, K.N. Bardsley, J.D.S. Davie and C D . 
Woodroffe (eds). Mangrove Monograph 1, Australian 
National University North Australia Research Unit, 
Darwin, pp. 277-283. 
Hamburg, S.P. and Cogbill, C.V. 1988, 'Historical decline 
of red spruce populations and climatic warming'. Nature 
331, pp. 428-431. 
Hansen, J., Johnson, D., Lacis, A., Lebedeff, S., Lee, P., 
Rind, D. and Russell, G. 1981, 'Climate impact of 
increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide'. Science 213, pp. 
957-966. 
Hansen, J., Fung, I., Lacis, A., Lebedeff, S., Rind, D., 
Ruedy, R., Russell, G. 1988a, 'Prediction of near-term 
climate evolution: what can we tell decision-makers 
now?' In: Preparing for Climate Change: Proceedings of 
the First North American Conference on Preparing for 
Climate Change: A Cooperative Approach. Government 
Institutes: Washington, DC, pp. 35-47. 
Hansen, J., Fung, I., Lacis, A., Rind, D., Lebedeff, S., 
Ruedy, R. and Russell G. 1988b, 
'Global climate 
changes as forecast by Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
three dimensional model'. J. geophysical Res. 93 (D8), 
pp. 9341-9364. 
Harmsworth, G.C. and Long, S.P. 1986, 'An assessment 
of saltmarsh erosion in Essex, England, with reference to 
the Dengie Peninsula'. Biological Conservation 35, pp. 
377-387. 
Harington, C.R., 1986, 'The impact of changing climate 
on some vertebrates in the Canadian Arctic. In: Impact 
of Climate Change on the Canadian Arctic. Proceedings 
of a Canadian Climate Change Program workshop, 
Orillia, Ontario, 3-5 March, 1986. 
Harrison, P. 1984, 'Population, climate, and future world 
supply'. Ambio 13 (3), pp. 161-167. 
Harte, J., Torn, M. and Jensen, D. 1990, 'The nature and 
consequences of indirect linkages between climate change 
and biological diversity'. In: Proceedings of World 
Wildlife Fund's Conference on Consequences of Global 
Warming for Biological Diversity, R.L. Peters and T.E. 
Lovejoy (eds). Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
Henderson, S. 1989, 'How it might be: species'. EPA 
Journal 15 (1), pp. 21-22. 
Heusser, C.J. 1974, 'Vegetation and climate of the 
southern Chilean lake district during and since the last 
interglaciation'. Quat. Res. 4, pp. 290-315. 
Hoffman, J.S., Keyes, D. and Titus, J.G. 1983, Projecting 
future sea level rise. 
US Environmental Protection 
Agency: Washington, DC. 
Holdridge, L.R. 1964, Life Zone Ecology. Tropical Science 
Center, San Jose, Costa Rica. 
Hoi ten, J.I. 1989, 'Predicted floristic change, and shift of 
vegetation zones in a coast-inland transect in central 
Norway', poster presented at European Conference on 
Landscape Ecological Impact of Climate Change, 3-7 
December 1989, Lunteren, The Netherlands. 
Holten, J.I. (ed.) 1990a, 'Effects of climate change on 
terrestrial ecosystems. 
Report from a seminar in 
Trondheim, 16 January 1990'. NINA Notat 4, pp. 1-30. 
Holten, J.I. (ed.) 1990b, 'Biological and ecological 
consequences of changes in climate in Norway'. NINA 
Utredning 11, pp. 1-59. 
Hosking, G.P. and Hutcheson, J.A. 1986, 'Hard beech 
decline on the Mamaku Plateau, North Island, New 
Zealand'. New Zealand Journal of Botany 24, pp. 
263-269. 
Hosking, G.P. and Kershaw, D.J. 1985, 'Beech mortality 
in the Maruia Valley'. New Zealand Journal of Botany 
23, pp. 201-211. 
Huntley, B. and Webb T. Ill 1989, 'Migration: species' 
response to climatic variations caused by changes in the 
earth's orbit'. Journal of Biogeography 16, pp. 5-19. 
Isakov, 
Yu. 
A. 
and 
Shevarev, 
T.P. 
1968, 
'Interrelationships of waterfowl breeding and wintering 
areas in the central Palaearctic'. In: Proceedings of a 
technical meeting on wetland conservation. IUCN 
Publication new series, 12, pp. 165-174. 
Ives, W.G.H., 1974, Weather and outbreaks of the spruce 
budworm, Christonuera fumi ferena (Lepidoptera: 
Tortricidae). Can. For. Service Inf, Report NOR-X-118. 
Izrael, Yu. A. and Semenov, S.M. 1990 (in press), 
'Ecological standards setting: methodolgy and practical 
issues: problems of ecological monitoring and ecosystem 
modelling'. Leningrad, Gidrometeoizdat Vol. 13 (in 
Russian.) 
Jacobs, M. 1982, 'The study of minor forest products'. 
Flora Malesiana Bulletin 35, pp. 3768-3781. 
Kana, T.W., Baca, B.J. and Williams, M.L. 1986, 
Potential impacts of sea level rise on wetlands around 
Charleston, South Carolina. US Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington. 
Kana, T.W., Baca, B.J. and Williams, M.L. 1988, 
'Charleston case study'. In: Greenhouse effect, sea level 
rise and coastal wetlands, J.G. Titus (ed.). 
US 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, pp. 37¬
59. 
Kana, T.W., Eiser, W.C., Baca, B.J. and Williams, M.L. 
1988, 'New Jersey case study'. In: Greenhouse effect, sea 
level rise and coastal wetlands, J.G. Titus (ed.). US 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, pp. 
61-86. 
3-39 
Kassam, A.H. and Higgins, G.M. 1980, Report on the 
second FAOIUNFPA expert consultation on land 
resources for population of the future. AGLS/FAO, 
Rome. 
Kauppi, P. and Posch, M. 1985, 'Sensitivity of boreal 
forests to possible climatic warming'. Climatic Change 7, 
pp. 45-54. 
Kearney, M.S. and Stevenson, J.C. 1988, 'Marsh loss and 
shore erosion with sea-level rise in Chesapeake Bay '. In : 
Proceedings: 2nd North American Conference on 
Preparing for Climate Change. Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC, 6-8 December, 1988. 
Kellogg, W.W. and Schwäre, R. 1981, Climate change and 
society: consequences of increasing carbon dioxide. 
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado. 
Kellison, R.C. and Weir, R.J. 1987, 'Selection and 
breeding strategies in tree improvement programs for 
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide levels'. 
In: The 
Greenhouse effect, Climate Change, and U.S. Forests, 
W.E. Shands and J.S. Hoffman (eds). 
Conservation 
Foundation: Washington, DC. 
Kirby, M.J. 1989, 'Forecast changes in sediment yield due 
to expected global wanning for Mediterranean Spain 
based on a slope evolution model'. Presented at the 
European Conference on Landscape Ecological Impact of 
Climate Change 3-7 December 1989 Lunteren, The 
Netherlands. 
Kirkham, 
I.R. 
1988, 
'The changing atmosphere: 
Implications for Ontario'. Seasons 28 (4), pp. 24-28. 
Knopf, F.L. and Sedgwick, J.A. 1987, 'Latent population 
responses of summer birds to a catastrophic climatological 
event'. The Condor 89, pp. 869-873. 
Korner, Ch. 1989, Carbon fertilization: the great 
uncertainty in future climate change. In: Global Climate 
Change, A. Solomon (ed.). Proc. Int. Symp. IIASA 
Laxenburg 1988, Kluiver Publ, Dordrecht, in press. 
Kramer, P.J. 1981, 'Carbon dioxide concentration, 
photosynthesis, and dry matter production'. Bioscience 
31, pp. 29-33. 
Kolasa, J., Loebach, C. and Hebert, P.D.N. 1988, Future 
Great Lake levels: vol.2 - impact on environment. Great 
Lakes Institute, Windsor, Ont. 
Kowalski, M. 1989, 'Climate-induced changes in species 
composition of forest stands in Poland', presented at the 
European Conference on Landscape Ecological Impact of 
Climate Change 3-7 December 1989, Lunteren, The 
Netherlands. 
Kullman, L. 1983, 'Past and present tree lines of different 
species in the Handolan Valley, Central Sweden'. In: 
Tree Line Ecology, P. Morisset and S. Payette (eds). 
Centre d'études nordiques de l'Université Laval, Quebec, 
pp. 25-42. 
Kushlan, J.A. 1986, 'Responses of wading birds to 
seasonally fluctuating water levels: strategies and their 
limits'. Colonial Waterbirds 9, pp. 155-162. 
Kwaad, F. 1989, 'Precipitation parameters and soil erosion 
on arable land on loess soils in South-Limburg (The 
Netherlands)', presented at the European Conference on 
Landscape Ecological Impact of Climate Change 3-7 
December 1989, Lunteren, The Netherlands. 
La mo the and Periard Consultants 1988, 'Implications of 
climate change for downhill skiing in Quebec'. 
In: 
Climate Change Digest (CCD 88-03), Environment 
Canada, Ottawa. 
Lavender, D.P. 1987, 'Climatic warming and the "chilling 
requirements" of forest trees', presented at IUFRO 
workshop on Woody Plant Growth in a changing physical 
and chemical environment 27-31 July 1987. University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Leemans, R. 1989, 'Possible changes in natural vegetation 
patterns due to a global warming'. In: 
Der 
Treibhauseffect: 
Das 
Problem-Mögliche 
Folgen-
Erforderliche Massnahmen, Hackl (ed.). Akademie fur 
Umvelt und Energie, Laxenberg, Austria, pp. 105-121. 
Le Houerou, H.N. 1985, 'Pastoralism'. In: 
Climate 
Impact Assessment, R.W. Kates, J.H. Ausubel and M. 
Berberian (eds). Wiley, Chichester, pp. 155-186. 
Le Houerou, H.N. and Popov, G.F. 1981: An Ecoclimatic 
Classification of Intertropical Africa. AGPE.FAO, Rome. 
Le Houerou, H.N. 1989, 'Global change: population, land-
use and vegetation in the Mediterranean basin by the mid 
21st century', presented at the European Conference on 
Landscape Ecological Impact of Climate Change, 3-7 
December 1989, Lunteren, The Netherlands. 
Liehne, P.F.S. 1988, 'Climatic influences on mosquito-
borne diseases in Australia'. In: Greenhouse. Planning for 
Climate Change, G.I. Pearman (ed.). 
CSIRO, 
Melbourne, pp. 624-637. 
Lester, R.T. and Myers, J.P. 1989, Global Warming, 
Climate. Audubon Wildlife Report. National Audubon 
Society, New York. 
Lewis, T.A. 1987, 'Will species die out as the earth heats 
up?' International Wildlife 17 (6), pp. 18-22. 
Logo, A.E. and Brinson, M . M . 1979, 'Calculations of the 
value of salt water wetlands'. In: Wetland functions and 
values: the state of our understanding, P.E. Greeson, J.R. 
Clark and J.E. Clark (eds). American Water Resource 
Association, Minneapolis, Minnesota, pp. 120-130. 
Louisiana Wetland Protection Panel, 
1987, Saving 
Louisiana's coastal wetlands: the need for a long-term 
plan of action. US Environmental Protection Agency and 
Louisiana Geological Survey, Washington and Baton 
Rouge. 
Lovejoy, T.E. 1980, 'A projection of species extinctions'. 
In: The Global 2000 Report to the President: Entering the 
Twenty-First Century. Council on Environmental Quality 
and the Department of State. US Government Printing 
Office: Washington, DC, pp. 328-331. 
Lovejoy, T.E. 1985, 'Rehabilitation of degraded tropical 
rainforest lands'. Commission on Ecology Occ. Pap. 5. 
International Union for the Conservation of Nature and 
Natural Resources, Gland, Switzerland. 
Lusigi, W.J. 
1981, 
'New approaches to wildlife 
conservation in Kenya'. Ambio 10, pp. 87-92. 
MacArthur, R.H. 1972, GeographicalEcology. Harper& 
Rown, New York. 
McNeely, J.A. 1989, 'Conserving biological diversity'. 
IUCN News Bulletin 20 (4-6), pp. 6-7. 
Main, A.R. 1988, 'Climatic change and its impact on 
nature conservation in Australia'. In: Greenhouse: 
planning for climate change, G.I Pearman (ed.). CSIRO 
Australia, pp. 361-374. 
Marshall, J.K. 1978, 'Factors limiting the survival of 
Corynephorus canescens (L) Beauv in Great Britain at the 
northern edge of its distribution'. Oikos 19, pp. 206-216. 
3-40 
Malanson, G.P. and Westman, W.E. In press, 'Modeling 
interactive effects of climate change, air pollution, and 
fire on a California shrubland'. Climatic Change, 
forthcoming. 
Maltby, E. 1986, Waterlogged wealth. Earthscan, London. 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R.T. 1987, 'Large-scale 
changes of soil wetness induced by an increase in 
atmospheric carbon dioxide'. 
Atmos. Sci. 44, pp. 
1211-1235. 
Margines, C.R., Nicholls, A.O. and Pressey, R.L. 1988, 
'Selecting networks of reserves to maximize biological 
diversity'. Biol. Conserv. 43, pp. 63-76. 
Markham, B.J., 1982, 'Waterfowl production and water 
level fluctuation'. Canadian Water Resources Journal 7 
(4), pp. 22-36. 
Meo, M. 1988, 'Institutional response to sea-level rise: the 
case of Louisiana'. In: Societal responses to climate 
change: forecasting by analogy, M.H. Glantz (ed.). 
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pp. 215-242. 
Menchaca, L. and Byrne, R. 1990, The potential impact of 
greenhouse warming on the terrestrial ecosystems of 
Mexico (private communications, in press). 
Meo, M. 1988, 'Institutional response to sea-level rise: the 
case of Louisana'. In: Societal responses to climate 
change: forecasting by analogy, M.H. Glantz (ed.). 
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pp. 215-242. 
Miller, R.I., Bratton, S.P. and White, P.S. 1987, 'A 
regional strategy for reserve design and placement based 
on an analysis of rare and endangered species' 
distribution patterns'. Biol. Conserv. 39, pp. 255-268. 
Miller, J.A. 1989, 'Diseases for our future. Global ecology 
and emerging viruses'. Bioscience 39, pp. 509-517. 
Miller, W.F., Dougherty, P.M.K. and Switzer, G.L. 1987, 
'Rising carbon and changing climate: major southern 
forest management implications'. In: The greenhouse 
effect, climate change, and U.S. forests. Conservation 
Foundation, Washington, DC. 
Mooney, H.A. and Drake, J.A. 1989, 'Biological 
invasions, a SCOPE program overview'. In: Biological 
invasions: a global perspective (SCOPE 37), 1. A. Drake, 
H.A. Mooney, F. De Castri, R.H. Groves, F.J. Kruger, 
M. Rejmanek and M. Williamson (eds). Wiley 
Chichester, pp. 491-508. 
More, G. 1988, 'Impact of climate change and variability 
on recreation in the prairie provinces'. In: The impact of 
climate variability and change on the Canadian Prairies, 
B.C. Magill and F. Geddes (eds). Proceedings of the 
Symposium/ Workshop Alberta Environment, Edmonton. 
Morrissey, L.A., Livingston, G.P. and Card, D.H. 1988, 
'Estimating regional methane flux in northern high 
latitude ecosystems'. In: Annual Report, Ecosystem 
Science and Technology Branch, NASA Ames Research 
Center, Moffett Field, CA, pp. 26-27. 
Morzer-Bruijns, M.F. and Westhoff, V. 1968, 'Notes on 
the economic value of wetlands based on the experience 
in the Netherlands'. In: Proceedings of a technical 
meeting on wetland conservation. IUCN Publication new 
series, 12, pp. 203-204. 
Muller, H. 1979, 'Climatic changes during the last three 
interglacials'. In: Man's Impact on Climate, W. Bach, 
J. Pankrath, and W.W. Kellogg (eds). Elsevier Scientific 
Publishing: Amsterdam, pp. 29-41. 
Murphy, D.D. and Weiss, S.B. 1990, 'The effects of 
climate change on biological diversity in western North 
America: 
species losses and mechanisms'. 
In: 
Proceedings of World Wildlife Fund's Conference on the 
Consequences of the Greenhouse Effect for Biological 
Diversity, R.L. Peters and T.E. Lovejoy (eds). Yale 
Univ. Press, New Haven, Connecticut. 
Myers, J.P. 1988, 'The likely impact of climate change on 
migratory birds in the arctic'. Presentation at Seminar on 
Impact of Climate Change on Wildlife, 21-22 January, 
1988; Climate Institute: Washington, DC. 
Myers, R.L. 1983, 'Site susceptibility to invasion by the 
exotic tree Melaleuca quinquenervia in southern Florida'. 
J. Appl. Ecol. 20 (2), pp. 645-658. 
Myers, N. 1984, The Primary Source: Tropical Forests and 
our Future. W.W. Norton, New York. 399pp. 
Munshi, A.I. 1985, 'Mangrove resources of Bangladesh.' 
In: 
Coastal and Tidal Wetlands of the Australian 
Monsoon Region, K.N. Bardsley, J.D.S. Davie and C D . 
Woodroffe (eds). Mangrove Monograph 1, Australian 
National University, North Australia Research Unit, 
Darwin, pp. 347-348. 
National Research Council (NRC) 1983, Changing 
Climate. National Academy Press: Washington, DC. 
New Zealand Climate Impact Document 1989, Ch. X X . 
Impacts on forestry and forest ecosystems. Ms. 
Oechel, W.G. 1989, 'Effects of climate change and 
elevated carbon on tundra ecosystems': 
methods and 
monitoring presented at European Conference on 
Landscape Ecological Impact of Climate Change, 3-7 
December 1989 Lunteren, The Netherlands. 
Oldfield, M.L. 1984, The value of conserving genetic 
resources. US Department of the Interior, National Park 
Service, Washington, DC. 
O'Leary, J.F., and Westman W.E. (no date), 'Regional 
disturbance effects on herb succession patterns in coastal 
sage scrub'. Journal of Biogeography 15, pp. 775-786. 
Orians, 
G.H. 
1986, 
'Site characteristics favoring 
invasions'. In: Ecology of Biological Invasions of North 
America and Hawaii, H.A. Mooney and J. Drake (eds), 
pp. 133-148. 
Owonubi, J.J. 1989, 'Overview of climatic change and 
patterns of crop production in the Northern Guinea and 
Sudan savanna areas'. Presented at PAN-EARTH 
workshop, Sally, Senegal. 
Pain, S. 1988a, 'How the heat trap will wreak havoc'. 
New Scientist October 15, p. 22. 
Pain, S. 1988b, 'No escape from the global greenhouse'. 
New Scientist November 12, p. 22. 
Park, R.A., Trehan, M.S., Mausel, P.W. and Howe, R.C. 
1989, 'Coastal wetlands in the twenty-first century: 
profound alterations due to rising sea level'. In: 
Wetlands, concerns and successes, D.W. Fisk (ed.). 
American Water Resources Association, Bethesda, 
Maryland, pp. 71-80. 
Park, R.A., Armentano, T.V. and Coolan, C.L. 1986, 
'Predicting the effects of sea-level rise on coastal 
wetlands'. In Effects of Changes in Stratospheric Ozone 
and Global Climate, J.G. Titus (ed.). US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, pp. 129-152. 
Pastor, J. and Post, W.M. 1988, 'Response of northern 
forests to carbon-induced climate change'. Nature 334, 
pp. 55-58. 
3-41 
Patterson, D.T. and Flint, E.P. 1980, 'Potential effects of 
global atmospheric carbon enrichment on the growth and 
competitiveness of C-3 and C-4 weed and crop plants'. 
Weed Sci 28 (1), pp. 71-75. 
Payette, S. and Filion, L. 1985, 'White spruce expansion 
at the tree line and recent climatic change'. Can. J. For. 
Res. 15, pp. 241-251. 
Penfield, W. 1989, 'African deliverance, out of a dying 
forest came a controversial game ranch.' Equinox 46, pp. 
27-39. 
Perring, F.H. 1965, 'The advance and retreat of the British 
flora'. In: The Biological Significance of Climatic 
Changes in Britain, C.J. Johnson and L.P. Smith (eds). 
Academic Press: London, pp. 51-59. 
Peters, R.L. and Darling, J.D. 1985, 'The greenhouse 
effect and nature reserves'. Biosci. 35 (11), pp. 707-717. 
Peters, D.S., Ahrenholz, D.W. and Rice, T.R. 1978, 
'Harvest and value of wetland associated fish and 
shellfish'. In: Wetland functions and values: the state of 
our understanding, P.E. Greeson, J.R. Clark and J.E. 
Clark (eds). American Water Resource Association, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, pp. 606-617. 
Peters, R.L. 1988, Effects of Global Warming on 
Biological Diversity: An Overview. World Wildlife 
Fund, Washington, DC. 
Pollard, D.F.W. 1989, 'Forestry in a changing climate in 
Climatic Applications' In: Forest Renewal and Forest 
Production: Proceedings of Forest Climate '86 Nov 
17-20, 1986 Forestry Canada, pp. 181-184. 
Ramcharan, E.K. 1989, Personal communication. Institute 
of Marine Affairs, Carenage, Trinidad and Tobago. 
Rampino, M.R. and Sanders, J.E. 1981, 'Episodic growth 
of Holocene tidal marshes in the northeastern United 
States: A possible indication of eustatic sea-level 
fluctuations.' Geology 9 (2), pp. 63-67. 
Rand, 
A.S. 
1964, 
'Inverse 
relationship 
between 
temperature and shyness in the lizard Anolis lineatopus'. 
Ecology 45, pp. 863-864. 
Raphael, C.N. and Jaworski, E. 1979, 'Economic value of 
fish, wildlife and recreation in Michigan's coastal 
wetlands'. Coastal Zone Management Journal 5, pp. 
181-194. 
Rapoport, E.H. 1982, Areography: 
Geographical 
Strategies of Species. Pergamon Press, New York. 
Rapoport, E.H., Borioli, G., Monjeau, J.A., Pantieri, J.E. 
and Oviedo, R.O. 1986, 'The design of nature reserves: 
a simulation trial for assessing specific conservation 
value'. Biol. Conserv. 37, pp. 269-290. 
Rice, R.M., Corbett, E.S. and Bailey, R.G. 1969, 'Soil 
slips related to vegetation, topography, and soil in 
southern California'. Water Resources Research 5, pp. 
647-659. 
Rice, R.M. and Foggin G.T. Ill, 1971, 'Effects of high 
intensity storms on soil slippage on mountainous 
watersheds in southern California'. Water Resources 
Research 7, pp. 1485-1496. 
Rizzo, B. and Wiken, E. 1989, 'Assessing the sensitivity of 
Canada's ecosystems to climatic change', presented at 
European Conference on Landscape Ecological Impact of 
Climate Change, 3-7 December 1989, Lunteren, The 
Netherlands. 
Roberts, L. 1989, 'How fast can trees migrate?' Science 
243, pp. 735-737. 
Roulet, 
N. 
1989, 
Personal communication. 
York 
University, Downsview, Ont. 
Rosenberg, N.J., Crosson, P., Easterling W. Ill, 
Frederick, K. and Seejo, R. 1989, 'Policy options for 
adaptations to climate change'. In: The full range of 
responses to 
climatic 
change. 
United 
Nations 
Environment Programme/The Beijer Institute. Chapter 5, 
pp 69-100. 
Ruqiu, Ye 1990, 'An assessment of the impact of climate 
change caused by 
human 
activities 
on 
China's 
environment'. A report submitted to the IPCC Working 
Group II by the National Environmental Protection 
Agency, Beijing, China. 
Russell, D.E., Nixon, W. and Martell, A. 1988, 
'Implications of climate and weather to the ecology of the 
Porcupine Caribou Herd'. Canadian Climate Program, 
Proceedings of the Third Meeting on Northern Climate, 
Whitehorse, Yukon, 7-8 September, 1988. 
Saenger, P., Hegerl, E.J. and Davie, J.D.S. 1983, Global 
status of mangrove ecosystems. IUCN-WWF, Gland, 
Switzerland. 
Safranyik, L. 1981, 'Population biology and management 
of lodgepole pine', in Proc. Mountain Pine Beetle 
Symposium, Coleman, Alberta. Alberta Energy and 
Natural Resources, pp. 80-84 
Sale, J.B. 1983, The importance and values of wild plants 
and animals in Africa. International Union for the 
Conservation of Nature, Gland, Switzerland. 
Sargent, N.E. 1988, 'Redistribution of the Canadian boreal 
forest under a warmed climate'. Climatological Bulletin 
22 (3). 
Sather, J.H and Smith, R.D. 1984, An overview of major 
wetland functions and values. US Fish and Wildlife 
Service Report FWS/OBS-84/18. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and Mitchell, P.F.B. 1987, 'Climate 
model simulations of the equilibrium climatic response to 
increased carbon'. Reviews of Geophysics 25 (4), pp. 
760-798. 
Schneider, S.H. 1989, 'The greenhouse effect: Science 
and Policy'. Science 243, pp. 771-781. 
Schneider, S.H. and Londer, R. 1984, The Coevolution of 
Climate and Life. Sierra Club Books, San Francisco. 
Schonewald-Cox, C M . and Bayless, J.W. 1986, 'The 
boundary model: a geographical analysis of design and 
conservation of nature reserves'. Biol. Conserv. 38, pp. 
305-322. 
Seddon, B. 1971, Introduction to Biogeography. Barnes 
and Noble, New York. 
Shugart, H.H. and Antonovsky, M. Ya., Jarvis, P.G. and 
Sandford, A.P 1986, 'C0 2 climatic change and forest 
ecosystems,' In: 
The Greenhouse Effect, Climatic 
Change and Ecosystems, B.Bolin, B.R. Doos, J. Jager 
and R.A. Warrick (eds). SCOPE 29, John Wiley and 
Sons, Chichester, UK, pp. 475-521. 
Skinner, J. 1989, 'Flood restored in the Sahel'. IWRB 
News 1, p. 6. 
Soegiarto, A. 1985, 'The mangrove ecosystem in 
Indonesia: its problems and management'. In: Coastal 
and tidal wetlands of the Australian monsoon region, 
K.N. Bardsley, J.D.S. Davie and C D . Woodroffe (eds). 
Mangrove Monograph 1, Australian National University 
North Australia Research Unit, Darwin, pp. 313-326. 
3-42 
Solomon, A . M . 1986, 'Transient response of forests to 
C02-indueed climate change: simulation modeling 
experiments in eastern North America'. Oecologia 68, 
pp. 567-579. 
Solomon, A. 1986, Personal communications. 
Soule, M.E. 1986, Conservation biology: the science of 
scarcity and diversity. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, 
USA, 584pp. 
Soule, M.E. 1987, Viable populations for conservation. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 
189pp. 
Spence, D.H.N. 1964, 'The macrophytic vegetation of 
freshwater lochs, swamps and associated fens', In: The 
vegetation of Scotland, J.H. Bennett (ed.). Oliver and 
Boyd, Edinburgh, pp. 306-425. 
Steudler, P.A., Bowden, R.D., Melillo, J.M. and Aber, 
J.D. 1989, 'Influence of nitrogen fertilization on methane 
uptake in temperate forest soils', Nature 341, pp. 
314-316. 
Stevenson, J.C., Ward, L.G. and Keaney, M. 1986, 
'Vertical accretion in marshes with varying rates of sea 
level rise'. In: Estuarine variability, D. Wolf (ed.). 
Academic Press, New York, pp. 241-260. 
Stokoe, P.K. 1988, 'Strategies to respond to climate change 
and sea-level rise'. In: Atlantic Canada in Coping with 
Climate Change, proceedings of the second North 
American conference on preparing for climate change: a 
cooperative approach, Topping, J.C. (ed.). Climate 
Institute, Washington, DC. 
Stotts, V.D. 1985, 'Values and functions of Chesapeake 
Bay wetlands for waterfowl'. In: 
Wetlands of the 
Chesapeake, H.A. Groman et al. (eds). Environmental 
Law Institute, Washington, pp. 129-142. 
Strain, B.R. and Cure J.D. (eds) 1985, Direct effects of 
increasing carbon dioxide on vegetation. United States 
Department of Energy. DOE/ER-0238. 
Street, R.B. 1989, 'Climate change and forest fires in 
Ontario,' In: Proceedings of the 10th Conference on Fire 
and Forest Meteorology, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
Teskey, R. and Hinkley, T.M. 1977, 'Impact of water level 
changes on woody riparian and wetland communities.' In: 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Report Vol 2, southern 
forest regions, FWS/OBS-77/59. 
Thibodeau, F.R. 1981, 'The economic analysis of wetland 
protection'. Journal of Environmental Management 12, 
pp. 19-30. 
Thorhaug, A. and Miller, B. 1986, 'Stemming the loss of 
coastal wetland habitats: Jamaica as a model for the 
tropical 
developing 
countries'? 
Environmental 
Conservation 13, pp. 72-73. 
Titus, J.B. 1985, 'Sea level rise and wetlands loss', In: 
Coastal zone '85, O.T. Magoon (ed.). American Society 
of Civil Engineers, New York, pp. 1979-1990. 
Titus, J.G. 1988, 'Sea level rise and wetland loss: an 
overview'. In: Greenhouse effect, sea level rise and 
coastal wetlands, J.G. Titus (ed.). US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, pp. 1-35. 
Titus, J.G. (ed.), 1988, Greenhouse effect, sea level rise 
and coastal wetlands. US Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington. 
Titus, J.G., Henderson, T.R. and Teal, J.M. 1984, 'Sea 
level rise and wetlands loss in the United States'. 
National Wetlands Newsletter 6 (5), pp. 3-6. 
Topping, J.C. and Bond, J.P. 1988, The Potential Impact 
of Climate Change on Fisheries and Wildlife in North 
America. 
Report to the Climate Institute of the US 
Environmental Protection Agency, May, 1988. 
Tralau, H. 1973, 'Some quaternary plants'. In: Atlas of 
Palaeobiogeography, A. Hallam (ed.). Elsevier Scientific 
Publishing, Amsterdam, pp. 499-503. 
Turner, R.E. 1977, Tntertidal regulations and commercial 
yields of penacid shrimp'. Transactions of the American 
Fish Society 106, pp. 411-416. 
Udvardy, M.D.F. 1975, A classification of biogeographical 
provinces of the world. IUCN occasional paper no. 18. 
International Union for Conservation of Nature and 
Natural Resources, Gland, Switzerland. 
US Fish and Wildlife Service 1988, 'Predicted global 
climate change and migratory bird management'. Notes 
distributed at an October, 1988, North American 
Waterfowl Management Plan meeting. 
Van Dam, H. 1988, 'Acidification of three moorland pools 
in the Netherlands by acid precipitation and extreme 
drought periods over seven decades'. Freshwater Biology 
20, pp. 157-176. 
Van Dam, H. 1989, Personal communication. Rijkinstituut 
voor Natuurbeheer, Leersum, The Netherlands. 
Van der Valk, A.G., and Davis, C.B. 1978, 'Primary 
production of prairie glacial marshes'. In: Freshwater 
wetlands: ecological processes and management potential, 
R.E. Good, D.F. Whigham and R.L. Simpson (eds). 
Academic Press, New York, pp. 21-37. 
Van Devender, T.R. and Spaulding, W.G. 1979, 
'Development of vegetation 
and 
climate 
in 
the 
southwestern United States'. Science 204, pp. 701-710. 
van Dorp, D. 1985, 'Frugivoria y dispersion de semillas 
por aves'. In: Investigaciones sobre la regeneration de 
selvas maltes en Vera Cruz, Mexico, Volume II, pp. 
333-363. 
Velitchko, A.A., Borisova, O.K., Zelikson, E.M. and 
Nechaev, V.P. 1990, An assessment of dynamics of 
natural geosystems in the forest and tundra zones under 
anthropogenic 
climatic 
change 
(Personal 
communications). 
Vitousek, P.M. 1986, 'Biological invasions and ecosystem 
properties: can species make a difference'? In: Ecology of 
Biological Invasions of North America and Hawaii, H.A. 
Mooney and J. Drake (eds), pp. 163-178. 
Wall, G. 1988, 'Implications of climatic change for tourism 
and recreation in Ontario'. In: Climate Change Digest 
(CCD 88-05). Environment Canada, Ottawa. 
Wall, G., Harrison, R., Kinnaird, V., McBoyle, G. and 
Quinlan, C. 1986, 'The implications of climatic change 
for camping in Ontario'. Recreation Research Review 13 
(1), pp. 50-60. 
Waller, B.H. et al. 1989, 'Global Climate Change and 
Australia: effects on renewable natural resources'. In: 
Prime Minister's Science Council, Global Climate Change 
- Issues for Australia, Australian Government Publishing 
Service. Canberra, Australia. 
Webb, L.J. 1958, 'Cyclones as an ecological factor in 
tropical lowland rainforest, North Queensland'. Australian 
Journal of Botany 6, pp. 220-228. 
Webb, L.J. and Tracey, J.G. 1981, 'Australian rainforests: 
patterns and change'. In: Ecological Biogeography of 
3-43 
Australia, A. Keast (ed.). Dr W. Junk, The Hague, pp. 
607-696. 
Webb, T. Ill, 1990, 'Past changes in vegetation and 
climate: lessons for the future'. In: Proceedings of 
World Wildlife Fund's Conference on Consequences of the 
Greenhouse Effect for Biological Diversity, R.L. Peters 
and T.E. Lovejoy (eds). Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
Westman, W.E. 1977, 'How much are Nature's services 
worth'? Science 197, pp. 960-964. 
Westman, W.E. 1978, 'Inputs and cycling of mineral 
nutrients in a coastal subtropical eucalypt forest'. Journal 
of Ecology 66, pp. 513-531. 
Westman, W.E. 1981, 'Factors influencing the distribution 
of species of Californian coastal sage scrub'. Ecology 62, 
pp. 439-455. 
Westman, W.E. and O'Leary, J.F. 1986, 'Measures of 
resilience: the response of coastal sage scrub to fire'. 
Vegetatio 65, pp. 179-189. 
Westman, W.E. and Malanson, G.P. in press, 'Effects of 
climate change on Mediterranean-type ecosystems in 
California and Baja California'. In: Consequences of the 
Greenhouse Effect for Biodiversity, R.L. Peters and T. 
Lovejoy (eds). Yale University Press, New Haven. 
[Forthcoming.] 
Wellington, W.G., Fettes, J.J., Turner, K.B. and Belyea, 
R.M. 1950, 'Physical and biological indicators of the 
development of outbreaks of the spruce budworm*. Can. 
J.Research, D. 28, pp. 308-331. 
Wheaton, E.E., Singh, T., Dempster, R., Higgenbotham, 
K.O., Thorpe, J.P., van Kooten, G.C. and Taylor, J.S. 
1987, An exploration and assessment of the implications 
of climatic change for the boreal forest and forestry 
economics of the prairie provinces and North-West 
Territories: Phase One. SRC Publication E-906-36-
B-87. SRC technical report 211. 
Whitman, W.R. and Meridith W.H. (eds), 1987, 
Waterfowl and wetland symposium. Delaware Coastal 
Management Program, Dover. 
Wigley, 1989, 
Wilson, E.O. 1985, 'The Biological Diversity Crisis: the 
Challenge to Science Issues.' Sci. Technol. 2, pp. 20-29. 
Wilson, E.O. 1988, Biodiversity. National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC. 
Winget, C.H. 1988, 'Forest management strategies to 
address climate change'. 
In: Preparing for Climate 
Change: Proceedings of the First North American 
Conference on Preparing for Climate Change: A 
Cooperative Approach. Government Institutes, Rockville, 
MD, pp. 328-333. 
Woodward, F.I. 1990, 'Review of the effects of climate on 
vegetation: ranges, competition and composition'. In: 
Proceedings of World Wildlife Fund's Conference on 
Consequences of the Greenhouse Effect for Biological 
Diversity, R.L. Peters and T.E. Lovejoy (eds). Yale 
Univ. Press, New Haven, Connecticut. 
World Meteorological Organization 1988, Developing 
policies for responding to climatic change, a summary of 
the discussions and recommendations ofthe workshops 
held in Villach (28 September-2 October 1987) and 
Bellagio (9-13 November 1987) under the auspices of the 
Beijer Institute, Stockholm. WMO/TD no 225, 53pp. 
Wright, H.E. Jr. 1971, 'Late Quaternary vegetational 
history of North America'. In: The Late Cenoioic 
Glacial Ages, K.K. Turekian (ed.). Yale Univ. Press, 
New Haven, pp. 425-464. 
3-44 
Chapter 4 
Hydrology and water resources 
Co-chairmen: 
I. Shiklomanov, H. Lins, E. Stakhiv and K Mostefa-Kara 
Lead authors: 
H. Lins, I. Shiklomanov and E. Stakhiv 
Contributors: 
M. Ayers; M. Beran; F. Bultot; L. da Cunha; G. Demar6e; B. 
Foxworthy; G. Griffiths; K. Hanaki; J. Kelman; R. Lawford; H. 
Liebscher; C. Liu; P. Mosley; B.Stewart; R. Street; T. Yamada 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction 
4-1 
2 
Climate scenarios 
4-1 
3 
Some physical aspects of hydrology and water resources 
4-1 
3.1 
Methodological approaches 
4-1 
3.2 
Changes in annual and seasonal conditions 
4-2 
3.3 
Water demand 
4-3 
3.4 
Water balance and lake levels 
4-4 
3.5 
Other hydrologic characteristics 
4-4 
4 
Hydrologic and water resource changes in large regions and countries 
4-5 
4.1 
North America 
4-5 
4.1.1 
United States 
4-5 
4.1.2 
Canada 
4-6 
4.2 
Brazil 
4-7 
4.3 
Western Europe and Scandinavia 
4-8 
4.4 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
4-11 
4.5 
Northern China 
4-11 
4.6 
Japan 
4-12 
4.7 
New Zealand 
4-13 
5 
Case studies of effects in critical or sensitive environments 
4-15 
5.1 
Large water bodies 
4-15 
5.1.1 
The Great Lakes Basin (US/Canada) 
4-15 
5.1.2 
The Caspian Sea 
4-16 
5.2 
The arid and semi-arid zones of North Africa, including the Sahel 
4-17 
5.3 
Water conditions in critical agricultural regions 
4-18 
5.3.1 
The South Platte River 
4-18 
5.3.2 
The Murray-Darling Basin (Australia) 
4-18 
5.4 
Water conditions in intensively urbanised areas - the Delaware River 
Basin (USA) 
4-21 
5.5 
Regions of snowmelt-generated runoff: 
The Sacramento-San Joaquin 
River Basin (USA) 
4-22 
6 
Conclusions 
4-24 
Tables 
Table 4.1. 
Estimated hydrologic impacts of varying climatic change scenarios for 
Canada (Marta, 1989) 
4-7 
Table 4.2. 
Estimated percentage changes in mean annual runoff at three sites in the 
UK in response to changes in temperature and precipitation, based on the 
Turc formula (Beran and Arnell, 1989) 
4-10 
Table 4.3. 
Potential changes in seasonal runoff in response to a temperature 
warming of 1°C for selected rivers in the USSR 
4-12 
Table 4.4. 
Estimated percentage changes in Great Lakes net basin supplies between 
current climatic conditions (1 x C 0 2 or the B A S E case) and doubled C 0 2 
conditions as simulated by the GISS, G F D L and O S U G C M s (Croley, in 
press) 
4-16 
Table 4.5. 
Changes in components of the water balance of the Caspian Sea in 
response to global warming 
4-17 
Table 4.6. 
Simulated percent of time in which the Delaware River Basin is in a 
drought warning or drought emergency condition for prescribed tempera-
ture and precipitation scenarios (Ayers et al, 1990) 
4-22 
4-ii 
Figures 
Figure 4.1. 
Dependence of consumptive water losses, over large continental areas, on 
the aridity index. 1 - Africa, 2 - Europe and Australia, 3 - North and 
South America, and Asia 
4-26 
Figure 4.2. 
Mean annual water supply (in billions of gallons per day) under current 
and hypothetical climatic conditions for the major water resource regions 
of the US 
4-27 
Figure 4.3. 
Percentage change in mean annual runoff by varying precipitation (upper) 
and potential évapotranspiration (lower) (Schaake, 1990) 
4-28 
Figure 4.4. 
Change in annual runoff (in centimetres) for the USSR as estimated for 
a warming of 1°C 
4-29 
Figure 4.5. 
Estimated percentage change in annual runoff under climate change 
scenario SI (2030-2050) in New Zealand (Griffiths, 1988) 
4-30 
Figure 4.6. 
The Great Lakes drainage area (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
4-31 
Figure 4.7. 
GCM-estimated average seasonal and annual changes in temperature 
(upper) and precipitation (lower) for the grid cells encompassing the 
Great Lakes (2 x C 0 2 minus 1 x C 0 2 ) (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
4-32 
Figure 4.8. 
Comparison of actual levels of Lake Erie for the period 1900-80 with 
estimated levels for the same period generated by superimposing onto the 
actual conditions a warmer climate and a warmer climate with future 
levels of consumptive use (Sanderson, 1989) 
4-33 
Figure 4.9. 
Estimated levels of the Caspian Sea, 1989-2020 under varying climate 
change scenarios: 
1 - stationary climate with man's impact, 2 -
model-based anthropogenic change in climate including man's impact, 3 
- map-based anthropogenic change in climate including man's impact, 46 
- observed lake level variations before 1988 
4-34 
Figure 4.10. 
Plot of normalised annual average rainfall (solid line) and 3-year moving 
average (dashed Une) for the town of Saint Louis, Senegal (upper, 
1932-1982) and Oran es Senia, Algeria (lower, 1927-1987) 
4-35 
Figure 4.11. 
Drainage area of the South Platte River basin (US Army Corps of 
Engineers, 1977) 
4-36 
Figure 4.12. 
GCM-estimated average seasonal and annual changes in temperature 
(upper) and precipitation (lower) for the grid ceUs encompassing the 
Great Plains (2 x C 0 2 minus 1 x C 0 2 ) (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
4-37 
Figure 4.13. 
The drainage area of the Murray-Darling basin in southeastern Australia 
(Stewart, 1989) 
4-38 
Figure 4.14. 
The Central Valley (shaded) and Central Valley Basin of California. 
Symbols refer to locations of the GISS, G F D L and O S U G C M gridpoints 
(Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
4-39 
References 
4-40 
4-iii 
Hydrology and water resources 
1 Introduction 
Changes in climatic conditions due to increasing 
atmospheric concentrations of radiatively active trace 
gases will probably alter land and water resources, 
their distribution in space and time, the hydrologic 
cycle of water bodies, water quality, and water 
supply systems and requirements for water resources 
in different regions. Quantitative estimates of the 
hydrologic effects of climate change are essential for 
understanding and solving potential water resource 
problems associated with domestic water use, indus-
try, power generation, agriculture, transportation, 
future water resources systems planning and man-
agement, and protection of the natural environment. 
Climate change can be expected to lead to changes 
in soil moisture and water resources. 
The most 
important climate variable that may change is 
regional precipitation, which cannot be predicted 
well. Water supply and use in semi-arid lands are 
very sensitive to small changes in precipitation and 
evapotranspiration by vegetation, because the frac-
tion of precipitation that runs off or percolates to 
groundwater is small. 
Increased heat will lead to 
more evapotranspiration, but the increase is expect-
ed to be partly offset by reduced plant water use in 
a COj-enriched atmosphere. 
Higher temperatures may also have an impact in the 
transitional winter snow zones. More winter precipi-
tation would be in the form of rain instead of snow, 
thereby increasing winter season runoff and decreas-
ing spring and summer snowmelt flows. Where the 
additional winter runoff cannot be stored because of 
flood control considerations or lack of adequate 
storage, a loss in usable supply would be the result. 
This chapter presents estimates of the influence of 
climatic change on hydrologic and water resource 
conditions in various countries and regions. 
2 Climate scenarios 
Forecasts of changes in climatic conditions for 
different regions and periods of time are required to 
estimate the hydrologic effects of increasing trace 
gas concentrations in the atmosphere. A i r tempera-
ture, precipitation, cloud cover or insolation, wind 
speed and humidity are the most important condi-
tions. 
However, reliable forecasts of regional 
climate change are unavailable. 
In their absence, 
various approaches to the development of scenarios 
of future climatic conditions are used, including (1) 
hypothetical (or prescribed) scenarios, (2) scenarios 
obtained from atmospheric general circulation 
models ( G C M ) , and (3) scenarios based on 
historical and palaeoclimatic reconstructions. 
The first approach is to prescribe climatic changes 
for various regions or river basins in a simplified 
manner. As a rule, such scenarios specify air tem-
perature increases from 0.5 °C to 4.0 °C and precipi-
tation changes (increase or decrease) in the range of 
10% to 25%. Some authors also prescribe hypo-
thetical changes in evaporation. 
The second approach is to obtain scenarios directly 
from G C M s in which the atmospheric concentration 
of C 0 2 is doubled (2 x C 0 2 ) . A problem with using 
G C M s is that the simulations for the same regions 
by different climate models may yield different and 
sometimes opposite results, especially for precipita-
tion changes (Gleick, 1988) .The third approach is to 
develop future climate analogs based on climatic 
reconstructions of past warm epochs, when atmos-
pheric C 0 2 was above the present value. 
For 
instance, Soviet climatologists show in their studies 
(Budyko and Izrael, 1987) that the so-called 
Holocene optimum (about 5-6 K A ) can be con-
sidered as a 1°C global warming analog (about in 
the year 2000-2005); the last interglacial epoch (the 
Mikulino, 125 K A ) can serve as an analog of the 
climatic conditions with a 2°C warming in the year 
2020-2025; and the Pliocene climatic optimum that 
took place a few million years ago, with mean air 
temperatures 3°C-4°C above present, can be an 
analog of climatic conditions for the more distant 
future years 2040-2050. 
There are difficulties and limitations in the applica-
tion of palaeoclimatic reconstructions owing to the 
uncertainty of the climatic conditions of the remote 
past and to the lack of reliable palaeoclimatic data 
for many regions and countries. 
There is also a 
continuing discussion of the relative merits of the 
three approaches. In the absence of reliable predic-
tions, the question of which scenario is best remains 
unanswered. 
3 Some physical aspects of hy-
drology and water resources 
3.1 Methodological approaches 
During the past 10 years hydrologists from many 
countries have extensively studied hydrologic conse-
quences of future anthropogenic climate change. 
4-1 
These studies are based on various methods that can 
be united into the following groups: 
(i) Analysis of long-term variations in runoff and 
meteorological elements over past periods. 
This 
method can be approached in two ways. The first 
consists of statistical analyses of the relations be-
tween runoff, air temperature, and precipitation. 
This approach has been used by Stockton and 
Boggess (1979) and Revelle and Waggoner (1983) 
for western regions of the US and the Colorado 
River basin, and by Polyak and Speranskaya (1987) 
for annual river runoff in the USSR. 
The second 
way is to study the hydrologic consequences of past 
periods of very warm or cold, wet or dry conditions. 
Such analyses have been carried out by Schwarz 
(1977) and Glantz (1988) for the US, by Liu (1989) 
for northern China, and by Demaree and Nicolis 
(1990) for the Sahelian region. 
In 
the 
US, 
the 
first 
major 
assessment 
of 
climate-runoff relations was conducted by Langbein 
et al. (1949), who produced a set of rainfall-runoff 
curves widely used in crude impact studies. These 
relations were tested and updated by Karl and 
Riebsame (1989), based on an analysis of actual 
climate fluctuations over 90 undisturbed drainages. 
They found that runoff was less sensitive to tempera-
ture changes than suggested by Langbein and his 
colleagues. 
(ii) Use of water balance methods over a long 
period of time. In this approach the main task is to 
estimate future total evaporation. These methods 
have been used by Glantz and Wigley (1987) for the 
US, Babkin (Shiklomanov, 1988), Vinnikov et al. 
(1989) for the USSR, Griffiths (1989) for New 
Zealand. 
(iii) Use of atmospheric G C M s . In this approach, 
G C M s with prescribed increases in the concentra-
tions of trace gases in the atmosphere (usually 
2 x C 0 2 ) are used to obtain direct estimates of 
changes in the climatic and hydrologic characteristics 
for large regions. For example, possible changes in 
runoff, soil moisture, and evaporation have been 
estimated for the US and Canada using G C M s 
(USEPA, 1984; Sanderson and Wong, 1987; and 
Singh, 1987). 
(iv) Use of deterministic hydrologic models. In this 
approach, rainfall-runoff models for river basins are 
employed with climatological data sets, including 
G C M outputs, to determine changes in hydrologic 
conditions. 
This approach was used by many 
authors for the basins located in various hydroclima-
tic environments (Nemec and Schaake, 1982; Gleick, 
1986, 1987; Mather and Feddema, 1986; Cohen, 
1986; Flashka et a l , 1987; Bultot et al, 1988; 
Kuchment et al, 1989; Shiklomanov, 1989a; and 
Croley, in press). 
The first and second methods have been widely 
applied to estimate changes in water resources over 
large areas because a relatively small amount of 
initial data is required, usually annual runoff, pre-
cipitation, and air temperature. Caution should be 
exercised in extrapolating regression relationships 
over past years to future periods. 
One cannot 
assume that a past interannual pattern of meteoro-
logical factors will be repeated in the future. It is 
also true that for the same annual precipitation and 
temperature, annual runoff can widely vary, depend-
ing on the distribution of the meteorological vari-
ables within months and seasons. 
The results obtained in hydrologic simulations based 
on different G C M s are inconsistent for certain 
important hydrologic conditions and regions. This 
can be attributed to the low resolution of the current 
generation of G C M s , and to their simplified descrip-
tion of hydrologic processes. 
Nevertheless, the 
approach is very promising and studies of this type 
should be continued. 
Deterministic hydrologic models have some desir-
able properties. They allow explicit study of causal 
relations in the climate-water resources system for 
estimating the sensitivity of river basins to changing 
climatic conditions. 
In addition, when regional 
climatic forecasts are available, possible runoff 
changes in different hydroclimatic environments may 
be simulated for water planning and management. 
Perhaps the most comprehensive assessment of the 
effect of climate change on water resources was a 
recent report that focused on the US by the 
American Association for the Advancement of 
Science Panel on Climatic Variability, Climate 
Change and the Planning and Management of US 
Water Resources (Waggoner, 1990). This document 
includes 18 papers by more than two dozen authors 
and encompasses methods and issues ranging from 
climate forecasting, the translation of climatic 
change information into hydrologic consequences, 
vulnerability of water systems, impacts and respons-
es, to future water use and decision making under 
climate uncertainty. Its contents cut across most of 
the above stated methods. 
3.2 Changes in annual and seasonal condi-
tions 
Since the late 1970s, changes in annual and seasonal 
runoff have been extensively investigated and de-
scribed in many publications. This is because annual 
4-2 
and seasonal river runoff are very important for 
providing adequate water supplies to meet the 
demands of most regions. Quantitative estimates 
have been obtained for many regions of the US, for 
the USSR and New Zealand, for some regions of 
Canada, river basins in England, Wales, Belgium 
and other specific regions (see Sections 4 and 5). 
Investigations highlight the great sensitivity of river 
watersheds to even small changes in climatic condi-
tions. 
Watersheds located in arid and semi-arid 
regions are especially sensitive because annual runoff 
is highly variable. For watersheds where snowmelt 
is an important source of runoff, annual runoff and 
its seasonal distribution is vulnerable both to chan-
ging air temperature and to changing precipitation. 
In middle latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere with 
a 1°C or 2°C warming, the winter runoff is expected 
to increase drastically and spring high water to be 
lower owing to earlier snowmelt (see Section 4). 
Many estimates of runoff change due to global 
climate warming, including those given in Sections 4 
and 5 do not consider the possible direct influence 
of increased C 0 2 on évapotranspiration (with in-
creased C 0 2 
concentration 
évapotranspiration 
usually decreases). This phenomenon is considered 
in Idso and Brazel (1984) for five US river basins as 
well as in Aston (1987) for river basins in Australia. 
In these studies, the results were opposite to those 
obtained by other researchers, namely, a doubling of 
C0 2 concentration brought about a 40% to 60% 
increase in annual runoff for US rivers in question, 
and that for Australian rivers by 60% to 80%. 
Wigley and Jones (1985) and Palutikof (1987) 
pointed out to the great role of taking into account 
the direct C 0 2 effects on évapotranspiration and 
total evaporation, which is ignored by many re-
searchers. These findings are controversial and need 
further investigation as total evaporation from land 
is thought to be determined primarily by energy 
factors. 
An important hydrologie consequence of global 
warming is potential changes in runoff extremes, 
both high and low. Changing high flow extremes 
raise the problems of runoff control, development of 
flood control works, and design of hydrologie struc-
tures. Changing low flow extremes may require a 
reassessment of water storage requirements and of 
water allocation schedules, in particular in the 
limiting periods of the year. 
Estimation of extreme river runoff conditions in 
conjunction with anthropogenic climate change is a 
very important problem in hydrologie engineering 
calculations, since the design of hydrologie structures 
is based on the concept of stationarity of hydro-
meteorological conditions. 
It is assumed that the 
observational data over past decades reflect hydro-
meteorological conditions during the design life of 
the project. Changes in extremes will modify statis-
tical calculations to estimate sizes of constructions 
and their conveying capacity and to maintain stability 
during disastrous natural events. 
Since extreme meteorological events cannot be 
explicitly forecast by G C M simulations, nor by using 
palaeoclimatic analogs, in practice the quantitative 
regional estimates of possible changes in runoff 
extremes are as yet unavailable. Nevertheless, there 
are plenty of qualitative estimates, based usually on 
an assumption about the proportionality of changes 
in runoff extremes to those in annual, seasonal or 
monthly runoff (see Section 5). 
More reliable 
conclusions about the runoff extremes in various 
regions of the world could be drawn if detailed 
quantitative estimates of changes in meteorological 
characteristics over shorter periods of time were 
available. 
3.3 Water demand 
Under global climate wanning, changes in demand 
for water resources should be expected in many 
regions of the world. Considerable transformation 
in the structure and the character of water consump-
tion by different branches of industry and agricul-
ture, and deepening conflicts and contradictions 
between individual water users, are possible. With 
the same level of economic activities in a region, the 
water requirements and even actual consumption are 
determined by the extent of total moisture delivery 
to the region. 
The relation between water consumption and avail-
able water is illustrated in Figure 4.1 which shows 
per capita water consumption in the year 2000 and 
a dryness index R D / L P (where R D is the radiation 
balance of a wet surface, P is the precipitation, and 
L is the latent heat of condensation). The greater 
the dryness index, the higher the specific water 
consumption. The relations depicted in Figure 4.1 
are derived for large natural-economic regions of the 
world by estimating future water consumption in 
various countries up to the end of the century under 
stable 
climatic 
conditions 
(Shiklomanov 
and 
Markova, 1986; Shiklomanov, 1988, 1989b). Using 
these graphs and knowing possible changes in 
climatic parameters with global warming, it is easy 
to estimate approximate changes in total water 
demands in different world regions. G C M simula-
tions with 2 x C 0 2 in the atmosphere allow direct 
estimations to be made for regional changes in the 
dryness index; such estimates have been made for 
the US (Stakhiv and Lins, 1989). 
4-3 
The actual values of water consumption in various 
regions will depend on climatic factors, the extent of 
development of water-consuming sectors of national 
economies (primarily on irrigated lands), and on the 
limitations in water resources. 
With significant 
future climate change there will probably be prob-
lems in planning and locating future irrigated areas, 
industries with high water consumption, reservoirs, 
and problems of water supply for current water 
users. These changes may exacerbate problems in 
arid and semi-arid regions, where at present there 
are difficulties with water supply and where conflicts 
take place between various water consumers and 
managers. 
Much is known about how water resource systems 
operate under climatic stress, and extrapolations of 
this knowledge will help us anticipate impacts on 
management and demand for water, and on protec-
tion afforded from floods and droughts in a changing 
climate (Fiering and Rogers, 1989; Stakhiv and 
Hanchey, 1989). 
A useful literature has developed on water system 
sensitivity and adaptability to climate fluctuations. 
Fiering (1982) and Hashimoto et al. (1982) laid out 
criteria for assessing system sensitivity, including 
reliability, resiliency and vulnerability. Matalas and 
Fiering (1977) described an optimising approach to 
designing water systems with climate fluctuations in 
mind, and Novaky et al. (1985) offered a conceptual 
model of water system impact and response and 
created a matrix for assessing system sensitivity to 
climate change. 
Klemes (1985) synthesised the 
water system sensitivity literature, suggesting that the 
key concept is reliability - the long-term ability of a 
system to meet demand despite fluctuations in 
climate. 
Peterson and Keller (1990) have evaluated the 
influence of temperature and precipitation changes 
on the irrigation requirements and the possibilities 
of developing future irrigated areas in arid regions 
of the western US. They came to the conclusion 
that a warming could exert an enormous effect on 
irrigation development in the region. By increasing 
temperature by 3°C and decreasing precipitation by 
10%, cultivated areas in the western US could 
decrease by 30% and efforts would be required to 
improve efficiency of water use and to develop new 
freshwater supplies (Gleick, 1989). 
Studies on the effects of effects of anthropogenic 
climatic changes on irrigation water consumption 
have been conducted by the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) along with the UK's Institute of 
Hydrology for the 3240 km
2 Malibamatsama Basin 
in Lesotho (South Africa) (Nemec, 1989; Institute of 
Hydrology, 1988). Future climate change simula-
tions for this region have been accomplished using 
a G C M with doubling C 0 2 . The G C M data indicat-
ed a 6°C increase in mean monthly temperature, a 
4-23% decrease in monthly precipitation from 
December to May, and a 10-15% increase in month-
ly precipitation from June to November. Estimates 
of changing evaporation and river runoff were based 
on a water-balance model with a 10-day time incre-
ment. The research showed that with a doubling of 
C 0 2 , changes in meteorological conditions in the 
Basin led to a 65% increase in water demands for 
irrigation; this could bring about the shrinkage of 
irrigated areas from 37,500 ha at present to 20,000 
ha. 
Regional estimates of potential changes in water 
demand with global warming are presented below in 
Sections 4 and 5. The cases indicate that estimating 
future water requirements and arrangements should 
be made by taking into account the peculiarities of 
each region. Then the reliability of such estimates 
will be primarily dependent on the accuracy and 
comprehensiveness of predicting the changes in 
climatic characteristics and hydrology with global 
warming. 
3.4 Water balance and lake levels 
The hydrologic cycle of large lakes, in particular of 
enclosed lakes, integrates climatic variability over 
vast areas, including the lake basins and adjacent 
regions. Future global warming due to increasing 
C 0 2 in the atmosphere would lead to changes in the 
lake water balance components 
(precipitation, 
evaporation, inflow and outflow), their levels and 
heat budget. 
These changes are different for the 
drainage basins and the enclosed lakes. 
Given 
below in Section 5, as an example, are some ap-
proximate estimates of possible changes in the water 
balance and hydrologic cycle of the North American 
Great Lakes and of the Caspian Sea, the largest 
enclosed lake in the world. 
3.5 Other hydrologic characteristics 
The hydrologic consequences of anthropogenic 
global warming are not limited to changes in river 
runoff and water balance values. 
Other conse-
quences include changes in total water amount and 
levels, erosion in river basins and riverbeds, and 
modifications of turbidity and sediment load. Water 
quality in many water bodies could deteriorate. 
Decreasing river runoff and lake level declines could 
decrease the possibility of dissolving pollutants and 
flushing processes. 
4-4 
Sea-level rise and runoff changes could lead to 
increased flooding of low-lying coastal regions, 
increased shoreline erosion, changes in deltaic 
processes, salinity changes in estuaries and rivers, 
and contamination of aquifers through saltwater 
intrusion (see Chapter 6). 
Answers to questions 
associated with the hydrologic consequences of 
global warming can be found only through innova-
tive and geographically diverse studies that take into 
account forecasts of both changing regional climatic 
conditions and water use. 
4 
Hydrologic and water re-
source changes in large re-
gions and countries 
4.1 
North America 
4.1.1 United States 
In the US, in the 1970s and 1980s, on the basis of 
hypothetical climate scenarios and river runoff 
dependence on meteorological factors, future annual 
runoff changes were determined for the northeast 
(Schwarz, 1977) and western regions of the US 
(Stockton and Boggess, 1979), and the Colorado 
River basin (Revelle and Waggoner, 1983). 
A 
similar study, using an annual water-balance model 
was conducted by Flaschka (1984) for the Great 
Basin rivers. A deterministic hydrological model 
was used by Nemec and Schaake (1982) to study two 
idealised basins in arid and humid regions. 
The 
research demonstrated a strong sensitivity of river 
basins (in particular, in arid and semi-arid regions) 
even to small changes in climatic conditions. 
For example, increasing the annual air temperature 
by 1°C or 2°C and decreasing precipitation by 10% 
decreases the annual river runoff in regions with 
relatively low precipitation by 40% to 70%. Subse-
quently, these results were supported by calculations 
made by Stockton et al. (1989) who used more 
advanced models simulating runoff formation in 
river basins. These authors predict changes in water 
resources for diverse water supply regions of the 
country using two hypothetical scenarios: warm and 
dry (temperature change of +2°C, precipitation 
change of -10%) and cold and wet (-2°C and 
+ 10%). The results are given in Figure 4.2. They 
show that for many regions of the US, water re-
sources are expected to decrease by 1.5 to 2 times 
under the warm and dry scenario. 
Schaake (1990) investigated how the sensitivity of 
runoff to given scenarios of climatic change would 
vary spatially with different climate conditions over 
the southeastern US. A simple, monthly, non-linear 
water-balance model was developed using a basin in 
China and another in Oklahoma, U S . 
Constant 
values were assumed for the five parameters of the 
model over the entire region. 
The model and 
parameter values were tested using more than 2000 
station-years of data from 52 basins in the region. 
None of the test data were used to develop or 
calibrate the model. Simulated mean annual runoff 
for 49 of the 52 basins fell within error bounds of 
100%. The climate scenarios were for changes of 
10% in potential évapotranspiration and 10% in 
precipitation. The study concluded that the hydro-
logic processes amplify the effects of such changes 
on runoff. 
A measure of this amplification is elasticity; the ratio 
of the relative change in a runoff variable to the 
relative change in a climate variable. To illustrate 
this point, maps showing the percentage change in 
mean annual runoff to a 10% change in precipitation 
and potential évapotranspiration are presented in 
Figure 4.3. Elasticities as high as 5 were found in 
the southeastern US. The study concluded that: dry 
climates are more sensitive to change than humid 
climates; elasticity to precipitation change is greater 
than to évapotranspiration change; low flows will be 
more affected than high flows; reservoir yields will 
be affected, but the elasticity of reservoir yield is less 
than the elasticity of the mean flow; and, because 
water quality problems tend to be coupled with low 
flow conditions, water quality effects may prove to 
be among the most significant, especially in arid 
areas.In 1984, the US Environmental Protection 
Agency (USEPA, 1984) used output from G C M s 
directly for analysing changing precipitation, soil 
moisture, and runoff under doubled atmospheric 
C 0 2 conditions. The results indicated a significant 
increase (20%-60%) in river runoff in the north-
western US, and a decrease (26%) in the central 
region. 
Manabe and Wetherald (1986) obtained 
similar results using a G C M to estimate soil mois-
ture changes in the mid-continent region of the US. 
In contrast, however, simulations with other G C M s 
produced opposite results for the same region 
(Schlesinger 
and 
Mitchell, 
1987; 
Mitchell 
and 
Warrilow, 1987). 
Developing reliable scenarios of potential climatic 
changes for regional impact assessment is a major 
problem. 
The use of output from the current 
generation of G C M s to estimate regional hydrologic 
impacts of climatic change is highly suspect because 
of the coarse resolution of the models and the gross 
simplifications used in the parameterisations of the 
terrestrial hydrology (Gleick, 1989; W M O , 1987). 
Since soil moisture and river runoff processes are 
not well specified in G C M s , a more fruitful ap-
proach for estimating hydrologic impacts is the 
coupling of G C M s and deterministic hydrologic 
4-5 
models. In this case, the G C M output (typically 
temperature and precipitation) becomes the input 
data for more comprehensive regional hydrologic 
models. 
Gleick (1986,1987) was one of the first to apply this 
approach for estimating global warming effects on 
the seasonal runoff of the Sacramento River 
(California). 
As the basis, Gleick used climate 
change scenarios (monthly air temperature and 
precipitation) developed from three G C M s with 
2 x C 0 2 in the atmosphere. Simulation of hydro-
logic impacts was carried out with a water-balance 
basin model with a monthly time increment. These 
simulations showed increased winter runoff from 
16% to 81% and decreased summer runoff from 
30% to 68%. These results can be explained by a 
drastic change in snowfall and snowmelt conditions 
associated with a rising air temperature. A similar 
approach has been used by other authors. 
With 
doubling atmospheric C 0 2 , Great Lakes basin runoff 
decreased by 12-13% (Sanderson and Wong, 1987), 
Great Lakes net basin supplies decreased by 2-113% 
(Croley, in press), and the flow of large rivers in the 
Province of Quebec, Canada, increased by 7-20% 
(Singh, 1987). 
Of the four G C M s most widely used in the United 
States, none is capable of simulating observed 
annual or seasonal precipitation with accuracy on a 
regional basis. The models also differ in the values 
of forecasted warming for US regions, particularly 
for the summer months. Nevertheless, in analysing 
the conclusions drawn by different researchers, the 
following regional tendencies are presented as 
potential hydrologic effects of global warming: 
Pacific Northwest: some increase in annual runoff 
and floods; 
California: 
a considerable increase in winter and 
decrease in summer runoff with insignificant rise in 
annual runoff; 
Colorado and Rio Grande River Basins, the Great 
Basin: decreasing runoff; 
Great Lakes Basin: decreasing runoff and increasing 
evaporation; 
Great Plains, northern and southeastern states: 
uncertain changes in water resources. 
The above inferences were also obtained by Soviet 
climatologists (Budyko and Izrael, 1987) using 
palaeoclimatic analogs. These results show a con-
siderable decrease in moisture south of 55°N and a 
noticeable increase in precipitation in northern 
regions of North America. 
4.1.2 Canada 
In recent years a number of studies have investigat-
ed the potential hydrologic and water resources 
effects of a climatic warming for Canada over the 
coming decades. Most of these studies have based 
their impacts on climatic simulations produced by 
the GISS, G F D L , and U K M O G C M s (Marta, 1989). 
A summary of the results of these studies is present-
ed in Table 4.1. Most of the investigations focused 
on one of three distinct areas in the south-central 
part of the nation: the Great Lakes, James Bay, and 
the Saskatchewan River sub-basin. 
A nationwide 
study of broad Canadian regions has also been 
completed. 
In the Great Lakes region, G C M -
simulated temperatures range from 
+3.1°C -
+ 4.8°C. The simulations for precipitation are much 
more variable, ranging from -3% to +8%. General-
ly speaking, the mix of this range of conditions could 
portend a decline in the hydrologic and water 
resource base or the region. Under these tempera-
ture and precipitation conditions, runoff to the lakes 
is estimated to decrease between 8% and 11%, lake 
levels could drop between 21 cm and 59 cm, and 
water supplies could fall from 18% to 21%. 
Farther north, in the James Bay region, the water 
resource 
picture 
appears 
more 
favourable. 
Model-simulated temperature increases for this area 
fall in the range of 3.5°C to 4.7°C, with precipitation 
estimated more narrowly to increase from between 
15% to 17.5%. This range of climatic conditions 
favours increases in runoff ranging from 8% to 16% 
with concomitant increases in water supply of 9% to 
22%. 
Moving west onto the Canadian Prairie, 
impacts on the hydrology of the Saskatchewan River 
sub-basin appear to be strongly model-dependent. 
Both the GISS and G F D L simulations indicate 
impacts of fairly large magnitude, especially in terms 
of changes in the timing, location, duration and 
extent of runoff as well as soil moisture. However, 
the GISS simulations indicate increasing streamflows 
and water supplies for the region while the GFDL 
simulations indicate decreases. In terms of net basin 
supply, incorporating projected consumptive use, the 
GISS simulation produced a range of increases 
varying from 29% to 40%. On the other hand, the 
G F D L simulation produced declines in net basin 
supply ranging from 27% to 70% (Cohen et al, 
1989). 
Water in the Saskatchewan River sub-basin 
is 
utilised for agriculture, hydroelectric power produc-
tion, cooling at thermal power plants, recreation and 
industrial processing. Agriculture is a major con 
4-6 
Table 4.1 Estimated hydrologic impacts of varying climatic change scenarios for Canada (Marta, 1989). 
Author 
Southam and 
Dumont 
(1985) 
Cohen 
(1986; 1987) 
Singh (1988) 
Cohen et al. 
(1989) 
Haas and 
Marta (1988) 
Ripley 
(1987) 
Region 
Great Lakes 
Great Lakes 
James Bay 
Saskatchewan 
River 
S. Saskatchewan 
River (to Lake 
Diefcnbaker) 
Arctic 
Atlantic 
Gulf 
Hudson 
Pacific 
Canada 
Drainage 
area 
(kmJ x 104) 
76.0 
(32% is lake 
surface) 
76.0 
17.5 
(18% is lake 
and reservoir 
surface) 
36.4 
15.7 
331.0 
151.0 
3.0 
356.0 
94.0 
935.0 
Est. 
(T°C) 
+4.5 
+3.1 to 
3.7 
+4.3 to 
4.8 
+3.5 
+4.7 
+2.5 
+4.4 
+2.5 
+4.4 
+2 to 3.5 
+2 to 3.5 
+2.5 to 3 
+2 to 4.5 
+2 to 3 
+2 to 3 
climatic changes 
(P%) 
(GCM) 
-3 to +8 
+0.8 
+6.5 
+ 17.5 
+ 15 
+ 18 
+ 19 
+ 18 
+ 19 
+54 
+ 11 
+23 
+ 17 
+23 
+23 
GISS/84 
GFDL/80 
GISS/84 
GFDL/80 
GISS/84 
GFDL/80 
GISS/84 
GFDL/80 
GISS/84 
UKMO/83 
UKMO/83 
UKMO/83 
UKMO/83 
UKMO/83 
UKMO/83 
Est. hydrological 
changes 
(Runoff 
-%> 
-8.2 
-10.9 
+ 10.9 
+ 15.7 
-58 
+37 
-20 
+28 
+95 
+ 10 
+235 
+20 
+20 
+32 
Other 
Levels (cm) 
-21 to -59 
Flows (%) 
+2 to -13 
Supply (%) 
-18.4 
Supply (%) 
-20.8 
Supply (%) 
+ 13.9 
Supply (%) 
+ 16.1 
Supply (%) 
-65 
Supply (%) 
+38 
sumer of water, in which return flows arc consider-
ably less than withdrawals from surface supplies. 
Certain others, such as hydroelectric production and 
recreation, arc in-strcam users that do not 'consume' 
water, that is, their use of water docs not result in a 
'loss' from surface supplies. If the status quo is to 
be maintained, results from the study of this water-
shed indicate that for the GISS scenarios, an in-
crease in agricultural demand for water would not 
significantly affect the availability of water for other 
users, since the net basin supply is estimated to be 
relatively high. For the GFDL scenarios, however, 
the low estimated net basin supply could seriously 
compromise all users. 
Such a situation would 
necessitate a major policy response, such as the 
establishment of a regional water allocation scheme 
for the sub-basin, involving government agencies, 
user groups and the public. Should there be increas-
es in population, reservoir storage, industrial or 
agricultural development, such a scheme might not 
be required to cope with the conditions estimated 
under the GISS scenario, but any increases in water 
demand would only make the situation more critical 
given the conditions estimated by the GFDL GCM. 
Looking very broadly at the impact of climatic 
warming on the water resources of Canada in the 
aggregate, the general outlook may be somewhat 
favourable. With temperature rises generally in the 
2°C to 4°C range and precipitation generally in-
creasing across the country from 11% to 54%, 
runoff could be expected to increase in all major 
regions by 10% to 235% (Ripley, 1987). 
4.2 Brazil 
The Brazilian government and scientific community 
only recently became concerned over the prospect of 
a greenhouse-gas-induced climate warming and its 
associated consequences on the water resources of 
South America. Attention has been given to the 
possible effects of deforestation of Amazonia on 
regional hydrology and atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
Very recently, the Brazilian government began to 
exert some control over the deforestation process. 
4-7 
Although this is a positive step toward decreasing 
the atmospheric build-up of C 0 2 , it is also necessary 
to point out that fossil fuel combustion is about 3 to 
5 times more important than deforestation as a net 
contributor to global warming (Moore and Bohn, 
1987). 
As yet, there are no indications of a large scale 
anthropogenically-induced change on precipitation in 
the Brazilian Amazon (Sternberg, 1987). 
This 
stability is probably due to the relatively small 
percentage of the total rainforest area that has been 
deforested (7%). Nobre et al. (1989) simulated the 
climatic effects of total deforestation using a model 
developed by Sellers et al. (1986). 
This model 
incorporates the interactions between vegetation and 
the general circulation of the atmosphere. 
The 
model results indicated that the ground temperature 
in the Amazon region would increase between 
1°-3°C, évapotranspiration would decrease 20-40%, 
and precipitation would decrease 20-30%. 
Such a temperature increase, whether from defor-
estation, fossil fuel emissions, or both, will probably 
intensify and concentrate tropical convective rainfall 
and, as a result, promote increased flooding and 
erosion, and decreased soil moisture. This suggests 
that the firm yield from existing reservoirs could 
decrease and that the probability of dam overtopping 
owing to extreme floods may increase. 
4.3 Western Europe and Scandinavia 
Effects of climate change on water resources have 
been estimated for Western Europe (primarily for 
the northern regions) by using various scenarios and 
approaches. Western Europe was similar to North 
America in that river basins were very sensitive to 
small variations in climatic conditions, especially 
precipitation (Palutikof, 1987; Novaky, 1985; Beran, 
1986; and Verhoog, 1987). 
Studies by Schnell (1984) and Beran (1986) are 
significant for forecasting future water resources. 
Schnell estimated the consequences of C 0 2 doubling 
for river runoff in the countries of the European 
Economic Community (EEC) using temperature and 
precipitation derived from the UK Meteorological 
Office ( U K M O ) G C M . The runoff values obtained 
by Schnell using waterbalance methods show pos-
sible significant increases in the north of Europe 
(the U K , The Netherlands, and Belgium) and 
decreases of similar significance in central and 
southern Europe. 
A very comprehensive assessment of the potential 
water resources response to climate change for over 
12 countries within the E E C has been conducted by 
da Cunha (1989). Detailed information about water 
resources and water availability for each country, 
coupled with the scenarios of climatic change simu-
lated by G C M s for the E E C region, indicate that 
man-induced climatic change is likely to influence 
water resources differentially in different parts of the 
region. If the simulated G C M results turn out to be 
correct, then average precipitation values in the 
southern part of Spain, Portugal, and Greece can be 
expected to decrease, while increases can be expect-
ed throughout the rest of the E E C region. The 
model results also indicate a tendency for reduced 
precipitation variability in some of the northern 
parts of the region during the entire year, and for 
increased variability in Greece and southern Italy 
during the summer. 
Such changes in variability 
could mean that higher flood peaks are possible in 
parts of the U K , Germany, Denmark, and The 
Netherlands, while more severe droughts are pos-
sible in Greece and southern Italy. 
Thus, it is 
implied that a large part of the E E C region would 
benefit from what appear to be potentially favour-
able changes in climate, while a smaller part in the 
south would suffer unfavourable impacts. 
The impacts of climate change on water resources 
have been classified by da Cunha into three groups: 
economic, social, and environmental. Economic 
impacts are often the most relevant. The changes in 
the global amount of water resources available and 
in the space and time distribution of these resources 
may lead to water shortages and cause water price 
increases. Changes in water quality are also likely as 
a result of climatic change. Temperature increases 
would also induce an increase in the demand for 
water, thus contributing to a worsening situation 
resulting from a decrease in water availability. The 
negative impacts are expected to be particularly 
serious on cultivated land areas. Examples of these 
negative impacts include crop losses or shortages, 
replacement of present agricultural species by other 
species more resistant to water shortage but less 
useful, increased activity of insects and predators, 
and the abandonment of agricultural land. Such 
impacts may also affect livestock by reducing herd 
sizes and increasing disease and problems of vector 
control. Other economic impacts relate to losses in 
timber production, fisheries, and recreational busi-
nesses. Important indirect impacts include sedimen-
tation processes, ie erosion, transport and deposition 
of sediments, as well as agriculture, hydraulic work 
operations, and estuarine and coastal areas. 
The social impacts of climatic change on water 
resources are also important, since it is essential that 
decision makers provide guidelines on the strategies 
to be adopted by water users to enable them to cope 
with climate change. In fact, the various types of 
4-8 
water users (farmers, industrialists or domestic 
consumers) are not, by themselves, able to assume 
individually the most positive attitudes in order to 
reduce the negative impacts of climate change on 
water resources. The possible climatic impacts on 
water resources will force society to modify its 
relation with the environment by introducing a 
number of adjustments in its behaviour. Emigration 
from the southern parts of the E E C unfavourably 
affected by climatic change would be one immediate 
form of social adjustment. 
Other possible social 
consequences include unemployment, deterioration 
of conditions of hygiene and public health in the 
affected regions, as well as public safety from forest 
fires. 
Environmental impacts may also be relevant, ranging 
from serious ecological disruption to less serious and 
more localised effects. Examples of serious disrup-
tions are desertification, which is a possibility in the 
southern region, and sea-level rise with possible 
effects on flooding in coastal areas, destruction of 
engineering works and structures, and modification 
of coastal and estuarine environments. Examples of 
more localised effects include damage to wildlife 
habitat owing to water shortages, degradation of 
visual landscape quality, increased salinity of soil and 
groundwater, soil, erosion, forest fires, plant diseas-
es, and insect and predator plagues. 
Bultot et al. (1988, 1989) made the most detailed 
estimations of river runoff changes for Belgium with 
a doubling of the C 0 2 concentration. The authors 
used the monthly values of climatic conditions 
obtained from G C M s predicting a 2.9 °C annual air 
temperature increase and a 55 cm precipitation rise. 
To assess the hydrologic consequences for the three 
river basins with different conditions of runoff 
formation, a conceptual hydrologic model with 
diurnal time increments was used. The calculations 
showed increasing annual runoff (3-10%) and 
changes in the seasonal runoff pattern. The winter 
and spring runoff increased by 10-14%, while the 
summer runoff remained unchanged of decreased 
from 1% to 15%). 
To date there have been no studies in the UK using 
hydrologic models to estimate the effect of climatic 
change on annual runoff. Beran and Arnell suggest, 
however, that it may be possible to make some 
generalised statements using a simple water-balance 
approach where changes in mean annual runoff are 
determined from changes in mean annual rainfall 
and mean annual evaporation (Beran and Arnell, 
1989). 
Evaporation, however, is dependent on 
several climatic attributes which vary together in a 
complex manner. Thus, a simple empirical formula 
developed by Turc (1954), which operates on an 
annual time scale, was utilised by the British. 
Mean annual runoff is estimated by subtracting 
evaporation from precipitation, for three combina-
tions of mean annual temperature and precipitation 
found in different parts of the UK (Table 4.2). 
Parts a and b in the table represent catchments with 
similar rainfall, but different mean annual tempera-
ture and, for a given change in precipitation, there 
is relatively little difference in effect on runoff 
between the 'cool Scottish' and 'mild English' sites. 
The data in the table imply that if temperatures 
were to increase by 3°C, an increase in annual 
precipitation of 10% or more would lead to an 
increase in annual runoff. 
For comparative pur-
poses, the current scenario implies an increase in 
annual rainfall of 140 mm (14% on an initial value 
of 1000 mm) if summers are wetter (as in Scotland 
and the north of England), but only 80 mm (8%) if 
summers are drier. 
The estimated conditions 
depicted in part c of Table 4.2 are more representa-
tive of the drier climates of southern and eastern 
England. Here annual precipitation would have to 
increase by over 10% before annual runoff would 
increase. The scenario increase in precipitation of 
80 mm (10% of 800 mm) is just at this threshold 
value. 
These estimates imply that mean annual runoff 
would probably increase over most of the UK in a 
warmer world, with the greatest increase in the 
north. The actual increase in runoff is very sensitive 
to the estimated increase in precipitation (more so 
than to changes in évapotranspiration). It is import-
ant to note that alterations in annual runoff due to 
climatic change may approach changes in runoff due 
to major land use change. Gross et al. (1989) used 
a conceptual rainfall-runoff model to show, for 
example, that clearing the forest in a small basin in 
upland Wales could produce an increase in annual 
runoff of nearly 30%. 
Although the evidence is limited, it is possible that 
the model-simulated increased seasonality in rainfall 
will be reflected in a stronger seasonal variation in 
streamflow throughout the U K . Note, even under 
the 'wet summer' scenario, increases in summer 
precipitation are less than increases in winter pre-
cipitation. However, the effect will depend strongly 
on catchment geology, and it is possible that summer 
flows in catchments with high groundwater levels will 
be maintained or even increased by higher winter 
and spring rainfalls. 
Saelthun et al. (1990) have produced an initial 
assessment of the consequences of climatic change 
for water resources in Norway. 
Using a 
climate 
4-9 
Table 4.2 Extimated percentage changes in mean annual runoff at three sites in Great Britain in response to changes in 
temperature and precipitation* 
a) Initial mean annual precipitation: 
Initial mean annual temperature: 
Initial estimated mean annual runoff: 
Temp, change (°C) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
b) Initial mean annual precipitation: 
Initial mean annual temperature: 
-10% 
-21.3 
-25.8 
-30.4 
-35.1 
-39.8 
Initial estimated mean annual runoff: 
Temp, change (°C) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
c) Initial mean annual precipitation: 
Initial mean annual temperature: 
-10% 
-23.0 
-28.1 
-33.3 
-38.5 
-43.7 
Initial estimated mean annual runoff: 
Temp, change (°C) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
* Based 
-10% 
-26.1 
-32.2 
-38.3 
-44.2 
-49.9 
on the Turc 
Change 
0% 
-4.8 
-9.6 
-14.7 
-19.8 
-25.0 
in annual precipitation 
10% 
12.3 
7.1 
1.7 
-3.8 
-9.5 
Change in annual 
0% 
-5.6 
-11.2 
-17.0 
-22.8 
-28.7 
Change 
0% 
-7.0 
-14.0 
-20.9 
-27.8 
-34.6 
10% 
12.6 
6.4 
0.2 
-6.2 
-12.7 
20% 
29.7 
24.2 
18.5 
12.7 
6.6 
precipitation 
20% 
31.2 
24.7 
18.0 
111 
4.1 
in annual precipitation 
10% 
13.3 
5.5 
-2.3 
-10.1 
-17.8 
formula (Beran and Arncll, 
20% 
34.4 
26.0 
17.4 
8.9 
0.3 
, 1989) 
30% 
47.4 
41.7 
35.8 
29.6 
23.2 
30% 
50.2 
43.4 
36.3 
29.0 
21.5 
30% 
56.3 
47.3 
38.1 
28.8 
19.4 
1000 mm 
8 °C 
530 mm 
40% 
65.3 
59.4 
53.3 
46.8 
40.1 
1000 mm 
10 "C 
479 mm 
40% 
69.6 
62.5 
55.1 
47.4 
39.5 
800 mm 
10 "C 
311 mm 
40% 
78.8 
69.3 
59.5 
49.5 
39.4 
change scenario of a temperature increase of 
1.5°-3.5°C (with the higher temperatures prevailing 
during winter and in upland areas) and a precipita-
tion increase of 7-8%, the following hydrologic con-
sequences were posited. Annual runoff in moun-
tainous areas and regions of high annual precipita-
tion will likely experience a moderate increase. In 
lowland and forest inland basins, annual runoff may 
decrease in response to increased evapotranspira-
tion. The intensity of the spring flood could de-
crease in most basins, while winter runoff may 
increase substantially and summer runoff may de-
crease. Floods are likely to occur more frequently 
in autumn and winter. The period of snow cover 
will probably be shortened by one to three months. 
The scenarios indicate that glaciers will decrease, 
particularly those in inland areas. The net melt 
could be lower on glaciers near the west coast, while 
the glaciers on the coast of northern Norway will 
most likely remain unchanged. The duration of ice 
cover may decrease and it is possible that many of 
the larger lakes in southern Norway may not develop 
ice covers in most winters. 
Erosion and sediment transport is likely to increase 
significantly during winter unless the agricultural 
practice of leaving soils bare during winter is 
changed. 
Soil loss could become a very serious 
problem. 
Finally, a positive potential outcome of global 
warming is that the hydroelectric power production 
of Norway could increase by 2-3% under the as-
sumed climate change scenario. This is due in part 
to an increase in reservoir inflows, and in part to 
reductions in reservoirs spillovers. 
The seasonal 
distribution of runoff may more closely match that 
of energy consumption, thereby increasing firm 
power yield. 
4-10 
4.4 Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Quantitative estimates of potential climate change 
effects on rivers in the USSR have generally been 
based on palaeoclimatic analogs of the past. The 
proxy-based estimates were first obtained at the 
State Hydrological Institute in 1978 under the 
guidance of M.I. Budyko (Budyko et al, 1978). 
Subsequently, as the climatic predictions were 
refined, estimates were made for changes in annual 
runoff of rivers in the USSR for the years 1990, 
2000, and 2020. This procedure was repeated for 
other regions of the Northern Hemisphere. 
The 
results of these simulations are presented in the 
report Anthropogenic Climatic Changes (Budyko 
and Izrael, 1987) and by Shiklomanov (1988). The 
simulations were based on meteorological-runoff 
relationships, or on water-balance equations, devel-
oped over long time periods. 
The results of the 
simulations were presented in the form of runoff 
change isoclines and also as averages for the main 
basins for the years 2000-2005. 
These average 
changes were in the range of + /-12% (Shiklomanov, 
1988). The values are only rough approximations 
due to the uncertainty associated with the initial air 
temperature and precipitation data for certain river 
basins. 
The mean annual runoff changes over the USSR for 
a 1°C global warming (expected to occur between 
2000-2010) have been estimated. 
This work was 
based on refined predictions of changes in summer 
and winter temperature and annual precipitation for 
the USSR (Budyko, 1988) developed at the State 
Hydrological Institute under the guidance of K . Y a . 
Vinnikov. 
The comprehensive data presented in 
Figure 4.4 suggest the following conclusions. The 
most detrimental effect on resources can be expect-
ed in the south of the forest zones of the European 
USSR and west Siberia. Annual runoff could fall to 
10-20% of normal (20-25 mm). This effect is due to 
an increase in air temperature accompanied by no 
change or even a slight decrease in precipitation. 
In the southernmost steppe regions, owing to a 
marked increase in precipitation, the annual runoff 
is most likely to increase by 10-20%. 
In the 
northern regions of the European USSR and 
Siberia, runoff may increase by 280-320 km
3/yr or 
7%, which may compensate for future water con-
sumption. Estimates for the more distant future are 
less certain; nevertheless, there is evidence to sug-
gest that with a 2°C global warming the annual 
runoff will increase by 10-20% on all the large rivers 
of the USSR. 
This increase will provide an addi-
tional 700-800 km
3/yr of water for the whole 
country. Although these values are very approxi-
mate, they cannot be ignored in the long-range 
planning and management of water resources and 
protection of the natural environment. 
Additional effects may be caused by global warming 
on seasonal and inter-annual runoff patterns. For a 
number of river basins in the European USSR, the 
influence of climatic change on the hydrologic cycle 
has been simulated using a specially developed 
water-balance model with a 10-day time increment. 
The model was calibrated and checked by observa-
tional data over long-term periods. The simulations 
were carried out for four river basins: 
one small 
and 
two 
middle-sized 
basins 
located 
in 
the 
forest-steppe and steppe zones, and the Volga River 
Basin, the largest in Europe. The climatic scenarios 
used included changes in summer and winter air 
temperature and annual precipitation in the years 
2000-2005, taken from the palaeoclimatic maps for 
each river basin (increasing summer temperatures by 
0.5°-1.5°C and winter temperatures by 1.5°-2.5°C 
and changing annual precipitation by -3% to +12%). 
The model calculations show that even small chan-
ges in climatic conditions can lead to considerable 
alterations in the runoff regime. 
The primary 
manifestation of such an alteration is a dramatic 
increase in winter runoff, owing to more intense 
snowmelt during the winter season and a corres-
ponding decrease in spring runoff. 
The seasonal 
runoff changes averaged over a long-term period for 
the indicated river basins are presented in Table 4.3. 
This table indicates that winter runoff for the rela-
tively dry zone (steppe) increases many-fold and 
considerably rises even for the vast Volga River 
basin. Observational data show, on the rivers of the 
European USSR since the second half of the 1980s, 
that winter runoff has tended to increase noticeably, 
possibly as a consequence of global climate warming. 
4.5 Northern China 
The analysis of hydrometeorological observational 
data for northern China (Chunzhen, 1989) shows 
that the warmest period over the last 250 years 
began in 1981. The mean air temperature over the 
period 1981-87 was 0.5°C above the normal, while 
for the same period precipitation was somewhat 
lower than normal (for Beijing by 4%). Studies of 
natural climate variations for the past 100 years 
suggest that the warming in northern China will 
continue up to the next century. Estimates of the 
potential influence of increasing atmospheric C 0 2 on 
northern China arc not available. At the same time, 
it is possible that small climate changes can have 
considerable hydrologic consequences. Simulations 
using the Hinangchzang hydrological model show 
that in semi-arid regions, with a 10% increase in 
precipitation and a 4% decrease in evaporation, 
4-11 
Table 4.3 Potential changes in seasonal runoff in response to a temperature warming of 1"C for selected rivers in the 
USSR 
River 
Volga-Volgograd 
Sonsa-Yeletz 
Chir-Oblivskoye 
Devitza-Nizhnedeyitsk 
Basin area 
(km') 
1,360,000 
16,300 
8,470 
76 
Zone 
Forest/Forest-steppe 
Forest-steppe 
Steppe 
Forest-steppe 
Annual 
187 
165 
144 
129 
47 
70 
127 
112 
Runoff (mm) 
Winter 
22 
35 
30 
53 
3 
22 
26 
36 
Spring 
107 
94 
102 
63 
43 
45 
60 
41 
Summer-
Fall 
58 
36 
12 
13 
1 
3 
41 
35 
Note: For each river the top set of runoff values refers to the long-term mean under natural conditions. The 
bottom set of values is the estimated runoff for an assumed warming of 1 °C. 
the runoff will increase by 27%. Increasing precipi-
tation by 10% and evaporation by 4% results in an 
18% increase in runoff. If these climatic changes 
take place in semi-arid regions, runoff increases by 
30%-50% (Chunzhen, 1989). 
4.6 Japan 
A number of agencies and institutes within Japan 
have begun to focus on how climate warming would 
affect the water resources and related environment 
systems of that country. To date, the studies have 
emphasised the empirical description and characteri-
sation of effects and problem areas with the aim of 
identifying how to derive quantitative estimates of 
likely impacts. To estimate the potential hydrologic 
consequences of global warming, long-term series of 
meteorological observations in different regions of 
the country have been analysed. 
In particular, 
precipitation and runoff characteristics have been 
compared over the coldest and the warmest 10-year 
periods with the mean temperature difference of 
0.074°C. Precipitation over the warmest period 
turned out to increase by 10%, the incidence of 
heavy rains (more than 300 mm for two days) 
becoming much more frequent. At the same time, 
precipitation sums for 60- to 90-day periods with 
minimum rains during the warm decade have been 
noticeably smaller than in the cold decade (Yamada, 
1989). This empirical data analysis makes it possible 
to assume that with global warming in most regions 
of Japan, maximum precipitation and river runoff 
volume are expected to somewhat grow, especially 
over the periods of rain storms. At the same time, 
in dry seasons the runoff can decrease thus exacer-
bating the problems of water supply. Because of the 
lack of data, it is impossible to estimate quantitative-
ly the corresponding values. 
The use of GCM 
output is particularly troublesome in Japan since a 
large percentage of precipitation is generated by 
typhoons and convectivc storms, which arc not 
resolved by the GCMs, as well as by frontal storms, 
which are. Accurate accounting of water resource 
impacts would, therefore, need to consider, for 
example, how typhoon frequency, magnitude, and 
intensity would be affected. 
Given 
the 
critical 
concern 
with 
which 
the 
government of Japan views the potential threat 
imposed by a greenhouse-gas-induced 
climatic 
warming, a preliminary study was undertaken with 
the support of the Japanese Environment Agency 
(Matsuo et al., 1989). 
It assessed effects on a 
number of environmental systems, including water 
resources, associated with a potential severe change 
in climatic conditions. The specific water resources 
issues addressed included flood control, water use, 
and water quality. 
Looking first at flood control, the report notes that 
current reservoir storage capacity is limited, so much 
so that the multipurpose use of reservoirs for flood 
4-12 
control and water use could become increasingly 
difficult. An increase in rainfall intensity brought by 
typhoons or fronts would give rise to serious flood-
ing. Prolonged periods of drought, punctuated by 
short bursts of intense precipitation, could lead to 
increased frequency of mudslides. 
Since many 
Japanese cities are situated in coastal areas and 
lowlands, any flood could produce heavy damages. 
Rising atmospheric temperatures could be expected 
to alter the timing and volume of snowmelt gener-
ated runoff, thereby producing the potential for 
increases in flood peaks and associated damages. 
In terms of water use, a number of effects were 
identified. In general, water demand is expected to 
increase, while water supply decreases, spreading 
localised water shortages to broader regions or to 
the nation as a whole. Reduced precipitation and the 
associated reduction in discharge can be expected to 
reduce both the amount and regularity of hydroelec-
tric power generation. 
In the particular case of 
rivers dependent upon snowmelt, the impact could 
be quite significant. Moreover, contamination due 
to salt-water 
intrusion 
could 
lead 
to 
acute 
agricultural and municipal water supply problems. 
Reduced water levels in rivers and lakes could also 
produce deleterious effects on navigation and recrea-
tional activities.Finally, with respect to water quality, 
the expectation is that river water quality will decline 
with decreases in minimum flow. Lake quality could 
be threatened by a prolonged state of thermal 
stratification, and increasing temperatures may lead 
to increased eutrophication. It is also thought that 
declines in the water level and storage capacity of 
lakes and dams could adversely affect water quality, 
although the precise mechanism behind such dete-
rioration remains unclear. 
4.7 New Zealand 
In June, 1988, the New Zealand government institut-
ed a national climate change program under the 
coordination of the Ministry for the Environment. 
Three working groups were formed, considering 
respectively facts, impacts, and responses, consistent 
with the three working groups of the IPCC. The 
Facts Working Group was formed to produce a 
report on the scientific basis for the predictions of 
climate change. An abridged version of this report 
has been published which contains the following 
conclusions (Salinger and Hicks, 1989). 
Annual 
average warming in New Zealand under a doubled 
C0 2 climatic regime range from 1.4°C to 3.5°C. 
There is some possibility that winter temperatures 
will rise faster than summer temperatures in more 
southerly parts of the country. It is possible that the 
snowline could retreat between 100 m and 150 m for 
every 1°C rise in temperature. 
However, even 
though New Zealand temperatures have increased 
by 0.5 °C since the 1940s, no retreat of snowline or 
advance of tree line has yet been measured. 
The Impacts Working Group was formed to produce 
a series of reports addressing the broad range of 
physical, biological, economic, and social issues likely 
to be affected by the climatic change estimates 
provided by the Facts Working Group. One of these 
impact reports deals with water resources (Griffiths, 
1989). A l l the impact assessments considered two 
scenarios of climate change, one based on a tempo-
ral analog (referred to as SI) and the other on the 
limiting conditions simulated by G C M s (S2). 
The 
analog scenario is based on the period of maximum 
warmth 8,000 to 10,000 years ago, when westerlies 
were weaker and there was more airflow from the 
northwest. New Zealand temperatures were 1.5°C 
warmer than at present and westerly winds were 
lighter, especially in winter. There was a reduced 
frequency of frontal storms, and global sea-level was 
20 cm to 40 cm higher than at present. 
The 
second 
scenario 
is 
based 
on 
the 
model-simulated upper limit to greenhouse warming 
in the New Zealand area of 3°C. It is accompanied 
by positive mode Southern Oscillation conditions (La 
Nina) on average. Frequent incursions of tropical 
air from the north are expected and, although the 
intensity of the westerlies may decrease, they will 
still prevail. Moreover, global sea-level may be 30 
cm to 60 cm higher than at present. 
Regionally, the principal likely impacts of climate 
change on runoff are depicted in Figure 4.5, and 
more broadly on water resources as follows. 
In 
Northland, flooding could become more frequent 
and more severe. Baseflows in rivers and streams 
may be enhanced, while lake levels may rise. There 
could be greater groundwater recharge and less 
demand for irrigation. Wetlands may not drain as 
easily, especially in the Ruawai flats south of Darga-
ville. 
Earthflow and other erosion in weathered 
greywackes, Tangihia volcanics and podsolised sand 
hill country may precipitate increased suspended 
sediment loadings in rivers and streams. 
A number of similar effects could probably occur in 
the region around Auckland. These include more 
frequent and severe flooding, enhanced baseflows in 
rivers and streams and increased lake levels, and 
greater recharge of groundwater and less demand 
for irrigation. There could also be changes in lake 
stratification patterns and a rise in the number of 
dune lakes. Moreover, a number of urban-related 
problems are possible. It may be that more care 
will be needed in siting urban developments to 
protect them from increased flooding. High intensi-
4-13 
ty rainfalls may overload stormwater/sewerage sys-
tems leading to frequent discharges of contaminated 
water. Finally, the possibility of increased erosion 
may result in higher suspended sediment concentra-
tions in estuarine and harbour receiving waters. 
The 
region 
encompassing 
Waikato 
Bay 
of 
Plenty-Taupo also is likely to be more prone to 
frequent and sever flooding, especially in the 
Hauraki Plains, Bay of Plenty coastal plains, and 
Lower Waikato River valley. Enhanced baseflows in 
rivers and streams and lake levels on the volcanic 
plateau will rise. Lakes may stratify more often and 
a reduction in lake carrying capacity could possibly 
occur, although this may be offset to some extent by 
increased flushing rates and higher water levels. 
Anoxic conditions are likely in some lakes, while 
those already anoxic will probably have the period 
extended. This area, too, may experience greater 
groundwater recharge and reduced demand for 
irrigation. The increased frequency of subtropical 
cyclones may be compensated for by the lower 
frequency of southeasterly storms under climate 
scenario SI, but not under scenario S2. A number 
of other unique impacts are also likely. For exam-
ple, geothermal systems may receive greater ground-
water recharge; Waitomo Glow Worm Cave may be 
closed more frequently because of flooding, and 
siltation in the cave may increase; a significant 
increase in water yield from Pinus rodiafa-forested 
basins can be expected with more yield in summer 
than in winter; the operation of the Huntley thermal 
power station may be affected by increased river 
temperatures (discharges are already limited by 
temperature restrictions in the summer), although 
increased river flows may compensate to some 
degree; and sever gullying could occur in highly 
erodible volcanic materials leading to increased 
infilling of hydro-dam reservoirs, thus reducing 
reservoir life and flood storage capacity. 
In the Taranaki-Manawatu-Wellington region flood-
ing is also likely to become more frequent and 
severe, especially around Ohura, along with en-
hanced baseflows in rivers and streams. This area 
may experience a slight increase in groundwater 
availability and less need for irrigation under scen-
ario SI and greater irrigation demand under S2. An 
increase in high intensity rainfalls will probably have 
significant effects on agricultural productivity in 
Taranaki, as well as overloading storm water/sewer-
age systems that could produce frequent discharges 
of contaminated waters. Increased erosion here will 
also probably result in higher suspended sediment 
concentrations in rivers and streams. 
The southeast part of the North Island, the 
Gisborne-Hawkes Bay-Wairarapa region may exhibit 
a number of unique water resources effects. 
For 
example, greater incidence of drought and the more 
frequent drying-up of long reaches of river may 
accompany climatic warming, as well as diminished 
baseflows in rivers and streams in Hawkes Bay and 
eastern Wairarapa. 
Lake levels will be low more 
often and anoxic conditions could result at times, 
especially in Lake Tutira, while impedance of drain-
age at river mouths will occur in Hawkes Bay 
requiring increased pumping capacity. 
Although 
little change in groundwater recharge is likely, the 
increased use of groundwater for irrigation is. Also, 
under scenario S2, it is possible that devastating 
impacts could be produced by the more frequent 
passage of large tropical cyclones. 
On the South Island, in the Nelson-Marlborough 
Region, the likely impacts include more frequent 
and severe flooding along with a small increase in 
the pumping of drains; urban flooding of east coast 
catchments; flooding in Tikaki Valley; enhanced 
baseflows; more droughts in the drier eastern hill 
country of Marlborough; and more frequent erosion 
episodes in the Marlborough Sounds. In addition, 
there may be a small beneficial effect in the availab-
ility of groundwater resources, and the Takaka River 
may run dry less often. However, salinity increases 
in the Waikoropupu Springs are possible, along with 
a slight increase in mean discharge, and highly 
erodible basins in eastern Marlborough could supply 
more suspended sediment to the Wairau River. 
This may affect irrigation regimes and produce an 
increased demand for groundwater. 
Potential impacts in the Westland-Fiordland region 
include several that are more related to mountainous 
conditions. 
For example, the meltdown of the 
snowpack could significantly increase the size of 
flood peaks, while the drying out of regolith could 
promote slope failure during high intensity rainfalls 
giving increased suspended sediment loading in 
streams. Moreover, under scenario S2, there maybe 
an overall tendency toward a more stable, less 
extreme environment, but periods of water deficit 
are likely to occur. 
In Canterbury, little change in groundwater recharge 
is likely under either scenario SI or S2, but an 
increase in the number of days of soil moisture 
being below the wilting point suggests that there 
may be greater demands for groundwater-supplied 
irrigation. There may also be a greater incidence of 
drought and of river reaches drying up, along with 
major aridity problems on non-irrigated downland 
areas. 
Canterbury will also probably experience 
greatly increased competition for water between 
instream and out-of-stream uses. Another potential 
problem relates to snowmelt. 
It is probable that 
4-14 
there will be less water in rivers in late spring and 
early summer in those regions where snowmelt is 
now important. Moreover, very little snow storage 
is likely in South Canterbury resulting in significant 
changes in the temporal pattern of runoff. Snow-
melt contributions will probably move forward about 
a month in time. 
Finally, in the Otago-Southland region, a significant 
reduction in the long-term availability of ground-
water is likely in the eastern parts of the regions. 
Droughts are likely to increase and major aridity 
problems may prevail in downland areas particularly 
in central and eastern regions. Eastern areas may 
also experience a greater and an earlier demand for 
irrigation water, while forested areas there will 
supply a reduced water surplus to stream flows and 
groundwater recharge. 
There is also likely to be 
increased water use by permanent grassland and a 
shortening of the period of soil water recharge. 
5 
Case studies of effects in 
critical or sensitive environ-
ments 
5.1 
Large water bodies 
5.1.1 The Great Lakes Basin (US/Canada) 
A detailed examination of available water supply and 
users for the Great Lakes basin reveals a number of 
commonly encountered conflicts among competing 
water uses, even under present climatic conditions. 
First, it should be recognised that there are two 
major and different hydrologic regions: the Great 
Lakes proper and the tributary watersheds. Most of 
the salient conflicting water uses for which the 
regulation and stabilisation of the Great Lakes is 
important is navigation and hydroelectric power 
production, which favour high lake levels versus 
recreation, reduction of flooding and shoreline 
erosion which favours low lake levels. The former 
(hydroelectric power and navigation) affects the 
basis of an extensive industrial economy in the 
region, while the latter affects millions of residents 
who wish to recreate on the shores of the Great 
Lakes and whose houses and property are affected 
by storm damage. Since the lakes themselves are a 
vast reservoir of water, the projected typical con-
sumptive uses of water (municipal and industrial 
water supply, thermal cooling) are not expected to 
impose a significant incremental adverse impact. 
Tributary watersheds, on the other hand, experience 
highly variable flows, with significant present con-
straints on in-stream and off-stream water uses. 
Over 8,000 km
3, storing 20% of the world's fresh 
surface water and 95% of the fresh surface water of 
the US, the Great Lakes have a surface area of 
246,000 km
2. 
The drainage area, including the 
surface area of the Great Lakes encompasses nearly 
766,000 km
2. Eight states of the US and two prov-
inces of Canada (Ontario and Quebec) border the 
Great Lakes (Figure 4.6). Two of the Great Lakes 
are regulated: Lake Superior and Lake Ontario; ie 
their outflows are controlled. Lakes Michigan and 
Huron are connected by the Straits of Mackinac and 
their surface water elevations respond synchronously 
to changes in water supply. 
The Great Lakes Basin encompasses a population of 
29 million Americans (12% of the US population) 
and 8 million Canadians (27% of the Canadian 
population) (Cohen et al, 1989). Millions of people 
benefit directly from the water-resources related-
services of the Great Lakes in the form of hydro-
electric power, navigation/transportation of mineral 
resources including coal and iron and food. In 1975 
economic activity in the US portion amounted to 
$155 billion (1971) while that of Canada was esti-
mated to $27 billion (1971) (International Joint 
Commission, 1985). By 1985, the Great Lakes Basin 
accounted for 37% of the US manufacturing output, 
consisting of transportation equipment, machinery, 
primary metals, fabricated metals and food and 
beverage products. 
The Great Lakes water levels have fluctuated over a 
range of 2 m during the past 150 years. Seasonal 
lake level variations average 0.3 m in Lake Erie and 
0.5 m in Lake Ontario. 
Also, the Great Lakes 
region has experienced twelve serious droughts in 
the past 60 years and six periods of extensive flood-
ing. A high precipitation regime during the past 20 
years resulted in 1986 in record high lake levels for 
this century. 
The G C M s used to predict temperature and precipi-
tation differ substantially in their prediction for each 
of the regions under consideration. 
Figure 4.7 
shows, for example, that the GISS model predicts a 
net increase in summer precipitation in the Great 
Lakes of about 0.4 mm/day, whereas the G F D L 
model shows a decrease of over 0.6 mm/day and the 
O S U model shows no change. 
Precipitation is 
important for non-irrigated agriculture (dryland 
farming). However, water availability in the streams 
(runoff) and in the soil is a function of évapotran-
spiration, which is a non-linear function of tempera-
ture. Hence, runoff computation based on G C M 
model outputs will also vary widely depending on the 
temperature and precipitation conditions predicted 
by each model. A comparison of the runoff compu-
tations for the doubled-C0 2 scenario based on the 
outputs of three G C M s (GISS, G F D L and OSU) 
was conducted by Croley (in press). 
The analysis 
4-15 
used daily models to simulate moisture storage and 
runoff for 121 watersheds draining into the Great 
Lakes, over-lake precipitation into each lake, and the 
heat storage and evaporation for each lake. Table 
4.4 shows that there is a 23% to 51% reduction in 
net basin supplies to all the Great Lakes for the 
three models. 
The largest changes in net basin 
supply would occur in Lake Erie, a feature that was 
uniform in all three models, with the GISS model 
showing the greatest percentage change. Sanderson 
(1989) simulated the effects that the reduction of net 
basin supply would have on the historical levels of 
Lake Erie from 1900-1980 (Figure 4.8). 
Table 4.4 Estimated percentage changes in Great Lakes net 
basin supplies between current climatic conditions* and 
doubled C02 conditions** 
lxC02 Net basin supply and 
2xC02 relative changes 
BASE 
GISS 
GDFL 
OSU 
Basin 
(mm) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
Superior 
Michigan 
Huron 
St.Clair 
Erie 
Ontario 
* 
(1 x CO 
847 
698 
1052 
4395 
592 
1941 
-2 
-45 
-46 
-50 
-113 
-43 
: or the BASE case) 
** 
as simulated by the GISS, 
-57 
-65 
-41 
-28 
-91 
-29 
GFDL 
-19 
-32 
-19 
-25 
-56 
-11 
and ( 
GCMs (Croley, undated) 
Thermoelectric power cooling is projected to in-
crease significantly, accounting also for much of the 
increase in consumptive water use. 
Consumptive 
uses of water, largely through evaporation, represent 
a net loss of water to the hydrologic system. This 
fairly large loss was estimated by the USGS to be 85 
cm in 1985, rising to 170 cm in 2000. This loss, 
however, would only account for a reduction of a 
few centimetres in lake levels in comparison to a 
one-half metre drop in lake levels projected from a 
reduction of net basin supplies due to increased 
natural evapotranspiration. If the dramatic climate 
change scenario were to materialise, the large 
socioeconomic impacts would stem from water use 
conflicts and shortages that are currently encount-
ered primarily during naturally fluctuating low lake 
level stands. That is, hydroelectric power production 
would be significantly affected, particularly in the 
Lake Ontario and Lake Eric drainage areas. There 
are substitutes for the loss of hydroelectric power, 
but most will add to the emission of greenhouse 
gases (GHG) and consumption of thermoelectric 
cooling water. 
Commercial navigation is a very important compo-
nent of the Great Lakes economy that would be 
seriously affected by lower lake levels. 
Either 
cargoes would have to decrease to get through the 
locks, imposing increased transportation costs, or the 
locks on the Great Lakes would have to be rebuilt. 
In either case, the economic cost would be high. 
The water resources impacts are also likely to be of 
great socioeconomic consequence in the streams of 
the watersheds that drain into the Great Lakes. 
These watersheds arc largely unregulated and the 
municipalities and industries depend on natural 
stream flow and groundwater. Although the variabili-
ty of weather and associated shifts in the frequency 
and magnitude of climate events were not available 
from the outputs of the GCMs, there is reason to 
believe that the increased precipitation regime 
predicted by some of the GCMs will result in 
greater and more frequent flooding in the tributary 
watersheds. Along with this trend, it is possible that 
the frequency, duration and magnitude of droughts 
might also increase as a consequence of the warming 
trend. 
In other words, the cycles of floods and 
droughts experienced in the current hydrologic 
record could become worse, exacerbating future 
conditions of higher water demands. 
5.1.2 The Caspian Sea 
The Caspian Sea is the world's largest enclosed lake 
with a surface area of 371,000 km2. 
Lake-level 
variations have a very large amplitude and depend 
mainly on the river inflow-water surface evaporation 
ratio (precipitation on the lake surface is small). 
Over the last 2000 years the amplitude of lake-level 
variation has been about 10 m. Instrumental obser-
vations (since 1837) indicate that lake-level vari-
ations ranged between -25.5 m and -26.5 m abs 
during the period 1837 to 1932. 
The lake then 
began to fall and reached a low of -29.10 m abs in 
1977. 
From 1978 to present the lake level has 
increased, reaching a level of -27.7 m in 1989 
(Shiklomanov, 1988). 
Future lake levels depend on natural inflow variation 
(80% of the inflow is contributed by runoff from the 
Volga River). Other controlling factors are man's 
activities in the river basin, anthropogenic climate 
changes, and changes in precipitation and evapora-
tion. To assess future levels of the Caspian Sea, 
methods for probabilistic prediction have been 
4-16 
developed which take into account potential effects 
of natural and anthropogenic factors, including 
global warming. 
The methods are based on a 
complex water balance model which uses Monte 
Carlo procedures to simulate an annual inflow 
series. 
The scenarios were based on empirical data for all 
the water-balance components obtained since 1880. 
The mean decrease in river water inflow due to 
present and projected man's activities are, according 
to SHI estimates (in km3 yr'): in 1989, -40; 2000, 
-55; 2010, -60; 2020, -65. For every year the values 
of river runoff were taken separately for all the main 
rivers. In the case of non-stable climatic conditions, 
possible climate changes for the years 2000 and 2020 
have been estimated for the basin and the Sea 
according to predictions by Soviet climatologists on 
the basis of palaeoclimatic reconstructions (see 
Section 4.4). Possible changes in river water inflow 
to the Sea have been obtained independently by two 
extreme estimates derived from the river runoff 
change maps for 2000 (Figure 4.9) and by the water 
balance model over decades (Section 4.4). Changing 
evaporation has been calculated from air tempera-
ture and precipitation data. 
Table 4.5 shows calculated changes in the water-
balance elements for the Caspian Sea with global 
warming. According to these estimates a consider-
able decrease (relative to the normal) in river water 
inflow to the Sea would occur by the end of the 
century, mainly due to decreased Volga River 
Runoff. 
This would be followed by a marked 
increase in inflow. Precipitation increases over the 
Sea would be particularly significant (up to 60% in 
the year 2020, from the current annual mean pre-
cipitation of 240 mm); evaporation would change 
insignificantly (up to 3%). 
Table 4.5 Changes in components of the water balance of 
the Caspian Sea in response to global warming 
Water balance 
Iff! 
component 
1989 
2000 
2020 
Total inflow flcm3 yr ') 
From map analysis 
0 
-20 
+40 
From model analysis 
0 
-30 
+10 
Precipitation (mm) 
0 
+100 
+150 
Evaporation (mm) 
0 
+15 
+30 
A simulation of water-balance components under 
varying climate conditions has been carried out by 
the same technique, taking into account, however, 
the data in Table 4.5 with interpolation for each year 
of the period under consideration. In this case, the 
shape of distribution curves, variability of water-
balance components, coefficients of their autoregres-
sion and intercorrelation are accepted according to 
observational records. The results are presented in 
Figure 4.9. 
By the end of the century some 
lake-level lowering is expected to take place due to 
increasing human activities in the basin. After the 
year 2000, some stabilisation may occur followed by 
a significant rise in the Sea's level owing to predicted 
increases in inflow and precipitation over its surface 
(Shiklomanov, 1988; 1989a). These results, though 
preliminary, show the importance and necessity of 
taking into account anthropogenic climate change 
forecasts to estimate the fate of continental reser-
voirs and to plan future management. 
5.2 The arid and semi-arid zones of North 
Africa, including the Sahel 
North Africa and the Sahelian zone are both subject 
to frequent and disastrous droughts, progressive 
aridisation, and encroaching desertification. 
The 
Sahel, a vast though narrow, belt stretching from 
West Africa to the Horn of Africa, is the transition 
zone from the Saharan desert to the hot and 
semi-arid African savannahs. 
Analysis of annual 
precipitation data from stations in the Sahelian zone 
for the period 1968-88 indicate that this period was 
exceptionally dry. Although the current Sahelian 
drought appears to many scientists and policy 
makers to be a persistent and unprecedented phe-
nomenon, this drought is far from unique. During 
the current century, the Sahelian region experienced 
several dry periods of varying duration, magnitude, 
and spatial extent (Grove, 1973; Sircoulon, 1976). 
During the last five centuries, historical accounts and 
palaeoclimatic evidence indicate that there have 
been rainfall fluctuations of extremely variable 
duration (from years to several decades) (Nicholson, 
1978; 1989). Demarde and Nicolis (1990) viewed the 
Sahelian drought as a fluctuation-induced abrupt 
transition between a stable state of 'high' rainfall 
and a stable state of 'low' rainfall. 
The major reason for Sahelian droughts is a de-
crease in annual precipitation. Ojo (1987) analysed 
precipitation data for 1901-85 using 60 stations in 
western Africa. 
He found that during 1970-79 
average precipitation there was 62% of normal and, 
during 1981-84, about 50% of normal (Figure 4.10). 
The Sahelian zone is characterised by a strong 
sensitivity to hydrometeorological conditions, espe-
cially precipitation. This is confirmed by analysis of 
4-17 
precipitation and runoff over the most dry and wet 
five year periods of time in the Senegal, Niger and 
Shari Rivers basins, as well as by Lake Chad levels 
and areas indicated in Sircoulon (1987). According 
to these data, with precipitation increasing by 
20-30% the runoff rises by 30-50% in the river 
basins; with precipitation decreasing by 9-24% the 
runoff is reduced by 15-59%. In addition, between 
the early 1960s and 1985, the area of Lake Chad 
shrank by more than 11 times, ie from 23,500 km
2 to 
2000 km
2. 
The analysis of the series of total annual precipita-
tion amounts from the stations situated in arid zones 
of Northern Africa for the period 1972-87 shows a 
trend toward decreasing total annual precipitation. 
The total annual precipitation amounts are much 
below normal (during the period in question). 
Likewise for Sahel, it is a succession of dry years 
that has created a critical situation in the region. 
This succession of dry years has led to decreasing 
water resources in region. 
An analysis of the 
number of rainy days during which a considerable 
amount of precipitation was observed showed a 
decrease toward days with small amounts of precipi-
tation. From the decrease in the number of rainy 
days, the coefficient of runoff decreases too, which 
is manifest in a general decrease in runoff. 
A 
change in the distribution of precipitation toward a 
decrease in the number of rain days, as well as a 
significant shortening in the length of the rainy 
season, have been mentioned by many authors who 
have analysed Sudano-Sahelian precipitation data for 
the last 20 years (see, eg Demar6e and Chadilly, 
1988 and Erpicum et al, 1989). 
In view of its recurrent but aperiodic character, this 
tendency may represent a potential risk of drought 
possibly contributing to the process of desertification 
and extension of deserts. It seems obvious that the 
future water resources, ecology and economies of 
countries in the Sahelian and arid and semi-arid 
zones will depend upon changing precipitation in the 
region due to the growth of radiatively active trace 
gas concentrations in the atmosphere. 
An optimistic forecast has been proposed by Soviet 
climatologists for Northern Africa on the basis of 
palaeoclimatic 
reconstructions 
(Anthropogenic 
climatic changes, 1987). According to these data, in 
the next several decades annual precipitation may 
increase considerably as may total moisture and 
river runoff. 
The estimates obtained are very 
approximate and need thorough checking and 
improvement, based on more detailed information 
and different methods. 
The quality of the data, 
however, should not deter attempts to solve the 
problem of considering climate variability in water 
resources management. 
In this regard two issues 
should be considered: water resources management 
problems and water quality problems. 
The first issue is directly related to the sensitivity of 
hydrologjc systems to climate changes and, in par-
ticular, to droughts and floods. 
This necessitates 
taking into account risks while developing water 
resource projects. 
The second issue is related to 
water quality, ie the problem of pollution in relation 
to both human activities and natural processes. 
From the standpoint of anthropogenic climate 
change, there is no evidence to suggest that the 
drought problem for Northern Africa and the 
Sahelian zone will be reduced. Finally, taking into 
account the importance of climatic and hydrologic 
data for use in economic analyses of the African 
continent, there is a clear need to establish (i) 
systematic networks for meteorological data moni-
toring, and (ii) improved and expanded surface 
hydrologic data collection networks. 
5.3 
Water conditions in critical 
agricultural regions 
5.3.1 The South Platte River 
Next to the direct impact on water resources, per-
haps the most critical social and economic concern 
associated with climatic change is the impact on 
agriculture. 
This is especially true in marginal 
farming regions of dryland farming or those that are 
heavily dependent upon irrigation for the mainte-
nance of agricultural productivity. An example of 
such a region is the South Platte River basin in the 
west-central part of the US. The basin is primarily 
in the State of Colorado, but the river also drains 
parts of southwestern Nebraska and southeastern 
Wyoming (Figure 4.11). 
It is watershed number 
1019 which drains into Water Resources Region 10, 
the Missouri River basin. 
The basin comprises 
62,210 km
2 of mountains, plains foothills and alluvial 
fans. The western part is dominated by the rugged 
mountains of the Front Range, which is part of the 
Southern Rocky Mountains in Colorado. Of the 
49,250 km
2 of the basin in Colorado, about 20% is 
above 2700 m in altitude, and more than half is 
above 1800 m. A few peaks rise above 4000 m. 
Land use is diverse in the South Platte River basin. 
Most of the mountain area remains as near-natural 
National Forest land, with coniferous trees as the 
dominant vegetation. 
These forest lands are not 
extensively logged, and are now used mainly for 
recreation. 
Some of the lower slopes of the 
mountains are used for grazing. The transition area 
between the mountains and the plains includes most 
of the urban and suburban development. The plains 
4-18 
are used principally for pasture and rangeland, dry 
cropland, and irrigated cropland. 
By 1980, the basin had about 75 surface reservoirs 
with storage capacities of at least 6 million m
3, and 
about 300 other reservoirs with capacities of at least 
0.6 million m
3. The total reservoir-storage capacity 
in the basin exceeds 2.5 billion m
3 (US Army Corps 
of Engineers, 1980). 
The reservoirs are operated 
primarily for irrigation, and public supplies, hydro-
electric power generation, and flood control. How-
ever, recreation development has occurred on nearly 
all of the storage reservoirs in the basin (US Geo-
logical Survey, 1990). About 20 transbasin diversion 
structures have been used to import water into the 
South Platte River basin, including five tunnels and 
three pipelines US Army Corps of Engineers, 1977). 
The intensive development of water and lands in the 
South Platte basin has solved some problems while 
incurring others. There are still unmet demands for 
municipal and agricultural water supply. Ground-
water overdrafting is occurring as a consequence. 
Over 200 communities have flooding problems and 
water quality has diminished, partly from irrigation 
return flows and partly from non-point source 
pollution. 
The South Platte River basin is typical of the agri-
culturally based economy of the US Great Plains 
states, which includes a large livestock industry. 
Farmers in the Great Plains are particularly vul-
nerable to climate variability and the drought of the 
1930s was so devastating, serving as the impetus for 
a large-scale social migration. The Great Plains has 
become a productive agricultural area in the US 
thanks to the large degree of water resources devel-
opment. In its natural state, however, it is a margin-
al agricultural region and is very sensitive to climatic 
variability.This fact leads to considerable concern 
when current estimates of climate change are fac-
tored in. A comparison of the output of general 
circulation models, under doubled C 0 2 conditions, 
show that both the GISS and G F D L models predict 
a net annual decrease in precipitation for the Great 
Plains region. The O S U models, on the other hand, 
shows a slight increase over present conditions, even 
during the critical summer period (Figure 4.12). 
The largest predicted summer season precipitation 
deficit is nearly 5 mm/day, according to the G F D L 
model, which is of the same order of deficit experi-
enced during the 
devastating drought 
of the 
1930s.The 2,301,000 people in the South Platte basin 
use 6894 litres per capita per day of fresh water for 
a total of 15,873 ML/day. 
Of this total, 4635 
ML/day are withdrawn from groundwater sources 
and 11,237 ML/day from surface water sources. 
Irrigation is by far the largest user of fresh water 
(11,237 ML/day), of which 4271 ML/day if from 
groundwater sources and 6962 M L / d a y is from 
surface water resources. About 90% (9911 ML/day) 
of the water used for irrigation is lost by conveyance 
or consumption. Thermoelectric cooling uses ac-
count for 2247 M L / d a y and a consumptive loss of 53 
ML/day. 
Publicly supplied water, largely for 
municipal uses, accounts for 2001 M L / d a y from 
surface water sources and 171 M L / d a y from ground-
water sources. 
Clearly, the doubled atmospheric C O z general 
circulation model simulations (except for those of 
the O S U model), if true, depict a potentially serious 
climate 
change 
scenario, 
particularly 
for 
the 
agricultural sector. 
Despite the large amount of 
irrigation, most of the farming in the South Platte 
River basin and the Great Plains is dryland. Only 
about 10% of the farmland is irrigated. 
The fact 
that 30-50% of all irrigation is from groundwater, 
which is already being rapidly depleted, does not 
bode well for any climate change scenario which 
greatly exacerbates current conditions. 
In general, results of recent studies show a net 
reduction in crop (wheat and corn) yields, even with 
the compensating effects of C 0 2 on plant photosyn-
thesis (Smith and Tozan, 1988). Dryland farming 
would likely become increasingly risky and less 
economical. Moreover, the present water resources 
base (both surface and groundwater) could not 
compensate for the relatively large loss of marginal 
dryland acreage. 
Navigation and hydroelectric power production on 
the mainstem reservoirs could be threatened as 
could surface water quality. 
Development of the 
basin's surface water potential is near capacity. 
Substantial changes in present water use technolo-
gies, particularly for irrigation, would have to be 
undertaken to meet the more stressful conditions 
postulated under the modelled climate change 
scenario. 
This encompasses increased water use 
efficiencies, conjunctive use of surface and ground 
waters, transfer of water rights and, lastly, major 
new imports of water from outside the basin. 
5.3.2 The Murray-Darling Basin 
(Australia) 
Another detailed look at the hydrologic and water 
resources impacts of a climatic change in a critical 
agricultural region has been completed for the 
Murray-Darling Basin in southeastern Australia 
(Stewart, 1989; Figure 4.13). In this basin, which has 
an area of 1.06 million km
2, about 10 million of the 
12.4 million ML of water per annum available under 
present climatic conditions have already been devel-
oped and mean water usage already exceeds 8.6 
4-19 
million ML (Zillman, 1989). The region presently 
accounts for just under 60% of mean annual water 
use and includes 75% of the total irrigated area of 
the continent (1.7 million ha). The Murray-Darling 
Basin must be regarded as extremely vulnerable to 
the effects of climate variability or change and is of 
major socioeconomic importance to Australia. 
The Australian analysis evaluated water resources 
impacts on the basis of output from five atmospheric 
general circulation models for both summer (DJF) 
and winter (JJA) seasons under equilibrium doubled 
C0 2 conditions. These included the GISS, GFDL, 
NCAR, OSU, and UKMO models. 
All of the 
models predict increases in surface air temperatures, 
ranging from 3°C to 7°C for the basin region. The 
models predict different changes in precipitation 
rates, including both increases and decreases, with a 
range 2.5 mm/day to 1.0 mm/day. The most widely 
used scenario of climate change in Australia is for a 
temperature rise of between 2°C and 4°C and 
precipitation increases up to 50% in summer (except 
in southern regions) and decreases of up to 10% in 
winter (Pittock, 1988). 
Three distinct methods were used to estimate the 
estimate the potential impacts of these various 
model-generated 
climate 
scenarios; 
temporal 
analogs, spatial analogs, and hydrological models. 
Because the GCM models all predict increases in 
temperature of similar magnitude, and since global 
temperatures have undergone a modest increase 
over the past 100 years, temporal and spatial analogs 
operate on the assumption that the magnitude of the 
predicted global warming is correct. Although this 
assumption may or may not be valid, these proced-
ures do provide one mechanism for understanding 
basin response to anomalous climatic conditions. 
Thus, periods of above average temperature in the 
historical record may provide indications of the 
potential impact of climatic change (temporal 
analogs). Areas with past climatic conditions similar 
to those expected in the future may also provide 
such indications (spatial analogs). 
Hydrological 
models can be used to determine the impacts of 
changes in precipitation and other factors defined by 
the scenarios or analogs. 
Evaluation of the' impacts of climatic change on a 
temporal basis can be studied in two ways. First, 
trends attributable to climatic change can be sought 
t in recorded data and, if found, can be extrapolated 
into the future. Analysis of available temperature, 
precipitation, 
and 
runoff 
data 
from 
the 
Murray-Darling basin has not revealed any trend 
attributable to climatic change. 
This does not 
discount the possibility of climatic change but, 
rather, indicates that impacts are not yet discernible. 
The predictions of the general circulation models are 
for increasing temperatures across Australia of the 
order of 4°C to 5°C. If these changes are realised, 
the annual average temperatures in the southern 
part of the basin could rise to between 17°C or 
18°C, while those in the northwestern region could 
increase to between 25 °C and 26 °C. 
Spatial 
analogs, that is using areas in Australia that current-
ly have such temperature conditions to estimate 
future climatic patterns, would suggest that precipi-
tation in both regions could decrease by 40% to 
50%. Spatial analogs, however, can be misleading 
because not all characteristics are maintained in the 
analogous area. The differences can be in terms of 
vegetation types, topography, storm types and 
mechanisms, and moisture sources. Some of these 
characteristics may cause feedback mechanisms. It 
should be noted that the majority of the GCMs 
predict increases in precipitation, not decreases as 
suggested by the temporal and spatial analogs. 
Close (1988) used computer models to examine how 
the River Murray system would have behaved if the 
current storages and current irrigation developments 
had existed for the last 94 years. By superimposing 
predictions of climatic changes assumed to be 
associated with the greenhouse effect, the impacts 
on water resources and system operation were 
estimated. Close concluded that: 
(i) 
Tributary flows will increase over almost all of 
the Murray-Darling basin. 
(ii) Flow increases will be more pronounced in the 
northern rivers of the basin than in those in the 
south. 
(iii) Spring, autumn, and summer precipitation will 
increase while winter rainfall may decrease slightly. 
(iv) Demand for irrigation water per hectare will 
decrease slightly. 
(v) The water resources available for irrigation will 
increase, which will permit cither the area of irriga-
tion to be increased or the security of supply of the 
current irrigation areas to be improved. 
(vi) Dilution flows will increase and hence salinity 
in the lower river will decrease. 
It should be noted that these impacts are based on 
only one scenario, which does not agree with those 
provided by the majority of GCMs, or with the 
temporal and spatial analogs. The value of models 
is that they can be used to determine the impacts of 
a range of scenarios and to establish the most 
4-20 
sensitive climatic parameters in a region, on which 
to then concentrate. 
5.4 Water conditions in intensively 
urbanised areas - the Delaware River 
Basin (USA) 
Estimating the water resources impacts of climatic 
change in dynamic and intensively urbanised areas 
has some unique problems. 
Perhaps the most 
significant of these is that such areas frequently 
undergo 
major 
population, 
commercial 
and 
industrial changes over time periods of several 
decades. 
The water resources effects of these 
changes are likely to be more significant than any 
that would be attributable to climatic change over 
the same time frame. Thus, estimates of changes in 
total population and its spatial distribution, as well 
as changes in industrial and land use conditions, are 
as essential to the determination of future water 
resources conditions as are estimates of climate 
change. Unfortunately, experience to date indicates 
that the estimation of future demographic, industrial, 
technological, and land use conditions, when avail-
able, is generally unreliable (Osborn, 1986). 
In the US, a recent study investigated the sensitivity 
of hydrologic and water resource conditions in the 
Delaware River Basin, an intensively urbanised basin 
on the middle Atlantic coast, to potential changes in 
climate (Ayers ct al., 1990). This work evaluated 
water resources impacts using estimates of climate 
change both with and without estimates of social and 
economic change. 
The Delaware River Basin is an environmentally 
diverse region encompassing an area of approxi-
mately 33,000 km- and crossing five major physio-
graphic provinces and three distinct ecosystem types. 
Runoff processes differ considerably over the basin; 
in addition, human activities influence the movement 
and storage of water in the basin, adding consider-
able complexity to the hydrologic response charac-
teristics of the various physiographic provinces. 
Urbanisation in the lower portions of the basin has 
significantly altered the regional runoff response 
(Ayers and Leaveslcy, 1988). 
With respect to climatic change, perhaps the most 
important issue is that the Delaware River provides 
water for an estimated 20 million people (Delaware 
River Basin Commission, 1986). Water availability 
is enhanced by complex systems of reservoirs for 
storage, and wells, pipes, tunnels, and canals for 
diversion and delivery. 
Moreover, the lower 
one-third of the river is tidal, and the freshwater 
part of the tidal river serves as a major source of 
groundwater recharge for aquifer systems supplying 
water to regions around the river and as an import-
ant water-supply source for the City of Philadelphia 
and many industries by direct diversion. It is critical, 
therefore, that the water in this stretch of the river 
remain potable, even during periods of prolonged 
low flow (droughts). This is the social and environ-
mental context within which the Delaware Basin 
study was conducted. 
Models of monthly streamflow (with and without 
reservoirs) and daily streamflow (without reservoirs) 
were developed to analyse the effects of climatic 
change on basin runoff. Analyses of the sensitivity 
of monthly streamflow to change in climate using a 
monthly water-balance model without reservoirs, and 
without changes in water use, indicate that warming 
could result in an increase in the proportion of 
winter precipitation that falls as rain in the northern 
part of the basin (McCabe and Ayers, 1989). The 
effect of such a change would be to reduce snow 
accumulation, increase winter runoff, and reduce 
spring and summer runoff. Basin-wide estimates of 
total annual runoff 
indicate that warming of 
2°C-4°C, 
without 
corresponding 
precipitation 
increases, could produce a 9% to 25% decrease in 
total annual runoff as a result of increased evapo-
transpiration. 
The simulations suggest that an 
increase in precipitation of about 3% would be 
needed to counteract decreases in runoff that would 
result from each 1°C of warming. Annual runoff 
changes estimated from the water-balance model 
driven by climate change values generated using 
three GCMs ranged from -39% to +9%. 
Similar sensitivity analyses using a stochastic monthly 
flow model with reservoirs indicate that the risk of 
drought is significantly greater in those climate 
change scenarios where precipitation does not 
increase sufficiently to offset the temperature in-
crease. In one instance, water use was held constant 
at 1986 levels, that is, it was assumed that there 
would be no demographic, industrial, or technologi-
cal changes occurring contemporaneously with 
climate change. The simulations indicated that the 
percentage of time that the basin would be under 
drought warning or emergency could increase. The 
probability of entering a drought condition in the 
Delaware River Basin currently is 9.5%, based on a 
1000-year simulation (Table 4.6). Under assumed 
warmings of 2°C and 4°C, the probability of drought 
in the basin increases by 1.9 and 2.9 times respec-
tively. When the two warming scenarios are accom-
panied by a 10% decrease in average precipitation, 
the probability of drought increases to 4.8 and 6.4 
times the probability under current conditions 
respectively. A 10% increase in average precipita-
tion in conjunction with a 2°C warming actually 
causes a decrease in the probability of drought. The 
4-21 
simulated range in the amount of time the basin 
would experience drought, from a 60% decrease to 
a 540% increase, corresponds to the uncertainty 
associated with potential climatic change in the 
basin. 
The simulation results presented in Table 4.6 indi-
cate that virtually no change in the probability of 
drought will result from the projected growth in 
consumptive water use in the basin. 
Currently, 
however, a drought is defined only by the contents 
of the New York City reservoirs, and the magnitude 
of consumptive water use in the upper part of the 
basin is small relative to the diversions to New York 
City and to the increased evapotranspiration that 
could accompany a temperature increase. 
Table 4.6 Simulated percentage of time in which the 
Delaware River Basin is in a drought warning or emergency 
condition* 
Change in tern- 
Change in precipitation 
perature 
-10% 
None 
+10% 
For observed 1986 
water use 
None 
9.5 
+2°C 
45.8 
17.7 
5.6 
+4°C 
61.1 
27.2 
10.3 
For estimated 2040 
water use 
None 
9.6 
+2°C 
46.0 
17.8 
5.7 
+4°C 
61.3 
29.3 
10.4 
* For prescribed temperature and precipitation 
scenarios (Ayers et al., 1990) 
A topographically based hydrologic model was 
developed and linked with a wet/dry climate model 
to assess the sensitivity of daily streamflow to climat-
ic change in the Delaware River basin (Wolock et 
al., 1989). The sensitivity of streamflow in on-urban 
watersheds in the Delaware River basin to climatic 
change was evaluated, using this daily flow model. 
The model stochastically generates time series of 
temperature and precipitation and uses estimates of 
parameters derived from watershed topography 
(Price et al., 1989) and soil hydraulic properties to 
generate a time series of streamflow. 
A series of 60-year simulations, each representing a 
different possible future realisation of the same 
climatic change projection (a gradual warming of 
3°C with current precipitation characteristics) was 
performed. 
Annual and monthly maximum daily 
streamflow and Kendall's tau statistics then were 
calculated for each of the 60-year streamflow time 
series to detect trends in streamflow. 
These simulations illustrate two important charac-
teristics about the sensitivity of basin watersheds to 
climatic change. First, seasonal differences in the 
expected effects of global warming on streamflow 
are observed. Maximum daily streamflows increase 
with time (more positive than negative trends) in 
mid winter months, decrease in spring and summer, 
and change little in fall and early winter. 
These 
seasonal differences in trend primarily reflect chan-
ges in snowfall accumulation and snowmelt. With 
warming, more winter precipitation falls as rain than 
as snow, and snowmelt occurs earlier. The warming 
effect is strongest in the northern part of the basin 
where snow accumulation currently is significant. 
Second, natural variability in precipitation masks the 
effects of increasing temperature. The percentage of 
simulations that do not show a significant increase 
or decrease is greater than 58% in any month and 
average 84%. Results of the simulations using the 
daily watershed model (without reservoirs) indicate 
that, overall, warming alone would cause a decrease 
in daily streamflow, specifically the maximum and 
average daily low and 7-day low flow. Most of this 
decrease would occur in the warmer months. Where 
snow accumulation currently is significant (in the 
northern part of the basin), however, the warming 
would result in an increase in the February average 
and maximum daily flow, regardless of precipitation 
changes. In general, watershed runoff was found to 
be more sensitive to changes in daily precipitation 
amounts than to changes in daily temperature or 
precipitation duration. 
Dctectability of runoff 
changes was masked by the underlying variability in 
precipitation. 
5.5 Regions of snowmelt-generated run-
off: The Sacramento-San Joaquin 
River Basin (USA) 
The Sacramento-San Joaquin Rivers comprise the 
drainage basin of the Central Valley of California, 
one of the most productive and diverse agricultural 
regions in the world (Figure 4.14). It encompasses 
several large metropolitan areas, and sustains many 
others. Over 40% of California's total surface water 
drains from the Central Valley Basin into the San 
Francisco Bay area, supplying water for irrigated 
agriculture, municipal and industrial uses and nu-
merous other recreational and ecological purposes. 
Elevations in the basin range from sea-level in the 
Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta to mountain 
peaks of over 4,200 m in the Sierra Nevada range. 
4-22 
California's climate is characterised by wet winters 
and dry summers, with mean annual precipitation 
decreasing from 190 cm in the northern Sacramento 
River basin to 15 cm in the southern San Joaquin 
River basin. 
The key feature of the hydrologic 
characteristics of this basin is that a significant 
proportion of the basin's precipitation falls as snow 
in the high mountains. 
Consequently, storage of 
water in the snowpack controls the seasonal timing 
of runoff in the Central Valley rivers and has shaped 
the evolution of strategies for water management 
and flood protection (Smith and Tirpak, 1989). 
California's rivers are highly regulated because its 
water resources are poorly distributed relative to its 
settlement patterns. 
Nearly 70% of the state's 
surface water supply originates north of Sacramento, 
while 70% of its population and 80% of the total 
demand for water lies to the south. About 85% of 
the Central Valley basin's total annual precipitation 
occurs between November and April, whereas peak 
water use occurs during the summer. About 826,000 
ha are irrigated in the Sacramento River basin by 
groundwater and surface water sources. An addi-
tional 794,000 ha are irrigated in the San Joaquin 
River basin. Roughly 60% of the total population of 
California (26 million) is served by surface water 
sources, the remainder derived from groundwater. 
Gleick (1989) reported that the drought of 1976-77 
combined two of the driest years on record and 
resulted in a reconsideration of systemic water 
management procedures and their effects on the 
economic infrastructure of region. As an example of 
the severity of the drought, average annual precipita-
tion in California is approximately 250 billion m
3. In 
the 1976 water year, precipitation decreased to 160 
billion m
3, followed by even less precipitation in 
1977, totalling 135 billion m
3, or 45% of average. 
Runoff in California's river dropped to 47% of 
normal in 1976 and to 22% in 1977. 
Hydroelectricity is a major source of power in 
California, providing approximately 20% of the 
state's total electricity production. 
In 1976, total 
hydroelectric output dropped to just under 10%, 
while in 1977 it dropped to 7%. The reduction in 
relatively inexpensive hydroelectric energy produc-
tion occurred as the need for groundwater pumping 
increased dramatically as a consequence of drasti-
cally reduced surface water deliveries. In 1977, 4.2 
billion m
3 more water than normal were pumped 
from groundwater reservoirs (Gleick, 1988). 
Droughts have a direct effect on salinity intrusion 
from San Francisco Bay into the Sacramento-San 
Joaquin Delta region. Upstream reservoirs changed 
their operating policies in the 1980s to prevent the 
worst effects of salinity intrusion during low flow 
years at the expense of increasing the vulnerability of 
the entire water management system. Flooding is a 
continuing major problem in the central basin and, 
as urbanisation increasingly spreads out onto the flat 
Central Valley, flood damages will increase propor-
tionately. 
Gleick also sees evidence of increased runoff varia-
bility in the long term record of the Sacramento 
River basin as expressed by the five-year moving 
average of the standard deviation of the Sacramento 
Basin unimpaired runoff record of 1906-86. This 
relatively recent increase in variability (since the 
1970s) has resulted in a series of changes in 
standard planning and design assumptions about 
peak flood volumes, drought severity, recurrence 
intervals and reservoir operating rules. Thus, one of 
the likely future climatic states of global warming 
could be one in which there is a decrease in the 
mean runoff and an increase in variability, ie an 
increase in the frequency and magnitude of floods 
and droughts. 
An assessment of the possible water resources 
impacts of a doubling of atmospheric C 0 2 has been 
made using the output from three G C M s . It should 
be noted that conditions for the entire Central 
Valley drainage system are encompassed within one 
grid cell for each of the three G C M s . Again, there 
is considerable diversity among the three models, 
especially with regard to the seasonal prediction of 
precipitation changes. 
Nevertheless, based on a 
series of hydrologic impact studies conducted 
through the US Environmental Protection Agency 
and reported in Smith and Tirpak (1989), it was 
shown 
that 
total 
annual 
runoff 
in 
the 
Sacramento-San Joaquin 
River basin might be 
expected to remain near current levels or to increase 
somewhat under the scenarios simulated by each of 
the G C M s . However, major changes could probably 
occur in the seasonality of the runoff. In response 
to higher temperatures, less precipitation would be 
expected to fall as snow, and the snowpack that does 
accumulate could melt earlier in the year. 
Thus, 
there could be higher runoff in the winter months 
and considerably less in the traditional spring snow-
melt-runoff season. 
Roos (1990) estimates that a 
3°C temperature increase could shift about one-third 
of the present spring snowmelt into increased winter 
runoff. Also, the possibility exists for runoff varia-
bility to increase substantially during the winter 
season. 
Change in the timing of runoff could have profound 
influences both on the aquatic and terrestrial ecology 
and on water resources management, despite the 
fact that total annual runoff could be slightly higher. 
4-23 
First, more liquid precipitation in the winters months 
could lead to reduced runoff in the late spring and 
summer, thereby reducing the carry-over soil mois-
ture needed by the vegetation. Also, such a reduc-
tion in stream-flow in the late summer could lead to 
a degradation in the health of aquatic species. 
An analysis of 1990 water use demands, in conjunc-
tion with instream flow constraints and delta outflow 
requirements and current reservoir operating poli-
cies, indicate a potential decrease in mean annual 
deliveries from 7% (OSU model) to 14% ( G F D L 
model) to 15% (GISS model). This would occur be-
cause under current operating rules combined with 
earlier (ie winter) snowmelt, the reservoir would not 
have the capacity to store the early runoff for 
summer season irrigation withdrawals while simulta-
neously retaining springtime flood control capabili-
ties. 
Future 
demands 
for surface 
water 
from 
the 
Sacramento-San Joaquin system are expected to in-
crease 30% by the year 2010. 'This demand could 
not be reliably supplied under the current climate 
and resource system, and the shortage might be 
exacerbated under either of the three G C M derived 
scenarios' (Smith and Tirpak, 1989). Furthermore, 
the potential magnitude of changes in the seasonality 
of runoff are such that operational changes alone 
would probably not significantly improve the systems 
performance. 
Climate change impacts on agriculture are compli-
cated by the fact that so much of it is dependent on 
irrigation, which accounts for 80% of California's 
water use. 
If there are substantial and persistent 
shortages as a result of the inability of current water 
management operating procedures to adapt to the 
change in seasonality, these deficits would clearly 
affect agricultural yields. 
However, two of the 
GCMs, the GISS and G F D L models, were used to 
predict changes in the yields of several different 
crops (sugar beets, corn, cotton, and tomatoes) 
under a doubling of C O z and the resultant potential 
changes in mean annual and seasonal temperature, 
precipitation and soil moisture. Under those direct 
conditions of climatic change, all the crops were 
simulated to suffer decreases in yield. When growth 
enhancing effects of a doubled C 0 2 atmosphere 
were taken into account along with the primary 
climatic effects, all the crops (except corn) showed 
substantial increases in yield. 
6 Conclusions 
Relatively small climate changes can cause large 
water resource problems in many areas, especially 
arid and semi-arid regions and those humid areas 
where demand or pollution has led to water scarcity. 
Little is known about regional details of greenhouse-
gas-induced hydrometeorological change. It appears 
that many areas may have increased precipitation, 
soil moisture and water storage, thus altering pat-
terns of agriculture, ecosystems and other water 
uses. In other areas, however, water availability may 
decrease, an important consideration for existing 
marginal situations such as the Sahelian zone in 
Africa. This has significant implications for agricul-
ture, water storage and distribution, and for hydro-
electric power generation. In some comparatively 
small areas, assuming a 1°C-2°C temperature in-
crease coupled with a 10%-20% reduction in precipi-
tation, a 40%-70% decrease in annual or seasonal 
runoff could occur. Regions such as Southeast Asia, 
that are dependent on unregulated river systems, are 
particularly vulnerable to hydrometeorological 
change. 
On the other hand, regions such as the 
western USSR and western US that have large 
regulated water resource systems are less sensitive to 
the range of hydrometeorological changes in the 
assumed greenhouse scenario. 
If meaningful estimates of water resources condi-
tions, appropriate for planning and policy formula-
tion, are to be produced, then studies must include 
estimates on the frequency, intensity and duration of 
potential future hydrologic events. This is especially 
critical for evaluating effects on agriculture, the de-
sign of water resource management systems, and for 
producing reasonably accurate water supply esti-
mates. 
In many instances, it can be expected that changes 
in hydrologic extremes in response to global warm-
ing will be more significant than changes in hydro-
logic mean conditions. 
Thus, attention must be 
focused on changes in the frequency and magnitude 
of floods and droughts in evaluating the societal 
ramifications of water resource changes. 
Initial water resource planning and policy-making 
will continue to be implemented even in the face of 
uncertainty about global change. Clarification and 
specification of the useful information content of the 
various methods for estimating future change must 
be made available to the management community. 
The most essential need is for more reliable and 
detailed (both in space and time) estimates of future 
climatic conditions. These estimates must be region-
ally specific and provide information on both the 
frequency and magnitude of events. 
Increased understanding of relations between climat-
ic variability and hydrologic response must be 
developed. Such work should include the develop-
4-24 
menl of methods for translating climate model 
information into a form that provides meaningful 
data to watershed and water resource system 
models. 
Areas particularly vulnerable to even small changes 
in climate must be identified worldwide. Vulner-
abilities must be ascertained, considering both 
natural and anthropogenic conditions and potential 
changes. 
Intensive assessments of water resource sensitivities 
are necessary in developing countries, especially 
those located in environmentally sensitive arid and 
semi-arid regions, where the potential for conflicts 
associated with low water resource system develop-
ment and rapidly increasing water demands is high. 
Studies are needed that produce improved proced-
ures for operating water management systems in 
consideration of climate uncertainty. 
A related 
aspect of this work is the development of design 
criteria for engineered structures that specifically 
incorporate estimates of climatic variability and 
change. 
Very little is currently known about the effects of 
climate change on water quality. Although water 
quality concerns are becoming increasingly import-
ant, 
the separation 
of human-induced versus 
climate-induced changes in water quality is a very 
difficult problem. Specifically, there is an immediate 
need to identify those aspects of this problem that 
hold the most promise for yielding credible evalu-
ations of climatic effects on water quality. 
4-25 
Figure 4.1. Dependence of consumptive water losses, over large continental areas, on the aridity index. 1 
- Africa, 2 - Europe and Australia, 3 - North and South America, and Asia 
4-26 
Figure 4.2. Mean annual water supply (in billions of gallons per day) under current and hypothetical 
conditions for the major water resource regions of the US 
4-27 
Figure 4.3. Percentage change in mean annual runoff by varying precipitation (upper) and potential 
évapotranspiration (lower) (Schaake, 1990) 
PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN MEAN ANNUAL RUNOFF 
PRECIPITATION — NO CHANGE 
POTENTIAL EVAPOTRANSPIRATION +10% 
4-28 
Figure 4.4. Change in annual runoff (in centimetres) for the USSR as estimated for a warming of 1° 
4-29 
Figure 4.5. Estimated percentage change in annual runoff under climate change scenario SI (2030-2050) in 
New Zealand (Griffiths, 1988) 
4-30 
Figure 4.6. The Great Lakes drainage area (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
White Fish Bay 
\ 
-ASault St Marie 
?-
/ Wisconsin .•' 
( 
^ 
Green Bay 
Cornwall 
Ontario -<-r~-T T . . 
"^Lake Ontario-
Buffalo New York 
\ 
J 
Wr—, 
£r\£V> 
f 
iw-ip^ • 
> 
) 
fjT^ 
r 
$ Forest Sites 
f 
/ 
/ 
A Compensating Works 
• Agriculture Sites 
V 
• Shipping Sites 
4-31 
Figure 4.9. Estimated levels of the Caspian Sea, 1989-2020 under varying climate change scenarios: 1 -
stationary climate with man's impact, 2 - model-based anthropogenic change in climate including 
man's impact, 3 - map-based anthropogenic change in climate including man's impact, 46 -
observed lake level variations before 1988 
4-34 
Figure 4.10. 
Plot of normalised annual average rainfall (solid line) and 3-year moving average (dashed 
line) for the town of Saint Louis, Senegal (upper, 1932-1982) and Oran es Senia, Algeria 
(lower, 1927-1987) 
4-35 
Figure 4.11. Drainage area of the South Platte River basin (US Army Corps of Engineers, 1977) 
N 
• e 
UTAH 
ARIZONA 
WYOMING 
NEBRASKA 
South Platte River Basin 
North Platte 
Study Area 
COLORADO 
0 
40 
80 
120 
20 
60 
100 
140 
Approximate scale in miles 
NEW MEXICO 
4-36 
Figure 4.12. GCM-estimated average seasonal and annual changes in temperature (upper) and 
precipitation (lower) for the grid cells encompassing the Great Plains (2 x C 0 2 minus 
1 x CQ 2) (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
4-37 
Figure 4.13. The drainage area of the Murray-Darling basin in southeastern Australia (Stewart, 1989) 
4-38 
Figure 4.14. 
The Central Valley (shaded) and Central Valley Basin of California. 
Symbols refer to 
locations of the GISS, GFDL and OSU G C M gridpoints (Smith and Tirpak, 1989) 
124° 
120° 
I 
L 
116° 
4-39 
References 
Arnell, N. and Reynard, N. 1989, 'Estimating the impacts 
of climatic change on river flows: some examples from 
Britain'. Proc, Conference on Climate and We r. 
Helsinki, pp. 426-436. 
Aston, A.R. 1987, 'The effect of doubling atmospheric 
C 0 2 on stream flow: a simulation'. /. ofHydr. no. 67, 
pp. 273-280. 
Ayers, M . , Wolock, D., McCabe, G., and Hay, L. 1990, 
'Simulated hydrologie effects of climatic change in the 
Delaware River Basin'. Proc, Symposium on Inter-
national and Transboundary Water Resources Issues. 
American Water Resources Assoc. 
Toronto, pp. 
587-594. 
Ayers, M. and Leavesley, G. 1988, 'Assessment of the 
potential effects of climate change on water resources of 
the Delaware River basin'. 
US Geological Survey 
Open-File Rept. 88-478. 66pp. 
Beran, M.A. 1986, 'The water resources impact of future 
climate change and variability'. In: Effects of Changes in 
Stratospheric Ozone and Global Climate, J. Titus (ed.). 
USEPA. Washington, pp. 299-330. 
Beran, M.A. 1988. 'Hydrological impacts - what if we are 
right?'. In: Climate and Geo-Sciences, Berger et al. 
(eds). Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 661-665. 
Beran, M. and Arnell, N. 1989, Effect of Climatic Change 
on Quantitative Aspects of United Kingdom Water 
Resources. Institute of Hydrology. Wallingford, 93pp. 
Budyko, M.I. 
1988, 'The late 20th century climate'. 
Meteorologiya i Gidrologiya, no. 10, pp. 5-24. 
Budyko, M.I. andlzrael, Y.A. (eds) 1987, Anthropogenic 
Climatic Changes. Gidrometeoizdat, 406pp. 
(Eng. 
translat.: The University of Arizona Press, 1990). 
Budyko, M.I. et al. 
1978, 'The expected climatic 
changes'. Ser. Geogr. no. 6, pp. 5-20. 
Bultot, F., Coppens, A., Dupriez, A., Gellens, D. and 
Meulenberghs, F. 1988, 'Repercussions of a C 0 2 
doubling on the water cycle and on the water balance. A 
case study for Belgium'. /. Hydrology 99, pp. 319-347. 
Bultot, F. and Gellens, D. 1989, 'Simulation of the impact 
of C 0 2 atmospheric doubling on precipitation and 
évapotranspiration - study of the sensitivity to various 
hypotheses'. Proc, Conference on Climate and Water, 
Helsinki, pp. 73-92. 
Close, A.F. 1988, 'Potential impact of the greenhouse 
effect on the water resources of the River Murray'. In: 
Greenhouse, Planning for Climatic Change, G. Pearman 
(éd.). CSIRO, Australia, pp. 312-323. 
Cohen, S.I. 1986, 'Impacts of C02-induced climatic change 
on water resources in the Great Lakes basin'. Climatic 
Change 8, pp. 135-153. 
Cohen, S.I. 1988. In: 
Societal Response to Regional 
Climatic Change - Forecasting by Analogy, M. Glantz 
(ed.). Westview Press, 428pp. 
Cohen, S., Welsh, L., and Louie, P. 1989, Possible 
impacts of climatic warming scenarios on water resources 
in the Saskatchewan River sub-basin, Canadian Climate 
Centre Rept. No. 89-9, 39pp. 
Croley, T.E. In press, 'Laurentian Great Lakes double-C02 
climate change impact'. Climatic Change. 
da Cunha, L. 1989, 'Water resources situation and 
management in the E E C . Hydrogeology 2, pp. 57-69. 
Delaware River Basin Commission 1986, 
'Annual 
Report'. West Trenton. 
Demarée, G. and Chadilly, M. 1988, 'The Sahelian 
drought(s) as seen from the rainfall data of a Mauritanian 
station'. In: Computer Methods and Water Resources, D. 
Ouazar et al. (eds). Springer-Verlag, pp. 15-23. 
Demarée, G. and Nicolis, C. 1990, 'Onset of Sahelian 
drought viewed as a fluctuation-induced transition'. 
Q.J.R. Meteorol. Soc. 116, pp. 221-238. 
Erpicum, M . , Binard, M . , Peters, J., and Alexandre, J. 
1989, 'Une méthode d'analyse des pluies en région 
Sahélienne'. In: Actes des Journées en Climatologie, M. 
Erpicum (éd.). Liège, pp. 43-56. 
Fiering, M.B. 1982, 'A screening model to quantify 
resilience'. Water Resources Research, 18, pp. 27-32. 
Fiering, M. and Rogers, P. 1989, Climate Change and 
Water Resources Planning Under Uncertainty. US Army 
Institute for Water Resources. Ft. Belvoir, 105pp. 
Flaschka, J.M. 1984, Climatic Change and Water Supply 
in the Great Basin. 
Masters Thesis, Department of 
Hydrology and Water Resources, University of Arizona. 
Flaschka, J., Stockton, C, and Boggess, W. 1987, 
'Climatic variation and surface water resources in the 
Great Basin region'. Water Resources Bulletin, 23, pp. 
47-57. 
Glantz, M.H. (ed.) 1988, Societal Response to Regional 
Climatic Change: Forecasting by Analogy. Westview 
Press. Boulder, 428pp. 
Glantz, M. and Wigley, T. 1987, 'Climatic variations and 
their effects on water resources'. In: Resources and 
World Development, D. McLaren and B. Skinner (eds). 
Wiley. Chichester, pp. 625-641. 
Gleick, P.H. 1986, 'Methods for evaluating the regional 
hydrologie impacts of global climatic changes'. 
J. 
Hydrology 88, pp. 99-116. 
Gleick, P.H. 1987, 'The development and testing of a 
water balance model for climate impacts assessment'. 
Water Resources Research 23, pp. 1049-1061. 
Gleick, P.H. 1988, 'Climatic change and California: past, 
present and future vulnerabilities'. In: Societal Response 
to Regional Climatic Change - Forecasting by Analogy, 
M. Glantz (ed.). Westview Press, pp. 307-327. 
Gleick, P.H. 1989, 'Climate change, hydrology, and water 
resources'. Reviews of Geophysics 27', pp. 329-344. 
Gross, R., Eeles, C, and Gustard, A. 1989, 'Application 
of a lumped conceptual model to FREND catchments'. 
In: PRENDS in Hydrology. 
IAHS Publ. 187, pp. 
309-320. 
Grove, A.T. 1973, 'A note on the remarkably low rainfall 
of the Sudan zone in 1913'. Savanna 2, pp. 133-138. 
Griffiths, G.A. 1989, 'Water Resources'. Chapter XX, 
New Zealand Report on Impacts of Climate Change. 
North Canterbury Catchment Board and Regional Water 
Board. New Zealand, 21pp. 
4-40 
Hashimoto, T., Stedinger, J., and Loucks, D. 1982, 
'Reliability, resiliency, and vulnerability criteria for water 
resource system performance evaluation'. 
Water 
Resources Research 18, pp. 14-20. 
Idso, S. and Brazel, A. 1984, 'Rising atmospheric carbon 
dioxide concentrations may increase streamflow'. Nature 
312, pp. 51-53. 
Institute of Hydrology, 1988, Effects of Climatic Change 
on Water Resources for Irrigation. An Example for 
Lesotho. Report prepared for FAO. Wallingford. 
International Joint Commission, 1985, Great Lakes 
Diversions and Consumptive Uses. 
Report to the 
governments of the 
United 
States 
and 
Canada, 
Washington and Ottawa. 
Karl, T. and Riebsame, W. 1989, 'The impact of decadal 
fluctuations in mean precipitation and temperature on 
runoff: 
a sensitivity study over the United States'. 
Climatic Change (In press). 
Klemes, V. 1985, Sensitivity of Water Resource Systems to 
Climate Variations. 
Publ. No. 98, World Climate 
Programme. Geneva. 
Kuchment, L., Motovilov, Y., and Startsava, L. 1989, 
'Sensitivity of evapotranspiration and soil moisture to 
possible climatic changes'. Proc, Conference on Climate 
and Water. Helsinki. 
Langbein, W.B. et al. 1949, 'Annual runoff in the United 
States'. US Geological Survey Circular 5. Washington, 
DC. 
Liu, C. 1989, The Study of Climate Change and Water 
Resources in North China. 
Ministry 
of Water 
Resources. 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R. 1986, 'Reduction in 
summer soil wetness induced by an increase in 
atmospheric carbon dioxide'. Science 232, pp. 626-629. 
Marta, T. 
1989, 'Water planning and management 
implications and responses to climatic change: 
a 
sustainable resource challenge'. Annual Canadian Water 
Resources Conf. Halifax, 18pp. 
Mather, J. and Feddema, J. 
1986, 'Hydrologic 
consequences of increase in trace gases and C 0 2 in the 
atmosphere'. In: Effects of Changes in Stratospheric 
Ozone and Global Climate, J. Titus (ed.). USEPA. 
Washington, pp. 251-271 
Matsuo, T. et al. 1989, Report on the Analysis of the 
Effects of Climate Change and their Countermeasures in 
the Field of Civil and Environmental Engineering. 
Unpublished manuscript prepared for the Japanese 
Environment Agency. 
McCabe, G. and Ayers, M. 1989, 'Hydrologic effects of 
climate change in the Delaware River basin'. 
Water 
Resources Bulletin 25, pp. 1231-1242. 
Mitchell, J. and Warrilow, D. 1987, 'Summer dryness in 
northern mid-latitudes due to increased C0 2'. Nature 
330, pp. 238-240. 
Moore, B. and Bohn, B. 1987, 'C0 2 and global climate 
change'. Oceanus 29. 
Nemec, J. and Schaake, J. 1982, 'Sensitivity of water 
resource systems to climate variation'. 
Hydrological 
Sciences 27, pp. 327-343. 
Nemec, J. 1989, 'Impact of climate variability and change 
on water resources management in agriculture'. Proc, 
Conference on Climate and Water. 
Helsinki, pp. 
357-371. 
Nicholson, S.E. 1978, 'Climatic v»m.'t'.,'it in the SaheJ a.v: 
other African regions during the p*.tt frve oewtone*' 
/ 
Arid Environments 1, pp. 3-24. 
Nicholson, S.E. 
1989, 'Long learn dwi&t* m A(n.',i,
r. 
rainfall'. Weather 44, pp. 46-56, 
Nobre, C, Schukla, J., and Seller», P 1989, "Ctotiut 
impacts 
of Amazonian development* 
Association of Water Resources, Bui loir., 3>9 
Novaky, B. 1985, 'Water resource*'. In; Climate tmpw.; 
Assessment, R. Kates (ed.). Chicherter. pp IZ7-2H 
Ojo, O. 
1987, 'Rainfall trends in We*! Atnut 
1901-1985'. In: The Influence of Climate Chanyt orœ 
Climatic Variability on the Hydrologic Regime and Watr 
Resources, S. Solomon et al. (eds). IAHS Pufal;ci.:.o.-
No. 168, pp. 37-43. 
Osborn, C, Schefter, J., and Shabman, L. 1986, Tht 
accuracy of water use forecasts'. 
Water Resource? 
Bulletin 22, pp. 101-109. 
Palutikof, J. 1987, 'Some possible impacts of greenhouse 
gas induced climatic change on water resources in 
England and Wales'. 
In: The Influence of Climate 
Change and Climatic Variability on the Hydrologic 
Regime and Water Resources, S. Solomon et al. (edjj 
IAHS Publication No. 168, pp. 585-596. 
Peterson, D. and Keller, A. 1990, 'Irrigation'. In: Climate 
Change and U.S. Water Resources, P. Waggoner fed i 
John Wiley, New York, pp. 269-306. 
Pittock, A.B. 1988, 'Actual and anticipated changes Lr. 
Australia's climate'. 
In: 
Greenhouse, Planning fcr 
Climatic Change, G. Pearman (éd.). CSIRO, Amtnlui 
pp. 35-51. 
Price, C, Wolock, D., and Ayers, M. 1989, 'Ettracao- :: 
terrain features from digital elevation modeii" 
F+:c 
National Conf. on Hydraulic Engineering. AS CE tç 
845-850. 
Revelle, R. and Waggoner, P. 1983, 'Effects s: J. sim:rc 
dioxide-induced climatic change on water $_TÇ'.J::< H "JC 
western United States'. Changing CtcmjZi. NiûcmL. 
Academy of Sciences, National 
ACAJCSTJ 
PTÏS.I 
Washington, pp. 419-432. 
Ripley, E.A. 1987, 'Climatic change arc in r/'Mr-jrpca. 
regime'. In: Canadian Aquatic Ressxrctj. M H s l V ' 
and R. Wallace (eds). Canadian B'-lkcr. c: F-S-rcrjis ire 
Aquatic Sciences 215 Dept of F"iir..;r..w ire Cosirj 
pp. 137-178. 
Saelthun, N., Bogen. J . Hartmann FIccc. M . Li_3Li.-_-
T., Roald, L., Tvede. A . and Wc'si. B 
1*^0. C s t i V 
Change and Water Rescur.-es 
NYE Pt_el Y30. 
Norwegian Water Resources and Energy Acrnnatrsuion 
Salinger, M . and Hicks. D. 
I9S9. Refund Climate 
Change Scenarios. 
New Zealand Ministry for the 
Environment. 
Sanderson, M. 19S9. In: Great Lakes Water Le\els. 
Shoreline Dilemmas. National Research Council, Ottawa. 
Sanderson, M. and Wong. L. 1987. "Climatic change and 
Great Lakes water levels*. In: The Influence of Climate 
Change and Climatic Variabdiry on the Hydrologic 
Regime and Water Resources, S. Solomon et al. (eds). 
IAHS Publication No. 168, pp. 477-487. 
Schaake, J.C. 1990, 'From climate to flow'. In: Climate 
Change and U.S. Water Resources, P. Waggoner (ed.). 
John Wiley, New York, pp. 177-206. 
4-41 
Schlesinger, M. and Mitchell, J. 1987, 'Climate model 
simulations of the equilibrium climatic response to 
increased carbon dioxide'. Reviews of Geophysics 25, 
pp. 760-798. 
Schnell, C. 1984, 'Socio-economic impacts of climate 
change due to a doubling of atmospheric C0 2 content'. 
In: Current Issues in Climate Research, A. Ghazi and R. 
Fantechi (eds). Reidel. Dordrecht, pp. 270-287. 
Schwarz, H.E. 1977, 'Climatic change and water supply: 
how sensitive is the Northeast?'. In: Climate, Climatic 
Change and Water Supply. 
National Academy of 
Sciences, Washington, DC. 
Sellers, P., Mintz, Y., and Sud, Y. 1986, 'A simple 
biosphere model (SIB) for use within general circulation 
models'. J. Atmospheric Sciences 43, pp. 505-531. 
Shiklomanov, I.A. 1988, Studying Water Resources of 
Land: Results, Problems, Outlook. Gidrometeoizdat, 
Leningrad. 
Shiklomanov, I.A. 
1989a, 'Anthropogenic change of 
climate, 
water 
resources 
and 
water 
management 
problems'. Proc, Conference on Climate and Water. 
Helsinki. 
Shiklomanov, I. A. 1989b, Man's Impact on River Runoff. 
Gidrometeoizdat, Leningrad, 330pp. 
Shiklomanov, I. and Markova, D. 1986, The Problems of 
Water Supply and River Runoff Transfer in the World. 
Gidrometeoizdat, Leningrad. 
Singh, B. 
1987, 'The impacts of C02-induced climate 
change on hydro-electric generation potential in the James 
Bay Territory of Quebec'. In: The Influence of Climate 
Change and Climatic Variability on the Hydrologie 
Regime and Water Resources, S. Solomon et al. (eds). 
IAHS Publication No. 168, pp. 403-418. 
Sircoulon, J.H. 1976, 'Les données hydropluvio-métriques 
de la sécheresse récente en Afrique intertropicale. 
Comparaison avec les sécheresses "1913 et 1940".' cah. 
Orstom, set. Hydrol., 13, pp. 75-174. 
Sircoulon, J.H. 
1987, 'Variation des débits des cours 
d'eau et des niveaux des lacs en Afrique de l'ouest depuis 
le début 20 ème siècle'. In: The Influence of Climate 
Change and Climatic Variability on the Hydrologie 
Regime and Water Resources, S. Solomon et al. (eds). 
IAHS Publication No. 168, pp. 13-25. 
Smith, J. and Tirpak, D. (eds). 1989, The Potential Effects 
of Global Climate Change on the United States. US 
Environmental Protection Agency. Washington, DC, 
413pp. 
Stakhiv, E. and Hanchey, J. 1989, 'Policy implications of 
climate change on the Great Lakes'. Panel discussion 
paper, First United States-Canada Symp. on the Impacts 
of Climate Change on the Great Lakes Basin, Chicago. 
Stakhiv, E. and Lins, H. 1989, 'Impacts of climate change 
on U.S. water resources (with reference to the Great 
Lakes basin, USA)'. Presentation to IPCC Work Group 
III Workshop. Geneva, 15pp. 
Sternberg, H.O. 
1987, 'Aggravation of floods in the 
Amazon River as a consequence of deforestation'. 
Geografiska Annaler 69 A. 
Stewart, B.J. 1989. Potential Impact of Climatic Change 
on the Water Resources of the Murray-Darling Basin. 
Unpublished manuscript, 12pp. 
Stockton, C, Meko, D., and Boggess, W. 
1979, 
Geohydrological Implications of Climate Change on 
Water Resources Development. USACE Institute for 
Water Resources, Ft. Belvoir. 
Ture, L. 1954, 'Calcul du bilan de l'eau evaluation en 
fonction des precipitations et des temperatures'. IAHS 
Rome Symposium. IAHS Publ. 38, pp. 188-202. 
US Army Corps of Engineers, 1977, Water and Related 
Land Resources Management Study - Metropolitan Denver 
and South Platte River and Tributaries, Vol. 5, 
Supporting Technical Reports and Appendices, Dept. of 
the Army. 
US Army Corps of Engineers, 1980, Water and Related 
Land Resources Management Study - Metropolitan Denver 
and South Platte River and Tributaries, Vol. 1, Summary 
Report, Dept. of the Army. 
US Environmental Protection Agency, 1984, Potential 
Climatic Impacts of Increasing Atmospheric CO¡ with 
Emphasis on Water Availability and Hydrology in the 
United States. Office of Policy Analysis. Washington, 
DC. 
US Geological Survey, 1990, 'National Water Summary 
1987 - Hydrologic Events and Water Supply and Use'. 
US Geological Survey Water-Supply Paper 2350. 
Washington, DC, 553pp. 
Verhoog, F.H. 1987, 'Impact of climate change on the 
morphology of river basins'. 
In: 
The Influence of 
Climate Change and Climatic Variability on the 
Hydrologic Regime and Water Resources, S. Solomon et 
al. (eds). IAHS Publication No. 168, pp. 315-327. 
Vinnikov, K., Lemeshko, N . , and Speranskaya, N. 1989, 
'Soil moisture and runoff in the extratropical part of the 
northern hemisphere'. Meteorology and Hydrology, 14. 
Waggoner, P.E. (ed). 1990. Climate Change and U.S. 
Water Resources. John Wiley, New York, 496pp. 
Wigley, T. and Jones, P. 1985, 'Influence of precipitation 
changes and direct C 0 2 effects on streamflow'. Nature 
314, pp. 149-152. 
Wolock, D., Ayers, M . , Hay, L., and McCabe. 1989, 
'Effects of climate change on watershed runoff. Proc. 
National Conf. on Hydraulic Engineering. ASCE, pp. 
673-678. 
WMO, 1987, Water Resources and Climatic Change: 
Sensitivity of Water-Resources Systems to Climate Change 
and Variability. Proc. Norwich meeting. WCAP-4. 
Geneva, 50pp. 
Yamada, T. 1989, Tasks for River Administration in 
Relation to the Global Environment Issues. 
Japan 
Ministry of Construction (River Bureau). Unpublished 
manuscript, 34pp. 
Zillman, J.W. 1989, 'Climate variability and change -
their implications for the Murray-Darling basin'. 12th 
Invitation Symp., Murray-Darling Basin: A Resource to 
be Managed. 
Australian Academy of Technological 
Sciences and Engineering, Albury. 
4-42 
Chapter 5 
Human settlement; 
the energy, transport and industrial sectors; 
human health; air quality; and changes in 
ultraviolet-B radiation 
Co-chairmen: 
M. Hashimoto, M. Styrikovich and S. Nishioka 
Lead authors: 
C. Rouviere; T. Williams; R. Ball; Y. Shinyak; J. Topping; 
S. Nishioka; M. Ando; T. Okita 
Contributors: 
P. Cheng; 
J. Connell; 
P. Roy; 
S. Safiullah; 
R<B. Street; 
H.L. Tebicke;P. Donat-Hader;K. Gertis;G. Jendritzky;E.G. Jung; 
F. Steimle; E. Tekulve; G. Waschke; A. Sugandhy; M. Iriki; 
S. Nishinomiya; N. Washida; R. Odingo; J.C van der Leun; 
D.S. Wratt;W.H. Weihe; L.D. Grant; D. Guinnup; J.D. Longstreth; 
M. Oppenheimer; 
A. Teramura; 
M.P. Walsh; 
I. Nazarov; 
N.F. Vladimirova; A.F. Yakovlev; P.J. Waight; R. Ye 
 
Contents 
1 
Overview 
5-1 
1.1 
Introduction 
5-1 
1.2 
Direct impacts of global climate change on human activity 
5-1 
1.3 
Observed changes in global, regional and local climate 
5-2 
1.3.1 
Potential intensification of the urban heat-island effect 
5-3 
1.3.2 
The growth of desertification following land degradation 
5-3 
1.3.3 
Regional climatic implications of deforestation 
5-3 
1.3.4 
Trends in stratospheric ozone depletion 
5-4 
1.3.5 
Significance of rates of change 
5-4 
1.4 
Potential impacts of human response: strategies to limit emissions of 
greenhouse gases 
5-4 
2 
Summary of likely impacts of climatic change on human settlement 
5-5 
2.1 
Scope and limitations of the assessment 
5-6 
2.2 
Assessment of impacts 
5-6 
2.2.1 
An overview of potential vulnerability of human settlement to 
rapid climate change 
5-6 
2.2.1.1 
Vulnerability of human settlement to sea-level rise . . 
5-6 
2.2.1.2 
Vulnerability of human settlement to tropical cyc-
lones 
5-7 
2.2.1.3 
Vulnerability of human settlement to flood 
5-7 
2.2.1.4 
Vulnerability of human settlement to drought or 
water shortages 
5-7 
2.2.1.5 
Vulnerability of human settlement in some countries 
to loss of biomass 
5-8 
2.2.1.6 
Vulnerability of human settlement to rapid thawing of 
the permafrost 
5-8 
2.2.1.7 
Vulnerability of human settlement to health problems 
associated with climate change 
5-8 
2.2.2 
Implications of climate change for economic activity 
5-8 
(i) Modification of supplies and consumption patterns 
5-8 
(ii) Changes in the physical and social environment 
5-9 
2.2.3 
Migration and resettlement 
5-9 
2.3 
Determination of sensitivities 
5-10 
2.3.1 
Factors enhancing sensitivity to the impacts 
5-10 
2.3.2 
Spatial and social differentiation 
5-11 
2.4 
Tasks for the near future 
5-11 
3 
Summary of likely impacts of climate change on the energy sector 
5-11 
3.1 
Scope and limitations of the assessment 
5-11 
3.1.1 
Definitions 
5-11 
3.1.2 
Geographic and substantive scope 
5-11 
3.1.3 
The relationships of expected impacts 
5-12 
3.2 
Assessment of impacts 
5-12 
3.2.1 
Industrial country energy demand 
5-12 
3.2.2 
Developing countries' electricity demand 
5-13 
3.2.3 
Implications for demand by particular utilities 
5-14 
3.2.4 
Implications for availability of hydroelectric power 
5-14 
3.2.5 
Other potential impacts 
5-15 
3.3 
Determination of sensitivities 
5-16 
3.4 
Tasks for the near future 
5-16 
4 
Summary of likely impacts of climate change on transport 
5-17 
4.1 
Scope and limitations of the assessment 
5-17 
4.1.1 
Direct impacts of climate change 
5-17 
4.1.2 
Indirect impacts of climate change 
5-17 
5-ii 
7.4 
Tasks for the near future 
5-32 
8 
Summary of likely impacts of increased U V - B radiation 
5-33 
8.1 
Scope and limitations of the assessment 
5-33 
8.2 
Assessment of impacts 
5-33 
8.3 
Determination of sensitivities 
5-34 
8.4 
Study tasks for the near future 
5-34 
8.4.1 
U V - B radiation 
5-34 
8.4.2 
Terrestrial plants 
5-34 
8.4.3 
Aquatic ecosystems 
5-34 
8.4.4 
Tropospheric air quality 
5-35 
8.4.5 
Materials damage 
5-35 
Tables 
Table 5.1 
Sectoral shares of electricity consumption, 1970-1986 
5-13 
Table 5.2 
Shares of public electricity generation in 1986 by power source . . 
5-15 
Table 5.3 
Average number of events per annum in which major climatic 
variables affect UK transport system 
5-18 
Table 5.4 
Estimated economic impacts of lowerings of the levels of Lake 
Michigan over a 50-year period (1990-2040) 
5-19 
Table 5.5 
Estimated total 1989 damages by storm type 
5-26 
Table 5.6 
Estimated change in the annual damage-producing potential of 
wind and hail 
5-26 
Figures 
Figure 5.1 
Examples of possible energy impacts of climate changes 
5-36 
Figure 5.2 
Impacts of climate change on health 
5-37 
Figure 5.3 
Effects of climate change on air quality 
5-38 
Figure 5.4 
Scope of the assessment on U V - B radiation and secondary effects 
on human health and the environment 
5-39 
References 
5-40 
5-iv 
 
Human settlement; the energy, transport 
and industrial sectors; human health; 
air quality, and changes in 
ultraviolet-B radiation 
1 
Overview 
1.1 
Introduction 
This chapter covers a wide range of potential im-
pacts of climate change. It addresses the implica-
tions of global warming, sea-level rise, changed 
precipitation and evaporation and stratospheric 
ozone depletion for human settlement, which in-
cludes housing and infrastructure, and for the 
energy, transport and industrial sectors. 
It also 
covers the likely impacts of global warming and 
stratospheric ozone depletion on human health and 
air quality, and the 
potential overall impact on 
human health and natural systems of increased levels 
of ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation reaching the 
earth's surface as a result of depletion of the strato-
spheric ozone layer. 
Evaluating scientific predictions of global climate 
change is the responsibility of Working Group I. At 
present there are substantial scientific uncertainties 
about the nature and magnitude of climatic changes 
that might result from an effective doubling of C 0 2 
concentrations in the atmosphere. However, it is 
necessary to make some assumptions about changes 
in climate in order to assess potential impacts which 
are due to these changes. 
The general types of 
changes that serve as a basis for the impacts assess-
ments are described below. They are not intended to 
be definitive. The assessments in each section of 
this report summarise studies in the literature that 
are based on varying assumptions about 
climate 
change; those assumptions are generally described 
for each study cited. Many impact assessments are 
based on projections of a particular General Circu-
lation Model ( G C M ) for long-term equilibrium 
conditions due to an equivalent C 0 2 doubling in 
radiative forcing, while others assume a particular 
change in temperature, precipitation, or other 
variables. Owing to the large heat capacity of the 
oceans, full realisation of equilibrium temperature 
increase associated with a radiative forcing is expect-
ed to be delayed a number of years. 
A consensus exists among the world's leading 
scientists that a continuation of the current rate of 
increase in concentrations of greenhouse gases 
(GHG) in the atmosphere will cause a significant 
increase in global average annual temperatures. An 
increase in G H G concentrations equivalent in 
infrared absorbing effect to a doubling of pre-
industrial levels of C 0 2 is projected to occur be-
tween 2025 and 2050. This increase in concentra-
tions of G H G could be expected at equilibrium, 
according to projections of Working Group I, to 
produce a rise in average annual global temperature 
of 2°-4°C. Although most climate impact scenarios 
have used effective C 0 2 doubling, should current 
emissions growth continue G H G concentrations 
would be expected to rise past an effective C 0 2 
doubling. 
1.2 Direct impacts of global climate 
change on human activity 
Model simulation and palaeoclimatic evidence 
suggest that when climate warms, it warms more in 
higher latitudes than in lower latitudes and more in 
winter than in summer (Golitsyn, 1989; Schneider, 
1989). A warmer atmosphere contains more water 
vapour and increases the intensity of the whole 
hydrological cycle, but precipitation patterns are 
likely to change homogenously in time and space 
(Golitsyn, 1989). Some scientists believe that in a 
warmer climate the earth can be expected to experi-
ence more variable weather than now, with a likeli-
hood of more 
floods and drought, more intense 
hurricanes 
or typhoons, 
and more heatwaves 
(Golitsyn, 1989; Hansen et al., 1989). 
The expected rise in global temperatures will affect 
human health, comfort, life styles, food production, 
economic activity, and residential and migration 
patterns. As global temperature rises, atmospheric 
circulation patterns are likely to change with alter-
ations in the frequency and seasonality of precipita-
tion and an overall increase in the rate of evapora-
tion and precipitation. Coupled with the associated 
general rise in temperature, such changes in the 
water cycle will affect water availability, agricultural 
activity, flood protection practices, infrastructure 
planning and natural habitats. If the intensity of the 
hydrologic cycle increases, some scientists believe 
5-1 
that humanity and natural systems may experience 
much more severe weather-related events such as 
droughts, floods and extremely severe tropical 
cyclones. 
One estimate is that an effective C 0 2 
doubling may increase the intensity of tropical 
cyclones or hurricanes as much as 40% (Emanuel, 
1987). 
Along with this potential increase in the 
intensity of such storms, humanity can expect an 
expansion of the area vulnerable to tropical cyclones, 
with the areas of potential damage expanding 
northward in the Northern Hemisphere and south-
ward in the Southern Hemisphere, perhaps exposing 
such populated areas as the eastern coasts of 
Australia (Henderson-Sellers and Blong, 1989). 
These projections of greater problems from tropical 
cyclones are based largely on calculations of effects 
of increased surface temperature. Although the area 
of sea having temperatures over this critical value 
will increase as the globe warms, the critical tem-
perature itself may increase in a warmer world 
(Working Group I Report). Further studies may 
provide a much more definitive picture of likely 
impacts of global warming on tropical cyclone 
activity. 
Together with the anticipated disruption in atmos-
pheric circulation and storm patterns, humanity is 
expected to face a significant rise in global mean 
sea-level. 
Global warming will cause a thermal 
expansion of the upper layers of the ocean and this 
expansion, together with the expected melting and 
movement into the ocean of some land-based 
glaciers, is expected to accelerate the current sea-
level rise trend. A rise of 9-29 cm is expected over 
the next 40 years, or 28-98 cm by 2090 (Working 
Group I Report - Summary). A rise of only 25 cm 
or more in relative sea-level would displace many 
residents of the delta regions of the Nile, the Ganges 
and the Yangtze from their homes and livelihoods 
and could render uninhabitable island nations such 
as the Maldives in the Indian Ocean, and Kiribati, 
Tuvalu and the Marshall Islands in the Pacific 
(Tickell, 1989). This projected sea-level rise will 
cause widespread coastal erosion, especially on 
gradually sloping coasts such as those in the Atlantic 
or Gulf Coasts of the US (Titus, 1988), or the West 
Coast of Africa (Murday, 1989). 
One scientist has projected that a rise of 1 m in sea-
level could seriously affect nearly a hundred million 
people along the coasts of China, particularly in the 
Pearl River deltaic plain containing the city of 
Guangxhou, the eastern half of the Yangtze River 
plain, in which Shanghai is situated, the eastern half 
of the North China coastal plain containing Tainjin, 
and the southern half of the Lower Liao River plain 
where the city of Yingkou is located (Han, 1989). 
Besides sea-level rise, perhaps attributable to green-
house effect-induced global warming, tectonic factors 
and groundwater withdrawal have contributed to 
rapid rises in recent years in the sea-level along 
many parts of China's coasts. Although sea-level 
along the Chinese coast has generally risen 11.5 cm 
in the past 100 years, relative sea-level rise has been 
much faster in some low-lying coastal plains. Sea-
level rose 0.75 m from 1954-1978 in the Pearl River 
deltaic plain and 1.3 m in the North China coastal 
plain around Tianjin; in recent years land settlement 
caused merely by groundwater withdrawal has 
exceeded 2 m in the downtown areas of Tianjin and 
Shanghai (Han, 1989). 
In the absence of concerted human efforts to build 
coastal defences, a sea-level rise of 1 m could 
inundate the port area of 1900 km
2 and cause 
damage to nine million Japanese (Ministry of 
Transport of Japan, 1989). With industry in sub-
Saharan Africa concentrated heavily in seaports, 
many of which are capitals (Tebicke, personal 
communication, 1989), even a modest sea-level rise 
could pose a major threat to the economy and 
political 
infrastructure of Africa. 
Chapter 6 
discusses these potential impacts of sea-level rise in 
more detail. 
1.3 Observed changes in global, regional 
and local climate 
According to a study released early in 1989, 1988 
was the warmest year of the past century in average 
global temperature (British Meteorological Office 
and University of East Anglia, 1989). The same 
researchers reported that 1989 was the fifth warmest 
year in the 134 years for which they have compiled 
global temperature records and that six of the ten 
warmest years on record were in the 1980s (Kerr, 
1990). 
Although climatologists disagree on whether the 
observed increase over the past century of about 
0.6 °C in average annual global surface temperature 
is a clear 'signal' of greenhouse warming, or still 
within the natural variability of climate, there seems 
little dispute among climatologists that humanity has 
already significantly reshaped the earth's climate 
through such factors as the urban heat-island effect, 
intensification of desertification through land degra-
dation, deforestation and stratospheric ozone deple-
tion. These factors, some of which have arisen quite 
independently of the build-up in global concen-
trations of G H G , are likely to produce significant 
effects on humanity, often magnifying the disruption 
caused by a rapid greenhouse-induced global warm-
ing. 
5-2 
1.3.1 Potential intensification of the urban 
heat-island effect 
Removal of vegetation, construction of buildings, 
roads, pavement and other human transformations 
of the natural environment, together with direct heat 
generation from human activity, are known to cause 
the temperatures of urban areas to rise above those 
of surrounding rural areas. In the US this urban 
heat-island effect was estimated at an average of just 
over 1.1°C for a sample of 30 US cities and about 
2.9°C for New York City (Viterito, 1989). 
In 
Moscow, USSR, the heat-island effect is projected to 
add about 3°-3.5°C to average annual temperatures 
(Izrael, 1989). 
The urban heat-island effect in Shanghai, China, is 
quite pronounced, with a potential intensity as high 
as 6.5 °C on a calm, clear December night in 1979, 
but no heat-island effect observed on days with 
strong wind and heavy rain (Zhou, 1989). 
The 
urban heat-island effect has been reduced signifi-
cantly in one city by large-scale tree planting. In 
Nanking, China, the planting since 1949 of 34 million 
trees has been credited with a significant cooling of 
the cities' average temperature (De La Croix, 1990). 
Although the heat-island effect has tended to enter 
into global climate discussions largely in the context 
of whether some of the observed global temperature 
rise may be ascribed to the placement of some 
thermometers in urban areas, the heat-island effect 
has considerable independent significance for hu-
manity. The rapid urbanisation of many developing 
countries is transforming the landscape of many 
cities. The continuing explosive growth of such cities 
as Cairo (Egypt), Sao Paulo (Brazil), Mexico City 
(Mexico), Lagos (Nigeria), Delhi (India) and many 
other urban megalopolises is likely to effectuate a 
profound alteration in the local climate. It is quite 
possible that a considerable temperature amplifica-
tion in many such areas, attributable to the heat-
island effect alone, might be added to an already 
sizeable projected temperature increase from green-
house effect-induced global warming. Heat-stress 
impacts on health, human discomfort and aggrava-
tion of urban air-pollution problems, such as smog, 
are all possible consequences of an additive heat-
island and greenhouse warming. 
1.3.2 The growth of desertification follow-
ing land degradation 
Human actions such as overgrazing of agricultural 
lands, 
removal 
of 
tree 
cover 
and 
intensive 
agricultural practices have furthered soil erosion and 
have accelerated desertification which in the past 
was largely caused by natural climatic processes. 
Whether or not the current desertification is signifi-
cantly linked to a greenhouse-induced warming 
trend, it is causing enormous dislocations and great 
human suffering in Africa. Thousands of nomads in 
Mauritania have been driven into urban areas and 
refugee camps, creating great social turmoil (Dadda, 
1989). The dimensions of this problem were recent-
ly summarised by Lt Col Christine Debrah (Ret'd), 
Executive Chairman of the Environmental Protec-
tion Council of Ghana: 
As we are meeting here today, millions of 
Africans are suffering from hunger and malnu-
trition. Vast numbers of people are moving 
within and across national boundaries in search 
of food, thereby creating environmental refu-
gees. There is, of course, no accurate measure 
of the extent of the crisis. But the orders of 
magnitude are indicative: 150 million people 
threatened by starvation or malnutrition and 
an estimated 4 million refugees and returnees 
and an untold number of displaced persons. 
Thus, in Africa, dry weather conditions have 
been experienced, leading to brushfires and 
further degradation of the land. (Debrah, 
1989). 
Yet some climate models project that this trend in 
much of Africa is likely to be exacerbated as the 
world warms, with increased drought in such places 
as northwestern Africa (Druyan, 1989, Hansen et al., 
1989). 
1.3.3 Regional climatic implications of 
deforestation 
Wide-scale deforestation, besides its contribution to 
the greenhouse effect by converting trees to C 0 2 and 
reducing vegetation available to store C 0 2 , also 
profoundly alters local and regional climates. This 
alteration can take several forms. 
By removing vegetative cover, deforestation reduces 
the water retention capacity of the soil, increasing 
soil erosion and making lowland areas more vulnera-
ble to flooding. Extensive deforestation appears to 
have been a large factor in continental runoff. 
In addition, wide-scale deforestation appears to dry 
the climate of the surrounding region with studies 
suggesting such effects in parts of India, peninsular 
Malaysia, parts of the Philippines, Ivory Coast and 
the Panama Canal area and perhaps also in south-
western China, northwestern Costa Rica and 
northern Tanzania (Myers, 1988; Regie Newell, 
Salati, 1984-85). The local and regional climatic 
disruption, especially parching of agricultural lands, 
5-3 
may be of much greater climatic impact to many 
areas than the changes produced by greenhouse-
induced warming. Other human activities in addi-
tion to deforestation, eg drainage of wetlands, 
summer fallowing, bush clearing, and grazing of 
livestock, may also have regional climatic implica-
tions (Street, 1989). 
1.3.4 Trends in stratospheric ozone deple-
tion 
There has been a certain decline of stratospheric 
ozone over the middle latitudes of the Northern 
Hemisphere in the past 20 years. The decrease in 
total column ozone between latitudes 30 °N and 
64°N has been 3% to 5.5% in the winter/early 
spring months since the late 1960s. Observations in 
the equatorial zone and Southern 
Hemisphere 
(aside from Antarctica where there has been pro-
nounced ozone loss) are too sparse to be evaluated 
at this time (NASA, W M O Ozone Trends Panel, 
1988; U N E P , 1989a). 
Despite the certain ozone decrease, the information 
on the increase to date in biologically certain effects 
of U V - B radiation has been minimal. The major 
effects of the observed ozone reduction may occur in 
the winter months when, because of a low sun angle, 
U V - B radiation is normally low. Thus, the observed 
increases have been quantitatively quite small 
(WHO, 1989). Yet, even with full implementation 
of the Montreal Protocol to protect the ozone layer, 
it is projected that concentrations of chlorine in the 
stratosphere could roughly triple from their current 
levels of about 2.7 parts per billion (Hoffman and 
Gibbs, 1988). 
Furthermore, it is indicated that 
under certain conditions, significant ozone reduction 
may occur through heterogeneous reactions in such 
areas as the Antarctic. 
U V - B radiation in the biologically active spectrum is 
projected to increase by at maximum 20-25% by 
2050, but the projected depletion may vary by 
latitude (WHO, 1989). An increase of anywhere 
near this magnitude could have serious consequences 
for human health, forests, agriculture, the marine 
food chain and materials as indicated in Section 7 of 
this chapter. 
Increased U V - B radiation resulting from strato-
spheric ozone depletion will interact with global 
warming to affect such concerns as air pollution, 
human health, vegetation, fisheries and natural 
systems. 
In addition, it is likely that expected 
further reduction of stratospheric ozone could have 
some direct impact on the warming itself by altering 
the atmospheric chemistry within the troposphere. 
Although it would hardly be surprising that a signifi-
cant drop in stratospheric ozone could affect surface 
temperatures, it is not possible at this point even to 
be certain of the direction of this effect: whether it 
would magnify or reduce the projected rate of global 
warming. Increased U V - B radiation striking the 
surface of the ocean could, however, act to enhance 
the warming by reducing the biomass of CO^absorb-
ing marine phytoplankton. 
The one clearly understood interrelationship be-
tween global warming and stratospheric ozone 
depletion is the common role that man-made chloro-
fluorocarbons (CFC) and other ozone-depleting 
substances play in both processes. 
These com-
pounds may provide as much as 25% of the current 
forcing towards global warming (Hansen et al., 1989) 
and are the principal cause of stratospheric ozone 
depletion. 
1.3.5 Significance of rates of change 
Even in the absence of such potentially additive or 
multiplicative local, regional or global effects such as 
urbanisation, 
desertification, 
deforestation 
and 
stratospheric ozone depletion, the projected pace of 
global warming is unprecedented in human history. 
Schneider (1989) points out that a climate change 
increase of 2°-10°F (1.1°-5.5°C) over a century, as 
projected by some emissions scenarios and models, 
is some 10 to 50 times faster than the average 
natural rates of change following the earth's recovery 
from the last ice age. 
If the rate of change is sufficiently rapid, this change 
could overwhelm humanity's ability to adapt, trigger-
ing widespread refugee problems, famine and 
conflict over scarce resources. Moreover, capital 
equipment and facilities, such as buildings, industrial 
plants and civil works, each have design lifetimes 
after which replacement normally is expected. 
When the rate of climate change is sufficiently rapid 
and serious to necessitate abandonment or major 
modification before the end of the normal lifetimes 
of such investments, much greater economic costs 
may be incurred. 
1.4 Potential impacts of human response: 
strategies to limit emissions of green-
house gases 
Humanity's growing concern over the political, 
economic and ecological consequences of rapid and 
large-scale climate change may itself produce major 
impacts on the energy, transport and industrial 
sectors, and result in changes in building design, 
land use, agricultural practices, and even in air 
pollution control. 
5-4 
Some sectors that will experience little impact from 
the direct effects of greenhouse warming, such as 
increased mean temperatures, changed precipitation 
and evaporation patterns, higher sea-levels and 
different storm patterns, may nevertheless be very 
significantly affected by public policies or consumer 
actions designed to restrain emissions of G H G . A 
particularly noteworthy example is the automotive 
industry. 
A rise of 3°C or 4°C in mean global 
temperatures would require only little adaptation in 
engine design given the wide tolerances already 
engineered into cars; yet public concern about G H G 
emissions may lead to more stringent fuel economy 
standards, taxes on carbon-based fuels, consumer 
movement to smaller or more fuel-efficient vehicles, 
and public policies or consumer shifts favouring 
alternative fuels in place of gasoline, and shifts from 
private automobiles to mass transit. 
Concern over the growth of G H G emissions could 
lead to public policies increasing taxes on gasoline or 
other fossil fuels, or institution of a carbon tax, 
levying higher relative charges on such high carbon-
content fuels as coal compared with natural gas. 
Such policies could produce some shifting among 
fossil fuels, penalising coal producers while increas-
ing markets for gas producers. Regulatory and tax 
policies designed to limit emissions of G H G gases 
could create greater market opportunities for energy 
conservation technologies and non-carbon-based 
fuels such as solar, wind, geothermal, ocean thermal, 
hydrogen, fission and fusion. 
Governmental policies initiated in response to 
greenhouse effect concerns also may have impacts 
on the structure of energy investment. 
Response 
strategies to greenhouse effect concerns may cause 
some countries to choose more reliance on nuclear 
power and others to rely more on renewables, more 
energy-efficient fossil-fuel technologies, or shifts 
among types of fossil fuels. 
Non-climate-related 
environmental factors may also act as constraints on 
rapidly increased reliance on non-carbon energy 
systems such as hydroelectric power or nuclear 
power. 
Increased construction of hydroelectric 
projects may require considerable human resettle-
ment and flooding of important ecological resources. 
A serious constraint on increased reliance on 
nuclear power will be the satisfying of public con-
cerns regarding plant safety and adequacy of waste 
disposal. Analysis of response strategies and their 
implications have been undertaken within Working 
Group III. 
Concerns in the US in the mid 1970s over potential 
depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer led to a 
sharp drop in sales of C F C aerosols well before the 
US Environmental Protection Agency in March 1978 
prohibited the production and use of non-essential 
aerosols. Once consumers had been widely aroused 
by news reports of the C F C threat to the ozone 
layer, producers of non-CFC aerosols and alternative 
delivery systems such as pumps and hydrocarbon-
propelled sprays aggressively and successfully mar-
keted the environmental advantages of their pro-
ducts. 
(EPA, June 15, 1988 Regulatory Impact 
Analysis; Kavanaugh et al., 1986.) 
It appears too early to detect any pronounced shift 
in consumer choices in response to concerns about 
greenhouse emissions. 
Yet environmental and 
public groups are promoting product or fuel shifts 
partly out of concern over emissions of G H G . 
The 
renewable 
energy 
industry 
and 
energy 
conservation technology industries are likely benefi-
ciaries of the growing public concern about climate 
change. 
Consumer interest in environmentally 
benign technologies may stimulate their growth. 
Already some public interest groups are circulating 
catalogues indicating where consumers can purchase 
non-CFC refrigerators and a variety of energy saving 
products. 
International treaties, government regulatory poli-
cies, shifts in consumer preference for products, and 
changes in public and private sector investment 
patterns may all result from growing public concern 
over the threat to humanity posed by rapid global 
warming. 
These responses may produce major 
impacts on significant sectors of society, but aside 
from the studies under way within Working Group 
III there is little analysis allowing such potential 
effects to be quantified. Accordingly, other sections 
of this chapter will focus largely on such direct 
effects of climate change as changes in temperature, 
precipitation, wind, storm patterns, sea-level and 
U V - B radiation. A high priority of climate impacts 
research and analysis should be the assessment of 
the potential magnitude and direction of alternative 
response strategies to address climate change. 
2 Summary of likely impacts of 
climatic change on human 
settlement 
Among the most significant of all the potential 
impacts of climate change are the possible effects on 
human settlement, a broad term meant to encom-
pass (i) housing or shelter, (ii) the surrounding 
community, neighbourhood, village or relevant social 
unit in which individuals live, (iii) the supporting 
physical infrastructure (eg water and sanitation 
services and communications links) and (iv) social 
and cultural services (eg health services, education, 
5-5 
police protection, 
recreational services, 
parks, 
museums etc). Several areas, eg energy, transport, 
industry and human health, each of which is a 
central concern of human settlement, will be ad-
dressed 
separately in some detail in subsequent 
sections. 
2.1 Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
There are relatively few studies on the likely impact 
of climate change on communities, other than some 
studies of likely implications of sea-level rise. 
A principal difficulty in constructing studies of the 
likely impact of climate change on human habitat is 
the fact that many other factors largely independent 
of climate change, eg demographic trends, techno-
logical innovation, evolving cultural tastes, employ-
ment opportunities and transportation modes, may 
significantly shape where and how people will choose 
to live in the future. For purposes of constructing a 
model, it is convenient to hold all other factors equal 
while varying only climate. 
Yet as Timmerman 
(1989) points out, virtually the only thing we can be 
sure of is that all other things will not remain equal. 
One can reliably predict that certain developing 
societies will be more vulnerable to climate changes 
than highly industrialised countries because they are 
already at the limits of their capacity to cope with 
climatic events. Tropical cyclones such as Hurricane 
Gilbert that ravaged Jamaica in 1988, the floods that 
inundated large portions of Bangladesh in 1987 and 
1988, and the drought-induced famine that has 
plagued parts of Africa over the past decade are all 
manifestations of the extraordinary present vulnera-
bility of many developing countries to extreme 
climatic events. 
2.2 
Assessment of impacts 
2.2.1 An overview of potential vulnerability 
of human settlement to rapid climate 
change 
Although there are few analyses of such potential 
impacts, there is every reason to believe that if 
climate change were to occur at the high end of the 
projected ranges, the consequences could be serious 
for many countries, 
especially for developing 
countries. 
The very existence of entire island countries such as 
the Maldives, Tuvalu and Kiribati could be imper-
illed by a rise in the mid range of current sea-level 
rise projections. 
Such a sea-level rise could also 
cause large population displacements in the river 
delta regions of such densely populated nations as 
Egypt, India, Bangladesh and China (Tickell, 1989). 
Although studies of the likely impact of climate 
change on agricultural production in developing 
countries are quite sparse, such agriculture is quite 
vulnerable to climatic variability, and much present 
hunger and malnutrition in Africa may already be 
attributable to drought-induced famine. 
Changes in climate could produce large impacts on 
nomads and traditional societies, such as Canadian 
Inuit people (Amagoalik, 1989), the Gwichin people 
of Canada's Northwest Territories and Yukon 
Territory, where climate change may adversely affect 
hunting, trapping and fishing, which are central both 
to the economy and the culture of the Gwichin 
people (Kassi, 1989). Warming in the Arctic and 
sub-Arctic could mean a shorter trapping season and 
reduced quality of furs, a major source of income 
for many Yukon Territory residents (Klassen, 1989). 
With Working Group I having projected that an 
effective C 0 2 doubling could produce a warming of 
2°-5°C in winter and 3°-5°C in summer in the 
southern Sahara, it appears plausible that inhabitants 
of that region, many of whom are nomads, would be 
significantly affected by such changes in an already 
hot climate, but little systematic study has been done 
to identify the potential effect of climate warming on 
nomadic peoples in hot regions such as the Sahara 
or the Arabian Peninsula. 
Studies do exist, however, in several important areas. 
These include: 
2.2.1.1 Vulnerability of human settlement to sea-level 
rise 
A i m sea-level rise is likely to cause major prob-
lems on the intensely utilised and densely populated 
Asian coastal plains - producing coastline recession 
of up to several kilometres, displacing coastal 
villages and depriving many people of their land and 
resources (Bird, 1986). A group of experts convened 
by the Commonwealth Secretariat (1989) reported 
that important river deltas that are likely to be 
seriously affected by climate change include 'the Nile 
in Egypt, Ganges in Bangladesh, the Yangtze and 
Hwang Ho in China, the Mekong in Indo-China, the 
Irrawaddy in Burma, the Indus in Pakistan, the 
Niger in Nigeria, the Parana, Magdalena, Orinoco 
and Amazon in South America, Mississippi in US 
and the Po in Europe' (at p67). 
Major coastal 
erosion problems are likely in South America at 
population centres such as Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 
and Mar del Plata, Argentina, (Leathcrman, 1986). 
In an analysis of implications of sea-level rise on 
four Pacific atoll states, Kiribati, Tuvalu and the 
Marshall Islands (all independent nations) and 
5-6 
Tokelau (a territory of New Zealand), Roy and 
Connell (1989) project the drowning of barrier reefs, 
intrusion of saltwater into coastal groundwater 
supplies, erosion of flat land, and storm damage to 
ports and other coastal facilities. 
Significant sea-level rise could cause considerable 
damage to the southeast coastal zone of China, that 
country's most developed agricultural and industrial 
area. 
There is a possibility of the flooding and 
destruction of most of the existing salterns and 
seawater farms, which are important food sources 
for China's coastal cities. Wide-scale destruction is 
projected along the more developed areas on the 
Yangtze River and Yellow River, with loss of at 
least 10 million tons of grain. Additional potential 
adverse effects include damage to housing, transpor-
tation and water supply, and expansion of salinised 
land with destruction of the coastal ecological 
environment and environmental protection facilities 
(Ye, 1990). 
A i m sea-level rise could inundate 12-15% of 
Egypt's arable land and 11.5% of the land of 
Bangladesh (Broadus et al., 1986). Sea-level rise 
already threatens the historic Kenyan town of 
Lamma (Odingo, 1989). Preliminary findings of a 
survey by the Ministry for Population and Environ-
ment indicate that a i m sea-level rise would pro-
duce 
wide-scale 
population 
displacement 
in 
Indonesia. 
A case study of such impacts on the 
coastal areas found significant population displace-
ment in each of the three regencies surveyed. 
In 
Bekasi Regency such a sea-level rise would flood 
about 7000 ha of brackish water fish area, 10,000 ha 
of food crops would be damaged by saltwater 
intrusion, and 3300 households would lose their land. 
At Karawang Regency this sea-level rise would flood 
about 11,000 ha of brackish water fish area, damage 
50,000 ha of agricultural land through saltwater 
intrusion and deprive at least 80,000 households of 
their livelihood. A i m sea-level rise at Subang 
Regency could flood about 7000 ha of brackish 
water fish area, damage 20,000 ha of rice-producing 
wetlands and 6000 ha of home gardens, and destroy 
the livelihoods of about 81,000 farmers (Sugandhy, 
1989). Recently, India has launched a major pro-
gram for study of the impact of sea-level rise due to 
the greenhouse effect along the coasts and islands of 
India. U N E P is sponsoring similar studies of the 
coasts of West Africa and East Africa. 
2.2.7.2 Vulnerability of human settlement to tropical 
cyclones 
As sea surface temperature rises, the ocean area 
which can spawn tropical cyclones (typhoons, hurri-
canes etc) is expected to increase. 
Although the 
area of sea having temperatures over this critical 
value will increase as the globe warms, the critical 
temperature itself may increase in a warmer world 
(Working Group I Report). Some scientists argue 
that the intensity of these storms may increase 
(Emanuel, 1987). One severe storm in September 
1988, Hurricane Gilbert, is estimated to have caused 
eight billion dollars damage in Jamaica alone (Top-
ping, 1988). Damage by tropical cyclones is a major 
impediment to economic development throughout 
the Caribbean region and can be expected to be-
come an even larger factor if storm damage increas-
es (Granger, 1989). 
Tropical cyclones also pose 
major threats to industrialised nations, as occurred 
when Hurricane Hugo in September 1989 wreaked 
havoc along the Carolina coast of the US. 
2.2.1.3 Vulnerability of human settlement to flood 
Floods are already a major ongoing concern of many 
developing countries and this problem may be 
exacerbated by global climate change. Some climate 
model projections suggest that the greenhouse effect 
will enhance both ends of the hydrologic cycle, 
producing more instances of extreme rainfall as well 
as increased drought (Hansen et al., 1989; Golitsyn, 
1989). Thus, floods may become an even greater 
threat as the world warms. In some instances, the 
expected rise of sea-levels may aggravate the vul-
nerability of coastal countries to floods. The floods 
of 1987 and 
1988 proved very damaging to 
Bangladesh, forcing millions of people from their 
homes for long periods of time. Yet the people of 
Bangladesh showed a remarkable resiliency in 
responding to the 1988 flood, which inundated a 
large portion of the country (Safiullah, 1989), and 
this ability to adapt will be increasingly important to 
coastal countries that will experience increased 
inundation even under a low climate change scen-
ario. 
2.2.1.4 Vulnerability of human settlement to drought 
or water shortages 
Another section of Working Group II is developing 
detailed projections of likely availability of water 
resources in a warmer world. The present literature 
suggests that drought may become a much greater 
problem. 
Hansen et al. (1989) foresee drought 
conditions occurring 5% of the time in the control 
run (1965 to relatively recently), rising to 10% in the 
1990s, about 25% in the 2020s and about 45% in 
2050. 
An Indonesian government study of C 0 2 
doubling and its effect on three river basins, the 
Citarum River Basin in West Java, the Brantas River 
Basin in East Java and the Saddang River Basin in 
South Sulawesi, projected much faster runoff, wide-
scale soil erosion and much lower water production. 
5-7 
(Sugandhy, 1989.) 
Such a loss of water resources 
could be expected to have considerable impact in 
Indonesia, population of which is increasing rapidly. 
Global warming may be expected in some regions to 
lower the groundwater level, decrease the surface of 
many lakes or inland waterways, and drop the water 
level of such bodies. 
Major disruptions such as 
those experienced in the Lake Chad region of Africa 
could become a greater problem. 
Some other 
regions might benefit from more abundant water, 
but accurate prediction of such regional impacts is 
difficult at this point. 
Farmers' responses to drought and land degradation 
may take many forms. Adaptation to drought may 
include 
agro-pastoral 
management 
techniques 
providing for a more efficient use of reduced 
rainfall. Poverty and hunger resulting from drought 
may cause migration and degradation, or change of 
diet. Land degradation may produce either aban-
donment of the land or, where investment capacity 
and knowledge are available, change in cultivation 
practices to improve yields and arrest land degrada-
tion (Mortimore, 1989). 
2.2.1.5 Vulnerability of human settlement in some 
countries to loss of biomass 
A major threat to developing countries posed by 
global warming may be acceleration of depletion of 
biomass cover as a result of increased drought. This 
could be an especially severe problem in Africa, 
where energy supply for 40-odd oil importing count-
ries comes from biomass to a very large degree: 
upwards of 80% in most countries and over 90% in 
some (Tebicke, personal comment, 1989). Africans, 
the majority of whom depend on biomass also for 
housing, furniture, implements, utensils etc, could 
experience greater scarcity for such uses. 
2.2.1.6 Vulnerability of human settlement to rapid 
thawing of the permafrost 
Climate models have generally projected that arctic 
and subarctic areas are likely to warm more rapidly 
than the average global temperature increase. Such 
a rapid warming could result in a significant thawing 
of the permafrost in the subarctic, producing major 
disruption to buildings, roads and bridges, adversely 
affecting the stability of some existing structures and 
forcing changes in construction practice (French, 
1989). 
Permafrost areas of China, which account for about 
18% of that country's total territory, appear highly 
vulnerable to thawing, according to a recent Chinese 
government assessment. 
This permafrost zone is 
mainly distributed in Quinghoi, Tibet Plateau, 
Quilianshon Mountains, Tionshon Mountains, Altai 
Mountains, Doxirganling and Xiaoxingongling 
Mountains in northeast China, and Inner Mongolia. 
The layer of permafrost is located normally at 1.5¬
5.0 m in depth and is about 0.5-2.0 m thick (Ye, 
1990). 
If the temperature were to rise by 0.5°C and remain 
stable for 10-20 years, it is projected that about 5% 
of the permafrost in China would thaw out, while a 
40-50% thawing is projected for a 2°C rise over 10¬
20 years. 
Projected impacts of such a thawing 
include a large a area of thaw settlement and slope 
landslide with destruction of highways, railways and 
housing built on permafrost (Ye, 1990). 
2.2.1.7 Vulnerability of human settlement to health 
problems associated with climate change 
Climate change may threaten the health of large 
numbers of people. 
Flooding and storm surges 
associated with sea-level rise could increase the 
incidence of water-borne diseases. 
Opportunistic 
diseases could afflict those weakened by famine or 
malnutrition. Wide-scale disruption of communities 
could 
include 
psychological 
stress 
among 
environmental refugees. 
Degradation of water 
quality or sanitation 
faculties could put more 
pressure on public health faculties. These and other 
health effects are discussed in more detail in Sec-
tions 2.2.3 and 6. 
2.2.2 Implications of climate change for 
economic activity 
Owing to the complexity of developed countries and 
the fact that many factors largely independent of 
climate change - employment changes, technological 
innovation, changes in terms of trade and currency 
values, and land use policies - will affect human 
habitat, it appears quite difficult to isolate changes 
which are due to global warming from other changes 
that might occur. 
Some assessments exist in the 
following two areas: 
(i) Modification of supplies and consumption pat-
terns 
Climate change can be expected to have differential 
regional impacts on the supply and cost of various 
types of food and fibre, and on availability of water. 
This changing availability of resources could be 
reflected in changed diets, production patterns and 
employment levels. One study has projected that an 
effective C 0 2 doubling could produce a major water 
shortfall for New York City equal to 28-42% of the 
planned supply in the Hudson River Basin. The 
least expensive means of adding this capacity, it is 
5-8 
calculated, would be a $3 billion project to skim 
Hudson River floodwaters into additional reservoirs 
(Miller, 1989). 
(ii) Changes in the physical and social environment 
The physical environment may be transformed as a 
result of direct effects of climate variability: 
• loss of property from natural disaster including 
storm surge that would be aggravated by sea-level 
rise. (This is a particularly significant factor in 
the Caribbean region (Granger, 1989) and has 
recently contributed to huge losses in the southern 
US as well.) 
• effects of weather variables on housing and street 
conditions. An effective C 0 2 doubling is expected 
to save the American city of Cleveland, Ohio, 
$US4.5 million annually in reduced snow and ice 
removal costs and $700,000 per year from reduced 
frost damage to roads and bridges. Yet the same 
study projects that global climate change, largely 
sea-level rise, would require at least $600 million 
in additional public sector capital investment in 
the Greater Miami area of Florida over the next 
century. 
A i m sea-level rise would require 
raising most bridges to ensure sufficient under-
clearances. Such a sea-level rise could infiltrate 
the base of about a third of the streets of Dade 
County, Florida, necessitating added public recon-
struction costs of $250 million and large additional 
costs to building owners to improve drainage, 
raise yards and pump sewage to mains (Miller, 
1989). 
• effects on construction materials. 
The same 
Urban Institute study of added infrastructure 
needs in Cleveland, Greater Miami and New 
York City associated with climate change found 
minimal effects on sewer pipe corrosion in Miami, 
and annual reductions, in 1987 US dollars, of 
$700,000 in frost damage to roads, $500,000 in 
road maintenance and $200,000 in road recon-
struction, all in Cleveland. An analysis of impacts 
of climate variability on construction in the UK 
notes that high humidity and high temperatures 
weaken alumina cement, and low humidity and 
high evaporation rates lead to plastic cracking of 
concrete (Parry and Read, 1988). A i r pollution 
poses threats to metals and other building materi-
als (Graedel and McGill, 1986). Should climate 
change exacerbate air pollution, these materials 
effects could increase. 
• stress on sewerage and septic waste systems 
resulting from increases in frequency of storm-
water surcharging and potential overflows. 
• increased life of vehicles and other metal objects 
owing to reduced use of salt for snow and ice 
mitigation (Goklany, personal communication, 
1989). 
There is a wide number of potential indirect effects 
that may follow changes in climatic variability. 
These include: 
• potential abandonment or relocation of industrial 
sites as a result of climate change. Changes in 
availability of natural resources, particularly water, 
may affect the viability of industrial facilities that 
are dependent on such resources. 
• changes in traffic resulting from climate-induced 
changes in transport modes. 
Water resource 
changes could reduce or increase use of barge 
traffic, thereby changing traffic on competing 
transport modes such as railways or roads. 
• changes in building design to accommodate to 
climatic change. These could include road layout 
affecting the placing of buildings, greater use of 
new, more weather-tolerant materials and greater 
attention to landscaping to reduce the urban heat-
island effect. 
2.2.3 Migration and resettlement 
Migration and resettlement may be the most threat-
ening short-term effects of climate change on human 
settlements. People may decide to migrate in any of 
the following cases: 
• loss of housing (because of river or sea flooding 
or mudslides); 
• loss of living resources (like water, energy and 
food supply or employment affected by climate 
change); 
• loss of social and cultural resources (loss of 
cultural properties, neighbourhood or community 
networks, particularly in the case of a devastating 
flood). 
In developing countries, changes in commodity 
prices or foreign trade practices may trigger large-
scale migration. The declining demand for natural 
rubber reportedly caused significant migration in 
Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia (Simmons et al., 
1977). 
Migration may occur following a decline in living 
standards or a total loss of livelihood following land 
degradation (itself possibly due to an earlier migra-
tion toward marginal land unable to support over-
5-9 
cultivation) or a major 'natural' disaster like flooding 
or drought. The vulnerability of human settlements 
to climatic events is particularly great in developing 
countries, where high population densities and 
growing urban congestion are likely to increase the 
sensitivity to and potential magnitude of natural 
disasters. 
'Environmental refugees,' 
people 
displaced by 
degradation of land, flooding or drought, are becom-
ing a much larger factor in many developing count-
ries (Jacobsen, 1989; Tickell, 1989; Debrah, 1989). 
Even a modest rise in global sea-levels could pro-
duce tens of millions of such refugees. Population 
movements from blighted agricultural regions could 
result in areas where crop productivity may be cut 
by prolonged drought or temperature stress on 
vulnerable crops. 
Resettlement itself raises considerable new problems 
for newcomers and possibly for local inhabitants. In 
cities, it places additional burdens on existing hous-
ing, medical care facilities and various essential 
urban services and infrastructure. From the point 
of view of health, migration and resettlement could 
cause the following situations to occur in developing 
countries (modified from Lee, 1985): 
• Insufficient capacity of health services and lack of 
physical or economic access to them; 
• Sanitary facilities and housing could become 
quickly overburdened in the receiving area, en-
hancing the spread of communicable diseases; 
• Both residents and newcomers may be exposed 
and susceptible to new diseases (introduced by 
new arrivals or inversely); 
• More directly, resettlement is known to be the 
cause of psychological strains (loss of connection 
with the original land and traditions) further 
inducing health problems. 
In economically advanced industrialised countries, 
migration is a likely social and cultural response of 
specific population groups to new physical and social 
environments produced by climatic change. Forced 
migration and resettlement would be the most 
severe effects of climatic change as a result of 
natural disaster and loss of employment. 
Natural disaster (particularly flooding) is likely to 
occur in some areas as a result of climatic condi-
tions. Moreover, local communities may be induced 
to migrate by the policy choice of no response to 
sea-level rise in particular areas of developed count-
ries. 
Changes 
in 
production systems may lead to 
industrial relocation or employment reductions. 
Migration may be a preferred response to threat-
ened loss of housing or employment. 
2.3 
Determination of sensitivities 
2.3.1 Factors enhancing sensitivity to the 
impacts 
In developing countries, climate change should be a 
major cause of damages to human settlements for 
two reasons: 
• the 
high 
dependence 
on 
food 
supply 
and 
agricultural production, which is highly sensitive to 
climate change; 
• the inability to respond to major impacts like sea-
level rise or flooding while the magnitude of 
impacts in these particular areas will be high 
(Tickell, 1989). 
The sensitivity of developing countries to impacts on 
human settlement through land degradation and 
natural disasters is already evident in some count-
ries: 
flooding in Bangladesh in 1988, monsoon 
failure in India in 1987, progressive desertification in 
Sahel countries. 
Important and significant trends able to slow down 
or aggravate the effects of climate change on social 
and economic restructuring are the following: 
• Industrialisation and over-urbanisation; 
• Population increase, urbanisation and industrialis-
ation in the developing world will combine with 
climate change to produce significant societal 
changes; 
• In developed countries, economic changes of 
recent years have generally led to significant 
spatial and urban changes. First, some places are 
in decline (abandoned former industrial sites, 
some forms of housing, urban zones). 
Second, 
enterprises as well as individuals are more sensi-
tive to the quality of the living environment 
(housing, medical care, social services, culture, 
recreation and climate itself) (see Ministère de 
l'Equipement, du Logement, de l'Aménagement 
du Territoire et des Transports, 1986, modified). 
The communications revolution and computer and 
F A X technologies may permit greater decentrali-
sation of the population by enabling many profes-
sional and technical people to perform work in 
homes far removed from major metropolitan 
centres. 
5-10 
2.3.2 Spatial and social differentiation 
Climate change could translate into migration of 
impoverished people from rural to urban areas 
(developing countries), from coastal lowlands (par-
ticularly densely inhabited delta areas) to inland 
areas, and possibly across national boundaries. 
The most vulnerable populations are those exposed 
to natural hazards. In 2050, habitable land could be 
lost for 16% in Bangladesh and 15% in Egypt. 
Population displaced would amount to 13% and 
14%, respectively (Jacobson, 1989). 
In developing countries, the most vulnerable popula-
tions are farmers engaged in subsistence agriculture, 
residents of coastal lowland, populations in semi-arid 
grassland, and the urban poor pushed back into 
squatter settlements, 
slums and shanty towns. 
Urban population growth is the highest in Africa, 
the urban population of which should double be-
tween 1980 and 2000. Population and urbanisation 
increases in developing countries in general will 
generate impacts on natural resources and the 
environment which are likely to increase sensitivity 
to climate change. Vulnerable populations should 
primarily be the elderly and low income households 
which may face higher costs for supplies, facilities 
and essential services. 
2.4 Tasks for the near future 
Some important priorities may be defined. First, 
reliable projections of human settlement implications 
of climate change should relate to specific climate 
models, none of which can yet provide reliable 
projections of likely future local climates. Improve-
ment of the grid resolution of the G C M s would 
seem essential to permit correlation between likely 
local climate scenarios and potential impacts. 
Climate change impact analyses are especially scarce 
for Latin America which contains regions highly 
sensitive to climatic fluctuations associated with such 
phenomena as El Niño. 
Second, the complex 
linkages between urban functions likely to be affect-
ed by changed weather conditions and altered urban 
settlement patterns in developed countries are not 
well understood, and these interactions may vary 
considerably in different geographic areas, eg central 
cities, secondary cities, suburbs and rural areas. In 
developing countries, many largely non-climatic 
factors, eg improvement of agricultural management, 
increased urbanisation, and self-reliance, may pro-
duce very different impacts in urban and rural areas. 
Third, the relationship between urban, social and 
economic changes and climatic effects needs to be 
quantified. Finally, study needs for the effects on 
building materials and design of buildings have been 
described by Parry and Read (1988). 
The most difficult task is to correlate analogical 
studies (assessment of effects from historical and 
geographical analogies) with the future climate 
change projections. This should in addition take into 
account the effects of policy trends (housing and 
social policies, energy policies etc). The need to 
consider the feedback of policies developed to 
address social and economic problems constitutes a 
serious difficulty in correctly assessing the expected 
impacts of climate change on human settlements. 
3 
Summary of likely impacts of 
climate change on the energy 
sector 
3.1 
Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
3.1.1 Definitions 
Energy includes all controllable forms of energy 
used for heat, power and processes in human activi-
ties: electricity, fossil and other fuels, nuclear power, 
hydroelectric power, biomass, animal power, solar, 
wind etc. Energy sector impacts mean the effects of 
climate change in changing demand, prices and 
availability of energy commodities, and in altering 
the function of all parts of energy supply and use 
systems: 
exploration, 
extraction, 
conversion, 
distribution and consumption of energy. 
3.1.2 Geographic and substantive scope 
This section deals with available information on 
potential impacts on energy supply and consumption 
due to assumed global climate change. 
Energy 
supply and prices may be affected through impacts 
on the supply system and also through secondary 
effects of impacts that alter demand for energy, eg 
decreasing demand for heating and increased de-
mand for air-conditioning. Primary, secondary and 
higher orders of impact refer to the relative stage of 
the cause-effect chain starting with primary effects 
directly connected with changes in climate variables 
(ie temperature, precipitation, wind and other 
atmospheric variables, plus changes in ocean vari-
ables such as temperature, currents and sea-levels). 
Secondary and higher order effects are not necessa-
rily less important than primary effects, but they are 
typically more difficult to estimate with precision. 
Indirect impacts on energy activities due to policy 
responses to climate change are only briefly dis-
cussed, but potentially they might be important. 
These impacts are considered by Working Group III. 
5-11 
Because of the sparse treatment of this topic in 
available literature, quantitative information on 
impacts primarily is limited to changes in electricity 
demand for three 
industrialised temperate zone 
countries with and without climate change at levels 
predicted by the GISS G C M (Smith and Tirpak, 
1989; Nishinomiya et al., 1989; Parry and Read, 
1988). Another case study of impacts on energy use 
for heating and air-conditioning in a fourth 
temperate country, West Germany (FRG), also is 
discussed (Gertis and Steimle, 1989). Impacts of 
changes in water availability on hydroelectric power 
also have been estimated for several sub-national 
regions (ICF Inc., 1987; Smith and Tirpak, 1989; 
Singh, 1988). 
Additionally, recent trends in electricity and direct 
heat use in developing countries are provided in 
order to give qualitative statements as to the prob-
able degree to which current use may be affected by 
potential climate change (Meyers and Sathaye, 1988; 
Sathaye et al., 1989). 
Finally, a set of comments extracted from the 
literature and discussions of the panel concerning 
unquantified and secondary impacts on energy and 
electricity production is provided; these include 
primary supply impacts due to accelerated sea-level 
rise and potential extremes in weather, plus secon-
dary impacts due to changes in water supply and 
biomass production (Smith and Tirpak, 1989; 
Nishinomiya et al., 1989; Tebicke, 1989). 
3.1.3 The relationships of expected impacts 
Figure 5.1 provides a system flow chart of how 
changes in climate parameters can affect energy 
supply and demand, resulting in impacts on energy 
supply and cost. As the figure indicates, demand 
can be increased or decreased by temperature 
increases according to season, and reliability of 
energy supply may be reduced unless additional 
reserve capacity and protection from severe weather 
incidents are provided. Most changes indicated in 
Figure 5.1 can occur in either direction; for example, 
increased regional precipitation could increase the 
potential for hydroelectric power generation and 
biomass fuel energy. Many potential impacts are 
not shown in Figure 5.1. The choice among fuel 
forms and among energy sources, including alternate 
energy sources such as direct solar, hydro and 
nuclear, may be constrained; added capacity, espe-
cially peaking capacity and the associated additional 
capital and higher operation costs, may be required. 
Existing and potential biomass energy supply and 
use, of special importance in many developing 
countries, may be reduced by decreases in soil 
moisture or inundation of agricultural land by sea-
level rise. 
This would force countries to spend 
capital and operating costs to substitute alternative 
energy sources or conservation measures. (Biomass 
impacts are addressed by other sections of Working 
Group II, but these indirect impacts on energy are 
noted here for completeness.) 
Most of these impacts are typically not likely to 
result in absolute constraints on energy supply 
systems, but the magnitude and the rate of the 
added demands and constraints need to be con-
sidered with a full representation of uncertainties of 
the global climate change forecasts. Climate-related 
reductions in limited energy sources such as biomass 
and hydroelectric power, combined with other 
stresses, might constrain availability of these re-
sources. Non-climate-related environmental factors 
may also act as constraints on rapidly increased 
reliance on non-carbon-based energy systems such as 
hydroelectric power or nuclear power. 
Increased 
construction of hydroelectric projects may require 
considerable human resettlement and flooding of 
important ecological resources. A serious constraint 
on increased reliance on nuclear power will be the 
satisfaction of public concerns regarding plant safety 
and adequacy of waste disposal. 
3.2 
Assessment of impacts 
3.2.1 Industrial country energy demand 
The principal quantitative analyses of energy impacts 
have been carried out using the U S ' and Japan's 
electricity supply and demand case studies under 
conditions of no assumed climate change contrasted 
to global climate change as predicted by the GISS 
models (Smith and Tirpak, 1989; Nishinomiya et al., 
1989). Studies of the effect of temperature change 
on electricity demand have also been made in the 
UK (Parry and Read, 1988) and on end-use energy 
in the F R G (Gertis and Steimle, 1989). In the US 
this includes results for the year 2010 and 2055; the 
preliminary Japanese study considers conditions for 
the year 2000 but with an equivalent temperature 
change predicted due to a doubling of C 0 2 concen-
tration, a condition similar to the US 2055 forecast. 
The study of F R G on the energy demand for heating 
and air-conditioning contrasts space heating and air-
conditioning energy use in 2030, with and without a 
climate change of 1°C temperature increase and 
technology improvements in insulation. A USSR 
assessment has been made of heating costs in a 
changed climate. 
These studies suggest for these 
five temperate-climate, industrialised countries the 
following: 
• Demand for electricity over the next 60 years 
without climate change will more than double for 
5-12 
(see Table 5.1.). 
In Japan, in contrast, use of 
electricity in commercial and residential facilities in 
1987 was about 55% of total usage (Nishinomiya et 
al., 1989). 
There is wide contrast in this share 
among countries. Based on unconstrained electricity 
use scenarios estimated by US E P A in the year 
2025, rapid growth in the developing countries would 
result in expanded electricity use of over 50%, and 
the residential commercial part of the growth would 
be slightly less than the 1986 figure - 22% (Sathaye 
et al., 1989). 
Therefore, although the developing countries, as 
projected by the Sathaye et al., 1989 forecast, may 
have substantial investment needs to meet the pro-
jected demand for electricity, the fraction of this 
demand that is related to temperature change re-
mains much smaller than the fraction expected in an 
industrialised nation. 
The added increment for 
developing countries should be less than 10%, again 
a small but added uncertainty for utility planners 
compared to the demands placed on the same 
planners without consideration of climate change. 
3.2.3 Implications for demand by particular 
utilities 
Examining three electric utilities, one in upstate New 
York, one in downstate serving the New York City 
metropolitan area and one in the southeastern 
United States, Linder and Gibbs (1988) project that 
a summer temperature increase of about 0.8°C 
would cause an 0.96% to 2.14% increase in peak 
demand and an 0.27% to 0.21% decrease in primary 
energy use for the upstate New York utility, and a 
2.20% to 4.04% increase in peak demand and an 
0.49% to 1.04% increase in energy demand for the 
downstate New York utility. Projecting an increase 
in summer temperature of just over 1°C, they 
projected a 7.04% increase in peak demand and a 
3.4% increase in total energy demand. 
In an examination of regional and national climatic 
effects of climate change on demands for electricity 
in the US, Linder (1989) projects that new capacity 
requirements would increase 9-19% or about 25 to 
55 gigawatts (GW) using GISS Model B for 2010. 
The majority of the capacity increase would be for 
peaking capacity rather than for baseload capacity. 
The largest regional impacts are anticipated in the 
southeast and the southwest where air-conditioning 
is a major use of electricity. 
Parry and Read (1988), in a study of energy demand 
in the U K , report: 
Demand for energy increases progressively as 
temperatures fall below 18°C. For example, 
demand on the Central Electricity Generating 
Board (CEGB) in the U.K.increases by one 
percent (400 M W ) in response to a tempera-
ture fall from 1°C to 0°C; larger increases 
occur for a one degree fall in colder conditions 
(at pp. 37-38). 
Parry and Read project that an increase in wind-
speed from 5 to 15 knots at 2°C raised UK demand 
by 700 megawatts (MW). 
In a detailed study of public buildings in Cleveland, 
Ohio, US, Miller (1989) projected that in a C 0 2 
doubling scenario heating cost for public buildings 
could drop an estimated $2.3 million per year while 
public air-conditioning costs could rise by $6.6 to 
$9.3 million annually. 
It would appear that global warming would have 
very different effects on energy demand, raising it in 
areas where air-conditioning is a driving factor in 
such demand and sometimes reducing demand 
where heating is a more dominant use. 
3.2.4 Implications for availability of hydro-
electric power 
By changing water resource availability, climatic 
change could affect the hydroelectric power industry, 
producing quite different effects in various regions. 
Based on the US impact studies (Smith and Tirpak, 
1989; ICF Inc., 1987), a major concern is the avail-
ability of water on a sustained basis for natural 
systems, irrigation, domestic needs and hydroelectric 
generation plants. 
G C M s predict considerable 
variability in total annual water supply and, for many 
areas, changes in levels of relative seasonal supply. 
As shown in Table 5.2, the fraction of domestic 
electricity demand met by hydroelectric power varies 
considerably among countries in all categories of 
industrialisation. 
(See Table 5.2 for some exam-
ples.) The changes that may occur to the potential 
electricity supply from this energy source could be 
considerable for many countries if the annual or 
seasonal variations cause significantly lower water 
reserves. 
Examining implications of climate change for 
Quebec under an effective C 0 2 doubling, Singh 
(1988 given) projects a potential increase in hydro-
electric generating capacity of about 93,000 GW 
hours. On the other hand, Sanderson (1987) esti-
mates that for the Canadian hydroelectric generating 
stations on the Great Lakes, climatic change plus 
greater consumption could result in a loss of 4165 
GW hours of power generation. 
5-14 
• Climate change may lead to redistribution of 
populations, resulting in increased investment to 
supply the needed shifts in energy supply and 
distribution infrastructure. 
• Biomass energy (eg fuelwood for cooking) repre-
sents a large fraction of total energy use in some 
developing countries: 
more than 80% in most 
and 90% in some African countries (Tebicke, 
Remarks, 1989). If biomass production potential 
is constrained by climate change induced reduc-
tion in soil moisture or inundation of arable land, 
then it will be difficult for nations so affected to 
replace the energy in view of the capital costs of 
alternative sources. Biomass for energy may also 
remove valuable forest cover and it competes with 
alternative uses of the biomass (eg for building 
material) or of the land for food production. 
Biomass currently is used for energy with very low 
efficiency except for new advanced technologies, 
such as new cooking-stove designs. 
• Increases in storm activity (eg hurricanes, torna-
does, hail storms etc) tend to disrupt energy 
exploration (eg offshore drilling), production and 
transportation. This increases the cost and might 
be constraining on development of some eco-
nomically marginal resources. 
• For some temperate climate areas of the USSR, 
it has been estimated that increased humidity 
associated with a global warming of 3°C could 
result in increased costs of coal-produced electri-
city because of additional expenses incurred in 
mining and transporting coal and removing 
moisture before combustion. This could amount 
to 
as 
much 
as 
6% 
of 
operating 
costs 
(Vladimirova, 1990). 
3.3 Determination of sensitivities 
Many of the potential impacts on energy supply, 
generation and distribution depend on the rates of 
change and on direction and magnitude of change of 
specific climate parameters in a region. Different 
rates of change are likely to result in substantial 
differences in costs to take mitigative actions, de-
pending on whether normal planning and replace-
ment of facilities can occur or whether the lifetime 
of existing energy units is reduced. Some locales 
may experience increased supply of water from 
climate change without offsetting evaporation; this 
can reduce costs in differences among technology 
choices because of availability of water or, in other 
locales, it can increase costs at existing facilities 
because of changes in levels of water bodies poten-
tially increasing flooding or changing thermal dis-
charge patterns. 
Seasonal changes in weather 
patterns, water supply and insolation may be benefi-
cial or constraining. (Smith and Tirpak, 1989; ICF 
Inc., 1987.) Thus, the sensitivity of energy activities 
to climate change can vary greatly with local condi-
tions such as hydrology and water use. 
It should also be noted that the effects of policy 
responses to global warming have not been con-
sidered here. 
Since fossil-fuel energy production 
and utilisation is a major contributor to G H G 
emissions, it is likely that any response policy will 
greatly constrain or increase the price of fuels and 
electricity produced for fossil fuels. 
Response 
strategies may also directly produce shifts in fuels or 
energy technologies. 
3.4 Tasks for the near future 
Studies of impacts on energy supply and demand are 
presently limited in terms of types of potential 
impacts studied, regions studied and consideration of 
the range of potential impact under the uncertain 
and highly variable results of regional climate change 
provided by G C M s . 
The rates of change and 
patterns of change for regions over several decades 
need to be more properly represented in the impacts 
assessment. Since new energy sources and technolo-
gies are evolving, detailed studies of their capabilities 
and vulnerability to climate change are needed. In 
the case of hydroelectric power, possible changes in 
runoff and demands for water vary greatly with local 
conditions. Hence, detailed study of each basin will 
be required to identify the range of possible climate 
change impacts. 
Studies are needed of potential effects of climate 
change on availability of biomass energy, especially 
in developing countries. Future conditions need to 
be considered, including population and competition 
for biomass and land resources, along with possibili-
ties for improvements in efficiency or substitution 
for utilisation of biomass energy. 
A survey of the availability of non-traditional forms 
of energy such as wind or solar power would be 
helpful. 
This survey could develop an atlas of 
availability of such resources in countries around the 
world together with a preliminary analysis of how 
changed weather circulation patterns and cloud 
cover might affect their potential for energy produc-
tion. 
There is a general need to examine energy sector 
impacts in depth on an integrated fuel-cycle basis, 
including all key stages from exploration through 
consumption and disposal of waste, in order to 
capture the cumulative impact of many small effects 
and to assist decision making among alternatives. 
5-16 
The potential indirect impacts on energy use pat-
terns due to policy responses to global warming 
should be analysed, including secondary effects on 
the natural environment and on regional economies. 
4 Summary of likely impacts of 
climate change on transport 
The study here is directed at the impacts of climate 
change on services and facilities for the transporta-
tion of goods or persons. 
4.1 Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
Analysis of the effects of climate change is made 
according to two interrelated systems: infrastructure 
and traffic on the one hand, and by transportation 
means, defined as airways, waterways, roads and 
railways, on the other hand. 
The studies concerning the likely implications of 
climate change for transport are quite restricted in 
geographic scope, being limited largely to three 
countries: Canada, the UK and the US. It is uncer-
tain how these studies in three high latitude 
Northern Hemisphere nations are representative of 
likely transport impacts on the globe as a whole. 
4.1.1 Direct impacts of climate change 
Climate change is likely to have a number of direct 
effects on transportation. Increased temperature can 
be expected to reduce sea and river ice and snowfall, 
affecting shipping, air travel, highway and rail 
transport. 
Increased sea-levels associated with 
global warming could be expected to affect transport 
infrastructure such as ocean ports. Changed hydro-
logic and cvapotranspiration patterns associated with 
climate warming arc likely to shift water levels on 
lakes and rivers, affecting navigation on inland 
waterways. Changes in frequency and seasonality of 
storms may affect airways, waterways, roads and 
railways. 
4.1.2 Indirect impacts of climate change 
Some elements of transport arc likely to be signifi-
cantly affected by public policies or consumer 
actions designed to restrain emissions of GHG. 
This is particularly true of the automotive industry. 
A rise of several degrees Celsius in mean global 
temperature would require only minor adaptations 
in engine design because of the wide tolerances 
already built into cars; yet public concern about 
GHG emissions may lead to more stringent fuel 
economy standards, taxes on carbon-based fuels, 
consumer movement to smaller or more fucl-cffi-
cient vehicles, public policies or consumer shifts 
favouring alternative fuels in place of gasoline, and 
shifts toward greater reliance on mass transit. 
4.1.3 Potential impacts on the transport 
sector of governmental regulations 
seeking to curtail emissions of green-
house gases 
Concern over global warming has added a new 
factor to transport and energy policy debates, affect-
ing a recent government decision in the US to set 
the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) 
standard at 27.5 miles per gallon rather than moving 
it to 26 mpg as sought by some industry petitioners. 
Although assessments of the likely impacts of such 
potential regulatory policies is conjectural, concern 
over global warming would seem likely to result in 
regulatory or tax measures encouraging fuel efficien-
cy, more stringent emission controls on automobiles, 
and greater support for mass transit. 
4.1.4 Potential impacts on transport sector 
of shifts in consumer patterns in 
order to curtail emissions of green-
house gases 
Public concern over GHG emissions may cause 
consumers to purchase more fuel-efficient cars, 
move to non-carbon or lower carbon content fuels, 
and even abandon private car travel for mass transit. 
It appears too early to detect any pronounced shift 
in consumer preferences in response to concerns 
about greenhouse emissions. 
Yet environmental 
groups are already promoting product or fuel shifts 
as a result of concern over GHG. 
4.2 Assessment of impacts 
Studies of the likely impact of climate change on 
transport have centred almost entirely on three 
Northern Hemisphere nations: Canada, the UK and 
the US. A large portion of the North American 
impact analysis has centred on the Great Lakes 
region where inland waterways are significant to 
both the Canadian and US economy. 
In an effort to compare relative impacts of climatic 
variables in the UK transportation modes, Parry and 
Read produced the following table (Table 5.3). 
4.2.1 Impact of climate change on airways 
Aircraft today arc engineered with strong tolerances 
for widely varying climatic conditions. They may fly 
in temperatures as low as -65°C and in winds as 
great as 400 knots (Parry and Read, 1988.) Most 
major airports have provisions for snow and ice 
5-17 
Table 5.3 Average number of events per annum in which major climatic variables affect UK transport system 
Variable 
Transport system 
Rail 
Road 
Air 
Sea 
na = not affected 
Low cloud 
na 
na 
20 
na 
Snow 
3 
9 
5 
na 
Rain 
1 
(landslide) 
10 
0.5 
na 
Ice 
30 
40 
20 
2 
Fog 
2-3 
2-3 
20 
20 
Wind 
na 
2 
5 
3O40 
Source: Parry and Read (1988). 
control, but fog and low cloud remain serious prob-
lems, although technological improvements may be 
minimising these visibility problems at major air-
ports. Climate warming would be likely to reduce 
snow or ice problems which hinder air travel. It is 
unclear what its effects would be on fog and low 
clouds. 
Air temperature is a critical factor in aircraft per-
formance during take off, especially from aircraft 
situated in warmer regions and at higher altitudes. 
Already under some conditions of high tempera-
ture and low barometric pressure, aircraft either 
have to take off with reduced loads or delay taking 
off until the temperature drops. Helicopter oper-
ation is also affected by high temperatures. Tem-
perature rise due to greenhouse warming may 
exacerbate such problems. 
If global warming results in a change in prevailing 
winds, the orientation of runways may need to be 
changed for safety and efficiency considerations. 
Such changes in runway orientation may not be feas-
ible in existing airports because of local geographic 
constraints and environmental considerations, such 
as noise impact on urban areas under the new 
potential flight paths. 
Some major airports are located near the ocean and 
may be vulnerable to sea-level rise. 
An Urban 
Institute study projected that a i m sea-level rise 
would necessitate roughly $30 million in drainage 
improvements for Miami International Airport, 
Florida, US, (Miller, 1989). 
4.2.2 Impact of climate change on water-
ways 
Climate change is likely to produce very different 
effects on shipping on inland waterways as opposed 
to maritime traffic on the oceans or seas. Changes 
in hydrological and evaporation patterns could be 
expected to change levels of some inland waterways, 
sometimes causing lake levels to drop. 
Global 
warming would, however, produce a rise of perhaps 
as much as a metre in sea-levels worldwide. The 
relative sea-level rise would vary modestly on par-
ticular coasts due to local subsidence and crustal 
rebound. 
4.2.2.1 Impact of climate change on inland waterways 
Virtually all of the analysis of likely impacts of 
climate change on inland waterways concerns poten-
tial effects on the Great Lakes of Canada and the 
US. 
An effective CG\ doubling may result in 
significantly lower lake levels throughout the five 
Great Lakes: Superior, Huron, Michigan, Erie and 
Ontario (Sanderson, 1987; Quinn, 1988; Bolhofer, 
1989; Smith, 1989). These lake levels have varied 
significantly in the past with quite low lake levels 
experienced in the 1964-65 period. Changnon ct al. 
(1989) have studied the effects of these conditions 
on Lake Michigan, Chicago and the Illinois shore-
line. They report significant increases in dredging 
cost for Calumet Harbor and Waukcgan Harbor in 
1965, and inflow of water into the Chicago River and 
the canal diversion system. This system uses water 
from Lake Michigan in order to maintain sufficient 
flow and water levels in the Illinois River system to 
meet barge transportation and sanitation needs. The 
study projects that payloads on lake carriers were 
5-18 
Table 5.4 Estimated economic impacts of lowering* of the levels of Lake Michigan over a 50-year period (1990-2040) 
(Costs in millions of 1988 dollars needed to address future lake levels at indicated depths below average 
level of Lake Michigan, 1950-80) 
1. Recreational harbours 
Dredging 
Sheeting 
Slips/docks 
2. Commercial harbours 
Dredging 
Sheeting/bulkheads 
Slips/docks 
3. Water supply sources 
Extending urban intakes 
Wilmettc Harbour intake 
4. Beaches 
Facility relocations 
5. Outfalls for stormwater 
Extensions and modifications 
Totals 
1.25 m lower 
30 to 50 
15 
20* 
108 
38 
40* 
15 
1 
1-2 
2 
$270 to $291 
million* 
2.52 m lower 
75 to 100 
35 
40* 
212 
38 
90* 
22 
2 
1.2 
4 
$519 to $545 
million* 
* 
Some costs could be partly covered by normal replacement expenditures over the 50-year period. 
Source: Changnon et al. (1983) p25. 
reduced between 5% and 10% resulting in higher 
shipping costs. 
Changnon et al. report some impacts on recreational 
boating. Shallow water caused some problems for 
pleasure crafts in harbours and inlets to harbours. 
Additional dredging was required in some private 
and local urban inlets and small-craft harbours, 
including Montrose, Belmont, and Jackson Harbours 
of the Chicago Park District. 
Some docks were 
extended and others lowered and ladders were 
constructed to get from existing docks to boat level. 
In projecting potential impacts of future lower lake 
levels on Lake Michigan, Changnon ct al. make 
projections of overall costs for a lowering of lake 
levels of 1.25 m and 2.52 m between 1990 and 2040. 
(Sec Table 5.4). 
Many harbours have wooden slips and docks and 
exposure over time of the bclow-watcr portion of 
these structures would produce dry rot. A 1.25 or 
2.52 m decrease in lake levels would necessitate 
replacement of all wooden slips and docks. Much of 
this, however, would be handled as part of normal 
replacement costs. All pleasure boat harbours could 
be adjusted through dredging to handle a 1.25 m 
reduction, but a 2.52 m lowering of lake levels would 
make some harbours unusable. Dredging costs for 
the 1.25 m reduction were estimated at $3 to $5 
million per harbour and for a 2.52 m lowering at $5 
to $10 million per harbour. 
Using a GISS 1984 climate scenario indicating that 
mean Great Lakes lake levels may be reduced 30-80 
cm, Sanderson (1987) calculates that average annual 
costs to Canadian Great Lakes shipping companies 
for the four principal cargoes, iron ore, grain, coal 
and limestone, may increase approximately 30% and 
that in nine years out of ten, shipping costs are likely 
to equal or exceed those of the low lake levels of 
1963-65. 
Another major change reported by Sanderson is that 
maximum ice cover on the Lakes may decline from 
72% to 0% for Lake Superior, 38% to 0% for Lake 
Michigan, 65% to 0% for Lake Huron, 90% to 50% 
for Lake Erie, and 33% to 0% for Lake Ontario, 
thus permitting an 11-month ice-free shipping 
season. 
Climate warming might be expected to result in 
substantial cost savings for transport of goods in the 
Mackenzie River region of Canada's Northwest 
5-19 
Territory, where over 90% of all goods are shipped 
by barges. Extension of the barge season from its 
present four months (mid June to mid October) by 
about six to eight additional weeks would be expect-
ed to result in decreased costs (Lonergan 1989). 
4.2.2.2 Impact of climate change on ocean shipping 
There is little data or analysis concerning the poten-
tial impacts of climate change and associated sea-
level rise on ocean shipping and on sea ports. An 
extensive study of the physical and ecological im-
pacts of climate change on the marine environment 
of Atlantic Canada (Stokoe, 1988) does provide an 
excellent summary for the provinces of Nova Scotia, 
New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and New-
foundland. 
Some benefits are reported from the reduction of 
sea ice. Absence of sea ice south of Labrador in 
most years could eliminate Coast Guard ice-breaking 
requirements, 
which now cost $15-$20 million 
Canadian each year. Absence of sea ice could cut 
costs for ferry services and marine transport and 
permit extended seasons for some routes. 
These 
gains for Atlantic Canada might be offset in part by 
loss of winter marine traffic to Churchill, Montreal 
and Saint Lawrence Seaway ports as these ports 
become ice free or accessible nearly all year round. 
Negative aspects of climate change for Atlantic 
Canada include damage to infrastructure resulting 
from sea-level rise. Stokoe projects losses of several 
hundred million dollars (Canadian) for each of the 
following categories: (i) urban waterfront land, (ii) 
buildings, (ii) breakwaters, (iv) bridges and cause-
ways, (v) roads and railways, (vi) fish processing 
plants and (vii) wharves. 
4.2.3 Impact of climate change on roads 
The only comprehensive study of likely impacts of 
climate change on roads of a large region is that 
contained in Stokoe's study of Atlantic Canada. 
Costs in the range of hundreds of millions of dollars 
are ascribed to each of the following categories: (i) 
bridges and causeways and (ii) roads and railways. 
An Urban Institute analysis of the effect of a 1 m 
sea-level rise on Greater Miami, Florida, US, 
(Miller, 1989) found that this 'would require raising 
most bridges to ensure adequate under-clearances, 
to prevent erosion beneath abutments, lifting of steel 
and box culverts, and pavement failure in bridge 
approaches, and to reduce vulnerability to storm 
surges during hurricanes.' 
The same study found beneficial effects on road 
costs from climate warming in Cleveland, Ohio, US, 
where climate change could cause annual snowfall to 
drop from 50 to roughly 8 inches, reducing annual 
snow and ice control costs by about $US4.5 million 
and producing a savings of about $700,000 each year 
from decreased frost damage to roads and bridges. 
(Miller, 1989.) 
A decrease in deep freezes and 
freeze-thaw cycles would result in fewer potholes, 
while warmer temperatures and improved drainage 
resulting from higher evaporation rates could allow 
use of thinner pavements in many areas, but require 
enhanced expansion capabilities. 
(Hyman, et al., 
1989.) The savings in Cleveland, Ohio, are projected 
at about 1% of road reconstruction costs, and 3% of 
resurfacing costs (Hyman et al., 1989). 
Parry and Read (1988) in their study of impact of 
climate variables on transport in the UK state: 
Although the U . K . has a comparatively mild 
and equable climate, the extremes of weather 
or climate are not always the most costly or 
dangerous, and weather thresholds of economic 
or safety interest can be in the midst of a 
range. 
To illustrate, a temperature of 0°C, 
though hardly extreme is critical because ice is 
most slippery when its temperature is at zero. 
Thus although the U . K . winter climate is 
warmer than that of most of continental 
Europe, because it is less predictable as far as 
the 0°C threshold is concerned, icy roads are 
potentially more dangerous in the U . K . and 
more difficult to manage. 
This observation suggests reason for caution in 
predicting likely effects of global warming on high-
way safety. 
Although the Mackenzie River region of Canada 
might be expected to realise some cost savings owing 
to a longer ice-free season, allowing barge traffic, 
some of these savings might be offset by a decrease 
in the winter road operating season as ice bridges 
may be usable for only a limited period (Lonergan, 
1989). It appears possible that this problem could 
be a concern in other regions of the Arctic. 
The greatest impacts on the automotive sector are 
likely to result from response strategies to global 
warming and related air pollution. Walsh (personal 
communication, 1989) points out that increased 
global warming will increase photochemical activity 
and increase tropospheric ozone for a given emission 
of hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides (NO x). Thus, 
it will increase pressure for greater control of these 
emissions from motor vehicles. Since tropospheric 
ozone is a G H G , global warming provides another 
5-20 
impetus for controlling N O x from vehicles. 
This 
should in turn encourage more stringent emissions 
control using existing conventional technology but, 
increased concern about C 0 2 , is likely to increase 
the pressure for advanced fuels and technologies 
such as fuel cells, hydrogen, solar etc (Walsh, 
personal communication, 1989). 
Pressures are also likely to develop for stringent 
controls on emissions of carbon monoxide because 
of its large potential to enhance the Greenhouse 
Effect. 
Global CO levels are increasing 0.8% to 
1.4% per year according to Khalil and Rasmussen 
(1988). 
Carbon monoxide, although a radiatively 
inactive gas can, through its interaction with O H , 
serve to increase the concentration of several im-
portant G H G (Ramanathan, 1988). 
Dr Gordon 
MacDonald (1989), in testimony before the US 
Senate Committee on Environment and Public 
Works stated: 
Carbon monoxide could thus be indirectly 
responsible for increasing greenhouse warming 
by 20 to 40% through raising the levels of 
methane and ozone... . 
Carbon monoxide 
participates in the formation of ozone and also 
in the destruction of hydroxyl radicals, which 
are principal sinks for ozone and methane 
G H G . Because carbon monoxide reacts rapid-
ly with hydroxyl, 
increases levels of carbon 
monoxide will lead to higher regional concen-
trations of ozone and methane. Measures to 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions will assisting 
in controlling global warming. 
The combined concern over the aggravation of air 
pollution as a result of global warming and over the 
contribution of auto emissions to the build-up of 
concentrations of G H G seems likely to push govern-
ments to enact increasingly stringent auto emissions 
controls and perhaps to encourage new fuel tech-
nologies. 
4.2.4 Impact of climate change on railways 
Relatively little data exist concerning potential 
impacts of climate change on railways. Miller (1989) 
reports that 100 °F weather expanded railroad tracks 
in the US in the summer of 1988, forcing Amtrak, 
the major US passenger railway, to reduce speeds 
from 125 to 80 miles per hour between Washington 
and Philadelphia, and allegedly caused a train wreck 
that injured 160 people on a Chicago to Seattle 
route. Global warming could be expected to exacer-
bate such heat-stress-related problems for railways, 
while producing some offsetting benefits through 
reduced snow obstruction of tracks. No systematic 
analysis exists in the literature, however, on the 
likely aggregate impacts on railways of increased 
heat stress or reduced snowfall. 
4.3 Determination of sensitivities 
The studies in the literature concerning likely im-
pacts of climate change on transport largely concern 
three high-latitude Northern Hemisphere countries, 
Canada, the UK and the US. It is not clear how 
much one can generalise from these effects to likely 
effects in the Southern Hemisphere or in tropical 
and 
subtropical 
regions 
of 
the 
Northern 
Hemisphere. 
Shipping in such regions may be 
affected greatly by changes in tropical cyclone 
patterns. Such changes could have potentially large 
consequences 
in 
places 
such 
as 
Australia 
(Henderson-Sellers and Blong, 1989; Pearman, 
1988). 
No analysis exists in the literature of the likely 
overall impact of greenhouse response strategies on 
the transport sector. It is likely, however, that the 
transport sector, especially the automotive sector, 
will become a major focus of greenhouse policy 
concern. 
Tracing C O z trends in Canada, Jessup 
(1989) states that in 1985, Canadian cars, trucks and 
other vehicles produced 34.5 mt of carbon, approxi-
mately 30% of Canada's total emissions of 118 mt. 
This motor vehicle component was, Jessup points 
out, the largest single component of Canada's 
carbon emissions, greater even than the 25.4 mt 
produced by electricity generation. Jessup goes on 
to suggest that governmental regulatory and taxing 
policies should be fashioned to reduce C 0 2 emis-
sions. Yet no analysis exists in the literature of how 
such policies might produce shifts between various 
transport modes. 
Although it is possible, even 
probable, that aggressive governmental policies to 
restrain greenhouse emissions would produce shifts 
between various transport modes, the absence of 
some systematic analysis makes such projections 
quite conjectural. 
4.4 Tasks for the near future 
Research and analysis of the following are needed: 
• implications of changes in tropical storm patterns, 
sea-ice extent, and iceberg flow on ocean ship-
ping; 
• likely impacts of government regulatory policies to 
restrain greenhouse emissions on the automotive 
sector, including improvement of efficiency in 
transportation facilities, likelihood of fuel switch-
ing, increased use of mass transit, or shift to other 
modes of transport; 
5-21 
• changes in water levels in inland waterways and 
potential effects on inland shipping; 
• likely impacts on transportation infrastructure in 
tropical areas of climate warming and sea-level 
rise; 
• likely impacts on transport and roads of a thawing 
of the permafrost associated with warming in the 
arctic and other cold regions; 
• the impact of likely climate-induced population 
migration on traffic and transport patterns; 
• transportation models, permitting projection of 
likely shifts between transportation modes as a 
result of climate change. 
5 
Summary of likely impacts of 
climate change on industry 
The term 'industry
5 here applies specifically to the 
production of goods and services. Thus, the impacts 
assessed in this section are primarily the direct 
effects of climate change on the producing of goods 
and services and the related production facilities. 
The energy industry and the transport industry are 
separately covered in the two preceding sections. 
5.1 Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
The change in climate that is predicted to accompa-
ny the rise of levels of C 0 2 and other infrared-
absorbing gases in the atmosphere, a so-called 
greenhouse effect-induced global warming, is expect-
ed to have far-reaching consequences on the world's 
industries. Each aspect of the 'greenhouse' scenario 
will contribute individual as well as aggregate im-
pacts to the worldwide industrial community. 
Additionally, the effects can be broken down into 
direct and indirect aspects. 
5.1.1 Direct impacts of climate change 
The direct impacts of climate change are likely to 
vary considerably between different industrial sec-
tors. One effort to assess impacts of climatic varia-
bility across industrial sectors of an entire nation is 
an unpublished (1985) British Meteorological Office 
Study cited by Parry and Read, (1988), at p2. This 
study shows the sensitivity of various industrial 
sectors within the UK to climatic variability by 
comparing the interannual variation in value of 
turnover in each sector due to weather with the total 
value of turnover in that sector. The most weather-
sensitive industries in descending order as a ratio of 
interannual variability to total value of turnover were 
agriculture (30.1%), transportation and communica-
tions (20.2%), construction (14.7%), energy (9.9%), 
consumer 
manufacturing 
(6.9%), 
retail 
and 
distribution (5.9%), other services, including televi-
sion (4.3%), minerals and metal manufacturing 
(3.0%), engineering (2.9%) and professional services 
(2.0%). 
Generally, the more weather-sensitive industries on 
a historical basis would appear more vulnerable in a 
rapidly warming world; nevertheless, some historic 
losses may become less of a factor, eg disruption 
due to blizzards or ice storms. It is possible that 
warming will have quite differential impacts on 
particular industries, in some cases reducing varia-
bility and in other cases magnifying it. 
5.1.2 Indirect impacts of climate change 
Among the most significant likely impacts of climate 
change on the industrial sector are public policies 
designed to restrain emissions of G H G . 
Such 
policies could enhance opportunities for energy-
efficient industries and industries that produce or 
use low quantities of G H G while penalising 
industries that produce large quantities of G H G . 
Among the greatest potential impacts on the manu-
facturing sector may be requirements to increase the 
efficiency of manufacturing processes to reduce 
energy consumption and G H G emissions. Among 
those industries that may be especially affected by 
response strategies is the Portland cement industry, 
which generates, according to one estimate, about 
1181 million tons of global C 0 2 emissions each year 
(Margolin, 1990). At this time, there is little analysis 
to project these potential impacts of response 
strategies on industry. 
5.2 Assessment of impacts 
There are relatively few detailed studies concerning 
the likely impact of climate change on industry, and 
these studies have been performed in only a few 
countries: principally Australia, Canada, Japan, the 
UK and the US. 
The most significant of these 
studies are reviewed by industry grouping. 
5.2.1 Direct impact of climate change on 
particular industries 
Virtually all of the studies concerning impacts of 
climate change on industry involve direct impacts 
such as changes in temperature, seasonality and 
frequency of precipitation, storm patterns, sea-level 
rise or water flow. These changes can be divided 
into a number of categories as follows: 
5-22 
5.2.1.1 Weather-dependent demand 
The most detailed studies of changes in demand due 
to climate warming have been done by Linder and 
Gibbs (1988), Parry and Read (1988) and Linder 
(1989) concerning energy demand. 
These are 
discussed in the chapter on energy above. 
Climate warming could be expected to increase 
demand for such cold drinks as carbonated bever-
ages, fruit juices, lemonade and ice tea, and to 
reduce demand for such hot beverages as hot coffee 
or hot tea. 
No reliable projections of the likely 
magnitude of such changes in average consumption 
are available. Global warming might also be expect-
ed to affect consumer demands for certain foods, 
but no studies are available to project such potential 
effects. 
The clothing industry would also be likely to experi-
ence changes in consumer demand owing to global 
warming. 
There would appear reason to expect 
increased demand for cotton clothing and certain 
synthetics that are comfortable in hot weather and to 
expect some potential reduction in demand for 
wools. In addition, the design of clothing could be 
expected to change to greater use of lightweight 
materials and use of short-sleeve shirts or blouses. 
Climate warming will affect the beverage, food and 
garment industries and other sectors. Effects will 
probably stimulate demand for some products and 
reduce demand for others. There appear, however, 
no systematic projections of such likely effects. One 
of the few studies of weather-dependent demand 
concerns wide fluctuations in sales of air-condition-
ers. In Japan on days over 35 °C air-conditioning 
sales tend to rise by 40,000 units (Sakai, 1988). 
5.2.1.2 Weather vulnerable industry 
Some industries appear especially sensitive to weath-
er conditions, with extreme cold and, to a lesser 
extent, extreme heat appearing to limit production in 
the construction industry and severe storms being a 
considerable detriment to such industries as offshore 
oil and gas drilling. 
In surveying impacts of climatic variability on UK 
industry, Parry and Read report that rainfall is 
responsible for more delays than any other climatic 
variable and that snow will affect operations on 
construction sites as well as transport to the sites. 
In the U K , they report: 
Snow depth in December and January, and 
mean monthly temperatures in November and 
December seem to be the most important 
climatic variables determining productivity in 
the construction industry, but sometimes with 
a lag effect so that, for example, the size of the 
construction labour force in February is related 
to air temperature two or even three months 
earlier (at p. 30). 
The analysis by Friedman (1989) on insurance 
implications for the US of climate change, provides 
a potential projection of changed vulnerability of 
storm-sensitive industries. Friedman projects that an 
increase in seasonal sea surface temperature of only 
0.5°C could be expected to lengthen the hurricane 
season by 20 days and that it could increase the 
annual average loss expectancy due to hurricane-
caused catastrophes by 40%. Such changes presum-
ably would increase storm vulnerability of such 
industries as coastal fisheries and offshore oil and 
gas drilling. 
In some high-latitude areas outside of traditional 
hurricane or tropical cyclone belts, reduced sea ice 
and icebergs could yield major benefits for offshore 
oil and gas drilling. Sea ice and icebergs currently 
have major adverse impacts on such exploration and 
development on the Northern Grand Banks and 
Labrador Shelf of Canada. During the extremely 
severe ice year of 1984-85, 8952 hours of drilling 
downtime resulted from ice problems and produced 
losses of $40 million (Canadian), based on a cost of 
$100,000 per 24-hour day (CCD 88-07). 
In the event that global warming causes an increase 
in the intensity or frequency of tropical cyclones, this 
could result in lost industrial productivity as industry 
in the affected regions is forced to suspend oper-
ations during the storm threat and its aftermath. 
5.2.1.3 Climate-utilising industry 
Some industries are directly dependent on climate 
for their success. 
The skiing industry requires 
sufficiently low temperatures for snow (or at least 
artificial snow), 
and some other recreational 
industries such as water sports or swimming pool 
sales may benefit from warmer climates. 
In a study of implications of an effective C 0 2 doub-
ling for tourism and recreation in Ontario, Canada, 
Wall (1988) projects that the downhill ski season in 
the South Georgian Bay Region could be eliminated 
with an annual loss of $36.55 million (Canadian) per 
annum in skier spending there and a $12.8 million 
drop in spending at Collingwood. Some of these 
losses would be offset by extended seasons for 
summer recreational activities. 
In an analysis of 
likely implications of an effective C 0 2 doubling for 
downhill skiing in Quebec, Lamothe and Periard 
(1988) project a decrease in the number of skiable 
days of 50% to 70% for Southern Quebec and that 
5-23 
ski resorts equipped with snow-making devices 
would probably experience a 40% to 50% reduction 
in the number of skiable days. The study projects 
sizeable losses to the Quebec economy. In a study 
of skiing in Japan, Aoki (1989) finds skiing highly 
sensitive to snowfall. 
The wine-producing industry is especially sensitive to 
climate. 
Tom Roper, Minister for Planning and 
Environment of Australia's second most populous 
state, Victoria, recently projected, 
The increased temperatures would be likely to 
severely affect 
the variability 
of current 
temperate fruit production ... . Victorian wine 
growers could see their cool climate vineyards 
disappear and growing conditions transformed 
over the space of 30 years. (Roper, 1989). 
5.2.1.4 Local resource-dependent industry 
Some industries are very dependent on the availabili-
ty of local resources which may be affected greatly 
by changes in climate. Climate-induced changes in 
the availability, or cost of obtaining crops, domestic 
animals, fish or aquatic animals, wood, water, or 
mineral resources could affect the standing of such 
industries as the agricultural processing industry, the 
forest and paper products industry, the fish-process-
ing industry, the hydroelectric power industry, and 
such energy-dependent industries as the aluminium 
manufacturing industry. 
There is a large number of studies of the likely 
impact of climatic change and of climatic variability 
on agriculture. 
Perhaps the most comprehensive 
work is Parry et al., (1987). A number of competing 
factors may affect the cost, quality and availability of 
agricultural raw materials. Increased concentrations 
of C 0 2 in the atmosphere are expected to enhance 
the rate of photosynthesis and increase the rate of 
growth of most plants, but this change is expected to 
vary greatly among plants. 
Other climate-change-
related variables which may have mixed or negative 
results include changes in length of growing season, 
frequency and seasonality of precipitation, rate of 
évapotranspiration, heat stress and changes in U V - B 
radiation. 
For agricultural industries dependent on a single 
agricultural raw material, eg fruit or wine produc-
tion, wool or fibre industry, changed local availability 
of such materials might affect the competitive 
standing of such industries. Reliable projections of 
such effects do not, however, seem available at 
present. 
Climate change is expected to have significant effects 
on forest productivity (Shands and Hoffman, 1986; 
Winget, 1988; Regens et al., 1989). These effects 
could ultimately affect the competitive position of 
the timber and logging industries, pulp and paper 
products industries and the wood products industry. 
Regens et al. foresee major shifts in US forest 
markets ultimately affecting the forest products 
industry, possibly causing a shift northward of the 
industry's processing infrastructure. Yet such a shift 
would be constrained, they maintain, by a huge entry 
cost for new paper mills (about $US500 million, 
each in current dollar terms) and the lack of ad-
equate water supplies and transportation routes 
servicing alternate potential mill sites. Opening of 
new sawmills where the investment runs only $US10 
million to $US20 million would be accomplished 
much more readily. 
Summarising results of a Symposium on Implications 
of Climate Change for Commercial and Sport 
Fisheries in North America, Topping and Bond 
(1988) conclude that fish productivity is likely to rise 
with an increase in mean water temperature; so a 
moderate global warming might be expected to 
increase fish yields. 
Distribution and range of 
particular fish species may change significantly as a 
result of an increase in water temperature. In some 
cases, secondary environmental effects associated 
with climate warming such as greater estuarine 
salinity might offset or overwhelm the direct benefits 
from warmer water temperatures. 
Topping and 
Bond project that the 
greatest threat to global 
fisheries productivity from climate change may stem 
from increased U V - B radiation resulting from a 
depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer. 
Tsyban et al. (1985), however, identify two possible 
adverse impacts associated with global warming 
which could each act to reduce significantly world 
fisheries production. 
These include a potential 
reduction in the intensity and areas of oceanic 
upwelling and a corresponding loss of nutrients, and 
a decrease of the pH in water calculated at about 
0.3 for a C 0 2 doubling, which may harm marine 
organisms. See Chapter 6 for an extended discus-
sion of these issue. 
Although the effects of climate warming may be of 
benefit to fresh water fisheries such as those in the 
US-Canadian Great Lakes region (Regier et al., 
1988), such associated effects as sea-level rise could 
pose major problems for the fish-processing industry 
in coastal areas. 
Stokoe (1988) notes that fish-
processing facilities in Canada's Atlantic provinces 
have a capital value of $1 billion dollars (Canadian), 
and most are situated at or near the water's edge 
5-24 
and could be vulnerable to inundation or damage as 
a result of sea-level rise. 
Studies of likely impacts of climate change on 
aquaculture are sparse, with Rothlisberg et al. (1988) 
indicating that climate warming could lead to an 
increase in banana prawn catches and a decrease in 
tiger prawn catches in the Gulf of Carpentaria off 
Australia. Kennedy (1989) concludes, after a study 
of likely impacts of climate change on aquaculture in 
the Chesapeake Bay region of the US, that soft 
clams and winter flounder may disappear from the 
bay under a climate warming of 3°-4°C. 
5.2.1.5 Site-dependent industry 
Climate change and sea-level rise may have signifi-
cant and mixed impacts on such site-dependent 
industries as the tourism and resort industry, such 
transportation industries as highways and mass 
transit, and a whole range of coastal industries, 
particularly the beach and recreation industry. 
A preliminary Japanese case study projects that in 
the absence of concerted human efforts to build 
coastal defence, sea-level rise of 1 m could inundate 
the port area of 1900 km
2 and cause damage to nine 
million Japanese (Ministry of Transport of Japan, 
1989). An even greater proportion of industry may 
be vulnerable in Africa, where industry tends to be 
concentrated in capital cities, a large portion of 
which are seaports (Tebicke, 1989). 
The impacts of sea-level rise on beaches and coastal 
resorts may be quite great. Even a rise of a fraction 
of a metre could produce wide-scale erosion on 
vulnerable coasts, particularly those with very gradu-
al slopes such as much of the US Atlantic and Gulf 
Coasts. The cost of beach nourishment, ie dredging 
sand from the ocean to rebuild major recreational 
beaches, may be quite considerable. 
Leatherman 
(1989) estimates that the costs of such an engineer-
ing approach to protect major US recreational 
beaches would be likely to range from $US2.3 billion 
to $US5.9 billion by the year 2020. 
A major uncertainty affecting the recreational 
industry is how these costs will be apportioned by 
coastal nations facing such problems. If these costs 
are borne largely by the national government, as 
they have generally been to date in the US, the 
added cost to coastal recreation and related 
industries may be modest. If local governments in 
coastal areas are made to face the primary burden 
of financing such projects, this is likely to result in 
more beach abandonment and greater tax burdens 
upon coastal industries and communities when such 
projects are carried out. 
5.2.1.6 Variability-dependent industry 
The principal impact of weather or climate on some 
industries involves the occurrence of extreme events 
which cause potentially large losses. 
Perhaps the 
most significant of these industries is the insurance 
industry which will insure against risk to property, 
risks of death or injury, medical expenses and 
damage to crops. A second complex of industries 
likely to be affected by climate change includes those 
that are related to the construction or maintenance 
of infrastructure, dams, bridges, causeways, highways 
and other long-lived investments that must be built 
to stand up to ordinary wear and tear as well as 
extreme events such as floods, hurricanes, blizzards 
and ice storms. 
The most detailed analysis of likely implications of 
climate change for the insurance industry is a 
Friedman (1989) analysis of insurance pay outs on 
weather related catastrophes in the US. 
In the 
following table he presents an analysis of likely 
annual losses to US insurers from weather related 
catastrophes under current climatic conditions. 
Friedman calculates that these weather-related 
insurance losses are likely to rise about $300 million 
on an annual basis in a typical year during the 
transition period between 1990 and 2010 during 
which a greenhouse warming would occur. Although 
some modest gains would be realised by a reduction 
in winter storm damage, this would be overwhelmed 
by sizeable increases in hurricane damage and 
modest increases in damage from severe local 
storms. 
Friedman, Table 5.6, lists the resultant 
increases in damage. 
Parry and Read (1988) report that weather-related 
insurance claim pay outs in a normal year represent 
about 40% of the UK's annual total of about 2000 
million pounds. 
The greatest problems for the 
insurance industry in the UK have been associated 
with wind storms, severe cold and coastal flooding 
incident to storm surge. 
Peele (1988) projects that insurance claims in 
Australia from losses associated with tropical cyc-
lones, hailstorms, floods and brushfires associated 
with greenhouse warming will result in increased 
premiums on property insurance and a movement to 
higher deductibles. 
Berz (1988) in an analysis of likely impact of climate 
change on international reinsurance projects that 
costs are likely to increase greatly as the increased 
intensity of convective processes in the atmosphere 
raises the frequency and severity of tropical cyclones, 
tornadoes, hailstorms and storm surges in many 
5-25 
Table 5.5 Estimated total 1989 damages by storm type* 
Present climatic regime 
Storm type 
Hurricane 
Severe local 
storm 
Winter storm 
Total 
Number of 
catastrophes 
51 
649 
99 
799 
Percentage 
6.4 
81.2 
12.4 
100.0 
Total damage 
production 
(billions of 
dollars) 
$27.2 
31.4 
9.1 
$67.7 
Percentage 
40.2 
46.4 
13.4 
100.0 
Average 
annual 
damage 
production 
$680,000,000 
$780,000,000 
$230,000,000 
$1,690,000,000 
* Damages resulting from a repeat of each of the catastrophe-coded weather events that have occurred in the 
past forty years and which would cause at least $5 million in damage to presently insured properties in the 
US 
Source: Friedman, D.G. (1989 p390). 
Table 5.6 Estimated change in the annual damage producing potential of wind and hail* 
* 
Includes insurance industry coded catastrophes caused by the insured perils of wind and hail between the 
present climatic regime and an undefined time during the transitional climate period (1990-2010) when a 
projected warming due to the Greenhouse Effect might be attained. Damage potential is expressed in 
1989 dollars. 
Storm type 
Winter storm 
Hurricane 
Severe local storm 
Annual damage based 
on present climatic 
conditions 
$ 230,000,000 
680,000,000 
780,000,000 
Annual damage based 
on change in annual 
damage potential 
$ 20,000,000 
+ 270,000,000 
+ 25,000,000 
Transitional climate 
condition 
$ 210,000,000 
950,000,000 
850,000,000 
$1,690,000,000 
$275,000,000 
$1,965,000,000 
Source: Friedman, D.G. (1989 p393). 
5-26 
parts of the world. 
In certain coastal areas he 
predicts that insurance coverage will be available 
only after significant restrictions have been applied 
such as high deductibles and low liability or loss 
limits. 
Stark (1988) argues that the Greenhouse Effect will 
affect coastal and marine structures and develop-
ments in three principal ways thus requiring engi-
neers to build into the design of these structures and 
projects a rise in mean sea levels, or potential 
increase in frequency of and areas affected by 
tropical cyclones and an increase in intensity of 
cyclones. Current designs are not adequate, Stark 
maintains, to withstand storm surges and wave 
attacks that can be anticipated under existing climate 
change scenarios. 
Flynn et al. (1984) assessing the implications of sea-
level rise for hazardous waste sites in coastal flood-
plains conclude that serious health and environment-
al problems may arise from the flooding of some 
active US hazardous waste facilities even in the 
absence of sea level rise. 
Sea-level rise concerns 
may, they suggest, require relocation of some exist-
ing hazardous waste facilities and strengthened 
design criteria for new sites. The hazardous waste 
industry is likely to be directly affected by concerns 
about flooding from storm surge. 
5.2.2 Indirect impacts of climate change 
on industry 
An analysis of likely indirect impacts of climate 
change on industry is speculative given the paucity of 
reliable studies on direct impacts. Climate change 
appears likely to alter consumer demand in ways not 
yet perceived. 
Travel and transportation patterns 
are likely to change affecting such industries as 
tourism. 
Shifts in natural resources availability 
resulting from climate change will change inter-
national trade relations, affecting investment in 
seemingly unrelated industries. 
Among the more predictable of the indirect effects 
is the creation of market opportunities for industries 
that seize the opening created by public concern 
about the greenhouse effect. 
These may include 
manufacturers and marketers of energy conservation 
devices, coastal engineers, developers of water 
conserving or desalinisation technologies, agricultural 
researchers or biotechnology firms that develop 
drought resistant or temperature resistant crops. 
The converse of this effect may be increased regula-
tory pressures or tax burdens on firms that produce 
substantial quantities of G H G emissions. 
5.3 Determination of sensitivities 
The principal limitation in any review of climate 
impacts on industry is the inability of current climate 
models to give reasonable projections of regional 
and local climate scenarios. This is particularly true 
concerning water availability, a crucial variable in 
projections of impacts on many industries. 
In addition, analyses of climate impacts on industry 
exist in only a few countries, all in the industrialised 
world. 
There is strong evidence to suggest that 
developing countries will bear a major part of the 
burden of rapid and large-scale climate change, and 
it is likely that industry in these countries, particular-
ly that sited in coastal areas, will be profoundly 
affected (Tebicke, personal communication, 1989). 
5.4 Tasks for the near future 
More case studies of likely impacts on particular 
industries are needed. Many of these studies should 
be directed at developing country industries. Central 
to this analysis is a projection of the likely change in 
the production map of primary products as a result 
of climate change. Changes in the price and availab-
ility of primary products will affect the competitive 
position of industry in developing countries. Such 
studies could have major implications for develop-
ment planning and investment policies. 
Analysis 
should also be performed of market opportunities 
created by the new global focus on and response to 
greenhouse warming. 
Mechanisms should be developed for ensuring 
growth of climate impact expertise within developing 
countries to cover the whole range of climate im-
pacts. This could be facilitated through the funding 
of regional climate centres and rotation of scholars 
from various affected countries to these regional 
centres. 
There is also a strong need to involve industrial 
strategic planners in order to fine-tune the research 
and analysis of industry impacts and ensure that the 
results of such analysis are incorporated in industrial 
planning. 
6 Summary of likely impacts of 
climate change on human health 
This section summarises the likely effects on human 
health following both global warming and U V - B 
radiation increase. 
5-27 
6.1 Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
The study assesses acute, chronic and ecotoxico-
logical effects of global climate change on human 
health (Figure 5.2). 
6.2 Assessment of impacts 
Global climate change may lead to change directly 
in morbidity and mortality through global warming 
and through U V - B radiation increase. 
Global 
climate change is likely to affect the ecosystem and 
alter the human hazards such as parasites and 
chemical pollutants and also affect human health by 
producing changes in air quality and water quality. 
6.2.1 General climate effect 
Human beings have the potential to adapt to climate 
change not only by physiological, but also by social 
and cultural adaptive measures, such as hygiene 
practices, medicine and agricultural traditions. 
Owing to these abilities of adaptation, human beings 
can live throughout the world. 
Therefore, it is 
necessary to study the capacity for adaptation to 
extreme climate. 
Among major causes of mortality, cardiovascular 
disease, cerebrovascular disease, hypertensive heart 
disease, and cancer, are influenced by a variety of 
environmental factors including climate, urbanisa-
tion, social environment and life styles. 
In the 
economically developed countries, these diseases 
cause over two-thirds of total mortality. The time 
trends of incidence of death may be related to 
change of environmental factors, such as life styles 
and urbanisation. 
In temperate and cooler regions, seasonal trends of 
the mortality of cardiovascular, cerebrovascular, and 
hypertensive heart diseases indicate a winter maxi-
mum and summer minimum (Momiyama and 
Katayama, 1972). Cancer trends, however, are not 
seasonal. 
The seasonal trends of major causes of 
death have changed. For example, there has been a 
deseasonalisation of infant mortality in Japan. 
Global warming may change the environmental 
factors and affect the time trends and seasonality of 
these diseases in many countries. 
The effect of global climate change on human health 
may also be detected most sensitively in changes of 
some seasonally changing biological phenomena. 
Birth seasonality, one of the most distinct seasonal 
phenomena in human reproductive physiology, may 
be affected by global warming (Miura, 1987). 
Hypothermia, which is caused by exposure to ex-
treme cold in winter, also shows seasonality. Acci-
dental hypothermia of the aged was often discovered 
in the morning because of defective heating systems. 
As a result of global warming, the incidence of 
accidental hypothermia of the aged may be reduced 
(Iriki and Tanaka, 1987). 
6\2.2 Heat stress 
In recent years, cardiovascular mortality has in-
creased in many industrialised and developing 
countries (United Nations, 1986). 
Since heat 
conservation and loss by the human body are pri-
marily controlled by the cardiovascular system, 
cardiovascular diseases may increase during heat 
stress (Weihe, 1985). 
Heatwaves may be associated with increases in 
morbidity and mortality (Longstreth, 1989; Schuman, 
1972; Marmor, 1978). Threshold temperatures for 
heat stress are relative rather than absolute. 
The 
higher summer threshold temperatures are observed 
in the hot climate regions while the lower are found 
in cool climates. 
While deaths of infants under the age of one were 
not examined, the categories which appeared most 
sensitive to weather are total deaths and elderly 
deaths (greater than 65 years old). 
For the total 
deaths in summer, the most important factors 
influencing mortality are the accumulation of degree 
hours above the threshold temperature each day and 
their time occurrence. Early heat waves in summer 
are more likely to have effects than those late in the 
season (Kalkstein, 1989). 
Correlation analysis 
between mortality and weather conditions in the US 
and Japan shows that mortality from several causes 
of death was also closely associated with air tem-
perature (Kalkstein, 1989; Makino, 1987). 
6.2.3 Air pollution 
Global warming and elevation of U V - B radiation 
would 
accelerate photochemical 
reaction rates 
among chemical pollutants in the atmosphere, 
causing increased oxidants in many urban areas. In 
summer, high concentrations of oxidants are ob-
served around many large cities throughout the 
world, frequently in excess of health-based ambient 
standards. 
Global warming may increase ozone 
concentrations in urban areas and spread the pollut-
ed areas even further, thereby increasing the health 
risk already posed to persons in those areas. 
The main pollutants caused by photochemical 
reactions are ozone, oxides of nitrogen, aldehydes, 
peroxyacetyl nitrates, and propylene glycol nitrates. 
5-28 
Evidence exists to associate the photochemical 
oxidants with adverse effects on human health 
(Schneider et al., 1989). The diseases that fall into 
this category are inflammatory disease of the eye, 
acute non-specific upper respiratory disease, chronic 
bronchitis, chronic obstructive ventilatory disease, 
pulmonary emphysema, and bronchial 
asthma. 
Moreover, it is reported that ozone modifies lung 
tumour formation (Hassett et al., 1985; Last et al., 
1987). 
Many organic carcinogens are also common in the 
urban air. 
Since some of these chemicals are 
produced or decomposed by chemical reaction in the 
air, the concentration of these pollutants may be 
affected by global warming and UV-B radiation 
increase. 
6.2.4 Chemical pollution 
Global warming has potential impacts on crop yields 
and productivity. Since crop production is sensitive 
to water supply and plant pests, crop yields could 
change water supply and pest control management. 
Global warming may modify the incidence of plant 
pests and hazardous insect population. Changes in 
water supply could affect the agrochemical leaching 
from farms and degrade surface and groundwater 
quality in many areas. 
Many types of pesticides are used to control plant 
pests and parasites. Since temperature increase may 
accelerate the volatilisation of many organic chemi-
cals, the atmospheric transport of the chemicals may 
accelerate (Bidelman et al., 1981; Rapaport et al., 
1985; Rovinsky et al., 1982; Tanabe et al., 1982). 
High temperature and elevation of UV-B radiation 
may accelerate the chemical reaction of organic 
pollutants in the atmosphere and the degradation 
rate of the chemicals. Therefore, global warming 
could influence the concentration of many organic 
pollutants in the environment thereby resulting in a 
change of human exposure (Ando et al., 1985). 
6.2.5 Water quality and quantity 
Global warming may change the timing and amount 
of precipitation in various countries. In the regions 
with less precipitation, salt concentrations in water 
may increase greatly. 
High salt concentration in 
water and reduction of water supply may directly 
affect the health of people in that area. If global 
warming reduces the precipitation, food production 
could decrease significantly 
(US EPA, 1988). 
Sometimes, the low food supply will increase famine 
and malnutrition in developing countries with poten-
tially large consequences for human mortality. On 
the other hand, heavy rain also could decrease water 
quality. Sometimes, frequent flooding has threat-
ened the health of people in developing countries, 
directly or indirectly. Permafrost degradation may 
cause leaching from disposed wastes, resulting in 
contamination of the groundwater. If global warm-
ing worsens the water quality or increases inunda-
tion, diarrhoea, cholera and dysentery epidemics 
could spread in developing countries and in the 
subarctic area. 
6.2.6 Vector-borne diseases 
Global warming may modify the incidence and/or 
distribution of vector-borne disease. 
If global 
warming changes rainfall and temperature, the 
seasonal and geographical abundance of the major 
vector species, such as mosquitoes, could change. In 
the Northern 
Hemisphere, these 
vector-borne 
diseases could move northward and in the Southern 
Hemisphere southward. 
Some infectious diseases are well known to show 
apparent seasonal changes and would seem to be 
very sensitive to global warming. Japanese encepha-
litis and some other viral diseases are regulated by 
some seasonal factors. Therefore, an improvement 
of the environment may be necessary to prevent the 
breeding of vector species. 
In tropical regions, vector-borne diseases have 
important impacts on morbidity and mortality. In 
1988 malaria and schistosomiasis posed potential 
risks to 2100 and 600 million people, respectively. If 
global warming increases the precipitation in tropical 
and subtropical areas, many diseases may further 
threaten human health. Parasitic and viral diseases, 
such as malaria, schistosomiasis and dengue have the 
potential for increase and reintroduction in many 
countries (WHO, 1990; Dobson and Carper, 1989). 
6.2.7 Ultraviolet-B radiation 
UV-B radiation has many damaging effects on 
human health, such as skin cancer, cataract and 
snow blindness (Hiller et al., 1983). UV-B radiation 
also suppresses the immune defences against certain 
infections and tumours initiated in the skin. 
There are two main types of non-melanoma skin 
cancer: basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell 
carcinoma, which have a convincing and clear-cut 
relationship to UV-B radiation (Blum et al., 1941; 
Blum 1959). Malignant melanoma is also at least 
partially caused by exposure to UV-B radiation. It 
has been recognised that the incidence of skin 
cancer including melanoma increases from high to 
low latitudes possibly due to the increase of UV-B 
radiation. In this connection, account must be taken 
5-29 
of the changes that have occurred in recreational 
behaviour and people's willingness to expose them-
selves to the sun. 
While it is difficult to estimate numerical effect on 
the basis of epidemiologic data in the US (US E P A , 
1987), U N E P (1989) and W H O (1989) estimated 
that for every 1% decrease in stratospheric ozone, 
there will be between a 0.3% to 0.6% increase in 
cataracts. Based on the same epidemiologic date, it 
was also estimated that for every 1% depletion of 
ozone the incidence of basal cell carcinoma, squa-
mous cell carcinoma and malignant melanoma, will 
increase 2.7%, 4.6% and 0.6%, respectively. There 
is concern that U V - B radiation, suppression of the 
immune system might lead to an increase of the 
incidence and severity of infectious diseases. It is 
necessary to confirm the incidence rate of skin 
cancer in various countries in relation to U V - B dose. 
Data on U V - B exposure dose is extremely limited. 
6.3 
Determination of sensitivities 
6.3.1 General climate effect 
Global warming may affect the seasonality of many 
causes of death. The seasonal variation of mortality 
also changes sharply according to the improvement 
of the environment and the socioeconomic condition 
of countries. 
6.3.2 Heat stress 
Global warming is likely to induce mortality increase 
during heat waves in summer. On the other hand, 
winter mortality may decrease. In general, weather-
induced deaths are more important in summer than 
in winter. 
Artificial heating and cooling, when 
affordable, may reduce deaths from heat and cold. 
The less resilient population - the poor, the disabled, 
the sick and the aged - are at greater risk. 
6.3.3 Air pollution 
Global warming and increased U V - B radiation 
would both accelerate the photochemical reaction 
rates among chemical pollutants and increase ozone 
concentration in urban areas. 
Ozone and other 
photochemical oxidants may be associated with many 
respiratory diseases and cancer. 
6.3.4 Chemical pollution 
Global warming may result in an increase of pesti-
cide use in agriculture, and accelerate the volatilisa-
tion and atmospheric transport of many organic 
pollutants in global ecosystems. 
6.3.5 Water quality 
As global warming could change the precipitation, 
water quality may be affected greatly. 
High salt 
concentration and less water supply may threaten 
the drier land through impaired drinking water and 
food production. On the other hand, heavy rain will 
cause floods and spread water-borne diseases. 
6.3.6 Vector-borne diseases 
Since global warming changes rainfall and tempera-
ture, distribution and abundance of many vector 
species should change. 
Some infectious diseases 
including parasitic and viral 
diseases, such as 
malaria, schistosomiasis and dengue have the poten-
tial to increase in many countries, especially tropical 
and subtropical areas. 
6.3.7 UV-B radiation 
Since build-up of CFCs in the stratosphere may lead 
to stratospheric ozone depletion and increase U V - B 
radiation, a number of diseases of the eyes and skin, 
such as cataract, non-melanoma and melanoma skin 
cancer, may increase. 
6.4 Tasks for the near future 
The following research would be necessary: 
6.4.1 General climate effect 
(i) The effect of global warming on seasonal trends 
of major causes of morbidity and mortality, 
(ii) 
The assessment of the incidence of major 
causes of death in industrialised and developing 
countries in the future. 
6.4.2 Temperature stress 
(i) The effect of global warming on heat and cold 
wave episodes; 
(ii) Methods of decreasing mortality among high-
risk groups; 
(in) The assessment of capacity of adaptation to hot 
and cold weather, especially among vulnerable 
population groups such as the elderly. 
6.4.3 Air pollution 
(i) The effect of global climate change on oxidants 
and organic carcinogens in the atmosphere; 
(ii) Exposure assessment of these air pollutants; 
5-30 
(iii) The incidence of respiratory disease and lung 
cancer in polluted and non-polluted areas. 
6.4.4 Chemical pollution 
(i) The effect of global warming on the worldwide 
chemical pollution; 
(ii) Human exposure to these chemical pollutants; 
(iii) The incidence of morbidity and mortality in 
acutely or chronically exposed populations. 
6.4.5 Water quality 
(i) The effect of global warming on the precipita-
tion in various countries; 
(ii) The assessment of hygienic quality of water 
resources in the world. 
6.4.6 Vector-borne diseases 
(i) The effect of global warming on geographical 
abundance of major vector species; 
(ii) The assessment of incidence of vector-borne 
diseases in the future; 
(iii) 
The improvement of the environment to 
prevent the breeding of vector species. 
6.4.7 UV-B radiation 
(i) 
The assessment of the elevation of U V - B 
radiation according to ozone depletion in order to 
determine the dose received; 
(ii) 
Epidemiological association of the rise of 
incidence of cataracts, non-melanoma and melanoma 
skin cancer and an increase of U V - B radiation in 
many countries. 
(iii) The risk evaluation of immune suppression by 
U V - B radiation increase on vaccination and infec-
tious diseases. 
7 Summary of likely impacts of 
global warming and strato-
spheric ozone depletion on air 
quality 
This section addresses the effects on regional and 
tropospheric air quality resulting from climate 
warming and stratospheric ozone depletion. 
7.1 Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
(See Figure 5.3.) 
Change in air quality, photochemical ozone produc-
tion, acid rain, visibility and albedo due to climate 
change and tropospheric temperature rise are 
assessed. 
However, the lack of reliable regional 
prediction of changes in circulation, precipitation, 
humidity, cloud cover, arid area, trace-gas concentra-
tions etc hinders their quantitative assessment. 
7.2 Assessment of impacts 
The tropospheric temperature rise induced by the 
greenhouse effect could change homogeneous and 
heterogeneous reaction rates (Washida et al., 1985), 
solubility to cloud water, emission from marine, soil 
and vegetative surfaces and deposition to plant 
surfaces of various atmospheric gases including 
water vapor and C H 4 (WHO, 1989). 
A change in water vapour concentration will lead to 
change in concentration of H O x radicals and H 2 0 2 , 
which are important for the oxidation of volatile 
organic compounds (VOC), S 0 2 and N O x in the 
atmosphere. 
Climatic change could induce change in pressure 
patterns, humidity, atmospheric stability, clouds, 
precipitation and distribution of arid lands. 
The 
predicted change of the patterns of cloud cover, 
stability in the lower atmosphere, circulation and 
precipitation could concentrate or dilute pollutants, 
and 
change 
their 
distribution 
pattern 
and 
transformation rates in local and regional scales. 
A change in aerosol formation by atmospheric 
conversion from V O C , N O x and S 0 2 and windblown 
dust from arid land, and organic aerosol production 
from vegetation, could lead to changes in visibility, 
the planetary albedo and effect upon human health 
(WHO, 1989). 
A change in energy usage due to fuel switching and 
increased use of air-conditioners will lead to changes 
in energy-related emissions. 
A l l of the above changes will be linked to impose 
some effects upon air quality, ozone and aerosol 
production, visibility, global albedo and acid deposi-
tion in local, regional and global scales. Among 
these combined effects the effect of temperature 
upon ozone production has been studied most 
extensively. 
5-31 
Temperature-dependent modelling studies on ozone 
production were conducted by Gery et al. (1987), 
Morris et al. (US E P A , 1988), and MacCracken and 
Santer (1975). According to the studies by Gery et 
al. (1987) the increase in ozone is predicted to be 
about 1.4 ± 0.5% per IK increase. The production 
of H 2 0 2 is predicted to increase at a much higher 
rate. The model calculation also predicted increased 
ozone production with the depletion of stratospheric 
ozone. 
In the San Francisco Bay area Morris 
concluded that 4K of temperature increase resulted 
in a 20% increase in peak ozone concentration and 
about a doubling of the area in exceedence of the 
national ambient air quality standards (120 ppb). 
On the other hand, MacCracken and Santer indicat-
ed that for the San Francisco Bay area the L I R A Q 
model showed 2% decrease in peak ozone with a 
nominal temperature increase from 285K to 304K. 
Wratt (1989) predicted that in Auckland tempera-
ture increases of 1.5K and 3.5K would increase peak 
ozone concentration by 8% and 19%, respectively. 
A recent modelling analysis conducted by the US 
E P A showed that for a maximum average tempera-
ture rise of 2.5K, the increase in peak ozone would 
be between 2% and 10% for various urban locations 
throughout the US. 
Smog chamber studies conducted by Carter et al. 
(1979) and by Hatakeyama et al. (1989) found 
increases in peak ozone concentration with the rise 
of temperature from experimental temperature of 
280K to 320K and of 303K to 323K, respectively. 
The chamber experiments supported a view that the 
time of exposure to high levels of ozone would be 
increased in the region of higher temperature. In 
smog chamber experiments Johnson (1983) found 
that photochemical smog increases with temperature, 
provided that photochemical smog production is in 
the so-called 'light-limited' phase and not the ' N O x 
limited phase.' 
While some different results were obtained, a 
majority of the studies indicate the potential for 
increased ozone production with increasing tempera-
ture in industrialised urban areas. 
Since higher 
temperature increase is predicted at higher latitudes, 
much attention should be paid to the increased 
ozone production in such areas. 
In developing 
countries, ozone pollution may be limited to the 
largest cities, but the extent of the problem may 
expand, given the explosive growth of urban area in 
those parts of the world. It is well accepted that 
increased levels of local and regional air pollution, 
particularly photochemical air pollution, may exert 
effects upon human health and terrestrial plants. In 
addition, acid rain could affect sensitive areas in 
Europe, the northeastern US, Canada and some 
areas of east Asia, where acidification of lakes and 
forest damage may occur. Material damage caused 
by acidic and other kinds of air pollutants may be 
aggravated by higher levels of humidity. 
7.3 Determination of sensitivities 
Severalfold increases of natural emissions or atmos-
pheric concentration of trace gases with a tempera-
ture rise of 10K have been observed in specific 
locations by various researchers. For example, the 
following increases were noted for N H 3 (3.1), D M S 
(9.0), H 2S + COS (4.1), NO (3.3) and terpenes 
(6.0). (Figure in parenthesis is factor of multiplica-
tion for each compound of the gases with tempera-
ture rise of 10K.) 
(Okita and Kanamori, 1971; 
Aneja et al., 1979; Tingey et al., 1981; Johansson and 
Granat, 1984.) 
The average increase of peak electricity demand due 
to increased use of air-conditioners with temperature 
rise of IK is about 3%. US E P A (1988) calculated 
that a 10% increase in electric power demand 
increases S 0 2 emissions by 30%. 
However, as 
patterns of power output are different in different 
regions, care should be taken in applying this figure 
to other areas. 
Impacts on energy usage are likely to vary in winter 
and summer. In the Tokyo area, overall electricity 
consumption is decreased by 0.9% in winter and 
increased by 2.7% in summer with IK rise of air 
temperature (Tokyo E.C., 1988). Using non-linear 
regression 
analysis, 
Wratt 
predicted 
that 
at 
Christchurch, New Zealand, with minimum tempera-
ture rise of 1.8K and 3.0K mean TSP (total suspend-
ed particulates) from domestic fire smoke would 
decrease by 14% and 19%, respectively. 
A temperature rise of 2K would raise water vapour 
concentration by 10%-30%. 
7.4 Tasks for the near future 
Changes in the frequency and pattern of cloud cover 
owing to the greenhouse effect should be studied in 
relation to ozone formation and conversion of S 0 2 
and N O x . 
Change in pressure, wind, circulation and precipita-
tion patterns and the frequency and intensity of 
stagnation episodes due to the greenhouse effect 
should be studied in relation to the change in 
distribution of air quality, oxidants and acid rain. 
Quantification should be made of the effect of 
atmospheric temperature on photochemical oxidant 
formation and on acid rain. Particularly, the discre-
pancy between model prediction and the results of 
5-32 
photochemical smog chamber experiments in differ-
ent levels of N O x should be pursued. 
The temperature dependence of energy use in 
various sectors other than electricity, due to global 
warming, should be studied in relation to its effect 
upon acid deposition and photochemical ozone 
formation. 
Change in the extent of arid regions should be 
studied in relation to generation of windblown dust 
and its effect upon air quality, acid rain and planet-
ary albedo. 
Change in oxidant formation in remote areas due to 
the greenhouse effect should be studied, taking the 
change of emission of precursor gases into account. 
Interaction of climate factors and emission of 
dimethylsulphide should be studied to prove or 
refute one of Lovelock's Gaia hypotheses. 
The 
temperature 
dependence 
of homogeneous 
reaction rates, and reaction rates in aqueous phase 
of atmospherically important gaseous species should 
be more accurately quantified. 
More study should be made on the temperature 
dependence of emissions of important gases from 
soil, sea surface and plants. 
GCMs and mesoscale meteorology-chemistry models 
which include the above effects should be linked to 
predict overall effects of G H G . 
8 Summary of likely impacts of 
increased UV-B radiation 
This section summarises the effects of U V - B 
radiation, resulting from the depletion of the strato-
spheric ozone layer, upon ecosystems, air quality and 
materials. 
8.1 Scope and limitations of the assess-
ment 
(See Figure 5.4.) 
This section discusses the potential influence of the 
greenhouse effect upon stratospheric ozone deple-
tion. 
The potential impacts of U V - B radiation 
arising from the ozone depletion on terrestrial 
vegetation, marine organisms, air quality and materi-
als are also analysed. 
The U V - B impact upon 
human health has been described in the section on 
health. 
However, the lack of data on the dose 
received of U V - B hinders a quantitative assessment 
of impacts. 
8.2 Assessment of impacts 
It is expected that the depletion of the ozone column 
due to anthropogenic activities incrcaAM UV-B 
radiation. The U V - B range of the vjlar tp-tctrum n 
defined as wavelengths from 290 to 320 nano-ni.c.vtt 
(nm). On the other hand, the greenhoiiat tUssl-
induced global warming will, wm.c tacnijzti bt/.ur<^ 
decrease stratospheric temperutixit and mx'i r.im-
press the ozone depletion (Manafce ajwd ViV-te?*-*-^ 
1967). 
Investigations have shown that L*V-£ m.i..n\ai 
a multitude of effects on humans., t.eTTtv'j"
_..iJ vagsu-
tion, marine organisms, air quality and csc.sr.Aji: 
most of these effects are damaging fWHG. 
However, no exact measurements on the relaiiocai-y 
between U V - B intensity near the ground and the 
amount of ozone in the stratosphere and tropo-
sphere has been established. 
Research into the potential impacts of an increase in 
solar U V - B radiation to plants has centred on the 
effects on plant growth and physiology under artifi-
cial U V - B irradiation supplied to plants in growth 
chambers or greenhouses. 
Overall, the effective U V - B varies both among 
species and among cultivars of a given species. 
Sensitive cultivars of soybean, wheat, oat, cucumber, 
sunflower etc, often exhibit reduced growth, photo-
synthetic activity, pollination, germination and 
flowering. Photosynthetic activity may be reduced 
and photosynthetic pigments are also affected by 
U V - B (Tevini and Teramura, 1989). 
Increases in U V - B radiation reduce yield in certain 
agricultural crops. 
Many soybean cultivars are 
sensitive to increased U V - B radiation. The crop 
quality may be reduced under increased levels of 
U V - B radiation. Reduced quality has been noted in 
certain cultivars of tomato, potato, sugar beets and 
soybean (Tevini and Teramura, 1989). 
Although only limited information exists, gymno-
sperms also appear to be sensitive to U V - B 
radiation (Sullivan and Teramura, 1988). 
Water stress in combination with U V - B adversely 
affected 
water 
loss 
in 
cucumber 
cotyledons 
(Takeuchi and Hayashida, 1987). 
Increased solar U V - B radiation could reduce the 
productivity of the phytoplankton, with dramatic 
effects both for intricate marine ecosystems. An% 
reduction of this marine productivity will undoubted-
ly affect global food supply (Damkaer, 1^"V 
5-33 
Recent studies have shown that U V - B impairs 
motility in a number of micro-organisms; any de-
crease in orientation of motile phytoplankton pre-
vents the necessary constant adaptation to the 
changing environmental conditions and possibly 
hazardous situations (Hader and Hader, 1988a, 
1988b and 1989). 
U V - B radiation also affects growth and the rhythm 
of many microorganisms (Worrest, 1982). Studies 
have also 
found that U V - B radiation drastically 
affects nitrogen fixation and thus the growth and 
productivity of higher plants in a number of import-
ant phytoplankton species (Dohler et al., 1985). 
Various experiments have demonstrated that U V - B 
radiation causes damage to fish larvae and juveniles, 
shrimp larvae, crab larvae, copepods, and plants 
essential to the marine food web (US E P A , 1987). 
There is also evidence that an increase in U V - B 
could diminish the growing season of invertebrate 
zooplankton populations (Damkaer et al., 1980). 
The effect of increased U V - B on the air quality of 
remote areas should be a decrease in the already 
low surface ozone concentrations (Liu and Trainer, 
1988) . Results from several modelling studies and 
one chamber study suggested that increased U V - B 
radiation from ozone depletion may increase the 
rate of urban ozone formation (Whitten and Gery, 
1986; Gery et al., 1987; Morris et al., 1988). Pre-
liminary results from the modelling studies also 
suggested that large increases in hydrogen peroxide 
would result from increased U V - B radiation. One 
study has shown that hydrogen peroxide increases 
can produce increases in the formation of acid 
precipitation. 
Higher levels of short wavelength radiation below 
295 nm will lead to a significant acceleration of 
light-induced degradation processes of plastics and 
other coatings used outdoors. 
8.3 Determination of sensitivities 
One soybean cultivar showed a yield loss of up to 
25% following exposure to U V - B radiation simulat-
ing a 5% ozone reduction (Tevini and Teramura, 
1989) . 
In one study involving anchovy larvae, a 20% in-
crease of U V - B radiation resulted in the death of 
about 8% of the annual larval population (Hunter et 
al., 1982). 
Based on one assessment (using the relationship that 
fisheries yield increases as productivity is raised to 
the 1.55 power), a 5% decrease in primary produc-
tion (estimated for a 16% ozone depletion) would 
yield reductions in fish yield of approximately 6% to 
9%. 
A 10% decrease in phytoplankton biomass equals 
1014 kg and leaves the same amount of C O z in the 
atmosphere as annual fossil-fuel burning (5Gt) 
(Hader, 1980). 
8.4 
Study tasks for the near future 
8.4.1 UV-B radiation 
Trends of U V - B radiation should be studied and 
correlated to ozone trends. 
More detailed measurements of the wavelength 
dependence of U V - B radiation should be made. 
Efforts should be made to improve the standardising 
of instrumentation and calibrations of UV measure-
ment. 
8.4.2 Terrestrial plants 
The number of field experiments for impacts of 
U V - B on agriculture should be increased. 
Studies must be initiated to determine the impacts 
of U V - B to natural ecosystems. 
U V - B effects on growth and reproductive cycles of 
lower plants, such as mosses, fungi and ferns, have 
yet to be studied. 
Increase the effort taken to obtain a better under-
standing of the effects of multiple stresses and of 
shifts in competitive balance when plants are given 
additional U V - B . 
An area of worldwide interest may be tropical rice-
growing regions, where information is limited on 
how rice will be affected either under enhanced 
U V - B or under increased temperature and C 0 2 . 
8.4.3 Aquatic ecosystems 
Establish the effect of U V - B stress to aquatic 
microorganisms on commercial fisheries. 
Determine the threshold of effect and biological 
action spectra for aquatic organisms. 
Determine long-term effects for embryos or larvae 
exposed to U V - B radiation. 
Determine effects on ecosystems, including the 
antarctic ecosystems. 
5-34 
Obtain data on the mechanisms of damage, and 
range of possible adaptation or genetic selection, in 
response to increased UV-B radiation. 
Develop predictive three-dimensional models for loss 
in biomass production with C0 2 increase, including 
the enhancing effect of temperature increase. 
8.4.4 Tropospheric air quality 
For the ozone formation and destruction problem, 
the main research areas are: peroxides, photodis-
sociation reactions of compounds that absorb UV-B, 
and aerosol formation. 
Expanded modelling is needed to understand the 
effects of increased UV-B on tropospheric air 
quality and model predictions should be verified 
experimentally. 
8.4.5 Materials damage 
A comparative study is needed of environmental 
photodcgradation of relevant plastic materials under 
near-equator and high-latitude conditions. 
A study should be initiated to quantify the effect of 
UV-B radiation on non-plastic materials such as 
paints and coatings, rubber products, wood and 
paper products, and textiles. 
Set up long-term weathering studies in different 
geographical regions to study the effects of naturally 
occurring variations in UV content of sunlight. 
Undertake investigations of surface coating, painting 
and other means of controlling photodegradation 
including a study of environmental impact of such 
technologies. 
5-35 
Figure 5.1 Examples of possible energy impacts of climate changes 
c 
UJ 
5 
CD 
u> 
c 
2 s. 
CO 
% 
T O O 
ill 
m o 
| Z £ 
£ 
2 
c 
CD 
CO 
c 
o 
<_> 
c o 
§ 
CO 
c 
CD 
CO 
CD 
r? 
o c 
u 
m 
< 
H 
a 
"TO 
d 
CD 
CD 
3 
OILL 
c «_ 
s 
0) 
Q. 
o 
CO 
CO 
o 
a 
c 
- C 2 
S 
c o 
CO 
CD 
co 
C 
o 
o o o </> o 
CD 
II I 
|
( 
"O C 
CO CD 
< LUOQC 
> 
CO 
h . 
CD 
c 
LU 
c 
c 
CO 
.c 
c m 
E 
CD 
O Q 
liii 
CD 
5 
o 
mCL 
'*- 3 
ten 
ydr 
z* n 
3 a 
•O 
Q. 
CD 3 
CC C/5 
§ 2 
CO 
C 
* - co 
.EFT 
co ,_ 
11 
CO CO 
c E 
••= t 
O CD 
O £ 
U 1-
CO 
5 . 
CO 
c 
• S 3 a* 
Illl 
CD 
m 
b 
0 
3 
CD 
E 
!° 
'£ 
w 
CD 
CO 
2 
u 
I 
2 
III 
2 
a : 
CD Q 
i s 
: # 
_ 
Q W I U J Q 
"D 
CD 
CO s 
o 
CD 
| 
"co c o 
O! 
CD 
C 
o 
2 
Q . 
; 
euro. 
5-36 
Figure 5.2 Impacts of climate change on health 
Global 
1 
"Warming 
Temperature 
Rise 
Precipitation 
Change 
UV-B Radiation 
Increase 
Heat Stress 
in Hot Summer 
I 
Adaptation 
Excess Death 
Vector Species 4 
> — » 
L_. 
y 
Plant Pest & 
Parasite 
Vector-borne 
Diseases 
Water Quality 
[LP 
Pesticides 
Application 
Pollution 
Pesticide 
Intoxication 
(Acute & Chronic) 
Water-related 
Health Effects 
Famine 
Inflammatory & 
Respiratory 
Diseases (Cancer) 
Immune 
Suppressions 
< L 
] 
Vaccination 
Infectious 
Diseases 
Skin Cancer 
Cataract 
5-37 
Figure 5.3 Effects of climate change on air quality 
I 
2 
"8 
II 
?-S 
II 
rTTi I 
Si 
18 
I 
ss 
II 
o II 
-O 
LTTT 
1 & 
5-38 
Figure 5.4 Scope of the assessment on UV-B radiation and secondary effects on human 
health and the environment 
Increase of 
greenhouse 
Stratospheric 
cooling 
Increase of 
concentra-
tions of CFCs 
and N20 
(Negative effect) 
Decrease of 
stratospheric 
ozone 
concentration 
Increase of 
ground-level 
UV-B 
Increase of 
tropospheric 
ozone 
__J 
(Negative effect) 
Increase of 
incidence of 
cataract 
Increase of 
occurrence of 
skin cancer 
„ T o HEALTH 
section 
Increase of 
immunosuppres-
sion 
. _ / 
Marine ecosystem 
change 
Effect on 
crop yield 
Formation of 
tropospheric 
ozone 
Greenhouse 
effect 
Effect on 
Polymers 
5-39 
References 
Amagoalik, John, President, Inuit Taparisat [Assembly] of 
Canada 1989, Address to Climate Institute Symposium on 
the Arctic and Global Change. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 
26 October 1989. 
Ando, M . , Hirano, S., and H. Itoh, 1985. 'Transfer of 
hexachlorobenzene from mother to new-born baby 
through placenta and milk'. Archives of Toxicology 56, 
pp. 195-200. 
Aneja, V.P., Overton, J.H. Jr., Cuppitt, L.T., Durham, 
J.L. and Wilson, W.E., 1979. 'Direct measurements of 
emission rates of some atmospheric biogenic sulfur 
compounds'. Tellus 31, pp. 174-178. 
Aoki, Yoji 1989, 'Climatic sensitivity of downhill ski 
demands', NIES, Tsukuba City, Japan. 
Berz, G. 1988, 'Climatic change: impact on international 
reinsurance'. In: Greenhouse: Planning for Climate 
Change, G.I. Pearman (ed.). CSIRO Publications, East 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 
Bidelman, T.F., Christenson, E.J., Billings, W.N. and 
Leonard, R. 
1981, 
'Atmospheric transport of 
organochlorines in the North Atlantic gyre'. Journal of 
Marine Research 39, pp. 443-464-. 
Bird, Eric C P . 1986, 'Potential effects of sea level rise on 
the coasts of Australia, Africa, and Asia'. In: Effects of 
Changes in Stratospheric Ozone and Global Climate, 
J.G. Titus (ed.). Vol.4: Sea Level Rise, US EPA and 
UN Environment Programme, October 1986. 
Blum, H.F. 1959, Carcinogenesis by Ultraviolet Light. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Blum, H.F., Grady, H.G. and Kirby-Smith, J.S. 1941, 
'Quantitative introduction of tumors in mice with 
ultraviolet radiation'. 
Journal of National Cancer 
Institute of U.S. 2, pp. 259-268. 
Bolhofer, W.C. 1989, 'Summary of the U.S. Canada Great 
Lakes Climate Change Symposium,' In: Coping With 
Climate Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate 
Institute, Washington, DC. 
British Meteorological Office Report, 1989, 3 February. 
Broadus, James M . , Millman, John D., Edwards, Steven 
F., Aubrey, David G. and Gable, Frank 1986, 'Rising 
sea level and damming of rivers: possible Effects in 
Egypt and Bangladesh'. In: Effects of Changes in 
Stratospheric Ozone and Global Climate, James G. Titus 
(ed.). Vol. 4: 
Sea Level Rise, US EPA and UN 
Environment Programme, October 1986. 
Brown, H.M. 1989, 'Planning for climate change in the 
Arctic - the impact on energy resource development'. 
Climate Institute Symposium on the Arctic and Global 
Change, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 26 October 1989. 
CCD 88-07 1988, 'Socioeconomic assessment of the 
physical and ecological impacts of climate change on the 
marine environment of the Atlantic region of Canada -
Phase I'. Climate Change Digest, Canadian Climate 
Centre, Downsview, Ontario, Canada. Submitted by Dr 
Peter Stokoe, Dalhousie University, Halifax Nova Scotia. 
Carter, W.P.L., Winer, A . M . , Darnall, K.R. and Pitts, 
J.N. Jr. 1979, 'Smog chamber studies of temperature 
effects in photochemical smog'. Environ. Sci. Tech. 13, 
pp. 1094-1100. 
Changnon, Stanley A., 1989, Leffler, Steven M. and 
Shealey, Robin 1989, Effects of Past Low Lake Levels 
and Future Climate Related Low Lake Levels on Lake 
Michigan, Chicago and the Illinois Shoreline. Illinois 
State Water Survey, Champaign, Illinois, USA. 
Climate Institute 1988, Climate Change and the Third 
World, 
Summary Report of the Symposium on the 
Impact of Climate Change for the Third World: 
Implications for Economic Development and Financing 
(24-25 March 1988, Washington, DC) and Related 
Symposium for United Nations Missions and Agencies 
(13 June 1988, New York, NY). 
Cohen, Stewart J. 1988, 'How climate change in the Great 
Lakes Region may affect energy, hydrology, shipping and 
recreation,' In: Preparing for Climate Change, Climate 
Institute, 
Government Institutes, 
Inc., 
Rockville, 
Maryland, USA. 
Commonwealth Secretariat 1989, Climate Change, 
Meeting the Challenge, September 1989. 
Conde, Julien 1986, South North International Migrations, 
OECD, Development Center Papers. 
Dadda, TurkiyaOuld 1989, Presentation to Conference on 
Implications of Climate Change for Africa, Howard 
University, Washington, DC, USA, 5 May 1989. 
Damkaer, D.M. 1987, 'Possible influences of solar UV 
radiation in the evolution of marine zooplankton'. In: The 
Role of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation in Marine 
Ecosystems, J. Calkins (ed.). New York, Plenum. 
Damkaer, D.M., Day, D.B., Heron, G.A. and Prentice 
E.F. 1980, 'Effects of UV-B radiation on near-surface 
zooplankton of Puget Sounds'. 
Oecologia 44, pp. 
149-158. 
Davis, Devra Lee, Miller, Victor and Reisa, James J. 1988, 
'Potential public health consequences of global climate 
change'. In: Preparing for Climate Change, Climate 
Institute, 
Government 
Institutes, 
Inc., 
Rockville, 
Maryland, USA. 
Debrah, Lt. Col. Christine (Ret'd) 1989, Address to the 
Conference on Implications of Climate Change for 
Africa, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA, 5 
May 1989. 
DeFabo, E.C. and Noonan, F.P. 1989, 'Stratospheric 
ozone depletion, sunlight and immune suppression: a 
new connection'. In Coping With Climate Change, John 
C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, 
DC, USA. 
DeLaCroix, Linda 1990, 'Setting your thermostat'. 
Address to APA National Planning Conference, April. 
Demaree, G.R. 1990, 'Onset ofSahelian drought viewed as 
a fluctuation-induced transition'. Q.V.R. Meteorol. Soc. 
116, pp. 221-238. 
Dobson, A.P. and Carper, E.R. 1989, 'Global warming 
and potential changes in host-parasite and disease-vector 
relationships'. In: Consequences of Global Warming for 
Biodiversity, R. Peters (ed.). Yale University Press. 
5-40 
Dobson, Andrew 1989, 'Climate change and parasitic 
diseases of man and domestic livestock in the United 
States', In: Coping With Climate Change, John C. 
Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC, 
USA. 
Dohler, G. 1985, 'Effect of UV-B radiation (290-320 ran) 
on the nitrogen metabolism of several marine diatoms'. 
J. Plant Physiol. 118, pp. 391-400. 
Druyan, Leonard 1989, Presentation, Conference on 
Implications of Climate Change for Africa, Howard 
University, Washington, DC, USA, 5 May 1989. 
Emanuel, K.A. 1987, 'The dependence of hurricane 
intensity on climate'. Nature 326, pp. 483-485. 
Flynn, Timothy J., Walesh, Stuart G., Titus, James G. and 
Barth, Michael C. 1984, 'Implications of sea level rise 
for hazardous waste sites in coastal floodplains,' In: 
Greenhouse Effect and Sea Level Rise: A Challenge for 
this Generation, Michael C. Barth and James G. Titus 
(eds). Van Nostrand, Reinhold Co., New York, NY, 
USA. 
French, Hugh 1989, Presentation to Climate Institute 
Symposium on the Arctic and Global Change, Ottawa, 
Canada, 26 October 26, 1989. 
Friedman, D.G. 1989, 'Implications of climate change for 
the insurance industry'. In: Coping With Climate Change, 
John 
C. 
Topping, Jr. 
(ed.). 
Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC. 
Galloway, R.W. 1988, 'The potential impact of climate 
changes on Australian ski fields'. In Greenhouse: 
Planning for Climate Change, CSIRO Publications, East 
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 
Gertis, K. and Steimle, F. 1989 'Impact of climate change 
on energy consumption for heating and air conditioning'. 
Report to the Federal Minister for Economics, Summary. 
Gery, M.W., Edmond, R.D. and Whitten, G.Z. 1987, 
'Tropospheric ultraviolet radiation: Assessment of 
existing data and effect on ozone formation'. 
EPA 
Report 600/3-87/047, October. 
Glantz, M.H., Brown, B.G. and Krenz, M.E. 1988, 
'Societal 
responses 
to 
regional 
climate 
change: 
forecasting by analogy'. ESIG/EPA. 
Goklany, Indur, 1990, Personal communication (February 
8). 
Golitsyn, G.S. 1989 (Institute of Atmospheric Physics, 
Moscow, USSR) 'Climate changes and related issues', 
Presentation 24 August 1989 at Sundance, Utah 
Symposium on Global Climate Change. 
Graedel, T.E. and McGill, R. 1986, 'Degradation of 
materials in the atmosphere'. Environmental Pollution 
Technology 20 (11). 
Granger, Orman E. 1989, 'Implications for Caribbean 
societies of climate change, sea-level rise and shifts in 
storm patterns'. In: Coping With Climate Change, John 
C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, 
DC, USA. 
Hader, D.P. 1989, Private communication. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader, M.A. 1988a, 'Inhibition of 
motility and phototaxis in the green flagellate, Euglena 
gracilis, by UV-B radiation'. Arch. Microbiol. 150, pp. 
20-25. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader M.A. 1988b, 'Ultraviolet-B 
inhibition of motility in green and dark bleached Euglena 
gracilis', Current Microbiol. 17, pp. 215-220. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader, M.A. 1989, Effects of solar UV-B 
irradiation 
on 
photomovement 
and 
motility 
in 
photosynthetic and colorless flagellates, in press. 
Han, Mukang, 1989, 'Global warming induced sea level 
rise in China: Response and strategies'. Presentation to 
World Conference on Preparing for Climate Change, 
December 19, Cairo, Egypt. 
Hansen, J., Rind, D., Del Genio, A., Lacis, A., Lebedeff, 
S., Prather, M . , Ruedy, R. and Karl, T. 1989, 'Regional 
greenhouse climate effects'. In: Coping With Climate 
Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC, USA. 
Hassett, G., Mustafa, M.G., Levison, W. and Elastoff, 
R.M. 1985, 'Marine lung carcinogenesis following 
exposure to ambient ozone concentrations', J. Natl 
Cancer Inst. 75, pp. 771-777. 
Hatakeyama, S., Watanabe, M. and Washida N. 1989, 
'Effect of global warming on photochemical smog'. To 
be presented at the 30th Annual Meeting of Japan Soc. 
Air Pollut. 
Henderson-Sellers, Ann and Blong, Russell 1989, Tne 
Greenhouse Effect: Living in a Warmer Australia, Nr* 
South Wales University Press, Kensington, NSW, 
Australia. 
Hiller, R., Sperduto, R.D. and Ederer, F. 1983, 
'Epidemiologic associations with cataract in the 1971¬
1972 National Health Nutrition Survey', Am. J. Epi. 
118, pp. 239-249. 
Hoffman, John and Gibbs, Michael 1988, Future 
Concentrations of Stratospheric Chlorine and Bromine, 
US EPA, Washington, DC, August. 
Hunter, J.R., Kaupp, S.E. and Taylor J.H. 1982, 
'Assessment of the effects of UV radiation on marine fish 
larvae'. In: The Role of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation in 
Marine Ecosystems, Calkins, J. (ed.). 
New York, 
Plenum. 
Hyman, William, Miller, Ted. R. and Walker, J. 
Christopher 1989, 'Impacts of global climate change on 
urban transportation'. Transportation Research Record, 
at press. 
ICF Inc. 1987, 'Potential impacts of climate change on 
electric utilities'. Study for New York Research and 
Development Authority, December. 
Iriki, M and Tanaka, M. 1987, 'Accidental hypothermia in 
Japan,' In: Climate and Human Health, World climate 
programme 
applications, 
World 
Meteorological 
Organization. 
Izrael, Yuri 1989, Personal communication, Tokyo, Japan, 
14 September 14. 
Jacobsen, Jodi I. 1989, 'Abandoning homelands,' In: State 
of the World, WorldWatch Institute, Washington, DC, 
USA. 
Japan Ministry of Transportation 1989, Impact on the 
Harbor Area, August 1989. 
Jessup, Philip S. 1989, 'Carbon dioxide trends in Canadian 
transportation,' In: Coping With Climate Change, John 
C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, 
DC, USA. 
Jodha, N.S. 1989, 'Potential strategies for adapting to 
greenhouse warming: perspectives from the developing 
world' In: Greenhouse Warming: Abatement and 
Adaptation, 
Norman J. Rosenberg, William E. 
5-41 
EasterlinglH, Pierre R. Crosson, JoelDarmstadter(eds). 
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, USA. 
Johansson, E. and Granat L. 1984. 
'Emission of nitric 
oxide from arable land'. Tellus 36B, pp. 25-27. 
Johnson, G.M. 1983, 'Factors affecting oxidant formation 
in Sydney air'. In: The Urban Atmosphere - Sydney: a 
case study, J.N. Carras adn G.M. Johnson (eds). CSIRO 
Division of Fossil Fuels, Sydney, Australia. 
Jung, E.G. 1989, 'Wie kann man Melanome verhindern, 
Prävention der Melanome und 
Fruherkennungder 
Melanomvorlaufer 
(How 
to 
prevent 
melanoma? 
Prevention of melanoma and early diagnosis)'. DMW 
Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift 114, pp. 393-397. 
Kalkstein, Laurence S. 1989b, 'A new approach to 
evaluate the impact of climate upon human mortality'. 
Report to Conference on Global Atmospheric Change and 
Human Health, NIEHS. 
Kalkstein, Laurence S. 1989, 'Potential impact of global 
warming: changes in mortality from extreme heat and 
cold'. In: Coping With Climate Change, John C. 
Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC, 
USA. 
Kassi, Norma 1989, Notes for a Panel Discussion on Social 
Effects of Global Change, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 
October 27. 
Kavanaugh, M . , Barth, M. and Jaenicke, T. 1986, 'An 
analysis of the economic effects of regulatory and non-
regulatory events related to the abandonment of 
chlorofluorocarbons as aerosol propellants in the United 
States with a discussion of applicability of the analysis to 
other nations'. Aerosol Working Paper Series, Paper 1, 
ICF Inc., Washington, DC. 
Kennedy, Victor S. 1989, 'Potential impact of climate 
change on Chesapeake Bay animals and fisheries,' In: 
Coping With Climate Change, John C. Topping, Jr. 
(ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC. 
Kerr, Richard A. 1990, 'Global warming continues in 
1989'. Science, February 2, 1990, p. 521. 
Khalil, M.A.K, and Rasmussen, R.A. 1988, 'Carbon 
monoxide in the earth's atmosphere: 
indications of a 
global increase,' Nature 332 (March 1988), p. 245. 
Klassen, W.J. 1989, Speaking notes. Climate Institute 
Symposium on the Arctic and Global Change, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada, October 27. 
Kornhauser, A. 1989, 'Implications of ultraviolet light in 
skin cancer and eye disorders' in Coping With Climate 
Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC, USA. 
La mo the and Periard 1988, 'Implications of climate 
change for downhill skiing in Quebec,' Environment 
Canada, CCD 88-03, Downsview, Ontario, Canada. 
Lashof, Daniel A. and Tirpak, Dennis (eds). 1989, The 
Draft Stabilization Report of the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Policy Options for Stabilizing Global 
Climate, Washington DC, USA, February 1989. 
Last, J.A., Warren, DiL., Pecquet-Goad, E. and Witsohi, 
H.P. 1987, 'Modification of lung tumor development in 
mice by ozone'. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 78, pp. 149-154. 
Leatherman, Stephen P. 1989, 'Beach response strategies 
to accelerated sea-level rise'. In: Coping With Climate 
Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, 
Washington DC, USA. 
Lee, James A. 1985, The Environment, Public Health and 
Human 
Ecology, 
Considerations for 
Economic 
Development. World Bank Publication, Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 
Linder, Kenneth and Gibbs, Michael 1988, 'The potential 
impacts of climate change on electric utilities: project 
summary'. In: Preparing for Climate Change. Climate 
Institute, 
Government 
Institutes, 
Inc., 
Rockville, 
Maryland, USA. 
Linder, Kenneth 1989, 'Regional and national effect of 
climate change on demands for electricity'. In: Coping 
with Climate Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). 
Climate Institute, Washington, DC, USA. 
Liu, S.C. and M. Trainer 1988, 'Responses of the 
tropospheric ozone and odd hydrogen radicals to column 
ozone change'. J. Atmos. Chem. 6, p. 221. 
Lonergan, Steven 1989, 'Climate change and transportation 
in the Canadian Arctic'. Climate Institute Symposium on 
the Arctic and Global Change, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 
October 26. 
Longstreth, Janice 1989, 'Overview of the potential effects 
of climate change on human health'. In: Coping With 
Climate Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate 
Institute, Washington, DC, USA. 
Mabbutt, J.A., 1989, 'Impact of carbon dioxide warming 
on climate and man in the semi-arid tropics.' Climatic 
Change 15, Nos. 1-2 (October 1989). 
MacCracken, M.C. and Santer, G.D. 1975, Development 
of air pollution model for the San Francisco Bay area. 
UCRL 51920 Vol. 1, Lawrence Livermore Laboratory, 
Univ. California, Livermore, CA. 
MacDonald, Gordon J. 1987, 'The Greenhouse Effect and 
climate change', presented to Env. & Public Works 
Committee, 28 January 1987. 
Makino, K. 1987, 'Effects of weather on mortality from 
major causes using monthly number of deaths for a thirty 
year period', Jpn. J. Biometeor. 25, pp. 69-78. 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R.T. 
1967, 'Thermal 
equilibrium of the atmosphere with a given distribution of 
relative humidity'. J.Atmos. Sci. 21, pp. 361-385. 
Margolin, Stanley V. 1990, Study of Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions Related to the Metallurgical. US Bureau of 
Mines, May 4. 
Marmor, M. 1978, 
'Heat wave mortality in nursing 
homes'. Environmental Research, 17, pp. 102-115. 
Medioli, Alfred 1989, 'Climate change: the implications 
for securities underwriting'. In: Coping With Climate 
Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC. 
Meyers and J. Sathaye, Electricity in Developing 
Countries: Trends in Supply and Use Since 1970, 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, LBL-2166, December 
1988. 
Miller, Ted R. 1989, 'Impacts of global climate change on 
metropolitan infrastructure'. In: Coping With Climate 
Change, John C. Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC, USA. 
Ministère 
de 
l'Equipement 
du 
Logement, 
de 
l'Aménagement du Territoire et des Transports 1986, 
Mutations 
Economiques 
et 
Urbanisation, 
La 
Documentation Française. 
5-42 
Miura, T. 1987, 'The influence of seasonal atmospheric 
factors on human reproduction'. Experientia 43, pp. 
48-54. 
Momiyama, M. and Katayama, K. 1972, 'Deseasonal-
ization of mortality in the world'. Int. J. Biomet. 16, pp. 
329-342. 
Morris, R.E., Gery, M.W., Liu, M.K. Moore, G.E., 
Daly, C. and Greenfield S.M. 1988, Examination of 
sensitivity of a regional oxidant model to climate 
variations, Draft Final Report, Systems Applications, 
Inc., San Rafael, CA. 
Mortimore, Michael 1989, The Causes, Nature and Rate of 
Soil Degradation in the Northernmost States of Nigeria 
and an Assessment of the Role of Fertilizer in 
Counteracting 
the 
Processes 
of 
Degradation. 
Environment Department Working Paper No. 17, World 
Bank, July 1989. 
Murday, Maylo 1989, Presentation to Conference on 
Implications of Climate Change for Africa, Howard 
University, Washington, DC, USA, 4 May 1989. 
Myers, Norman 1988, 'Tropical deforestation and climatic 
change'. Environmental Conservation, Vol. 15, No. 4, 
The Foundation for Environmental Conservation, 
Switzerland, (Winter). 
NASA/WMO 1988, Ozone Trends Panel Report. 
Nishinomiya, S., and Kato H. 1989, Potential Effects of 
Global Warming on the Japanese Electric Industry -
Event tree of impacts on the electric utility industry 
stemming from climate-induced changes in the natural 
environment, ecosystems and human society. CRIEPI 
report, in press. 
Norwegian Delegation 1990, 'Comments submitted to the 
meeting of IPCC Working Group II', Moscow, 28-31 
May. 
Odingo, Richard 1989, Personal communication, Geneva, 
Switzerland, IPCC WGII meeting, 1 November 1989 
(Professor, University of Nairobi). 
OECD, Center of Development 1974, 'La migration 
internationale dans ses relations avec les politiques 
d'adjustement industriel et agricole'. Comptes rendus du 
Séminaire de Vienne, 13-15 Mai 1974, Paris. 
Okita, T. and Kanamori 1971, 'Determination of trace 
concentration of ammonia using pyridine-pyrazolone 
reagent'. Atmos. Environ. 5, pp. 621-628. 
Oppenheimer, Michael 1989, 'Climate Change and 
Environmental Pollution and Biological Interactions.' 
Climatic Change 15 (Nos. 1-2), October 1989. 
Parry, M.L. and Read, N.J. 1988, The Impact of Climatic 
Variability on U.K. Industry. Atmospheric Impacts 
Group, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 
Parry, M.L., Carter, T.R. and Konijn, N.T. 1987, The 
Impact of Climate Variations on Agriculture. Reidel, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 1987. 
Pearman, G.I. (ed.) 1988, Greenhouse: Planning for 
Climate Change, CSIRO Australia, Melbourne. 
Peele, B.D. 1988, 'Insurance and the greenhouse effect.' 
In: Greenhouse: Planning for Climate Change, G.I. 
Pearman (ed.). CSIRO Publications, East Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia. 
Quinn, Frank H. 1988, 'Likely effects of climate change on 
water levels in the Great Lakes'. In: Preparing for 
Climate Change. 
Climate Institute, Institutes, Inc , 
Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Ramanathan, V. 1988, 'The greenhouse theory of climate 
change: 
a test by an inadvertent global experiment'. 
Science 15 April 1988. 
Raoul, Joseph and Goodwin, Zane M. 1988, 'Climatic 
changes - impacts on Great Lakes lake levels and 
navigation'. In: Preparing for Climate Change. Climate 
Institute 
Government 
Institutes, 
Inc., 
Rockville, 
Maryland, USA. 
Rapaport, R.A., Urban, N.R., Capel, P.D., Baker, J.E., 
Looney, B.B., Eisenreich, S.J. and Gorham, E. 1985, 
'"New" DDT inputs to North America: atmospheric 
deposition'. Chemosphere 14, pp. 1167-1173. 
Regens, James L., Cubbage, Frederick W. and Hodges, 
Donald G. 1989, 'Climate change and U.S. forest 
markets'. In; Coping With Climate Change, John C. 
Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC. 
Regier, H.A., Holmes, J.A. and Meisner, J.D. 1989, 
'Likely impact of climate change on fisheries and 
wetlands with emphasis on the Great Lakes'. In: 
Preparing for Climate Change. Climate Institute, 
Government Institutes, Inc., Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Roper, Tom 1989, Presentation to Fabian Society 
Greenhouse Conference, Lome, Victoria, Australia, 20 
May 1989. 
Rothlisberg, P., Staples, D., Poiner, I. and Wolanski, E. 
1988 'The possible impact of the greenhouse effect on 
commercial prawn populations 
in 
the 
Gulf of 
Carpentaria'. In: Greenhouse: Planning for Climate 
Change, CSIRO Publications, East Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia. 
Rovinsky, F.Y.A., Afanasjev, M.I., Brutseva, L.V. and 
Yegorov, V.I. 1982, 
'Background environmental 
pollution of the Eurasian continent'. Environmental 
Monitoring and Assessment 2, pp. 379-386. 
Roy, Peter and Connell, John 1989, Greenhouse: the 
Impact of Sea Level Rise on Low Coral Islands in the 
South Pacific. Research Institute for Asia and the 
University of Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
Safiullah, Syed 1989, 'Disaster - Perception Cycle,' 
Remarks presented at IPCC WG2 Section 5 Lead Authors 
meeting, Tsukuba, Japan, 18-21 September 1989. 
Sakai, S. 1988, The Impact of Climatic Variation on 
Secondary and Tertiary Industry in Japan. 
Sanderson, Marie 1987, Implications of Climatic Change 
for Navigation and Power Generation in the Great Lakes, 
Environment Canada, CCD 87-03, Downsview, Ontario, 
Canada. 
Sathaye, J., Ketoff, A., Schippev, L. and LeLe, S. 1989, 
An End-Use Approach to the Development of Long-Term 
Energy Demand Scenarios for Developing Countries, 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, LBL-25611, February 
1989. 
Schneider, Stephen H. 1989, 'The Greenhouse Effect: 
reality or media event'. In: Coping With Climate Change, 
John C. 
Topping, Jr. 
(ed.). 
Climate Institute, 
Washington, DC, USA. 
Schneider, Stephen H. 1989. Scientific American (Sept.). 
Schneider, T., Lee, S.D., Walters, G.J.R. and Grant, L.D 
1988, 
77i*> Proceedings of the 1988 U.S.-Dutch 
Symposium on Ozone. 
Schuman, S.H. 1972, 'Patterns of urban heat-wave deaths 
and implications for prevention'. Environmental Research 
5, pp. 59-75. 
5-43 
Shands, William and Hoffman, John (eds) 1987, The 
Greenhouse Effect, Climate Change and U.S. Forests. 
The Conservation Foundation, Washington, DC. 
Silvey, Joseph F. 1989, 'Implications of climate change for 
the environmental engineering and construction industry'. 
In: Coping With Climate Change, John C. Topping, Jr. 
(ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC. 
Simmons, Alan, Diaz-Bricquets, Serio and Laquian, 
Aprodicio A. 1977, Social Change and Internal 
Migration, A Review of Research Findings from Africa, 
Asia and Latin America, International Development 
Research Center. 
Singh, Professor Bhawan 1988, The Implications of 
Climate Change for Natural Resources in Quebec, 
Environment Canada, CCD 88-08, Downsview, Ontario, 
Canada. 
Smith, Barry 1987, Implications of Climatic Change for 
Agriculture in Ontario, Environment Canada, CCD 
87-02, Downsview, Ontario, Canada. 
Smith, J.B. and Tirpak, D.A., Ed. 1989, 'The potential 
effects of global climate change on the United States,' US 
EPA. 
Smith, Joel B. 1989. "An overview of the EPA studies of 
the potential impacts of climate change on the Great 
Lakes region'. In: Coping With Climate Change, John C. 
Topping, Jr. (ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC, 
USA. 
Stark, K.P. 1988, 'Designing for coastal structures in a 
greenhouse age'. In: Greenhouse: Planning for Climate 
Change, CSIRO Publications, East Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia. 
Stokoe, Peter 1988, Socio-Economic Assessment of the 
Physical and Ecological Impacts of Climate Change on 
the Marine Environment of the Atlantic Region of 
Canada—Phase 1, Environment Canada, CCD 88-07, 
Downsview, Ontario, Canada. 
Street, Roger 1989, Personal communication, 6 November. 
Sugandhy, Aca 1989, 'Preliminary findings on potential 
impact of climate change in Indonesia'. Remarks 
presented at IPCC WG2 Section 5 Leading Authors 
meeting, Tsukuba, Japan, September 18-21. 
Sullivan, J.H. and Teramura, A.H. 1988, 'Effects of 
ultraviolet-B irradiation on seedling growth in the 
Pinaceae'. Am.J. ofBot. 75, pp. 225-230. 
Takeuchi, U. and Hayashida, S. 1987, 'Effects of ozone 
layer depletion upon vegetation'. Kankyo-gijutsu 16, pp. 
732-735. 
Tanabe, S., Tatsukawa, R., Kawano, M. and Hidaka, H. 
1982, 'Global distribution an atmospheric transport of 
chlorinated 
hydrocarbons'. 
Journal 
of 
the 
Oceanographical Society of Japan 38, pp. 137-148. 
Tebicke, Haile Lul 1989, Personal communication, IPCC 
Lead Authors meeting, Tsukuba City, Japan, 19 
September. 
Tebicke, Haile Lul. 1989, 'Climate change, its likely 
impact on the energy sector in Africa'. Remarks 
presented at IPCC WG2 Section 5 Lead Authors meeting, 
Tsukuba, Japan, 18-21 September 1989. 
Tevini, M . , and Teramura, A.H. 1989, 'UV-B effects on 
terrestrial 
plants'. 
Photochem. 
and 
Photobiol, 
forthcoming. 
Tickell, Sir Crispin 1989, 'Environmental Refugees'. 
National Environment Research Council Annual Lecture, 
at the Royal Society, London, UK, 5 June 1989. 
Timmerman, Peter 1989, 'Everything else will not remain 
equal, the challenge of social science research in the face 
of a global climate warming'. In: Impacts of Climate 
Change on the Great Lakes, 
US National Climate 
Program Office and Canadian Climate Centre, January 
1989. 
Tingey, D.T., Manning, M . , Grothasu, L.C. and Bums, 
W.F. 1980, 'The influence of light and temperature on 
monoterpene emission rates from slash pine'. Plant 
Physiol. 65, 797j. 
Titus, J.G. 1988, 'Cause and effects of sea level rise', In: 
Preparing for Climate Change, Climate Institute, 
Government Institutes, Inc., Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Tokyo Electric Company 1988, Summary of prediction 
of electricity demand in 1988-1997 (in Japanese). 
Topping, John C, Jr. and Bond, John P. 1988, Impact of 
Climate Change on Fisheries and Wildlife in North 
America. Climate Institute, Washington, DC, 1988. 
Topping, John C, Jr. 1988, 'Where are we headed in 
responding to climate change'. In: Inter-national 
Environment Reporter, Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 
October 1988. 
Tsyban, A.V., Volodkovich, Yu L., Venttsel, M.V., 
Pfeifere, M.Yu. 1985, Zagryazhenie i tsirkulyatsiya 
toksicheskikhzagryaznyayuschikhveschestvv ekosisteme 
Baltijskogo morya V knige: issledovanie elcosistemy 
Baltijskago 
morya. 
Vypusk 
2. 
Liningrad. 
Gidrometeoizdat, s. 244-257. 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1987, 'An 
assessment of the effects of ultraviolet-B radiation on 
aquatic organisms'. In: Assessing the Risks of Trace 
Gases that Can Modify the Stratosphere, J.S. Hoffman 
(ed.). US EPA 400/1-87/001C, Chapter 7. 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1987, Ultraviolet 
Radiation and Melanoma - With a Special Focus on 
Assessing the Risks of Ozone Depletion, Vol. JV, J.D. 
Longstreth (ed.). EPA 400/1- 87/001D. 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1988, The potential 
effects of global climate change on the United States, 
Draft Report to Congress. 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1988, 
The 
Potential Effects of Global Climate Change on the United 
States. Draft, Report to Congress Vol. I: Regional 
Studies, J.B. Smith and D.A. Tirpak (eds). Office of 
Policy, Planning and Evaluation, October. 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1988, Regulatory 
Impact Analysis: Protection of Stratospheric Ozone, 15 
June 1988. 
UNEP 1989a, Synthesis Report of the Four Assessment 
Panels Reports, the Open-ended Working Group of the 
Parties to the Montreal Protocol. 
UNEP 1989b, Van der Leun, J.C., Longstreth, J.P., 
English, D., Kerdel-Vegas, F. and Takisawa Y., Draft of 
UNEP Report on the Environmental Effects of Ozone 
Depletion, ch.3, 1-18 (1989). 
United Nations 1986, Determinants of Mortality Change 
and Differentials in Developing Countries. Population 
Studies No. 94, United Nations, New York. 
5-44 
Victoria Ministry for Planning and Environment 1989, 
The Greenhouse Challenge, 
Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia, June. 
Viterito, Arthur 1989, 'Implications of urbanization for 
local and regional temperatures in the United States'. In: 
Coping With Climate Change, John C. Topping, Jr. 
(ed.). Climate Institute, Washington, DC, USA. 
Vladimirova, N. 1990, Personal communication, Nalchik, 
USSR, February 28. 
Walker, J. Christopher, Miller, Ted R., Kingsley, G. 
Thomas, and Hyman, William A., 'Impact of global 
climate change on urban infrastructure' The Potential 
Effects of Global Climate Change on the United States, 
Appendix H. 
Wall, G. 1988, Implications of Climatic Change for 
Tourism and Recreation in Ontario, Environment 
Canada, CCD 88-05, Downsview, Ontario, Canada. 
Walsh, Michael P. 1989, 'Global Trends in Motor Vehicle 
Pollution Control - a 1988 Perspective', SAE Technical 
Paper Series, Detroit, Michigan, USA, 27 February 
1989. 
Walsh, Michael P. 1989, 'Global Warming: 
The 
Implications for Alternative Fuels', SAE Technical Paper 
Series, Washington, DC, USA, 2 May 1989. 
Walsh, Michael P. 1989, Personal communication, 12 
October. 
Walsh, Michael P. 1989, "The global importance of motor 
vehicles in the climate modification problem*. In: 
International Environment Reporter, BNA, Washington 
DC. USA, May 1989, pp. 261-267. 
Washida, N . , Hatakeyama, S. and Kajimoto, O. 1985, 
'Studies on the rate constants of free radical reactions and 
related spectroscopic and thermochemical parameters'. 
Res. Report Natl. Inst. Environ. Stud., R-85. 
Weihe, W.H. 1985, 'Life expectancy in tropical climates 
and urbanization'. World Climate Technical Conference. 
WMO No.652, Geneva, pp. 313-353. 
Whitten, G.Z. and Gery, W.N. 1986, 'The interaction of 
photochemical 
processes 
in 
the 
stratosphere and 
troposphere'. In: Effects of Changes in Stratospheric 
Ozone and Global Climate, Titus, J.G. (ed.). US EPA 
and UNEP, Washington, DC. 
WHO 1990, 'Health implication of global warming and 
ozone depletion'. 
Williams, G.D.V., Fautley, R.A., Jones, K.H., Stewart, 
R.B. and Wheaton, E.E., 'Estimating effects of climatic 
change for agriculture in Saskatchewan'. Canada, CCD. 
Winget, Carl 1988, 'Forest management strategies to 
address climatic change'. In: Preparing for Climate 
Change, Climate Institute, Government Institutes, Inc., 
Rockville, Maryland, USA. 
Worrest, R.C. 1982, 'Review of literature concerning the 
impact of UV-B radiation upon marine organisms'. In: 
The Role of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation in Marine 
Ecosystems, J. Calkins (ed.). Plenum Publishing Corp., 
New York, pp. 429-457. 
Wratt, D.S. 1989, Impacts of climate change on the 
atmosphere. Private communication. 
Ye, Ruquiu 1990, 'An assessment of the impact of climate 
change caused by 
human 
activities 
on 
China's 
environment'. 
Unpublished paper prepared for the 
National Environmental Protection Agency, People's 
Republic of China, May 21. 
Zhou, Shuzhen 1990, 'The Shanghai urban heat island and 
its formative factors'. 
In: Controlling Summer Heat 
Islands, Karina Garbes, Hashem Akbari and Phil Martren 
(eds). Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. 
5-45 
 
Chapter 6 
World oceans and coastal zones 
Chairpersons: 
A. Tsyban, J. Everett and J. Titus 
Contributors: 
T. Agnew; 
M. Berry; 
S. Chernyak; 
D. Etkin; M. Glantz; 
B. Glebov; 
C. Griffiths; 
P. Kaplin; Korsak; 
A. Krovnin; 
A, Lapenis; E. LaRoe; A. Lukin; J. Meehan; S. Nishioka; 
I. Pershina; 
M. Rees; 
S. Rodionov; 
V. Shigaev; 
J. Smith; 
W. Sprigg; E. Stakhiv; R. Stewart; S. Zeeman 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction 
6-1 
2 
The socioeconomic and ecological impacts of sea-level rise and related climate 
change 
6-1 
2.1 
Introduction 
6-1 
2.1.1 
Methodological limitations 
6-2 
2.2 
Socioeconomic impacts: threatened populations in low-lying areas and 
island countries 
6-2 
2.2.1 
Inundation 
6-2 
2.2.2 
Agricultural losses 
6-3 
2.2.3 
Erosion and tourism 
6-3 
2.2.4 
Increased potential of coastal flooding 
6-3 
2.2.5 
Water supply and quality 
6-5 
2.2.6 
Infrastructure 
6-6 
2.3 
Ecological impacts: alteration and degradation of the biophysical 
properties of beaches, coral reefs, estuaries and wetlands 
6-6 
2.3.1 
Wetlands 
6-6 
2.3.2 
Background: importance of wetlands 
6-7 
2.3.3 
Redistribution of wetlands 
6-7 
2.3.4 
Changes in nutrients and chemicals 
6-8 
2.3.5 
Other ecological impacts of sea-level rise 
6-8 
2.4 
Physical aspects of shoreline retreat: inundation, erosion and recession of 
barrier islands, coral reefs and other shorelines 
6-8 
2.4.1 
Background 
6-8 
2.4.2 
Global projections of inundation and recession 
6-9 
2.4.3 
Shoreline erosion and stabilisation 
6-9 
2.4.4 
Examples of sea-level rise impacts on particular regions 
6-10 
3 
The ecological and socioeconomic impacts of climate change on the world 
ocean 
6-11 
3.1 
Introduction 
6-11 
3.2 
Impact on physiochemical processes 
6-11 
3.2.1 
Impact of global warming on the heat budget and water circu-
lation of the World Ocean 
6-11 
3.2.2 
Changes in the carbon cycle 
6-13 
3.2.3 
Changes in nutrients 
6-13 
3.2.4 
Changes in contaminants 
6-14 
3.3 
Ecological impacts 
6-15 
3.3.1 
Changes in habitats 
6-15 
3.3.2 
Changes in production/destruction processes and biosedimen-
tation 
6-15 
3.3.3 
The role of ice in supporting polar ecosystems 
6-16 
3.3.4 
Regional aspects of the problem (the Bering Sea as an exam-
ple) 
6-17 
3.4 
Palaeoecological studies and El Nino analogs 
6-17 
3.5 
Impacts on fisheries 
6-18 
3.6 
Socioeconomic impacts 
6-19 
3.7 
Impacts on navigation and territorial policies 
6-20 
Table 
Table 6.1 
Survey of 1 m sea-level rise and protection costs. (Countries and 
territories ranked by estimated costs as per cent of GNP) 
6-4 
6-ii 
Figures 
Figure 6.1 
Estimates of future sea-level rise 
6-21 
Figure 6.2 
Physical consequences of climate change 
6-22 
Figure 6.3 
Impacts of sea-level rise on groundwater tables 
6-23 
Figure 6.4 
Evolution of a marsh as sea-level rises 
6-24 
References 
6-25 
6-iii 
World oceans and coastal zones 
1 Introduction 
Climate change will have significant impacts on the 
oceans of the world and the coastal zone, which will 
also play an important part in determining the 
nature and extent of climate change. Probably the 
most important aspects of climate change on the 
World Ocean and coastal zones will be the impact of 
sea-level rise on coastal residents and on marine 
ecosystems. 
These impacts are treated first, fol-
lowed by the other impacts of climate change on the 
ocean and coastal zone. 
The following assumptions were made in this report: 
• 
carbon dioxide (CO z) will double by 2050; 
• 
other greenhouse trace gases will increase 
significantly; 
• 
average world air temperature will increase by 
1.5°-4.5°C; 
• sea-level will rise by 0.3-0.5 m by 2050; up to 
about 1 m by 2100; 
• there will possibly be an increase in solar ultravio-
let-B (UV-B) radiation. 
IPCC Working Group I scenarios were developed in 
parallel with the preparation of this report and are 
generally consistent with the assumptions of this 
report. However, a few of the cited studies with 
respect to sea-level rise have considered higher rates 
than those projected by Working Group I. This is 
useful information, given that there are important 
regional differences expected in sea-level rise be-
cause of such things as regional land subsidence, 
glacial rebound and oceanic currents (Mikolajewice 
et al., 1990), and the possibility of continuing natural 
processes such as polar ice sheet response to the last 
glaciation (NASA, 1990). 
2 The socioeconomic and 
ecological impacts of sea-level 
rise and related climate change 
2.1 Introduction 
Future global warming could increase the rate at 
which sea-level has been rising by (i) warming and 
thereby 
expanding 
ocean 
water, 
(ii) 
melting 
mountain glaciers, and (iii) possibly causing polar ice 
sheets in Greenland and perhaps Antarctica to 
disintegrate. 
Current estimates are that sea-level 
will rise between 30-50 cm by the year 2050 and 
possibly up to 1 m by the year 2100 (Figure 6.1). 
Site-specific studies must add current trends in 
subsidence or emergence to these estimates. In 
addition, global warming may increase storm fre-
quencies and intensities. 
A rise in sea-level would (i) inundate and displace 
wetlands and lowlands, (ii) erode shorelines, (iii) 
exacerbate coastal storm flooding, (iv) increase the 
salinity of estuaries and threaten freshwater aquifers 
and otherwise impair water quality, (v) alter tidal 
ranges in rivers and bays, (vi) alter sediment deposi-
tion patterns, and (vii) decrease the amount of light 
reaching water bottoms (Figure 6.2). 
Present population growth and development in areas 
subject to natural water-related hazards is itself a 
reason for concern. The foreseeable consequences 
of global warming and sea-level rise heighten con-
cerns for countries and their citizens occupying these 
vulnerable areas. 
Other aspects of a countrys 
economic and social well-being may be adversely 
affected by fundamental changes to its fisheries and 
agriculture or its economic base in tourism. Also, in 
some countries, beaches and other coastal features 
provide important cultural values which may be 
threatened by sea-level rise. Further, there may be 
impacts on biodiversity as some small localised 
habitats are lost or move faster than the plants or 
animals which depend on them can adjust. 
The present trend towards increasing deterioration 
of coastal areas through pollution, development and 
overuse ( G E S A M P , 1990) are also reducing the 
capacity of coastal systems to respond to and com-
pensate for climate changes and sea-level rise. 
After discussing the methodological limitations of 
existing knowledge, this chapter divides the impacts 
of sea-level rise into three categories: 
(i) socioeconomic impacts (threatened populations 
in low-lying areas and island nations); 
(ii) ecological impacts (alteration and degradation of 
the biophysical properties of beaches, estuaries, and 
wetlands); 
(iii) physical aspects of shoreline retreat. 
6-1 
2.1.1 Methodological limitations 
This chapter relies on previously published analyses 
that are based on a variety of sea-level scenarios. 
Many project a i m sea-level rise which Working 
Group I estimates will not be reached before the 
year 2100. There are far fewer studies which have 
looked at a rise of 0.5 m or less amount. 
Because of inadequate data and the uncertainties 
regarding global warming, sea-level rise and future 
coastal development, the studies cited herein deal 
with possibilities, not forecasts. It is particularly 
difficult to assess the potential impacts consistently 
for all coastal regions. 
Another problem facing all impact analyses is the 
need for baseline scenarios - in this case, what 
would happen without global warming (Stakhiv and 
Hanchey, 1989). Unfortunately, most sea-level rise 
studies (a notable exception is Gibbs, 1984), have 
ignored this issue and have generally assumed the 
current level of coastal development (eg Park et al., 
1989; Delft, 1990a). The failure to consider future 
coastal development may have led these studies to 
underestimate the socioeconomic and environmental 
impacts of rising sea-level. Finally, there is little 
consistency regarding the probable response of 
society. 
The purpose of this section is to assess the impacts 
of sea-level rise assuming (i) that people take 
rational but ad hoc actions and (ii) that governments 
take no organised response. Unfortunately, many of 
the studies cited do not follow this convention. 
2.2 Socioeconomic impacts: threatened 
populations in low-lying areas and 
island countries 
A simple measure of a country's vulnerability to sea-
level rise is the proportion of its population and 
productive land that is within a few metres of 
present mean sea-level. A direct relationship exists 
between inundation (extended by the impacts of 
climate variability, storm surges, waves and erosion) 
and the viability of inhabited areas. Health, safety 
and food security are among the primary deter-
minants of socioeconomic well-being. Threats to 
these attributes of well-being define a region's 
vulnerability. Not all countries are equally vulnera-
ble and many will be only indirectly affected by sea-
level rise, with limited impacts to a particular sector 
of the economy (eg fisheries, tourism) or affecting 
the mechanisms of trade and transportation (eg 
waterways, ports, inlets). 
Coastal areas, particularly low-lying areas exposed to 
the open ocean are inherently hazardous, yet they 
have attracted people, industry and commerce. 
Every year lives are lost, tens of billions of dollars of 
damages are sustained, and hundreds of square 
kilometres of land are eroded. For most inhabitants 
who have a choice, the perceived benefits of living in 
this highly variable zone outweigh the risks and 
costs. Many are not so fortunate - they do not have 
the choices available to them. Thus, much of the 
dense coastal infrastructure in place today will 
probably be protected to the extent technically and 
economically feasible. Retreat would be more likely 
in less developed areas (Moser and Stakhiv, 1989; 
Dean et al., 1987; Barth and Titus, 1984). 
Estimating monetary impacts is fairly straightfor-
ward; it is much harder to assign market values to 
non-monetary impacts (morbidity or mortality, 
ecosystem damage). Jansen (1990) reviewed meth-
ods of quantifying each. He discussed preventative 
policy measures, which are global and long term, 
and adaptive measures that can be more easily 
implemented nationally or locally. The few studies 
on economic assessment of sea-level rise estimate 
the engineering cost only. 
Data on vulnerability to damage (altitudes of vul-
nerable areas, existing buildings and infrastructures) 
vary widely from country to country. The following 
sections examine the socioeconomic implications of 
inundation, erosion, agricultural losses, increased 
flooding and the impacts of water supply, water 
quality and infrastructures. 
2.2.1 Inundation 
The direct effect of inundation is the potentially 
large loss of inhabited areas, particularly in low-
lying, flat deltaic and estuarine areas. 
Half of 
humanity inhabits the coastal regions around the 
globe, and large areas of highly vulnerable flood-
prone sections are densely populated. A i m rise in 
sea-level could inundate 12-15% of Egypt's arable 
land (Broadus et.al., 1986) and 17% of Bangladesh 
(Commonwealth Secretariat, 1989). Large displace-
ments of population would be likely in Indonesia 
and Vietnam. The United States would lose 20,000 
km
2 kilometres of land, an area worth about $650 
billion (Park et al., 1989; Yohe, 1990). 
In extremely flat deltaic areas, a i m rise in sea-level 
would cause shores to retreat several kilometres, 
displacing hundreds of villages and depriving mil-
lions of people of their means of subsistence, ie their 
lands and natural resources. 
A group of experts 
convened by the Commonwealth Secretariat (1989) 
reported that the most vulnerable deltas include: 
6-2 
the Nile in Egypt, Ganges in Bangladesh, the 
Yangtze and Hwang Ho in China, the Mekong in 
Vietnam, the Irrawaddy in Burma, the Indus in 
Pakistan, the Niger in Nigeria, the Parana, 
Magdalena, Orinoco and Amazon in South America, 
the Mississippi in the US and the Po in Italy. 
Many small island countries would lose a significant 
part of their land area with a sea-level rise of 1 m 
(Lewis, 1988). Coral atoll nations, such as Kiribati, 
Marshall Islands, Tokelau and Tuvalu, Cocos and 
Keeling Islands, are particularly vulnerable to 
inundation and erosion because they are generally 
below 3 m elevation and narrow, implying few 
possibilities for retreat. 
Coral reefs along many 
tropical coasts serve as natural breakwaters. Any 
sea-level rise will allow waves to over-top the reefs, 
increasing coastal vulnerability to erosion and 
storms, at least until reef growth can catch up with 
sea-level. The more rapid the rate of sea-level rise, 
the longer the period of vulnerability, and the 
greater the possibility that present reefs will be 
unable to catch up and that they will drown. Coral 
mining for building materials, and land reclamation 
on coral reef flats increase the risk of damage. 
Some scientists (eg Parnell, 1989) have suggested 
that increased growth rate of coral reefs and more 
efficient sedimentation processes may offset some of 
the sea-level rise effects for atolls, at least for the 
next 50-100 years. Further research and study are 
clearly needed. 
The 1190 small islands making up the Republic of 
the Maldives barely rise 2-4 m above sea-level 
(Small States Conference on Sea-level Rise, 1989.). 
A recent U N E P report on the republic (Pernetta 
and Sestini, 1989) illustrates the dilemma facing atoll 
countries. The Maldives already experience serious 
environmental degradation, primarily because of the 
high population density on the few inhabited islands 
within each atoll. 
In a recent survey, Delft Hydraulics Laboratory 
(1990a, 1990b) attempted a first-order estimate of 
181 coastal countries and territories. The study 
estimated that 345,335 km of low coast, 6400 km of 
urban waterfronts, 10,725 km of sandy beaches, and 
1756 km
2 of harbour areas would have to be protect-
ed. Many of the island countries do not have the 
alternative of retreat and must either protect them-
selves or evacuate the islands. Table 6.1 shows the 
annual costs of preventing inundation and erosion as 
a percentage of the country's G N P . For ten count-
ries, nine of which are islands, the estimate of 
annual costs would comprise greater than 5% of 
their G N P . Because the study assumed that all low 
land areas with population density greater than 10 
inhabitants per km
2 would be protected, protection 
costs may be overstated. 
On the other hand, the 
total cost of sea-level rise may be underestimated 
because coastal areas are still being developed and 
the study did not consider the value of lost wetlands, 
dry land that would not be protected, or the cost of 
correcting problems due to increased flooding or 
saltwater intrusion. 
2.2.2 Agricultural losses 
Sea-level rise could decrease the agricultural pro-
ductivity of many deltaic countries that can least 
afford the losses (Bangladesh, Egypt, China etc). 
The impacts on agriculture arise not only from 
direct loss of arable land to inundation, but also to 
the increased potential for erosion and increased 
coastal and riverine flooding. For example, about 
20% of agricultural production could be lost, mainly 
rice, sugarcane and jute, as a result of the 1 m 
inundation of Bangladesh (UNEP, 1989). Similarly, 
about 15% of Egypt's agricultural production would 
be permanently lost. 
Thailand and China are 
regarded as being especially vulnerable to significant 
losses of productive deltaic agricultural land, as are 
Gambia, Senegal, Nigeria and Mozambique. Addi-
tional land could also be degraded by salinisation 
and flooding. 
Differing interests may cause conflict and dispute 
over property rights and responsibilities. Farmers 
losing land to sea-level rise can get land only from 
others to compensate for their loss. Since vacant 
agricultural land is scarce, the result could be ruin 
for farmers hit by the effects of land loss. 
The 
problems can be tremendous in countries where 
large populations and areas are seriously hit. 
2.2.3 Erosion and tourism 
In many areas, the total shoreline retreat from rising 
sea-level would be greater than that due to inunda-
tion alone, because land well above sea-level could 
also erode. In the US, several studies have conclud-
ed that a 30 cm rise would eliminate the existing 
recreational beaches at most major resorts and 
threaten ocean-front property worth tens of millions 
of (US) dollars per kilometre of shoreline (Kana et 
al., 1984; Leatherman, 1985; Titus, 1986; 1990). The 
Miami and Perth IPCC coastal workshops suggested 
that sea-level rise would also threaten oceanside 
development in Portugal, Brazil, Nigeria, Thailand 
and most other nations with tourist beaches. 
2.2.4 Increased potential of coastal flooding 
Coastal storms can threaten human life, livestock, 
crops, structures and water supplies. 
As sea-level 
6-3 
Table 6.1 Survey of 1 m sea-level rise and protection costs. (Countries and territories ranked by estimated 
costs as per cent of GNP*) 
No 
Country or territory 
Annual cost as % of 
Length low coast 
Beach length 
GNP 
(km) 
(km) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
Maldives 
Kiribati 
Tuvalu 
Tokelau 
Anguilla 
Guinea-Bissau 
Turks and Caicos 
Marshall Island 
Cocos (Keeling) Isl 
Seychelles 
Falkland Isl 
French Guiana 
Belize 
Papua New Guinea 
Bahamas, the 
Liberia 
Gambia, the 
Mozambique 
St.Chr. and Nevis 
Nieu 
Guyana 
Suriname 
Sierra Leone 
Aruba 
Pitcairn Island 
Fiji 
Sao Tome and Pr. 
Nauru 
British Virgin Isl 
Tonga 
Cayman Islands 
Cook Islands 
Equitorial Guinea 
Antiqua and Barbuda 
Sri Lanka 
Togo 
St Lucia 
Burma 
Benin 
Micronesia, Fed. St. 
New Zealand 
Palau 
Grenada 
Neth. Antilles 
Senegal 
Ghana 
Somalia 
Western Samoa 
Madagascar 
St. Vincent and Gr. 
34.33 
18.79 
14.14 
11.11 
10.31 
8.15 
8.10 
7.24 
5.82 
5.51 
4.75 
2.96 
2.93 
2.78 
2.67 
2.66 
2.64 
2.48 
2.33 
2.18 
2.12 
1.94 
1.86 
1.85 
1.71 
1.53 
1.46 
1.25 
1.24 
1.14 
1.04 
1.03 
1.02 
1.01 
0.89 
0.87 
0.82 
0.77 
0.74 
0.73 
0.70 
0.69 
o.67 
0.66 
0.65 
0.64 
0.62 
0.59 
0.56 
0.55 
1 
0 
0 
0 
30 
1240 
80 
0 
1 
1 
1 
540 
500 
6400 
400 
2200 
400 
10015 
40 
6 
1040 
2800 
1835 
1 
0 
11 
3 
3 
1 
4 
1 
0 
7 
50 
9770 
300 
25 
7470 
485 
0 
14900 
7 
6 
25 
1345 
2400 
700 
11 
1190 
7 
25 
0 
0 
0 
5 
0 
5 
0 
0 
25 
0 
0 
0 
0 
200 
0 
0 
25 
10 
0 
0 
0 
0 
15 
0 
25 
5 
0 
10 
0 
25 
0 
0 
10 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
0 
100 
0 
5 
30 
0 
20 
0 
0 
0 
5 
This estimate does not represent the total cost of sea-level rise, only the cost of erecting shore 
protection structures. 
6-4 
rises, these damages could increase substantially as 
the most densely populated areas landward of the 
present shoreline come under the direct influence of 
storm surges and wave attack. 
Sea-level could 
increase the risk of flooding for three reasons: (i) 
there would be a higher base upon which storm 
surges would build; if sea-level rises 1 m, an area 
flooded today with 50 cm of water every 20 years 
would then be flooded with 150 cm every 20 years; 
surges would penetrate further inland (Kana et al., 
1984). (ii) beaches, sand dunes, coral reefs, marshes 
and mangroves currently protect many areas from 
direct wave attack; by removing these protective 
barriers, erosion would leave many areas more 
vulnerable; and (iii) sea-level rise would increase 
flooding from rainstorms and river surges owing to 
decreased drainage (Titus et al., 1987). 
The higher base for storm surges would be particu-
larly important in areas where hurricanes or severe 
storms are frequent, such as the southeastern US, 
the Indian subcontinent, the western Pacific and 
islands in the Caribbean Sea. Wynne (1989) esti-
mates that even a 50 cm rise would cause areas in 
South Australia, flooded today only once per centu-
ry, to be flooded every two years. In Japan, a i m 
rise would threaten an area of 1700 km
2 square 
kilometres in which 4 million people live (Mansfield 
and Nishioka, 1989). 
Floods in Bangladesh would be worse for all of 
these reasons. In 1987, for example, flood crests of 
the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers coincided in 
Bangladesh, inundating about one third of the 
country and forcing tens of millions of people from 
their homes. In addition, about ten million people 
live on land that lies within 1 m of mean sea-level 
near the coast. The coastal plains of Guyana, which 
also he at the high-tide level, are inhabited by 90% 
of the population. The coastal defence system has 
deteriorated and is vulnerable to sea-level rise. 
Finally, the Pacific and Indian Ocean atoll countries 
would be especially threatened by the increased 
flooding from a combination of sea-level rise and the 
possibility of the increased frequency and magnitude 
of coastal storms and cyclones (Emmanuel, 1988). 
Other possible associated effects of global warming 
could also increase coastal flooding. In particular, 
increases in the frequency and magnitude of riverine 
floods and coastal storms could result from changing 
weather 
patterns, 
increased 
precipitation, 
and 
shifting of the seasonality of monsoons, snowmelt 
and other precipitation - runoff phenomena. 
The 
resultant wetter soils and increased flows could 
exacerbate flooding and result in the loss of 
agricultural productivity, as the soils stayed saturated 
for longer periods. 
2.2.5 Water supply and quality 
Sea-level rise would generally enable salt water to 
advance inland in both aquifers and estuaries. 
Particularly during droughts, the upstream migration 
of salt fronts in estuaries would threaten municipal 
and industrial freshwater intakes that draw water 
from tidal rivers for water supply. In the US, a 50 
cm rise would enable salt water to advance 10-20 km 
upstream in the Delaware Estuary, threatening 
Philadelphia's municipal intake, as well as adjacent 
aquifers that are recharged by the (currently fresh) 
river water (Hull and Titus, 1986); New York 
(Miller et al., 1988), Southern California (Williams, 
1989) and coastal cities throughout the world relying 
on freshwater intakes that draw water from tidal 
rivers would be similarly vulnerable. 
Saltwater contamination of municipal water supplies 
could also occur more frequently than under 
historical drought periods. Even in areas where the 
General Circulation Models ( G C M ) predict a net 
increase of mean annual precipitation, the models 
also suggest a progressive increase in the frequency 
of droughts to the year 2050. 
Not only could 
municipal water supplies be contaminated more 
frequently, at the most critical times, groundwater 
aquifers could also be contaminated by saltwater 
intrusion. In addition, a good deal of agricultural 
irrigation water is withdrawn from the streams and 
rivers. Hence these supplies would also be adversely 
affected by extended periods of saltwater intrusion, 
also during the critical drought periods. 
A particular concern facing atoll countries is the 
impact of sea-level rise on groundwater availability. 
Countries such as Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Tokelau 
and Tuvalu in the Pacific, and the Maldives, Cocos 
and Keeling Islands in the Indian Ocean depend on 
rainwater lenses that lie atop salt water. 
As sea-
level rises, the thickness of the freshwater lens 
decreases, and hence the volume of fresh water 
decreases (Figure 6.3). Also sea-level rise would 
increase the likelihood of storm overwash of the 
islands, causing increased incidence of saltwater 
contamination of the freshwater lenses. Studies have 
also shown that as the atoll islands erode owing to 
increased sea-level rise and wave attack, a 20% 
reduction in the width of an island may cause a 50% 
loss of the volume of fresh water (Commonwealth 
Secretariat, 1989). 
Clearly, basic subsistence on 
these islands would be seriously impaired. If these 
changes are coupled with more frequently occurring 
droughts, the socioeconomic and ecological impacts 
could be devastating to these island countries. 
Sea-level rise will impair estuarine water quality in 
other subtle ways, contributing to the degradation of 
6-5 
in situ conditions for aquatic biota (eg increased 
temperature results in lower dissolved oxygen) and 
increasing the health risks of the population depend-
ent on withdrawals of fresh water from the streams. 
Increased precipitation and consequent riverine 
flooding, coupled with reduced interior drainage, 
could cause more frequent stormwater overloading 
of the municipal drainage and sewerage systems. 
The addition of large pulses of point source and 
non-point source pollution would contribute to 
general water quality degradation of riverine, estua-
rine and coastal waters. 
Less obvious are the 
potentially serious effects of the leaching of toxic 
and hazardous contaminants from countless hazard-
ous waste sites, at least those in the US, that are 
located within the 100-year floodplain. 
Septic 
systems would fail and overflow more frequently as 
the soils remain waterlogged for extended periods. 
Moreover, if drainfields from septic tanks are less 
than 1.5 m above the watertable, they contaminate 
it; higher watertables would make this situation 
more commonplace. Finally, water bodies could 
stagnate, both because of higher temperatures and 
the decreased mixing and tidal flushing associated 
with deeper water (Park, 1990). 
2.2.6' Infrastructure 
Rising sea-level would expose coastal infrastructure 
to the combined impacts of waves, storm surges and 
erosion. In the US, about $100 billion could be 
required to protect tourist resorts and vulnerable 
urban areas from inundation and erosion alone. 
Modifications to stormwater and sewerage systems, 
ports and navigation channels, roads, bridges and 
water supply infrastructure could substantially 
increase this figure (Titus and Greene, 1989). 
Drainage improvements necessitated by a 1 m rise 
in sea-level for Miami International Airport alone, 
would cost about $US30 million (Miller, 1988). In 
Japan, the cost of modifying infrastructure for a 1 m 
rise in sea-level would be about $US20 billion 
(Mansfield and Nishioka, 1989). 
Higher sea-levels would ease access to some shallow 
ports and through some sea-level canals. 
2.3 
Ecological impacts: alteration and 
degradation of the biophysical 
properties of beaches, coral reefs, 
estuaries and wetlands 
2.3.1 Wetlands 
Over two-thirds of fish caught for human consump-
tion - as well as many birds and terrestrial animals 
depend on coastal marshes and swamps for part of 
their life cycles. 
Unlike most dry land, coastal 
wetlands can keep pace with a slow rate of sea-level 
rise. As Figure 6.4 shows, this ability has enabled 
the area of intertidal wetlands to increase several-
fold with the slow rate of rise over the last few 
thousand years. However, if sea-level rises at a rate 
greater than the ability of wetlands to keep pace, the 
area of wetlands could decline by a similar amount; 
and when bulkheads and dikes protect adjacent dry 
land, there could be a complete loss (Titus et al., 
1984; Titus, 1986, 1990). 
Kana et al. (1988a and 1988b) surveyed the intertidal 
wetlands around Charleston, South Carolina, and 
Long Beach Island, NJ. In the Charleston site, they 
found that a 90 cm rise would inundate 50% of 
existing wetlands, although the net loss would be 
only 40% if wetlands are able to form inland. In the 
case of a 140 cm rise, they estimated that 90% of 
existing wetlands would be lost, but the net loss 
would be only 80% if the adjacent dryland areas are 
abandoned. In contrast, in the Long Beach Island 
site they found that a 90 cm rise would have little 
impact on total wetland acreage; the primary impact 
would be to convert the predominant high marsh to 
low marsh; a 140 cm rise, however, would drown 
80% of the wetlands. 
Park et al. (1986) used topographic maps to attain a 
first approximation of the impact of sea-level rise on 
US coastal wetlands. Their results suggested that a 
1.4 m and 2.1 m rise in sea-level would inundate 
47% and 80% (respectively) of US wetlands, but 
these losses could be reduced to 31% and 70% 
(respectively) if adjacent developed lowland were 
abandoned to the advancing sea.
1 However, Titus 
(1988) noted that interpolation of topographic maps 
inherently overestimates wetland elevations, and 
hence underestimates wetland loss. Therefore, Park 
et al. (1989) revised their regional study, this time 
using an unbiased procedure for estimating wetland 
elevations and using the lower estimate of a 1 m rise 
in sea-level. The revised results implied that such a 
rise would inundate 50-82% (95% confidence inter-
val) of existing wetlands, but that the net loss would 
be reduced to 29-66% if only densely developed 
areas are protected.
2 
The applicability of these estimates for other count-
ries is unknown. Because wetlands are found below 
the annual high tide, the most vulnerable areas 
would tend to be those in areas with small tidal 
ranges, such as the Mediterranean and Black seas, 
1. 
These results are reported in Titus, 1988, who did 
regional weighting to obtain national results. 
2. 
These results are reported in Titus and Greene, 1989. 
6-6 
the Gulf of Mexico and estuaries with narrow 
openings to the sea. The least vulnerable would be 
those in areas with large tidal ranges, such as the 
Bay of Fundy. 
A recent global survey of coastal wetlands and 
mangrove swamps was conducted by the Netherlands 
(Rijkswaterstaat, 1990). This survey, which did not 
include data from the US, Canada, Australia and 
New Zealand, shows that, in the aggregate, there are 
about 730,000 km
2 of coastal wetlands, plus another 
165,000 km
2 of mangroves. Eight countries out of 
120 surveyed - Mexico, Brazil, Argentina, Cuba, 
Indonesia, 
Papua-New 
Guinea, 
Vietnam 
and 
Malaysia - possess slightly more than half of the 
world's coastal wetlands. They found through their 
survey that about 88% of the total coastal wetlands 
areas of the world are situated in regions with a 
population density of less than 10 inhabitants/km
2. 
They reason that these areas are unlikely to be 
protected by 'hard' coastal structures because of 
unfavourable economics, and thus, the land uses 
upland of the wetlands pose no barriers to the 
landward migration and transition of wetland types 
as sea-level rises. At most, 5-10% of wetlands by 
area would be lost to hard coastal structures with a 
rise of 1 m given the current level of coastal devel-
opment. This conclusion is similar to that of Park et 
al. (1989). Thus, most wetland loss would be due to 
inundation, not coastal structures. 
Nevertheless, 
several authors have cautioned that current rates of 
coastal development could lead to much greater 
proportion of the coast being developed, with a 
corresponding increase in wetland loss due to 
structures preventing the inland migration of coastal 
ecosystems (Everett and Pastula, 1990; Titus, 1990). 
Coastal areas place an added problem of the 
presence of hazardous waste sites, the flooding of 
which could have serious environmental conse-
quences. 
In the US, about 1100 active hazardous 
waste sites, and possibly as many closed or aban-
doned sites, are located within areas that have a 
probability of flooding once every 100 years (Flynn 
et al., 1984). Increased flooding could exacerbate 
the problem of hazardous waste entering the envi-
ronment. 
2.3.2 Background: importance of wetlands 
Coastal tidal wetlands are very important to the 
functioning of estuarine and near-shore ecosystems. 
In Europe and the US, a large proportion of coastal 
wetlands has been lost to development - and a rela-
tively high percentage continues to be lost annually 
through a combination of subsidence and sediment 
starvation caused by dams and dikes that restrict 
natural sedimentation. About 18,000 square km
2 of 
coastal wetlands remain in the US (Office of 
Technology Assessment, 1984). 
Wetlands are vital to the ecology and economy of 
coastal areas. Their biological productivity is equal 
to 
or exceeds that of any other natural 
or 
agricultural system, (Teal, 1962; Ryzkowski, 1984). 
Wetlands support resident and migratory birds, 
coastal animals which use them for habitats and 
forage, and they are vital to the well-being of many 
species of fish and shellfish. Over half the species of 
commercially important fish in the southeastern US 
use salt marshes as nursery grounds. The value of 
marshes as habitat for various life-cycle stages of 
countless species may be their most important 
function. Wetlands also serve as sinks for pollutants 
and provide a degree of protection from floods, 
storms and high tides. 
Based on these functions, 
marshes have an estimated present worth to society 
of as much as $US13,600/ha (Thurman, 1983). 
Coastal wetlands and estuaries are important to 
many species. If sea-level rise is too rapid, natural 
succession of the coastal ecology would not take 
place and could lead to disruption in the life cycles 
of many species. In the near term, production of 
fisheries could rise as marshes flood, die and decom-
pose, thus improving fisheries habitat in some cases 
and providing more nutrients. Additional nutrients 
would become available from leaching of soils and 
peat which would flood more frequently. 
This 
temporary increase in productivity appears to be 
happening now in the southeastern US where sea-
level rise is compounded by land subsidence 
(Zimmerman et al., 1989). However, this temporary 
benefit for fisheries may be balanced by negative 
impacts on birds and other wildlife as the habitat 
area is decreased. In the longer term, by 2050 the 
overall impact on fisheries and wildlife will probably 
be negative. 
For example, in coastal Louisiana, US, brackish 
marshes are deteriorating because of high rate of 
sea-level rise (due to subsidence) and saltwater 
intrusion. Recent increases in juvenile shrimp in the 
fishery may be the result of a short-term increase in 
nursery area due to increased tidal penetration into 
the marshes. If this is so, then the increasing trend 
of shrimp production may be reversed if wetland 
deterioration continues (Condrey, 1989). 
2.3.3 Redistribution of wetlands 
An accelerated rise in sea-level could result in a 
substantial redistribution of coastal wetlands types. 
Salt, brackish and fresh marshes as well as mangrove 
and other swamps would be successively lost to 
inundation and erosion; others would transform and 
6-7 
adapt to the new hydrologic and hydraulic regime or 
would migrate inland through adjacent lowlands not 
impeded by protective structures. The value of these 
wetlands as habitat for wildlife could be impaired 
during the transitional period and their biodiversity 
may decrease (Davis, 1985). Sedimentation and peat 
formation have allowed many wetlands to keep pace 
with sea-level rise in the last few thousand years, 
which has enabled the area of wetlands to increase 
in most parts of the world, as illustrated in Figure 
6.3. However, if the sea-level rises more rapidly than 
the wetland vertical accretion rate, there could be a 
corresponding net loss of wetlands. 
Kearney and 
Stevenson (1985) found that in some areas, any 
acceleration of sea-level rise would induce a net loss 
of wetlands; 
in contrast, Park et al. (1986, 1989) 
assumed that wetland accretion in most areas could 
keep pace with an acceleration of 1 or 2 mm per 
year. The literature provides no evidence, however, 
that wetlands could generally keep pace with a 
relative sea-level rise of 1 cm per year, which would 
be reached by the year 2100 even in the 50 cm 
scenario. In fact, such a rate would be as great as 
the rate attained during the disintegration of the 
continental ice sheets at the end of the Pleistocene, 
which drowned barrier islands and associated fea-
tures on the continental shelves (Peltier, 1988). 
Owing to the combination of climatic changes, it is 
expected that specific ecological communities within 
coastal ecosystems will not only move inland, wher-
ever humankind does not intervene, but will general-
ly move poleward. 
2.3.4 Changes in nutrients and chemicals 
Particularly for a large rise in sea-level, biogeo-
chemical cycles will be altered by saltwater inunda-
tion of land not submerged in millennia. Increases 
in nitrogen and phosphorous concentrations can be 
expected as well as the release into the marine 
environment of pesticides and toxic substances 
resident in the ground. 
2.3.5 Other ecological impacts of sea-level 
rise 
There are several ecological impacts of sea-level rise 
beyond those in wetland areas. Many species of sea 
turdes are recognised throughout the world as 
threatened with extinction. (Everett and Pastula, 
1990). As nesting beaches are lost, either by sea-
level rise or by human development, additional 
significant stresses will be placed on turtle popula-
tions. In addition, dune ecosystems are also import-
ant to many species of birds and other animals as 
nesting and foraging areas. 
Many marine mammals rely on beach zones for 
critical parts of their life cycle. Sea-level rise ap-
proaching the 1 m worst-case scenario may inundate 
some important haulout or put these mammals into 
conflict with human uses; however, in most cases 
animals are expected to adapt. On the other hand 
coral reef communities have a limited capacity to 
adjust to sea-level rise: whereas the corals appear to 
have accommodated to historic sea-level change 
rates, it is unclear whether they can adjust as readily 
under rates approaching the worst-case scenario. 
In addition, a rapid rate of sea-level rise may threat-
en coral reefs which fringe coral atolls and provide 
the material sustenance for them. They may not be 
able to keep up with the sea-level rise, thus causing 
their ecological structure to change as they become 
flooded. 
2.4 
Physical aspects of shoreline 
retreat: inundation, erosion and 
recession of barrier islands, coral 
reefs and other shorelines 
2.4.1 Background 
The primary direct physical effect of sea-level rise is 
inundation. Inundation increases the rate of shore-
line recession or retreat by raising the mean water 
level upon which the tides, waves and storm surges 
can attack the beaches, bluffs, embayments and 
barrier islands of the world's coastlines. Historically, 
submergence has accounted for a relatively small 
portion of net shoreline recession along exposed 
sedimentary coasts (Hands, 1976). 
That is, most 
sandy shorelines worldwide have retreated during 
the past century because of the erosion associated 
with the regional storm and wave climate (Bird, 
1976). Locally, human interference with the coastal 
sediment transport regime has accelerated erosion 
problems, as jetties and groins have impeded littoral 
transport processes. 
On a global scale, however, 
human interference cannot be considered a primary 
cause of erosion since retreat also occurs on sparsely 
populated and little-developed sandy coasts (Bird, 
1976). Less than 10% of the length of the world's 
sandy shoreline has progressed, more than 60% has 
regressed, and the balance (30%) has been relatively 
stable or has shown no consistent trend during the 
past century (Bird, 1976). 
The slope of the beach foreshore is the controlling 
variable of shoreline recession: steep-sloped shore-
lines will experience relatively little horizontal 
displacement with each increment of sea-level rise. 
Gently sloping shores will undergo much greater 
recession and flooding for the same increment of 
sea-level rise (National Research Council, 1987). 
6-8 
For example, the deltaic coast of Louisiana in the 
Gulf Coast region of the US has been receding at a 
rate of 4.2 m/yr (May et al., 1983). This is associat-
ed with a relative rise of sea-level (caused mostly by 
subsidence) of about 1 cm/yr. Along sand beaches, 
the general rule of thumb for the relationship of 
average beach recession to sea-level rise is about 
100:1, ie a shoreline recession of 100 m for a 1 m 
rise in sea-level (National Research Council, 1987). 
It is essential to understand the effects of sea-level 
rise on coastal physical processes, for these process-
es will not only determine the overall physiographic 
and geomorphological features of the coast, but also 
their interaction with man-made structures designed 
to stabilise the shoreline. 
Our ability to predict 
these processes under contemporary slow rising sea-
level remains rudimentary, even though a consider-
able amount of empirical and theoretical coastal 
engineering 
research 
has 
been 
accomplished 
(National Research Council, 1987). 
2.4.2 Global projections of inundation and 
recession 
The recent Dutch study (Delft Hydraulics Labora-
tory, 1990b), estimated the total shoreline length that 
would be inundated or otherwise affected by a rise 
in sea-level of 1 m. 
Low coasts were defined as 
those with a coastal zone broader than 25 km below 
the 100 m contour. In addition, the Dutch reasoned 
that only coastal areas with a population density 
greater than 10 inhabitants/km
2 could be considered 
vulnerable to the combined threat of inundation, 
flooding and erosion. Over 345,000 km of low coast 
in 181 countries were identified and surveyed on the 
basis of these assumptions, along with 10,700 km of 
barrier island beaches and major recreational 
oceanic beaches. 
The Dutch used Leatherman's 
(1988) estimates for the length of sandy shorelines 
in the US. Of the 11,000 km of sandy shoreline in 
the US, some 3000 km were considered to require 
some form of stabilisation. 
According to the US Army Corps of Engineers' 
National Shoreline Study (1971), there are approxi-
mately 51,000 km of shoreline in the conterminous 
US (excludes Alaska which has about 75,000 km and 
Hawaii). Of the 51,000 km, about 24,500 km (nearly 
50%) were considered erosional, but only 3000 km 
were considered to be critical enough for protective 
action. Currently, only about 1000 km are protected 
by some form of 'soft' (eg periodic beach nourish-
ment) or 'hard' structural measures. These figures 
are presented as a rough indicator of the current 
degree of protection that is considered economically 
feasible for a country. 
2.4.3 Shoreline erosion and stabilisation 
As was demonstrated by the Dutch worldwide survey 
of coastal inundation, low coasts of variable sedi-
mentary composition and morphology dominate the 
statistics. 
They consist of sandy, rocky or muddy 
substrates, supporting various types of vegetation 
such as marshes, mangroves and meadows. Erosion 
processes are variable and as a result are difficult to 
predict. 
Apart from direct inundation, and the 
impacts on human safety and agricultural produc-
tivity, there is the perpetual issue of barrier island 
stabilisation from the erosive forces of wind, waves 
and storm surges. 
Because of human habitation on inherently hazard-
ous shores, primarily for recreation and aesthetic 
enjoyment, society has taken actions to stabilise 
these highly mobile shores through various protec-
tive measures that include periodic beach nourish-
ment, groins, breakwaters, bulkheads and riprap. 
One of the most important aspects of shoreline 
management is the stabilisation of inlets and naviga-
tion channels that are needed for recreational boats 
as well as for commercial navigation, including 
fishing fleets. 
Barrier islands and classical sandy coast-lines appar-
ently account for a very small proportion of the total 
shoreline subject to inundation due to projected sea-
level rise according to the Dutch survey. Much of 
the research and literature on shoreline stabilisation 
issues deal with the highly mobile, dynamic process-
es associated with these beaches. 
There is still 
considerable debate in the literature regarding the 
origin and fate of barrier beaches under conditions 
of sea-level rise. The general consensus is that in 
response to sea-level rise, barrier islands tend to 
migrate landward as storms wash sand from the 
ocean side to the bay side. This overwash process 
may enable barrier islands to keep pace with an 
accelerated 
sea-level 
rise 
(Leatherman, 
1982). 
However, there is also a belief that these barrier 
islands will either disintegrate or will merge with the 
mainland, if the rate of sea-level rise is rapid. 
The lagoons and embayments behind barrier islands 
and spits provide natural sheltered harbour. In their 
natural conditions, the tidal inlets between barrier 
islands migrate along the shoreline, whereas when 
stabilised by jetties, they are fixed in position to 
provide the essential and reliable navigation channels 
(National Research Council, 1987). In some bays 
and inlets, the tidal transport of sediment creates 
shallow delta, depositing the sediment load either on 
the seaward side of the bay entrance (on the ebb-
tide) or on the bay side (on the floodtide). Conse-
quently, as sea-level rises, the volume of these shoals 
6-9 
will increase correspondingly, and the elevation of 
these deltas will grow in elevation to keep up with 
the rising sea-level. 
The shoreline stabilisation implications for the 
downdrift beaches are clear. 
Ebbtide deltas will 
become ever greater barriers to downdrift longshore 
transport of sediment, causing greater erosion 
downstream of the inlets. 
Unless there are sand 
bypass technologies available, the rate of erosion 
would be greater than that expected by sea-level rise 
(National Research Council, 1987). 
The costs of navigation channel and tidal inlet 
maintenance, through dredging, sand bypassing, and 
construction of jetties, will increase at a greater than 
linear rate. This is because some of the sediments 
are polluted and the costs of dredged material 
disposal have increased sharply over the past decade 
as a result of a variety of stringent environment 
regulations in many developed countries. 
2.4.4 Examples of sea-level rise impacts on 
particular regions 
The Mediterranean The Mediterranean region has 
about 46,000 km of coastline, 75% of which is found 
in four countries - Greece, Yugoslavia, Italy and 
Turkey (Telegersma and Sestini, 1989). More than 
50% of the coast is rocky, the rest being considered 
sedimentary (Baric, 1989). 
Tourism comprises a 
large part of the economy of these countries: over 
100 million visitors annually in 1984. 
Tourism 
associated with beaches and recreational navigation 
would be most adversely affected in the European 
Mediterranean, because many of the beaches are 
small pockets fringed by rocky coastlines. 
Venice, Italy Since 1890, relative mean sea-level in 
Venice has risen by about 25 cm. 
The mean 
number of floodings has increased over that period 
from 10/yr to 40/yr (Sbavaglia et al., 1989). 
In 
terms of damaging effects, the increased flooding is 
equivalent to increasing the frequency of 'normal' 
floods, as well as that of rare floods, although no 
statistical evidence has shown that the frequency of 
storms has increased. Further rises in sea-level will 
only exacerbate the problem. 
Egypt A i m rise in sea-level would extend inland 
over 30 km south of the city of Alexandria, which is 
a highly industrialised city. Furthermore, erosion 
and accretion patterns along the Mediterranean 
coast of Egypt would change significantly, affecting 
the important tourist, recreational and economically 
developed areas (El Raey, 1989). 
Poland 
Poland has a 493 km long coast on the 
Baltic sea, which consists of alternating cliffed (105 
km) and barrier beaches (373 km). The coast is 
relatively low lying. Almost 3000 km
2 lies below an 
elevation of +2 m (mean sea-level), with a total 
population of 405,000 in this low-lying zone that 
would be seriously threatened by a 1 m rise in sea-
level (Rotnicki and Borowka, 1989). The recession 
rate is estimated to be 2.3 m/year. 
In the Odra River valley, a sea-level rise of 0.5 m 
will have a direct impact on a floodplain 3-4 km 
wide and extending 50 km upstream, and a corres-
ponding increase in the salinity of surface and 
groundwater. (Rotnicki and Borowka, 1989). 
Ivory Coast The Ivory Coast has 550 km of low 
barrier beach shoreline which is fringed with 350 km 
of lagoon covering about 1200 km
2. Approximately 
3 million people out of a total population of 10 
million live along the coast and derive their liveli-
hood there. A large portion of the sandy shorelines 
is being eroded at a rate of 1-2 m/year (Kaba et al., 
1989). Increased sea-level will accelerate the shore-
line recession rate. 
Ghana 
The Ghanaian coastline stretches for ap-
proximately 550 km and suffers from severe erosion, 
which would be accelerated by sea-level rise. Many 
towns and villages have been retreating from the 
large rate of coastal recession. Flooding has been a 
major problem for many of the villages, disrupting 
daily life and the means of subsistence which is 
dependent on agriculture and fisheries. 
Argentina The Argentine coasts exhibit a diversity of 
coastal geomorphic features, with different tidal and 
wave regimes. Of the 5000 km of coastline, espe-
cially severe erosion occurs in the Province of 
Buenos Aires, with a coastline of 1800 km and 40% 
of the country's population. 
Coastal floods are 
severe on the shores of the Rio de la Plata. Coastal 
recession in some sections of the shore exceed 5 
m/yr 
(Schnack et al., 1989) and is expected to 
continue. 
Guiana Coast, South America The Guiana coast 
(Guyana, Surinam and French Guiana) can be 
designated as a low-lying chenier plain, much of 
which would be inundated by a sea-level rise of 30 
cm. 
More than 90% of the population of the 
Guiana coast lives in the coastal plain. A i m rise 
in sea-level would cause the coastline to retreat 2-5 
km, causing large-scale disruption in urban and 
agricultural areas (Daniel, 1989). 
Australia 
Australia's coastline is dominated by 
sedimentary deposits composed of sand (16,000 km
2) 
6-10 
and mud (6500 km
2). In addition, there are hun-
dreds of deltas, bays, estuaries and offshore islands 
that would be vulnerable to rising sea-levels (Prime 
Minister's Science Council, 1989). Australia's Great 
Barrier Reef and the reef complexes of western 
Australia are active coral communities which could 
be threatened by the rate of sea-level rise in the 
high scenario. 
China A i m rise would flood or destroy most 
salterns and seawater breeding farms. Reconstruc-
tion will require 5000 km
2 of land. Nearly half of 
the Pearl River Delta would be inundated, along 
with the more developed areas of the Yangtze and 
Yellow Rivers. There will also be other widespread 
impacts on housing, transport, and food and water 
supply (Ruqiu, 1990). 
Soviet Union The Soviet Union is a nation with a 
great diversity of coasts and there are varying 
directions and amounts of vertical movement of local 
land masses. Thus, even though the overall amount 
of change for the nation is an increase of 1-2 mm 
per year (similar to that observed for the world), the 
local impacts will vary considerably. This is particu-
larly so because there are periodic changes in sea-
level of 5, 7, 10, 12, 20 and 22 years for different 
areas of the Soviet Union, thus compounding the 
impacts on areas that are in a natural period of 
increasing sea-level (Goskomgidromet, 1990). 
3 The ecological and socioecono-
mic impacts of climate change 
on the world ocean 
3.1 Introduction 
The earth's climate is directly influenced by the 
ocean-atmosphere system. 
The two continuously 
interact. The World Ocean plays a deciding role in 
the turnover of water and C 0 2 as well as in the 
biogeochemical cycling of all the most important 
biogenic elements. 
Because of this, the predicted global climate warm-
ing (for the middle of the next century) will have an 
appreciable effect on the state of the World Ocean 
and, consequently, on the nature of its effects on 
human kind. The magnitude and direction of such 
an effect may differ significantly between the open 
ocean and coastal zones. Possible physiochemical, 
ecological and socioeconomic consequences will be 
determined by the specific character of the function 
of marine ecosystems, their regional peculiarities and 
their role in the world and national economies. 
A whole complex of scientific methods and ap-
proaches is necessary to assess the impact of global 
climate warming on the World Ocean. Data from 
the G C M s of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system, 
and the global C O z cycle, results of palaeooceano-
graphic investigations, analog comparisons, analysis 
of ecological observations and economic estimates 
were used in this report. 
An analysis was conducted of possible changes in the 
physiochemical parameters of the ocean environment 
and their influence on the biological and ecological 
characteristics of marine ecosystems on global and 
regional scales. 
Socioeconomic consequences were assessed on the 
basis of the expected changes in the state of fisheries 
in the open ocean and coastal zones using historic 
analogs. 
As a whole, comprehensive assessment of the effect 
of global warming of the World Ocean and its 
coastal zones will contribute to forecasting the 
development of human civilisation in new climatic 
conditions, as well as planning the system of adap-
tive options. 
3.2 
Impact on physiochemical processes 
3.2.1 Impact of global warming on the heat 
budget and water circulation of the 
World Ocean 
A key problem in forecasting possible changes in all 
fundamental 
natural 
processes 
under 
changed 
climatic conditions is assessing the impact of global 
warming on the heat budget and water circulation of 
the World Ocean. Because changes in the compo-
sition and circulation of the atmosphere affect the 
processes occurring in the ocean and, vice versa, it 
is necessary to consider the function of the ocean-
atmosphere system in conditions of the development 
of the greenhouse effect to resolve this problem. 
One of the most promising methods to investigate 
the sensitivity of the climatic system to the gaseous 
composition of the atmosphere is the performance 
of numerical experiments with the use of the nu-
merical G C M s of the coupled ocean/atmosphere 
system (Manabe and Stouffer, 1980; Schlesinger, 
1986). Using these models, it is possible to predict 
a change in the temperature regime of the lower 
atmosphere and the surface layer of the oceans. 
Among the coupled ocean-atmosphere GCMs, those 
of the Oregon State University (US) (Ghan, 1982; 
Schlesinger and Mitchell, 1987), the Goddard 
Institute for Space Studies (US) (Hansen et al., 
6-11 
1983, 1988), the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics La-
boratory of N O A A (Princeton, US) (Manabe and 
Wetherald, 1980, 1987) and the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research (US) (Washington and 
Meehl, 1989) include most of the principal factors 
influencing the coupled circulation processes. 
The basic parameters studied in all these models 
are: sea surface temperature, average surface wind 
speed, solar radiation flux, total cloudiness, sea-level 
pressure and evaporation. In each model, the ocean 
is considered as a simple mixed layer; ice cover and 
its melting are also included. However, none of the 
published coupled ocean-atmosphere G C M s has a 
satisfactory treatment of sea ice or deep ocean 
circulation. A chronic problem in these models has 
been a too large ice extent and too weak thermo¬
haline circulation in the northern North Atlantic and 
its connection to the Arctic Ocean (Bryan, 1986; 
Washington and Meehl, 1989). In their present state 
of development, the global climate models are 
unable to capture some of the possible feedbacks 
that may occur in the ice-ocean system as a response 
to atmospheric warming. 
Results of numerical experiments with these G C M s 
show a good qualitative agreement in the basic 
trends for thermal budgets of ocean and atmosphere 
under conditions of doubled atmospheric C 0 2 . 
However, significant differences exist in the quantita-
tive estimates. According to these calculations, the 
warming of the lower atmosphere by 1.3°-4.2°C 
should be expected, with a more intensive warming 
on the land than on the ocean. 
Comparable sea 
surface temperature increases will vary from 0.2° to 
2.5 °C. 
Increased precipitation should also be 
expected, especially on the eastern edges of the 
continents. Analysis of the seasonal dynamics of the 
temperature field for all four models has pointed to 
the maximum warming occurring in winter in arctic 
and antarctic regions. 
The predicted warming trend in arctic and subarctic 
regions is significant. An intensive warming in polar 
latitudes will reduce the meridional (north, south) 
gradients of sea surface temperature and, conse-
quently, will lead to a decrease in the trade wind 
intensity and in the power of ocean currents 
(Mitchell, 1988). 
This, in turn, could lead to a 
reduction in the area and intensity of ocean upwell-
ing, such as in the equatorial eastern tropical Pacific. 
On the other hand, G C M s predict that increases in 
temperature gradients between the strongly heated 
land mass and the cooler ocean can drive a compet-
ing mechanism by intensifying the along-shore wind 
stress on the ocean surface. This process would be 
accompanied by acceleration of coastal upwelling 
This is confirmed by present-day natural observa-
tions of upwelling dynamics (Bakun, 1990). These 
data from widely separated areas of the world 
suggest that the equator-ward along-shore wind 
stress has been increasing during the respective 
upwelling seasons of the past 40 years. 
It is likely that both upwelling mechanisms could 
take place under conditions of global warming, but 
the dominance of one or the other mechanisms will 
be determined by the proximity to land (eg eastern 
boundary current regimes) or the open ocean (eg 
the North Pacific Equatorial Counter-current). 
Upwelling is likely to intensify in coastal regions, 
whereas oceanic upwelling may weaken. 
These 
subtle, but large-scale, changes have profound 
impacts upon the fisheries as well as on the climate 
of the immediate coastal zone. 
Apart from the impact on the water circulation in 
the World Ocean, a warming in arctic and antarctic 
regions may have a significant influence on the state 
of the earth's cryosphere (glaciers and shelf and sea 
ice). 
Such changes will in turn further affect the 
global climate. First, sea ice, covering 11% of the 
world's ocean surface, affects internal ocean and 
ocean-atmosphere thermal exchange. These factors 
determine the intensity of convection in the ocean 
which characterises the mean time scale of processes 
occurring in deep ocean layers (for example, C 0 2 
uptake). Therefore, changes in the extent of sea ice 
will have an effect on atmospheric circulation and 
temperature. Also, open ocean waters absorb much 
more solar radiation than do those which are ice 
covered (Walsh, 1983). Second, even small changes 
in the earth's cryosphere could lead to a noticeable 
deviation of global sea-level from its recent average 
value. 
The predicted warming for the Arctic will 
lead to significant reduction in sea-ice extent around 
Svalbard, and along the north Siberian and Canadian 
arctic coasts. At the same time the projected rise in 
temperature for the period up to the middle of the 
21st century is not expected to lead to a significant 
decrease in the amount of ice volume in the massive 
ice caps of Greenland and Antarctica. 
In fact, a 
recent study in the Northern Hemisphere has shown 
that despite a small increase in mean annual tem-
perature, the extent of ice has increased in the most 
recent decade (Bryan et al., 1988). The predicted 
rise of temperature by 4°-5°C by the middle of the 
21st century (Mitchell, 1988) might lead to accelera-
tion of the ice flow from the continent into the 
ocean in west Antarctica and lead to decrease in ice 
cover in the Arctic (Budyko and Izrael, 1987). 
Owing to melting sea ice in the Arctic, freshening of 
surface waters in the North Atlantic would occur, 
interfering with bottom water formation. 
This 
process might affect the northward heat flux and 
6-12 
cross-equatorial heat transfer (the so-called 'con-
veyor belt' (Broecker et al., 1985)), which could 
cause a shift in global ocean circulation (Broecker 
and Peng, 1990; Bryan, 1986). The consequences of 
such major changes in ocean circulation would be 
enormous in terms of regional climate and biochem-
ical cycling. A major international program, the 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), is 
now under way to study this question. 
3.2.2 Changes in the carbon cycle 
The predicted increase of C 0 2 in the atmosphere by 
the middle of the next century could lead to disturb-
ances in the global carbon cycle and, as a conse-
quence, could have strong feedback to the earth's 
climate system. 
To assess the impact of such an 
anthropogenic increase of C 0 2 in the atmosphere 
and of resultant changes in the global carbon cycling 
on the World Ocean, it is necessary to improve our 
understanding of the cause-and-effect relationship of 
past natural C 0 2 variations. 
Measurements of gases trapped in polar ice cores 
(Barnola et al., 1987) convincingly demonstrated that 
the concentration of atmospheric C 0 2 was subject to 
several dramatic natural changes which paralleled 
and possibly slightly preceded the major climatic 
fluctuations. 
Since the ocean contains about 60 
atmospheric carbon units (Sundquist and Broecker, 
1985) such changes, to a great extent, must be tied 
to the ocean. The 'biological pump' transfers C 0 2 
across the thermocline into deep water via photosyn-
thetic marine organisms which incorporate gaseous 
C O z into carbonaceous compounds. The combined 
variations in the 'biological pump' process and in the 
chemistry and physical circulations of the ocean, 
could provide the dominant forcing of the observed 
changes in atmospheric C 0 2 (Siegenthaler and 
Wenk, 1984). 
In this context, numerous models 
have been proposed and examined (Sundquist and 
Broecker, 1985; Meir-Reimer and Hasselmann, 1987; 
Mix, 1989). 
One important result of such model experiments, 
using data from ocean palaeoproductivity estimates, 
is that changes in coastal and equatorial upwelling 
may in part control atmospheric C 0 2 (Sarntheim et 
al., 1988; Flohn, 1982). Recent studies have shown 
that this factor alone cannot explain the whole 
amplitude of natural variations and that a major role 
for controlling atmospheric C 0 2 levels is played by 
the ocean alkalinity which determines the solubility 
of C 0 2 in ocean water. Alkalinity variations appear 
to be triggered by changes in deep water formation 
in the high-latitude North Atlantic (Boyle, 1988; 
Broecker and Peng, 1990). 
According 
to 
Takahashi's 
estimates 
of C 0 2 
source/sink regions in the World Ocean (Takahashi, 
1989) the most intense source of C 0 2 is the 
equatorial Pacific and the most intense sink is the 
subantarctic belt, 40°-55° S. Coastal and equatorial 
upwelling regions are carbon sinks because of their 
productivity, but are net sources of C 0 2 due to 
outgassing of CO z-enriched waters, which overpow-
ers the carbon transfer by productivity. 
Furthermore, increased dissolution of carbonates 
due to the acidification of sea water by an increase 
of C 0 2 would lead to higher alkalinity and therefore 
higher C 0 2 uptake capacity of the ocean (Boyle, 
1988) . Enhanced burial of organic matter in ocean 
sediments due to increased nutrients influx would 
promote the sequestering of C 0 2 from the atmos-
phere (Siegenthaler, 1989). Lastly, arctic/subarctic 
seas are also significant sink areas for anthropogenic 
C 0 2 (Roots, 1989). 
Expected changes in the carbonate system and in the 
transport of particulate organic carbon from surface 
into deep ocean layers will greatly affect the marine 
biota. For example, recent results have suggested 
that the dissolution rate of shells of some mussels 
may be significantly higher than hitherto assumed 
(Betzer et al., 1984). 
In conclusion it should be noted that increasing C 0 2 
in the atmosphere could lead to disturbances in the 
global carbon cycling. The direction and magnitude 
of such changes will be determined to some extent 
by the functioning of upwelling ecosystems and 
changes in oceanic carbonate systems under the 
conditions of global warming. 
A major international program, the Joint Global 
Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) has been set up under 
the auspices of the ICSU-sponsored Scientific 
Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) for the 
decade 1990-99. Its main purpose is to investigate 
the flux of carbon in the ocean and the extent to 
which the oceans may affect climate change by 
exchanging C 0 2 with the atmosphere. 
3.2.3 Changes in nutrients 
In highly industrialised regions, such as the North 
Atlantic community, increased discharge of anthro-
pogenic gases and aerosols containing compounds of 
nitrogen, phosporous and sulphur into the atmos-
phere, results in increased fluxes of these substances 
from the atmosphere into the ocean (Oppenheimer, 
1989) . This process could be of great importance 
for nitrogen and sulphur, the atmospheric inputs of 
which to the photic zone of the ocean (at least for 
the Sargasso Sea and the equatorial Pacific) are 
6-13 
comparable to diffusive convectional inputs (Duce, 
1986). Marine biota may respond to these changes 
in nitrogen and sulphur contents with increased 
productivity, especially in impacted areas of the 
ocean. Such processes are already observed in the 
North Sea (Lancelot et al., 1987). 
Sea-level rise, followed by flooding and erosion of 
soil, could lead to substantial increases in the flow of 
nitrogen, phosphorous and sulphur into the coastal 
zones, creating the potential for severe eutrophica-
tion. The consequence will be an acceleration of 
biochemical cycling of all biogenic elements (Oppen¬
heimer, 1989). In turn, the increased cycling could 
cause a rise in the productivity of adjacent nutrient-
poor ecosystems, particularly the so-called 'oceanic 
deserts'. However, whether or not nutrient supplies 
and productivity would actually increase as a result 
of increased wetland and sediment erosion from sea-
level rise appears to be dependent on regional 
conditions. 
For example, in the Beaufort Sea, 
eroding peat from the tundra may be an important 
source of organic carbon for the coastal food chain, 
but in warmer water, such as the gulf of Mexico, 
where the biodegration and nutrient recycling rates 
are higher, the eroding nutrient and organics may 
not provide a significant contribution to the overall 
flux of materials. 
Rather, the relationship of 
increased fishery yield with wetland degradation in 
warmer waters may be more plausibly related to 
increased 
wetland-saltwater 
interface, 
affecting 
habitat dimensions (Condrey, 1989). This phenom-
enon has been observed, at least for the short term, 
in the Gulf of Mexico (Zimmerman et al., 1989). 
Oxygen depletion also occurs in association with 
increased eutrophication, especially in estuarine and 
deltaic regions adversely impacting all higher life 
forms. 
If, as suggested by G C M s , some mid-latitude conti-
nental areas will become more arid, then fewer 
nutrients would flow through river systems to estua-
rine areas (Glantz, 1989) although the reduction in 
nutrient may not be proportional to reduction in 
precipitation and river discharge. Loss of nutrients 
could have an adverse effect on fish populations and 
decreased river discharge would affect some organ-
isms which depend on fresh discharges for spawning. 
River systems of this type might include the Mississ-
ippi (US) and the Nile (Egypt) (Condrey, 1989,). 
On the other hand, precipitation and runoff are 
expected to increase in'most high-latitude continen-
tal areas, thereby increasing the volume of nutrients 
delivered to subpolar continental shelf areas. 
The reduction or displacement of salt marshes and 
littoral zones as a result of sea-level rise could lead 
to a sustained loss or disturbances of habitats of 
marine plants which synthesise dimethylsulphide 
(DMS) (Holligan and Kirst, 1989). 
D M S is the 
most important component of the global sulphur 
cycles and could be a major source of cloud conden-
sation nuclei over the oceans (Charlson et al., 1987; 
Griffin, 1988) with consequent influences on global 
albedo and climate. 
The subgroup takes note of the discussions on the 
feasibility of fertilising the oceans with iron which 
would be carried to appropriate iron-deficient zones 
by vessels. The idea is to increase primary produc-
tion, leading to removal of some C 0 2 from the 
atmosphere and is based on the work of Martin 
(1990). 
We urge full consideration of ecosystem 
impacts and strong caution in these discussions. 
3.2.4 Changes in contaminants 
A rise of temperature will result in the acceleration 
of biodégradation of global organic pollutants 
(petroleum and chlorinated hydrocarbons etc). This 
process would promote their removal from the 
photic zone of the ocean (Izrael et al., 1990; Tanabe, 
1985) 
On the other hand, sorption of these com-
pounds on suspended matter may decrease as a 
result of higher temperature, which will lead to less 
deposition of these pollutants in the bottom sedi-
ments (Pierce et al., 1974). As a consequence, it 
could increase the 'residence time' of the pollutants 
in ecosystems. 
The increase of U V - B radiation intensity (as a result 
of depletion of the atmospheric ozone layer) will 
increase the intensity of photochemical processes, 
particularly at the air/sea interface (Zika, 1989). 
This factor would accelerate the photo-destruction of 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) and polyaromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH) and, as a consequence, reduce 
this type of pollution in sea water (Doskey and 
Andren, 1987). 
But at the same time, increased 
penetration of solar U V - B radiation itself can have 
widespread adverse effects on life in the open ocean 
and wetlands. (US E P A , 1987). 
The increased concentration of atmospheric C 0 2 
could probably cause some acidification of surface 
waters (Wilson and Mitchell, 1987). The process 
will not influence the behaviour of organic hydro-
phobic contaminants, but it could be rather signifi-
cant for ionogenic compounds. 
The assciated 
decline in pH could enable the enhanced penetration 
of organic ionogenic compounds through cell mem-
branes and, correspondingly, the increased accumu-
lation of pollutants in hydrobionts (Landner, 1989). 
Furthermore, the enhanced acidity may decrease the 
stability of the complexes of heavy metals with 
humic substances (Paxeus, 1985; Mantoura and 
6-14 
Riley, 1975). The process may be accompanied by 
an increased toxic impact on marine organisms 
(Sunda and Lewis, 1978; Sedlacek et ah, 1983). 
3.3 Ecological impacts 
Physical-chemical 
parameters 
are the 
primary 
determinants of the distribution of marine habitats, 
communities, and ecosystems. A change in these 
parameters (described above) will have broad 
impacts on basic ecological structures and processes. 
These changes will, in turn, cause impacts on marine 
and coastal resources. 
3.3.1 
Changes in habitats 
The predicted temperature rise of surface waters 
and a change in the ocean circulation would substan-
tially impact on the structure and location of marine 
habitats. 
However, marine organisms, as a rule, 
have rather high genetic and behavioural plasticity, 
allowing them to adapt to constantly changing 
environmental conditions. This property is a basis 
for the relative stability of zoogeographical patterns 
under the conditions of natural climate variations 
(Odum, 1986). 
Under the present scenario for anthropogenically-
influcnced climate change, a general global warming 
is postulated, causing poleward spreading and 
deepening of warm oceanic waters. The response of 
biological communities will, in general, reflect 
poleward translocation to new optimal habitat. 
However, some life forms that arc relatively immo-
bile or arc genetically less adaptable may be threat-
ened with extinction if the rates in the worst-case 
scenario are realised (Sharp, 1989). 
Global warming could have especially strong impacts 
on the regions of sub-polar fronts (Roots, 1989) 
where the temperature increase in deep water could 
lead to a substantial redistribution of both pelagic 
and benthic communities, including commercially 
important fish species. At the same time, a similar 
temperature rise in tropical latitudes would not 
affect greatly the functioning of marine organisms. 
However, the distribution of biological populations, 
as well as their abundance, appears often to be more 
related to the dynamic physical processes that 
control various patterns in the ecosystem than to the 
direct effects of temperature itself (Bakun, 1990). 
For example, recent empirical results (Cury and 
Roy, 1989) indicate that reproductive success of 
pelagic fishes in upwelling regions mostly depends 
on wind stress. 
As a result of changes in the ocean and coastal zone, 
there may be impacts on biodiversity. In the open 
ocean, the effects on biodiversity will likely be less 
than those expected in the estuaries and wetlands. 
The oceanic ecosystems will be relatively free to 
move to new geographic areas while the near-shore 
ecosystems are more constrained by the physical 
features of the shore. With regard to the coastal 
ocean, the effects of changing freshwater inputs as a 
result of changing precipitation patterns, and the 
consequent impact on estuarine habitats, circulation, 
and nutrient and sediment supply warrant consider-
ation. It is important to keep in mind the dynamics 
of shelf-water masses are influenced by meteorologi-
cal forcing in addition to upwelling, as classically 
defined. 
In warm temperate and sub-tropical 
regions (eg the southeast US and Gulf of Mexico) 
cross-shelf transport, associated with frontal pas-
sages, is important to the transport offshore of eggs 
and larvae of estuarine-dependent species offish and 
crustaceans. Thus, meteorological forcing influences 
shelf-water mass stability and advection, which in 
turn has important biological and geochemical 
consequences. 
In summary, global warming may cause considerable 
changes in the structure and distribution of marine 
habitats, thereby greatly impacting on the structure 
and operation of world fisheries. 
3.3.2 
Changes in production/destruction 
processes and biosedimentation 
To assess possible consequences of the effect of 
global warming on the productivity of oceanic 
ecosystems, it should be taken into account that 45% 
of the annual primary production of organic matter 
in the World Ocean is synthesised in the upwelling 
zones and high-latitude regions, and 20% is in near-
shore 
waters 
(Koblents-Mishke 
et 
al., 
1970; 
Sarnthein et al., 1988). Hence, the productivity of 
the global ocean in the new climatic conditions 
would be first of all determined by the changes in 
functioning of the ecosystems of those highly pro-
ductive regions. 
Current forecasts of the possible changes in ocean 
productivity are mainly based on the outputs of 
GCMs and the result of palaeoclimatic reconstruc-
tions. 
GCM outputs indicate that climate warming causes 
a decrease in meridional temperature gradients 
(Schlesinger, 1986; Mitchell, 1988), as well as a 
general weakening of oceanic upwelling. Numerous 
palaeoclimate studies have estimated past productivi-
ty that tends to confirm the GCM results. Accord-
ing to these studies, the productivity of oceanic 
6-15 
upwelling regions during glacial periods was much 
higher than during interglacial periods (Sarntheim et 
al., 1987; Sarntheim et al., 1989; Lapenis et al., 
1990). 
A l l of these studies indicate that global 
warming should be accompanied by a fall of produc-
tivity in upwelling regions and, thus, a decrease in 
total productivity of the global ocean (Budyko and 
Izrael, 1987; Lapenis et al., 1990). 
The mechanisms just discussed deal primarily with 
the open reaches of the global ocean. However, as 
previously noted in Section 3.2.2, the predicted 
intensification of the coastal upwellings would tend 
to enhance primary organic production in these 
systems. 
But whether this increased primary 
production would be channelled to trophic compo-
nents that society particularly values is unclear. 
There has been little clear demonstration that 
increased primary production actually promotes 
reproductive success and population growth of 
commercial fishes. (Bakun, 1990). Consequently, 
conclusions about compensatory changes in total 
ocean productivity under the present scenario cannot 
be made on existing information. 
Apart from tropical and mid-latitude regions where 
productivity is mainly determined only by the con-
tents of nutrients, the basic limiting factors in polar 
and subpolar regions are light and temperature. A 
rise of mean temperature of high latitudes will lead 
to an increase in the duration of the growing period 
and ultimately in the bioproductivity of these re-
gions. 
However, the predicted rise of water temperature 
will be accompanied by an increase in the rate of 
degradation of organic matter, especially in subpolar 
waters as well as in shelf waters and the surface 
layer of the boreal zones by 1.1 to 1.3 times (Odum, 
1986; Izrael and Tsyban, 1989). 
Biodégradation rates in the surface layers in low 
latitudes are determined by the inflow of organic 
matter from sub-polar regions through meridional 
transport of intermediate and deep waters. In this 
connection, elevated temperatures are expected to 
increase biodégradation rates. However, the overall 
amount of low-latitude biodégradation may not be 
changed significantly. 
According to Suess (1980) the amount and the rate 
of biosedimental flux would increase with an in-
crease in productivity. So, taking into consideration 
the predicted changes in production/destruction 
processes the enhanced biosedimental flux is expect-
ed in the coastal upwelling zone (Bakun, 1990). At 
the same time, increased production in subpolar 
regions does not appear to be accompanied by 
raising of the biosedimental flux due to intensive 
microbial degradation. 
Increased anthropogenic pollution in the global 
oceans is expected to affect the rate of production of 
organic matter. 
According to the estimates, the 
quantity of the contaminants in the photic zone of 
the ocean would have increased by 25-30% by the 
middle of the next century (Izrael and Tsyban, 
1989). Besides, the warming of the sea water fol-
lowed by the acceleration of chemical reactions 
could lead to the strengthening of toxicity of the 
contaminants to marine biota. This process would 
negatively affect the productivity of oceanic eco-
systems (Tsyban et al., 1985; Patin 1979). 
In conclusion, it should be noted that primary 
production does not necessarily equate with fishery 
production. Nevertheless, under conditions of global 
warming, changes in the centres of primary produc-
tion could lead to changes in the distribution pat-
terns of commercially important fish stocks and the 
recruitment of fish resources. 
3.3.3 The role of ice in supporting polar 
ecosystems 
Ice plays a major role in the development and 
sustenance of arctic and subarctic ecosystems: (i) it 
plays a significant role in the growth of marine algae 
(the primary source of food for the marine eco-
system), (ii) it creates a productive environment at 
the ice/water interface, allowing plants to grow and, 
in turn, supporting abundant and diverse communi-
ties, and (iii) it supports organisms which form a 
link in the transfer of energy between primary 
production (algae and phytoplankton) and fish, sea 
birds and mammals. 
One of the possible consequences of global warming 
would be to reduce the extent and persistence of sea 
ice, affecting the production regimes and ecosystems 
accordingly. For example, the absence of summer 
ice over the continental shelves of the Arctic Ocean 
would radically increase the productivity of affected 
areas, given an adequate supply of nutrients. 
Polar mammals use ice in particular ways to support 
their feeding and reproduction needs. For example, 
the range of polar bears is determined by the 
maximum seasonal extent of sea ice in any one year 
and clearly, without ice, the very existence of polar 
bears and also some seals would be threatened. 
Similarly, a reduction in ice would be expected to 
have a significant effect upon the feeding, breeding 
and resting activity of penguins and walruses and 
they would be very vulnerable to hunting and preda-
tory pressures. If ice is reduced, other animals, such 
6-16 
as the otter, would move into new territories. It is 
not clear how the migratory patterns of animals, 
such as whales which follow the ice edge, would be 
affected by changes in ice distribution. 
Changes to water temperature and wind regimes as 
a result of global warming would also probably 
affect the distribution and characteristics of polynyas 
(ice-free areas) which are so vital to the polar 
ecosystems. Also, changes in the extent and dur-
ation of ice, combined with changes in characteristics 
of currents, for example the Circumpolar Current in 
southern latitudes, may affect distribution, mass and 
harvesting of krill. Krill is an important link in the 
food chain of southern ocean fauna and an economi-
cally important fishery. 
It is important to under-
stand how and where the Southern Ocean produc-
tivity will change under global warming processes. 
3.3.4 Regional aspects of the problem 
(the Bering Sea as an example) 
It is predicted that high latitudes would be profound-
ly influenced by global warming (Roots, 1989). 
There could be marked changes in the functioning of 
sea ecosystems. Thus, it is necessary to summarise 
the results of modern ecological observations of the 
state of sub-polar and polar ecosystems with the aim 
of having an earlier understanding of the effects of 
global warming. 
The Soviet-American long-term research study 
(Programme 'Bering Sea', Project 'Comprehensive 
Analysis of the Environment') has produced a large 
amount of information about the functioning of the 
subarctic ecosystem of the Bering Sea. 
Under conditions of global warming in the region of 
the Bering Sea, according to the predictions of 
GCMs, the shift of the sea surface isotherms to-
wards the North Pole could occur (warming by 
0.5°C for a decade could be followed by the shift of 
more than 50 km) (Hansen et al., 1988). Such a 
temperature shift would lead to an increase in the 
area and duration of the ice-free season, which 
would in turn increase the growing season (Roots, 
1989), thereby further enhancing the productivity of 
the Bering Sea ecosystem. 
According to current estimates, the mean value of 
primary production in the Bering Sea is 0.65 g C / m
2 
per day reaching in some areas 7 g C / m
2 per day, 
(Izrael et al., 1986; Whitledge et al., 1988; McRoy 
and Goering, 1976). With the expected creation of 
more favourable conditions for marine biota, the 
mean value of primary production could rise to 0.75-
0.90 g / C m
2 per day. 
Taking into account that, at present, the mean value 
of the microbial degradation of organic substances 
in the Bering Sea is 0.3 g C / m
3 per year (Izrael et 
al., 1986; Whitledge et al., 1988), the predicted 
intensification of these processes under conditions of 
global warming in subpolar regions could lead to 
raising the magnitude up to 0.35-0.50 g C / m
3 per 
year. 
The expected acceleration of the microbial and 
photochemical processes, followed by the increase of 
the destruction of organic contaminants, could cause 
some decrease of the anthropogenic pollution of the 
ecosystem (Izrael et al., 1990). 
The acceleration of the production/degradation 
processes would lead to the intensification of the 
biogenic sedimentation. 
Also, some increase in 
biosedimental flux would be possible. It is estimated 
that 1.6 x 10
81 C per year is deposited in sediments 
of the Bering Sea (Izrael et al., 1986). This could be 
taken as a minimum one of the carbon flux fiom 
atmosphere to the seawater, since 53 x 10
8 t C per 
year is estimated as the general flux of carbon from 
the atmosphere into the World Ocean (Odum, 
1986). 
These results confirm the importance of 
subarctic ecosystems for global biogeochemical 
carbon cycling. 
One of the most important consequences of the 
global warming could be the shift of the subarctic 
front into the Bering Sea, which would lead to 
abrupt changes in habitats of pelagic and benthic 
communities, including many valuable fish species. 
Because the Bering Sea is an important fisheries 
region for several countries, where annually 3 x 10
6 
t of fish is caught (Wilimovski, 1974), it is necessary 
to foresee the possible negative consequences of a 
warming climate in this region for the distribution 
and recruitment of the main commercially important 
species and for marine mammals and birds. The 
creation of forecasts for living marine resources 
under conditions of global warming would promote 
development of effective systems of adaptive options. 
3.4 Palaeoecological studies and El Nino 
analogs 
G C M s still lack the specificity to predict ocean 
currents and upwelling accurately. However, the 
palaeosedimentary record is available through 
analysis of sediment cores and can demonstrate how 
ecosystems changed in the past when the earth was 
warmer. This could improve understanding of the 
cause-and-effect relationships and possible feedback 
loops during times of rapid climate change. 
6-17 
Recent investigations of palaeo-productivity of the 
World Ocean, based on organic carbon accumulation 
rates (Sarnthein et al., 1987) have shown that the 
basic spatial distribution patterns of ocean produc-
tivity persisted through glacial and interglacial times. 
However, the ocean in glacial times was character-
ised by a more polarised productivity pattern than 
today, that is, by more productive upwelling cells 
and a slightly less productive ocean. This regime 
induced a bulk increase in the global carbon transfer 
to the deep ocean by about 2-4 GtC/yr and led, via 
an enhanced C a C 0 3 dissolution and alkalinity in the 
deep ocean, to a significant extraction of C 0 2 from 
the surface and intermediate waters and the atmos-
phere. 
According to data from empirical palaeoproductivity 
curves from the east Atlantic (Sarnthein et al., 1988), 
this increase, to a large extent, was linked to en-
hanced carbon export from pulsating plankton 
blooms and resulted from a strong intensifying of 
oceanic upwelling in middle and low latitudes. It is 
confirmed by other palaeoecological analyses of 
zonal sea surface anomalies that show the average 
intensity of wind-driven coastal upwelling along the 
northeast Atlantic continental margin increased by at 
least 50% during the last Glacial Maximum (Lapenis 
et al., 1990; Sarnthein et al., 1987). 
The interglacial reduction in bioproductivity of 
upwelling regions is one of the main factors leading 
to both the simultaneous rise in atmosphere C 0 2 as 
recorded in ice cores and, with a delay of more than 
1000 years, to a large-scale gradual C 0 2 depletion of 
the deep ocean. 
This conclusion is based on the 
benthic carbon isotope record of C 0 2 . The decrease 
in new production matches a clear 13C depletion of 
organic matter, possibly recording an end of extreme 
nutrient utilisation in upwelling cells (Sarnthein et 
al., 1988). 
Based on these results and prognostic 
estimates of G C M s , Lapenis et al. (1990) predict a 
decrease in productivity of upwelling zones and, 
consequently, of the whole ocean under conditions 
of global warming. 
In the Pacific Ocean the El Nino phenomenon is the 
dominant interannual climate signal. Thus, it has 
immense consequences in the Pacific and also in 
other parts of the world. Consequently it is import-
ant to know what will happen to this dominant 
short-term 
phenomenon 
under 
the 
postulated 
conditions of long-term global warming. El Nino is 
an oscillatory ocean-atmosphere interaction process, 
which exhibits maxima recurring at intervals of 2-10 
years with extremes occurring at about 30 years. It 
is caused by disturbances in the global atmospheric 
circulation system. The spreading of warm waters 
from the north to the south along the coast of South 
America is accompanied by a rise of sea surface 
temperature of 5°-8°C, strengthening of water mass 
stratification and, consequently, by a sharp weaken-
ing of the intensity of coastal upwelling. 
These 
processes lead to mass development of the organ-
isms of 'red tides' (dinoflagellates and symbiotic 
bacteria), changes in the series structure of the 
phytoplanktonic community, a sharp reduction of 
productivity in the coastal zone, mass mortality of 
fish and birds feeding on them, as well as to secon-
dary contamination of the ecosystem with organic 
matter. Economic damage for the region is estimat-
ed at hundreds of millions of dollars. 
Furthermore, evidence is mounting for teleconnec-
tions between El Nino and worldwide climate 
anomalies having the same characteristic periodici-
ties (Glantz, 1984). These climate anomalies can be 
traced in all kinds of global palaeo-climate records, 
such as: varied sediments, coral records and tree 
ring cores. 
Studies using ocean/atmosphere models, the low 
cadmium content in 400-year-old coral records (Shen 
et at., 1987) and tree ring analyses (Michaelson, 
1989) indicate that the frequency and intensity of El 
Nino events since the little ice age ( A D 1500-1850) 
were not too much different from those experienced 
in modern times. 
Hence, one can speculate that 
such frequency and intensity of El Nino phenomena 
will continue over the next 100 years regardless of 
the trend in global warming (Enfield, 1988). 
3.5 Impacts on fisheries 
Climate change is one of the most important factors 
affecting fisheries. The level of the impact varies 
widely and depends on attributes of the species as 
well as on their regional specificity. 
Each population within a species is adapted to a 
hydrodynamic structure of specific temporal and 
spatial features. Changes in the ocean circulation 
may lead to the loss of certain populations, or the 
establishment of new ones, at the periphery of the 
species' area of distribution, in addition to changes 
in the location and absolute abundance of the 
population inside the boundaries of the species 
distribution areas (Troadec, 1989). 
One useful approach to identify possible impacts is 
the method of historical analogs. It might be in-
structive to consider the biological consequences 
according to the decadal scale of warming that 
occurred during the first half of the present century. 
One of the most obvious consequences of that 
warming was the penetration of tropical and sub-
tropical marine organisms into the temperate lati-
6-18 
tudes and the penetration of boreal organisms into 
the higher latitudes. This penetration was observed 
both in the North Pacific and North Atlantic; but 
warming impacts on the abundance of commercially 
important species can be either positive or negative, 
even for the same species, depending on region. For 
example, in the 1940s and 1950s, increased water 
temperature coincided with the largest year of 
biomass of Atlanto-Scandinavian herring, while at 
the same time the North Sea herring biomass fell to 
very low levels. 
More recent fishery investigations in the North 
Atlantic have revealed clear climatic influences on 
growth, distribution and recruitment of commercially 
important fish stocks. For example, the 'seventies 
anomaly' (Rapp, 1984) brought about considerable 
impact on several fish stocks. This anomaly which 
started off East Greenland in the 1960s, propagated 
around Greenland and Labrador and into the North 
Atlantic Current, and reached the Barents Sea in 
1979-80 (Dickson et al., 1984). In the late 1960s, 
this anomaly gave rise to extremely low tempera-
tures in North Icelandic waters and was the probable 
reason for the change in summer distribution of the 
Atlanto-Scandinavian herring. 
While these observations and others show conse-
quences of fluctuations within a few years, it is likely 
that the impacts of a far more permanent change in 
temperature will be even more profound. A tem-
perature rise of about 2°C may have substantial 
impact on the distribution, growth and reproduction 
of the fish stocks. The commercially very important 
fish stocks may take new spawning areas and their 
distribution patterns may change considerably. 
In the Bering Sea, an increase was observed in 
pollock stocks in the 1970s and early 1980s. 
The 
high level of pollock stocks has been sustained 
despite the high levels of exploitation. This shows 
that the impact of climate may be manifested to a 
lesser degree in high productivity regions in the 
temperate and high latitudes such as the Bering Sea, 
than in less productive regions. Above all, in the 
most productive upwelling areas, the abundance of 
commercially important fish has remained at rela-
tively stable levels (except for collapse of Peruvian 
anchovy in 1972-73). 
Mariculture will also be affected by climatic change. 
Increasing near-shore temperatures resulting from 
the greenhouse effect could result in increased 
production of species in established higher latitude 
farming operations because of the prolonged avail-
ability of temperatures near to those optimum for 
growth. Cultivation of new species of temperate and 
subtropical origin could conceivably result as well. 
Finally a decrease in ice cover could substantially 
expand the geographic limits for potentially viable 
commercial operations for species such as salmonids, 
oysters and scallops (Frank et al., 1988). However, 
a significant increase in summer seawater tempera-
tures in the Marlborough Sound in New Zealand, 
for example, may have serious implications for the 
salmon farming industry as these are already near 
the maximum for the successful cultivation of sal-
monids (New Zealand, 1989). For wild northern 
salmon, however, the strong homing instinct will 
prevent populations from southern areas which are 
warming up, from moving northward and they may 
finally disappear from different river systems as 
conditions become too severe for survival. 
The impact of U V - B radiation is of concern because 
commercial and recreational species reside, during 
their very early life stages, in wetlands or in neuston, 
and/or feed on near-surface plankton during some 
life stage of their existence. 
Although most sea 
water may be relatively opaque to U V - B radiation, 
fish eggs and larvae that float close to the surface, as 
well as near-surface phytoplankton, zooplankton, 
corals and wetland plants, could be exposed to levels 
which will cause genetic abnormalities or direct 
mortality. 
Recent investigations have shown that 
U V - B radiation exposure could have a lethal effect 
on several marine species, including anchovy, 
shrimp, and crab larvae (Hunter et al., 1979). In 
connection with the expected increase in the intensi-
ty of U V - B radiation, there is a need for the full 
assessment of such effects on a population-wide 
basis for a number of vulnerable species. 
3.6 Socioeconomic impacts 
Changes in climate will alter the species composition 
and productivity of marine ecosystems supporting 
major fisheries. 
As a first approximation of the 
ability of societies to cope with changes in abun-
dance and distribution of marine resources, one can 
look at the socioeconomic impacts of such changes 
in the recent past. 
Commonly cited examples of 
such changes include the collapse of the Peruvian 
anchoveta, the Californian sardine, the Alaskan King 
Crab, or the expansion of such fisheries as the 
Bering Sea pollock and the Chilean sardine. These 
provide important information about how societies 
have dealt with major changes (favourable as well as 
adverse) in fishery resources availability in the recent 
past. 
For example, as fish stocks have declined 
because of a combination of less favourable envi-
ronmental conditions and overfishing, industries have 
often made the problem worse by continuing heavy 
fishing pressure, thus accelerating the collapse of the 
fishery. Frequently, industries as well as govern-
ments have been unwilling to accept the advice of 
6-19 
scientists and take meaningful action to protect fish 
stocks. It is likely that global warming will produce 
collapses of some fisheries and expansions of others. 
The likelihood of collapse may be aggravated by 
inadequate management due to insufficient authori-
ty, unwillingness to act or lack of knowledge. 
Fishery management is affected by shortcomings in 
the institutions for allocating scarce fish and by 
limited understanding of fish reproductive strategies 
with regard to environmental variability. If uncer-
tainty with regard to the abundance of fish in the 
future is going to increase, regulatory institutions 
will have more difficulty in adapting. Many stocks 
will remain overexploited which is already the major 
cause of variability. On the other hand, improve-
ment in the fishery management institutions will 
reduce variability as well as the adverse effects of 
equivalent changes due to global warming. There is 
progress on understanding fish and their environ-
ment. If the direction of potential changes in ocean 
circulation could be known, useful assumptions could 
be made on the likely changes in fish stock abun-
dance 
and, 
hence, 
on 
fisheries 
management 
(Troadec, 1989). As an example of the interaction 
of fisheries, their environment and fishery manage-
ment, the onset of a major El Niño event in 1972 
coupled with overexploitation and apparent recruit-
ment failure caused the Peruvian fishing industry to 
suffer a severe crisis in the following years 
(Caviedes, 1989; Barker and Chavez, 1986). 
A major adverse impact occurs in societies having 
economies which are narrowly dependent on fishery 
resources and which are incapable of diversifying to 
other activities. This often is the case in developing 
countries bordered by major upwelling regions (eg 
Mauritania, Namibia, Peru, Somalia) (Troadec, 
1989). 
In general, societies have not coped well with chan-
ges in biological productivity, regardless of causes 
(natural or anthropogenic) (Glantz et al., 1987). 
Case studies of societal response provide insight into 
how people and their governments can better pre-
pare for regional changes in distribution and abun-
dance that might accompany global warming. If, in 
the face of climate change, it is desired to maintain 
fisheries at levels matching society's needs, higher 
levels of international collaboration might be need-
ed, for which there, is no global analog from the 
past. 
3.7 Impacts on navigation and territorial 
policies 
At present, the northern ice-bound land borders of 
North America, Europe and Asia are highly sensitive 
national defence zones for all countries with Arctic 
territory. Security adjustments will be necessary if 
these coastal areas become navigable. 
National 
sovereignty issues regarding international fishing, 
hydroelectric power development, and freshwater 
transfers may be significantly altered. In the south 
polar region, warming may have implications for the 
future of the Antarctic Treaty which presently holds 
a number of territorial claims in abeyance. 
The 
possibility of climate-induced changes in access and 
prospects for resource development may result in 
altered national positions and competing claims. It 
is also recognised that the incidence of sea ice 
should decrease, providing benefits to navigation. 
Small sea-level rises may also be beneficial to port 
operations by enabling ships to be loaded to greater 
draught and still clear restricted channels. Trans-
portation aspects are treated in Chapter 5. 
6-20 
Figure 6.1 Estimates of future sea-level rise 
SEA LEVEL RISE RELATIVE 
TO 1986 (METRES) 
4.0-1 
3.0-
2.0-
• 
Estimate of 
Sea Level Rise 
— NRC (1987) Low. 
Mid. 8- High 
WMO(1985) High* 
• EPA (1983) High 
• EPA (1983) Mid-High 
• NRC (1985) High* 
• EPA (1983) Mid-Low 
• IPCC-WG1 (1990) 
EPA (1983) Low 
NRC (1985) Low* 
PCC-WG1 (1990) 
2100 
Glacial Volume Estimate of NRC (1985) Augmented With Thermal Expansion Estimates of NRC (1983) 
SOURCES: 
Environmental Protection Agency, Projecting Future Sea Level Rise, 1983. 
National Research Council. Responding to Changes in Sea Level: Engineering Implications, 1987. 
National Research Council, Glaciers, Ice Sheets, and Sea Level, 1985. 
National Research Council, HroDatHe Future Changes In See Level Resulting From Increased Atmospheric 
Carbon Dioxide, Changing Climate, 1983. 
World Meteorological Organization, International Assessment of the Role of Carbon Dioxide and Other 
Greenhouse Gases in Climate Variations and Associated Impacts, 1985. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change — Working Group 1,1990 Meier, M.F. 1990 'Reduced 
Rise in Sea Level': Nature 
6-21 
Figure 6.2 Physical consequences of climate change 
CO 
< 11 
g 15.1 
| | l | | 2 f 
n 
ill 
topS 
111 111 
O UJ m _i <n > 
CJC3 • 
ADD C02 
Decrease Ocean 
C02 Solubility 
W 
m 
Q) 
< 
Z <gro 
O j c , 
r— 2- O •> 
^ < % " 2 
Q c © re 
z ^ b s 
| 5 £ S 
— 0 
• 
• 
q; 
c o 
CL 
O 
iZ 
• 
6 22 
Figure 6.3 Impacts of sea-level rise on groundwater tables 
Upper limit of 
water table 
t 
D 
Operating 
Well 
Abandoned 
Well 
Freshwater 
| 
J Saltwater 
Source: IPCC 1 990 Miami Conference 
6 23 
Figure 6.4 Evolution of a marsh as sea-level rises 
A 5000 Years Ago 
Sea Level 
5 
B Today 
Current 
Sea Level 
-¥• 
Sedimentation and 
Peat Formation 
Past 
Sea Level 
C Future 
Substantial Wetland Loss Where 
There is Vacant Upland 
Future 
Sea Level 
Z 
Current 
Sea Level 
D Future 
Complete Wetland Loss Where House is Protected 
in Response to Rise in Sea Level 
Future 
Sea Level 
Current 
Sea Level 
Source: Titus (1986) 
6-24 
References 
Army Corps of Engineers 1971, National Shoreline Study, 
Washington, DC. 
Bakun, A. 1990, 'Global climate change and intensification 
of coastal ocean upwelling'. Science 247, pp. 198-201. 
Baric, A. 1990, 'Impacts of climate change on the socio-
economic structure and activities in the Mediterranean 
Region'. In: Changing Climate and the Coast, J.G. Titus 
(ed.). IPCC, US EPA, Washington, DC. 
Barnola, J.M., Raynaud, D., Korotkevich, Y.S., and 
Loris, C. 1987, 'Vostok ice core provides 160,000-year 
record of atmospheric C0 2'. Nature 329, pp. 408-414. 
Barth, M.C and Titus, J.G. (eds) 1984, Greenhouse Effect 
and Sea Level Rise: A Challenge for this Generation. 
New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold. 
Betzer, P.R., Byrne, R.H., Acker, J.C., Lewis, C.S., 
Jolley, R.R. and Feely, R.A. 1984, 'The oceanic carbon-
ate system: a reassessment of biogenic controls'. Science 
226, pp. 1074-1077. 
Bird, E.C.F. 1976. 'Shoreline changes during the past 
century'. 
Proc, 23rd Int'l Geographical Congress, 
Moscow, Pergamon Press, 54pp. 
Boyle, E. A. 1988, 'Vertical oceanic nutrient fractionation and 
glacial/interglacial COj cycles'. Nature 331, pp. 55-56. 
Broadus, J.M., Millman, J.D,, Edwards, S.F., Aubrey, 
D.G. and Gable, F. 1986, 'Rising sea level and damming 
of rivers: possible effects in Egypt and Bangladesh.' In: 
Effects of Changes in Stratospheric Ozone and Global 
Climate, J.G. Titus (ed.). Washington, DC, Environ-
mental Protection Agency and United Nations Environ-
ment Program. 
Broecker, D.M. Peteet and Rind, D. 1985, 'Does the 
ocean atmosphere system have more than one stable mode 
of operation?'. Nature 315, pp. 21-25. 
Broecker, W.S. and Peng, T.H. 1990, The cause of glacial 
to interglacial atmospheric C 0 2 change. The polar alkili-
nity hypothesis. Global Geochemical Cycles. In press. 
Bryan, F. 1986, 'High latitude salinity effects and inter-
hemispheric thermohaline circulations'. Nature 305, pp. 
301-304. 
Bryan, K., Manabe, S. and Spelman, G. 1988, Journal of 
Physical Oceanography 18, pp. 850-867. 
Budyko, M.I. and Izrael, Yu. A. (eds.) 1987, Anthro-
pogenic climate change, Leningrad, Gidrometizdat, 
378pp. [In Russian] 
Caviedes, C. 1989, 
Report of the Climate and Fisheries 
Workshop; organised by Michael H. Glantz, National Center 
for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado, p. 23. 
Charlson, R.J., Lovelock, J.E., Andreae, M.O. and 
Warren, S.G., 1987, 
'Oceanic phytoplankton, atmos-
pheric sulphur, cloud albedo and climate'. Nature 326, 
pp. 655-661. 
Commonwealth Secretariat 1989, 
Climate Change: 
Meeting the Challenge. 
Report by a Commonwealth. 
Group of Experts, London, UK. 
Condrey, R. 1989, 
Report of the Climate and Fisheries 
Workshop; organised by Michael H. Glantz, National Center 
for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado, pl2, p24. 
Cury, D. and Roy, C. 1989, Can. J. Fish Aquat. Sci. 46, 
p. 670 (cited in (Bakun, 1990). 
Daniel, J.R.K. 1990, 'Potential impacts on the Guiana 
Coast'. In: Changing Climate and the Coast, J.G. Titus 
(ed.). IPCC, US EPA, Washington, DC. 
Davis, R.A. 1985, Coastal Sedimentary Environments. 
Springer-Verlag, New York. 
Dean, R.G. et al. 1987, Responding to Changes in Sea 
Level. National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Delft Hydraulic Laboratory 1990a, 'Sea Level rise: a 
worldwide cost estimate of basic control defence 
measures'. Prepared for IPCC/ RIJKSWATERSTAAT. 
Delft Hydraulic Laboratory 1990b, 'A global survey of 
coastal wetlands: their functions and threats in relation to 
adaptive responses to sea level rise'. Prepared by the 
Dutch IPCC/RSWG Delegation and presented at Perth 
Australia Meeting of IPCC, February 1990. 
Dickson, C, Meincke, M . , Malmberg, R. and Lee, G. 
1984, 'The great salinity anomaly in the northern North 
Atlantic'. Progr. Oceanogr. 20, p. 2. 
Doskey, P.V. and Andren, A W . 1987, 'Modelling the flux of 
atmospheric polychlorinated biphenyls across the air-water 
interface', Environ. Sic. Technol. 15, pp. 705-711. 
Duce, R.A. 1986, 'The impact of atmospheric nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and iron species on marine biological 
productivity'. 
In: 
The role of air-sea exchange in 
geochemical cycling, P. Buat-Menerd (ed.), pp. 497-529. 
El-Raey, M. 1990, 'Responses to the impacts of green-
house enhanced sea level rise on Egypt'. In: Changing 
Climate and the Coast, J.G. Titus (ed.). IPCC, US EPA, 
Washington, DC. 
Emmanuel, K.A. 1988, 
'The dependence of hurricane 
intensity on climate.' Nature 326, pp. 483-85. 
Enfield, D.B. 1988, 'Is El Nino becoming more common?' 
Oceanography, pp. 23-27, and p. 59. 
Everett, J.T. and Pastula, E.J. 1990. 
'Coastal marine 
fishery options in the event of a world-wide rise in sea 
level'. In: Changing Climate and the Coast, J.G.Titus 
(ed.). IPCC, US EPA, Washington, DC. 
Flohn, H. 1982, 'Oceanic upwelling as a key for abrupt 
climatic change'. J. Meteor. Soc. Japan 60, pp. 268-273. 
Frank, K.T., Perry, R.I., Drinkwater, K.F. and Lear, 
W.H. 1988, Changes in the fisheries of Atlantic Canada 
associated with global increases in atmospheric carbon 
dioxide. A preliminary report. Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 1652, 52pp. 
Ghan, S.J. 1982, A documentation of the OSU Two-level 
Atmospheric GCM Model. CRI Rep. 35, Oregon State 
Univ., 395pp. 
Gibbs, M.J. 1984, 'Economic analysis of sea level rise', 
In: Greenhouse Effect and Sea Level Rise: A Challenge 
for this Generation, M.C. Barth and J.G. Titus (eds). Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York. 
Glantz, M.H. 1984, 'El Nino - Should it take the blame 
for disasters?'. Maxingira Mar, pp. 21-26. 
Glantz, M.H. 1989, Report of the climate and fishery 
workshop, organised by M.H. Glantz, NCAR, Boulder, 
CO, p. 12. 
6-25 
GLantz, M.H., Katz, R. and Krenz, M. eds. 1987, Climate 
Crisis. National Center for Atmospheric Research, 
Boulder, Colorado, USA. 105pp. 
Goskomgidromet 1990, (Telefax Statement) Moscow, USSR. 
Griffin, J.J. 1988, 'The oceanic key to climate change'. 
New Sci. 118, pp. 32-33. 
Hands, E.B. 1976, Observations of Barred Coastal Profiles 
Under the Influence of Rising Water Levels, Eastern Lake 
Michigan, 1967-71. Coastal Engineering Research Center, 
Report TR-76-1. Vicksburg, MS. 
Hansen, J., Russel, G., Rind, D., Stone, D., Lacis, A., 
Lebedeff, S., Ruedy, R. and Travis, L. 1983, 'Efficient 
three-dimensional global models for climate studies: 
models I and II'. Mon.Wea.Rev. I l l , pp. 609-622. 
Hansen, J., Fung, I., Lacis., A., Rind., D., Lebedeff, S., 
Ruedy, R. and Stone, D. 1988, 'Global climate change as 
forecast by Goddard Institute for Space Study three-
dimensional model'. /. Geophys. Res. 93, pp. 9341-9364. 
Holligan, P.M. and Kirst, G.O. 1989, 'Marine algae as a 
source of dimethysulphide emission to the atmosphere'. 
UNESCO Technical Papers in Marine Science 56, pp. 64-69. 
Hull, C.H.J, and Titus, J.G. eds. 1986, Greenhouse 
Effect, Sea Level Rise and Salinity in the Delaware 
Estuary, Environmental Protection Agency and Delaware 
River Basin Commission, Washington DC. 
Hunter, J.R., Taylor, J.H. and Moser, H.G. 1979, 'The 
effect of ultraviolet radiation on eggs and larvae of 
northern anchovy and Pacific mackerel'. Photochemistry 
and Photobiology 29, pp. 325-338. 
Izrael, Yu.A., Tsyban, A.V., Panov.G.V., Korsak, M.N., 
Kudryavtsev, V . N . , Volodkovich, Yu.L. and Chernyak, 
S.M. 1986, 'Comprehensive analysis of the Bering Sea 
ecosystem'. In: Monitoring and managing environmental 
impact: American and Soviet perspectives, G.E. 
Schweitzer and A.S. Phillips (eds). National Academy 
Press, pp. 58-88. 
Izrael, Yu.A. and Tsyban, A.V. 1989, Anthropogenic 
ecology of the ocean. Leningrad, Gidrometizdat. 528pp. 
[In Russian]. 
Izrael, Yu.A., Tsyban, A.V., Panov, G.V., Chernyak, 
S.M. 1990, 'Microbial transformation of polychlorinated 
biphenyls in polar sea regions'. DAN USSR/Reports of 
the USSR Academy of Sciences/310, pp. 502-506. fin 
Russian]. 
Jansen, H. (ed.) 1990, Impacts of Sea Level Rise: an 
Economic Approach. Organization for Economic Cooper-
ation and Development, Environment Committee, Group 
of Economic Experts. 
Kaba, N., Koffi, P. and Zabi, S.G. 1990, 'Response to 
expected impacts of climatic changes on the lagoonal and 
marine sectors of the Ivorian Coast.' 
In: Changing 
Climate and the Coast, J.G. Titus (ed.). IPCC, US EPA, 
Washington, DC. 
Kana, T.W., Baca, B.J. and Williams, M.L. 1988a,. 
'Charleston Case Study.' In: Greenhouse Effect, Sea 
Level Rise and Coastal Wetlands, J.G. Titus (ed.). US 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
Kana, T.W., Eiser, W.C., Baca, B.J. and Williams, M.L. 
1988b, 'New Jersey case study'. In: Greenhouse Effect, 
Sea Level Rise and Coastal Wetlands, J.G.Titus (ed.). 
US Environmental Protection Agency. 
Kana, T.W., Michel, J., Hayes, M.O. and Jensen, J.R. 
1984, 'The physical impact of sea level rise in the area of 
Charleston, South Carolina'. In: Greenhouse Effect and Sea 
Level Rise, M.C. Barth and J.G. Titus (eds). Van Nostrand 
Reinhold Co., New York, NY, Chap. 4, pp. 105-150. 
Koblents-Mishke, 
O.G., 
Volkovinsky, V.V. 
and 
Kabanova, J.G. 1970, 'Plankton primary production of 
the World Ocean'. In: Scientific exploration of the South 
Pacific, W.S. Wooster (ed.). National Academy of 
Science, Washington D C , pp. 183-193. 
Lancelot, C, Billen, G., Sourina, A., Weisse, T., Colijn, 
F., Veldhuis, M.J.W., Davies, A. and Wassman, P. 
1987, 'Phaeocystic blooms and nutrient environment in 
the continental coastal zones of the North Sea'. Ambio 
16, pp. 38-46. 
Landner, L. ed. 1989, Chemicals in the aquatic environ-
ment; advanced hazard assessment. Springer Verlag, 
Berlin, 569pp. 
Lapenis, A.G., Oskina, N.S., Barash, M.S., Blyum, N.S. 
and Vasileva, Ye V. 1990, 'The late quaternary changes 
in ocean biota productivity', Okeanologiya/Oceanology 
30, pp. 93-101. [In Russian] 
Leatherman, S.P. 1982, 
Barrier Island Handbook, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 92pp. 
Leatherman, S.P. 1985, 'Effect of accelerated sea level 
rise on Ocean City, Maryland'. In: Potential Impacts of 
Sea Level Rise on the Beach at Ocean City, Maryland, 
J.G. Titus (ed.). US EPA, Washington, DC. 
Leatherman, S.P. 
1988, Barrier Island Handbook, 
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, 92pp. 
Lewis, J. 1988, The Implications of Sea Level Rise for 
Island and Low Lying Countries. Report for Common-
wealth Secretariat. 
Manabe, S. and Stouffer, R.J. 1980, 'Sensitivity of a 
global climate model to an increase of C 0 2 concentration 
in the atmosphere'. Journal of Geophysical Research 85, 
pp. 5529-5554. 
Manabe, S., and Wetherald, R.T. 1980, 'On the distribu-
tion of climate change resulting from an increase in C0 2 
content of the atmosphere'. J. Atm. Sci. 37, pp. 99-118. 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R.T. 1987, 
'Large-scale 
changes in soil wetness induced by an increase in carbon 
dioxide'. J. Atm. Sci. 44, pp. 1211-1235. 
Mansfield, T. and Nishioka, S. 1989, 'An assessment of 
the research on the effects of a rise in sea level by the 
relevant Japanese ministries', Unpublished Draft submit-
ted to the IPCC. Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan: National 
Institute for Environmental Studies. 
Mantoura, R.F.C. and Riley, J.P. 1975, 'The use of gel-
filtration in the study of metal binding of humic acids and 
related compounds'. Anab/t. Chim. Acta 78, pp. 183-200. 
Martin, J.H., Gordon, R.M. and Fitzwater, S.E. 1990, 
'Iron in Antarctic Waters'. Nature 345, pp. 156-158. 
May, S., Dolam, R. and Haydens, B. 1983, 'Erosion of 
U.S. shorelines'. EOS 64, pp. 551-552. 
McRoy, C P . and Goering, J.J. 1976, 'Annual budget of 
primary production in the Bering Sea'. Mar. Sci. Comm. 
2, pp. 255-267. 
Meir-Reimer, E. and Hasselmann, K. 1987, 'Transport 
and storage C 0 2 in the ocean'. Clim. Dyn. 2, pp. 63-90. 
Michaelson, J. 1989, 'Long-period fluctuations in El Nino 
amplitude and frequency reconstructed from tree-rings'. 
In: Interdisciplinary Aspects of Climate Variability in the 
Pacific and Western Americas. Amer. Geophys. Union 
Monogr. Ser. 48. 
6-26 
Mikolajewicz, U., Santer, B. and Maier-Reimer, E. 1990, 
Ocean response to global warming, Max-Planck-Institut 
fur Meteorologie Report. 
Miller et al. 1988, (Partial reference). In: The Potential Effects 
of Global Climate Change on the Untied States, J. Smith and 
D. Tirpak (eds). US Environmental Protection Agency. 
Mitchell, J. F.B. 1988, 'Local effects of greenhouse gases'. 
Nature 332, pp. 399-400. 
Mix, A. 1989, 'Influence of productivity variations on 
long-term atmospheric C0 2', Nature 337, pp. 541-544. 
Montague, C.L., Zale, A.V. and Percival, H.F. 1987, 
'Ecological effects of coastal marsh impoundments: a 
review'. Environmental Management 11, pp. 743-756. 
Moser, D. and Stakhiv, E. 1989, 'Risk-cost evaluation of 
coastal protection projects with sea level rise and climate 
change'. In: Risk Analysis and Management of Natural 
and Man-Made Hazards, Y.Y.Harris and E. Stakhiv 
(eds). Proc. Engineering Foundation, ASCE New York, 
pp. 22-239. 
NASA 1990, SeaRise: a Multidisciplinary Research Initia-
tive to Predict Rapid Changes in Global Sea Level Caused 
by Collapse of Marine Ice Sheets. NSF/NASA Work-
shop, College Park, Maryland, USA. 
National Research Council 1987, Responding to Changes 
in Sea Level: Engineering Duplications. 
National 
Academy Press, Washington, DC. 148pp. 
New Zealand Climate Impact Document 1989. Impacts 
on Forestry and Forest Ecosystems, Ms, Ch. XX. 
Odum, G., 1986, Ecology, vol. 2. Moscow, Mir, 359pp. 
Office of Technology Assessment 1984, Wetlands: Their 
Use and Regulation. 
US Congress, OTA-0-206, 
Washington, DC, 208pp. 
Oppenheimer, M. 1989, 'Climate change and environment-
al pollution: physical and biological interactions', dim. 
Change 15, pp. 255-270. 
Park, R.A. 1990, 'Implications of response strategies for 
water quality', In: Changing Climate and the Coast, J.G. 
Titus (ed.). IPCC, US EPA, Washington, DC. 
Park, R.A., Armentano, T.V. and Cloonan, C.L. 1986, 
'Predicting the effect of sea level rise on coastal wet-
lands.' In: Effects of Changes in Stratospheric Ozone and 
Global Climate, J.G. Titus (ed.). Washington, DC, 
Environmental Protection Agency and United Nations 
Environment Programme. 
Park, R.A., Trehan, M.S., Mausel, P.W. and Howe, 
R.C. 1989, 'The effects of sea level rise on U.S. coastal 
wetlands', In: 
Potential Effects of Global Climate 
Change on the United States, Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, DC. 
Parnell, K.E. 1989, 'Reefs in the "Greenhouse": a review'. 
Proceedings, 
Fifteenth 
New 
Zealand 
Geography 
Conference, Dunedin. 
Patin, S.A. 1979, The impact of pollution on biological 
resources and productivity of the World Ocean. 
Pishchevaya Promyshelenost, Moscow, 111pp. 
Paxeus, N. 1985, Studies on aquatic humic substances. 
Ph.D. Thesis, University of Goetenborg, Sweden. 
Peltier, W.R. 1988, 'Global sea level and earth rotation'. 
Science 240, pp. 895-901. 
Pernetta, J. and Sestini, G. 1984. The Maldives and the 
Impact of Expected Climate Changes. UNEP Regional 
Seas Reports and Studies No. 104, United Nations 
Environment Programme. 84pp. 
Pierce, R.H. Jr. 1974, 'p,p' DDT-absorption to suspended 
particulate matter in sea water'. Geochim. Cosmochim. 
Acta 38, pp. 1061-1073. 
Prime Minister's Science Council 1989, Global Climatic 
Change - Issues for Australia. Commonwealth of 
Australia. 
Rapp, P.-V. 1984, Reun. Cons. Int. Explor. Mer. Vol 85. 
Rijkswaterstaat 1990, 'A global survey of coastal wet-
lands, their functions and threats in relation to adaptive 
responses to sea level rise'. Prepared by Dutch IPCC/-
RSWG/CZM Delegation, Tidal Water Division, Note No. 
GWWS-90. 
Roots, E.F. 1989, 'Climate change: high-latitude regions'. 
Cum. change 15, pp. 223-253. 
Rotnicki, K. and Borowka, R.K. 1990, 'Impact of a future 
sea level rise in the Polish Baltic coastal zone'. In: 
Changing Climate and the Coast, J.G. Titus (ed.). IPCC, 
US EPA, Washington DC. 
Ruqiu, Y. 1990, Personal communication, National Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, Xizhimennei Nanxiaojie, 
Beijing, 100035, China. 
Ryzkowski, L. 1984, 'Primary production in agroeco-
systems'. 
Options Mediterraneannes. Mediterranean 
Agronomic Institute of Saragossa, Spain, 84 (1), pp. 77-
94. 
Sarnthein, M . , Winn, K. and Zahn, R. 1987, 'Paleo-
productivity of oceanic upwelling and the effect on 
atmospheric C 0 2 and the climate change during deglacia-
tion times'. In: Abrupt climatic change - evidence and 
implications. D. Reidel Publ. Co., Holland, pp. 311-337. 
Sarntheim, M . , Duplessy, J.C. and Fontuge, M. 1988, 
'Ocean productivity in low and mid latitudes; influences 
on C 0 2 reservoirs of the deep ocean and atmosphere 
during the last 21,000 years'. Paleoceanography 3, pp. 
361-399. 
Sbavaglia, A. et al. 1989, 
'Venice: 
an anticipatory 
experience of sea level rise problems'. Presented at the 
IPCC Workshop on Coastal Zone Management, RSWG. 
Miami, FL. 27 November-1 December 1989. 
Schlesinger, M.E. 1986, 'Equilibrium and transient climat-
ic warming induced by increased atmospheric C0 2'. 
Clim. Dyn. 1, pp. 35-53. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and Mitchell, J.F.B. 1987, 
'Model 
projections of the equilibrium climate response to in-
creased carbon dioxide'. Rev. Geoph. 25, pp. 760-798. 
Schnack, E. J. et al. 1989, 'Impacts of sea level rise on 
the Argentine coast'. Presented at the IPCC Workshop 
on Coastal Zone Management, RSWG. Miami, FL. 27 
November-1 December 1989. 
Sedlacek, J., Kallquist, T. and Gjessing, E. 1983, 'Effect 
of aquatic humus on uptake and toxicity of cadmium to 
Selenastrum capricornutum'. In: Aquatic and terrestrial 
humic materials, Christmann R.F. Printz and E.T. 
Gjessing (eds). Ann Arbor, pp. 495-516. 
Sharp, G. 1989, Personal communication. (NOAA Center 
for Ocean Analysis and Prediction, Monterey, California.) 
Shen, G.T., Boyle, E.A. and Lea, D.W. 1987, 'Cadmium 
in corals as a tracer of historical upwelling and industrial 
fallout'. Nature 328, pp. 794-796. 
Siegenthaler, U. 1989, 'Exchange of C 0 2 between atmos-
phere and ocean'. UNESCO Technical Papers in Marine 
Science 56, pp. 44-49. 
6-27 
Siegenthaler, U. and Wenk, Th. 1984, 'Rapid atmospheric 
C 0 2 variations and ocean circulation'. Nature 308, pp. 
624-626. 
Small States Conference on Sea Level Rise, 1989. 
Republic of the Maldives. 
Smith, J. and Tirpak, D. eds. 1988. The Potential Effects 
of Global Climate Change on the United States. US 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
Stakhiv, E. and Hanchey, J. 1989, 'Policy implications of 
climate change'. In: U.S.-Canada Symposium on the 
Impacts of Climate Change on the Great Lakes Basin. 
National Climate Program Office, Rockvüle, MD, 
pp.162-173. 
Suess, E. 1980, 
'Particulate organic carbon flux in the 
oceans - surface productivity and oxygen utilisation'. 
Nature 288, pp. 260-263. 
Sunda, W. G., and Lewis, J.A.M. 1978, 'Effect of 
complexation by natural organic ligands on the toxicity of 
copper to a unicellular algae, Monochreysis luthery'. 
Limnol, Oceanogr. 23, pp. 870-876. 
Sundquist, E.T. and Broecker, W.S. eds 1985, 
The 
carbon cycle and atmospheric CO¡; natural variations 
archean to present. Geophys. Monogr. Ser. 32, AGU, 
Washington DC, 627pp. 
Takahashi, T. 1989, 'Only half as much C 0 2 as expected 
from industrial emissions is accumulating in the atmos-
phere. 
Could the oceans be the storehouse for the 
missing gas?'. Oceanus 32 (2), pp. 22-29. 
Tanabe, S. 1985, 
'Distribution, behaviour and fate of 
PCBs in the marine environment'. J. Ocean. Soc. Jap. 
42, pp. 358-370. 
Teal, J.M. 1962, 'Energy flow in the salt marsh ecosystem 
of Georgia'. Ecology 43, pp. 614-624. 
Telegersma, S. and Sestini, G. 1988, Impact of Future Rise 
in Sea Level on the Coastal Lowlands of the Mediter-
ranean. United Nations Environment Programme Report. 
Thurman, H.V. 1983, 
Essentials of Oceanography. 
Charles E. Merrill, Columbus, Ohio. 
Titus, J.G. 1986, 'Greenhouse effect, sea level rise and 
coastal zone management.' Coastal Management 14 (3). 
Titus, J.G. ed. 1988, Greenhouse Effect, Sea Level Rise, 
and Coastal Wetlands. Washington, DC, Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
Titus, J.G. 1990, 'Greenhouse effect, sea level rise, and 
barrier islands.' In: Coastal Management 18 (1). 
Titus, J.G. and Barth, M.C., 1984, 'An overview of the 
causes and effects of sea level rise.' In: Greenhouse 
Effect and Sea Level Rise: A Challenge for this Genera-
tion. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York. 
Titus, J.G. and Greene, M. 1989, 'An overview of the 
nationwide impacts of sea level rise,' In: 
Potential 
Impact of Global Climate Change on the United States, 
Appendix B: Sea Level Rise. US Environmental Protection 
Agency. 
Titus, J.G., Henderson, T. and Teal, J.M. 1984, 'Sea level 
rise and wetlands loss in the United States.' National 
Wetlands Newsletter. 
Titus, J.G., Kuo, C.Y., Gibbs, M.J., LaRoche, T.B., 
Webb, M.K. and Waddell, J.O. 1987, 
'Greenhouse 
effect, sea level rise, and coastal drainage systems'. 
Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 
113 (2). 
Troadec, J.P. 1989, Report of the Climate and Fisheries 
Workshop; organised by Michael H. Glantz, National 
Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, Colorado, pp. 
7-8, p. 16. 
Tsyban, A.V., Volodkovich, Yu.L., Pfeiffere, M.Yu. 
1985, Circulation of the contaminant in the Baltic Sea 
ecosystem. Investigation of the Baltic Sea ecosystem. 
Leningrad, Gidrometizdat, pp. 244-257. [In Russian] 
United Nations Environment Programme 1989, The Full 
Range of Responses to Expected Climate Change. Beyer 
Institute, Nairobi Conference. 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1987, Chapter 12. 
'An assessment of the effects of ultraviolet-B radiation on 
aquatic organisms', In: Assessing the risks of trace gases 
that can modify the stratosphere, J.S. Hoffman (ed.). US 
EPA 400/1-87/001C. 
Walsh, J.E. 1983, 'The role of sea ice in climatic varia-
bility: theories and evidence'. Atmosphere Ocean 21 (3) 
(March). 
Washington, W. and Meehle, G. 1989, 'Climate sensitivity 
due to necessary C0 2. 
Experiment with a coupled 
atmosphere and ocean General Circulation Model.' Clim. 
Dyn. 4, pp. 1-38. 
Whitledge, T.E., Bidigare, R.L., Zeeman.S.I., Sambrotto, 
R.N. Rossingno, P.F., Jensen, P.R., Brooks, J.M., 
Trees, Ch. and Veidht, D.M. 1988, 'Biological meas-
urements and related chemical features in Soviet and 
United States regions of the Bering Sea'. Com. Shelf 
Res. 8, pp. 1299-1319. 
Wilimovsky, N.J. 1974, 'Fisheries for the Bering Sea: the 
state of existing knowledge and requirements for future 
effective effort'. In: Oceanography of the Bering Sea 
with Emphasis on Renewable Resources, D.W. Hood, 
and E.J. Kelly (eds). University of Alaska, Fairbanks, 
pp. 246-248. 
Williams, P. 1989, In: Potential Impact of Global Climate 
Change on the United States, Appendix A: Water Re-
sources, US Environmental Protection Agency. 
Wilson, C.A. and Mitchell J.F.B. 1987, 'A doubled C0 2 
climate sensitivity experiment with a global climate model 
including a simple ocean'. J.Geophys. Res. 92 D l l , pp. 
313-315. 
Wynne, T. 1989, 'Implications for coastal erosion and 
flooding in South Australia'. 
In: Greenhouse '88: 
Planning for Climate Change, T. Dendy (ed.). South 
Australia: Department of Environment and Planning. 
Yohe, G.W. 1990, 'The cost of not holding back the sea; 
a national sample of environmental vulnerability.' In: 
Coastal Management, in press. 
Zimmerman, R., Klima, E., Minello, T. and Nance, J. 
1989, Wetland Losses and Fishery Gains: A Paradox in 
the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico (Manuscript in peer 
review), US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admin-
istration. 
Zika, K.G. 1989, 'The role of photochemical processes in 
the air/sea exchange of chemical species'. 
UNESCO 
Technical Papers in Marine Science 56, pp. 87-95. 
6-28 
I 
Chapter 7 
Seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
Co-Chairmen: 
R.B. Street, Canada 
P.I. Melnikov, USSR 
Expert contributors: 
D. Riseborough (Canada); 
O. Anisimov (USSR); 
Cheng Guodong (China); 
V.J. Lunardini (USA); M. Gavrilova (USSR); E.A. Köster (The Netherlands); 
R.M. Koerner (Canada); M.F. Meier (USA); M. Smith (Canada); H. Baker 
(Canada); N.A. Grave (USSR); C M . Clapperton (UK); M. Brugman (Canada); 
S.M. Hodge (USA); L. Menchaca (Mexico); A.S. Judge (Canada); P.G. Quilty 
(Australia); R.Hansson (Norway); J.A. Heginbottom (Canada); H. Keys (New 
Zealand); D.A. Etkin (Canada); F.E. Nelson (USA); D.M. Barnett (Canada); 
B. Fitzharris (New Zealand); I.M. Whillans (USA); A.A. Velichko (USSR); 
R. Haugen (USA); F. Sayles (USA); 
 
Contents 
1 
Introduction 
7-1 
2 
Environmental impacts 
7-2 
2.1 
Seasonal snow cover 
7-2 
2.2 
Ice sheets and glaciers 
7-4 
2.3 
Permafrost 
7-7 
2.3.1 
Nature, extent and stability of permafrost 
7-7 
2.3.2 
Responses of permafrost to climatic changes 
7-10 
2.3.2.1 Changes in permafrost distribution 
7-12 
2.3.2.2 Implications of permafrost degradation 
7-14 
2.3.3 
Gas hydrates and methane 
7-15 
2.4 
Seasonally frozen ground 
7-16 
3 
Socioeconomic consequences 
7-16 
3.1 
Seasonal snow cover 
7-16 
3.2 
Glaciers and ice sheets 
7-17 
3.3 
Permafrost 
7-18 
3.4 
Seasonally frozen ground 
7-22 
4 
Future deliberations 
7-22 
Tables 
Table 7.1 
Relative extent of terrestrial areas of seasonal snow cover, ice 
and permafrost (after Washburn, 1980a and Rott, 1983) 
7-2 
Table 7.2 
Characteristics of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets (based 
on Oerlemans and van der Veen, 1984) 
7-5 
Table 7.3 
Effect of terrestrial ice sheets on sea-level, 
adapted from 
Workshop on Glaciers, Ice Sheets and Sea Level: Effect of a 
COylnduced Climatic Change. National Research Council, 1985 
and Meier, 1990 
7-8 
Table 7.4 
Estimates of methane hydrate resources (from Kvenvolden, 
1988) 
7-15 
Figures 
Figure 7.1 
Global distribution of permafrost 
7-25 
Figure 7.2 
Schematic representation of the interrelations in the atmosphere -
'buffer layer' - permafrost system (Nieuwenhuijzen and Koster, 
1989) 
7-26 
Figure 7.3 
Projected changes in the distribution of continuous permafrost in 
the USSR as a result of a 2°C increase in mean annual global 
temperature 
7-27 
Figure 7.4a 
Projected changes of permafrost in the USSR along a N-S 
transect at approximately 83°-85° E longitude) (Velichko et al., 
1990) 
7-28 
Figure 7.4b 
Projected changes of permafrost in Canada along a N-S transect 
at approximately 100°W longitude) (Velichko et al., 1990) 
7-29 
References 
7-30 
7-ii 
 
Seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
1 Introduction 
This report examines the impact of climate change 
on the terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
including seasonal snow cover, mountain glaciers, ice 
sheets, frozen ground including permafrost (ground 
that remains frozen for more than one year) and 
seasonally frozen ground. Potential changes in these 
elements of the terrestrial cryosphere as a result of 
the projected changes in climate induced by en-
hanced atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse 
gases ( G H G ) are discussed. In addition, this report 
reviews the current understanding of the likely 
ecological and socioeconomic consequences of these 
changes. 
The changes in climate that form the foundation of 
this chapter are primarily based on the scenario 
developed at the Villach 1987 meeting. Illustrative 
examples, however, will also make use of scenarios 
developed using palaeo-based reconstruction tech-
niques and those produced by various computer 
simulations using general circulation models ( G C M ) 
depending on the specific scenario used by the 
referenced authors. 
Currently, most of the land-based mass of ice is 
contained in the ice sheets of Antarctica and 
Greenland (Table 7.1). Compared to the total 
volume of the oceans, the ice volume stored in 
Greenland and Antarctica is relatively small at 2.1% 
(Oerlemans and van der Veen, 1984). 
The largest areal extent of the snow is observed 
during the winter when seasonal snow cover occurs. 
The maximum extent of this snow cover can be as 
much as 62% of the Eurasian continent and virtually 
all of North America north of 35° during some 
portion of the winter season. The fact that seasonal 
snow in temperate latitudes is typically close to its 
melting point suggests that a temperature increase of 
even a few degrees could have a dramatic influence 
on its presence and its characteristics. 
Seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost will be 
significantly affected by the suggested GHG-induced 
climatic changes. The projected climate warming 
and changes in precipitation will, in general, de-
crease the global areal extent and masses of the 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost. For most 
locations which currently experience a seasonal snow 
cover and seasonally frozen ground, the projected 
climate changes suggest a decreased duration of 
snow cover and increased length of the frost-frec 
season and, in some cases, a complete withdrawal of 
snow. 
In the case of glaciers and ice sheets the 
impacts of the projected changes in climate are 
complicated by the complex relationships between 
the dynamics of these ice masses and projected 
increases in temperatures and changes in precipita-
tion characteristics. 
Although the relationships 
between permafrost and climate are complex, the 
projected climatic changes will most likely lead to 
increased degradation. 
The associated changes in 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost have 
ramifications in terms of both local and global 
hydrology (eg meltwater flow, peak discharge, 
seasonal distribution of runoff and sea-level rise), 
nature and distribution of vegetation, as well 
as 
local and regional terrain stability (eg subsidence, 
landslides and other mass movements). 
Changes in seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
can also affect climate through various feedback 
mechanisms. 
Snow and ice surfaces have much 
higher albedos than do other natural land surfaces 
and, therefore, are capable of reflecting a greater 
percentage of the incident solar radiation. Decreas-
ing coverage of snow and ice will, therefore, lead to 
an increase in the amount of solar radiation ab-
sorbed by the earth, thereby enhancing the global 
warming process. This may be further enhanced if 
increased cloudiness accompanies increased warming 
(see Working Group I Report). 
The additional 
long-wave radiation from the new snow-free land 
would be 'trapped' even more than at present if 
cloudiness also increases. Furthermore, degradation 
of permafrost could alter atmosphere-biosphere 
fluxes of G H G (eg methane), thereby influencing the 
amount and rate of global warming. Increased rates 
of melting, however, will reduce the potential climat-
ic warming as energy is used to melt the ice. 
Another factor that should not be neglected in this 
assessment is the influence of human activities on 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost. 
The 
influence is felt mainly locally through anthropogenic 
changes in the surface and quantity and quality of 
the snow or ice. These changes disrupt the surface 
(change in albedo, exposure of ice mass etc) and 
thereby alter the ablation and degradation processes. 
Examples 
of these disturbances are abundant, 
ranging from the impact of building snow roads and 
ice bridges, and of traffic on glaciers and ice sheets, 
to surface disruptions during the building of struc-
tures and pipelines. 
In the case of snow, human 
activities such as building of structures and certain 
7-1 
Table 7.1 
Relative extent of terrestrial areas of seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost (after Washburn, 1980a and 
Rott, 1983). 
Land ice 
Antarctica 
Greenland 
Small ice caps 
Mountain glaciers 
Major permafrost region 
USSR 
Canada 
China 
Greenland 
USA (Alaska) 
World land area 
Northern hemisphere 
Continuous 
Discontinuous 
Alpine permafrost 
Land ice and seasonal snow 
Northern hemisphere 
Early February 
Late August 
Southern hemipshere 
Late July 
Early May 
* Approximate 
Area 
(million km2) 
13.9 
1.8 
0.35 
0.2 
16.84 
9.38 
9.38 
2.18 
1.52 
140.7 
7.6* 
17.3* 
2.33* 
Area 
46.3 
8.7 
0.85 
0.07 
Volume 
(million km3) 
30.1 
2.7 
0.2 
0.03 
Percentage underlain 
by permafrost 
50 
50 
22 
100 
82 
20-25 
Volume 
0.002 
types of logging practices can actually increase the 
amount and duration of snow cover and, thereby, 
also influence any underlying permafrost. 
The relationships between the dynamics of climate 
and seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost are 
exceedingly complex and, because of their nature (eg 
remote, massive, dynamic etc), difficult to study. 
Observation techniques and analysis methodologies 
that will provide a better understanding of the 
dynamics of these relationships are relatively new or 
under development and therefore have not been 
widely used. 
Limited research and basic data combined with the 
lack of involvement of representatives from social 
and economic communities in programs which 
examine the implications of the suggested changes 
lead to conclusions which are in most cases highly 
speculative. This does not diminish in any way the 
need for effective and timely responses. 
With 
climatic changes, seasonal snow cover, ice and 
permafrost will be affected and the suggested chan-
ges are qualitatively plausible. 
Actions to solve 
problems cannot be made until the causes of the 
problems are more than speculative. 
This alone 
suggests that decisive actions are required to obtain 
more comprehensive information and to undertake 
directed, integrated research. Long-term research 
should be designed to better define the dynamics of 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost and the 
bounds of possible response strategies. 
2 
Environmental impacts 
2.1 Seasonal snow cover 
Seasonal snow cover is for the most part a transient 
element of the earth's surface persisting at one 
location anywhere from a few days to a major 
portion of the year. The areal extent of seasonal 
snow cover is also highly variable (Fohn, 1989) 
changing continually during a particular season and 
from one year to the next. These temporal and 
7-2 
spatial fluctuations are in response to the variable 
microclimates and terrains typical of those areas 
which experience seasonal snow cover. 
The impacts that GHG-induced climatic changes 
would have on seasonal snow cover, particularly at 
higher latitudes, are not known with certainty. In 
those areas where spring temperatures are expected 
to increase with early spring snowfalls becoming rain 
events and, where warm air advection events could 
become more frequent, the duration of snow cover 
will decrease. In those areas where temperatures 
are projected to remain below or at freezing and 
where winters are expected to be warmer but wetter, 
the snow pack will increase and hence take longer to 
melt in the spring. Increased snowfall and suggested 
changes in the snow cover dissipation could have 
serious repercussions by delaying planting and access 
to pastures and rangelands. 
Computer-generated climate scenarios provide some 
indications of possible impacts of GHG-induced 
climate changes on seasonal snow cover at a conti-
nental scale (Schlesinger, 1986). When interpreting 
these results it should be noted that current versions 
of these models have rudimentary simulations of the 
exchanges between the ocean and the atmosphere 
including the impact of sea ice and, because of their 
spatial resolution, limited representation of potential 
regional impacts and elevation differences. 
As 
would be expected under the influence of global 
warming, the simulations indicate that the area 
covered by snow will decrease in both the southern 
and northern hemispheres. In terms of the mass of 
snow, however, the responses are less uniform. In 
general, within the Northern Hemisphere, a decrease 
in the mass of snow is indicated, whereas an in-
crease occurs within the Southern Hemisphere. 
These changes in mass, however, are not uniform 
but, to some degree, depend on latitude, elevation 
and season. Throughout the year, snow mass north 
of 30°N latitude and north of 68°S latitude is 
expected to decrease in response to climatic changes, 
while snow mass is expected to increase over 
Antarctica, south of 68°S latitude. 
As depicted by computer simulation (note limited 
modelling of orographic features in G C M ) , changes 
in snow mass during the winter within the Northern 
Hemisphere do not appear to be related to eleva-
tion; however, during the summer, elevations below 
1500 m predominantly have snow mass decreases, 
while locations at higher elevations show both 
increases and decreases. The increases in Northern 
Hemisphere snow mass occur over the Greenland 
interior in both summer and winter. 
In the 
Southern Hemisphere, snow mass increases are 
suggested during summer and winter in the interior 
of Antarctica above the 400 m level with decreases 
around the Antarctic coastline. 
The suggestion that snowfall along the coastline of 
Antarctica will decrease as a result of projected 
climatic changes is debatable. Projected reductions 
in the sea ice cover around the Antarctic continent 
as a result of climatic changes will increase the area 
of open water, thereby providing an additional 
moisture source for increasing atmospheric moisture 
and, thus snowfall on the adjacent land or ice sheet. 
Possible impacts of GHG-induced climatic changes 
on seasonal snow storage and the snowline have 
been estimated for New Zealand (Fitzharris, 1989) 
using a snow wedge simulation model with tempera-
ture increased by 3°C and precipitation by 15% 
above current levels. 
When applied to the South 
Island, this model suggests that the snowline will rise 
300-400 m, with a decrease in snow accumulation 
below 2300 m. Seasonal snow storage, which now 
averages 350 mm, will decrease to 190 mm, and the 
area covered by winter snow will be halved. 
Within the Alps, Kuhn (1988) suggests that a perma-
nent snow cover will be observed only at altitudes 
above 1500 m by the year 2050 as a result of the 
projected changes in climate. 
An analysis of the 
recent seasonal distribution of snow cover at 20 
stations in the Alps (Fohn, 1989) 
found large 
seasonal fluctuations with no long-term trend. The 
last five to seven winters did, however, clearly show 
lower than normal snow depths on 1 January. 
Despite the fact that these depths were not outside 
the range of normal fluctuations, continuation and 
intensification of this trend would have serious 
ramifications to snow dependent components of the 
Alps economic communities (eg skiing and tourist 
industries). 
Owing to its high air content, dry snow is a very 
effective insulator for the ground. Significant de-
creases in snow cover will result in increased sus-
ceptibility of agricultural crops (eg winter wheat), 
natural ecosystems perennial species (eg trees and 
shrubs) and animals (eg hibernating species) to 
adverse effects of cold temperatures and frost where 
freezing temperatures continue to occur. Lack of 
sufficient insulation by snow cover has been cited as 
a factor contributing to reductions in forest health 
and losses in overwintering agricultural crops. Lack 
of insulation from snow cover has also led to damag-
es to urban infrastructure and to other facilities as a 
result of frost heave. 
Climate models have shown that snow cover, 
through its influence on surface albedo, is a critical 
factor in the local and global climate system 
7-3 
(Budyko 1969; Manabe and Wetherald, 1980), 
particularly at high latitudes/altitudes where the 
ground may be covered with snow from 6-9 months 
each year. 
This albedo-temperature feedback 
mechanism is related to the fact that snow, depend-
ing on its quality, has a very high albedo (0.3-0.9) 
reflecting the sun's radiation 2-3 times more than 
grassland and soil. 
In addition, although snow 
absorbs and emits long-wave radiation most effec-
tively, the emission is limited by the fact that the 
snow surface temperature is below 0°C. Based on 
this limitation, snow cover hampers a fast warming 
of the adjacent air relative to that which would occur 
from a warmer, snow-free surface. 
Changes in the duration and area covered by snow 
could, therefore, have significant impact on local, 
regional and global climates (Fohn, 1989). Where 
climatic warming leads to decreased snow cover a 
lowering of the surface albedo will occur. This in 
turn would result in more absorption of solar ener-
gy, and thus increased warming of the adjacent air 
(positive feedback). In those areas where climatic 
warming results in increased snow cover, surface 
albedo would increase which would decrease the 
solar radiation absorbed by the surface. This would 
reduce warming of the adjacent air. 
Any increase in precipitation should lead to more 
frequent summer storms and more freezing rain in 
the autumn. 
Although the duration of the snow 
cover season may be shorter, substantial precipita-
tion increases could lead to more snow accumula-
tion. 
Global warming might advance the melt 
season so that melt will no longer occur within the 
intense solar insolation period near the solstice. 
Snow accumulations, which formerly provided late-
season local water sources required to maintain 
wetlands, may not persist (Woo, 1989). 
2.2 Ice sheets and glaciers 
The relationships between climatic changes and ice 
sheet and glacier responses are complex and, be-
cause of relatively limited monitoring and research, 
are not yet fully understood. Projected increases in 
air temperature, because of its relationship with the 
surface energy budget, may increase melting rates. 
However, other factors such as changes in winter 
precipitation and surface albedo and in the case of 
ice sheets, iceberg discharge and ocean-ice shelf 
melting and freezing, add to the complexity of the 
response. 
The bulk of the earth's ice mass is stored within the 
Antarctic ice sheet (see Table 7.1). The continent, 
which is approximately 98% ice covered, is naturally 
divided into two parts: an eastern portion rests on 
continental crust which, without an ice load would 
be dominantly above sea-level; and a large western 
portion which is underlaid both by continental crust 
and ocean. 
A review of available evidence from 
mass balance studies (Budd and Smith, 1985) sug-
gests that the rate of accumulation of ice and the 
total rate of discharge are nearly in balance for this 
ice sheet with a discrepancy from 0-20% (due mainly 
to uncertainties in iceberg discharge, accumulation 
data, and in the rates of melting below the major ice 
shelves). 
The Antarctic ice sheet, however, is 
probably still adjusting its mass balance to changes 
that were initiated hundreds or even a few thousand 
years ago (it is quite probable, dynamically, that it is 
in fact still responding to the transition out of the 
last glacial period, over 11,000 years ago). 
The Greenland ice sheet is smaller with portions of 
the continent in the coastal areas permanently ice 
free. It is not possible at present to estimate reliably 
the mass balance of the Greenland ice sheet because 
of a lack of comprehensive observations. 
Recent 
estimates (Zwally et al., 1989) using satellite obser-
vations, however, indicate that the Greenland ice 
sheet has thickened by approximately a quarter of a 
metre a year since the late 1970s. 
Zwally et al. 
hypothesise that the observed thickening is a direct 
measure of the amount of new snow accumulating 
on the ice sheet. 
Characteristics of the Antarctic and Greenland ice 
sheets are summarised in Table 7.2. Apart from the 
major ice sheets, small ice caps are found on some 
Canadian, 
Norwegian 
and Soviet 
islands 
(eg 
Ellesmere Island where three ice caps cover an area 
of more than 20,000 km
2 and Svalbard, where three 
ice caps cover 15,000 K m
2 of a total 36,000 Km
2). 
The effects of GHG-induced climatic changes on ice 
sheets will be to bring them out of balance (mass 
balance) 
and 
to 
gradually 
warm 
them 
up 
(Oerlemans and van der Veen, 1984). Surface 
melting with runoff to the sea, particularly for 
Antarctica, is unlikely to be significant during the 
next century. In the case of the southern portion of 
the Greenland ice sheet, which has huge ablation 
zones in the true temperate glacier sense, surface 
melting with runoff may be significant (possible 
contribution to sea-level rise in the next hundred 
years). 
The relation between precipitation changes and 
temperature changes in polar regions is of central 
importance to understanding current and future 
behaviour of the ice sheets (Zwally, 1989). In polar 
regions, enhanced precipitation is associated with 
warmer temperatures because of the greater mois-
ture capacity of warmer air and the increased 
7-4 
Table 7.2 
Characteristics of the Greenland and Antarctic 
ice sheets (based on Oerlemans and van der 
Veen, 1984). 
Area (million km2) 
Mean ice thickness 
(metres) 
Ice volume (million 
km5) 
Maximum surface 
elevation (metres) 
Annual accumula-
tion (cm ice 
depth/year) 
Loss of ice (%) 
Calving 
Melting 
Greenland 
1.8 
1530 
2.7 
3300 
34 
50 
50 
Antarctica 
13.9 
2160 
30.1 
4000 
17 
99 
1 
availability of moisture as the ocean area covered by 
ice declines. Schlesinger and Mitchell (1987) suggest 
that the increase in precipitation is 5% to 20% per 
degree Kelvin. Owing to the projected changes in 
temperature, precipitation and cloudiness and the 
influence these have on ice sheet accumulation and 
ablation, the dominant short-term effect of these 
changes may be growth of both the Greenland and 
Antarctic ice sheets, but in the case of Greenland 
may be offset by increases in melting in marginal 
areas. 
The warming of the ocean as a result of climatic 
changes may have an important impact, particularly 
on the west Antarctic ice sheet. For a significant 
impact, however, the increased temperatures must 
reach the deeper layers of the ice sheet, a process 
which could take several thousand years. 
Using a scenario based on palaeo-bascd reconstruc-
tions, Kotlyakov and Grosswald (1981) suggest that 
in Greenland the altitude at which the ice sheet will 
continue to accumulate ice will rise 250-650 m under 
the impact of projected climatic changes. This level 
of change could lead to a two-fold growth of the 
ablation area and an annual lowering of the 
Greenland ice sheet at an average rate of 0.5-0.7 
m/ycar. Other calculations for the Greenland ice 
sheet (Ambach, 1980) indicate that as a result of a 
3°C increase in surface air temperature and a 12% 
increase in precipitation, a substantial decrease in its 
mass balance may result in a decrease of 3% in ice 
volume over the next 250 years (which could contri-
bute to a rise in sea-level of approximately 0.2 m). 
Braithwaite and Olesen (1984) have shown that 
temperature and ablation of Greenland ice are 
related. They hypothesise that a 3°C temperature 
increase from 2°C to 5°C would result in a 100% 
increase in the melt rate (from 20 kg/m2/day to 40 
kg/m2/day). The role of sensible heat flux is con-
sidered to be of paramount importance in deter-
mining the state of balance of the Greenland ice 
sheet (as well as other ice sheets), however, this 
effect is still not well understood. 
Projected changes for the Antarctic ice sheet are 
complex. A preliminary assessment that assumes an 
increase in surface air temperature of 3°C and a 
12% increase in precipitation during the next 100 
years suggests an increase of the Antarctic ice 
volume of approximately 0.5% after 250 years 
(which could contribute to a decrease in sea-level of 
approximately 0.3 m). 
Kotlyakov and Grosswald 
(1981) hypothesise that the eastern Antarctic ice 
sheet may remain unchanged as a result of the 
projected climatic changes. 
In contrast the western Antarctic ice sheet like other 
marine ice sheets, is inherently unstable and could 
be affected by ground-line retreat and by the rapid 
dispersal of ice into the surrounding oceans by way 
of relatively fast-flowing ice streams (Bindschadler, 
1990). Rapid changes recently observed on the west 
Antarctic ice sheet indicate possible instability. 
These observations, combined with the potential 
socioeconomic consequences should such a collapse 
occur (an immediate surge in global sea-level of up 
to 6 m), however, suggest that the west Antarctic ice 
sheet should continue to be closely studied. 
Climate does influence the dynamics of glaciers and 
small ice caps through its impact on the amount of 
snow that collects on their surfaces and the amount 
of snow and ice lost by melting (Paterson, 1981; 
Oerlemans and van der Veen, 1984). The response 
of a particular glacier or ice cap to climate, however, 
is complicated owing to the large number of other 
factors (eg glacier geometry, debris cover, ice 
thickness-mass balance feedback, and calving). 
The annual mass balance of a glacier is defined as 
the difference in water equivalent between accumu-
lation and ablation at the surface, summed over the 
area of the glacier. 
Accumulation normally is a 
result of snow which is transformed into ice; how-
ever, avalanches, rime formation and freezing of rain 
within the snowpack also add mass. Melting fol-
lowed by runoff, evaporation, removal of snow by 
wind, sublimation and calving of icebergs are pri-
mary ablation processes. All of these accumulation 
and ablation processes will be affected by climatic 
7-5 
changes with resulting impacts on glacial and ice cap 
masses. 
Glacier mass balance, although complicated by 
background 'noise' inherent in glacier dynamics due 
to local effects, is considered sensitive to climate 
(temperature, precipitation, cloudiness etc) and thus 
is an effective indicator of climatic change. 
The 
Permanent Service for the Fluctuation of Glaciers 
(now the World Glacier Monitoring Service) has 
been archiving mass balance data for approximately 
100 glaciers. 
Examination of the trends of mass 
balance data for five glaciers with relatively long 
records (since 1946) indicates decreasing values over 
the last few decades. 
Shrinkage has been most 
pronounced at mid-temperate latitudes (eg 0.37 
m/year from 1934 to 1982 at Hintereisferner in the 
Austrian Alps) and relatively minor at higher lati-
tudes (eg 0.06 m/year in the Canadian Arctic and 
0.25 m/yr in Scandinavia (Norway)). 
Projected increases in precipitation may cause some 
glaciers to advance despite increased ablation. This 
may presently be reflected by the increase in mass 
balance of certain Canadian and US glaciers, par-
ticularly those dominated by the effects of winter 
snowfall (eg Blue Glacier in northwest US and 
Sentinel Glacier in southwest Canada). 
Most Andean glaciers have receded dramatically 
from their positions in the mid-late 19th century 
(Clapperton and Sugden, 1988) with the period of 
most rapid recession being between the early 1930s 
and the early 1960s. 
Colombian glaciers have 
decreased in extent by one-third between 1939 and 
1969 (Wood, 1970). The complete disappearance of 
many small glaciers and perennial snowfields in the 
Pico Bolivar area of Venezuela has resulted as the 
snowline has risen approximately 6 m per year in 
this area during the period 1885-1972 (Shubert, 
1972). In New Zealand some glaciers are advancing 
whereas Heard Island (subantarctic island) glaciers 
are retreating. 
A preliminary assessment based on a climatic 
change scenario which includes a 1°C increase in 
temperature and an increase in accumulation of 150 
mm/year, suggests that an increase of 190 m could 
occur for the height above which glaciers may realise 
a net gain in mass in the European Alps (National 
Research Council, 1985). The projected increase in 
height is 230 m when the added accumulation was 
modelled as occurring in the winter months exclu-
sively. 
Following the palaeo-based reconstructions of 
Budyko et al. (1978), Kotlyakov and Grosswald 
(1981) conclude that the response of glaciers will 
depend on their type and geographic location. The 
net mass balance of mountain glaciers in the Eurasia 
temperate zone will remain essentially unchanged by 
the 2020s since increases in ablation will be balanced 
by suggested increases in snowfall. The ablation on 
the ice caps in the Soviet Arctic archipelagoes is 
expected to reach 4-6 m (water equivalent) of which 
only 10-15% will be balanced by increased accumu-
lation. This would suggest that the archipelagoes, 
with their mean present-day ice thickness of 150-250 
m may become completely free of glaciers within the 
next several decades. 
Kuhn (1989) examined the impact of a particular 
climate scenario for the year 2050 (including a 
temperature increase of 3°C) on alpine glaciers in 
Austria. Based on this analysis, he hypothesised that 
little or no ice may be found below 2500 m and only 
slightly more than half of the existing glacier surfac-
es will remain ice covered. The areas from which 
glaciers retreat would be converted into morpho-
logically highly unstable moraine slopes and fore-
fields which could contribute to landslides, mudflows 
and increased sediment loads in rivers. At high 
elevations and high latitudes summer conditions are 
such that the surface energy balance does not 
support releases of significant quantities of melt-
water. At lower elevations and latitudes glacier ice 
is exposed to temperatures sufficient to allow melt-
ing for several months of the year and, therefore, 
significantly impacts local and regional hydrology. 
The rate of production of meltwater from glaciers 
and small ice caps is influenced by the incoming 
solar radiation and by the albedo of their surfaces. 
Observed data indicate that warmer than average 
summers will tend to cause significant increases in 
runoff. The effects of changes in precipitation on 
these ice masses, however, are less straightforward. 
Changes in precipitation will influence ablation and 
meltwater production from glaciers and ice caps by 
affecting surface albedo and indirectly by associated 
changes in cloudiness and their effects on incoming 
solar radiation. For example, the previously men-
tioned increase in snow cover and/or longer persis-
tence of the snow cover in the spring could reduce 
early season melting and meltwater release from 
these ice masses. 
One concern regarding the melting of ice sheets and 
glaciers is related to the impact of this additional 
water on sea-level. 
Little if any sea-level change 
currently observed is caused by wasting of the 
Greenland ice sheet (a stable or slightly positive 
state of mass balance), and the Antarctic ice sheet, 
as mentioned above, is most likely growing, taking 
water out of the sea. 
The glaciers and small ice 
caps of the world outside of Greenland and 
7-6 
Antarctica, however, have in general been shrinking 
during the past 100 years (Meier, 1984). Sea-level is 
currently thought to be rising at a rate of 1 to 3 
mm/year (Meier, 1990) although this change is far 
from uniform throughout the world. The rise in sea-
level currently observed could be partly attributed to 
the wastage of alpine glaciers located in the 
mountains ranges along the Gulf of Alaska, in 
Central Asia, and from the Patagonian ice caps. 
Also contributing to the rise in sea-level are such 
processes as thermal expansion of sea water or the 
tectonic effects, isostatic rebound, erosion, and 
sedimentation. Estimates of the effect of current ice 
wastage compared with that projected under condi-
tions of doubled C 0 2 concentrations are shown in 
Table 7.3. 
Evidence of extensive forest cover (dated at 3000 
year bp) beneath present-day glaciers in the Rockies 
and coastal mountains in western North America 
provides further evidence that within the recent past, 
vast mid-latitude areas were deglaciated. 
If such 
déglaciation occurred today water supplies and local 
climates could be dramatically changed in these 
regions. 
Changes in the amount of melt occurring and the 
characteristics of glacier or ice sheet surfaces can 
affect the local and possibly the global climate 
(Oerlemans and van der Veen, 1984). Glaciers and 
ice sheets influence climate through their impacts on 
the local and global energy balance. 
Energy is 
required to melt ice and this energy (radiation, 
sensible and latent heat) is taken from the surround-
ing air (directly or indirectly) and water. Increases 
in the amount of ice experiencing melt could there-
fore lead to a general cooling of the atmosphere and 
surrounding waters. This potential cooling will have 
a greater effect on local climate than global climate 
as melting 1% of the terrestrial ice in 100 years 
requires a global average of 0.06 W m
2 which is 
negligible compared to the CCyinduced heat fluxes. 
Another factor to consider regarding the impact of 
changes in these ice masses on the energy balance is 
that snow and ice that make up the surfaces of 
glaciers and ice caps reflect more solar radiation 
than other natural surfaces (see previous discussion 
on seasonal snow cover). Decreases in the quantity 
and quality of the surfaces of these ice masses could 
enhance the warming effect. 
2.3 
Permafrost 
2.3.1 Nature, extent and stability of 
permafrost 
Permafrost is the term used to describe ground (soil 
or rock) that remains at or below 0°C throughout 
the year for at least two consecutive years. Perma-
frost usually contains ice in various forms, from ice 
held within soil pores to massive bodies of more or 
less pure ice many metres thick. The presence of 
ice in permafrost makes it behave uniquely as an 
earth material, and also makes it sensitive to climatic 
warming. Dramatic visual evidence of permafrost 
terrain such as pingos, patterned ground, earth 
hummocks, ice wedges, palsas, mass movement and 
thermokarst features are all dependent to some 
extent on the presence of ice (and especially phase 
changes of the ice) in the ground. 
Evidence of the existence of permafrost has been 
dated as far back as 600 million bp (Tarling, 1980). 
It does appear, however, that permafrost has not 
persisted throughout geological time, but occurred 
rather sporadically without a discernible pattern. 
Most of present permafrost is many thousands of 
years old and formed during the last glacial period 
or Pleistocene. Permafrost containing large amounts 
of ice and vulnerable to thaw is often of more 
practical significance. Today, permafrost underlies 
20-25% of the land surface of the earth (Figure 7.1) 
in the polar and circumpolar regions, and in alpine 
areas at lower latitudes. Freezing conditions in the 
surface layers of the earth (seasonal and perennial) 
are also found at temperate latitudes, and at high 
altitude in the tropics. 
Elsewhere permafrost is 
found in Antarctica, on high-latitude islands, in the 
mountain ranges of Scandinavia, Europe, North 
America, Central Asia, Chile, and South Africa, and 
scattered low-latitude peaks (eg Fujiyama and 
Kilimanjaro). 
In ice-covered regions permafrost 
occurs at glacier margins and in nonglaciated oases. 
Permafrost is also widespread beneath the seabed in 
the Arctic Ocean (Sellman and Hopkins, 1984). 
However, because of freezing point depression as a 
result of the salts present, the occurrence of exten-
sive ice-bonded material is limited to the continental 
shelf areas which were exposed to sub-areal condi-
tions during the Pleistocene (Hunter, 1988). Such 
permafrost (submarine permafrost) may be con-
sidered as relict (permafrost which formed under 
past climatic conditions and which could not form 
under present conditions) and is undergoing degra-
dation (ie thawing). In coastal areas where the sea 
normally freezes down to the seabed, permafrost is 
contemporary. 
7-7 
Table 7.3 
Effect of terrestrial ice sheets on sea level, adapted from a workshop (National Research Council, 1985) and 
Meier, 1990. 
Ice mass 
Glaciers and small ice caps 
Greenland ice sheet 
Antarctica 
Present yearly effect on sea-
level (mm/year) 
NRC 
Meier 
0.2 to 0.8 
Total 
-0.5 to +0.3 
-1.2 to 0.0 
-1.5 to +1.1 
-0.2 to -0.7 
-0.5 to -1.0 
Cummulative effect by Year 
2100 for 2 x C02 atmosphere 
(metres) 
NRC 
0.1 to 0.3 
(0.3 to 0.6 for 
complete melt) 
0.1 to 0.3 
-0.1 to 1.0 
(0.0 to 0.3 most 
probable) 
0.1 to 1.6 
(0.2 to 0.9 most 
probable) 
Meier 
0.02 to 0.3 
-0.04 to 0.2 
-0.5 to -0.1 
-0.5 to +0.4 
The greatest permafrost thicknesses occur as a result 
of a combination of low surface temperature, low 
geothermal heat flow and relatively high thermal 
conductivity and are also related to the non-glaciated 
past; permafrost extends to a depth of 1000 m or 
more in Canada (Judge, 1973), to 1500 m in the 
USSR (Melnikov, 1978), and 100-200 m in China 
(Youwu and Zhou, 1983). 
The development of 
permafrost to such thicknesses requires the persis-
tence of suitable climatic conditions on a geologic 
time scale, thus, to some extent, the depth of perma-
frost is dependent on its age (Kudriavtsev, 1965; 
Melnikov, 1978; Judge, 1973). 
Although permafrost is directly temperature-depend-
ent, its occurrence also depends on a number of 
local and other climatological factors (Washburn, 
1979; Williams and Smith, 1989). The relationships 
between the different factors and permafrost are 
schematically 
represented 
in 
Figure 
7.2 
(Nieuwenhuijzen and Koster, 1989). Some of the 
factors are relatively static in time (eg topography, 
altitude and latitude), although the majority are 
time-dependent and closely interrelated. Another 
complicating factor is the relict character of a large 
part of permafrost which has no clear relationship to 
present day climatic parameters. 
This greatly 
complicates the assessment of the effects of climatic 
changes on permafrost as changes in different 
variables may either enhance or counteract each 
other. 
Maps showing the distribution of permafrost arc 
based on broad correlations with climatic data. For 
example, the 'southern limit' of permafrost is often 
represented by the -1°C mean annual air isotherm 
(Brown, 1978; Gavrilova, 1981), although occur-
rences of permafrost are known south of this (eg 
Zoltai, 1971). Investigators concerned with mapping 
permafrost at small geographical scales generally use 
a classification scheme in which permafrost is 
characterised as continuous, discontinuous or spo-
radic. Maps employing such classifications usually 
depict specific zones at different latitudes, although 
in reality there is a gradual transition from the 
seasonally frozen ground of temperate regions to the 
perennially frozen ground of the polar regions. The 
zones are meant to convey the relative areal domi-
nance of permafrost and permafrost-free conditions. 
Wherever the average annual temperature is within 
a few degrees of 0°C, local variations in surface 
conditions 
(vegetation, 
topography, 
hydrologic 
conditions, solar exposure and snow cover) deter-
mine where the ground thermal regime can sustain 
permafrost. 
Where conditions are not homoge-
neous, permafrost can occur in patches. At higher 
latitudes, where temperatures are lower, bodies of 
permafrost become more frequent and larger in 
extent. Even in very cold regions, however, there 
are still gaps in the permafrost, due primarily to the 
presence of water bodies (streams, rivers and lakes) 
which do not freeze to their bottom in winter. 
These non-homogeneous characteristics of perma-
7-8 
frost coupled with the scattered nature of direct 
observations, make precise mapping of permafrost 
and ground thermal conditions difficult. They also 
make it difficult to develop an accurate geographic 
prognosis for permafrost responses to climatic 
changes. 
Although there is broad and intuitive agreement 
about the concept of permafrost zonation, satisfac-
tory operational definitions have not often been 
presented in the literature. This has lead to non-
standardised mapping criteria. 
Snow cover, through its influence on ground tem-
peratures, can significantly affect permafrost occur-
rence. 
In discontinuous and sporadic permafrost 
areas, snow cover may be the critical local factor 
determining whether permafrost is present or not. 
In the colder regions of more continuous perma-
frost, it influences the depth of the active layer. A 
sufficient blanket of snow provides insulation to the 
ground, thereby keeping it warmer than that which 
would occur under less abundant snow cover or 
snow-free conditions. Goodrich (1982) concluded 
that mean annual ground temperatures are most 
strongly influenced by the timing of snow accumula-
tion in autumn and early winter, and by the maxi-
mum depth attained over the winter. In his calcula-
tions, a doubling of the snow cover from 25 to 50 cm 
increased the mean annual surface temperature by 
several degrees. Rapid build-up of snow in autumn 
augmented this effect. 
In some cases an abundance of snow may promote 
the occurrence of permafrost. Under these condi-
tions the snow pack could persist until later in the 
spring or early summer. This delay would reduce 
the amount of warming of the ground that can occur 
(Gold, 1967; Goodwin and Outcalt, 1975). 
Rainfall can also influence the permafrost by in-
creasing ground temperatures. 
An increase in 
precipitation during the period when permafrost is 
not covered by snow tends to reduce ground surface 
temperatures due to associated cloud cover which 
reduces the incident solar radiation. Rain falling on 
snow also promotes the lowering of ground tempera-
tures by reducing the insulating quality of the snow. 
Vegetation and the organic layer play a role in the 
ground thermal regime in two ways: as part of a 
'canopy above the surface, or as a surface layer over 
the mineral soil. A vegetation canopy reduces the 
amount of solar radiation reaching the ground 
surface, and will have a variable effect on the 
accumulation and persistence of snow cover (eg 
Luthin and Guymon, 1974; Gavrilova, 1978; Rouse, 
1982). Interception of precipitation and transpira-
tion by the canopy also influence the ground thermal 
regime through evaporation and the water balance. 
Rouse (1984) found that summer soil temperatures 
beneath an open spruce forest were lower than 
adjacent tundra as a result of radiation interception 
by the canopy, higher evaporation from the wetter 
surface and the greater roughness of the forest 
which increases turbulent heat loss to the atmos-
phere. Brown (1965) concluded that variations in 
the vegetation canopy were a relatively minor 
influence on the ground thermal regime compared 
to the surface organic layer. 
The presence of sporadic or discontinuous perma-
frost is commonly associated with an organic surface 
layer, usually peat (Brown, 1973, 1978; Fitzgibbon, 
1981). 
The particular influence of organic soils 
(especially peat) on permafrost is attributed to: (i) 
the low conductivity of organic soils relative to 
mineral soils; (ii) the effect of seasonal variations in 
the water content of organic soil on its thermal 
conductivity; and (iii) the seasonal evaporative 
regime of the surface as controlled by climatic and 
surface factors (Riseborough and Burns, 1988). 
Seasonal variations in moisture content of the 
organic layer (thermal conductivity of peat 5-25 
times that of wet or dry frozen peat) give it a low 
thermal conductivity in summer, inhibiting warming 
of the ground. In winter the wetter organic layer 
freezes, increasing its thermal conductivity thereby 
enhancing cooling of the ground. The mean annual 
ground temperatures under peat are, therefore, 
lower than under adjacent areas without peat, and 
permafrost can persist at sites with positive mean 
annual surface temperatures (up to approximately 
+ 2°C). 
Furthermore, the generally low thermal 
conductivity of surface organic materials helps to 
preserve relict permafrost beneath it. 
In some areas at least, the direct effect of vegetation 
may be less important than its role in snow accumu-
lation (Smith, 1975; Rouse, 1984). 
Where the 
canopy can trap a deep blanket of snow, the soil will 
be considerably warmer in the winter than in the 
nearby tundra (Rouse, 1984). Interception of snow 
by trees in areas of extensive boreal forest can 
reduce the snow cover (French 1976), lowering 
ground temperatures. Alternatively, a deeper snow 
cover may have a net cooling effect if spring snow-
melt is prolonged, holding the ground surface 
temperature at or below 0°C when air temperature 
is high in early summer. 
The interplay of these 
factors contributes to the uncertainty over the 
precise implications of climatic changes for perma-
frost. 
7-9 
Permafrost does influence vegetative cover, although 
playing a relatively minor role compared to climate 
and soil type. The shallow active layer is a nutrient 
source for vegetation, maintaining water and nutrient 
supplies close to the surface. The permafrost layer 
is relatively impermeable and acts as a barrier to the 
movement of water and nutrients and restricts root 
growth to the active layer. Low active layer tem-
peratures reduce nutrient availability and the rate of 
decomposition. Ecosystems such as black spruce 
and forest floor moss have adapted to the presence 
of permafrost and often sustain permafrost as well 
as being sustained by it. 
Forest distribution near the tree line is commonly 
related to permafrost regimes (McKay and Baker, 
1986). 
The abundant growth of mosses and the 
accumulation of undecomposed organic material at 
the surface in arctic regions provides insulation 
against summer thaw and increases soil moisture 
(Kryuchkov, 1978). In a study of forests and vegeta-
tion in the Mackenzie Valley, Zoltai and Pettapiece 
(1973) noted that taller trees were associated with 
deeper active layers, but die-off occurred when moss 
layers developed. Some species such as trembling 
aspen are restricted to areas where the permafrost 
table is well below the level of rooting. 
Other 
species such as spruce can grow on much thinner 
active layers. 
Finally, permafrost as a climatic phenomenon is an 
indicator of both present and past climates. The 
upper layer (10-20 m), subject to annual tempera-
ture fluctuations, reflects current climatic conditions 
of an area - both regional (macroclimate) and site-
specific (microclimate). 
At greater depths the 
temperature regime reflects the climatic conditions 
of earlier periods. Relict permafrost, usually found 
at significant depth, currently exists in regions which 
should be free of permafrost according to the 
present energy budget; therefore, it is normally 
unstable and slowly degrading. 
Temperature records from oilwells and other bore-
holes in Alaska, Canada, Norway and Russia clearly 
show that the upper layers of permafrost (20-100 m) 
have increased in temperature over the past 50-100 
years (Lachenbruch et al., 1989; Balobaev, 1985; 
Taylor and Judge, 1985). A very clear departure 
from the long-term geothermal gradient has been 
observed at depth. Although the historical record 
cannot be recovered as a unique solution, a surface 
temperature record can be determined (with de-
creasing precision for older events). The records 
display evidence of permafrost disturbance, though 
the driving mechanism is not necessarily a simple 
relationship with climatic changes. Lachenbruch and 
Marshall (1986) concluded that the deviations were 
due to an increase of the surface temperature in the 
range of 2°-4°C during the last century or so. This 
coincides with the amelioration of global tempera-
tures since about 1850, following the Little Ice Age. 
2.3.2 Responses of permafrost to climatic 
changes 
Since permafrost is a thermal condition, it is sensi-
tive to changes in climate. Additionally, permafrost 
to a large extent is inherently unstable, since it exists 
so close to its melting point and frequently contains 
large amounts of excess ice. Most permafrost in the 
discontinuous zone is either relict, or in a delicate 
thermal balance with its environment. Many thou-
sands of square kilometres of permafrost are within 
1°-2°C of the melting point and are particularly 
vulnerable to climatic warming. The overall effect 
of the projected changes in climate will be to raise 
the mean annual surface temperature, which will 
result in a deeper active layer with the permafrost 
table receding until an equilibrium with the new 
surface temperature regime is established. The base 
of the permafrost would also rise, though at a much 
slower rate. If the progressive warming were great 
enough, then the permafrost could eventually disap-
pear altogether, although many centuries could be 
required for a complete thaw. Of more immediate 
importance would be various rapid-onset effects in 
areas of thaw-sensitive permafrost (that for which 
the potential for thaw and subsidence are great, and 
which contain up to 80% volume of ice in the upper 
5-10 m). Global warming could cause the upper 
layers (0-5 m) to experience accelerated thawing, 
probably resulting in the disappearance of perma-
frost - on the order of decades. 
At the lower 
latitude margins of the permafrost regions, climatic 
warming will induce thickening of the active layer in 
areas that continue to be underlaid by permafrost. 
An example of the fairly rapid response of perma-
frost to climatic warming is the changes in the 
boundary of continuous/discontinuous permafrost in 
the Mackenzie Valley of several hundreds of kilo-
metres in the late 1800s-1940s due to a temperature 
rise of 3°C (MacKay, 1975). 
Most responsive to changes in climate would be 
those portions nearest the surface and potentially 
serious impacts are associated with the melting of 
shallow ground ice. If ice-rich permafrost degrades, 
widespread terrain disturbance and instability will be 
likely, including thaw settlement (up to several 
metres) and ponding of surface water (associated 
with thermokarst), slope failures (landslides) and 
increased soil creep. The associated thickening of 
the active layer (the layer of ground subject to an 
annual regime of freezing and thawing) would lead 
to a decrease in the stability of the surface. Even in 
7-10 
colder, continuous permafrost areas, increased 
ground temperatures could lead to similar conditions 
of terrain instability, although there may not be any 
major changes in areal distribution of the perma-
frost. 
In practical terms, increased terrain instability would 
lead to major concerns for the integrity of roads, 
airfields, dams, reservoirs and structural foundations 
located in affected areas. Thickening of the active 
layer would subject foundations to continuing defor-
mations as a result of thaw settlement. Decreases in 
the amount of ground ice present would lead to 
decreases in the mechanical strength of the associat-
ed soil as well as increases in permeability, both of 
which will have significant consequences for engi-
neering and natural processes. 
Slope failures and thermokarst features would have 
detrimental effects upon local vegetation and could 
lead to significant decreases in plant species num-
bers and loss of sensitive populations. In the long-
term, degradation of permafrost would allow the 
growth of deeper rooted, broadleaved species and 
the establishment of denser forests of coniferous 
species (Zoltai and Pettapiece, 1973). Over hun-
dreds or thousands of years, species better adapted 
to warmer air and ground temperatures will tend to 
advance to higher latitudes. As the extent of the 
tundra shrinks, northern species may become less 
abundant as others replace them, potentially leading 
to the loss of some of the more sensitive plant 
species and ecosystems. 
Changes in wildlife are generally dominated by many 
factors other than permafrost (see Working Group 
II Report, Chapter 3). Degradation of permafrost 
and its effects on vegetation and forests, however, 
will influence wildlife through disruption of the 
terrain, changes in surface hydrology and food 
availability. It is likely that these changes could both 
enhance and diminish species variability and num-
bers (Harington, 1986). For example, native arctic 
species such as muskox, caribou and lemmings might 
suffer due to changes in climate and to their ecol-
ogy. A northward shift of the forests would reduce 
tundra and barrenlands species. 
Changes in wet-
lands may affect nesting areas and migration routes 
for waterfowl and other birds, as well as populations 
of insects and other wildlife native to these regions 
through potential losses and gains (thermokarst) in 
wetland areas. The overall impact on wildlife due to 
the expected permafrost degradation would be dif-
ficult to assess, especially considering the transient 
nature and rate of the expected ecosystem changes 
and associated changes in food and habitat avail-
ability. 
The response of permafrost to a change in the 
surface temperature is a function of both the initial 
condition (ground temperature profile), thermal 
properties, and other factors (ie nature of the 
surface temperature disturbance, ice content and 
local heat flow). On an annual basis, heat trans-
ferred into the permafrost during the thaw season is 
removed during the freeze season and a stable 
permafrost table is established. A disturbance (such 
as a climatic warming) which introduces more 
energy during the yearly cycle without a compensa-
ting heat removal will cause the permafrost to reach 
a new equilibrium at a lower depth or to disappear 
entirely. 
As permafrost at todays depths is still 
adjusting to climates of past millennia, contemporary 
climatic changes may require thousands of years to 
alter the bottom of permafrost (Lunardini, 1981). 
The effects of climate on permafrost temperatures 
depends on the relationships between air tempera-
ture, ground surface temperature, and the ground 
thermal regime. Ground surface temperatures are 
determined by the interaction between climate and 
surface conditions, while ground temperatures 
respond to the surface climate according to the 
thermal properties of the ground and the energy 
flows, phase changes etc. An increase in summer 
precipitation and temperatures would greatly in-
crease ground surface temperatures (Goodwin et al., 
1984). Wide variations in ground thermal conditions 
can occur within small areas of uniform climate, 
although in areas of little vegetation or snow cover 
the linkage between air temperatures and ground 
temperatures is more direct. The range in ground 
thermal conditions typically observed between sites 
in close proximity can be equivalent climatically to 
several degrees of latitude. 
Climate warming will alter the annual temperature 
range in the ground, temperatures will warm least in 
that part of the year in which the ground experienc-
es significant phase change (spring and autumn). 
Increased soil temperatures as a result of climate 
warming will penetrate slowly in warm permafrost, 
since the temperature change requires the absorp-
tion of significant latent heat of fusion (the entire 
latent heat of fusion for the soil if it warms above 
zero). 
Changes in the buffering action of the surface layer 
(snow cover, vegetation, the organic layer and the 
mineral soil) will also be an important factor in 
determining the impact of climatic changes on 
permafrost. For example, where organic material is 
present, the permafrost would probably not degrade 
as quickly as at other sites, especially when com-
bined with the effects of a forest canopy. Suggested 
increases in the incidence and severity of forest fires 
7-11 
induced by climatic changes would accelerate perma-
frost decay. 
Any changes in the surface properties or hydrologic 
conditions (such as those brought about by eco-
system changes concomitant with a change in 
climate) will undoubtedly have an effect on microcli-
matic conditions and thus ground thermal condi-
tions. As a result, once permafrost degradation is 
initiated, thaw settlement can result in radical 
changes in the surface energy balance and the 
effectiveness of the buffer layer, accelerating further 
degradation. 
The removal, damage or compaction of surface 
vegetation, peat and soil associated with changes in 
land use or catastrophic events can alter the balance 
of surface energy transfers, especially the rate at 
which heat can enter the ground. In general, these 
changes will lead to an increase in the mean summer 
surface temperature accompanied by deeper thawing 
of the active layer (Brown, 1963; Mackay, 1970), 
though soils under a disturbed layer can also freeze 
more intensively in winter (Gavrilova, 1973, 1978, 
1981). Clearing and construction associated with the 
Norman Wells, Canada, pipeline right-of-way has 
caused a 2°C temperature increase in mean annual 
ground surface temperature compared to the adja-
cent undisturbed areas. Areas of sporadic perma-
frost have disappeared in northern Alberta, Canada, 
as a result of clearing, ploughing and planting. 
Changes in snow cover accumulation, as suggested 
under various climatic change scenarios or that may 
result from creation of barriers, structures and 
depressions, or changes in vegetation cover or wind 
patterns, can lead to significant warming or cooling 
of the ground. 
The erection of snow fences has 
been shown to have an immediate warming effect on 
ground 
temperatures, 
maintained 
even 
against 
natural cooling trends. Gavrilova (1973,1978,1981) 
has found that similar disturbances to the surface 
cover can have opposite effects on the ground 
thermal regime in different regions or with differing 
sub-surface materials. 
However, the effects of 
surface environmental changes are usually restricted 
in areal extent, whereas climatic change, in contrast, 
can affect extensive areas of permafrost. 
2.3.2.1 Changes in permafrost distribution 
Climatic oscillations have caused significant degra-
dation of the permafrost in the past (Danilov et al., 
1985). For example, the multilayered permafrost in 
West Siberia consists of a relict part near its bottom, 
relatively new permafrost at the top, and a thick 
unfrozen layer with positive temperatures near zero 
separating them. 
Canadian and Soviet work 
(MacKay, 1975; Baulin and Danilova, 1988) docu-
ment the fact that the areal extent of permafrost has 
changed over very long time periods. 
There is 
recent evidence for both aggradation and degrada-
tion of permafrost with studies showing the southern 
margins in retreat (Thie, 1974; Mackay, 1975; 
Hunter, 1988). 
The problem of predicting the influence of climatic 
change on the future distribution of permafrost can 
be treated by examining the relationships between 
permafrost and climatic parameters. 
An ideal 
method for predicting permafrost response would 
consider the effects of macroclimate, snow cover, 
soil thermal properties, substrate variability, vegeta-
tion, and terrain complexity. Although scale de-
pendencies may prevent a detailed depiction of the 
effects of parameters with strong local variations, 
their influence may still be discernible in a general-
ised manner (Nelson, 1986). 
Nelson and Outcalt (1987) suggest that a 'frost 
number' based on frost/thaw depth ratio may be 
applied to the general problem of permafrost 
distribution and climatic changes. Stuart (1985) has 
demonstrated the validity of this approach. 
This 
index considers several important variables that 
influence permafrost, and can be computed using 
climate data that are widely available. Moreover, 
the index can be displayed in the form of readily 
interprétable maps. 
The frost number uses freezing and thawing degree-
day sums, or alternatively, freezing and thawing 
depths in the soil to régionalise permafrost on the 
basis of its continuity or discontinuity. Snow density, 
thickness, and duration, as well as soil thermal 
properties, are considered in the more elaborate 
variant of the model. Although vegetation has not 
been treated in any regional application to date, its 
effects could be taken into account in a generalised 
fashion through use of n-factor data (Lunardini, 
1978). The limitations imposed by scale consider-
ations on the inclusion of such effects should be kept 
firmly in mind, however, particularly in light of the 
fact that the frost number was devised to show 
broad relations over areas of continental dimensions. 
The frost number is also somewhat limited in its 
applicability to short-term climatic changes, owing to 
its implicit assumption of stationarity. 
The frost number methodology was applied to the 
problem 
of examining permafrost distribution, 
subject to the limitation noted above, induced by 
climate warming for both permafrost regions and 
those with deep annual freezing within the territory 
of the USSR. For these purposes, the scenario of 
7-12 
regional climatic changes derived from palaeo-based 
reconstructions was used (Budyko and Izrael, 1987). 
The greatest changes in soil thermal regime are 
expected in the northern continental regions, where-
as the near-coastal regions changes are not expected 
to be as pronounced. Under a 2°C global warming 
scenario (by the 2020s), active-layer thickening of 
10% can be expected in continental situations 
exemplified by central Siberia, but only 5% in 
regions subject to oceanic influence (eg Kamchatka). 
Climatic changes will also increase the duration of 
summer, which may be very important for regions 
with deep seasonal freezing. Such changes may have 
a profound effect on enterprises such as agriculture. 
Estimates such as those given above are valid only 
for the near-surface layer, as only seasonal freezing 
and thawing are considered. Changes in the thermal 
regime deep in the permafrost can be differentiated 
into two groups vis-a-vis global warming: i) a rela-
tively fast reaction in regions where global warming 
fails to produce an inter-permafrost talik (a layer of 
thawed soil); and ii) slow thermal evolution when 
large amounts of heat are expended on phase 
changes in warm permafrost. 
These topics were 
addressed by Anisimov (1989a; 1989b), who em-
ployed a non-stationary model of heat and water 
transport in a stratified medium in conjunction with 
the climatic palaeo-based reconstruction method to 
estimate changes in the extent of permafrost in the 
territory of the USSR. The results of that study 
suggest up to a 10% areal reduction of the extent of 
continuous permafrost in the USSR over a 50-year 
period, given a 2°C temperature increase (Figure 
7.3). Talik is expected to form between the top of 
the permafrost and the bottom of the active layer 
with the thickness of this melted layer increasing 
with time. 
Palaeo-based reconstructions of the potential impact 
of the projected changes in climate have been 
developed using the Holocene climatic optimum 
(5000-6000 years bp) and the climatic optimum of 
the recent interglacial (125 000 years bp) as prob-
able analogues of warming by 1°C and 2°C respec-
tively (Velichko et al., 1990). This analysis suggests 
that significant changes can be expected in the areas 
from which the presence of permafrost retreat 
towards the poles. 
Permafrost degradation is 
expected with an associated increase in the thickness 
of the active layer. 
The southern contemporary 
boundary of permafrost could shift northward in 
those areas where the permafrost thickness is 
currently less than 25 m. 
The actual impacts of the projected changes in 
climate are complicated by the influence of an 
expected increase in snow cover in much of the 
current areas containing permafrost. Recent obser-
vations of the response of permafrost to increase in 
temperature and snow cover (northern portion of 
Western Siberia during the 1940s) suggest that the 
maximum potential response of the permafrost 
during the next 2-3 decades to the projected climatic 
change may be one-half of that suggested by equilib-
rium analyses due to the influence of increased snow 
cover. 
Under global warming of 1°C the most significant 
changes within the USSR are proposed for the 
southernmost portions of the permafrost with the 
boundary of the climatic zone which supports 
permafrost shifting northward and northeastward by 
200-300 km. This will significantly expand the area 
of relict permafrost in western Siberia and the 
Pechora Valley. The boundary of the climatic zone 
which supports continuous permafrost will also 
recede approximately the same distance; however, in 
those areas where the ground temperatures are 
currently -5°C to -7°C continuous permafrost will be 
preserved. 
The thickness of the active layer (in 
loamy soils) is expected to increase by no more than 
0.5 m. 
A 2°C global warming (projected for 2020s) will 
shift the southern boundary of the climatic zone 
which supports permafrost over most of Siberia 
north and north eastward by no less than 500-700 
km from its current position. 
In the north of 
Eastern Europe only relict permafrost will remain. 
The climatic zone supporting continuous permafrost 
will disappear from Western Siberia and will be 
restricted to north of the Arctic Circle in Eastern 
Siberia. The depth of the active layer (in loamy 
soils) is expected to increase by nearly 1 m (Figure 
7.4a). 
Within Canada under a 1°C and 2°C increase in 
global temperature, responses within permafrost 
similar in magnitude to those for the USSR are 
suggested (Velichko et al., 1990). The southern 
boundary of the climatic zone supporting permafrost 
is expected to move poleward by approximately 200 
km and 700 km, respectively. Expected increases in 
the depth of the active layer of 0.5 m and 1 m, 
respectively, are similar to those proposed for the 
USSR. Permafrost will be preserved at latitudes of 
66°-68° N where low mean ground temperatures of 
-5°C to -6°C will persist even under a global tem-
perature increase of 2°C (Figure 7.4b). 
Goodwin et al. (1984) examined the impacts of 3°C 
and 6°C increases in temperature at two locations 
within Alaska: Barrow (continuous permafrost) and 
Fairbanks (discontinuous permafrost). At Barrow, 
7-13 
primarily as a result of higher summer temperatures, 
the thickness of the active layer increased 41% and 
71% respectively. At Fairbanks, the depth of the 
active layer increased 11% and 24% respectively 
with winter temperature apparently playing the 
dominant roles. 
Osterkamp (1984a; 1984b) discussed quantitatively 
the potential impact of climatic changes on perma-
frost and the time scales involved for various regions 
of Alaska. Under a ground temperature increase of 
3°C, a general warming is expected to occur in the 
continuous permafrost zone causing the permafrost 
to thaw at its base until it thins and a new equilib-
rium is reached (several thousand years). In the 
case of both continuous and discontinuous perma-
frost, thawing from the top and base may be expect-
ed. 
Generally, permafrost with a thickness of 
approximately 25 m is expected to completely thaw 
over about 200 years. 
Projects developed in China (Ruqiu, 1990) suggest 
that over the next 10-20 years a 0.5 °C increase in 
mean global temperature would result in a 5% 
decrease of the permafrost and that a 2.0 °C increase 
would produce a 10-50% decrease. Under this latter 
scenario, major portions of the large and continuous 
areas of permafrost in China would no longer exist. 
A mean annual warming of 2°C may have significant 
effects on the extent of permafrost ice on Mexico's 
higher peaks (Menchaca and Byrne, 1990). Disap-
pearance of existing ice fields, although currently not 
larger than 5 km, would have important conse-
quences for the hydrology and ecology of local 
streams and perhaps local climatic conditions (eg 
cold air drainage). 
2.3.2.2 Implications of permafrost degradation 
Global warming could result in an increase in the 
depth of maximum thaw (permafrost table) and a 
general warming of some thickness of the perma-
frost, even if the permafrost itself does not thaw. 
However, if the global warming also disturbs the 
buffer layer (eg increase in snow depth or duration) 
the effect on the active layer may not be reliably 
predictable. 
The active layer is the zone where 
many damaging phenomena such as frost heave and 
thaw settlement are most significant. If the active 
layer increases in thickness, it will probably compro-
mise the foundation designs of existing engineering 
systems founded on permafrost and can cause 
mechanical disruption of roots. Active layer growth 
will also mean an increase in the temperature of the 
remaining permafrost with the attendant operational 
difficulties associated with the decreased strength of 
warm permafrost. 
A n increase in the temperature of frozen ground will 
result in changes in mechanical properties, in par-
ticular soil strength and deformation characteristics. 
This will adversely affect the stability of slopes. 
Natural processes such as slumping, solifluction, and 
icing (ie sheet of ice on the ground surface as the 
result of groundwater seepage) can all be expected 
to accelerate. In mountainous areas such as Tjan 
Shan and Pamir in Central Asia, the thawing of 
moraines and stone glaciers could destroy structures 
(eg communication towers) located on slopes. The 
adverse effects of such phenomena are abundantly in 
evidence and give ample warning of what to expect 
in the permafrost regions should the expected global 
warming occur. 
A critical feature of some permafrost is the presence 
of massive ice (which may be detected and mapped 
using ground probing radar). 
When melted, the 
areas which have these deposits could experience 
land subsidence, shoreline retreat, and lake forma-
tion, directly related to the amount of ground ice 
and its thaw rate (Schur, 1974; Grigorian et al., 
1984). The failure of ice-rich riverbanks and slopes 
(Lawson, 1983) would be accelerated by general 
permafrost degradation. Although the interaction 
between permafrost and bank erosion is not well 
understood, it seems likely that in the short term 
thawing permafrost would aggravate streambank 
erosion. 
In the long term this erosion will not be 
significant in areas where the permafrost has disap-
peared. 
Soil erosion can be acute when the soil is finely 
textured and there are high quantities of melting 
ground ice (Linell and Tedrow, 1981). Where slopes 
are steep, solifluction and mass-wasting can be very 
significant erosion mechanisms. Degrading perma-
frost in ice-rich areas will increase natural erosion. 
In regions where the top of the permafrost (perma-
frost table) is lowered as a result of thawing, avail-
able soil moisture may eventually be decreased. In 
some areas, water is kept near the surface by a 
relatively impermeable layer of ice provided by the 
permafrost table. Existing vegetation can tap this 
moisture, with roots extending throughout the active 
layer. With the degradation of the permafrost, the 
permafrost table will retreat to lower depths in the 
soil or, may even disappear altogether. Water may 
no longer be trapped near the surface, reducing the 
amount of moisture available to the overlying 
vegetation. The forest (taiga) in Central Yakutia 
(Siberia), for example may become more desert-like 
if the permafrost table lowers. Serious drying could 
occur in areas of plateau permafrost in China, 
leading to a degradation of grassy marshland. In 
some portions of the plateau permafrost a desert-
7-14 
like low-temperature plateau area could develop and 
authors (Table 7.4) was adapted from the Potential 
existing pasture land areas could decrease. 
Gas Committee (1981). 
Permafrost is a product of climate, but it in turn 
influences climatic conditions through the heat and 
water balance near the surface, in air and in soils. 
Frozen soils absorb a great amount of heat during 
active layer development (thaw) in summer. Frozen 
soils also retain large amounts of moisture. Deep-
ening of the active layer and increase in soil tem-
perature will bring large volumes of water-bearing 
soils into the local water and energy balances in the 
short term. 
Increased evaporation may alter the 
areal, temporal aspects and types of cloud cover 
which could significantly effect the overall energy 
balance. 
2.3.3 
Gas hydrates and methane 
Gas hydrates can form in places where gas and 
water exist under high pressure and low tempera-
tures. In the case of permafrost, these conditions 
can exist within and beneath the permafrost and 
solid crystals of gas hydrates can be found. 
Al-
though gas hydrates were observed in Siberia in the 
early part of the 20th century, only in recent years 
has active interest been focused on whether they are 
widespread in permafrost regions. Because of their 
potential impact on climate warming it is important 
to consider where such deposits may exist and how 
they may be affected by the projected changes in 
climate. 
Evidence exists that degradation of permafrost as a 
result of the projected GHG-induced changes in 
climate will result in an increase in atmosphere. 
Degradation of permafrost will subject previously 
frozen biological material to rapid oxidation and 
large scale release of methane, and to a lesser extent 
CO; (Billings et al., 1982) into the atmosphere. In 
addition, significant quantities of methane within gas 
hydrates (Kvcnvoldcn, 1988) that arc trapped within 
and beneath permafrost will provide large amounts 
of this greenhouse gas to the atmosphere as degra-
dation proceeds. Of the various sources of methane 
on the earth, the most uncertain is that connected 
with gas-hydrate formations and their degradation. 
In the USSR, gas hydrates have been found in the 
Messoyakha gas field of western Siberia (Makogon 
ct al., 1972), Timan-Pcchora province, the eastern 
Siberia craton, and in the northeast and Kamchatka 
areas (Cherskiy ct al., 1985). 
In the North 
American Arctic, hydrates arc known in the 
Mackenzie Delta, the Sverdrup Basin, the Arctic 
Platform and the Arctic Islands (Judge, 1982), and 
in the North Slope of Alaska (Collett, 1983). A 
summary of the gas hydrate estimates of various 
Table 7.4 Estimates of methane hydrate resources within 
permafrost regions (adapted from Potential Gas Committee, 
1981) 
Volume 
mJ 
3.1 x 1015 
5-25 x 10'5 
7.6 x 10" 
3.1 x 10" 
Mass 
GT (10*g) 
OCEANIC 
1.7 x 103 
8.0 x 105 
4.1 x 10s 
CONTINENTAL 
1.7 x 10' 
Reference 
Mclver (1981) 
Trofimuk et al. 
(1977) 
Dobrynin and 
Koratajev (1981) 
Mclver (1981) 
5.7 x 10" 
3.4 x 10" 
3.1 x 10' 
1.8 x 104 
4.0 x 102 
Trofimuk et al. 
(1977) 
Dobrynin et al. 
(1981) 
MacDonald 
(1980) 
Estimates of annual methane release from hydrates 
over periods of several decades varies between 5 
Tg/year (Cicerone and Oremland, 1988) and 160 
Tg/year (Kvenvolden, 1988), the largest component 
in all cases being derived from areas of offshore 
permafrost. 
Hydrates contained in terrestrial 
permafrost are considered to be effectively isolated 
from warming, and would require centuries for 
temperature changes to affect them in any appreci-
able way. 
The contribution of methane derived from gas 
hydrates may lead to an additional 0.4°C increase in 
global temperature by the 2020s and 0.6-0.7°C by 
middle of the 21st century, when atmospheric 
methane concentrations are expected to be twice 
those in the pre-industrial period. There is reason 
to expect that the positive feedback between climate 
and methane hydrates in permafrost may be even 
stronger than this. Owing to photochemical reac-
tions between minor atmospheric constituents, an 
increase in the concentration of atmospheric me-
thane will cause an increase in its lifetime in the 
atmosphere, and the greenhouse effect produced by 
this gas could therefore be higher. 
The qualitative analysis presented above demon-
strates that hydrate-climate interactions will indeed 
7-15 
result in positive feedback and intensification of the 
greenhouse effect within the atmospheric system; 
owing to the many uncertainties and quantitative 
disagreements between authors, only a sign and an 
order of magnitude for this effect may be stated with 
confidence now. Further investigations are needed 
urgently to refine this. 
2.4 
Seasonally frozen ground 
Seasonally frozen ground occurs in those areas 
where the ground temperatures drop below 0°C only 
during some portion of the year (ie some fraction of 
the winter months). Frost penetrates the ground 
from the surface as the energy balance lowers 
ground surface temperatures to below freezing. The 
depth of frost penetration is controlled by several 
factors, primarily air temperature, the nature of the 
surface cover, water content in the soil and the 
thermal characteristics of the soil and snow cover. 
To a large extent, the physics associated with season-
ally frozen ground are analogous to aggradation and 
degradation of permafrost with the major difference 
being that, in the case of permafrost, the ice persists 
throughout the year. The role of the 'buffer' layer 
in the dynamics of the frozen ground, however, is 
similar. 
Global warming will affect the areal distribution of 
seasonally frozen ground and the depth of frost 
penetration. With warming and if other factors are 
essentially unchanged, the area experiencing season-
ally frozen ground will be reduced and, for those 
areas where the ground will still experience annual 
freezing, the depth of penetration will decrease. As 
in the case of permafrost, changes to the buffer layer 
(eg snow cover and vegetation) as a result of climat-
ic changes could influence the responses in some 
locations due to the net effect on the local surface 
energy budget. 
The impact of the projected changes in climate on 
frost penetration can be illustrated using empirical 
estimates based on degree days below 0°C. Calcula-
tions shows that for two locations in Canada, one a 
relatively cold location (Calgary, Alberta) and the 
other a more temperate location (Toronto, Ontario), 
frost penetration will be reduced significantly by 50¬
60% and 75-85% respectively as a result of an 
increase of 6°C in the mean annual air temperature 
(Brown, 1964; D O T , 1968). 
Regions experiencing seasonally frozen ground 
undergo many of the same detrimental effects noted 
for the permafrost zones and commonly support 
large populations, especially in North America. 
Reduction of the area experiencing seasonally frozen 
ground or in the depth of frost penetration would 
have significant positive ramifications especially for 
the agriculture and construction industry. 
3 
Socioeconomic consequences 
3.1 
Seasonal snow cover 
Despite the transient nature of seasonal snow cover, 
it plays an important role in the earth-atmosphere 
system both in a biophysical and a socioeconomic 
sense. Seasonal snow cover (along with mountain 
glaciers) is a vital water resource for irrigation, 
hydroelectric power generation, agriculture and 
potable water. There will be detectable changes in 
river flow regimes from the projected changes in 
snowfall and melt patterns. This would result in 
increased winter runoff in some regions owing to 
higher temperatures and a greater percentage of 
precipitation falling as rain. Less water would be 
available during the summer months in those regions 
which rely on snowmelt. These suggested changes 
could decrease the annual amplitude of river dis-
charges with water management benefiting as the 
demand for regulated storage decreases (Eriksson, 
1989). 
This change in runoff regime will have repercussions 
for hydroelectric power generation. Hydro projects 
such as those in eastern Canada at La Grande 
(Quebec) and Churchill Falls (Labrador) which fill 
their headponds from the snowmelt water accumu-
lated over the eight-month subarctic winter will be 
significantly affected by changes in snow cover and 
melt. Particularly sensitive are those areas for which 
snow melt supplies a major proportion of the water 
resources. 
This includes areas of the Alps and 
Carpathians of Western Europe, the Altai and Tjan-
Shan Mountains of Central Asia, the southern Andes 
in Argentina and Chile as well as in numerous parts 
of the Western Cordillera of the US, to cite a few 
examples. 
Computer simulations show desiccation of large 
areas of the mid-latitude agriculturally productive 
areas in the northern hemisphere (Schlesinger and 
Mitchell, 1985). This summer drying is, in part, due 
to the earlier spring melting of the seasonal snow-
pack. This has implications for many regions of the 
world adjacent to snow-rich mountain water supplies 
that recharge major rivers and groundwater reser-
voirs. 
For example the South Saskatchewan and 
North Saskatchewan Rivers in the Canadian Prairies 
maintain strong base flows even in drought years 
because their principal sources are in the Rocky 
Mountains. Similarly the Syr Dar'ya and the Amu 
Dar'ya Rivers passing through dry regions of the 
Central Asian republics of the USSR to the Aral Sea 
7-16 
are fed from snow supplies in the Hindu Kush and 
neighbouring mountain systems. 
As a consequence of projected changes in snow 
cover in New Zealand, the seasonal flow of rivers 
would change markedly, with major ones like the 
Clutha and Waitaki having 40% more flow in winter 
and 13% less flow in summer, although the latter 
could be further augmented by meltwater from 
diminishing glaciers. Annual runoff could increase 
by 14%. 
On smaller mountain streams, vital for 
local irrigation, the lower snow storage will probably 
lead to decreased summer flows when some will dry 
up. 
Survival of over-wintering agricultural crops such as 
alfalfa, winter wheat and perennial forage legumes 
in cold climates is linked to whether or not a persis-
tent snow cover exists during the winter months. 
Periods with warm temperatures and rainfall which 
melt existing snow cover and result in a dehardening 
of over-wintering crops commonly result in signifi-
cant losses (up to 30-40% on average for forage 
legumes and winter cereals in the Canadian Mari-
time Provinces, Suzuki, 1989). 
Changes in the 
frequency of these warm air intrusions would place 
these crops in a vulnerable position should the 
temperatures 
subsequently 
drop 
quickly below 
freezing. In addition, because of the bare ground 
with a freeze-thaw cycle, soil heaving and soil 
cracking could be extensive, jeopardising tap root 
crops such as alfalfa and exposing underground 
tissue. 
Seasonal snow cover is vital for winter tourism and 
recreation. In southern Quebec, Canada, it has been 
estimated that as a result of the GHG-induced 
climatic changes the number of days suitable for 
skiing would decrease by half or more, representing 
losses of tens of millions of dollars annually to the 
economy. The situation in the south Georgian Bay 
area of Ontario could be worse with the virtual 
elimination of a $50 million annual downhill ski 
industry with impacts on associated suppliers. 
Of particular concern to winter tourism is the 
economic consequences of a change in the seasonal 
distribution of snow cover. Should the start of the 
snow cover season be delayed until late December 
or January, winter tourism (eg skiing industry) would 
lose one of its most profitable periods (ie Christmas 
and New Year). 
Tourism will be both positively and negatively 
effected by suggested changes in snow cover (Chinn, 
1989). Less spectacular glacial and winter scenery 
may decrease the number of tourists; however, a 
more agreeable climate and easier access may 
encourage touring and hiking activities as the envi-
ronment would be less demanding. 
Changes in seasonal snow cover will have repercus-
sions with respect to snow removal costs and vehicu-
lar accidents. 
At Toronto, Ontario (Canada), a 
comparison was made between 1981-82, a near 
normal snowfall winter, and the succeeding year 
1982-83 which received 52% of normal snowfall 
(Rowe, 1984). Snow removal costs on roads, at the 
airport and at public buildings were reduced to near 
60% during the more open winter. Costs of vehicle 
accidents attributed to weather were reduced to 55% 
of that incurred during the snowy winter. 
Avalanche activity is one type of catastrophic event 
that may be affected as a result of climatic changes 
and potential changes in snow pack quantity and 
quality. Avalanche control is an expensive proposi-
tion, although justifiable based on the costs associat-
ed with lack of control. 
The fact that avalanches are also influenced by 
terrain and weather conditions adds complexity to 
the relationship between climate and avalanche 
activity. Data analysis of avalanches for the period 
1800 to 1985 does not show any temporal trends 
(Fohn, 1989). An analysis of the period from 1885 
to 1985 suggests that avalanche activity is associated 
with nine specific weather types. Projections of the 
frequency of these specific weather types under 
conditions of climate warming are required in order 
to assess effects on avalanche activity. 
Rogers' Pass in the Columbian Mountains of the 
Canadian Rockies averages approximately 38 major 
avalanches (more than 0.3 m of snow on the road) 
per winter. 
In addition to operational costs of 
monitoring and control (approximately $200,000 
annually in Banff National Park), these events can 
result in increased costs through clean-up related 
expenses and costs associated with re-routing or 
delays for transportation (road and railway). 
3.2 Glaciers and ice sheets 
In many parts of the world glacier runoff makes a 
significant contribution to the total water resource. 
Glaciers contain an enormous reserve of water 
equivalent to precipitation over the entire globe for 
about 60 years. Possible effects of climatic changes 
on availability of glacier runoff water should be 
taken into account in long-term water resource 
planning. The disappearance of 8.3 km
3 of water 
over the next 70 years as a result of glacial retreat in 
Austria (Kuhn, 1989) will contribute to the runoff of 
the Danube, Drau, and Rhine Rivers to the extent 
equivalent to only one 100 mm rainfall evenly spread 
7-17 
over the entire country, or little more than 1 
mm/year. 
For example, glacier retreat in the 
Susitna River basin - Alaska, where a major hydro-
electric faculty has been under consideration - has 
been large, and may increase as a result of climate 
warming. The availability of glacially derived water 
in the future needs to be considered. 
In New Zealand over 70% of the electricity is 
produced by hydroelectric generation (Fitzharris, 
1989). Under present conditions glaciers contribute 
to about 10% of the summertime flow in certain 
western rivers. Models indicate that a 3°C increase 
in mean annual temperature could result in a 10% 
increase in electricity production on an annual basis 
and would reduce water storage requirements. 
Changes in water management strategies would be 
required. 
The projected decrease in glacial coverage could 
increase the incidence of debris flows (Zimmermann 
and Haeberli, 1989). Uncovered debris masses on 
steep slopes have been exposed to erosive processes 
during the recent retreat of glaciers (Church and 
Ryder, 1972; Quilty, 1989). This debris has been 
responsible for the partial and complete burial of 
structures, traffic routes and vegetation and is 
commonly deposited in rivers obstructing their flows 
and increasing sediment loads. 
Increases in the 
amount of exposed debris are likely as glaciers 
retreat under the influence of projected climatic 
changes, thereby increasing the probability of debris 
flows. 
Research in Scandinavia suggests that projected 
temperature increases will cause enhanced glacier 
retreat and increased discharge into rivers which 
carry glacier meltwater (Karlen, 1989). 
Severe 
flooding of these river basins is not expected if the 
mean summer temperature increase is of the order 
of 1.6°C, however, if the mean summer temperature 
is increased by 5.5 °C over a relatively short period 
of time, heavy flooding could occur. 
3.3 
Permafrost 
Communities at high latitudes have adapted with 
varying degrees of success to the presence of perma-
frost. The effects of permafrost warming on these 
communities will depend on the relationships be-
tween the natural environment (including perma-
frost) and the various structures and facilities that 
make up the community. Although many anticipat-
ed impacts of permafrost degradation are negative 
(including the possible relocation of whole communi-
ties), positive impacts are also foreseen, especially in 
the long term after the near surface layers have 
achieved some measure of equilibrium with the 
climate. 
Construction on permafrost has been dealt with by 
building on its strengths and reducing its weakness-
es. 
Heated structures in permafrost are usually 
designed using one of four approaches: 
i) Disregard the thermal regime of underlying 
permafrost, and apply conventional techniques of 
temperate regions. This assumes that thawing of 
the permafrost will have no adverse effect on the 
structure. 
This is a risky design approach on 
thaw-unstable permafrost for all but small or 
short-lived structures. 
Where appropriate, this 
approach would be unaffected by climatic change. 
ii) Thaw permafrost before construction. 
This 
approach is expensive and not used widely, 
except in the mining industry in Alaska (Sanger, 
1969) and Russia (Bakakin and Zelenin, 1966). 
The procedure is limited to the discontinuous 
permafrost regions. It is possible that climatic 
warming may eventually lead to more wide-
spread use of this design technique. 
iii) Allow for thaw during the construction and 
operation of the structure. In the discontinuous 
permafrost zone where consolidation and thaw 
must be expected the permafrost may, under 
very special conditions be allowed to thaw 
during and after construction. 
The method 
should be used only where the foundation 
materials are thaw-stable or where expedient or 
short-term construction is involved. Generally, 
the design must allow for differential thaw and 
settlement. Although the Soviet Building Code 
(1960) lists the depth and rate of thaw allow-
able, the prediction of differential settlement is 
so unreliable that the entire procedure must be 
considered risky. Climatic warming would add 
new uncertainties. 
iv) Maintain the permafrost in a frozen state. One 
of the most common design techniques present-
ly used is to prevent thawing of the permafrost 
by maintaining the permafrost table and tem-
perature for the life of the structure. 
This 
technique, which is vital in continuous perma-
frost, is now widely used in Canada, USSR and 
the US. Climatic change would cause problems 
for those structures founded on permafrost 
which would not be sustained under a new 
climatic regime. 
Existing foundations designed on the principle that 
the ground remains frozen for the life of the struc-
ture will require modification. Pile foundations in 
7-18 
permafrost rely not only on the ground being frozen 
but the bearing capacity of individual piles is a direct 
function of the temperature of the frozen ground. 
Permafrost can lose more than half of its strength 
when warming close to the freezing point without 
thawing; actual thaw can reduce its bearing capacity 
to practically zero. Thickening of the active layer 
will mean an increase in the length of pile affected 
by seasonal frost action. Thus, any changes that can 
produce a warming of the permafrost can have a 
significant effect on such piles, within the life span of 
the structure. Structures will have to be redesigned 
to accommodate such warming where possible, or 
resort to refrigeration systems to maintain freezing 
temperatures. 
Permafrost warming or degradation, increased depth 
of seasonal freezing and thawing and associated 
increases 
in 
frost 
heave 
forces 
(Esch 
and 
Osterkamp, 1990) will result in an increase in the 
maintenance requirements of facilities founded on 
permafrost. 
When maintenance costs become 
excessive it may be necessary to retrofit existing 
facilities for economic reasons. 
Such remedial 
measures could include presently available methods 
such as supplemental freezing of the foundation 
materials, stiffening or replacement of the support-
ing structure, adding earth materials, insulating 
materials etc. 
Each type of facility will require 
retrofitting schemes tailored to preserve its function. 
Retrofitting and maintenance programs will require 
the use of existing techniques and the development 
of new maintenance methods. 
Bridges, buildings and utilities founded in thaw-
sensitive permafrost would experience an increased 
rate of settlement with any increase in permafrost 
temperature, due primarily to the creep of the 
frozen soils. The rates would be greatest in fine 
grained (silt or clay) ice-rich soils. 
Facilities on 
thaw-stable materials would be affected minimally by 
a rise in temperature. However, many structures are 
located on ice-rich permafrost soils and most utility 
lines (water, sewer, steam etc) traverse ice-rich soils 
and even ice wedges. The thawing of this perma-
frost would result in large total and differential 
settlements. 
Even minor settlement can render 
doors, windows and other structural features essen-
tially useless. Differential settlements would cause 
large internal stresses in the structure which could 
result in large distortions or even collapse. Utility 
lines could rupture where large differential settle-
ments occur. These lines are particularly vulnerable 
where they enter or approach a structure undergoing 
significant settlement or where they traverse thaw-
sensitive slopes. Thawing sensitive permafrost slopes 
could break portions of the lines away from portions 
founded on the stable soils or bedrock. 
Monitoring programs will be needed in order to 
avert property damage, possible loss of life, and 
environmental degradation. 
Observations of soil 
temperature as well as of the movements of the 
structure and the surrounding earth would be 
required. The results of the observational program 
should provide guidance for instituting remedial 
measures that would minimise damage and avoid 
loss of life. 
Monitoring of sensitive structures during the period 
of transition from permafrost to non-permafrost or 
for those structures not designed to adapt to degra-
dation of the permafrost as a result of climatic 
changes will be expensive. For example, improper 
installation of wooden piles for a building in Fort 
Franklin, Northwest Territories in Canada (1985) 
necessitated introduction of a monthly monitoring 
program, which cost $120,000 over a two-year 
period. 
Existing water-retaining structures founded on 
permafrost and subjected to an increase in tempera-
ture will suffer two serious consequences. First, the 
risk of water seepage through the foundation will be 
increased due to thaw in the foundation (as a result 
of the altered heat balance between the permafrost 
and the reservoir water), allowing seepage beneath 
the dam. Heat transported by the flowing water will 
accelerate thaw, exacerbating the seepage problem. 
Loss of water can have serious economic conse-
quences where the water is being stored for human 
consumption or for use in industrial processes. 
Second, if the foundation materials are thaw sensi-
tive, a catastrophic failure could occur owing to the 
reduction in strength when the frozen materials are 
thawed. The failure of dams retaining water could 
result in the loss of life and property downstream in 
addition to the economic loss of the dam and 
reservoir. To guard against the failure of a dam, 
extensive monitoring of dam and ground tempera-
tures will be required, as well as measurements of 
seepage and ground movements. The natural earth 
slopes surrounding the reservoir would require 
monitoring for movement and temperature changes 
as well. 
Current mining projects in areas of thaw-stable 
permafrost would be unaffected by permafrost 
degradation. Mines in thaw-sensitive areas, such as 
the Polaris mine near Resolute (Canada) have been 
designed to take advantage of the ice-rich perma-
frost (Giegerich, 1988), and degradation could create 
major problems there. In the Svalbard, Norway area 
there are currently no water problems in the mines 
due to the depth of the permafrost (200-300 m), 
although there is water under the glaciers (taliks) 
(Liest0l, 1976). 
7-19 
Mines such as Red Dog in Alaska, developed in ice-
rich and warm permafrost regions, experience 
significant engineering problems related to stability 
and leaching (Giegerich, 1988). Permafrost degra-
dation could only increase these problems over the 
short term. In the Isfjorden, Norway area, increased 
temperatures may affect the permafrost and create 
problems for mining only in the long term as thaw-
ing would take more than 100 years. In general, 
though, mining tends to occur in dry permafrost 
regions, and the melting of ground ice would not be 
significant (McKay and Baker, 1986). The release of 
methane from thawing permafrost could possibly be 
a health and safety hazard due to its poisonous and 
explosive nature. 
Several changes are predictable as climatic changes 
influence the frozen ground in and around mine 
sites. The first change, while not a change in per-
mafrost, will have significant effects on any mine 
which depends upon winter roads for supplies and 
back haul of product or other bulky materials. The 
snow road season will be shortened and the cost 
effectiveness will diminish. 
Conversely, increased 
precipitation as snow will ease the building of winter 
roads in areas where snow is presently in short 
supply. The Lupin Mine of Echo Bay Mines meas-
ures its savings from using winter roads in the 
millions of dollars each year. 
The mining, blasting and handling characteristics of 
unfrozen ore are better than those of frozen ore. It 
is difficult to imagine, however, that climatic changes 
would have economically measurable effects when 
the duration of any one mine is considered and the 
more immediate thermal effects of shipping, blasting 
and moving ore are contemplated. 
Of greater significance is the potential stability of 
mining structures which may persist beyond the 
economic life of the mine. 
These include waste 
dumps, tailings dams and water diversion channels. 
The stability of any or all such structures could 
diminish with increasing ground temperatures 
particularly if coupled with increased precipitation 
and runoff during the spring freshet. 
Increased 
precipitation plus increased ground water from the 
thickened active layer would increase costs of water 
management in open pit mines. 
In addition, the 
tailings pond management costs would increase as 
additional water handling and management would be 
required. 
The complex subject of acid mine drainage in a 
permafrost environment could be affected by ther-
mal and precipitation changes. More water from 
precipitation or permafrost degradation or both 
would increase the probability of acid generation at 
acidic mine sites. 
To the extent that receiving 
waters would have increased flow from non-acidic 
environments, however, the changes could be neu-
tralised. 
Any increase in acidity would increase 
treatment costs. 
In summary, the changes to the socioeconomic 
setting for surface mining would be measurable in 
several different ways but whether the net change 
would be positive or negative would depend upon 
local conditions and the degree of thermal change at 
any one mining operation. 
Existing underground storage cavities and rooms in 
permafrost soils would be subject to accelerated 
closure due to creep of the frozen soil when warm-
ing occurs. 
If the temperature rises above the 
melting point of the permafrost, the underground 
openings would most likely collapse. The stability of 
the openings in the thawed soil would depend upon 
the type of soil (clay, silt, sand or gravel) and its 
thawed strength. The rate of closure of an opening 
in permafrost increases with temperature, moisture 
content (ice and unfrozen water in permafrost), the 
magnitude of the applied stress, and the dimensions 
of the unsupported opening. Local meat cellars in 
native villages may flood with increased precipitation 
and thaw. 
Solid waste disposed of in a sanitary landfill site on 
permafrost subsequently freezes, so that decomposi-
tion occurs only slowly over the summer periods. 
The near-impermeability of permafrost ensures the 
isolation of leachate from local groundwater. 
Permafrost degradation could create a health risk at 
existing waste-disposal sites due to leaching and 
subsequent contamination of groundwater where the 
groundwater is no longer isolated from leachate by 
permafrost. Most governments will find it necessary 
to prohibit the practice of land application of liquid 
waste and to require that previously disposed toxic 
wastes be removed from areas where permafrost is 
degrading. 
Some of the more important implications of changes 
in permafrost are found in transportation networks. 
The development of thermokarst ponds and the 
thawing of ice wedges and changes in patterned 
ground upon warming of permafrost would reduce 
the accessibility of many areas. 
There would be 
negative impacts on many existing road and railroad 
networks and airstrips. 
In addition, permafrost 
terrain is particularly sensitive to vehicular traffic, 
which can alter the surface and may induce thermo-
karst features or alter vegetative growth (Richard 
and Brown, 1974). In the short term, the sensitivity 
of natural surfaces would probably increase. This 
7-20 
problem will eventually disappear in areas where 
permafrost degrades completely. 
Long linear structures such as highways, airfields, 
transmission lines and pipelines must deal with a 
variety of design and construction conditions in that 
they traverse nearly all types of permafrost and non-
permafrost conditions. An increase in the average 
annual temperature would cause the depth of 
seasonal thawing to increase to greater depths near 
these fadlities since much of the insulating vegeta-
tion has been removed from these areas during the 
construction of the facilities. 
In the areas where the soils consolidate upon thaw-
ing, transport facilities could experience uneven 
settlements, as well as lateral movements at loca-
tions where the facility traverses sloping terrain. 
Conditions would be aggravated where drainage 
systems are disrupted by earth movements. 
If the 
drainage system were left uncorrected, water could 
pond near the facility and also run uncontrolled in 
the vicinity causing erosion and increased subsidence 
near and within the facility. 
Pavements would 
undoubtedly be fractured and the traffic supporting 
surface could become rough enough to be unusable 
if uncorrected. The possible risk of pipeline rupture 
and the accompanying environmental degradation 
would be increased in areas where the pipeline 
depends upon permafrost for support. As a result, 
the amount of maintenance required to keep these 
types of facilities operational would increase signifi-
cantly. In many locations where thaw-sensitive soil 
is traversed it may be necessary to relocate airfields, 
highways and pipelines. In the case of either a hot 
or a chilled pipeline, it may be necessary to change 
operational procedures. 
Some examples of the costs associated with repair 
and retrofitting of these types of structures are 
indicated by the following. 
i) Electrical power transmission line extending 900 
km from Saskatchewan to Nelson River area 
through the discontinuous permafrost zone south 
of Winnipeg, Manitoba in Canada. By 1974 the 
effects of frost action had necessitated repairs to 
the foundations of transmission towers totalling $2 
million (1974). Power outages on the line im-
posed another $20,000 an hour and had an im-
mense economic and social impact on corporate 
and domestic consumers. 
ii) 
An unusually warm summer in 1989 caused 
major thaw settlement of the portion of the 
Deadhorse, Alaska, runway. Costs for remedial 
work on the runway is estimated to reach 
$440,000 and costs to rebuild the runway to 
overcome current thaw settlement problems is 
estimated at $6-8 million. 
iii) Maintenance for roads on unstable ice-rich 
permafrost costs about $5000/year/mile more 
than roads on stable ground. 
iv) The Northwest Territories in Canada has a total 
of 2000 km of all season roads and another 
2000 km of winter roads and plans exist to build 
another 2000 km of all season roads. Construc-
tion 
costs 
are 
estimated 
at 
$200,000 
to 
$300,000/km within the Mackenzie Lowland 
Area and $450,000 to $600,000 in the Precam-
brian Shield Area. It is estimated that design-
ing to include the effects of the projected 
climatic changes will double these costs. 
v) 
Alaska has 2300 miles of road of which 60% 
are in relatively warm discontinuous permafrost 
terrain. In recent years, 98 miles of highway 
have had chronic permafrost thaw settlement 
problems requiring frequent 
patching and 
levelling efforts while an estimated 340 addi-
tional miles will require eventual reconstruction 
to re-level sags, dips and spreading cracks at a 
cost of $150,000 to $200,000/mile. Repairs to 
100 m of the Dempster Highway, Northwest 
Territories, where a large ice wedge thawed and 
a truck fell into the hole, killing the driver, cost 
$100,000 in engineering studies and $150,000 in 
repair work. 
At present there is very little agriculture in northern 
high latitudes, although farming can be of significant 
local importance. The controlling factors on agricul-
ture are many, and include climate and soil proper-
ties. 
Soil temperatures are critical, and summer 
values of less than 8-ll°C prohibit agricultural 
crops. 
Much of the heat entering the ground in 
permafrost is required for thawing, thus keeping 
ground temperatures low. Linell and Tedrow (1981) 
conclude that agriculture on permafrost is usually 
not feasible, with the exception of greenhouse- or 
livestock-based agriculture. Agricultural prospects 
are limited for a variety of reasons, of which perma-
frost is only one and not the most significant. 
Studies reported by Dinkel (1984) suggest, however, 
that in some areas only slight increases in air tem-
perature would result in greatly improved crop 
potential at the latitudes of Alaska. 
Warming permafrost would benefit crop develop-
ment by increasing active layer thickness and water 
availability, although degrading permafrost in ice-
rich areas will probably increase natural erosion. 
Permafrost recession below the active layer would 
eventually allow summer active layer temperatures 
7-21 
to rise more than at present, but reduce moisture 
availability. Warmer soil temperatures would extend 
the crop growing season. 
Thermokarst features are favourable for crops in 
moisture-deficient environments. These depressions 
tend to have a more favourable moisture regime for 
crop growth than higher areas, in part because they 
tend to accumulate runoff. The melting ground ice 
creating the depression could act as a water resource 
for the crops. 
Thermokarst features are used to 
agricultural advantage, especially in Siberia and the 
Far East (Linell and Tedrow, 1981). 
Hunting and trapping are a valuable food source for 
local northern communities, as well as a source of 
income. In 1982-83 they provided almost $3 million 
of income to the Northwest Territories (McKay and 
Baker, 1986). 
Hunting and trapping as well as 
forestry and agriculture would tend to be enhanced 
as permafrost degrades or disappears. 
3.4 
Seasonally frozen ground 
Large portions of the world's population live in 
areas which experience seasonal frost. Decreases in 
the extent of areas experiencing seasonally frozen 
ground, and in the depth to which it penetrates, will 
be beneficial as costs of construction and mainte-
nance of structures and the area experiencing frost 
heave and related crop damage are reduced. 
Within the province of Ontario, Canada highways 
which experience seasonally frozen ground normally 
are repaired within 10 years of construction due to 
damages resulting from frost heave. The cost of this 
repair is estimated at $5000 -$10,000/km. 
4 Future deliberations 
Projected 
changes 
in 
climate 
will 
alter 
the 
distribution of seasonal snow cover, ice and perma-
frost. On a global scale, the areal extent of seasonal 
snow cover and permafrost will decrease as tempera-
tures warm. Snow will move to higher latitudes and 
elevations and existing permafrost melting and 
boundaries retreating towards the poles. The global 
distribution of glaciers and ice sheets is also project-
ed to decrease, however, their responses are compli-
cated by projected increases in snowfall in some 
areas (eg over Greenland and Antarctica) which 
could contribute to the growth of some glacier and 
ice sheets. 
Secular climatic trends are clearly 
reserved in mass and temperature changes of glaci-
ers and permafrost, which is mainly due to the 
slowness of heat diffusion and the retarding effect of 
latent heat exchange. 
Therefore, the analysis of 
permafrost temperature as a function of depth 
appears to yield a temporally integrated record of 
air temperature changes in the past. 
The uncertainties in our understanding of the 
dynamics of seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
are large. 
Our knowledge of snow accumulation 
rates, ice-shelf bottom melting rates and calving 
rates in Antarctica is significantly limited. Similarly, 
we have a poor knowledge of the ablation rates in 
Greenland and, even worse, calving rates there. 
Thus, we cannot say how these ice sheets will react 
until we know more about their basic dynamics. 
Systematic monitoring of climatic and seasonal snow 
cover, ice and permafrost conditions at a regional 
scale is required to identify trends, to provide data 
necessary to increase our understanding of climate 
relationships and to assist in defining likely respons-
es to changes in those conditions. Such data could 
be used to develop, refine and verify models of those 
relationships, and would also extend our knowledge 
of current distributions of seasonal snow cover, ice 
and permafrost and their dynamics. 
Uncertainty exists on how proposed global changes 
will be reflected at the regional and local levels. 
This uncertainty stems in part from the lack of 
knowledge of climatic changes at these scales. 
Current generations of G C M s are not able to 
provide sufficient detail on how regional and local 
climates will change as a result of the projected 
global changes. The fact that precipitation changes 
are also uncertain even at the global scale increases 
the uncertainty associated with defining likely im-
pacts. Palaeo-based reconstructions do not provide 
further refinement as the uncertainty associated with 
derived temperature and precipitation changes are at 
least as large as those associated with computer-
generated scenarios. 
Contributing to the uncertainty in the responses of 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost is the 
relative limited understanding of their sensitivities 
and behaviour in relationship to climate and climatic 
changes. Furthermore, other influential factors such 
as vegetation and human activity are also sensitive to 
climatic changes. Therefore, a better understanding 
of the response of seasonal snow cover, ice and 
permafrost to climatic changes requires a compre-
hensive modelling approach. 
Socioeconomic consequences of these impacts will 
be significant for those regions which depend on 
snow and ice for water resources, and their social 
and economic welfare (eg recreation and tourist 
industry). 
Proposed implications of permafrost 
degradation will adversely affect structures and 
facilities which have been designed assuming con-
7-22 
tinuation of current permafrost conditions for their 
structural support and integrity. Response strategies 
to adapt to these changes which could include 
abandonment have both social and economic costs 
associated with them. 
Implications of changes in 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost for eco-
system health and structure, and terrain characterist-
ics could also be significant. 
Understanding the socioeconomic consequences of 
proposed impacts on seasonal snow cover, ice and 
permafrost is in its infancy. 
In most cases the 
studies have not included a comprehensive approach 
and have not integrated appropriate representatives 
of sociological and economics communities. Con-
tinuing to limit the scope of these types of studies 
will limit our understanding of the full range of 
socioeconomic consequences. 
Of particular importance in defining socioeconomic 
consequences is understanding how projected chan-
ges in seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost could 
affect existing structures and how they could be 
modified to allow them to adapt to the proposed 
changes. 
In some cases, existing structures and 
facilities may have to be dismantled and new ones 
constructed whereas in others various degrees of 
retrofitting could be necessary. 
Retrofitting costs 
will need to be assessed and taken into consideration 
in construction costs for those structures and facili-
ties that could experience a change during their 
lifetime. 
New design and construction standards 
that consider the proposed impacts of climatic 
changes and associated risks will need to be devel-
oped for structures and facilities that rely on, or are 
affected by, seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost 
(eg hydroelectric dams, pipelines, urban infrastruc-
ture etc). 
Seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost are ideally 
suited for early detection of the effects on climatic 
changes. 
Despite the complicated nature of their 
responses, monitoring their behaviour could provide 
an effective indicator of climatic changes. 
Increasing our understanding of the dynamics of 
seasonal snow cover, ice and permafrost, the factors 
that control them and the impacts of climatic chan-
ges and associated socioeconomic consequences are 
of upmost importance. 
Activities that should be 
undertaken to promote this include: 
• Accurate projections of climatic changes, including 
seasonal effects, are required on a regional level. 
These are needed to assess the timing, duration, 
severity of climatic changes and the associated 
risks. 
• Establishment or enhancement of integrated, 
systematic observation programs at the regional 
and local level and with cooperation internation-
ally. These observation programs should be as 
comprehensive as possible and include coincident 
climatic and other (eg biological, pedological, 
geological etc) observations as required. Com-
mensurate with these programs, is the need to 
promote research on the use of more efficient 
ground-based systems and remote sensing tech-
nologies (eg satellite measurements, laser altim-
etry, seismic technologies and ground-probing 
radar) and the interpretation of the data. 
• In the case of permafrost, ground temperatures 
throughout the permafrost layer over long time 
periods and that are spatially representative are 
required to provide information on regional 
variations in permafrost responses to warming 
climate. An international network of deep (mini-
mum of 100-200 m but preferably 1-2 km) bore-
holes on north-south transects should be estab-
lished. 
The occurrence and distribution of gas 
hydrates found in and beneath permafrost need to 
be assessed to ascertain potential methane releas-
es. 
• A globally representative network of glacial and 
associated climatic observations for glaciers should 
be established and maintained. Mountain glaciers 
are among the clearest and most easily recognis-
able indicators of changes in climate (a direct link 
to summer temperatures). 
They 'record' both 
yearly variations and long-term changes and are 
relatively undisturbed by the direct action of 
humans. Mass balance studies are being carried 
out in different climatic zones and representative 
regions, however, significant gaps in the observa-
tion network exist mainly in the Southern 
Hemisphere and in the developing countries. 
• Sensitive structures on permafrost such as pipe-
lines, tailings dams, water retaining dykes and 
toxic waste sites should be monitored to check on 
the influences of climatic changes on their integri-
ty. This information would assist in defining the 
risk of damage or catastrophic collapse of associ-
ated structures and, thus the need and type of 
remedial action necessary. 
• The areal distribution of seasonal snow cover, ice 
and permafrost need to mapped on meaningful 
temporal and spatial scales to permit comparisons 
of changes in distribution under various climatic 
change scenarios. This should be done at both 
regional and global scales to allow broad applica-
tion of the produced maps. In the case of perma-
frost, mapping criteria and internationally agreed 
7-23 
operational definitions need to be established. In 
alpine basins the total volume of water stored in 
the seasonal snow pack is not monitored but, 
rather, measurement of snow depth and density at 
index points is relied on. It is not obvious that 
these will remain representative with climatic 
warming, and better methods of monitoring the 
spatial distribution of seasonal snow cover need to 
be developed. 
• Regional and local analyses of the impacts of 
projected changes in climate on seasonal snow 
cover, ice and permafrost are required. These 
studies should be comprehensive including global-
ly representativeness, direct and secondary im-
pacts, feedback mechanisms, risk analyses, and 
associated socioeconomic consequences. 
These 
requirements can best be met through multi-
disciplinary impacts programs which include 
representatives from groups typically involved in 
impact studies along with botanists, economists, 
foresters, sociologists, zoologists etc. To mount 
these impact programs, national and international 
research funding agencies should be encouraged 
to support multidisciplinary impact studies. Inter-
national coordination of these impact studies is 
essential and could be encouraged through co-
operation between existing national and inter-
national agencies and associations. 
• Dynamic models of the behaviour of seasonal 
snow cover, ice and permafrost which can address 
the implications of climatic changes should be 
developed and refined, especially those capable of 
operating at regional scales. To produce such 
models the relationships between the temperature 
of the air, precipitation, cloud cover and the 
behaviour of seasonal snow cover, ice and perma-
frost need to be more precisely defined. The role 
of other factors such as terrain, vegetation cover, 
human disturbances and, in the case of perma-
frost, the surface organic layer require particular 
attention. 
• Research on appropriate design and construction 
standards for structures and facilities in areas 
which will experience changes in seasonal snow 
cover, ice and permafrost should be conducted. 
This includes defining standards for retrofitting 
and for new structures and facilities. This type of 
research could be undertaken by both private and 
public agencies and should be supported by 
appropriate funding agencies. 
• The projected changes in the seasonal snow cover, 
ice and permafrost due to climatic changes should 
not be cause for neither alarm nor complacency. 
Those charged with planning and design responsi-
bilities should be made aware of and sensitised to 
the probabilities of and quantitative uncertainties 
related to issues of climatic changes and proposed 
effects on seasonal snow cover, ice and perma-
frost. 
This necessitates the development and 
dissemination of appropriate education and 
information materials. Research results including 
impacts studies should also be made more readily 
available. 
Existing national and international 
agencies and associations should be encouraged to 
undertake this vital task. 
7-24 
Figure 7.2 Schematic representation of the interrelations in the atmosphere -'buffer layer'- permafrost 
system (Nieuwenhuijzen and Koster, 1989) 
•it- ill 
Hi 
c I 
c 
UJ I 
2 
I*. i 
IP 
« 
o c 
4 
II 
.2 
c 
I 
a> o ii 
< 
Jin 
go. 
1 
g l » 
\¥ 
_/ 
Ill 
II
s 
c 
s ? 
(0 
£ 
X 
>-? 
2 
T) 
O 
? 
E 
2 
>-"D 
O .C 
c 
a 
{ 
o 
•C 
Q. 
o> o 
c 
at 
8 
0) 1 
7-26 
Figure 7.3 Projected changes in the distribution of continuous permafrost in the USSR as a result of a 2°C 
increase in mean annual global temperature 
7-27 
Figure 7.4a Projected changes of permafrost in the USSR along a N-S transect at approximately 83-85° 
E longitude (Velichko et al., 1990) 
7-28 
Figure 7.4b Projected changes of permafrost in Canada along a N-S transect at approximately 
100° W longitude (Velichko et al., 1990) 
c o 
7-29 
References 
Arnbach, W. 1980, 'Ansteig der COj Konzentration in der 
Atmosphäre und Klimaanderung: 
Mögliche Auswirk-
ungen auf den Grönländischer Eisschild'. Wetter und 
Leben 32, pp. 135-142. 
Anisimov, O.A. 1989a, 'An assessment of permafrost 
sensitivity to changes in the global thermal regime of the 
land surface'. Meteorology and Hydrology 1989, pp. 
79-84. 
Anisimov, O.A. 1989b, 'Changing climate and permafrost 
distribution in the Soviet Arctic'. Physical Geography 10, 
pp. 285-293. 
Bakakin, V.P. and Zelenin, 1966, 'Excavation of frozen 
soils'. In: First International Conference on Permafrost. 
11-15 November, 1963, Lafayette, Indiana, National 
Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC, No. 1297, pp. 
395-400. 
Balobaev, V.T. 1985, 'Reconstructionof paleotemperatures 
of permafrost'. In: Development of the Permafrost Zones 
in Eurasia in Upper Cenozoic, G.E. Rozenbaum (ed.). 
Moscow, Nauka, pp. 129-136. 
Baulin, V.V. and Danilova, N.S. 1988, 'Dynamics of late 
quaternary permafrost in Siberia'. In: Late Quaternary 
Environments of the Soviet Union, A.A. Velichko (ed.). 
University of Minnesota Press, pp. 69-77. 
Billings, W.D., Luken, J.O., Mortensen, D.A. and 
Peterson, K . M . 1982, 'Arctic tundra: a source or sink 
for atmospheric carbon dioxide in a changing environ-
ment?' Oecologia 53, pp. 7-11. 
Bindschadler, R.A. 1990, 'SeaRise; a multi-disciplinary 
research initiative to predict rapid changes in global sea 
level caused by collapse of marine ice sheets'. Results 
of a workshop held in College Park, Maryland, 23-25 
January 1990; NASA Conference Publication, Greenbelt, 
Maryland. 
Braithwaite, R.J. and Olesen, O.B. 1984, 'Ice ablation in 
West Greenland in relation to air temperature and global 
radiation.' Zeitschrift far Gleitscherkunde und Glazial-
geologie Band 20, pp. 155-168. 
Brown, R.J.E. 1963, 'Influence of vegetation on perma-
frost'. 
In: 
Proceedings, Permafrost International 
Conference, Washington DC, NAS/NRC Publication 
1287, pp. 20-25. 
Brown, R.J.E. 1965, 'Some observations on the influence 
of climatic and terrain features on permafrost at Norman 
Wells, N.W.T.' Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 2, 
pp. 15-31. 
Brown, R.J.E. 1973, 'Influence of climatic and terrain 
factors on ground temperatures at three locations in the 
permafrost region of Canada'. In: Proceedings of the 
Second International Conferenceon Permafrost. Yakutsk, 
USSR. North American Contribution, Washington DC, 
National Academy of Sciences, pp. 27-34. 
Brown, R.J.E. 1978, Permafrost map of Canada. Plate 32, 
In: Hydrological Atlas of Canada, Ottawa: Dept. of 
Fisheries and Environment. 
Brown, R.J.E. 1978, 'Influence of climate and terrain on 
ground temperatures in the continuous permafrost zone 
of northern Manitoba and Keewatin District, Canada'. 
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on 
Permafrost, Edmonton, Alberta, Vol. 1, pp. 15-21. 
Brown, W.G. 1964, 'Difficulties associated with predicting 
depth of freeze or thaw'. 
Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal 1 (4), pp. 215-226. 
Budd, W.F. and Smith, I.N. 1985, The state of balance of 
the Antarctic Ice Sheet in Glaciers, Ice Sheets and Sea 
Level: Effect of a carbon induced climatic change. US 
Department of Energy Report. DOE/EV/60235-1, 172¬
177. 
Budyko, M.I. 1969, 'The effect of solar radiation vari-
ations on the climate of the Earth'. 
Tellus 21, pp. 
611-619. 
Budyko, M.I., Vinnikov, K.Ya, Drozdov, O.A. and 
Efimova, N.A. 1978, Predstoyashchiye izmeneniya 
klimata. [In Russian] 
Budyko, M.I. and Izrael, Yu.A. (eds) 1987', Anthropogenic 
Climate Change. 
Hydrometeoizdat, Leningrad. Pn 
Russian] 
Cherskiy, N.V., Tsarev, V.P. and Nikitia, S.P. 1985, 
'Investigation and prediction of conditions of accumula-
tions of gas resources in gas-hydrate pools.' Petroleum 
Geology 21, pp. 65-89. 
Chinn, T.J.H. 1989, New Zealand Climate Change 
Programme Impacts Working Group Report on Snow and 
Ice Submissions. 
Church, N. and Ryder, J.M. 1972, 'Paraglacial sedimenta-
tion: a consideration of fluvial processes conditioned by 
glaciation', Geological Society of America Bulletin 83, 
pp. 3059-3072. 
Cicerone, R.J. and Oremland, R.S. 1988, 'Biogeochemical 
aspects of atmospheric methane'. Global Biogeochemical 
Cycles 2, pp. 299-327. 
CLapperton, O.M. and Sugden, D.E. 1988, 'Holocene 
glacier fluctuations in South America and Antarctica'. 
Quaternary Science Reviews 7, pp. 185-198. 
Collett, T.S. 1983, 'Detection and evaluation of natural gas 
hydrates from well logs, Prudhoe Bay, Alaska', In: 
Permafrost Fourth International Conference Proceedings. 
July 17-22, 1983. National Academy Press, Washington 
DC, pp. 169-174. 
Danilov, I.D., Nedesheva, G.N. and Poliakova, E.I. 1985, 
Permafrost zones in northern West Siberia in Late 
Pleistocene and Holocene in Development of the Perma-
frost Zones in Eurasia 
in Upper Cenozoic, 
G.E. 
Rozenbaum (ed.). Moscow, Nauka, pp. 129-136. 
Department of Transport, Canada 1968, Frost and thaw 
penetration of soils at Canadian airports, Air Services 
Construction Engineering and Architectural Branch, 
Airport Development Report, CED-6-163, 101. 
Dinkel, D.H. 1984, 'Improved crop potential for northern 
latitudes to occur with small increases of aid and soil 
temperatures'. In: The potential effects of carbon dioxide-
induced climatic changes in Alaska, J.E. McBeath (ed.). 
School of Agriculture and land Resources Management, 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks, USA, Msc. Publ. 83-1, 
pp. 175-177. 
7-30 
Dobrynin, V . M . , Korotajev, V.P. and Plyuschev, D.V. 
1981, 'Gas hydrates: A possible long-term energy 
resource'. In: Long-term Energy Resources, R.F. Meyer 
and J.C. Olson (eds). Vol. 1, Pitman, Boston, pp. 727¬
729. 
Eriksson, E. 1989, 'Possible climatic effects on water 
balance and runoff regimes in the Nordic countries.' In: 
Landscape ecological impacts of climatic change on 
Fennoscandian region. E.A. Koster and M . M . Bower 
(eds). A Discussion Report prepared for the European 
Conference on Landscape Ecological impacts of Climatic 
Change held in Lunteren, The Netherlands, December, 
1989, pp. 41-46. 
Esch, D.C. and Osterkamp, T.E. 1990, 'Arctic and cold 
regions 
engineering: Climatic warming concerns'. 
Journal of Cold Regions Engineering 4, pp. 6-14. 
Fitzgibbon, J.E. 1981, 'Thawing of seasonally frozen 
ground in 
organic terrain in central Saskatchewan' 
Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 18, pp. 1492-6. 
Fitzharris, B.B. 1989, Impact of Climate Change on the 
Terrestrial Cryosphere in New Zealand. Summary, 
Department of Geography, University of Otago. 
Fohn, P.M. 1989: 'Climate Change, Snowcover, and 
Avalanches' In: Landscape Ecological Impact of Climatic 
Change on Alpine Regions, J. Rupke and M . M . Boer 
(eds). 
Discussion report prepared for the European 
Conference on Landscape Ecological Impact of Climatic 
Change held in Lunteren, The Netherlands, December 
1989, pp. 27-33. 
French, H.M. 1976, The Periglacial Environment. 
Longman. 309pp. 
Gavrilova, M.K. 1973, 'Climatic (heat balance) factors 
governing formation of permafrost in the Mongolian 
People's Republic'. In: USSR Contribution Permafrost 
Second International Conference, July 13-28, 1973. 
National Academy of Science, Washington, DC, 1978, 
pp. 35-37. 
Gavrilova, M.K. 1978, 'Classification of the relation 
between climate and permafrost and the permafrost-
climatic regions'. In: Third International Conference on 
permafrost, Edmonton, Alberta, 10-13 July, 1978, pp. 
13-29. 
Gavrilova, M.K. 1981, Recent climate and permafrost on 
continents. Novosibirsk, Nauka. 112pp. 
Giegerich, H.M. 1988, 'Arctic mining in permafrost'. 
Fifth International Permafrost Conference, Trondheim, 
Norway, pp. 1382-1387. 
Gold, L.W. 1967, 'Influence of surface conditions on 
ground temperature', Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 
4, pp. 199-208. 
Goodrich, L.E. 1982, 'The influence of snow cover on the 
ground thermal regime'. Canadian Geotechnical Journal 
19, pp. 421-432. 
Goodwin, C.W., Brown, J. B and Outcalt, S.I. 1984, 
'Potential responses of permafrost to climatic warming'. 
Proceedings of a Conference on the Potential Effects of 
Carbon Dioxide-Induced Climatic Change in Alaska, 
J.H. McBeath (ed.). Fairbanks, University of Alaska, 
Miscellaneous Paper No. 83-1, pp. 92-105. 
Goodwin, C.W. and Outcalt, S.I. 1975, 'The development 
of a computer model of the annual snow-soil thermal 
regime in Arctic tundra terrain'. In: Climate of the 
Arctic, G. Weller and S.A. Bowling (eds). Geophysical 
Institute, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Alaska, pp. 
227-229. 
Grigorian, S.S. and Krass, M.S. (eds) 1984, Problems of 
mechanics in glaciology and geocryology. Moscow, 
Universitet. 
Harington, C.R. 1986: 'The impact of changing climate on 
some vertebrates in the Canadian Arctic'. In: Proceed-
ings: Impact of Climatic Change on the Canadian Arctic, 
H. French (ed.), pp. 100-113. 
Hunter, J.A. 1988, 'Permafrost aggradation and degrada-
tion on Arctic coasts of North America'. In: Permafrost, 
5th International Conf. on Permafrost in Trondheim, 
Norway, August 1988. Vol. 3, pp. 27-34. 
Judge, A.S. 1973, 'Deep temperature observations in the 
Canadian North'. In: North American Contribution 
Permafrost Second International Conference July 13-28, 
1973. Yakutsk, USSR. National Academy of Sciences, 
Washington DC. 
Judge, A.S. 1982, Natural gas hydrates in Canada (in 
French). 
In: Proceedings of the Fourth Canadian 
Permafrost Conference, National Research Council of 
Canada, Ottawa, p. 21. 
Karlen, W. 1989, 'Glacier fluctuations in Scandinavia in 
relation to climatic change'. In: Landscape Ecological 
Impact of Climatic Change on Boreal/(Sub)Arclic Regions 
with Emphasis on Fennoscandia, E.A. Koster and M.M. 
Boers (eds). Discussion report prepared for the European 
Conference on Landscape Ecological Impact of Climat-
ic Change held in Lunteren, The Netherlands, December, 
1989, p. 40. 
Kotlyakov, V . M . and Grosswald, M.G.1981, 'Climatically 
and non-climatically induced glacier changes; a review of 
Soviet studies.' In: Sea Level, Ice and Climatic Change, 
proceedings of a Symposium held 7-8 December, 1979, 
during the 17th General Assembly of the International 
Union of Geodesy and Geophysics, IAHS Publication no 
131. 
Kryuchkov, V.V. 1978, 'The effect of permafrost on the 
northern tree line'. Second International Permafrost 
Conf., pp 136-138. 
Kudriavtsev, V.A. 1965, Temperature, thickness and 
discontinuity of permafrost. National Research Council of 
Canada, TT-1187 (technical translation). 
Kuhn, M. 1989, 'The effects of long-term warming on 
alpine snow and ice'. In: Landscape Ecological Impact of 
Climatic Change on Alpine Regions, J. Rupke and M.M. 
Boer (eds). Discussion report prepared for the European 
Conference on Landscape Ecological Impact of Climatic 
Change held in Lunteren, The Netherlands, December, 
1989, pp. 10-16. 
Kvenholden, K.A. 1988, 'Methane hydrates and global 
climate'. In: GlobalBiogeochemical Cycles 2 (September 
1988), pp. 221-229. 
Lachenbruch, A.H, Cladouhos, T.T. and Slatus, R.W. 
1988, 'Permafrost temperature and the changing climate'. 
In: Permafrost, Vol. 3, 5lh International Conference on 
Permafrost in Trondheim, Norway, August, 1988, pp. 
9-17. 
Lachenbruch, A.H. and Marshall, B.V. 1986, 'Changing 
climate: geothermal evidence from permafrost in the 
Alaskan arctic'. Science 234, pp. 689-696. 
Lawson, D.E. 1983, 'Erosion of perennially frozen stream-
banks'. CRREL Report 83-29, p. 17. 
7-31 
Liestsl, O. 1976, 'Pingos, spring and permafrost in 
Spitzbergen.' Norsk Polarinst. Aarbok 1975, pp. 7-29. 
Linell, K.A. andTedrow, J.C.F. 1981, Soil and Permafrost 
Surveys in the Arctic. Oxford University Press. New 
York. 279pp. 
Lunardini, V.J. 1981, Heat Transfer in Cold Climates. 
van Norstrand Reinhold Company, New York. 
Lunardini, V.J. 1978, 'Theory ofn-factors and correlation 
of data'. In: Permafrost Proceedings Third International 
Conference July 10-13, 1978. National Research Council 
of Canada, Ottawa. 
Luthin, J.N. and Guymon, G.L. 1974, 'Soil moisture-
vegetation-temperature relationships in central Alaska'. 
Journal of Hydrology 23, pp. 233-246. 
MacDonald, G.J. 1989, 'Climate impacts of methane 
clathraks'. In: Proceedings, Second North American 
Conference on Preparing for Clitttate Change: A Co-
operative Approach, J.C. Topping (ed.). The Climate 
Institute, Washington, DC, pp. 94-101. 
Mackay, J.R. 1970, 'Disturbances to the tundra and forest 
tundra environment of the western Arctic'. Canadian 
Geotechnical Journal 7, pp. 420-432. 
Mackay, J.R. 1975, 'The stability of permafrost and recent 
climatic change in the Mackenzie Valley'. In: Current 
Research, Part A, Geological Survey of Canada, Paper 
75-1A, pp. 173-176. 
Makogon, Y.F., Trebin, F.A., Trofimuk, A.A. Tsarev, 
V.P. and Cherskiy, N.V. 1972, 'Detection of a pool of 
natural gas in a solid (hydrated gas) state'. Doklady 
Academy of Sciences of the USSR, Earth Science 
Section, (English translation) 196, pp. 199-200. 
Manabe, S. and Wetherald, R.T. 1980, 'On the distribution 
of climate change resulting from an increase in carbon 
content of the atmosphere'. J. Atmos. Sci. 37 (1), pp. 
99-118. 
Mclver, R.D. 1981, 'Gas hydrates'. In: Long-term Energy 
Resources, R.F. Meyer and J.C. Olson (eds). Vol.1, 
Pitman, Boston, pp. 713-726. 
McKay, G.A. and Baker, W.M. 1986, 'Socio-economic 
implications of climate change in the Canadian arctic'. 
In: Proceedings of a Canadian Climate Program "Work-
shop, Geneva Park, Ontario, March 1986, Atmospheric 
Environment Service, 
Canadian Climate Centre, 
Downsview, Ontario, pp. 116-136. 
Melnikov, P.I. 1978, 'Basic results of research in the field 
of permafrost for the period 1963-1973 and the prospects 
for its development'. In: USSR Contributions, Second 
International Conference on Permafrost, Yatutsk, USSR. 
National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC 78¬
51896, pp. 687-697. 
Meier, M.F. 1984, 'Contribution of small glaciers to global 
sea level.' Science 226, pp. 1418-1421. 
Meier, M.F. 1990, 'Greenhouse Effect: reduced rise in sea 
level'. Nature 343, pp. 115-116. 
Menchaca, L. and Byme, R. 1990, The potential impact of 
greenhouse warming on the terrestrial ecosystems of 
Mexico (Personal communications). 
National Research Council, 1985, Glaciers, Ice Sheets, 
and Sea Level: Effect of a Carbon-induced Climatic 
Change. 
Report on a Workshop held in Seattle, 
Washington, 13-15 September 1984. National Academy 
Press, 330pp. 
National Research Council Canada, 1988, Glossary of 
Permafrost and Related Ground Ice Terms, NRC, 
Canada, Technical Memorandum No. 142, Ottawa, 
Canada. 
Nelson, F.E. 1986, 'Permafrost distribution in central 
Canada: 
applications of a climate-based predictive 
model'. Annals of the Association of American Geogra-
phers 76, pp. 550-569. 
Nelson, F.E. and Outcalt, S.I. 1987, 'A computational 
method for prediction and regionalization of permafrost'. 
Arctic and Alpine Research 19, pp. 279-288. 
Nieuwenhugzen, N. E. and Koster, E.A. 1989, 'Assessing 
the effects of climatic change on permafrost - a short 
literature survey'. In: European Conference on Land-
scape Ecological Impact of Climatic Change, Lunteren, 
the Netherlands, 3-7 December, 1989. 
Oerlemans, J. and van der Veen, C.J. 1984, Ice Sheets and 
Climate, D.Reidel Publishing Company, Dortrecht, The 
Netherlands. 
Osterkamp, T.E. 1984a, 'Potential impact of a warmer 
climate on permafrost in Alaska'. In: The Potential 
Effects of Carbon Dioxide-induced Climatic Changes in 
Alaska, J.H. McBeath (ed.). Proceedings of a 
Conference, 
University 
of 
Alaska-Fairbanks, 
Miscellaneous Publications 83-1, pp. 106-114. 
Osterkamp, T.E. 1984b, 'Response of Alaskan permafrost 
to climate'. Proceedings of the Fourth International 
Conference on Permafrost, Fairbanks, Alaska, Final 
proceedings volume, pp. 145-152. 
Osterkamp, T.E. and Lachenbruch, A.H. 1990, 'Thermal 
regions of permafrost in Alaska and predicted global 
warming'. Journal Cold Regions Engr 4 (1), pp. 38-42. 
Paterson, W.S.B. 1981, The Physics of Glaciers. 
Pergamon Press, Oxford. 
Potential Gas Committee, 1981, Potential supply of 
natural gas in the United States (as of December 31, 
1980). Colorado School of Mines, Golden. 
Quilty, P.G. 1989, 'Landslides: extent and economic 
significance'. In: Antarctica and the Subantarctic In 
Landslides: Extent and Economic Significance, Brabb 
and Harrod (eds). Balkema, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
Ricard, W.E. and Brown, J. 1974, 'Effects of vehicles on 
Arctic tundra'. Environmental Conservation 1 (1), pp. 
55-62. 
Riseborough, D.W. and Burns, C.R. 1988, 'Influence of 
an organic mat on the active layer.' 
In: Fifth 
International Conference on Permafrost, 2-5 August 
1988, Trondheim, Norway, Tapir Publishers. 
Rott, H. 1983, SAR data analysis for an Alpine test site. 
The European SAR-580 Experiment Investigators Pre-
liminary Report, Publ. JRC-ESA September, 1983, pp. 
1-14. 
Rouse, W.R., 1982: 'Microclimate of low arctic tundra and 
forest at Churchill, Manitoba,' In: Proceedings of the 
Fourth Canadian Conference on Permafrost, Calgary, 
Alberta; NRCC, Ottawa, Ontario, pp. 68-80. 
Rouse, W.R. 1984, 'Microclimate of Arctic tree line. 2: 
Soil microclimate of tundra and forest'. Water Resources 
Research 20 (1), pp. 67-73. 
Rowe, K. 1984, 'The costs and benefits of inclement winter 
weather'. In: Toronto, Canadian Climate Centre Report 
No.84-11, Downsview, Ontario, Canada. crypart2 p. 9. 
7-32 
Ruqiu, Ye 1990, An Assessment of the Impacts of Climate 
Change Caused by Human Activities on China's Environ-
ment. Report submitted to the IPCC Working Group II 
by the Chinese National Environmental Protection 
Agency. 
Sanger, F.J., 1969: Foundations of Structures in Cold 
Regions, U.S. Army, CRREL Monograph M111-C4, 91 
pp. 
Schlesinger, M.E. 1986, 'General circulation model 
simulations of carbon-induced equilibrium climate 
change'. In: Proceedings of a Canadian Climate Pro-
gram Workshop, Geneva Park, Ontario, March, 1986, 
Atmospheric Environment Service, Canadian Climate 
Centre, Downsview, Ontario, pp. 15-51. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and Mitchell, P.F.B. 1985, 'Model 
projections of the equilibrium climatic response to 
increased carbon dioxide'. In: Potential climatic effects 
of increasing carbon dioxide, DOE/ER-0237, United 
States Department of Energy, pp. 81-147. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and Mitchell, P.F.B. 1987, 'Climate 
model simulations of the equilibrium climate response of 
increased carbon'. Reviews of Geophysics 25 (4), pp. 
760-798. 
Schur, I.L. 1974, 'Causes of thermokarst origin'. In: 
Physical and Geological Processes in Freezing and 
Thawing Rocks, L.V. Chistotinov (ed.), Vol. 70, pp. 31¬
47. 
SeUmann, P.V. and Hopkins, D.M. 1984, 'Subsea perma-
frost distribution on the Alaskan shelf. In: Fourth 
International Conference on Permafrost, Fairbanks, 
Alaska, July 17-22, 1983. Final Proceedings, Washington 
DC. National Academy Press, pp. 75-82. 
Shubert, C. 1972, 'Geomorphology and glacier retreat in 
the Pico Bolwar area, Sierra Nevada de Merida, 
Venezuela'. Zeitschrifffilr Gletscherkunde und Glacial-
geologie, Bd 8, Heft 1-2, pp. 189-202. 
Smith, M.W. 1975, 'Microclimatic influences on ground 
temperatures 
and permafrost distribution, Mackenzie 
delta, Northwest Territories'. Canadian Journal of Earth 
Sciences 12, pp. 1421-1438. 
Soviet Building Code 1960. 
Stuart, A. 1985, The development of a spatial permafrost 
model for Northern Canada and its application to scen-
arios of climate change. 
KelResearch Corporation, 
Downsview, Ontario, Final Report to Atmospheric 
Environment Service, Contract # 02sE.K147-5-0313. 
Tarling, D. 1980, 'Gondwanaland revisited.' Nature 284 
(5761), pp. 15-16. 
Taylor, A.E. and A.S. Judge, 1984: 'Obtaining precise 
measurements in abandoned offshore petroleum explor-
ations wells.' In: Workshop on Permafrost, J. Brown, 
M.C. Mets and P. Hoekstra, (eds.). Special Report 85¬
5, US Army Cold Regions research and Engineering 
laboratory, Hanover, NH, pp. 95-99. 
Thie, J. 1974, 'Distribution and thawing of permafrost in 
the southern part of the discontinuous permafrost zone in 
Manitoba.' Arctic 27, pp. 189-200. 
Trofimuk, A.A., Cherskiy, N.V. and Tsarev, V.P. 1977, 
'The role of continental glaciation and hydrate formation 
on petroleum occurrence.' In: Future Supply of Nature-
Made Petroleum and Gas, Pergamon, New York. 
Velichko, A.A., Borisova, O.K. Zelikson, E.M. and 
Nechaev, V.P. 1990, An assessment of dynamics of 
natural geosystem in the forest and tundra zones under 
anthropogenic climatic change (Personal communica-
tions). 
Washburn, A.L. 1980a, Geocryology: A Survey of Peri-
glacial Processes and Environments, John Wiley and 
Sons, NY, 406pp. 
Washburn, A.L. 1980b. 'Permafrost features as evidence 
of climatic change'. Earth Sciences Review 15, pp. 
327-402. 
Williams, P.J. and Smith, M.W. 1989, The Frozen Earth: 
Fundamentals of Geocryology, Cambridge University 
Press. 
Woo, M-K. 1989, 'Consequences of climatic change for 
hydrology in permafrost zones'. Preprint Proceedings, 
Workshop on Climate Change and Permafrost: Signifi-
cance to Science and Engineering held in conjunction 
with the ASCE Fifth International Cold Regions Engi-
neering Specialty Conference, St. Paul Minnesota, pp 
51-54. 
Wood, W.A. 1970, 'Recent glacial fluctuations in the 
Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, Columbia', Geographical 
Review 60p, pp. 374-392. 
Youwu, Dongxin and Zhou, Guo 1983, 'Some features of 
permafrost in China'. In: 
Fourth International 
Conference Permafrost Proceedings July 17-22, 1983. 
National Academy Press, Washington DC, pp. 169-174. 
Zimmermann, M. and Haegerli, W. 1989, 'Climatic 
change and debris flow activity in high-mountain areas', 
J. Rupkeand M . M . Boer (eds), pp. 52-66. 
Zoltai, S.C. 1971, Southern limit of permafrost features in 
peat landforms, Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Geological 
Association of Canada, Special Paper #9, 305-310. 
Zoltai, S.C. and Pettapiece, W.W. 1973, Studies of 
Vegetation, Landform and Permafrost in the Mackenzie 
Valley: Terrain, Vegetation and Permafrost Relationships 
in the Northern Part 
of the Mackenzie Valley and 
Northern Yukon. Task Force on Northern Oil Develop-
ment, report no. 73-4. 105pp. 
7-33 
 
