Climate Change 1995 
Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Edited by 
James P. Bruce 
Hoesung Lee 
Erik F. Haites 
Canadian Climate Program Board 
Korea Energy Economics Institute 
Margaree Consultants Inc. 
Contribution of Working Group III to the Second Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
5 # CAMBRIDGE 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Published by die Press Syndicate of the University ol Cambridge 
The Pilt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 1RP 
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA 
10 Slumlord Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
(OIPCC 1996 
I irst published 1996 
Printed in the United States of America 
Library of Congress cataloging-in-publication data are available. 
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library. 
ISDN 0-521 -56051 -9 Hardback 
ISBN 0-521-56854-4 Paperback 
Also available from Cambridge University Press: 
Climate Change 1995 - The Science of Climate Change 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Editors J.J. Houghton, L.G. Meiro Filho, 
IS. A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg and K. Maskell. (ISBN 0-521-56433-6 Hardback; 
0-521-56436-0 Paperback) 
('Iimate Change 1995 - Impacts, Adaptations and Mitigation of Climate Change: 
Scientific-Technical Analyses 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Editors R.T. Watson, 
M.C. Zinyowera and R.H. Moss. (ISBN 0-521-56431-X Hardback; 
0-521-56437-9 Paperback) 
Contents 
Foreword 
vii 
Preface 
ix 
Summary for Policymakers 
1 
1 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
17 
2 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
53 
3 
Equity and Social Considerations 
79 
4 
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency 
125 
5 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
145 
6 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the 
Benefits of Control 
179 
7 
A Generic Assessment of Response Options 
225 
8 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
263 
9 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
297 
10 
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison 
of Approaches and Results 
367 
11 An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate 
Change 
397 
Appendix 1 Contributors to the IPCC WG HI Second Assessment Report 
441 
Appendix 2 Reviewers of the IPCC WG III Report 
444 
Foreword 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was 
jointly established by the World Meteorological Organization 
and the United Nations Environment Programme in 1988, in 
order to: (i) assess available scientific information on climate 
change, (ii) assess the environmental and socioeconomic 
impacts of climate change, and (iii) formulate response strate-
gies. The IPCC First Assessment Report was completed in 
August 1990 and served as the basis for negotiating the UN 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. The IPCC also 
completed its 1992 Supplement and Climate Change 1994: Ra-
diative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the 
IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios to assist the Convention process 
further. 
In 1992, the Panel reorganized its Working Groups II and 
III and committed itself to complete a Second Assessment in 
1995, not only updating the information on the same range of 
topics as in the First Assessment but also including the new 
subject area of technical issues related to the economic as-
pects of climate change. We applaud the IPCC for producing 
its Second Assessment Report (SAR) as scheduled. We are 
convinced that the SAR, like the earlier IPCC reports, will 
become a standard work of reference, widely used by policy-
makers, scientists, and other experts. 
This volume, which forms part of the SAR, has been pro-
duced by Working Group III of the IPCC and focuses on 
the socioeconomic aspects of climate change. It consists of 
eleven chapters covering the scope of the analysis, decision 
making under uncertainty, equity issues, intertemporal equity 
and discounting, applicability of cost and benefit assessments 
to climate change, social costs of climate change, response op-
tions, conceptual issues related to estimating mitigation costs, 
review of mitigation cost studies, integrated assessment of cli-
mate change, and an economic assessment of policy options 
to address climate change. 
As usual in the IPCC, success in producing this report has 
depended on the enthusiasm and cooperation of numerous 
busy economists and other experts worldwide. We are exceed-
ingly pleased to note here the very special efforts imple-
mented by the IPCC in ensuring the participation of experts 
from the developing and transitional economy countries in its 
activities, in particular in the writing, reviewing, and revising 
of its reports. The experts from the developed, developing, 
and transitional-economy countries have given of their time 
very generously, and governments have supported them in the 
enormous intellectual and physical effort required, often go-
ing substantially beyond reasonable demands of duty. Without 
such conscientious and professional involvement, the IPCC 
would be greatly impoverished. We express to all these ex-
perts, and the governments that supported them, our grateful 
and sincere appreciation for their commitment. 
We take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the fol-
lowing individuals for nurturing another IPCC report through 
to a successful completion: 
Prof. Bolin, the Chairman of the IPCC, for his able leader-
ship and skilful guidance of the IPCC; 
the Co-Chairs of Working Group III, Dr. James P. Bruce 
(Canada) and Dr. Hoesung Lee (Korea); 
the Vice Chairs of Working Group III, Dr. Richard Odingo 
(Kenya), Dr. Lorents Lorentsen (Norway), and his prede-
cessor Dr. Theodore Hanisch (Norway); 
Dr. Erik F. Haitcs, the Head of the Technical Support Unit 
of the Working Group and his staff, including Ms. Lori 
Lawson and Ms. Vanda Dreja as well as Mr. David Francis 
of Lanark House Communications, the technical editor, and 
Ms. Kim Massicotte of Carriage Hill Design, the graphic 
artist for the report; 
/// 
Mr. W.G.B. (Bill) Smith, who developed and, with the help 
of his colleagues from Environment Canada - Mr. Mike 
Malone and Mr. Ralph Home - implemented the system 
for collating review comments; 
Foreword 
and Dr. N. Sundararaman, the Secretary of the IPCC and 
his staff, including Mr. S. Tewunga, Mrs. R. Bourgeois, 
Ms. C. Ettori, and Ms. C. Tanikie. 
G O P . Obasi 
Secretary-General 
World Meteorological Organization 
Ms. E. Dowdeswell 
Executive Director 
United Nations Environment Programme 
Preface 
Responsibilities of Working Group III 
Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) was restructured in November 1992 to assess 
"cross-cutting economic and other issues related to climate 
change." The first Plenary Session of the Working Group was 
held in Montreal on 4-7 May, 1993. At this session, a pro-
posed plan for the Work Programme was developed and was 
subsequently approved with a few changes at the IPCC Ple-
nary Session in Geneva, 29-30 June, 1993. 
The Work Programme consisted of two parts: (1) an evalu-
ation of emission scenarios to be completed in time for inclu-
sion in the IPCC's 1994 Special Report to the Conference of 
the Parties (COP) to the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (FCCC), and (2) an assessment of the socioeconomic 
literature related to climate change for the Second Assessment 
Report. 
Working Group III was charged with taking into account a 
number of considerations, the first of which was: 
It will place the socio-economic perspectives of climate 
change in the context of sustainable development. In par-
ticular, and in accordance with the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change, the work of the Working Group will be 
comprehensive, cover all relevant sources, sinks and reser-
voirs of greenhouse gases and adaptation and comprise all 
economic sectors. 
The Working Group was also enjoined to assess available 
literature in these fields, to avoid policy judgements, and to 
recognize in its work the adopted Rio Declaration, Agenda 
'21 and, in particular, the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. 
The Working Group proceeded, after the May 1993 Ple-
nary, to seek government nominations of experts for writing 
teams to cover the scope of the two reports (1994 and 1995). 
IPCC has been fortunate in that countries nominated a number 
of prominent economists, distinguished social scientists, and 
other experts. This permitted the Working Group III bureau to 
form an outstanding set of writing teams. All writing teams in-
cluded at least one expert from a developing country and 
some teams had as many as three. 
To reach out and learn from an even broader community of 
experts in economics and the social sciences and to help cre-
ate awareness and participation in various regions, the Work-
ing Group sponsored four workshops, each with a topical and 
a regional component. These were: 
(1) 
Policy Instruments and their Implications/Asia and Pa-
cific-Tsukuba, Japan, 17-20 January, 1994. 
(2) 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Scenarios/Latin America 
and Caribbean - Fortaleza, Brazil, 7-8 April, 1994. 
(3) 
Top-Down and Bottom-Up Modelling: What Can We 
Learn from Each Approach/Central and Eastern Europe -
Milan, Italy, 27-29 April, 1994. 
(4) 
Equity and Social Considerations/Africa - Nairobi, 
Kenya, 18-22 July, 1994. 
Proceedings of Workshops 1 and 4 have been published as ad-
ditional contributions from Working Group III. 
Working Group III also contributed to the IPCC-wide 
workshop on Article 2 of the FCCC held in Fortaleza, Brazil, 
10-15 October, 1994. 
Evaluation of Emissions Scenarios 
A chapter entitled Evaluation of IS92 Emission Scenarios to-
gether with a Summary for Policymakers based on the chapter 
were published in IPCC's 1994 Special Report entitled Cli-
mate Change 1994. The Summary for Policymakers was ap-
proved and the underlying chapter was accepted by Plenary 
Sessions of the Working Group in Geneva 6-7 September, 
1994, and Nairobi, 7-9 November 1994. 
17// 
Foreword 
Mr. W.G.B. (Bill; Smith, who developed and, with the help 
of his colleagues from Environment Canada - Mr. Mike 
Malone and Mr. Ralph Home - implemented the system 
for collating review comments; 
and Dr. N. Sundararaman, the Secretary of the 1PCC and 
his staff, including Mr. S. Tewunga, Mrs. R. Bourgeois, 
Ms. C. Ettori, and Ms. C. Tanikie. 
G O P . Obasi 
Secretary-General 
World Meteorological Organization 
Ms. E. Dowdeswell 
Executive Director 
United Nations Environment Programme 
Preface 
Responsibilities of Working Group III 
Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) was restructured in November 1992 to assess 
"cross-cutting economic and other issues related to climate 
change." The first Plenary Session of the Working Group was 
held in Montreal on 4-7 May, 1993. At this session, a pro-
posed plan for the Work Programme was developed and was 
subsequently approved with a few changes at the IPCC Ple-
nary Session in Geneva, 29-30 June, 1993. 
The Work Programme consisted of two parts: (1) an evalu-
ation of emission scenarios to be completed in time for inclu-
sion in the IPCC's 1994 Special Report to the Conference of 
the Parties (COP) to the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (FCCC), and (2) an assessment of the socioeconomic 
literature related to climate change for the Second Assessment 
Report. 
Working Group III was charged with taking into account a 
number of considerations, the first of which was: 
It will place the socio-economic perspectives of climate 
change in the context of sustainable development. In par-
ticular, and in accordance with the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change, the work of the Working Group will be 
comprehensive, cover all relevant sources, sinks and reser-
voirs of greenhouse gases and adaptation and comprise all 
economic sectors. 
The Working Group was also enjoined to assess available 
literature in these fields, to avoid policy judgements, and to 
recognize in its work the adopted Rio Declaration. Agenda 
'21 and, in particular, the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. 
The Working Group proceeded, after the May 1993 Ple-
nary, to seek government nominations of experts for writing 
teams to cover the scope of the two reports (1994 and 1995). 
IPCC has been fortunate in that countries nominated a number 
of prominent economists, distinguished social scientists, and 
other experts. This permitted the Working Group III bureau to 
form an outstanding set of writing teams. All writing teams in-
cluded at least one expert from a developing country and 
some teams had as many as three. 
To reach out and learn from an even broader community of 
experts in economics and the social sciences and to help cre-
ate awareness and participation in various regions, the Work-
ing Group sponsored four workshops, each with a topical and 
a regional component. These were: 
(1) 
Policy Instruments and their Implications/Asia and Pa-
cific - Tsukuba, Japan, 17-20 January, 1994. 
(2) 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions Scenarios/Latin America 
and Caribbean - Fortaleza, Brazil, 7-8 April, 1994. 
(3) 
Top-Down and Bottom-Up Modelling: What Can We 
Learn from Each Approach/Central and Eastern Europe 
Milan, Italy, 27-29 April, 1994. 
(4) 
Equity and Social Considerations/Africa - Nairobi. 
Kenya, 18-22 July, 1994. 
Proceedings of Workshops 1 and 4 have been published as ad-
ditional contributions from Working Group III. 
Working Group III also contributed to the IPCC -wide 
workshop on Article 2 of the FCCC held in Fortaleza, Bra/il. 
10-15 October, 1994. 
Evaluation of Emissions Scenarios 
A chapter entitled Evaluation of IS92 Emission Scenarios to-
gether with a Summary for Policymakers based on the chapter 
were published in IPCC's 1994 Special Report entitled Cli-
mate Change 1994. The Summary for Policymakers was ap-
proved and the underlying chapter was accepted by Plcuan 
Sessions of the Working Group in Geneva 6-7 September. 
1994. and Nairobi. 7-9 November 1994. 
X 
Preface 
The evaluation of emission scenarios built "heavily on the 
work of the IPCC 1992 Update report, which contained six 
greenhouse gas emission scenarios." The peer and government 
reviews were undertaken concurrently because of the short 
time frame to meet deadlines for the 1994 Special Report. 
The Working Group III Bureau wishes to thank the lead au-
thors of the chapter on evaluation of emissions scenarios -
Joseph Alcamo, Alex Bouwman, James Edmonds, Arnulf 
Griibler, Tsuneyuki Morita, and Aca Sugandhy - for their hard 
work under severe time constraints. 
Assessment of the Socioeconomic Literature 
The Working Group III contribution to the IPCC's Second 
Assessment Report, which follows, contains a Summary for 
Policymakers and eleven chapters. The Summary for Policy-
makers draws on the chapters, and its sections follow the 
sequence of chapters for easy reference. The chapters are an 
assessment of the available literature in economics, and to a 
lesser extent in other social sciences, covering the full range 
of topics identified in Working Group Ill's approved Work 
Programme. 
For its contribution to the Second Assessment Report, the 
Working Group followed the IPCC procedures for, first, a 
peer review and, subsequently, a government and organiza-
tions review. Each review resulted in many valuable com-
ments and suggestions and thus in significant revisions to 
both the chapters and the Summary for Policymakers. 
The Summary for Policymakers was revised and approved 
by Plenary Sessions of the Working Group in Geneva, 25-28 
July and Montreal, 11-13 October, 1995. The latter session 
also accepted the underlying technical report. 
According to IPCC procedures the Summary for Policy-
makers is approved in detail by country representatives. The 
resulting Summary for Policymakers is thus an intergovern-
mentally negotiated text. In the course of these negotiations 
some of the draft text recommended by the Working Group III 
Bureau was deleted and in a few places, where agreement 
could not be reached, differing views of the findings are pre-
sented. Although the country representatives of the Working 
Group accept the underlying technical report, it is not re-
viewed in detail and its contents remain the responsibility of 
the lead authors. The reader wishing to have a short resume of 
the findings of the writing teams is referred to the summaries 
at the beginning of each chapter. 
The Working Group, lead authors, Bureau, and Technical 
Support Unit of Working Group III hope that this assessment 
of the socioeconomic literature will provide information of 
value to all concerned with climate change. In particular, it is 
our hope that it will assist countries individually and collec-
tively within the FCCC to develop appropriate responses to 
climate change. 
Summary for Policymakers 
CONTENTS 
1 Introduction 
5 
2 Scope of the Assessment 
5 
3 Decision Making Frameworks for 
Addressing Climate Change 
7 
4 Equity and Social Considerations 
7 
5 Intertemporal Equity and Discounting 
8 
6 Applicability of Cost and Benefit 
Assessments 
9 
7 The Social Costs of Anthropogenic Climate 
Change: Damages of Increased Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions 
9 
8 Generic Assessment of Response Strategies 
11 
9 Costs of Response Options 
12 
10 Integrated Assessment 
14 
11 An Economic Assessment of Policy 
Instruments for Combating Climate Change 
15 
SUMMARY FOR POLICYMAKERS 
1 Introduction 
Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) was restructured in November 1992 and 
charged with conducting "technical assessments of the socio-
economics of impacts, adaptation, and mitigation of climate 
change over both the short and long term and at the regional and 
global levels." Working Group III responded to this charge by 
further stipulating in its work plan that it would place the socio-
economic perspectives in the context of sustainable development, 
and, in accordance with the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (FCCC), provide comprehensive treatment of both miti-
gation and adaptation options while covering all economic sec-
tors and all relevant sources of greenhouse gases and sinks. 
This report assesses a large part of the existing literature on 
the socioeconomics of climate change and identifies areas in 
which a consensus has emerged on key issues and areas where 
differences exist.1 The chapters have been arranged to cover 
several key issues. First, frameworks for socioeconomic assess-
ment of costs and benefits of action and inaction are described. 
Particular attention is given to the applicability of cost-benefit 
analysis, the incorporation of equity and social considerations, 
and consideration of intergenerational equity issues. Second, 
the economic and social benefits of limiting greenhouse gas 
emissions and enhancing sinks are reviewed. Third, the eco-
nomic, social, and environmental costs of mitigating green-
house gas emissions are assessed. Next, generic mitigation and 
adaptation response options are reviewed, methods for assess-
ing the costs and effectiveness of different response options are 
summarized, and integrated assessment techniques are dis-
cussed. Finally, the report provides an economic assessment of 
policy instruments to combat climate change. 
In accordance with the approved work plan, this assess-
ment of the socioeconomic literature related to climate change 
focusses on economic studies; material from other social sci-
ences is found mostly in the chapter on equity and social con-
siderations. The report is an assessment of the state of 
knowledge - what we know and do not know - and not a pre-
scription for policy implementation. 
Countries can use the information in this report to help take 
decisions they believe are most appropriate for their specific 
circumstances. 
2 Scope of the Assessment 
Climate change presents the decision maker with a set of 
formidable complications: a considerable number of re-
maining uncertainties (which are inherent in the complexity 
of the problem), the potential for irreversible damages or 
costs, a very long planning horizon, long time lags between 
emissions and effects, wide regional variation in causes and 
effects, an irreducibly global scope of the problem, and 
the need to consider multiple greenhouse gases and aero-
sols. Yet another complication arises from the fact that ef-
fective protection of the climate system requires global 
cooperation. 
Nevertheless, a number of insights that may be useful to 
policymakers can be drawn from the literature: 
• Analyses indicate that a prudent way to deal with cli-
mate change is through a portfolio of actions aimed at 
mitigation, adaptation, and improvement of knowl-
edge. The appropriate portfolio will differ for each 
country. The challenge is not to find the best policy to-
day for the next 100 years, but to select a prudent strat-
egy and to adjust it over time in the light of new 
information. 
• Earlier mitigation action may increase flexibility in 
moving toward stabilization of atmospheric concentra-
tions of greenhouse gases (U.N. Framework Convention 
on Climate Change. Article 2). The choice of abatement 
paths involves balancing the economic risks of rapid 
abatement now (that premature capital stock retirement 
will later be proved unnecessary) against the corre-
sponding risk of delay (that more rapid reduction will 
then be required, necessitating premature retirement of 
future capital stock). 
• The literature indicates that significant "no regrets"2 
opportunities are available in most countries and that 
the risk of aggregate net damage due to climate change, 
consideration of risk aversion, and application of the 
precautionary principle provide rationales for action be-
yond no regrets. 
• The value of better information about climate change 
processes and impacts and society's responses to them 
is likely to be great. In particular, the literature accords 
high value to information about climate sensitivity to 
greenhouse gases and aerosols, climate change dam-
age functions, and variables such as determinants of 
economic growth and rates of energy efficiency im-
provements. Better information about the costs and 
benefits of mitigation and adaptation measures and 
how they might change in coming decades also has a 
high value. 
6 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
• Analysis of economic and social issues related to cli-
mate change, especially in developing countries where 
little work of this nature has been carried out, is a high 
priority for research. More generally, research is needed 
on integrated assessment and analysis of decision mak-
ing related to climate change. Further, research advanc-
ing the economic understanding of nonlinearities and 
new theories of economic growth is also needed. Re-
search and development related to energy efficiency 
technologies and nonfossil energy options also offer 
high potential value. In addition, there is also a need for 
research on the development of sustainable consump-
tion patterns. 
A portfolio of possible actions that policymakers could con-
sider, in accordance with applicable international agreements, 
to implement low cost and/or cost-effective measures to re-
duce emissions of greenhouse gases and adapt to climate 
change can include: 
• implementing energy efficiency measures including the 
removal of institutional barriers to energy efficiency 
improvements; 
• phasing out existing distortionary policies and practices 
that increase greenhouse gas emissions, such as some 
subsidies and regulations, noninternalization of envi-
ronmental costs, and distortions in transport pricing; 
• implementing cost-effective fuel switching measures 
from more to less carbon-intensive fuels and to carbon-
free fuels such as renewables; 
• implementing measures to enhance sinks or reservoirs 
of greenhouse gases such as improving forest manage-
ment and land use practices; 
• implementing measures and developing new techniques 
for reducing methane, nitrous oxide, and other green-
house gas emissions; 
• encouraging forms of international cooperation to limit 
greenhouse gas emissions, such as implementing co-
ordinated carbon/energy taxes, activities implemented 
jointly, and tradeable quotas; 
• promoting the development and implementation of na-
tional and international energy efficiency standards; 
• promoting voluntary actions to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions; 
• promoting education and training, implementing infor-
mation and advisory measures for sustainable devel-
opment and consumption patterns that will facilitate 
climate change mitigation and adaptation; 
• planning and implementing measures to adapt to the 
consequences of climate change; 
• undertaking research aimed at better understanding the 
causes and impacts of climate change and facilitating 
more effective adaptation to it; 
• conducting technological research aimed at minimizing 
emissions of greenhouse cases from continued use of 
fossil fuels and developing commercial nonfossil en-
ergy sources; 
• developing improved institutional mechanisms, such as 
improved insurance arrangements, to share the risks of 
damages due to climate change. 
Contribution of economics 
• Estimates of the costs and benefits of stabilizing green-
house gas concentrations are sensitive to, inter alia, the 
ultimate target concentration, the emissions path toward 
this level, the discount rate, and assumptions concern-
ing the costs and availability of technologies and prac-
tices. 
• Despite its widespread use in economic policy evalua-
tion, Gross Domestic Product is widely recognized to be 
an imperfect measure of a society's well-being, largely 
because it fails to account for degradation of the envi-
ronment and natural systems. Other methodologies exist 
that try to take these nonmarket values and social and 
ecological sustainability into account. Such methodolo-
gies would provide a more complete indication of how 
climate change might affect society's well-being. 
• Given the interrelated nature of the global economic 
system, attempts to mitigate climate change through ac-
tions in one region or sector may have offsetting eco-
nomic effects that risk increasing the emissions of other 
regions and sectors (so-called leakages). These emis-
sion leakages can be lessened through coordinated ac-
tions of groups of countries. 
• The literature suggests that flexible, cost-effective poli-
cies relying on economic incentives and instruments, as 
well as coordinated instruments, can considerably re-
duce mitigation or adaptation costs, or increase the cost-
effectiveness of emission reduction measures. 
Equity considerations 
In considering equity principles and issues related to green-
house gas emissions, it is important for policy consideration 
to take into account in particular Articles 3, 4.2a, and 11.2 of 
the Framework Convention on Climate Change, Principle 2 of 
the Rio Declaration, and general principles of international 
law. 
Scientific analyses cannot prescribe how equity should be 
applied in implementing the Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change, but analysis can clarify the implications of al-
ternative choices and their ethical basis. 
• Developing countries require support for institutional 
and endogenous capacity building, so that they may ef-
fectively participate in climate change decision making. 
• It is important that both efficiency and equity concerns 
be considered during the analysis of mitigation and 
adaptation measures. For the purposes of analysis, it is 
possible to separate efficiency from equity. This analyti-
Summary for Policymakers 
7 
cal separation presupposes that (and is valid, for policy 
purposes, only if) effective institutions exist or can be 
created for appropriate redistribution of climate change 
costs. It may be worthwhile to conduct analyses of the 
equity implications of particular measures for achieving 
efficiency, including social considerations and impacts. 
3 Decision Making Frameworks for Addressing 
Climate Change 
Since climate change is a global issue, comprehensive analy-
ses of mitigation, adaptation, and research measures are 
needed to identify the most efficient and appropriate strategy 
to address climate change. International decision making re-
lated to climate change as established by the FCCC is a col-
lective process in which a variety of concerns, such as equity, 
ecological protection, economics, ethics, and poverty-related 
issues, are of special significance for present and future gen-
erations. Treatments of decision making under uncertainty, 
risk aversion, technology development and diffusion pro-
cesses, and distributional considerations are at present rela-
tively poorly developed in international environmental 
economics, and especially in the climate change literature. 
Decision making related to climate change must take into 
account the unique characteristics of the "problem": large un-
certainties (scientific and economic), possible nonlinearities 
and irreversibilities, asymmetric distribution of impacts geo-
graphically and temporally, the very long time horizon, and 
the global nature of climate change with the associated poten-
tial for free riding. Beyond scientific uncertainties (discussed 
in Volume 1) and impact uncertainties (Volume 2), socioeco-
nomic uncertainties relate to estimates of how these changes 
will affect human society (including direct economic and 
broader welfare impacts) and to the socioeconomic implica-
tions of emission abatement. 
The other dimension that magnifies uncertainties and com-
plicates decision making is geographical: climate change is a 
global problem encompassing an incredibly diverse mix of 
human societies, with differing histories, circumstances, and 
capabilities. Many developing countries are in relatively hot 
climates, depend more heavily on agriculture, and have less 
well developed infrastructures and social structures; thus, they 
may suffer more than average, perhaps much more. In devel-
oped countries, there may also be large climate change im-
pacts. 
The literature also emphasizes that delaying responses is 
itself a decision involving costs. Some studies suggest that the 
cost of delay is small, others emphasize that the costs could 
include imposition of risks on all parties (particularly the most 
vulnerable), greater utilization of limited atmospheric capac-
ity, and potential deferral of desirable technical development. 
No consensus is reflected in the literature. 
The global nature of the problem - necessitating collective 
action by sovereign states - and the large differences in the 
circumstances of different parties raise consequential as well 
as procedural issues. Consequential issues relate to outcomes 
whereas procedural issues relate to how decisions arc made. 
In relation to climate change, the existence of an agreed legal 
framework involves a collective process within a negotiated 
framework (the FCCC). Accordingly decision making can he 
considered within three different categories of frameworks, 
each with different implications and with distinct foci: global 
optimization (trying to find the globally optimal result), pro-
cedural decision making (establishing and refining rules of 
procedure), and collective decision making (dealing with dis-
tributional issues and processes involving the interaction of 
numerous independent decision makers). 
Application of the literature on decision making to climate 
change provides elements that can be used in building collec-
tive and/or market-oriented strategies for sharing risks and re-
alizing mutual benefits. The literature suggests that actions be 
sequential (temporally distributed), that countries implement 
a portfolio of mitigation, adaptation, and research measures, 
and that they adjust this portfolio continuously in response to 
new knowledge. The potential for transfers of financial re-
sources and technology to developing countries may be con-
sidered as a part of any comprehensive analytical framework. 
Elements of a market-related strategy concern insurance 
and markets for risk. Pooling risk does not change the risk, 
but it can improve economic efficiency and welfare. Although 
insurance capable of sharing climate change risks on a global 
basis currently does not exist, one of the important potential 
gains from cooperating in a collective framework, such as the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, is that of risk 
sharing. Creating an insurance system to cover the risks of cli-
mate change is difficult,' and the international community has 
not yet established such sophisticated instruments. This does 
not preclude, however, future international action to establish 
insurance markets sufficient for some international needs. 
4 Equity and Social Considerations 
Equity considerations are an important aspect of climate 
change policy and of the Convention. In common language 
equity means "the quality of being impartial" or "something 
that is fair and just." The FCCC, including the references to 
equity and equitable in Articles 3.1, 4.2.a, and 11.2, provides 
the context for efforts to apply equity in meeting the purposes 
and the objective of the Convention. International law, includ-
ing relevant decisions of the International Court of Justice, 
may also provide guidance. 
A variety of ethical principles, including the importance of 
meeting people's basic needs, may be relevant to addressing 
climate change, but the application to relations among states 
of principles originally developed to guide individual behav-
iour is complex and not straightforward. Climate change poli-
cies should not aggravate existing disparities between one 
region and another or attempt to redress all equity issues. 
Equity involves procedural as well as consequential is-
sues. Procedural issues relate to how decisions are made 
whereas consequential issues relate to outcomes. To be effec-
tive and to promote cooperation, agreements must be re-
fi 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
garded as legitimate, and equity is an important element in 
gaining legitimacy. 
Procedural equity encompasses process and participation 
issues. It requires that all parties be able to participate effec-
tively in international negotiations related to climate change. 
Appropriate measures to enable developing country parties to 
participate effectively in negotiations increase the prospects 
for achieving effective, lasting, and equitable agreements on 
how best to address the threat of climate change. Concern 
about equity and social impacts indicates the need to build en-
dogenous capabilities and strengthen institutional capacities, 
particularly in developing countries, to make and implement 
collective decisions in a legitimate and equitable manner. 
Consequential equity has two components: the distribution 
of the costs of damages or adaptation and of measures to miti-
gate climate change. Because countries differ substantially 
in vulnerability, wealth, capacity, resource endowments, and 
other factors listed below, the costs of the damages, adapta-
tion, and mitigation may be borne inequitably, unless the dis-
tribution of these costs is addressed explicitly. 
Climate change is likely to impose costs on future genera-
tions and on regions where damages occur, including regions 
with low greenhouse gas emissions. Climate change impacts 
will be distributed unevenly. 
The Convention recognizes in Article 3.1 the principle of 
common but differentiated responsibilities and respective ca-
pabilities. Actions beyond "no regrets" measures impose costs 
on the present generation. Mitigation policies unavoidably 
raise issues about how to share the costs. The initial emission 
limitation intentions of Annex I parties represent an agreed 
collective first step of those parties in addressing climate 
change. 
Equity arguments can support a variety of proposals to dis-
tribute mitigation costs. Most of them seem to cluster around 
two main approaches: equal per capita emission allocations 
and allocations based on incremental departures from national 
baseline emissions (current or projected). Some proposals 
combine these approaches in an effort to incorporate equity 
concerns not addressed by relying exclusively on one or the 
other approach. The IPCC can clarify scientifically the impli-
cations of different approaches and proposals, but the choice 
of particular proposals is a policy judgment. 
There are substantial variations among both developed and 
developing countries that are relevant to the application of eq-
uity principles to mitigation. These include variations in his-
torical and cumulative emissions, current total and per capita 
emissions, emission intensities and economic output, and fac-
tors such as wealth, energy structures, and resource endow-
ments. The literature is weak on the equity implications of 
these variations among both developed and developing coun-
tries. 
In addition, the implications of climate change for devel-
oping countries are different from those for developed coun-
tries. The former often have different urgent priorities, weaker 
institutions, and are generally more vulnerable to climate 
change. It is likely, however, that developing countries' share 
of emissions will grow further to meet their social and devel-
opmental needs. Greenhouse gas emissions are likely to be-
come increasingly global, while substantial per capita dispari-
ties are likely to remain. 
It is important that both efficiency and equity concerns 
should be considered during the analysis of mitigation and 
adaptation measures. It may be worthwhile to conduct analyses 
of the equity implications of particular measures for achieving 
efficiency, including social considerations and impacts. 
5 Intertemporal Equity and Discounting 
Climate policy, like many other policy issues, raises particular 
questions of equity among generations, because future gener-
ations are not able to influence directly the policies being cho-
sen today that could affect their well-being, and because it 
might not be possible to compensate future generations for 
consequent reductions in their well-being. 
Sustainable development is one approach to intergenera-
tional equity. Sustainable development meets "the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs."4 A consensus exists among 
economists that this does not imply that future generations 
should inherit a world with at least as much of every resource. 
Nevertheless, sustainable development would require that use 
of exhaustible natural resources and environmental degrada-
tion be appropriately offset - for example, by an increase in 
productive assets sufficient to enable future generations to ob-
tain at least the same standard of living as those alive today. 
There are different views in the literature on the extent to 
which infrastructure and knowledge, on the one hand, and 
natural resources, such as a healthy environment, on the other 
hand, are substitutes. This is crucial to applying these con-
cepts. Some analysts stress that there are exhaustible re-
sources that are unique and cannot be substituted for. Others 
believe that current generations can compensate future gener-
ations for decreases in the quality or quantity of environmen-
tal resources by increases in other resources. 
Discounting is the principal analytical tool economists use 
to compare economic effects that occur at different points in 
time. The choice of discount rate is of crucial technical impor-
tance for analyses of climate change policy, because the time 
horizon is extremely long, and mitigation costs tend to come 
much earlier than the benefits of avoided damages. The higher 
the discount rate, the less future benefits and the more current 
costs matter in the analysis. 
Selection of a social discount rate is also a question of val-
ues since it inherently relates the costs of present measures to 
possible damages suffered by future generations if no action 
is taken.5 How best to choose a discount rate is. and will likely 
remain, an unresolved question in economics. Partly as a 
consequence, different discount rates are used in different 
countries. Analysts typically conduct sensitivity studies using 
various discount rates. It should also be recognized that the 
social discount rate presupposes that all effects are trans-
formed to their equivalent in consumption. This makes it dif-
ficult to apply to those nonmarket impacts of climate change 
which for ethical reasons might not be. or for practical reasons 
cannot be. converted into consumption units. 
Summary for Policymakers 
y 
The literature on the appropriate social discount rate for 
climate change analysis can be grouped into two broad cate-
gories. One approach discounts consumption by different gen-
erations using the "social rate of time preference," which is 
the sum of the rate of "pure time preference" (impatience) and 
the rate of increase of welfare derived from higher per capita 
incomes in the future. Depending on the values taken for the 
different parameters the discount rate tends to fall between 
0.5% and 3.0% per year on a global basis - using the above 
approach. Although wide variations in regional discount rates 
exist, they may still be consistent with a particular global av-
erage. 
The second approach to the discount rate considers market 
returns to investment, which range between 3% and 6% in 
real terms for long-term, risk-free public investments. Con-
ceptually, funds could be invested in projects that earn such 
returns, with the proceeds being used to increase the con-
sumption for future generations. 
The choice of the social discount rate for public investment 
projects is a matter of policy preference but has a major im-
pact on the economic evaluation of climate change actions/' 
For example, in today's dollars, $1,000 of damage 100 years 
from now would be valued at $370 using a 1% discount rate 
(near the low end of the range for the first approach) but 
would be valued at $7.60 using a 5% discount rate (near the 
upper end of the range for the second approach). However, in 
cost-effectiveness analyses of policies over short time hori-
zons, the impact of using different discount rates is much 
smaller. In all areas analysts should specify the discount 
rate(s) they use to facilitate comparison and aggregation of 
results. 
6 Applicability of Cost and Benefit Assessments 
Many factors need to be taken into account in the evaluation 
of projects and public policy issues related to climate change, 
including the analysis of possible costs and benefits. Although 
costs and benefits cannot all be measured in monetary terms, 
various techniques exist which offer a useful framework for 
organizing information about the consequences of alternative 
actions for addressing climate change. 
The family of analytical techniques for examining eco-
nomic environmental policies and decisions includes tradi-
tional project level cost-benefit analysis, cost-effectiveness 
analysis, multicriteria analysis, and decision analysis. Tradi-
tional cost-benefit analysis attempts to compare all costs and 
benefits expressed in terms of a common monetary unit. Cost-
effectiveness analysis seeks to find the lowest cost option to 
achieve an objective specified using other criteria. Multicrite-
ria analysis is designed to deal with problems where some 
benefits and/or costs are measured in nonmonetary units. De-
cision analysis focusses specifically on making decisions un-
der uncertainty. 
In principle, this group of techniques can contribute to im-
proving public policy decisions concerning the desirable ex-
tent of actions to mitigate global climate change, the timing of 
such actions, and the methods to be employed. 
Traditional cost-benefit analysis is based on the concept 
that the level of emission control at each point in time is de-
termined such that marginal costs equal marginal benefits. 
However, both costs and benefits may be hard, sometimes 
impossible, to assess. This may be due to large uncertainties, 
possible catastrophes with very small probabilities, or simply 
lack of consistent methodology for monetizing the effects. In 
some of these cases, it may be possible to apply mullicrileria 
analysis. This provides policymakers with a broader set of in-
formation, including evaluation of relevant costs and benefits, 
estimated within a common framework. 
Practical application of traditional cost-benefit analysis to 
the problem of climate change is therefore difficult because of 
the global, regional, and intergenerational nature of the prob-
lem. Estimates of the costs of mitigation options also vary 
widely. Furthermore, estimates of potential physical damages 
due to climate change also vary widely. In addition, confi-
dence in monetary estimates lor important consequences (es-
pecially nonmarket consequences) is low. These uncertainties 
and the resolution of uncertainty over time may he decisive 
for the choice of strategies to combat climate change. The ob-
jective of decision analysis is to deal with such problems. Fur-
thermore, for some categories of ecological, cultural and human 
health impacts, widely accepted economic concepts of value 
are not available. To the extent that some impacts and mea-
sures cannot be valued in monetary terms, economists aug-
ment the traditional cost-benefit analysis approach with such 
techniques as multicriteria analysis, permitting some quanti-
tative expression of the trade-offs to be made. These tech-
niques do not resolve questions involving equity - for 
example, determining who should bear the costs. However, 
they provide important information on the incidence of 
damage, mitigation, and adaptation costs, and where cost-
effective action might be taken. 
Despite their many imperfections, these techniques pro-
vide a valuable framework for identifying essential questions 
that policymakers must face when dealing with climate 
change, namely: 
• By how much should the emissions of greenhouse gases 
be reduced? 
• When should emissions be reduced? 
• How should emissions be reduced? 
These analytical techniques assist decision makers in compar-
ing the consequences of alternative actions, including that of 
no action, on a quantitative basis - and can certainly make a 
contribution to resolution of these questions. 
7 The Social Costs of Anthropogenic Climate 
Change: Damages of Increased Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions 
The literature on the subject of this section is controversial 
and mainly based on research done on developed countries, 
often extrapolated to developing countries. There is no con-
sensus about how to value statistical lives or how to aggregate 
10 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
statistical lives across countries.7 Monetary valuation should 
not obscure the human consequences of anthropogenic cli-
mate change damages, because the value of life has meaning 
beyond monetary considerations. It should be noted that the 
Rio Declaration and Agenda 21 call for human beings to re-
main at the centre of sustainable development. The approach 
taken to this valuation might affect the scale of damage reduc-
tion strategies. It may be noted that in virtually all the lit-
erature discussed in this section the developing country 
statistical lives have not been equally valued at the developed 
country value, nor are other damages in developing countries 
equally valued at the developed country value. Because 
national circumstances, including opportunity costs, differ, 
economists sometimes evaluate certain kinds of impacts dif-
ferently amongst countries. 
The benefits of limiting greenhouse gas emissions and en-
hancing sinks are (a) the climate change damages avoided and 
(b) the secondary benefits associated with the relevant poli-
cies. Secondary benefits include reductions in other pollutants 
jointly produced with greenhouse gases and the conservation 
of biological diversity. Net climate change damages include 
both market and nonmarket impacts as far as they can be 
quantified at present and. in some cases, adaptation costs. 
Damages are expressed in net terms to account for the fact 
that there are some beneficial impacts of climate change as 
well, which are, however, dominated by the damage costs. 
Nonmarket impacts, such as human health, risk of human 
mortality, and damage to ecosystems, form an important com-
ponent of available estimates of the social costs of climate 
change. The literature on monetary valuation of such nonmar-
ket effects reflects a number of divergent views and ap-
proaches. The estimates of nonmarket damages, however, are 
highly speculative and not comprehensive. 
Nonmarket damage estimates are a source of major uncer-
tainty in assessing the implications of global climate change 
for human welfare. Some regard monetary valuation of such 
impacts as essential to sound decision making, but others re-
ject monetary valuation of some impacts, such as risk of hu-
man mortality, on ethical grounds. Additionally, there is a 
danger that entire unique cultures may he obliterated. This is 
not something that can be considered in monetary terms, but 
becomes a question of loss of human diversity, for which we 
have no indicators to measure economic value. 
The assessed literature contains only a few estimates of the 
monetized damages associated with doubled CO, equivalent 
concentration scenarios. These estimates are aggregated to a 
global scale and illustrate the potential impacts of climate 
change under selected scenarios. Aggregating individual mon-
etized damages to obtain total social welfare impacts involves 
difficult decisions about equity amongst countries. Global esti-
mates are based on an aggregation of monetary damages 
across countries (damages which are themselves implicit ag-
gregations across individuals) that reflects intereountry differ-
ences in wealth and income. This fundamentally influences the 
monetary valuation of damages. Taking income differences as 
given implies that an equivalent impact in two countries (such 
as an equal increase in human mortality) would receive very 
different weights in the calculation of global damages. 
To enable choices between different ways of promoting hu-
man welfare to be made on a consistent basis, economists 
have for many years sought to express a wide range of human 
and environmental impacts in terms of monetary equivalents, 
using various techniques. The most commonly used of those 
techniques is an approach based on the observed willingness 
to pay for various nonmarket benefits.8 This is the approach 
that has been taken in most of the assessed literature. 
Human life is an element outside the market, and societies 
may want to preserve it in an equal way. An approach that in-
cludes equal valuation of impacts on human life wherever 
they occur may yield different global aggregate estimates than 
those reported below. For example, equalizing the value of a 
statistical life at a global average could leave total global 
damage unchanged but would increase markedly the share of 
these damages borne by the developing world. Equalizing the 
value at the level typical in developed countries would in-
crease monetized damages several times, and would further 
increase the share of the developing countries in the total 
damage estimate. 
Other aggregation methods can be used to adjust for differ-
ences in the wealth or incomes of countries in calculations of 
monetary damages. Because estimates of monetary damage 
tend to be a higher percentage of national GDP for low-
income countries than for high-income countries, aggregation 
schemes that adjust for wealth or income effects are expected 
to yield higher estimates of global damages than those pre-
sented in this report. 
The assessed literature quantifying total damages from 
2-3°C warming provides a wide range of point estimates for 
damages, given the presumed change in atmospheric green-
house gas concentrations. The aggregate estimates tend to be 
a few percent of world GDP, with, in general, considerably 
higher estimates of damage to developing countries as a share 
of their GDP. The aggregate estimates are subject to consider-
able uncertainty, but the range of uncertainty cannot be 
gauged from the literature. The range of estimates cannot be 
interpreted as a confidence interval, given the widely differ-
ing assumptions and methodologies in the studies. As noted 
above, aggregation is likely to mask even greater uncertain-
ties about damage components. 
Regional or sectoral approaches to estimating the conse-
quences of climate change include a much wider range of esti-
mates of the net economic effects. For some areas, damages 
are estimated to be significantly greater and could negatively 
affect economic development. For others, climate change is 
estimated to increase economic production and present oppor-
tunities for economic development. For countries generally 
having a diversified, industrial economy and an educated and 
flexible labour force, the limited set of published estimates 
of damages are of the order one to a few percent of GDP. 
For countries generally having a specialized and natural 
resource-based economy (e.g., heavily emphasizing agriculture 
or forestry), and a poorly developed and land-tied labour force, 
estimates of damages from the few studies available are sev-
eral times larger. Small islands and low-lying coastal areas are 
particularly vulnerable. Damages from possible large-scale 
catastrophes, such as major changes in ocean circulation, are 
Summary for Policymakers 
// 
not reflected in these estimates. There is little agreement 
across studies about the exact magnitude of each category of 
damages or relative ranking of the damage categories.1' Cli-
mate changes of this magnitude are not expected to be real-
ized for several decades, and damages in the interim could be 
smaller. Damages over a longer period of time might be 
greater.10 
IPCC does not endorse any particular range of values for 
the marginal damage of C02 emissions, but published esti-
mates range between $5 and $125 (1990 U.S.) per tonne of 
carbon emitted now. This range of estimates does not repre-
sent the full range of uncertainty. The estimates are also based 
on models that remain simplistic and are limited representa-
tions of the actual climate processes and are based on earlier 
IPCC scientific reports. The wide range of damage estimates 
reflects variations in model scenarios, discount rates, and 
other assumptions. It must be emphasized that the social cost 
estimates have a wide range of uncertainty because of limited 
knowledge of impacts, uncertain future technological and so-
cioeconomic developments, and the possibility of catastrophic 
events or surprises. 
8 Generic Assessment of Response Strategies 
A wide range of technologies and practices is available for 
mitigating emissions of carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous ox-
ide, and other greenhouse gases. There are also many adapta-
tion measures available for responding to the impacts of 
climate change. All these technologies, practices, and mea-
sures have financial and environmental costs as well as bene-
fits. This section surveys the range of options currently 
available or discussed in the literature. The optimal mix of re-
sponse options will vary by country and over time as local 
conditions and costs change. 
A review of C02 mitigation options suggests that: 
• A large potential for cost-effective energy conservation 
and efficiency improvements in energy supply and energy 
use exists in many sectors. These options offer economic 
and environmental benefits in addition to reducing emis-
sions of greenhouse gases. Various of these options can 
be deployed rapidly due to small unit size, modular de-
sign characteristics, and low lifetime costs. 
• The options for C01 mitigation in energy use include 
alternative 
methods and efficiency 
improvements 
among others in the construction, residential, commer-
cial, agriculture, and industry sectors. Not all cost-
effective strategies are based on new technology: some 
may rely on improved information dissemination and 
public education, managerial strategies, pricing poli-
cies, and institutional reforms. 
• Estimates of the technical potential for switching to less 
carbon-intensive fuels vary regionally and with the type 
of measure and economic availability of reserves of fos-
sil and alternative fuels. These estimates must also take 
into account potential methane emissions from leakage 
of natural gas during production and distribution. 
• Renewable energy technologies (e.g., solar, hydroelec-
tric, wind, traditional and modern biomass. and ocean 
thermal energy conversion) have achieved different lev-
els of technical development, economic maturity, anil 
commercial readiness. The potential of these energy 
sources is not fully realized. Cost estimates for these 
technologies are sensitive to site-specific characteris-
tics, resource variability, and the form of final energy 
delivered. These cost estimates vary widely. 
• Nuclear energyu is a technology that has been deployed 
for several decades in many countries. However, a num-
ber of factors have slowed the expansion of nuclear 
power, including: (a) wary public perceptions resulting 
from nuclear accidents, (b) not yet fully resolved issues 
concerning reactor safety, proliferation of fissile mater-
ial, power plant decommissioning, and long-term dis-
posal of nuclear waste, as well as, in some instances. 
lower-than-anticipated levels of demand for electricity. 
Regulatory and siting difficulties have increased con-
struction lead times, leading to higher capital costs for 
this option in some countries. If these issues, including 
inter alia the social, political, and environmental as-
pects mentioned above, can be resolved, nuclear energy 
has the potential to increase its present share in world-
wide energy production. 
• CO-, capture and disposal may be ultimately limited for 
technical and environmental reasons, because not all 
forms of disposal ensure prevention of carbon reenter-
ing the atmosphere. 
• Forestry options, in some circumstances, offer large po-
tential, modest costs, low risk, and other benefits. Further, 
the potential modern use of biomass as a source of fuels 
and electricity could become attractive. Halting or slow-
ing deforestation and increasing reforestation through 
increased silvicultural 
productivity and sustainable 
management programmes that increase agricultural pro-
ductivity, the expansion of forest reserves, and promotion 
of ecotourism are among the cost-effective options for 
slowing the atmospheric build-up of CO.,. Forestry pro-
grammes raise important equity considerations.'-
There is also a wide range of available technologies and 
practices for reducing emissions of methane from such 
sources as natural gas systems, coal mines, waste dumps, and 
farms. However, the issue of reduction of emissions related to 
the food supply may imply trade-offs with rates of food pro-
duction. These trade-offs must be carefully assessed as they 
may affect the provision of basic needs in some countries, 
particularly in developing countries. 
Most nitrous oxide emissions come from diffuse sources 
related to agriculture and forestry. These emissions are diffi-
cult to reduce rapidly. Industrial emissions of nitrous oxide 
and halogenated compounds tend to be concentrated in a few 
key sectors and tend to he easier to control. Measures to limit 
such emissions may be attractive for many countries. 
The slow implementation of many of the technologically 
attractive and cost-effective options listed above has many 
12 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
possible explanations, with both actual and perceived costs 
being a major factor. Among other factors, capital availability, 
information gaps, institutional obstacles, and market imper-
fections affect the rate of diffusion for these technologies. 
Identifying the reasons specific to a particular country is a 
precondition to devising sound and efficient policies to en-
courage their broader adoption. 
Education and training as well as information and advisory 
measures are important aspects of various response options. 
Many of the emission-reducing technologies and practices 
described above also provide other benefits to society. These 
additional benefits include improved air quality, better protec-
tion of surface and underground waters, enhanced animal pro-
ductivity, reduced risk of explosions and fire, and improved 
use of energy resources. 
Many options are also available for adapting to the impacts 
of climate change and thus reducing the damages to national 
economies and natural ecosystems. Adaptive options are 
available in many sectors, ranging from agriculture and en-
ergy to health, coastal zone management, offshore fisheries, 
and recreation. Some of these provide enhanced ability to 
cope with the current impacts of climate variability. However, 
possible trade-offs between implementation of mitigation and 
adaptation measures are important to consider in future re-
search. A summary of sectoral options for adaptation is pre-
sented in Volume 2. 
The optimal response strategy for each country will depend 
on the special circumstances and conditions which that coun-
try must face. Nonetheless, many recent studies and empirical 
observations suggest that some of the most cost-effective op-
tions can he most successfully implemented on a joint or co-
operative basis among nations. 
9 Costs of Response Options 
It must be emphasized that the text in this section is an assess-
ment of the technical literature and does not make recommen-
dations on policy matters. The available literature is primarily 
from developed countries. 
Cost concepts 
From the perspective of this section on assessing mitigation or 
adaptation costs, what matters is the net cost (total cost less 
secondary benefits and costs). These net costs exclude the so-
cial costs of climate change, which are discussed in Section 7. 
The assessed literature yields a very wide range of estimates 
of the costs of response options. The wide range largely re-
flects significant differences in assumptions about the effi-
ciency of energy and other markets, and about the ability of 
government institutions to address perceived market failures 
or imperfections. 
Measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions may yield 
additional economic impacts (for example, through techno-
logical externalities associated with fostering research and de-
velopment programmes) and/or environmental impacts (such 
as reduced emissions of acid rain and urban smog precursors). 
Studies suggest that the secondary environmental benefits 
may be substantial but are likely to differ from country to 
country. 
Specific results 
Estimates of the cost of greenhouse gas emission reduction 
depend critically on assumptions about the levels of energy 
efficiency improvements in the baseline scenario (that is, in 
the absence of climate policy) and on a wide range of factors 
such as consumption patterns, resource and technology avail-
ability, the desired level and timing of abatement, and the 
choice of policy instruments. Policymakers should not place 
too much confidence in the specific numerical results from 
any one analysis. For example, mitigation cost analyses reveal 
the costs of mitigation relative to a given baseline, but neither 
the baseline nor the intervention scenarios should be inter-
preted as representing likely future conditions. The focus 
should be on the general insights regarding the underlying de-
terminants of costs. 
The costs of stabilizing atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases at levels and within a time frame that will 
prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the cli-
mate system (the ultimate objective of the FCCC) will be crit-
ically dependent on the choice of emission timepath. The cost 
of the abatement programme will be influenced by the rate of 
capital replacement, the discount rate, and the effect of re-
search and development. 
Failure to adopt policies as early as possible to encourage 
efficient replacement investments at the end of the economic 
life of a plant and equipment (i.e., at the point of capital stock 
turnover) imposes an economic cost to society. Implementing 
emission reductions at rates that can be absorbed in the course 
of normal stock turnover is likely to be cheaper than enforcing 
premature retirement now. 
The choice of abatement paths thus involves balancing the 
economic risks of rapid abatement now (that premature capi-
tal stock retirement will later be proved unnecessary) against 
the corresponding risk of delay (that more rapid reduction will 
then be required, necessitating premature retirement of future 
capital stock). 
Appropriate long-run signals are required to allow produc-
ers and consumers to adapt cost-effectively to constraints on 
greenhouse gas emissions and to encourage research and de-
velopment. Benefits associated with the implementation of 
any "no regret" policies will offset, at least in part, the costs of 
a full portfolio of mitigation measures. This will also increase 
the time available to learn about climate risks and to bring 
new technologies into the marketplace. 
Despite significant differences in views, there is agreement 
that energy efficiency gains of perhaps 10 to 30% above base-
line trends over the next two to three decades can be realized 
at negative to zero net cost (negative net cost means an eco-
nomic benefit). With longer time horizons, which allow a 
more complete turnover of capital stocks, and which give re-
search and development and market transformation policies a 
chance to impact multiple replacement cycles, this potential is 
much higher. The magnitude of such "no regret" potentials 
BOX S.l: TOP-DOWN AND BOTTOM-UP 
MODELS 
Top-down models are aggregate models of the entire 
macroeconomy that draw on analysis of historical (rends 
and relationships to predict the large-scale interactions be-
tween the sectors of the economy, especially the inter-
actions between the energy sector and the rest of the 
economy. Top-down models typically incorporate rela-
tively little detail on energy consumption and technologi-
cal change, compared with bottom-up models. 
In contrast, bottom-up models incorporate detailed 
studies of engineering costs of a wide range of available 
and forecast technologies, and describe energy consump-
tion in great detail. However, compared with top-down 
models, they typically incorporate relatively little detail on 
nonenergy consumer behaviour and interactions with other 
sectors of the economy. 
This simple characterization of top-down and bottom-
up models is increasingly misleading as more recent ver-
sions of each approach have tended to provide greater 
detail in the aspects that were less developed in the past. 
As a result of this convergence in model structure, model 
results are tending to converge, and the remaining differ-
ences reflect differences in assumptions about how rapidly 
and effectively market institutions adopt cost-effective 
new technologies or can be induced to adopt them by pol-
icy interventions. 
Many existing models are not well suited to study 
economies in transition or those of developing countries. 
More work is needed to develop the appropriate method-
ologies, data, and models and to build the local institutional 
capacity to undertake analyses. 
Summary for Policymakers 
depends on the existence of substantial market or institutional 
imperfections that prevent cost-effective emission reduction 
measures from occurring. The key question is then the extent 
to which such imperfections and barriers can be removed 
cost-effectively by policy initiatives such as efficiency stan-
dards, incentives, removal of subsidies, information pro-
grammes, and funding of technology transfer. 
Progress has been made in a number of countries in cost-
effectively reducing imperfections and institutional barriers 
in markets through policy instruments based on voluntary 
agreements, energy efficiency incentives, product efficiency 
standards, and energy efficiency procurement programmes in-
volving manufacturers, as well as utility regulatory reforms. 
Where empirical evaluations have been made, many have 
found the benefit-cost ratio of increasing energy efficiency to 
be favourable, suggesting the practical feasibility of realizing 
"no regret" potentials at negative net cost. More information 
is needed on similar and improved programmes in a wider 
range of countries. 
Infrastructure decisions are critical in determining long-
term emissions and abatement costs because they can enhance 
or restrict the number and type of future options. Infrastruc-
ture decisions determine development patterns in transporta-
tion, urban settlement, and land use and influence energy 
system development and deforestation patterns. This issue is 
of particular importance to developing countries and many 
economies in transition where major infrastructure decisions 
will be made in the near term. 
If a carbon or carbon-energy tax is used as a policy instru-
ment for reducing emissions, the taxes could raise substantial 
revenues, and how the revenues are distributed could dramati-
cally affect the cost of mitigation. If the revenues are distrib-
uted by reducing distortionary taxes in the existing system, 
they will help reduce the excess burden of the existing tax 
system, potentially yielding an additional economic benefit 
(double dividend). For example, those European studies 
which are more optimistic regarding the potential for tax recy-
cling show lower and, in some instances, slightly negative 
costs. Conversely, inefficient recycling of the tax revenues 
could increase costs. For example, if the tax revenues are used 
to finance government programmes that yield a lower return 
than the private sector investments forgone because of the tax. 
then overall costs will increase. 
There are large differences in the costs of reducing green-
house gas emissions among countries because of their state of 
economic development, infrastructure choices, and natural re-
source base. This indicates that international cooperation 
could significantly reduce the global cost of reducing emis-
sions. Research suggests that, in principle, substantial savings 
would be possible if emissions are reduced where it is cheap-
est to do so. In practice, this requires international mecha-
nisms ensuring appropriate capital flows and technology 
transfers between countries. Conversely, a failure to achieve 
international cooperation could compromise unilateral at-
tempts by a country or a group of countries to limit green-
house gas emissions. However, estimates of so called leakage 
effects vary so widely that they provide little guidance to 
policymakers. 
There has been more analysis to date of emission reduction 
potentials and costs for developed countries than for other 
parts of the world. Moreover, many existing models are not 
well suited to study economies in transition or economies of 
developing countries. Much work is needed to develop and 
apply models for use outside developed countries (for exam-
ple, to represent more explicitly market imperfections, insti-
tutional barriers, and traditional and informal economic 
sectors). In addition, the discussion below and the bulk of the 
underlying report deal with costs of response options at the 
national or regional level in terms of effect on GDP. Further 
analysis is required concerning effects of response options on 
employment, inflation, trade competitiveness, and other pub-
lic issues. 
A large number of studies using both top-down and bottom-
up approaches (see box for definitions) were reviewed. Esti-
mates of the costs of limiting fossil fuel carbon dioxide 
emissions (expressed as carbon) vary widely and depend on 
choice of methodologies, underlying assumptions, emission 
scenarios, policy instruments, reporting year, and other crite-
ria. For specific results of individual studies, see Chapter V. 
14 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
OECD Countries. Although it is difficult to generalize, top-
down analyses suggest that the costs of substantial reductions 
below 1990 levels could be as high as several percent of GDP. 
In the specific case of stabilizing emissions at 1990 levels, most 
studies estimate that annual costs in the range of -0.5% of GDP 
(equivalent to a gain of about $60 billion in total for OECD 
countries at today's GDP levels) to 2% of GDP (equivalent to a 
loss of about $240 billion) could be reached over the next sev-
eral decades. However, studies also show that appropriate tim-
ing of abatement measures and the availability of low-cost 
alternatives may substantially reduce the size of the overall bill. 
Bottom-up studies are more optimistic about the potential for 
low- or negative-cost emission reductions, and the capacity to 
implement that potential. Such studies show that the costs of re-
ducing emissions by 20% in developed countries within two to 
three decades are negligible to negative. Other bottom-up stud-
ies suggest that there exists a potential for absolute reductions in 
excess of 50% in the longer term, without increasing, and per-
haps even reducing, total energy system costs. 
The results of top-down and bottom-up analyses differ be-
cause of such factors as higher estimates of no-regrets po-
tential and technological progress, and earlier saturation in 
energy services per unit GDP. In the most favourable assess-
ments, savings of 10-20% in the total cost of energy services 
can be achieved. 
Economies in transition. The potential for cost-effective 
reductions in energy use is apt to be considerable, but the real-
izable potential will depend on what economic and technolog-
ical development path is chosen, as well as the availability of 
capital to pursue different paths. A critical issue is the future 
of structural changes in these countries that are apt to change 
dramatically the level of baseline emissions and the emission 
reduction costs. 
Developing countries. Analyses suggest that there may be sub-
stantial low-cost fossil fuel carbon dioxide emission reduction 
opportunities for developing countries. Development path-
ways that increase energy efficiency, promote alternative 
energy technologies, reduce deforestation, and enhance agri-
cultural productivity and biomass energy production can be 
economically beneficial. To embark upon this pathway may re-
quire significant international cooperation and financial and 
technology transfers. However, these are likely to be insuffi-
cient to offset rapidly increasing emissions baselines, associ-
ated with increased economic growth and overall welfare. 
Stabilization of carbon dioxide emissions is likely to be costly. 
It should be noted that analyses of costs to economies in 
transition and developing countries typically neglect the 
general equilibrium effects of unilateral actions taken by de-
veloped countries. These effects may be either positive or 
negative and their magnitude is difficult to quantify. 
It should also be noted that estimates of costs or benefits of 
the order of a few percent ol GDP may represent small differ-
ences in GDP growth rates, but are nevertheless substantial in 
absolute terms. 
Preservation and augmentation of carbon sinks offer a sub-
stantial and often cost-effective component of a greenhouse 
gas mitigation strategy. Studies suggest that as much as 15-
30% of 1990 global energy-related emissions could be offset 
by carbon sequestration in forests for a period of 50 to 100 
years. The costs of carbon sequestration, which are competi-
tive with source control options, may differ among regions of 
the world. 
Control of emissions of other greenhouse gases, especially 
methane and nitrous oxide, can provide significant cost-effec-
tive opportunities in some countries. About 10% of anthro-
pogenic methane emissions could be reduced at negative or 
low cost using available mitigation options for such methane 
sources as natural gas systems, waste management, and agri-
culture. 
10 Integrated Assessment 
Integrated assessment models combine knowledge from a 
wide range of disciplines to provide insights that would not be 
observed through traditional disciplinary research. They are 
used to explore possible states of human and natural systems, 
analyze key questions related to policy formulation, and help 
set research priorities. Integration helps coordinate assump-
tions from different disciplines and allows feedbacks and in-
teractions absent from individual disciplines to be analyzed. 
However, the results of such analyses are no better than the in-
formation drawn from the underlying economic, atmospheric 
and biological sciences. Integrated assessment models are 
limited by both the underlying knowledge base on which they 
draw and the relatively limited experiential base. 
Most current integrated assessment models do not reflect 
the specific social and economic dynamics of the developing 
and transition economies well; for example, none of the exist-
ing models addresses most market imperfections, institutional 
barriers, or the operation of the informal sector in these 
countries. This can lead to biases in global assessments when 
mitigation options and impacts on developing or transition 
economies are valued as if their economies operate like those 
in the developed countries. 
Although relatively new. integrated assessment models of 
climate change have evolved rapidly. Integrated assessment 
models tend to fall into two categories: policy evaluation and 
policy optimization models. Policy evaluation models are rich 
in physical detail and have been used to analyze the potential 
for deforestation as a consequence of interactions between de-
mographics, agricultural productivity, and economic growth, 
and the relationship between climate change and the extent of 
potentially malarial regions. Policy optimization models opti-
mize over key variables (e.g.. emissions rates, carbon taxes) 
to achieve formulated policy goals (e.g., cost minimization or 
welfare optimization). 
Key uncertainties in current integrated assessments include 
the sensitivity of the climate system to changes in greenhouse 
gas concentrations, the specification and valuation of im-
pacts where there are no markets, changes in national and 
regional demographics, the choice of discount rates, and as-
sumptions regarding the cost, availability, and diffusion of 
technologies. 
Summary for 
Policymakers 
I> 
11 An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for 
Combating Climate Change 
Governments may have different sets of criteria for assess-
ing international as well as domestic greenhouse policy 
instruments. Among these criteria are efficiency and cost-
effectiveness, effectiveness 
in achieving stated environ-
mental targets, distributional (including intergenerational) 
equity, flexibility in the face of new knowledge, understand-
ability to the general public, and consistency with national 
priorities, policies, institutions, and traditions. The choice of 
instruments may also partly reflect a desire on the part of 
governments to achieve other objectives such as sustainable 
economic development, meeting social development goals 
and fiscal targets, or influencing pollution levels that are in-
directly related to greenhouse gas emissions. A further con-
cern of governments may lie with the effect of policies on 
competitiveness. 
The world economy and indeed some individual national 
economies suffer from a number of price distortions which in-
crease greenhouse gas emissions, such as some agricultural 
and fuel subsidies and distortions in transport pricing. A num-
ber of studies of this issue indicate that global emissions re-
ductions of 4-18%. together with increases in real incomes, are 
possible from phasing out fuel subsidies. For the most part, 
reducing such distortions could lower emissions and increase 
economic efficiency. However, subsidies are often introduced 
and price distortions maintained for social and distributional 
reasons, and may be difficult to remove. 
Policy instruments may be identified at two different lev-
els: those that might be used by a group of countries and those 
that might be used by individual nations unilaterally or to 
achieve compliance with a multilateral agreement. 
A group1-1 of countries may choose from policy measures 
and instruments including encouragement of voluntary ac-
tions and further research, tradable quotas, joint implemen-
tation (specifically activities implemented jointly under the 
pilot phase14), harmonized domestic carbon taxes, interna-
tional carbon taxes, nontradable quotas, and various inter-
national standards. If the group did not include all major 
greenhouse gas emitters, then there might be a tendency for 
fossil fuel use to increase in countries not participating in 
this group. This outcome might reduce the international 
competitiveness of some industries in participating countries 
as well as the environmental effectiveness of the countries' 
efforts. 
At both the international and national levels, the economic 
literature indicates that instruments that provide economic in-
centives, such as taxes and tradable quotas/permits, are likely 
to be more cost-effective than other approaches. Uniform 
standards among groups of countries participating in an inter-
national agreement are likely to be difficult to achieve. How-
ever, for one group of countries there has been agreement on 
the application of some uniform standards. 
At the international level, all the potentially efficient 
market-based instruments could be examined during the 
course of future negotiations. A tradable quota system has 
the disadvantage of making the marginal cost of emissions 
uncertain, whereas a carbon tax (and related instruments) 
has the disadvantage of leaving uncertain (he effect on tin-
level at which emissions are controlled. The weight given to 
the importance of reducing these different types of uncer 
tainty would be one crucial factor in further evaluating these 
alternative instruments. Because of the lack of appropriate 
scientific knowledge, there would remain a high degree ol 
uncertainty about the results of limiting emissions at spe-
cific levels. The adoption of either a tradable quota scheme 
or international taxes would have implications for the inter 
national distribution of wealth. The distributional conse-
quences would be the subject of negotiation. To ensure ihe 
practicability of such instruments, there is a need for addi 
tional studies on the possible design of tradable quotas and 
harmonized taxes and on the institutional framework in 
which they might operate. 
Individual countries that seek to implement mitigation 
policies can choose from among a large set of potential 
policies and instruments, including carbon taxes, tradable 
permits, deposit refund systems (and related instruments), 
and subsidies, as well as technology standards, performance 
standards, product bans, direct government investment, and 
voluntary agreements. Public education on the sustainable 
use of resources could play an important part in modify-
ing consumption patterns and other human behaviour. The 
choice of measures at the domestic level may reflect objec-
tives other than cost-effectiveness such as meeting fiscal 
targets. Revenue from carbon taxes or auctioned tradable 
permits could be used to replace existing distortionary 
taxes. The choice of instruments may also reflect other en-
vironmental objectives, such as reducing nongreenhouse 
pollution emissions, or increasing forest cover, or other 
concerns such as specific impacts on particular regions or 
communities. 
Endnotes 
1. The Framework Convention on Climate Change defines "cli-
mate change" as a change of climate which is attributed directly or 
indirectly to human activity thai alters (he composition ol the 
global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate vari-
ability observed over comparable time periods. The question as to 
whether such changes are potential or can already he identified is 
analyzed in Volume 1 of this IPCC Second Assessment Report 
(SAR). 
2. "No regrets" measures are those whose benefits, such as reduced 
energy costs and reduced emissions of local/regional pollutants 
equal or exceed their cost to society, excluding the benefits ol cli-
mate change mitigation. They are sometimes known as "measures 
worth doing anyway." 
3. Without knowing the extent of potential impacts, the ability ot pri-
vate markets to insure against losses associated with climate change 
is unknown. 
4. A related (somewhat stronger) concept is that each generation is 
entitled to inherit a planet and cultural resource base at least as good 
as that of previous generations. 
5. A social discount rate is a discount rate appropriate for use by gov-
ernments in the evaluation of public policy. 
6. Despite the differences in the value of the discount rate, policies 
developed on the basis of the two approaches may lead to similar re-
sults. 
16 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
7. The value of a statistical life is defined as the value people assign 
to a change in the risk of death among a population. 
8. The concept of willingness to pay is indicative, based on ex-
pressed desires, available resources, and information of a human be-
ing's preferences at a certain moment in time. The values may 
change over time. Also, other concepts (such as willingness to ac-
cept compensation for damage) have been advanced, but not yet 
widely applied, in the literature, and the interpretation and applica-
tion of willingness to pay and other concepts to the climate problem 
may evolve. 
9. Due to time lags between findings in the natural sciences, their use 
in determination of potential physical and biological impacts, and 
subsequent incorporation into economic analyses of climate change, 
the estimates of climate change damage are based mainly on the sci-
entific results from the 1990 and 1992 IPCC reports. 
10. See Volumes I and 2, the reports of Working Groups 1 and II. 
11. For more information on the technical aspects of nuclear power, 
see Volume 2. 
12. These are addressed in Section 4 above and in Chapter 3. 
13. The group could contain only a few, quite a number, or even all 
countries. 
14. See decision 5/CP.l of the first Conference of the Parties (COP1) 
to the FCCC. 
1 
Introduction: 
Scope of the Assessment 
J. GOLDEMBERG, R. SQUITIERI, J. STIGLITZ, A. AMANO, X. SHAOXIONG, 
R. SAHA 
Contributors: 
S. Kane, J. Reilly, T. Teisberg 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
1.1 Introduction 
1.2 Features of Climate Change 
1.3 Contribution of Economics 
1.3.1 Risk 
1.3.1.1 Portfolio theory 
1.3.1.2 Risk aversion 
1.3.1.3 Precautionary investments 
1.3.2 Sequential decision making 
1.3.3 Dynamics 
1.3.3.1 Kaya identity 
1.3.3.2 Nonrenewable resources, backstop 
technologies, and emission 
reduction strategies 
1.3.4 International public goods 
1.3.4.1 Property rights 
1.3.4.2 Paying for an international public 
good 
1.3.4.3 Enforcement 
1.3.4.4 Knowledge 
1.3.5 Efficiency 
1.3.5.1 Bankable permits 
1.3.5.2 Exchange/risk efficiency 
1.3.5.3 Comprehensiveness 
1.3.6 General equilibrium 
1.3.6.1 Intertemporal substitution 
1.4 Equity 
1.4.1 General issues 
1.4.2 Intergenerational equity 
1.4.3 Within-country equity 
21 
22 
22 
24 
24 
24 
24 
25 
26 
26 
27 
27 
28 
28 
29 
30 
30 
30 
30 
30 
31 
31 
31 
31 
31 
33 
33 
1.5 Economics of Policy Actions 
1.5.1 Zero-cost options 
1.5.2 Policy reform 
1.5.2.1 Removing energy subsidies 
1.5.2.2 Property rights reform 
1.5.2.3 Administrative reforms 
1.5.2.4 Regulating nongreenhouse 
externalities 
1.5.2.5 Special problems of economies in 
transition 
1.5.2.6 Examples of policies that affect 
efficiency 
1.5.3 Market failures and government 
responses 
1.5.3.1 Revising national accounts 
1.5.4 Innovation 
1.5.5 Carbon taxes and tradable permits 
1.5.5.1 A double dividend? 
1.5.5.2 Energy taxes 
1.5.5.3 Tradable permit markets 
1.5.5.4 Combining taxes with tradable 
permits 
1.5.5.5 Intertemporal patterns of taxation 
1.5.6 Regulatory approaches 
1.6 Sustainable Development 
1.6.1 The economic concept of sustainable 
development 
1.6.2 Implications of sustainable 
development for developing countries 
Endnotes 
References 
33 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 
34 
35 
35 
36 
37 
37 
3X 
39 
39 
39 
39 
39 
40 
40 
41 
41 
49 
SUMMARY 
Climate change presents the decision maker with a set of for-
midable complications: large uncertainties, the potential for 
irreversible damages or costs, a very long planning horizon, 
long time lags between emissions and effects, a global scope, 
wide regional variation, and multiple greenhouse gases of 
concern. Irrespective of the possible consequences of climate 
change, policies that mitigate or assist adaptation to climate 
change and have zero or negative net costs (no-regrets poli-
cies) are clearly justified. If the evidence suggests that dam-
ages can be expected from climate change, then the ex-
pectation of damages provides a rationale for going beyond 
no-regrets policies to those that incur positive net costs. The 
principles of risk aversion and portfolio balancing provide a 
rationale for further steps. 
The atmosphere is an international public good, in that all 
countries benefit from each country's reduction in greenhouse 
emissions; greenhouse gases are an international externality, 
in that emissions by one country affect all other countries to 
some extent. 
Both public goods and externalities require a legal frame-
work within which the problems they pose can be addressed. 
Mechanisms for control of international public goods may in-
clude the definition of property rights, the definition of limits 
to emissions, and a consensus for distributing the same in a 
fair and equitable manner. If, on the other hand, each agent 
acts in its individual interest, the result will be too little of the 
public good and too much of the externality. 
A decision process for climate change should be sequen-
tial. It should also be able to respond to new information with 
midcourse corrections and to include insurance arrangements. 
hedging strategies, and the option value of alternative courses 
of action. The challenge today is to identify short-term strate-
gies in the face of long-term uncertainty. The question is not. 
what is the best course over the next 100 years, but rather. 
what is the best course for the next few years, knowing that a 
prudent hedging strategy will allow time to learn and change 
course. 
Policy measures to reduce risks to future generations in-
clude (1) immediate reductions in emissions; (2) research and 
development related to new supply and conservation tech-
nologies; (3) continued research on how much change is 
likely and what its effects will be; and (4) investments to as-
sist in adaptation if significant global warming occurs. A well-
chosen portfolio of policies will yield greater benefits for a 
given cost than any one option undertaken by itself. Striking 
the appropriate balance requires taking into account costs. 
benefits, and risks. 
In an interrelated global economic system, an attempt in 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions in one region or one sector 
of the economy may be offset by increases in other regions or 
sectors. This may occur through the loss of comparative nil-
vantage in the carbon-intensive sectors of the regions thai 
limit emissions, through the relocation of industries, or 
through changes in world energy prices and the resulting shili 
in consumption. Any control strategy must account for these 
global effects. 
For the purposes of analysis it is useful to separate effi-
ciency from equity. The Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (FCCC) requires all parties to formulate and imple-
ment programmes to mitigate climate change and facilitate 
adaptation to climate change on the basis of their common but 
differentiated responsibilities, and taking into account their 
specific national and regional development priorities, objec-
tives, and circumstances. Developing countries are more 
likely to be adversely affected economically than the devel-
oped countries; moreover, developing countries often lack the-
financial and technical resources to respond to these changes. 
Efficiency requires that emission reductions occur where 
their cost is lowest, irrespective of who hears the financial re-
sponsibility. Efficiency calls for removing energy subsidies, 
reforming and clarifying property rights that affect energy use 
and carbon storage, and reducing nongreenhouse externalities 
that have the side benefit of reducing greenhouse emissions. 
Efficiency may also be promoted, and greenhouse emissions 
reduced, by better information dissemination and by address-
ing capital market imperfections that inhibit the adoption of 
energy-efficient technology. Dynamic analysis indicates large 
potential gains from flexibility in the timing of greenhouse re-
ductions to allow for the economical turnover of capital stock 
and to allow time for the development of low-cost substitutes. 
Policies that promote efficiency by requiring nations to face 
the full costs of their actions will also address equity con-
cerns. International mechanisms, such as joint implementa-
tion, coordinated economic instruments, carbon taxes, and 
tradable permits, if appropriately implemented, would pro-
mote efficiency. 
22 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
1.1 Introduction 
In recent decades, atmospheric emissions of greenhouse 
gases have risen significantly. Concentrations are currently 
about 25% greater than at the beginning of the Industrial 
Revolution. If current trends continue, concentrations will 
double from preindustrial levels before the end of the next 
century and, if unchecked, continue to rise thereafter (IPCC, 
1990a). 
The scientific community has noted the potentially serious 
effects of increased concentrations. These climatic effects 
could, in turn, have further effects on the biosphere, including 
an increase in mean global temperature, an increase in sea 
level, changes in agricultural yields, forest cover, and water 
resources, and a possible increase in storm damage. 
Increased concentrations of greenhouse gases are the result 
of fossil fuel burning, deforestation, livestock raising, and 
other human activities. Concerted action on the part of indi-
viduals and governments will be required to slow the increase 
in concentrations. Changes in greenhouse gas concentrations 
and the analysis of the climatic and other physical conse-
quences of those changes lie within the purview of the phys-
ical sciences. The role of human activity in generating 
greenhouse gases, the consequences of those changes for hu-
mans, and possible responses lie within the purview of the so-
cial sciences. 
Climate change impacts are likely to vary dramatically 
from country to country. A warmer climate could benefit sec-
tors of the economies of some mid- and high-latitude coun-
tries. It is possible that anthropogenic warming might heat the 
atmosphere enough to prevent or delay another ice age. On 
the other hand, even modest economic losses averaged over 
the globe could mask large regional losses: a rising sea level 
and the possibility of increased storm surges could threaten 
the survival of some small island states and coastal areas and 
could increase the risk of midcontinenl drought and desertifi-
cation for inland areas on the periphery of deserts. Such 
changes could promote human migration and major conflicts 
as well as famine, disease, and increased mortality. 
Within the past decade, a consensus has emerged on some 
key issues in the economics of climate change. This report de-
scribes areas of consensus as well as areas of disagreement, 
the sources of disagreement, and further research that could 
narrow the range of disagreement. This chapter frames the is-
sue of climate change largely from the point of view of eco-
nomics but also from that of other social sciences, introducing 
the more detailed discussions in the chapters to follow. 
At least two arguments have been offered to justify the 
commitment of resources to mitigate climate change. The first 
arises from fundamental values, the second from decision 
analysis. They may be summarized as follows: 
(1) 
We have only one planet. Some changes are largely irre-
versible and may occur rapidly. Prudence calls for 
avoiding a large-scale experiment with the planet. Thus, 
avoiding anthropogenic climate change lies beyond the 
scope of normal economic calculation. 
(2) 
The potential exists for the occurrence of sudden. 
largely irreversible, nonlinear changes in the global 
ecosystem. These would have major economic effects, 
which would be particularly severe in some countries or 
regions. 
Even if the first view is adopted, economics has much to con-
tribute to the discussion, for the question of cost-effective 
emission reductions must still be addressed. If the second 
view is adopted, economics and cost-benefit analysis will 
clearly be relevant, both in deciding how much mitigation to 
undertake and in designing the measures. 
This chapter, and others in this Assessment Report, draw 
on the findings of the IPCC's Working Groups I and II, and 
follow the guidelines provided by the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (FCCC). The Convention leaves open a 
number of important questions that must be addressed at the 
political level through future negotiations, including review-
ing the adequacy of commitments. It is hoped that the findings 
of this chapter, and the assessment report more broadly, will 
contribute to these future negotiations by providing an under-
standing of the costs and consequences of alternative actions 
and their scientific basis. 
1.2 Features of Climate Change 
Climate change could impose a variety of impacts on society. 
Volume 2 of this report analyzes these impacts in detail. They 
include effects on agriculture, forests, water resources, the 
costs of heating and cooling, the impact of sea level rise on 
small island states and low-lying coastal areas, and a possible 
increase in extreme events (e.g., storms). Although most at-
tention to date has focussed on negative impacts, some im-
pacts will be positive. Beyond these tangible impacts are a 
variety of intangible impacts,1 including damages to existing 
ecosystems and the threat of species losses.-
Climate change presents the analyst with a set of formida-
ble complications: large uncertainties, the potential for irre-
versible damages or costs, a very long planning horizon, long 
time lags between emissions and effects, a global scope, wide 
regional variations, and multiple greenhouse gases of concern. 
Large uncertainties. Although natural scientists agree that 
greenhouse gas concentrations are rising, there remain major 
uncertainties about the impacts on temperature and climate. 
These are reflected in a wide range of estimates of future 
global mean temperature increases and in uncertainties about 
regional climate changes. Estimates of net economic losses 
for the most likely range of warming over the next century, 
and the great uncertainties associated with such estimates, are 
discussed in Chapter 6. Social scientists do not agree on the 
size of the behavioural responses or economic effects that 
would follow or on the effect of these changes on human well-
being (Marine and Richels. 1992: Peck and Teisberg, 1993: 
Nordhaus. 1993).' 
Nonlinearitics and irreversibilities. Nonlinearities occur 
when changes in one variable cause a more than proportionate 
impact on another variable. Irreversibilities are changes that, 
once set in motion, cannot be reversed, at least on human 
timescales. For example, some have suggested that even a 
modest increase in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentra-
Introduction: Scope of the 
Assessment 
M, M2 
Temperature 
Note: As average temperature increases from M, to M, the number of days when the temperature 
exceeds T0 increases significantly. 
Figure 1.1: Effect of an increase in average temperature on the 
number of days that exceed a specified threshold. 
tions could, beyond a certain point, trigger a substantial in-
crease in temperature. Some have hypothesized that "runaway 
warming" could be triggered by a disruption of the North At-
lantic thermohaline circulation or by methane release from 
thawing of permafrost.4 Alternatively, even a modest increase 
in average temperature might significantly increase weather-
related agricultural losses because, for many crops, extra days 
of extreme heat severely limit yields. In Figure 1.1, if the 
threshold temperature for crop damage is T(|, then even a 
small increase in the mean temperature, from M, to M„ may 
greatly increase the number of days above the threshold, rep-
resented by the area under the curves to the right of T().s On 
the other hand, spending large sums to reduce the risk of cli-
mate change may also have largely irreversible consequences, 
slowing development as it drains resources from other efforts 
to improve the human condition. 
Long planning 
horizon. 
Greenhouse gas concentration 
changes occur over a long period of time; the full conse-
quences of actions taken over the coming decades will be felt 
increasingly over the next century and in future centuries. The 
truly long-term nature of the problem is one of the distinctive 
aspects of greenhouse gas warming. Seldom has the world 
consciously faced a set of decisions likely to affect our de-
scendants one, two, or three centuries from now/' Because the 
costs of taking action today are borne by the current genera-
tion, whereas the benefits that accrue will be felt possibly 
hundreds of years in the future, the world community is now 
faced with issues of intergenerational equity on an unprece-
dented scale. Although society has addressed similar prob-
lems concerning trade-offs over periods of fifty or even a 
hundred years, the long planning horizon for climate change 
puts the analytic questions at issue in a new light. The length 
of time involved has one further implication: changes in tech-
nology, as well as population and consumption patterns, be-
come of paramount importance. 
Long life of capital stock. Every country has made large 
capital investments in its cities, farms, ports, and other assets. 
Some of this investment cannot be changed without large 
costs: low-lying port cities, for example, cannot easily be re-
built. For other investments, the cost of change will be small. 
For diversified agricultural economies, the cost of switching' 
from one annual crop to another will be small if the tempera-
ture increase is modest; for less diversified economies, the 
costs may be larger. In short, both mankind and ecosystems 
have adjusted to the current climate, and adjustments to ac-
commodate climate change may be costly. 
Inertia in the climate system. Atmospheric concentrations, 
rather than emissions, determine the amount of warming pro-
jected by climate models. Concentrations change much more 
slowly than emissions, meaning that affected nations might 
not have enough time to prevent impacts from climate change, 
or to mitigate economic impacts after the effects of climate 
change become evident. In this respect, the risks of climate 
change are unlike those of earthquakes or floods. Long time 
lags and the difficulty of detecting climate change increase 
the difficulty of reliably determining the magnitude and tim-
ing of future effects before they begin to occur. 
Global scope. Climate change is a global challenge, which 
cannot be answered by a single country acting by itself. Miti-
gation must be coordinated globally. In an interlinked world 
economy, not only are the actions of a single country, or group 
of countries, not likely to be sufficient to address the problem, 
they are likely to be largely offset by actions of other coun-
tries. If, for instance, one group of countries reduces limber 
cutting to increase carbon absorption, the price of lumber will 
rise, which may induce other countries to increase cutting in 
their forests. 
Moreover, whereas economic analysis generally takes the 
point of view of a single decision maker or government, the 
important decisions on climate change will, of necessity, he 
made by many sovereign governments. Economic and deci-
sion sciences are not yet able to predict the outcome of bar-
gaining problems of this type.7 
Regional variation. Impacts are likely to vary greatly both 
within and among countries. Some countries and regions will 
suffer from warming: others will benefit, at least in some sec-
tors. Some cold countries will benefit from a reduction in 
heating costs and an increase in the length of growing sea-
sons; some warm countries will see a drop in yields from agri-
culture and forestry; low-lying states are likely to suffer from 
increased storm surges and flooding. 
Aggregation. 
For the world as a whole, the net effect at any 
time will be the sum of local effects at many points on the 
globe, some positive and some negative. Analysts have no 
way to estimate this sum without detailed local calculations 
(summarized in Chapter 6). 
Multiple gases of interest. The enhancement of the green-
house effect depends on the concentration of all greenhouse 
gases, even though most economic modelling to date has lim-
ited itself to the implications of changes in CO,. Because 
greenhouse gases differ in radiative efficiency and atmos-
pheric lifetime, analysts have devised measures of global 
warming potential (IPCC, 1990a, 1995) that seek to allow ra-
diative forcing from changes in the concentration of all green-
house gases to be measured in a commensurable fashion.* 
Studies also demonstrate the important role of sulphur and 
other aerosols, which cause negative radiative forcing (i.e.. 
cooling) by reflecting incoming solar radiation.9 
24 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Importance of net emissions. Because greenhouse gas con-
centrations depend on net rather than gross emissions, 
changes in forests and other greenhouse gas sinks must be 
taken into account.10 
Efficiency vs. equity. From an economist's perspective, 
how much to reduce emissions is a matter of efficiency (be-
cause achieving the proper level of emissions raises net well-
being), but who pays is a matter of equity. Economics has 
much to say about the former, but much less about the latter. 
Nonetheless, equity considerations will drive many of the pol-
icy decisions made under the Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change. 
1.3 Contribution of Economics 
Economics and the social sciences offer perspectives on cli-
mate change not provided by the physical sciences. In the 
classic definition, economics is the study of the allocation of 
scarce resources that have alternative uses. Economics em-
phasizes the importance of trade-offs between different uses 
of resources, and the forgone value of other uses of a resource, 
called the opportunity cost. In the context of climate change, 
this means that (I) costs and benefits matter; (2) resources are 
not free; and (3) resources used for one purpose are no longer 
available for other purposes. 
This chapter sets out the logic of cost-benefit analysis as 
applied to climate change. Standard cost-benefit analysis re-
quires (1) a valuing of costs and benefits over time, using will-
ingness to pay as a measure of value and (2) a criterion for 
accepting or rejecting proposals." The standard criterion is 
the compensation principle (Kaldor, 1939; Hicks, 1939), 
which says that if the project yields positive net benefits, then 
those made better off could compensate those made worse off 
with something extra left over. As long as compensation is 
paid, the result is an unambiguous gain in welfare, without the 
necessity of weighing effects on different individuals. 
Climate change raises difficulties with both requirements. 
Valuation is difficult because of the difficulty in valuing envi-
ronmental amenities, which are generally not traded in the 
market. And the compensation principle will not apply if 
mechanisms for affecting transfers do not exist, either be-
tween countries or regions in one generation, or - especially -
between generations. If transfers are not feasible, then the 
analysis must assign weights to different individuals (for ex-
ample, the utilitarian welfare function gives equal weight to 
each person). Only then can conclusions be drawn about net 
benefits for society as a whole. This issue is addressed in the 
discussion of equity in Section 1.4. 
Beyond these fundamental concepts are ideas, originally 
from other areas of economics, that may be applied directly to 
the study of climate change; these include work on risk, dy-
namics, sequential decision making, public goods and exter-
nalities, taxation, and general equilibrium. 
1.3.1 Risk 
In the past thirty years, much new economic research has fo-
cussed on rational responses to risk,12 including three areas 
important to a systematic examination of and rational re-
sponse to climate change: portfolio theory, insurance, and de-
cision analysis. 
1.3.1.1 Portfolio theory 
A portfolio manager attempts to get the best return for a given 
level of risk. One approach is to buy several types of assets 
whose returns are not correlated or are negatively correlated 
(that is, whose prices move either independently or in oppo-
site directions). In this respect, climate change policy deci-
sions can be compared to investment portfolio decisions. 
When faced with a risk, an individual may (1) act to reduce 
the chance the unfavourable event will occur; (2) act to reduce 
the cost if the event does occur; or (3) spread part of the risk to 
others through insurance. In response to the threat of climate 
change, nations may (1) reduce the chance that warming will 
occur by reducing greenhouse emissions (mitigation); (2) ad-
just to climate change if it does occur (adaptation); or (3) 
spread part of the risk through insurance. A porfolio approach 
can be expected to include both mitigation and adaptation ac-
tions. These may include government policy reforms, such as 
reducing fossil fuel subsidies; increased carbon sequestration; 
reducing emissions of methane and other non-CO,, green-
house gases; research and development, which can promote 
emission reductions or make it easier to adapt to any changes 
that do occur; and international actions, including joint imple-
mentation (one country funding emission reductions in an-
other country) and technology transfer. 
A well-chosen portfolio of climate change investments will 
yield greater benefit for a given cost than any one option un-
dertaken by itself. For an individual country, the issue is how 
to choose the portfolio of policy measures best suited to its 
circumstances and to adjust the portfolio over time in re-
sponse to new developments. Governments will be making 
climate change decisions for several decades at least. This 
means that they will have many opportunities to adjust the 
size (total resources) and mix (choice of measures) of their 
portfolios of responses. Portfolios may differ from country to 
country. 
1.3.1.2 Risk aversion 
Individuals and societies are generally risk-averse when fac-
ing large risks; that is, they are willing to pay something to re-
duce the likelihood of a large risk. The amount they are 
willing to pay is called the risk premium (see Box 1.1). 
That individuals and societies are risk-averse means that 
average utility (well-being) is increased by pooling risks, or, 
equivalently, that people are willing to pay to reduce the risks 
they face. If society as a whole is risk-averse, then some in-
vestments with a negative expected return, for example, a par-
ticular investment in climate change mitigation, should be 
undertaken if they reduce the probability of a loss or the costs 
of future adaptation. 
The magnitude of those expenditures depends on society's 
degree of risk aversion and the magnitude of the risk. The risk 
premium - the extra amount that society is willing to pay to 
reduce a risk - is small if the stakes (say. the maximum loss) 
are small, and lame if the stakes are lame. An investment of a 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
dollar is justified if it reduces the loss of expected utility by 
more than a dollar, and not justified if it reduces the loss by less 
than a dollar. Thus, results reported below focussing on the ex-
pected loss of GDP from climate change do not directly address 
the risk premium. If a possible outcome is a loss of 10%, even 
though the expected loss is only 3%, then the certainly equiva-
lent loss will exceed 3%. A dollar investment that reduces this 
certainty equivalent loss by more than a dollar should be under-
taken. Such an investment could either reduce the average loss, 
for example, by reducing the probability of the loss occurring 
(through mitigation actions), or reduce the variance of the loss. 
For example, some actions that reduce extreme losses will have 
more than proportionate returns. 
Ascertaining the magnitude of the risks, or how they are af-
fected by any particular action, is often difficult in a dynamic 
setting. One key consideration is how the particular action af-
fects the remaining options - the set of actions available in the 
future - along with their costs and benefits. Risk-reducing ex-
penditures are referred to as precautionary investments. Mak-
ing precautionary investments has the same effect as buying 
conventional insurance. 
The insurance expenditures associated with mitigation ac-
tions and investments are, in a sense, only the differences be-
tween the actual expenditures and the no-regrets benefits (the 
benefits other than those associated with greenhouse gas emis-
sions). Thus, investments in fuel-efficient cars may have a di-
rect benefit in reducing the cost of running a car and in reducing 
its emissions of local air pollutants. The mitigation investment 
is only the additional investment for climate purposes. 
Irrespective of the possible consequences of climate 
change, policies that mitigate against or assist adaptation to 
climate change and have zero or negative net costs (no-regrets 
policies) are clearly justified. If the evidence suggests that 
damages can be expected from climate change, then the ex-
pectation of damages provides a rationale for going beyond 
no-rcgrcts policies to those that incur positive net costs. The 
principles of risk aversion and portfolio balancing provide a 
rationale for further steps. The costs of such policies might be 
justified as a risk premium to be paid for the added security of 
reducing the likelihood of climate change. 
Traditional insurance rests on two principles: pooling risks 
and transferring risks to those more willing or better able u> 
bear them.13 Because the risks associated with climate change 
are correlated, pooling risks is less effective than it is in other 
situations. Nonetheless, differences in predicted regional im-
pacts, implying less than perfect correlation in climate change 
risks, make possible some degree of risk pooling. This holds 
irrespective of who pays the cost, because wealthier individu-
als and countries are better able to bear risk.14 Many countries 
likely to be most adversely affected will be developing coun-
tries, whereas many of the countries least affected (or posi 
lively affected) will be the industrialized countries, which 
could provide insurance for effects of climate change thai 
might fall harder on less developed economies.15 
Insurance markets, however, lace three problems in ad-
dressing climate change. First, they lack a mechanism to 
transfer some of the risk from those likely to bear it (future 
generations) to the current generation. Second, losses associ-
ated with climate change are likely to be both correlated and 
large, compared to losses absorbed in a single year by the 
commercial insurance industry (which itself has been hard 
pressed in recent years to handle natural disasters). Third, the 
long-term nature of climate change insurance raises the prob-
lem of contract enforcement: Will contracts signed today he 
enforceable tomorrow? Will the insurers be around to pay 
claims fifty or one hundred years from now? (Even in the in-
dustrialized countries, private markets may be inadequate to 
insure against losses from a major national disaster today.) 
These considerations suggest that private markets will not 
be able to insure fully against climate change. One possible 
solution would include international action to establish insur-
ance markets, perhaps with government reinsurance. Should 
such an insurance market be established, careful attention will 
have to be given to ensuring that the insured parties engage in 
appropriate adaptation actions, reducing the losses that might 
be associated with any greenhouse gas warming."' 
1.3.1.3 Precautionary investments 
A business makes precautionary investments to reduce the 
total risk of its portfolio. Numerous policy measures are avail-
able to reduce risks to future generations from climate change. 
Four have been most often discussed in recent years: (1) im-
mediate reductions in emissions to slow climate change; (2) 
research and development focussing on new supply and con-
servation technology to reduce future abatement costs;17 (3) 
continued research to reduce uncertainties about how much 
change will occur and what effects it will have; and (4) invest-
ments in actions to assist human and natural systems to adapt 
to climate change if it occurs. 
Precautionary investments may reduce the risk of climate 
change itself (mitigation), or they may enhance the ability of 
future generations to respond, in one of two ways. First, by 
analogy, an individual may set money aside in a "rainy day 
fund" when things are going well and allow it to grow over 
time in order to make it easier to adapt to difficulties that may 
occur later. Similarly, by increasing investment in productive 
BOX 1.1: RISK AND UNCERTAINTY 
Uncertainty arises when a decision can lead to a range of 
outcomes. 
Expected return or expected value of a decision is the 
mean of the distribution of returns, the amount a person 
would on average receive as a consequence of the deci-
sion. 
Risk aversion measures an individual's unwillingness to 
take risks. 
Risk premium is the amount an individual would pay to re-
place the uncertain distribution of outcomes with the ex-
pected value. 
Certainty equivalent is the amount that makes an individ-
ual indifferent between it and a risky proposition; for a 
risk-averse person, the certainty equivalent is higher than 
the expected return; the difference is the risk premium. 
26 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
assets now, countries will have a richer economy to draw on 
should climate change damages occur later. A policy of pre-
cautionary investments means investing more than would oth-
erwise have been invested. Second, investments can be made 
(including investment in research and development) that 
would enhance the economy's ability to adapt should climate 
change damages occur. 
Precautionary investments may also enhance the ability of 
future generations to react. An important reason that people 
establish savings accounts is to reduce the impact of un-
favourable events in the future. Similarly, a society may elect 
to accumulate capital against the possibility of a large loss 
from climate change. This is one thread of the debate over dis-
count rates discussed in Chapter 4. Those who argue for a dis-
count rate close to the opportunity cost of capital point out 
thai society may choose between immediate greenhouse gas 
mitigation, at a cost, and delayed mitigation, with some of the 
money saved put aside as a savings account for our grandchil-
dren in the event of large climate-induced damages. 
1.3.2 Sequential decision making 
As a policy question, global climate change is sometimes 
posed as a choice between (a) doing nothing at all or (b) com-
mitting to all-out effort. Given the large current uncertainties 
about the costs and benefits of greenhouse mitigation, this is 
the wrong way to frame the issue, as it obscures the choices 
that should he evaluated. Moreover, in part because option (b) 
may he perceived as too expensive to get political support, 
policy paralysis often results. 
A more useful formulation is: "Given current knowledge 
and concerns, what actions should we take over the next one 
or two decades to position ourselves to act on new informa-
tion that will become available?" (Lind. 1994). For example, 
decision makers would like to know if the possibility of irre-
versible damages, such as might be suffered by low-lying 
states, justifies undertaking an aggressive abatement pro-
gramme immediately.IS 
Climate change demands a decision process that is sequen-
tial and can incorporate new information. Timing will be a 
key element, and the date of resolution of uncertainty an im-
portant element of the analysis. Figure 1.2 shows schemati-
cally the progression from a simple decision to a sequence of 
linked decisions. In this example, the simple decision might 
he whether to take aggressive abatement actions now. Let us 
assume that the uncertainties are resolved in 200?. In the case 
of sequential decisions. Decision 1 (in 1998) could be whether 
to take aggressive abatement actions now: Uncertainty I (re-
solved in 2005) might be the cost of mitigation: Decision 2 (in 
2010) might he whether to tighten abatement programmes al-
ready in place: and Uncertainly 2 (resolved in 2020) might be 
the relation between greenhouse concentrations and tempera-
ture increase. Since both climate change and new knowledge 
(learning) are continuous processes, actions to address cli-
mate change should be adjusted continuously in the light of 
new information. 
A sequential decision-making strategy aims to identify 
short-term strategies in the face of long-term uncertainty. The 
next several decades will offer opportunities for learning and 
Simple decisions 
Sequential decision making 
4 O 
Decision Observed 
Decisions 
™ 
^ " — , 
outcomes based on new 
knowledge 
H 
Decisions 
w 
Observed outcomes 
Note: Time lags between decisions and observed 
outcomes and between outcomes and subsequent 
decisions vary. 
Figure 1.2: Sequential decision making. 
making mid-course corrections. The relevant question is not 
"What is the best course for the next 100 years?" but rather, 
"What is the best course for the next few years?" because a pru-
dent hedging strategy will allow time to learn and change course. 
For example, the choices might be (1) immediate invest-
ment in new plant and equipment, (2) aggressive research and 
development on greenhouse abatement technology, or (3) de-
ferring large investment for ten years, when the nature and 
size of the threat are better understood, when costs will pre-
sumably have dropped owing to the availability of improved 
technologies, and the job can be done more efficiently. 
Inappropriate interim goals increase the total cost of ad-
dressing the problem (Richels and Edmonds, 1993). For ex-
ample, a commitment to certain levels of emissions in cer-
tain years fails to take into account the effects of temporary 
economic disturbances on GDP. and thus on emissions and, 
hence, on the cost of controls. 
Because of the high cost of being wrong in either direction, 
(he value of information about climate change is likely to be 
great. In particular, the value of information about the sensitiv-
ity of temperature to CO\ increases, the temperature damage 
function, the GDP growth rate, and the rate of energy effi-
ciency improvement is likely to be high (Chao, 1992; Peck and 
Teisberg. 1992: Mamie and Richels, 1992; Nordhaus, 1993).'" 
The presence of uncertainty along a dynamic path creates 
an option value, the value of preserving choices for the future. 
In climate change, the term has been used in two different 
ways. One stresses the irreversibilities of climate change: mit-
igation expenditures now preserve the option of avoiding 
adaptation expenditure later. The other stresses irreversibili-
ties in investment and the cost of premature turnover of capi-
tal. Any action taken today changes the options available later 
or. more precisely, changes the consequences of any future ac-
tion. Sequential decision making focusses on how those con-
sequences are affected if one action is taken today rather than 
another, and on how these consequences are affected if ac-
tions are taken in parallel rather than serially. 
1.3.3 Dynamics 
The problem of greenhouse gas warming involves additions 
to concentrations resulting from net emissions over extended 
Introduction: Scope of the 
Assessment 
periods of time. Thus the analysis must focus on dynamics. 
Dynamic analysis involves three stages: the dynamic pro-
cesses involved, the trade-offs, and judgments concerning 
those trade-offs. 
Dynamic analyses have led to important insights. For ex-
ample, atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and, 
therefore, their effect on temperatures depend on the total 
amount emitted over a period of years. A given concentration 
target can be achieved by a variety of emission timepaths. 
Timepaths that provide for the economical turnover of exist-
ing capital stock and time to develop low-cost substitutes are 
likely to be less costly. This suggests large potential gains 
from flexibility in the timing of emission reductions.-" 
1.3.3.1 Kaya identity 
The driving forces in emissions of any greenhouse gas can be 
seen in the following identity for carbon dioxide emissions 
(Kaya, 1989): 
CO, 
= C O , / E 
X f / Q 
X g / L 
X 6 
carbon 
carbon 
energy 
output 
popu-
dioxide 
dioxide 
per unit 
per 
lation 
emissions 
emissions 
output 
capita 
per unit 
energy 
or, expressed in rates of change: 
d \nCO,/dt 
= d \nCO,/E 
/dt + d \nE/Q /dt + d InQ/L kit 
+ 
d\nLkft 
that is, the percentage rate of change in carbon dioxide emis-
sions is equal to the rate of change in carbon dioxide emis-
sions per unit energy plus the rate of change in energy 
requirements per unit output plus the rate of change in output 
per capita plus the rate of change in population.21 
This identity clarifies different approaches to reducing 
emissions. For a developed country with a stable or slowly 
growing population, as long as the ratio of emissions to output 
declines at least as fast as productivity rises. CO, emissions 
will not increase. Because of the substantial potential for en-
ergy efficiency improvements, this seems feasible for most 
developed countries. Many opportunities exist for increasing 
end-use efficiency, represented by the second term on the 
right-hand side - for example, a shift from cars to public-
transportation and from less to more fuel-efficient cars and 
homes.-- (The same term may also reflect structural shifts 
in the economy, as in the case of a shift away from energy-
intensive industries.) Fuel switching (for example, from coal-
based electricity to oil. gas. hydroelectric, wind, or geo-
thermal), represented by the first term, also offers 
the 
potential to limit CO, emissions in many countries. 
For many developing countries, emissions will increase 
unless energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions per 
unit of energy change to offset growth in per capita output and 
population. For many developing countries with rapidly 
growing populations, pressures for economic development 
will make it difficult to direct capital from investments with 
higher greenhouse gas emissions to those with lower green-
house cas emissions.ly 
Evidence for two other essential issues is currently limited. 
First, to what extent will improvements in energy efficiencx 
require net increases in investment beyond the resources 
saved from reduced energy usage; in other words, how much 
does aggressive emission reduction depress economic growth .' 
Order-of-magnitude calculations suggest the presence of only 
limited trade-offs, at least for the near term. Second, do devel-
oping countries have the institutional capacity to achieve the 
desired increases in emission efficiency? 
1.3.3.2 Nonrenewable 
resources, backstop 
technologies, 
and emission reduction 
strategies 
In principle the atmosphere is a renewable natural resource. 
However, the longevity of the greenhouse gases and the rela-
tionships between stocks and flows mean that, for practical 
purposes, it may be better treated as an exhaustible natural re-
source, although one in which welfare depends not just on the 
flow out of the stock but on the stock itself.-' 
The central problem with natural resources, whether re-
newable or not, is timing. Many renewable resources possess 
a maximum sustainable rate of exploitation. Exploitation can-
not long exceed this maximum rate without depleting the 
stock and ultimately reducing the harvest. Corresponding In 
the sustainable flow rate is a steady-state stock. If, initially. 
the actual stock exceeds the steady-state stock, then the flow 
can exceed the maximum sustainable flow for a while. The 
question is how to distribute this excess over lime. In addi-
tion, even when the stock is at the sustainable level, it may be 
desirable in times of emergency to exceed the maximum sus-
tainable flow. For a renewable resource, this can he done, 
though only at the expense of decreased flows later.-' 
Timing of reductions in greenhouse gas emissions should 
reflect differences in costs, discounting (to evaluate those 
costs), and risk. If technological change will make future 
emission reductions much less costly, some reductions should 
be postponed.-6 Conversely, research on learning 
effects 
shows that if actions taken today will lower costs faced to-
morrow, then these dynamic benefits should he included in 
the calculus (Arrow, 1962: Atkinson and Stiglitz. 1980). In the 
context of climate change, if emission constraints stimulate 
technical or other developments that help to lower the costs of 
continuing or additional emission abatement, then reductions 
should be accelerated (Grubb et al„ 1993a. 1993b, 1995). If 
discount rates are high, the costs borne by future generations 
will carry less weight than if discount rates are low. In the 
presence of risk, nonlinearities. or irreversibilities, the princi-
ple of risk aversion suggests a strategy of early mitigation. 
The theory of nonrenewable resources contains a second 
set of lessons for climate change policy. Suppose primary en-
ergy sources are divided into four groups: coal, gas and oil. 
biomass. and noncarbon sources. As a first approximation, 
gas and oil may be taken to he exhaustible. This means that to-
tal carbon emissions from gas and oil are fixed, or at least 
confined to narrow bounds; the question is not how much will 
be consumed, only when.27 
As an example. Figure 1.3 depicts three phases of fuel use 
in an economy. In the first phase, the economy relies on non-
renewable resources, such as oil and gas; in the second, on 
coal and perhaps nuclear power; in the third, on backstop 
28 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
1 
• 
Time 
Note: If the price of the nonfossil backstop technology is 
given hy A, all oil and gas reserves will he exhausted and 
coal will he used lor some time before being displaced 
by the backstop technology. If the price of the nonfossil 
backstop is given by It, it will he adopted before the oil 
and gas reserves are exhausted, resulting in lower 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
Figure 1.3: Influence of the cost of backstop technologies on energy 
use and greenhouse gas emissions. 
technologies,2" such as biomass combined with noncarbon 
sources. The switch points depend on rising energy prices 
and improving technology, which lowers the costs of the 
backstops. The figure shows alternative long-run scenarios. 
In alternative A, the price of the backstop technology falls 
sufficiently slowly that, for a time, the economy relies on 
coal. In alternative B. the price of the backstop technology 
falls fast enough to eliminate the intervening stage of primary 
reliance on coal. 
Since, to a first-order approximation, the total carbon load 
from oil and gas is fixed (and limited), the total carbon load 
on the atmosphere is ultimately primarily related to coal us-
age. From this perspective, an important uncertainty is the 
pace at which the cost of the backstop decreases. If it de-
creases fast enough, the intermediate stage of coal depen-
dence will he short, and the total carbon load low, whereas if 
the price decreases slowly, the carbon load could be much 
larger. 
From this perspective, rational use of gas and oil is an im-
portant part of a risk strategy, for it provides insurance against 
the possibility of a delay in the arrival of backstop energy 
sources.2" This, in turn, has important implications for the 
"leakage" debate, which asks whether, in the event that the 
developing countries impose carbon taxes but the undevel-
oped countries do not. the hitter's response will largely offset 
emission reductions made by the former. It is also possible 
that lower prices for gas and oil will induce coal-rich coun-
tries to decrease their reliance on coal, thus possibly produc-
ing negative leakages. But to the extent that such leakage 
occurs, the insurance provided by greater conservation of oil 
and gas is eliminated, and it is this insurance that should be an 
essential part of a dynamic strategy. If the backstop arrival is 
delayed, then earlier fuel switching by China and India, to 
mention the most pertinent examples, will yield no long-run 
benefits. On the other hand, if the backstop arrival is early, the 
whole issue is largely moot. Thus, leakage needs to be looked 
at. not from the static perspective of what occurs in a single 
year, but from a dynamic perspective that corresponds to the 
long-run nature of the global climate problem. 
1.3.4 International public goods 
The atmosphere is an international public good, in that atmos-
pheric concentrations are the result of combined actions by all 
countries. A pure public good (Samuelson, 1954) has two 
properties: nonrivalry and nonexcludability (see Box 1.2).30 
The atmosphere has both characteristics. That means that if 
one country's greenhouse gas reductions thwart global warm-
ing, all countries benefit.31 
Since countries will be affected differently by climate 
change, the benefits of avoiding greenhouse warming will 
also differ from country to country. Further, some actions will 
simultaneously affect local atmospheric conditions (providing 
local public goods) and greenhouse concentrations. For exam-
ple, actions that reduce urban driving improve local air qual-
ity and at the same time reduce greenhouse gas emissions.32 
1.3.4.1 Property rights 
An important strand of economic thought associates external-
ities with a failure to assign property rights (Coase, 1960). As-
signing property rights to the atmosphere is particularly 
difficult, however, since this would require the agreement of 
many sovereign states. Tradable greenhouse emission per-
mits, discussed below, can be thought of as an attempt to re-
solve the problem by explicitly assigning property rights to 
greenhouse emissions. 
Establishing property rights for emissions is not the same 
thing as considering the climate system itself as a public 
good. The FCCC refers to the climate system (not the atmos-
phere) as a "common concern of humankind." Atmospheric 
concentrations are the net result of emissions plus the contri-
butions and effects of other factors such as the oceans, forests, 
BOX 1.2: PUBLIC GOODS AND 
EXTERNALITIES 
Externality: An externality, or spillover, arises when the 
private costs or benefits of production differ from the so-
cial costs or benefits. Because the social costs or benefits 
are external to the private costs that firms face, the econ-
omy will tend to produce too little of a public good (like 
education) and too much of a public bad (like pollution). 
Public good: A public good has two properties: nonrivalry 
and nonexcludability. Nonrivalry means that additional 
consumers do not have to compete with each other to use 
the good and therefore drive up its cost: the marginal cost 
of an additional individual using the good is zero. Nonex-
cludability means that the marginal cost of exclusion - of 
stopping an individual from enjoying the good - is prohib-
itive. Public goods thus permit "free riding." Lighthouses, 
for example, are public goods: when lighthouse services 
are provided to one person, others may enjoy the same ser-
vices without cost. 
Market failure: Private markets may sometimes fail to 
provide a good at the most desirable level: private markets 
alone will likely provide too few lighthouses and too much 
pollution. 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
and agricultural activity. Establishing property rights over 
emissions does not provide guidance for the consideration of 
these other influencing factors. Thus, establishing property 
rights for the atmosphere is only one of the mechanisms nec-
essary to regulate climate change. 
1.3.4.2 Paying for an international public good 
Who should pay for a global public good? Every country 
faces this question internally in determining who should pay 
for the public goods it provides. Who should, for instance, pay 
for pollution control within a country? Economists generally 
agree on the following principles: 
First, for the purposes of analysis. // is useful to separate 
efficiency from equity. The implication of this principle is that 
because pollution is a social cost of production (and consump-
tion), everyone should be made to pay the full social costs of 
the pollution they generate. Thus, if there is a social cost to a 
unit of greenhouse gas emissions, that cost is the same no 
matter who produces the emissions. All should pay the full so-
cial costs of their actions, whether rich or poor. In this 
perspective, corrective (Pigouvian) taxes should be imposed 
uniformly. 
Second, it is inappropriate to redress all equity issues 
through climate change initiatives, although climate change 
should not aggravate disparities between one region and an-
other. 
No scientific consensus exists on the framework for decid-
ing the burden of financing mitigation and adaptation. At least 
four approaches have been proposed to determine how the 
burdens of taxation should be shared. One approach looks at 
benefits: Just as those who benefit from private goods must 
pay for them, those who benefit from a public good should be 
made to pay for it. The principle has some force when large 
differences in preferences exist within any income class. Pro-
viding a particular public good benefits some of those individ-
uals more than others, creating inequalities in the absence of 
benefit taxes. A major problem frequently encountered, par-
ticularly for pure public goods, is that it may be difficult to de-
termine who benefits. It is. in general, possible to ascertain 
the economic benefits of mitigation, and these are likely to be 
quite unequally distributed. But this principle, by itself, does 
not fully determine who should bear the costs. Appropriately 
designed mitigation strategies will produce a surplus of bene-
fits over costs, a surplus that must somehow be divided. 
A second approach looks at ability to pay. It is often held 
that richer countries (or individuals) should pay more than 
poorer ones. This approach sometimes rests on the claim that 
all people are entitled to a certain minimum consumption 
(Dasgupta, 1982). But this principle docs not answer the ques-
tion of how much extra the richer countries should pay. 
A third approach is based on contribution to the problem. 
Because the industrialized countries have contributed more 
than two-thirds of the stock of anthropogenic greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere today, this approach seems to suggest 
that they have a larger responsibility for bearing the costs. On 
the other hand, by the time greenhouse gas concentrations 
double from preindustrial levels, the developing countries are 
projected to be contributing more than half of annual emis-
sions, and roughly half of the total stock in the atmosphere 
(IPCC, 1990a; Cline, 1992). Thus, under this criterion, the de-
veloping countries might eventually pay far more of the miti-
gation costs than under the other principles described earlier. 
Economists have turned to a fourth approach - the social 
welfare function - to answer the question of how much extra 
different parties should pay, as well as the question of how to 
distribute the surplus. The discussion of equity below differ-
entiates between the Rawlsian and utilitarian approaches. In 
this case, both approaches yield similar results: In the absence 
of incentive problems, both imply that all of the surplus 
should be allocated to the poorer countries, or that all of the 
burden of effort should be borne by the richer countries." 
Yet a different approach holds thai social scientists as such 
have nothing to say about these ethical issues. C'oase (I960), 
for instance, approaches the problem of externalities by em-
phasizing that (a) in the absence of bargaining costs, an el'fi 
cient solution can be obtained by assigning property rights ; 
and (b) this solution is independent of how property rights are 
assigned.15 Coase also emphasizes the importance of transac-
tion costs, which will often influence the choice of policies. 
A simple approach that yields efficiency but does not re-
quire redistribution (and is thus consistent with the two prin-
ciples enunciated above) requires coordinated tax rates so thai 
all countries face the same energy prices. This approach 
makes the cost of emitting an extra tonne of carbon equal 
across all countries, with each country retaining the revenues 
thus generated.''' The net cost of such a tax (ignoring the ben-
efits from reduced greenhouse gas emissions) will, in general, 
be smaller for poorer countries, as a percentage of their na-
tional output. The burden of the tax is progressive in its distri-
bution across countries, even though the tax is levied at I he-
same rate in all countries.-17 
Accounting for past emissions. Article 3.1 of the frame-
work Convention on Climate Change directs the Annex I (i.e.. 
developed) countries to take the lead in responding to the 
threat of climate change "on the basis of equity and in accor-
dance with their common but differentiated responsibilities 
and respective capabilities." Some have argued in addition 
that because the industrialized countries have been the major 
contributors to current levels of greenhouse gases, they 
should bear most of the costs of mitigation. This view says 
that costs should he borne, not in proportion to benefits ex-
pected, but in proportion to contribution to pollution. This ar-
gument, however, is not based on the principle of economic-
efficiency. Efficiency requires that incentives he prospective 
(forward looking), not retrospective.18 No incentive effects re-
sult from imposing charges based on past actions. Whether to 
charge nations that contributed CO, to the atmosphere is an is-
sue of ethics, not efficiency.1'' 
The controversial issues of population growth and con-
sumption patterns, although central to economic develop-
ment, bear on climate change largely through their effects on 
emissions. Population growth in developing countries may 
also exacerbate the ecological and socioeconomic impacts of 
climate change. At the same time, high per capita consump 
tion in industrialized countries, where populations have 
nearly stabilized, will also affect mitigation and adaptation 
30 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
costs and strategies. The relation of population to sustainable 
development, although important, is beyond the scope of this 
paper.4" 
1.3.4.3 Enforcement 
Both externalities and public goods need a legal framework 
within which the problems they pose can he addressed. With-
out compulsory taxation, there is an incentive for each indi-
vidual to be a free rider, though there is some empirical 
evidence that the free rider effect may not be as significant as 
economists have previously assumed (Bohm, 1993). In the 
absence of compulsory taxation, externalities can only be ad-
dressed with well-defined property rights (Coase, I960)41 and 
a legal system that enforces compensation for externalities. 
Enforcing compliance with international legal agreements 
presents a number of legal and political problems. Many 
states resist compulsory use of the judicial process; this pro-
vides an incentive for free riding. The FCCC provides several 
means of settling disputes, including judicial recourse and ar-
bitration. It also requires the parties to consider establishing a 
"multilateral consultative process" to assist in implementation 
of the Convention and to anticipate and prevent confronta-
tions concerning compliance and enforcement. 
1.3.4.4 Knowledge 
A key element in addressing the problem of global warming is 
knowledge - knowledge about climate science as well as 
about the economic and social aspects of impacts, mitigation, 
and adaptation. Much of this knowledge is in the nature of an 
international public good. Developing ways of increasing en-
ergy efficiency will benefit all countries. Although in some 
cases, those countries engaged in the research will be able to 
appropriate for themselves a significant fraction of the private 
benefits (mostly in reduced energy costs), they will not be 
able to appropriate the broader social benefits, except through 
an energy tax (or permit fee) that is high enough that the price 
fully internalizes the emissions externality. Even then, the so-
cial benefits of innovation tend to far exceed the private bene-
fits. 
This suggests the need for an international agreement to 
fund basic research and subsidize applied research, particu-
larly in energy-related technologies for the developing coun-
tries. There need not be a central funding agency, or a central 
directorate determining which research should be undertaken. 
This calls for some mechanism, possibly including joint im-
plementation, for sharing research results and for ensuring 
that the fruits of this research are made available. 
1.3.5 Efficiency 
With some exceptions noted below, efficiency and equity can 
be analyzed separately.42 Analysts agree that any actions re-
sponding to climate change should be cost-effective: no mat-
ter who bears the cost of emission reductions, reductions 
should occur where their cost is lowest.4' Because of the low 
energy efficiency in many developing countries, many have 
proposed that more attention be paid to emission reductions 
there. 
Mechanisms for reducing emissions equitably and effi-
ciently, including joint implementation, tradable permits, and 
coordinated tax policies, are discussed below and in Chapter 
11. All these approaches, however, attempt to confront all in-
dividuals and producers in all countries with the same cost of 
emissions. Emission control is an international public good, 
in that greenhouse emission reductions have the same effect 
wherever they occur. Just as efficiency in the production of 
steel or any other commodity requires that all consumers and 
producers face the same price, so too with emissions. This can 
be achieved either through coordinated energy taxes or 
through tradable permit requirements; but unless the rules are 
applied in a systematic way to both developed and developing 
countries, emission reductions will be inefficient. 
Partial participation in an international emission reduction 
programme will significantly reduce its effectiveness. The 
growth of international trade has resulted in important links 
between the developed and developing countries, and the total 
effects of any policy undertaken in the former can only be 
evaluated in terms taking into account the systemic responses, 
including responses from the developing countries, as dis-
cussed under the heading of "general equilibrium" in Section 
1.3.6 below.44 
1.3.5.1 Bankable permits 
Efficiency imposes several requirements. One, just described, 
is that at any moment, the costs of reducing emissions should 
be minimized. The second is intertemporal efficiency: The 
marginal cost of reducing emissions at two points in time 
must be the same. If it will cost less to reduce emissions at 
some future date, adjusting for time discounting, option val-
ues (risk), and impacts on atmospheric concentrations, then 
the reduction schedule should be adjusted accordingly. 
Intertemporal efficiency would be promoted by allowing 
banking of permits (allowing a source to use fewer permits in 
one year and more in another), and by the development of fu-
tures and options markets. A bankable permit system would 
address some equity issues between developed and develop-
ing countries, including the concern among developing coun-
tries that delays in mitigation now by the industrialized 
economies would leave a greater burden for the future. 
1.3.5.2 Exchange/risk efficiency 
When different parties to an agreement hold widely differing 
views about risk and the probability of loss, significant effi-
ciency gains can result from transferring risk among them. In 
Section 1.3.1.2 we discussed the importance of establishing 
an international insurance market for those facing the threat of 
losses under global warming and noted the advantages of es-
tablishing a market within which countries that are less con-
cerned about these risks can assume more of the insurance 
burden. Any efficient international system for addressing the 
problems of global climate change must include both mitiga-
tion and insurance obligations. Governments that believe they 
have a comparative advantage in assuming climate risks can 
assume a larger share of those risks, trading off other obliga-
tions and substantially reducing the overall costs of respond-
ing to climate chance. 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
JI 
1.3.5.3 Comprehensiveness 
Efficiency also requires that the cost of reducing all green-
house emissions be minimized. This principle implies that any 
mitigation programme must include not only all greenhouse 
gases (taking into consideration their heat-trapping potentials 
and atmospheric lifetimes45) but also carbon sinks. 
Finally, and perhaps most controversially, it implies 
that mitigation strategies should focus on all elements of 
the Kaya identity, ensuring that the marginal cost of reduc-
tions is the same for each of the possible strategies. Thus, 
population control may be an element in a long-term miti-
gation strategy, no less than a shift in the composition of 
production or an increase in the energy efficiency of the 
economy. 
1.3.6 General equilibrium 
General equilibrium theory, an important element of eco-
nomic research over the last century, demonstrates the advan-
tage of looking beyond first-stage effects. It offers two 
important insights for climate change analysis. First, the vari-
ous parts of an economic system are interrelated; perturba-
tions to one part have ramifications for other parts, which may 
be quite distant. Second, when all the reverberations are taken 
into account, the net effect of an action may be markedly dif-
ferent from the initial (and intended) effect. 
One implication of general equilibrium theory has already 
been noted: Taxes imposed on one part of the global economy 
may have little if any effect on global emissions; they may 
simply result in a relocation of economic activity. Increas-
ingly, the world's economic system must be viewed from a 
global perspective. Location of economic activities is deter-
mined primarily by relative factor prices, taking into account 
certain specific locational advantages and specialized compe-
tencies. If, for example, the OECD countries impose carbon 
taxes on energy-intensive industries, those industries may re-
locate outside the OECD. Further, if greenhouse mitigation 
puts an economic drag on the developed countries, developing 
countries would be affected through trade. 
If different countries have different obligations to reduce 
greenhouse emissions, different implicit tax rates will result. 
This will interfere with world economic efficiency - decreas-
ing world real output - possibly with little effect on total 
greenhouse gas emissions. For example, the most energy-
intensive activities - such as aluminum production - may well 
relocate to developing countries.46 
Whereas many of the energy-economy-carbon models de-
scribed in subsequent chapters attempt to estimate the magni-
tude of such carbon "leaks" (where carbon-intensive pro-
duction moves to areas in which it is least regulated), most are 
based on standard international trade models, in which the lo-
cation of production of various goods and machines is fixed 
(Whalley and Wigle, 1991 ).47 Thus, estimates of carbon leak-
ages are based only on commodity substitution.48 But in the 
very long run. which is the time span of interest for an analy-
sis of global warming, leakages may well be higher, owing to the 
relocation of industries. No consensus now exists on the mag-
nitude of long-run leakages. 
1.3.6.1 Intertemporal substitution 
General equilibrium issues also arise when production can be 
shifted from one period to another. For example, in a partial 
equilibrium analysis, a tax on gas or oil raises the price of the 
fuel taxed, thereby reducing its consumption, and thus associ-
ated emissions. But over the long run an exhaustible natural 
resource like gas or oil has, by definition, an inelastic supply 
(ignoring for the moment extraction costs, which, in the case 
of gas and oil, are small relative to the price). The general 
theory of incidence argues that when a commodity is in in-
elastic supply, a tax affects the price, but not the level of con-
sumption. That is, when all countries impose a tax on f>as or 
oil, the producer price of oil falls, by an amount just equal to 
the tax. The full incidence falls on producers; as a first ap-
proximation, the level of consumption - and thus the level of 
emissions - remains unchanged. Obviously, if the tax is large 
enough, the price will fall below the cost of extraction for 
some output, and supply will be reduced. Moreover, in the 
case of exhaustible natural resources, taxes may affect the 
timing of consumption of the oil and gas (Stiglitz, Dasgupta. 
and Heal, 1980).4y 
1.4 Equity 
Who will be allowed to increase their greenhouse emissions 
and who will pay for greenhouse gas abatement and adapta-
tion are among the most contentious issues in climate change. 
Equity issues such as these have immediate implications for 
policy as well, because the initial allocation of emission rights 
and emission constraints will largely determine the distribu-
tion of costs. The Framework Convention on Climate Change 
explicitly directs the parties to consider the problem of equity: 
The Parties should protect the climate system for the bene-
fit of present and future generations of humankind, on the 
basis of equity and in accordance with their common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. 
Accordingly, the developed country Parties should take the 
lead in combating climate change and the adverse effects 
thereof. . . . 
[Account must be taken of] the differences in their start-
ing points and approaches, economic structures and re-
source bases, the need to maintain strong and sustainable 
economic growth, available technologies and other indi-
vidual circumstances, as well as the need for equitable and 
appropriate contributions by each of these Parties to the 
global effort regarding [the Convention's! objective.50 
1.4.1 General issues 
Within the limits of cost-benefit analysis, equity arises be-
cause of the principle of compensation, discussed in Section 
1.3. For example, suppose it could be shown that a business-
as-usual path produced higher total benefits than a path with 
lower greenhouse emissions. We could not conclude from this 
that the world as a whole would be better off. Indeed, if the 
losers are not compensated, and their loss is counted more 
heavily than the winners' gain, the world as a whole would be 
32 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
worse off. Or suppose the costs of warming fall predomi-
nantly on one group or one generation, while the benefits ac-
crue to another. (For example, some have speculated that the 
costs of damages from warming would fall largely on devel-
oping countries, without a compensating increase in benefits 
(Parikh. 1994).) Unless the gainers actually compensate the 
losers for their losses, cost-benefit analysis cannot conclude 
that the change has, on balance, been good for society. Com-
pensation is particularly difficult if future generations bear 
most of the costs, because no "fund for future greenhouse vic-
tims" exists (Birdsall and Steer, 1993). Thus, some have ar-
gued that, in the absence of mechanisms to make these 
transfers, we should not rely on possible future transfers from 
gainers to losers but should instead insist that the gainers pay 
the costs up front. An alternative explanation addresses these 
equity concerns by assigning different weights, perhaps based 
on economic status, to changes in consumption of different in-
dividuals (Atkinson. 1970). 
No consensus exists among either economists or philoso-
phers about the appropriate ethical responses to the changes 
that would come with global warming. Should, for instance, 
owners of resources he compensated for the losses they incur 
as a result of mitigation actions and the consequent change in 
prices or values? Economists have often argued no. for sev-
eral reasons. First, some wealth is not a reward for productive 
activity, but merely an accident. It is not because country X 
did something that $200 billion worth of minerals or oil was 
discovered to lie beneath its territory. One position is that 
these random allocations of wealth have actually contributed 
to world inequality, and that eliminating a part of these wind-
fall gains would, from the perspective of an egalitarian social 
welfare function, be welfare-increasing. Another view denies 
that government policies would he taking value from assets 
that by right should be there; until now. according to this 
view, these resources have simply been underpriced. not fully 
reflecting the social costs imposed by their use. In this view, 
actions to discourage overuse would simply rectify a previous 
mistake/' 
Whether investors or countries should be compensated for 
the adverse effects on their market values remains controver-
sial. There is. however, reasonable consensus on three general 
principles: Hirst, workers in adversely affected sectors may 
need assistance to switch occupations (the market failure here 
is that workers cannot purchase insurance against these kinds 
of adverse shocks). Second, gradual transitions may signifi-
cantly lower the absolute cost of the transition. For instance, 
workers leave jobs through natural attrition; if those leaving 
are not replaced, the industry will be scaled down, with no 
transition cost to any individual worker. Third, the magni-
tudes of the uncompensated redistributions associated with 
any change in policy are often correlated with the magnitude 
of the political opposition. 
Most policy changes produce winners as well as losers. If 
the relative price of natural gas increases, owners of natural 
gas deposits may actually be better off. In economies with 
progressive taxation of either capital gains or consumption, 
some part of those gains is implicitly shared more broadly. 
Virtually all policies discussed below also have different 
effects on different groups. Residents of very hot and very 
cold climates consume more energy for heating and cooling, 
and thus would be worse off, relative to those in more moder-
ate climates. In some countries, city dwellers can choose less 
energy-intensive modes of transport than those in the country-
side. 
Many of these impacts will be reflected in capital costs. 
Thus, the value of land is likely to rise in temperate climates 
and to fall in extreme climates. (Similar points can be raised, 
of course, about the costs imposed by climate change itself.) 
This capitalization effect has both favourable and unfa-
vourable implications. In the long run, residents of colder cli-
mates are likely to consume less heating fuel, but perhaps at a 
higher price, which would leave them on balance about where 
they started. Energy prices are likely to rise and land rents to 
fall, in an almost offsetting way. On the other hand, current 
owners of land would bear the full brunt of the present dis-
counted value of all future increases in taxes (or the tax-
equivalent cost of regulations designed to reduce energy 
utilization). As a result, unless policy changes are introduced 
gradually, dramatic changes in land values may occur, with 
possibly large effects on financial institutions and the econ-
omy as a whole. Anticipation of these policies would partially 
offset these effects.52 
National security. Climate change itself may affect the na-
tional security of many countries. At the same time, policies 
to reduce greenhouse emissions may affect the export earn-
ings and therefore the national security of the energy export-
ing countries. 
Although countries may be willing (or forced) to accept 
changes in national wealth as a result of changes in world 
prices induced by the response to the threat of global warm-
ing, countries are less likely to be willing or able to accept 
what they may perceive as implied threats to national security 
over which they have some control. Thus, a country with a 
large endowment of coal becomes more vulnerable if it comes 
to rely on imported oil or gas - supplies of which could be cut 
off in time of war. These countries may feel it imprudent to 
switch, even if private economic gains were to be had; and 
they are particularly unlikely to switch if the benefits take the 
form of an international public good. 
Increasing world political stability would clearly address 
these concerns. But even were that successful, it would not 
suffice. To increase national security, policies will need to 
focus on increasing energy efficiency and reducing energy 
demand. This is an example of the necessity of allowing 
sufficient flexibility in the design of an international structure 
for greenhouse gas emissions that the particular circum-
stances of each country can be appropriately taken into ac-
count. 
Benchmarks. The earlier discussion of equitable distribu-
tion of the burdens of responding to greenhouse gases, 
employing generally accepted principles of public finance, 
avoided the concept of benchmarks, that is. setting target 
emission reductions in relation to past emissions. These have 
played an important role in international negotiations. Indeed, 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
33 
the only quantitative target in the FCCC (Article 4.2a and b) 
requires developed country parties to aim to return their emis-
sions of C02 and other greenhouse gases not controlled by the 
Montreal Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000. Although 
this target suggests equitable treatment, were it to be accepted 
as legally binding on developed countries without further 
qualification, it would in fact result in unequal burdens, as it 
fails to take into account relative incomes and therefore im-
poses unequal tax rates. 
But this criterion can also be criticized as inequitable in a 
more fundamental sense, since it pays no attention to past ef-
forts at achieving energy efficiency, or to other circumstances 
that might affect the implied tax rate. For instance, a country 
that during the preceding ten years had made every effort to 
increase energy efficiency and switch consumption to less en-
ergy-intensive commodities would face the burden of reduc-
ing its emissions still further. Because the marginal cost curve 
for emission reductions rises steeply beyond a certain point, 
the implied tax rate would be considerably higher than for a 
country that had previously encouraged overconsumption of 
energy, for example, by energy subsidies. For the second 
country, achieving the emission targets might only require 
elimination of the energy subsidies, a policy with an implied 
negative tax rate. For a similar reason, countries with large 
endowments of hydroelectric power may find it relatively dif-
ficult to meet an emission target of this form. 
Public finance theory has focused extensively on "second-
best" policies, recognizing the difficulty of achieving first-
best objectives of either economic efficiency or distributive 
justice. In this context, the central issue is whether alterna-
tives to benchmarking exist. When the U.S. government re-
cently issued tradable emission permits for sulphur dioxide, it 
took account of emission reductions already achieved. Bench-
marking reflects information that would not be reflected in a 
simple criterion such as a particular emission level per unit 
population or GDP. Thus, a strong case can be made for in-
cluding benchmarking, if not in the final allocation of permits 
(obligations), at least in the transition rules. 
1.4.2 Intergenerational equity 
Efforts to control greenhouse emissions will provide benefits 
primarily for our grandchildren and their descendants. We 
face a difficult task in estimating and judging what aspects of 
climate and environment they will value and how best to pre-
serve those aspects for them. If we take aggressive action to 
limit climate change, they may regret that we did not use the 
funds instead to push ahead development in Africa, to better 
protect the species against the next retrovirus, or to dispose of 
nuclear materials safely. Chapter 4 addresses directly the most 
important issue in intergenerational equity: choice of an ap-
propriate discount rate. 
A similar argument applies to actions with differential im-
pacts on different regions. If greenhouse warming turns out to 
be a major threat to developing countries and if the developed 
countries fail to reduce emissions aggressively now, the de-
veloping countries may suffer additional damage later. Alter-
natively, if the developed countries choose to embark on an 
aggressive control regime now, and if this cuts into their 
growth rates, the result will shrink export markets for devel-
oping countries and thus reduce growth there. In addition, if 
developed countries view their greenhouse efforts as. in ef-
fect, aid to developing economies, they may cut back on other 
programmes (sanitation, water, education for women, etc.) 
that have a more immediate impact on life expectancy, health, 
and well-being. 
1.4.3 Within-country equity 
Most discussions of equity and climate change have so far fo-
cussed on developed and developing country issues or on is-
sues between one country and another, but issues of equity 
within a country are also important, and indeed play a central 
role in the political debates about appropriate responses to cli-
mate change. Most policy recommendations involve large 
within-country losses for certain groups. For instance, any 
policy leading to less use of coal and lower producer prices 
for it will lead to large losses for coal mine owners and work-
ers.53 
The net efficiency gains (in reduced emissions) relative lo 
the distributive effects may differ markedly across resources. 
Thus, if the price elasticity of world oil supply is small, a tax 
on oil will be reflected in the prices received by producers and 
have little effect on the cumulative consumption of oil. though 
it may result in some short-run substitution against coal. Poli-
cies aimed at bringing closer the date of arrival of substitutes 
for fossil fuels could lead to an increase in current emissions, 
though long-run effects on atmospheric concentrations would 
be positive. 
1.5 Economics of Policy Actions 
Earlier sections set forth a basic framework for analyzing 
policies related to global climate change, including a combi-
nation of mitigation, adaptation, and possibly climate engi-
neering. Striking the appropriate balance requires taking into 
account the costs, benefits, and risks associated with each 
strategy. For instance, setting aside risk, governments should 
reduce emissions to the point at which a dollar of extra spend-
ing would yield a dollar of expected savings from preventing 
damages imposed by climate change or would save an extra 
dollar of expected costs of adaptation. Adding risk and se-
quential decision making complicates the analysis but leaves 
the basic principles unchanged. Because of the lasting impact 
of climate change and the magnitude of the resulting eco-
nomic uncertainties, most policy analysis has focussed on a 
narrower set of questions: 
(1) 
What actions would improve economic efficiency (in-
cluding the social costs of implementing the policy) and 
reduce net greenhouse gas emissions? How much could 
emissions be reduced by these means? 
(2) 
Beyond these zero-cost options, what are the least-cost 
methods of reducing greenhouse gas emissions? What 
34 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
do the cost curves look like?54 What arc the alternative 
policy measures, and how do they compare? 
(3) 
What are the essential ingredients of an adaptation strat-
egy, and to what extent will market forces, on their own. 
provide the appropriate adaptive responses? 
1.5.1 Zero-cost options 
A variety of inefficiencies in the energy sector- many of them 
government-induced - would, if eliminated, increase eco-
nomic efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions at 
the same time. How large is the reservoir of conservation op-
portunities? Proponents of the two major approaches to the 
question have dehated this point for more than a decade. Top-
down models extrapolate observed behaviour into the future. 
Bottom-up models combine cost estimates derived from engi-
neering analyses with economic models of individual choice. 
Top-down models generally show significant costs to re-
ducing greenhouse emissions in the future.5S Bottom-up, or 
technology-specified models, have been used to show the ex-
istence of significant reductions in the cost of energy as new 
low-emission technologies are adopted. Some proponents of 
bottom-up models argue that emission reductions can be 
achieved at essentially no cost.Sh 
Much of the disagreement turns on empirical estimates. 
Economists have catalogued the unintended consequences of 
government regulation. Many have also identified important 
market failures that could give rise to inefficiencies within the 
private sector itself. The next two sections will examine each 
of these effects. 
1.5.2 Policy reform 
A variety of government reforms could enhance energy effi-
ciency, including removing energy subsidies, reforming or 
clarifying property rights, reducing nongreenhouse gas exter-
nalities, and administrative reforms. 
1.5.2.1 Removing energy subsidies 
Energy subsidies induce inefficient energy use. reducing the 
total output of the economy as well as increasing CO, emis-
sions.57 Shah and Larson (1991) estimated world energy sub-
sidies in 1990 to have been $230 billion. They calculated that 
their elimination would reduce global carbon emissions by 
9: % in addition to improving allocative efficiency and 
thereby generating a welfare gain in subsidizing countries. 
Burniaux el al. (1992) obtained similar results using the 
GREEN model, concluding that the elimination of all existing 
distortions on energy markets would yield an increase in 
world real income of 0.7'7r per year in addition to cutting 
world emissions by 189r in 2050 (Dean. 1994). Agricultural 
subsidies also distort the outcome, especially by affecting the 
size of forests. 
1.5.2.2 Property rights reform 
One responsibility of governments is to define property rights 
and enforce contracts. Ill-defined property rights encourage 
overconsumption of resources. A clearer definition of prop-
erty rights could be particularly important in helping to de-
crease deforestation, for example, while improving economic 
efficiency. Uncertainties about future property rights may also 
contribute to economic inefficiency. Thus, for example, in 
those developing countries where large forests are owned by a 
few large landowners, excessive deforestation may result 
from the landowners' fear that their tenure will be limited. 
1.5.2.3 Administrative reforms-
Defining property rights and eliminating energy subsidies are 
two important actions governments can take to reduce green-
house emissions. At the same time, many less sweeping re-
forms can improve economic efficiency and simultaneously 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. For example: 
Pricing of government-produced electricity. Many govern-
ments price electricity not at the market price but at the cost of 
production. Economists generally recommend that electricity, 
like any good, be priced not at its cost of production but at the 
competitive price. In countries with a mix of plants, this 
means that electricity from all sources should be priced the 
same - at the highest marginal cost of production.™ 
Land use and other regulation. Changes in land use policy 
can also reduce energy consumption (especially for trans-
portation, space heating, and air conditioning) and thus green-
house gas emissions. 
Full utilization of nonfossil fuel energy sources (taking ac-
count of other environmental impacts). When hydroelectric 
power generation, which does not increase greenhouse emis-
sions, can be cost-effectively expanded without other envi-
ronmental effects, it should be done.59 
1.5.2.4 Regulating nongreenhouse externalities 
Many activities producing greenhouse emissions also gener-
ate pollution of other types. For example, fossil fuel com-
bustion releases conventional air pollutants; rush hour auto 
use contributes to road congestion. In the presence of these 
spillover effects or externalities, market solutions will not prop-
erly reflect the externalities generated, leading to the overcon-
sumption of environmental resources. Energy taxes, congestion 
pricing, or tradable permits can correct these market signals, re-
sulting in lower emissions of both greenhouse gases and other 
pollutants. Some reforms, such as congestion pricing, also re-
duce the need for roads and other physical capacity. 
1.5.2.5 Special problems of economies in transition 
The economies in transition provide special opportunities for 
mitigating greenhouse emissions. In the former Soviet bloc, 
high energy subsidies and other price distortions affected 
energy usage directly, as well as indirectly through the com-
position of output (i.e.. a bias towards heavy industrial 
production). Spotty environmental regulation meant that East-
ern Bloc nations lacked the environmental controls common 
in the OECD. The capital shortage of the past decade has con-
tributed to the problem through a general deterioration of 
physical capital stock. 
Although these problems are largely of governments' mak-
ing, the remedy is likely to rely on a combination of public 
and private actions: effective environmental regulation, elimi-
Introduction: Scope of the 
Assessment 
nation of government-caused price distortions, and an eco-
nomic environment in which foreign and domestic investment 
can enhance the efficiency (including energy efficiency) of 
the economy. For example, many analysts believe that cutting 
methane leakage from gas pipelines will yield both high eco-
nomic benefits and cost-effective reductions in greenhouse 
emissions (IPCC, 1990a). 
1.5.2.6 Examples of policies that affect 
efficiency 
Policies that cause individuals not to take into account the full 
social costs of their actions often result in greater energy use 
and greenhouse emissions. The National Action Plans of 
many countries have revealed examples of such policies and 
have also suggested remedies,60 including: 
Unit pricing of waste disposal to encourage recycling. The 
life-cycle social cost of consuming a good includes its costs of 
production plus disposal. Most consumers, and many busi-
nesses, pay a flat fee for trash disposal: with a flat fee. the 
marginal cost of throwing away an extra pound of trash is 
zero. By moving from flat fees to unit pricing, the actual price 
consumers pay to buy and dispose of a good will more closely 
match its full life-cycle social cost. 
Pay-at-the-pump 
automobile 
insurance. In most countries, 
drivers pay automobile insurance yearly or monthly. Once the 
premium is paid, the marginal insurance cost of driving an ex-
tra mile is zero, even though driving more does increase the 
chance of being in an accident. As an alternative, drivers 
could be required to pay a portion of their insurance bill at re-
fuelling. With pay-at-the-pump insurance, a tax would be 
levied on gasoline and earmarked to pay for insurance premi-
ums. This would raise the cost of gasoline at the pump, but 
lower auto insurance premiums.61 
Eliminating subsidies for auto travel. Many countries sub-
sidize auto travel in various ways. In some industrialized 
countries, employers may provide parking to employees at no 
cost or lower-than-market cost, thus lowering the relative price 
of commuting by car relative to public transportation. A distor-
tion arises when governments tax income spent on public-
transportation but not income implicit in the parking subsidy. 
Eliminating 
subsidies that increase housing size. In some 
industrialized countries, home mortgage interest is tax-
deductible. In all but a few countries, the implicit income on 
owner-occupied housing is not taxed. These tax provisions 
encourage individuals to consume more housing space than 
they otherwise would. In cold or hot climates, where more 
housing space requires more energy for heating and cooling, 
this tax treatment increases CO, emissions. 
Eliminating 
subsidies for trucking. 
Studies suggest that 
virtually all road damage is caused by heavy trucks, which 
pay only a portion of the expense of building and maintaining 
the road system. Many countries thus subsidize trucking com-
pared with rail or barge transport, probably increasing green-
house emissions.6-
7.5.3 Market failures 
and government 
responses 
Policies exist that would increase economic efficiency at the 
same time that they reduce greenhouse emissions. For exam-
pie, in some countries, fuel prices do not reflect the full social 
cost of fuel burning. Taxes can correct this market failure. 
There is less agreement about whether. ,i;nr/f market 
prices. 
firms fail to take advantage of all the energy efficiency oppor 
tunities available to them. This controversy underlies ihe 
bottom-up versus top-down controversy treated at greater 
length in Chapter 8. Engineers have identified a host ol seem 
ingly profitable actions that would also save energy. Main 
economists, however, view this as evidence that the engineer-
ing analysis has omitted characteristics important to eon 
sumers. 
The substantial differences in practices both within ami 
between countries suggest scope for significantly increasing 
energy efficiency. Moreover, even best practices within a 
country may not put it at the technological frontier. In ileeul 
ing whether to adopt a new production process, businesses 
look only at the private costs and benefits. Many lechnolo 
gists, however, conclude that, even considering private costs 
only, firms should be undertaking many energy elficiem \ iis 1 
provements. This section attempts to reconcile the dilleient 
schools of thought by reference to information-based market 
imperfections as well as the criteria by which businesses 
make decisions. 
Information 
dissemination. 
Acquiring 
information 
is 
costly. Moreover, providing and disseminating information 
has many features of a public good (Stiglitz, 1988). In the ab-
sence of government intervention, there will he too little pro-
duction and dissemination of information. This is particularly 
true for information with widely dispersed impacts, as op 
posed to information about, for example, the production ol 
certain chemicals, which is primarily of value to a few compa-
nies/'3 
Moreover, both theory and evidence support the view that 
markets, on their own, do not provide an efficient level of dis-
closure of information (see, inter alia, Stiglitz. 1975a: (iross-
man and Stiglitz. 1981). Indeed, some evidence indicates that 
markets may try to obfuscate relevant information/'' This pro-
vides the rationale for government provision of information, 
or laws that in many countries require disclosure of interest 
rates and other consumer-relevant information, including ap-
pliance energy consumption. 
Bureaucratic 
structure and limited scope of attention. 
In 
recent years, economic and organizational theory''^ has em-
phasized that large organizations are not. in general, run by 
owners: that the managers, even with the nest-designed incen-
tives, do not in general maximize the firm's market value; and 
that among the principal scarce factors within an organization 
are time and attention. How managers direct their attention 
has much to do with what the firm does/'6 The information 
services and disclosure requirements noted above, as well as a 
number of other government programmes focusing on energy 
efficiency in consumer products, electric lights, and motors, 
help focus management attention on energy efficiency. The 
marginal managerial time required to make efficient energy 
decisions may be small, and focussing attention on this issue -
when information is being freely provided through govern-
ment and other sources - may thus yield private returns well 
beyond these slight marginal costs. 
36 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Returns to scale and system effects (network externalities). 
Some technologies might be economically attractive at a large 
scale of production but not on the much smaller scale on 
which they might initially be adopted. Other technologies ex-
hibit dynamic scale economies: Unit cost falls over time as a 
function of the cumulative output of firms or industries. Tech-
nology "networks" may also affect diffusion rates. For exam-
ple, cars and trucks powered by electricity, natural gas, 
methanol, or other alternative energy sources, require a re-
fuelling infrastructure, which itself competes for resources 
with the conventional fuel infrastructure already in place.''7 
Building codes can he justified both in terms of these ef-
fects on network externalities and in terms of information fail-
ures. Consumers often have limited information concerning 
the construction of their houses, and obtaining the informa-
tion after the house is completed is often difficult. Even were 
they to be provided with construction details, they would have 
difficulty interpreting the implications. 
Capital market imperfections. A major explanation of the 
difference between best-practice and actual-practice technol-
ogy is that bottom-up models often compute cost-effective-
ness using a discount rate substantially lower than the cost of 
capital calculated by firms.''* Studies of implicit discount rates 
consistently show that households and firms use discount 
rates substantially above the market rate for long-term gov-
ernment bonds. Two explanations have been offered: 
(1) 
Risk: Interest rates facing firms and households reflect 
the risk premium that lenders require to compensate 
them for the probability of default. Firms often use dis-
count rates that include a risk premium to reflect the 
riskiness of projects. 
(2) 
Capital constraints: Individuals and firms often face ra-
tioning in capital markets, both for credit and equity. 
Recent research has provided a rationale for this ra-
tioning based on the fact that information is imperfect 
and costly.1''' 
These capital market problems have one important implica-
tion: Models analyzing best-practice, cost-effective technolo-
gies using discount rates lower than those typically employed 
by firms will overestimate the rate of dissemination of these 
technologies and underestimate the perceived costs (to the 
firms and households adopting these technologies) of mitiga-
tion strategies. 
But these capital market problems raise three other ques-
tions: (1) Are firms rational in using such high discount rates? 
(2) Does the use of such high discount rates imply a market 
failure? (3) If so, will government intervention improve on 
the market outcome? 
Economists emphasize that an analysis of the costs and 
benefits of a project must separate four issues: timing, risk. 
capital constraints, and information. Discount rates are only 
to be used for timing. Risk should he treated by converting 
costs and benefits into certainty equivalents, then discounting 
costs and benefits for each year at the relevant discount rate.70 
Higher risks should not result in higher discount rates."1 Simi-
larly, capital constraints should be reflected in the shadow 
price of capital, not in the discount rate.'- Because of limited 
information (and a version of the "winners' curse"7-1) firms of-
ten require threshold rates of return significantly greater than 
the market rate of interest. In doing so, they may confuse time 
and information risk: that is, the rules of thumb firms use to 
evaluate investments may sometimes lead to market inef-
ficiencies, including some perhaps in the area of energy-
efficient technologies. 
Even were firms to follow the economists' guidelines, in 
the presence of capital constraints, market outcomes would 
not, in general, be socially efficient (i.e., they are not con-
strained to be Pareto optimal). There may be significant dis-
crepancies between social and private returns on investment 
(even apart from the externalities associated with greenhouse 
gases or technological diffusion). This provides part of the ra-
tionale for possible government interventions in capital mar-
kets.74 Though these capital market imperfections imply that 
there is no presumption that market allocations are efficient, 
there is no consensus that they lead to significant underinvest-
ment in energy-efficient technologies in particular.75 
1.5.3.1 Revising national accounts 
Some have suggested revising the conventional systems of 
national accounts to incorporate full social pricing of re-
sources. An early contribution suggested a new measure of 
economic welfare based on consumption that increases qual-
ity of life (Nordhaus and Tobin, 1973). These authors and 
others recognized that national income accounting, widely 
adopted after World War II, measures aggregate income and 
expenditure flows but does not incorporate environmental 
costs and benefits. 
Many researchers have noted deficiencies in standard na-
tional income accounts. First, national income accounts do 
not, in general, provide an adequate measure of welfare; sec-
ond, they do not provide the correct information for making 
policies relevant to sustainable development. Sustainable de-
velopment is concerned with society's resources; an economy 
is growing when its resource base (capital stock combined 
with natural resources) is growing. GDP does not, and is not 
intended to be. a measure of resource availability. Firms have 
two sets of accounts - cash flow (income) statements and bal-
ance sheet statements. GDP is a statement of the former type. 
Standard accounting procedures require that firms, in an 
attempt to present an accurate account of "true income," take 
account of depreciation. GDP measures gross output; it does 
not take into account depreciation, either of natural or physi-
cal capital stocks. The reason is simply that it is hard to get 
accurate measures of depreciation. Net national product, how-
ever, does consider depreciation, the change in capital stock. 
And it is this account that should be most subject to criticism, 
since it accounts for changes in the physical capital stock but 
not in other capital assets, in particular, environmental assets 
and natural resources. 
Conventional national income accounting does not fully 
report three categories of resource expenditures: (a) defensive 
expenditures, either for pollution prevention before the fact or 
for cleanup after the fact (although these expenditures are not 
separately reported, they are counted in GDP); (b) consump-
tion of environmental goods (such as exhaustible resources);76 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
and (c) conflicting uses of environmental services (such as the 
atmosphere, used by producers as an input into production 
and by households as a consumption good). 
One proposal would include in GDP the effect of changes 
in quality of the environment. In Eastern Europe and the for-
mer Soviet Union, steady increases in reported postwar GDP 
masked the effects of decades of environmental degradation; 
for part of that period, environment-adjusted GDP almost cer-
tainly declined.77 
However, important conceptual problems in defining lev-
els and changes of environmental assets, complicate the task 
of modifying national accounts. First, the stock of natural re-
sources has no obvious definition. Although most geologists 
would agree on the size of coal stocks - their location is 
known and their in situ value can be estimated - this cannot be 
said for oil or minerals.7S Second, environmental assets, such 
as air quality, present another set of problems, because no 
market prices exist to value the asset. 
Four approaches are commonly used to calculate changes 
in the natural environment (Peskin and Lutz. 1990): 
(1) 
The environmental expenditure approach, used recently 
in the United States, which subtracts pollution abate-
ment expenditures from GDP; 
(2) 
The physical accounting approach, used in Norway and 
France, which establishes satellite accounts using phys-
ical units of measurement to account for flows and 
stocks of resources; 
(3) 
The depreciation approach, which adjusts gross and net 
product by subtracting the value of natural resource de-
pletion (Repetto, 1989; El Serafy, 1989); and 
(4) 
The comprehensive approach, which uses both physical 
measures and value (United Nations Statistical Office 
1992% 
Another measure of broad-based welfare, although it does not 
include environmental amenities, is the UN's human develop-
ment index or HDI (UNDP, 1992). The HDI gives a composite 
measure of human development by combining three key in-
dicators: longevity (measured by life expectancy at birth), 
education (measured by adult literacy and mean years of 
schooling), and income (real GDP per capita adjusted for pur-
chasing power). Although the HDI is not directly related to 
global environmental issues, both global warming and abate-
ment policies may affect it.79 
1.5.4 Innovation 
Standard competitive analysis argues that, given all required 
information and technology, market economies produce effi-
cient outcomes. But recent economic analyses have shown 
that, in general, market economies need not result in the effi-
cient allocation of resources either to information production 
and dissemination or to innovation. The first of these issues 
was discussed earlier. The second is more complex. 
In the absence of intellectual property rights, firms would 
have less incentive to innovate. With standard patent terms, 
firms are not able to appropriate all the returns from their in-
novative activity. Setting the optimal patent life involves bal-
ancing off the inefficiencies resulting from the exercise of 
monopoly power during the duration of the patent (static inef-
ficiencies) with the increased incentives for innovation.^ 
Largely because innovators seldom appropriate all the returns 
from their innovations, there is a general consensus thai mar 
kets provide insufficient incentives for research and develop 
mcnt, and the greater the unrewarded spillovers, the greater 
the undersupply of innovation.*' The fact that spillovers arc 
likely to be greater at more basic levels of research suggests a 
role for government in subsidizing basic and near-basic re 
search. In the same way, the high cost of establishing iniellee 
tual property rights impedes the transfer of technology to 
developing countries. 
Still, there is a general consensus among economists that 
the patent system provides a better basis for financing applied 
research than do government grants, largely because of the 
difficulties government has in picking those innovations most 
likely to produce high returns. Consequently, it should be 
asked if market failure because of insufficient innovation is 
more likely than market failure for other reasons. In other 
words, are there any special grounds for arguing for govern-
ment research and development subsidies, provided the govern-
ment has corrected energy prices to reflect the externalities 
generated? Obviously, in the absence of such corrections, mar 
ket incentives to provide energy-saving innovations will he dis-
torted, just as market incentives to adopt energy-saving 
technologies are reduced.*- (Tradable permits have effects sim-
ilar to those of corrective taxes: They encourage firms to place 
a higher value on new technologies that reduce emissions be-
cause reductions will require them to purchase fewer permits.) 
Innovation is important, because it provides perhaps the 
best opportunity for low-cost methods of reducing emissions. 
Several studies have confirmed the impact of accelerated de-
ployment of advanced energy technologies on the future rate 
and timing of anthropogenic climate change.w 
7.5.5 Carbon taxes and tradable permits 
Economic efficiency requires all agents in the economy to pay 
the full marginal social costs of their actions. But firms and 
households are not charged for the additional warming poten-
tial they add to the atmosphere, and so do not pay the full so-
cial costs they impose. Two economic instruments can correct 
this market failure: carbon taxes and tradable permits. (Note 
on terminology: More detailed treatments, as in Chapter II. 
often reserve the term "emission permits" for domestic instru-
ments and "emission quotas" for international instruments. 
This section treats the issue of tradable emission rights in a 
general way. most often using the term "permits": whether the 
meaning is domestic or international should he clear from the 
context.) 
Implementing either one of these instruments could raise 
issues of national sovereignty, because to be effective either 
carbon taxes or permits would require the creation of institu-
tions with the authority to allocate, administer, and enforce 
agreements. Although these issues lie outside the immediate 
concern of economics, they are relevant to any discussion of 
practical implementation. 
38 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
A tradable permit scheme involves a determination of the 
total level of permits and a distribution of the initial alloca-
tion, with emission levels for any firm limited to the number 
of permits held. The initial distribution may be made by an 
auction or allocation according to benchmarks (e.g., per 
capita emissions as of a given date), or by historical emission 
levels ("grandfathering"). Alternatively, emission rights could 
be grandfathered in at current levels and gradually shifted 
over to a per capita allocation as of a given date. 
Once permits are distributed among the regulated entities, 
a market is set up, allowing companies to buy and sell permits 
according to their plants' planned emissions. The cost of pro-
duction then includes not only the costs of conventional 
inputs, but also the costs of additional permits to offset addi-
tional emissions. Plants whose cost of mitigation is low will 
find it relatively easier to abate pollution rather than to buy 
permits. Plants with higher costs of mitigation will have a 
greater preference for buying permits than for abating pollu-
tion. The price of the permits, which are artificially created 
scarce resources, is determined by the market. With the use of 
tradable permits, companies have an incentive to improve the 
efficiency of their production and thereby reduce their emis-
sion levels, as they can sell excess permits on the market and 
generate revenue.sl 
Although permits thus create a marginal cost of production 
related to the marginal emissions, carbon taxes impose a tax 
directly on the marginal emissions. Both systems thus force 
producers and households to face the true social costs of their 
actions.85 In principle, either could be adjusted to achieve the 
level of emissions desired, although adjustments of this sort 
may be difficult in practice. 
The initial allocation of permits will largely determine the 
distribution of costs of abatement (Chapter 3 discusses these 
issues of equity at greater length) and at the same time influ-
ence the growth path of participants' economies. For example. 
an allocation based on population at a given date would pro-
vide an incentive for population control.s" 
Imposing carbon taxes can have large distributive conse-
quences. A system of grants can largely offset these distribu-
tive consequences, but such offsetting grants might well not 
be made. Providing tradable permits equal to existing levels 
of emissions seemingly makes no firm or household a loser. 
But granting permits in that way effectively represents a grant 
of money (such permits have monetary value) in a way that 
may not accord well with standard ethical principles. For in-
stance, by embarking on an ambitious programme to reduce 
emissions, a firm may qualify for fewer permits than it would 
otherwise. Not only does this violate ordinary notions of fair-
ness, but anticipation of granting permits in this way would, 
accordingly, have strong adverse effects on emissions.87 
Although presenting a political impediment to its introduc-
tion, the fact that a tax has large distributive consequences is 
not necessarily an argument against it. Some argue that those 
who failed to pay the full social costs of their actions earlier 
are not therefore entitled to special allotments now. 
Once it is recognized that the distribution of permits across 
countries will inevitably he decided by some principle other 
than current levels of emissions, then it becomes clear that 
both taxes and tradable permits will have distributive conse-
quences. An agreement among countries to impose uniform 
corrective taxes, with each country retaining its own revenue, 
would have few consequences for redistribution between 
countries, and the burden of the tax would, as noted earlier, 
likely be progressive. 
Governments in the developed countries might decide to 
use some of the revenues so generated to encourage activities 
that benefit less developed countries (such as research and de-
velopment directed at technology appropriate for developing 
economies) or to provide other forms of assistance. Decisions 
about such uses could be made bilaterally or collectively. In 
contrast, decisions about how tradable permits would be allo-
cated across countries would have to be made multilaterally. 
Arriving at a formula for distributing these property rights 
may be far more difficult than arriving at a tax rate and a pro-
cedure for its revision, as any such formula may entail sub-
stantial redistribution. 
7.5.5.7 A double dividend? 
Many measures that reduce emissions of greenhouse gases 
also yield other environmental or economic benefits, such as 
reductions in emissions of other pollutants and energy sav-
ings. These are called secondary benefits or double dividends. 
Some analysts argue that using carbon tax revenues to reduce 
existing distortionary taxes is an economic double dividend. 
Revenues from carbon taxes may allow a reduction in dis-
tortionary taxes elsewhere in the economy. If the (compen-
sated) elasticity of demand of labour is relatively high, and 
the revenues from the carbon tax are used to reduce taxes on 
labour income, then there would be a double dividend from 
the carbon tax in the reduced deadweight loss from the labour 
tax, which would otherwise be significant. 
At least three objections have been raised to this idea. First, 
conceptually, rationalizing the tax system by reducing the 
most distortionary taxes is certainly a worthy goal but is not 
equivalent to imposing a carbon tax. Distortions can be re-
duced without a carbon tax, and a carbon tax could be im-
posed without reducing the existing distortions. Second, 
empirically, if the (compensated) labour supply elasticity is 
relatively low, then the deadweight loss from the labour tax is 
low. and the commensurate welfare gain is reduced. Third, 
politically, if carbon tax revenues are used to offset the exist-
ing deficit rather than to reduce taxes on labour and capital, 
then the carbon tax acts more like an ordinary tax increase, in-
creasing distortions from taxation to pay for budget items 
with a lower return than the extra burden imposed. The gains 
to total welfare (reductions in deadweight loss) depend on the 
welfare losses associated with these other distortionary taxes, 
as well as the cross-elasticities of demand between carbon and 
other taxed commodities.Sii 
Even though carbon taxes may have a positive effect on 
economic welfare, they can at the same time have a negative 
effect on measured economic growth, since those measures 
typically do not include the value of environmental degrada-
tion. Researchers differ on the size of the loss. The wide 
Introduction: Scope of the Assessment 
,'V 
spread in the numerical results, however, should not obscure 
agreement among researchers on a number of important 
points. All models used in the major comparison studies to 
date have projected, first, that intervention would be required 
to achieve the emission targets; second, that the size of the re-
quired tax increases with the stringency of the carbon limit; 
and third, that the size of the appropriate carbon tax varies 
over time, even for the same emission or concentration 
target.89 
1.5.5.2 Energy taxes 
Energy taxes as a means of controlling greenhouse emissions 
must be viewed as "second-best" taxes, in that they do not di-
rectly tax the externality, greenhouse emissions. Whereas car-
bon taxes directly penalize the externality-generating activity, 
less targeted alternatives, such as energy taxes, may be politi-
cally more acceptable. Carbon taxes reduce emissions, first 
directly, by moving up the demand curve; second indirectly, 
by encouraging consumers to switch to less carbon-intensive 
energy sources. On the other hand, energy taxes work through 
the first path by reducing total energy consumption. But to the 
extent that certain kinds of energy, like hydroelectric, have, at 
least in the short run, a relatively inelastic supply, there will 
be a major impact on oil, gas, and coal; and to the extent that 
oil and gas supplies are best described by a model of an ex-
haustible natural resource, with relatively low extraction 
costs, most of the supply reduction will occur in coal. Thus, 
indirectly, there will be a considerable amount of switching, 
through the indirect effects. 
1.5.5.3 Tradable permit markets 
In order for systems of emission permits to achieve reductions 
in emissions efficiently, there needs to be a market for emis-
sions across international boundaries. There is some debate 
about the role of government or international organizations in 
establishing a market for such emissions. Some believe that 
there are private incentives for the establishment of markets; 
others contend that government can play a key market facili-
tation role through establishing centralized clearinghouses for 
information or even providing for permit banking (storage) or 
brokerage (trading) to facilitate trades between private par-
ties. These services would prove especially useful in the more 
complex international context. 
1.5.5.4 Combining taxes with tradable permits 
Although carbon taxes and tradable permits are typically pre-
sented as alternatives, policymakers may prefer to combine 
them. The major disadvantage is the additional administrative 
cost. The advantage is more subtle: The market value of trad-
able permits is reduced as taxes increase. With an optimal car-
bon tax, and with a tradable permit supply set equal to the 
optimally chosen level of emissions, the price of a permit 
should be zero. More generally, the greater the tax, the less the 
value of a permit (for a fixed supply of permits), and thus, the 
less the distributive consequences of alternative rules for allo-
cating the initial endowments of permits. Another possible 
combination would utilize permits for large sources and a tax 
(set to equal the permit price) on small sources. 
1.5.5.5 Intertemporal patterns of taxation 
If the target is the long-run atmospheric concentrations of 
greenhouse gases, then climate change damages will be ap-
proximately the same for emissions in any particular year, 
although the optimal carbon tax must be adjusted for differ-
ences in costs, discounting, and risk.1'0 The focus on concen-
trations also implies that early reductions are more valuable 
than later reductions. 
For exhaustible natural resources such as oil. economic ef-
ficiency requires that those deposits with the lowest cost of 
extraction be extracted first. Holelling (1931) argued thai 
competitive equilibrium implies that rents (price minus costs 
of extraction) must rise at the rate of interest. The price of the 
backstop technology (an energy source assumed to be a\ail 
able in unlimited quantities at a certain price after a certain 
date, such as electricity from solar photovoltaic cells) deter-
mines the set of resources to be ultimately exploited, namely, 
all resources for which the cost of extraction is less than the 
price implied by the backstop technology's price. Thus, it is 
the tax on oil or gas at the date of switching to the backstop 
technology that determines the ultimate amount of oil and gas 
that will be extracted, and thus the total burden of CO, placed 
on the atmosphere by oil and gas. If that were the only matter 
of concern, one could simply announce a commitment to im-
pose such a tax sometime in the future when relevant backstop 
technologies become available and competitive. That an-
nouncement would, if believed, have an immediate effect on 
current prices. 
7.5.6 Regulatory approaches 
Regulation of greenhouse emissions may take many forms, 
including fuel restrictions, technology standards, and various 
economic incentives. Chapter 11 discusses these options in 
detail. Economists have long argued for the use of economic-
incentives for environmental management, although govern-
ments have so far relied on traditional regulations almost 
exclusively, as traditional approaches have been more ac-
ceptable to the public and industry. 
Proponents of the traditional approaches often claim that 
these approaches "force" technology (i.e.. stimulate techno-
logical innovation or refinement), with less redistribution than 
forcing technology through taxes. Thus, if automobile makers 
are required to attain a certain mileage standard, they will 
meet the standard; on the other hand, gasoline taxes might 
have to rise significantly to reduce fuel consumption by the 
same amount. Evidence for the claim of technology forcing, 
however, is equivocal. In several cases in which industry 
failed to meet the applicable standards, regulators withdrew 
the standard in the face of unacceptably high economic costs. 
The apparent advantage of technology forcing - one large in-
strument of coercion instead of the subtle and continuous in-
centives provided by market forces - is often in fact a dis-
advantage. 
40 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
There are oilier disadvantages to the traditional approach 
as well. First, traditional regulations do not in general result in 
economic efficiency, since those in one sector face implicit or 
explicit incentives at the margin that differ from those in other 
sectors. Second, traditional regulations fail to account for off-
setting private responses that may neutralize the regulation's 
intended effects and even cause environmental harm. Third, 
traditional regulations provide no incentives for exceeding the 
given target, even when doing so might result in little addi-
tional cost.'" 
Traditional regulations that focus on inputs and technology 
rather than outputs have the further disadvantage of not di-
recting research toward meeting performance objectives at 
least cost. For instance, when stack gas scrubbers are re-
quired, research will be directed at producing scrubbers at 
least cost, rather than reducing emissions at least cost. Hence, 
a dynamic inefficiency is added to the obvious static ineffi-
ciencies. Finally, because of the nature of the regulatory 
process, traditional regulatory designs are more likely to be 
captured by special interest groups.''-2 
It should be kept in mind that government policies to ad-
dress external effects (market imperfections) are likely to gen-
erate their own external effects, in part because of the 
difficulty in identifying the gainers and losers from changes in 
policy. Thus, the likely cost of "market failure" must be com-
pared to the likely costs imposed by governments' attempts to 
remedy the problem. 
1.6 Sustainable Development 
The concept of sustainable development was formulated 
about 1980 as a response to the apparent conflict between en-
vironmental concerns and the need for economic growth, es-
pecially in developing countries. At the time, preserving 
biodiversity and maintaining environmental quality seemed 
incompatible with a five- or tenfold increase in world output, 
as would be necessary if per capita incomes of the developing 
countries were eventually to approach those enjoyed by the 
developed countries now. The sustainable development de-
bate rekindled interest in the question of resource scarcity. 
originally addressed in the economics literature by Malthus 
(1798) and revived in the policy arena with the publication of 
The Limits to Growth (Meadows and Meadows. 1972). Re-
cently, the field of "ecological economics" has extended this 
approach (Howarth and Norgaard. 1992). 
A variety of definitions of sustainable development have 
been proposed. The Brundtland Commission offered this in-
terpretation (World Commission on Environment and Devel-
opment, 1987): 
Sustainable development is development that meets the 
needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs. 
Although the Commission clearly had in mind environmental 
considerations, its report did not spell out exactly what sus-
tainable development included. 
1.6.1 The economic concept of sustainable development 
Although sustainable development began as an ethical princi-
ple, it is at the same time an economic concept, focussing on 
two issues: (I) intertemporal equity and (2) capital accumula-
tion and substitutability. 
Intertemporal equity. Robert Solow's definition of sustain-
able development (Solow, 1992), which focusses on intertem-
poral equity, has enjoyed wide currency among economists. 
Sustainable development, he argues, requires that future gen-
erations be able to be at least as well off as current genera-
tions. The central implication is that any environmental 
degradation should be offset by increases in capital stock suf-
ficient to ensure future generations at least the same standard 
of living. Sustainable development does not preclude the use 
of exhaustible natural resources but requires that any use be 
appropriately offset. 
In practice, sustainability as defined by Solow provides 
few constraints on growth paths for the developed countries, 
so long as steady increases in productivity continue. Technical 
change alone, without further capital accumulation, may well 
sustain future living standards and offset any effects of envi-
ronmental degradation. To see this with a numerical example, 
note that even if estimates of adaptation costs are taken to be 
1-3% of GDP should significant warming occur, and if even 
moderate rates of technical progress of 1-1.5% per annum 
continue to occur, then future generations 45 to 70 years from 
now will have twice the income of the current generation. 
Even with no discounting, it would be hard on this account 
alone to justify the sacrifice of further consumption by this 
generation in order to enhance the standard of living of the fu-
ture generation. 
Capital accumulation and substitutability. To what extent 
can technology, skills, and capital equipment substitute for a 
decline in exhaustible resource stocks or a decline in per 
capita environmental amenities? Solow's definition, in com-
mon with much economic theory to date, implicitly assumes 
that substitutes exist or could be found for all resources. 
Pearce (1989, 1991) argued that if substitution possibilities 
are high, as most evidence from economic history indicates, 
then no single resource is indispensable, and intertemporal 
equity stands as the only crucial issue. If, on the other hand, 
human and natural capital are complements or only partial 
substitutes for each other (e.g.. if. because of the irreversibil-
ity of extinction."-' capital accumulation is only a partial sub-
stitute for biodiversity), then different classes of assets must 
be treated differently, and some assets are to be preserved at 
all costs. 
Pearce et al. (1994) distinguished between strong and 
weak sustainability. Weak sustainability requires that any de-
pletion of natural capital be offset by increases in human-
produced capital - the Solow criterion - or by the substitution 
of other forms of natural capital, such as renewable assets in 
place of nonrenewable assets. Strong sustainability requires 
that some natural capital, being irreplaceable, must be pre-
served.9-1 It has been argued that there are no close substitutes 
for the atmosphere and the climate it produces, implying no 
Introduction: 
Scope of the 
Assessment 
-// 
substitution possibilities and hence the need to preserve the 
atmosphere. 
1.6.2 Implications of sustainable development for 
developing countries 
In many developing countries, Solow's definition would not 
be viewed as acceptable, since it seems to place no weight on 
their aspirations for growth and development. Developing 
countries have also implicitly criticized the debate over sub-
stitutability for the same reason: If some natural assets must 
be preserved at any cost, then there may be no trade-off with 
development. Tariq Osman Hyder of Pakistan, a leading 
spokesman for the G-77 group of developing nations, has em-
phasized the importance of economic growth in achieving 
sustainable development: 
None of these linked [development] issues can be resolved 
unless and until there is broad-based development in the 
South. Only such broad-based development can provide 
the foundation of international security. The Northern ap-
proach is to attack the symptoms, with a residual emphasis 
on poverty eradication. But the international community 
must insist on addressing the underlying causes for con-
cern. Development, environmental protection, peace, and 
security are indivisible. (Hyder, 1992) 
Similarly, the G-77 and China emphasized the need for eco-
nomic growth in the following statement on sustainable de-
velopment and the environment introduced during the INC-2 
negotiations in 1991: 
Protection of the global climate against human-induced 
change should proceed in an integrated manner with eco-
nomic development in light of the specific conditions of 
each country, without prejudice to the socioeconomic de-
velopment of developing countries. Measures to guard 
against climate change should be integrated into national 
development programmes, taking into account that envi-
ronmental standards valid for developed countries may 
have inappropriate and unwarranted social and economic 
costs in developing countries. (Hyder, 1992) 
Endnotes 
1. Some analysts believe that the justification for costly and more re-
strictive actions rests on intangible costs (Nordhaus. 1993). Intangi-
ble refers to the difficulty of measuring; intangible costs are related 
to such factors as migration, comfort, health, leisure activities, urban 
infrastructure, and air pollution (Fankhauser, 1994; Cline, 1992). A 
warmer climate would improve human comfort in cold areas, and in 
the winter generally, while decreasing comfort in warm areas. 
Mearns et at. (1984) calculate a threefold increase in heat waves for 
a 1.7°C. rise in U.S. mean temperature. It is not yet clear whether net 
comfort averaged over the globe will rise or fall for a given rise in 
temperature. Chapter 6 covers these issues in more detail. 
2. 
Both the natural rate of species loss and the human contribution 
to the process are difficult to estimate (U.S. EPA, 1989). Predicting 
the effect of climate change on species distribution is more difficult 
still. The magnitude and even the sign of these intangibles remains in 
dispute, for uncertainty about the duration and types ofeiivironiiicn 
tal changes that would be caused by climate change makes the long 
term projection of species change highly complex. 
Population 
pressures have added to pressure on ecosystems, particularly in the 
Third World. Climate change may exacerbate these damages, panic 
ularly in Africa, where environmental degradation has been partial 
Iarly pronounced during the last fifteen years (UN, 1989). 
3. For greater warming - such as might be experienced over the ne\i 
two centuries, or which could occur sooner if modest neai UTIII 
warming triggers the release of large amounts of carbon from the 
biosphere and oceans to the atmosphere - the probability of large 
losses increases. These losses refer (o global losses, which represent 
an aggregation o\' individual losses. Impacts will differ across null 
viduals. groups, and regions. For some, the probability of laige 
losses will be high over the next century, despite the expectation that 
aggregate global losses will be small. 
4. Recent ice core data from Greenland point to the occurrenee ol 
earlier temperature rises of several degrees within a lew decades 
(IPCC. 1995). Reasons for these sudden changes are still not under 
stood, but might have come from changes in deep ocean cut rents. 
The other side of this debate holds that on the whole the biosphere is 
homeostatic or self-correcting. This "Gaia hypothesis" compares the 
biosphere to a living being: Once moved away from equilibrium, 
self-correcting forces naturally move it back to equilibrium (l.o\e 
lock. 1979). The two hypotheses are not necessarily inconsistent. 
Within a range of variation, homeostatic properties could dominate. 
even if stability were not guaranteed outside that range. 
5. A warmer climate might also increase climate variability, though 
climatologists cannot say with assurance whether climate will he 
come more or less variable daily and seasonally. The normal \an 
ability of existing climate also makes it difficult to detect an\ 
warming that might be occurring. The "signal-to-noise" problem 
makes it possible for observers to mistakenly consider a normal ex-
treme event as evidence of a trend or to fail to see a trend in a nois\ 
data series. Because of the signal-to-noise problem, the scientific 
community is unable to indicate confidently, for example, whether 
the extremely warm years of the 1980s are evidence of climate 
change or not (IPCC, l992:Solow. 1990). 
6. Countries make century-long choices implicitly, for example, 
when they choose population policies, policies affecting long-term 
capital formation and productivity growth, or policies to protect en-
vironmental assets. 
7. Bargaining theory has contributed some basic principles, however, 
such as the importance of threat points (i.e.. the outcome in the ab-
sence of an agreement). 
8. Although the global warming potential (GWP) measure, endorsed 
by the IPCC, is useful in formulating comprehensive approaches to 
greenhouse mitigation policies (Stewart and Wiener. 1990), some an-
alysts have recently criticized it on the grounds that GWP implicitly 
makes the opportunity costs of an increment in radiative forcing equal 
for all periods in the future (Schmalensee, 1993). If all greenhouse 
gases had the same rate of decay, then this problem would not arise. 
9. Aerosols have very short lifetimes, so their effects are far more re-
gional than those from longer-lived greenhouse gases. It may not he 
possible to develop an analogue of global warming potential lor 
aerosols. 
42 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
10. Forests cannot he expanded indefinitely, however. Thus, in-
creased carbon sequestration is not a permanent solution to increas-
ing greenhouse gas emissions. 
11. Advances in cost-benefit analysis have allowed the introduction 
of risk and equity issues in a systematic way. 
12. Knight's often-quoted distinction (Knight, 1921) separates risk, 
for which the probabilities of different outcomes are known, from 
uncertainty, in which either the probabilities are unknown or some 
potential outcomes are not specified. 
13. This transfer of risk is made easier by dividing the risk into small 
parts, so that any individual faces only a small risk and thus requires 
only a small risk premium in compensation. 
14. This conclusion assumes decreasing absolute risk aversion 
(about which there is a general consensus). Even if developing coun-
tries were adversely affected, so long as the adverse economic effects 
were proportionately smaller, then, assuming decreasing relative risk 
aversion (about which there is less consensus), the developed coun-
tries would he in a position to insure the undeveloped. 
Insurance contracts may also he created because of differences in 
judgments concerning the probability of the insured event occurring. 
This suggests the potential of an important principle to be invoked in 
future international negotiations or agreements: Countries that be-
lieve that the risks of climate change are low, and are therefore seem-
ingly unwilling to take strong actions to mitigate these risks, ought 
to he willing to provide insurance against climate change at low 
cost, since it has, from their perspective, an actuarially low value 
(Chichilnisky and Ileal. 1993), although enforcement issues may 
complicate the problem. 
Insurance markets, if appropriately designed, have one further ad-
vantage: They encourage actions that diminish the potential si/.e of 
any loss, because insurance firms have an interest in minimizing the 
cost of losses. Some of the losses associated with climate change can 
be easily avoided or reduced (e.g.. by making ocean-front houses 
more durable to reduce vulnerability to storm damage). In designing 
insurance for climate change risks, either the insurance should be 
based on exogenous events (e.g., not on the dollar losses incurred, 
but on the rise in sea level), or the insurance companies should he 
given broad discretion to require the insured to undertake actions to 
mitigate losses. 
15. Chapter d provides estimates of expected regional damage. 
16. In the absence o( such requirements, moral hazard problems 
arise. It may be desirable to focus government intervention not on 
the primary insurance market but on the reinsurance market. See re-
cent U.S. government analyses of failures in insurance markets for 
natural disasters and the design of appropriate responses to these. 
17. Computer modellers participating in the Energy Modeling Forum 
(EMF) examined an "accelerated R&D" scenario in which the cost 
of nonelectric backstop falls from $ 100 to $50 per barrel of oil equiv-
alent, and the cost of the electric backstop falls from 75 to 50 mills 
per kWh. The four models used were remarkably consistent in their 
estimates of economy-wide costs, reporting GDP losses falling by 
65rr for the 20'i emission reduction scenario (EMF. 1993). 
18. Weil/man el al. (.1981). cited in Lind (1994). make these points 
in formulating a sequential decision strategy for developing syn-
thetic fuels. 
19. Mannc and Richels (1992). Nordhaus (1993). and Peck and Teis-
berg (1993) all report a high value for better scientific information on 
climate change, including the cost and timing of new supply and 
conservation strategies. 
20. Richels and Edmonds (1993) provide a demonstration of this 
proposition; they calculate relatively low costs for stabilizing CO\ 
concentrations if flexibility in timing is allowed, compared to cap-
ping and stabilizing emissions to achieve the same atmospheric con-
centration. 
21. Alternatively, the Kaya identity may be written 
Growth rate of = growth rate — decline in energy — emissions 
CO, emissions 
of output 
per unit output 
per unit of 
energy use 
That is, C02 emissions will not rise as long as output grows no faster 
than the combined decline in energy intensity per unit of production 
and CO: emissions per unit of energy use. This formulation applies 
most usefully to the developed countries. 
22. Chapter 8, Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases, 
treats the important issue of inertia and technology. 
23. Note that energy-efficient development paths for developing 
countries have been proposed (Goldemberg et «/., 1988). 
24. That is, for conventional exhaustible resources, there is a stock. 
S. Welfare depends on flows out of the stock each year: 
(/(S, - % , s , - s , 
S, + , - S , 
J 
where U is utility or welfare, and 5; is the stock at the end of period /. 
In the case of climate change, welfare depends directly only on 
the stock of carbon in the atmosphere, though indirectly also on 
emissions, through the consumption of goods. 
WS„ C,(S, - SJ, S, C2(S;- S,) 
S,, C/S, + , - S,) 
J 
25. Even when the flow exceeds the long-run sustainable level, it 
will not be optimal to reduce the Mow instantaneously, unless there 
are zero costs of adjustment. For the atmosphere, a sustainable stock 
of greenhouse gases means stable concentrations. Current emissions 
are estimated to be at about twice the level consistent with stable 
concentrations. 
26. Postponing action may lead to some irreversible damages, such 
as the flooding of low-lying states. 
27. As noted, this is a simplification. Recent literature in resource 
economics often treats fossil fuels as depletable rather than ex-
haustible: that is. price affects incentives for exploration, and some 
marginal wells would not be drilled if oil prices fell too low. It is also 
a simplification to treat coal reserves as inexhaustible. With the more 
realistic assumptions of a steeply rising supply curve for oil and gas 
reserves (over the next century or two) and a rather Mat supply curve 
for coal, the results quoted still hold. 
28. Energy economic models often use the assumption that alterna-
tive sources of energy will become available at some future date 
from nonfossil (noncarbon-emitting) sources. The means to supply 
this energy is often called backstop technology. The modeller must 
specify the quantity, cost, and date of availability of the backstop 
technology. 
29. For analyses of market and optimal responses to uncertainty 
about the arrival of backstop technologies, see Dasgupta, Gilbert, 
and Stiglitz (1979) and Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1981). 
30. For counterexamples to the received wisdom, see Coase (1960). 
Introduction: 
Scope of the 
Assessment 
43 
31. Formally, if A measures the quality of the atmosphere, then each 
individual's or country's welfare. IS', is a function of its own con-
sumption, O , and the shared public good. A: UJ (C'.A). This does not 
mean that value changes in A are the same for all individuals and 
countries; that is (dU'ldC')l(dil'ldA) 
may differ in magnitude, and 
even in sign. 
32. Although there may also be trade-offs. Reductions in gases that 
contribute most to local pollution may sometimes be achieved at the 
expense of increased emissions of greenhouse gases. 
33. This kind of optimization problem was first studied by Edge-
worth (1881). The importance of incentive effects for the analysis of 
distributional issues was first emphasized by Mirrlccs (1971). There 
are, obviously, important incentive effects: If the less developed 
countries were able to classify any expenditure that had some effect 
on mitigation as a mitigation expenditure, with the cost borne by the 
developed countries, they would have an incentive to undertake ex-
cess expenditures of this type. The GEF (Global Environmental Fa-
cility) directly addresses this issue by providing funds only for 
incremental costs, that is. those costs that go beyond what would 
have been the efficient level of expenditures if the public good bene-
fits of greenhouse gas mitigation were ignored. 
34. The importance of the assumption that bargaining or transaction 
costs are absent (and perfect information is present) has only gradu-
ally come to be recognized. See Stiglitz (1988) for an elementary 
textbook treatment. 
35. For instance, it makes no difference whether smokers or non-
smokers are given the property rights to air. Rather, it is whether 
smokers value smoking more or less than nonsmokers value clean air 
that will determine whether smoking occurs. How property rights are 
assigned does make an important difference for the distribution of 
welfare. Coase's conclusion that outcomes are unrelated to the initial 
assignment of property rights obviously ignores potentially impor-
tant income effects. 
A slight extension of this perspective says that social scientists 
should simply describe 
the outcome of the bargaining process by 
which property rights are assigned. Beginning with the important 
work of Nash (1955). a variety of bargaining theories has been devel-
oped, most of which emphasize the importance of "threat points" -
the outcomes which arise in the absence of a bargaining agreement -
to the determination of the eventual outcome. In this case, the fact 
that the net losses of many developed countries may be limited rela-
tive to those of many of the less developed countries suggests a bar-
gaining solution in which much more of the costs of mitigation are 
borne by the less developed countries than under the "social welfare 
function" allocations described earlier. 
36. In the case of small taxes, these are "compensated" taxes and 
have no welfare effect, though they have a substitution effect, and 
therefore do reduce pollution. 
37. The loss in welfare (ignoring the benefits from reduced green-
house gas warming) are the Harberger triangles, and can thus be 
shown to be proportional to the product of the elasticity of demand 
for energy and the share of energy in national output. Since poorer 
countries are likely to have less access to alternatives that increase 
the elasticity of demand, and since the share of energy is larger in 
richer countries, the burden of the tax is progressive. 
38. The polluter-pays 
principle endorsed by the OECD is exclusively 
prospective. 
39. Many have challenged the ethical basis for assigning responsibil-
ity based on past damages. Using either an egalitarian social welfare 
function approach or a Rawlsian "behind the veil of ignorance" 
analysis (Rawls 1971) leads to the rejection of the polluter-pays prin-
ciple. Since at the time the relevant actions are taken, the polluter is 
not cognizant of the effects, such fees have no incentive effects, but 
rather appear as random taxes, lowering each person's expected util-
ity, and in particular the expected utility of the worst-off individual. 
There is a further ethical issue: It is generally difficult to ascertain 
who actually benefits from escaping the obligation of paying lor the 
pollution. It need not be the individual, firm, or country actually en-
gaging in the pollution-generating activity. In competitive markets, 
when firms are not charged the full social costs of production, prod-
uct prices will fall, giving consumers a substantial fraction of the 
benefits. 
40. Manne and Richels (1992) show that, under the IPCC emission 
scenarios, even the most drastic controls on emissions from devel-
oped countries would he insufficient to stabilize greenhouse gas 
concentrations without some means of controlling emissions limn 
developing countries. 
41. Public goods exist when property rights are not or cannot be 
clearly assigned. The atmosphere is an international public good lo-
calise assigning property rights to the atmosphere is difficult lor one 
nation acting alone, and particularly difficult when many sovereign 
states must agree among themselves. Tradable greenhouse emission 
permits, discussed below, attempt to resolve the problem by c\]>lie 
itly assigning property rights to greenhouse emissions. 
42. Coase's discussion of externalities (1960), emphasized the sepa 
lability of efficiency and equity issues. Though there have been se\ 
eral important qualifications to Coase's conjecture, emphasizing ilie 
importance of public goods, imperfect information, and transaction 
costs, the basic insight still remains applicable here. 
43. Chapter 7 discusses this issue at greater length. 
44. These concerns are not just theoretical possibilities, as the lol 
lowing two examples illustrate. Assume that the developed commies 
impose high energy taxes, but the developing countries fail lo do so. 
Energy-intensive industries, such as aluminum, migrate from Ilie ile 
veloped to the developing countries. But energy efficiency in Ilie ,le 
veloping countries is much less than in the industrialized commies, 
so the total energy used to produce a tonne of aluminum could in 
crease substantially. Although economic efficiency would call l>n 
locating energy intensive industries where energy efficient \ is 
greatest, a system of partial controls would result in energy-intense e 
industries being located where energy efficiency is lowest. Sinnlai l\. 
the reduced energy consumption by the developed countries v. ill re 
suit in lower producer prices of oil and gas. leading to increased eon 
sumption of energy in the developing world, partially offsetting any 
energy conservation induced in the industrialized countries. 
45. The precise manner in which this should he done is a technical 
matter, treated in the literature on Global Warming Potential (see. 
e.g.. IPCC, 1990a. 1995). To the extent that there are large dillci-
ences in atmospheric lifetimes, then the relative weighting of dillcr-
ent greenhouse gases should change over time, since the "shadow 
price" associated with effects on relative concentrations at different 
dates will differ. 
46. Similarly, if the developed countries restrict forest cutting, the 
price of lumber may rise, inducing the developing countries to cut 
44 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
down more of their own trees. Thus, total global carbon sequestra-
tion may not increase. Furthermore, if hardwood forests in the less 
developed countries are the least desirable ones to cut down from an 
ecological or economic perspective, as some researchers have con-
cluded, then environmental and economic efficiency will decrease if 
these forests are exploited more intensively (Edmonds and Reilly, 
1983). 
47. Only a few models take into account international capital flows. 
Thus, most models do not address issues of industry relocation 
(McKibben and Wilcoxen, 1992). It is also doubtful whether com-
puted general equilibrium models can realistically represent capital 
relocation from mic country to another. Chapter 11 provides a more 
complete discussion of leakages. 
48. In the case of production of highly substitulable commodities, 
carbon leakage will be much greater. 
49. Whether taxes, in fact, have this effect depends in part on the 
shape of the demand curves. With intertemporal separability in de-
mand curves, constant elasticity, and no backstop technology, a con-
stant ad valorem tax has no effect on the pattern of consumption. 
Coal presents markedly different issues, not so much because of 
its greater emissions per unit energy, but because of its higher cost of 
extraction-to-price ratio. Lowering producer prices may result in less 
coal being consumed, provided alternative energy sources become 
available. Thus, taxes on coal are likely to have significant general 
equilibrium as well as partial equilibrium effects; the increase in the 
price of coal will lead to a substitution of gas and oil. If alternative 
energy sources are not available, such policies will only affect the in-
tertemporal timing of coal consumption (given the much more lim-
ited resources of gas and oil). But even that might he o( some value 
in reducing long-run greenhouse gas emissions, as the ability to ex-
tract energy from coal may increase significantly over time. Analyz-
ing the optimal intertemporal structure of taxes to minimize long-run 
ambient levels of greenhouse gases, taking into account both in-
tertemporal substitution and substitution across energy sources, is a 
complicated technical issue that to date has not been adequately ana-
lyzed. 
50. United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. 
Framework Convention on Climate Change. May 9. 1992. 
51. The most difficult problem is posed by investors who invested in 
these resources under a previous regime (where these resources were 
not taxed). Do they have any special claim to compensation for a 
"change in regime." Changes in demands and supplies occur for vir-
tually all resources and are an inevitable part of the risks in investing. 
Most economists would argue that arbitrary and capricious changes 
in policies contribute to business uncertainty, and therefore have an 
adverse effect on economic growth, but reasoned changes in policies 
in response to changes in information are an inevitable part of busi-
ness risk. 
52. For example, some electric utilities in the U.S. are already mak-
ing decisions in anticipation of some future policies to limit green-
house emissions. 
53. These issues also arise among countries. Countries with large 
coal deposits will find the value of their natural wealth eroded and. 
quite naturally will be less enthusiastic about international agree-
ments that reduce coal use or lower producer prices. 
54. Studies show variation in GDP losses across models. For exam-
ple, it is estimated that stabilizing emissions at their 1990 levels 
would reduce U.S. GDP bv 0.2'l to O.Sr; in the vear 2010 - roimhlv 
a $20 billion to $80 billion loss for that year. Estimates of the costs of 
reducing emissions by 20% below 1990 levels in the year 2010 range 
from 0.9% to 1.7% of GDP. Aggregated models (top-down) have 
generally reported higher costs, whereas disaggregated models 
(bottom-up) have shown lower costs. Chapter 9 contains a more 
complete discussion. 
These GDP losses occur when carbon taxes lead to investments 
that are more expensive than those that would take place in the ab-
sence of the taxes. The higher the carbon taxes, the greater the in-
vestment in price-induced conservation and the greater the extent of 
fuel switching toward less carbon-intensive substitutes. 
The overall impact of a carbon tax will depend not only on the 
size of the tax but also on the uses to which the revenues are put. In 
the standard Energy Modeling Forum (EMF) scenarios, it was as-
sumed that tax revenues would be redistributed in a neutral manner 
(i.e., without affecting the marginal tax rates). There are, of course, 
numerous ways in which tax revenues can be used. These include re-
ducing budget deficits; reducing marginal rates of income, payroll, 
corporate, or other taxes; granting tax incentives to preferred activi-
ties; or increasing the level of government expenditures. The costs of 
the tax will vary widely depending on how the revenues are recycled. 
55. Top-down models estimate that for developing countries there 
exist low-cost options for reducing emissions in the near term, but 
eventually costs would exceed 1% to 2% of GDP (EMF, 1993). For 
economies in transition, because of historical inefficiencies and 
energy subsidies, there exist large opportunities to reduce emis-
sions at little or no cost. For developing countries, problems of 
informal economies make hard estimates difficult, but the cost of sta-
bilizing emissions would likely be large enough to cut into economic 
growth. 
56. Recent comparisons indicate that the most important differences 
between top-down and bottom-up models arise from differences in 
input parameters rather than from differences in model structure. 
57. Government institutions and regulations often hinder the effi-
cient use of energy. Developing countries are least able to absorb the 
costs of these inefficiencies. Thus, although some developing coun-
tries argue that they cannot afford to reduce greenhouse emissions, 
or cannot eliminate the subsidies to poor people implicit in bclow-
market energy prices, the same countries often have the most to gain 
from reforming government-caused inefficiencies. At least in the 
short run, international agreements committing countries to elimi-
nate at least the most egregious of these practices might go a long 
way to addressing the problem of emission reductions. 
58. This may also be a problem with electricity generated by the pri-
vate sector, as regulation has historically set price equal to average 
cost, rather than allowing it to match the competitive price. In many 
countries, the increase of competitive pressures has moved electric-
ity prices closer to the marginal cost of production. 
59. Further examples include: 
Eliminating regulations impeding efficient energy utilization. 
Many, perhaps most, countries have a host of regulations that in-
crease energy use as they impede economic efficiency. For instance, 
the U.S. has had a policy of restricting oil exports from Alaska. 
Whatever the merits of that policy, it has forced Japan to import oil 
from Indonesia and Saudi Arabia. World oil transportation costs have 
thus been greatly increased at the expense of the American economy. 
Another example of government reform, included in the U.S. Action 
Plan (Clinton and Gore. 1993). encourages efforts to expand and im-
Introduction: 
Scope 
of the 
Assessment 
^ 
prove natural gas markets through continued regulatory reform. 
These reform efforts include guidelines to allow greater natural gas 
use in the summer in coal- and oil-fired power plants. 
Other regulation. 
Unintended effects of many tax, expenditure, 
and other policies have contributed further to inefficiencies in land 
use. Among the unfortunate effects of the U.S. Superfund pro-
gramme for the management of hazardous wastes, for example, has 
been the creation of large unoccupied holes in the centres of major 
cities. 
60. In actual practice, some of these proposals would likely present 
practical obstacles, including the cost of implementation. 
61. Pay-at-the-pump insurance also has several potential drawbacks. 
For example, most such proposals fail to link the factors that most in-
fluence insurance rates (driver history, vehicle location, vehicle re-
pair costs) with actual insurance payments. 
62. Consider the following thought experiment: Compare an opti-
mally designed road system that only carries cars with an optimally 
designed road system that also carries trucks. The incremental cost 
of carrying trucks is, in most countries, much larger than the propor-
tionate share of the cost they bear in fuel taxes and other fees. 
63. For example, in many countries, governments have taken an ac-
tive role in the dissemination of information to the agriculture sector. 
These programmes are in some measure responsible for the large in-
crease in agricultural productivity in countries with agricultural ex-
tension services. 
64. This is because those who would be at a competitive disadvan-
tage under "true" disclosure have an incentive to add "noise" and be-
cause there are strong market forces for product differentiation. In 
markets with homogeneous commodities, profits will be driven to 
zero (in Bertrand competition), even with a limited number of sup-
pliers. For a discussion of these and related issues, see Salop (1977), 
Salop and Stiglitz (1977, 1982). and Stiglitz (1988). 
65. The standard reference in the organizational literature is March 
and Simon (1958). Economic theories emphasizing the nonvaluc 
maximizing behaviour of managers include those of Baumol (1959) 
and Marris (1964). The principal agent literature (Ross. 1973; 
Stiglitz, 1974) provided the informational microfoundations for un-
derstanding the divergences of interests. See Stiglitz (1988). A more 
recent overview is provided by Stiglitz (1991) and the symposium in 
the Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
Spring 1991. 
66. The facts that time is a scarce commodity and that decision mak-
ing in large organizations is decentralized do not in themselves con-
stitute a market failure: they do not prove that resources are not 
efficiently allocated, given the real constraints facing society, which 
include time. However, Grcenwald and Stiglitz (1984, 1988) have 
established a very general theorem showing that when information is 
imperfect and costly, market equilibrium is. in general, not Pareto ef-
ficient. Thus, there is no presumption concerning the efficiency of 
the market economy, even in the absence of the kinds of externality 
and public goods problems that are associated with greenhouse 
gases. For a more extended discussion, see Stiglitz (1994). 
Recent advances in the economics of information have provided 
sounder microfoundations for these theories of the firm. And indeed, 
the importance of the limitations on the availability of information, 
and the consequent importance of attention-directing efforts, applies 
to individuals as well as to organizations. Some studies have sug-
gested that the limited success of the special tax provisions in the 
U.S. designed to encourage savings (IRA accounts) was primarily 
due to the competitive efforts of banks to recruit these accounts and 
the attention that savings got as a result. 
67. Network externalities are manifested in other ways. Builders kill 
to install energy-efficient light bulbs, because customers dislike 
them and stores do not carry replacements: and stores do not earn 
them because the demand for them is too low. 
When there are important network externalities, market equilibria 
are frequently inefficient. The economy might, for instance, gel 
"stuck" in the wrong equilibrium. Government action can, in these 
instances, "force" the economy to move from one equilibrium in an 
other. 
68. This is not the only explanation of differences between bnttnni 
up and top-down models. There are several other features of market 
behaviour that bottom-up models often ignore. 
(a) 
Hidden costs: Consumers value a range of attributes dillieult 
to include in an engineering model. For example, auto bn\ers 
value not only initial costs and fuel economy (which computer 
models can easily calculate) bill also performance. salel\. ami 
durability, which they typically do not. 
(b) 
Divergence 
between laboratory 
and in-nse performance: 
Is 
pecially for new technologies, actual energy use often differs 
significantly from energy use calculated in the laboratory It is 
the latter on which purchasers focus. 
(c) 
Variation across individual 
consumers: 
Engineering models 
generally assume an average consumer, but actual consumers 
may display a wide range of characteristics and usage pat-
terns. Except when demand functions are linear in the relevant 
variables, the consumption of the "average" individual is mil 
equal to the average consumption, and what is optimal for I he 
average person may not be optimal for a significant fraction of 
the population. 
69. For a survey, see Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990). The basic theory of 
credit rationing was developed in Stiglitz and Weiss (1981). and the 
theory of credit rationing is further developed in Greenwald el al. 
(1984) and Myers and Maljuf (1984). 
70. This generally accepted methodology is, for instance, reflected in 
the guidelines issued by the Office of Management and Budget in the 
U.S. for the evaluation of projects and regulations. The applied liter-
ature does not address the question of whether this procedure is 
appropriate in the presence of certain types of time and risk nonsepa-
rabilities. 
71. Though if the variance of the net benefits is increasing over lime 
in a particular manner, the differences in the two methodologies may 
not be large. 
72. Again, under certain restrictive conditions, where I he shadow 
value of a capital constraint is changing systematically overtime, the 
differences in the two methodologies may not he great. 
73. See Wilson (1977). The "winner's curse" describes the tendency 
for the winner of an auction to fail to realize a competitive return; 
that is, in retrospect, to have paid too much. Though the original 
discussion of winner's curse focussed on bidding in auctions, it has 
subsequently come to be applied to a range of other market phenom-
ena. 
74. For a discussion of the role of the state in capital markets, see 
Stiglitz (1994). 
75. In some industrialized countries, energy-efficient home mort-
gage lending may help correct the problem. Lenders generally set 
criteria for the maximum loan amount based on the borrowers' abil-
ity to repay, which, in turn, depends on income and wealth. The fact 
46 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
that a particular expenditure would enhance efficiency and reduce 
utility bills is not given special attention. Energy-efficient mortgages 
provide funds to households to make energy efficiency-enhancing 
investments that are intended to pay for themselves by reducing util-
ity bills by an amount equal to or greater than the interest payments. 
With capital constraints, builders may have an incentive to trade off 
initial capital costs for higher maintenance costs (lower energy effi-
ciency). Building codes specifying minimal levels of energy effi-
ciency and full disclosure of expected life-cycle energy costs may 
help address these market distortions. 
76. A country that rapidly depletes its natural resources may show a 
high rate of growth under conventional income accounting, but a 
lower rate of growth when resource depletion is taken into account. 
Repetto (1989, 1991) calculated resource-adjusted GDP for several 
countries thai were rapidly harvesting their stocks of hardwoods and 
other resources, arguing that conventional measures sharply over-
stated GDP. 
77. Daley and Cobb (1989) have even claimed that U.S. per capita 
GDP, when adjusted for environmental damage, was stagnant be-
tween 1950 and 1986. This assertion is hard to reconcile with the 
steady improvement in most measures of environmental quality 
since 1970, when measurement standards were established. 
78. Analysts now use two methods to estimate stocks. The first as-
sumes a fixed stock of a natural resource such as oil. Consumption of 
oil then depletes the stock by the amount of consumption. The sec-
ond begins by treating discovered reserves as the asset. Thus, addi-
tions to reserves increase the asset, while consumption reduces it. If 
in any given year, new discoveries match resource utilization, then 
according to this method no net depletion has occurred. 
79. A number of difficult conceptual problems face the analyst defin-
ing levels and changes in levels of these assets. 
First, how should the "stock" of natural resources be defined? 
Coal poses perhaps the easiest situation. The location of coal re-
serves is known. Costs of extraction are high, so the rents (the value 
of coal in situ) are low. The depletion can be measured not by the 
coal used times the market price, but the coal used times the in situ 
value. But for oil and other minerals, information about where re-
serves are located is vital. Two models have been proposed. One sees 
the world as having a fixed stock of natural resources (say oil). When 
one uses oil. one is depleting this stock. Thus, to calculate the value 
of depletion, one does not need to know the entire stock; the flow 
(the amount of oil consumed) provides an accurate measure of the 
change in stock. 
The alternative model looks at the size of discovered reserves. 
Reserves are treated as the asset. Additions to reserves thus are 
viewed as increasing the resource base. If. in any given year, new 
discoveries match resource utilization, then there is no net depletion. 
This is the approach being taken by the U.S. Department of Com-
merce. This accounting framework would he correct if there were an 
infinite supply of the resource (reflected in zero rents). The essential 
"capital" good is information about where the resource is located. 
Environmental assets - such as air quality - present another set of 
problems, because there are no market prices to value the asset. Dy-
namic optimization problems of the kind described earlier can be 
used to calculate shadow prices. How sensitive these shadow prices 
are to specific assumptions remains to be investigated. 
Accounting systems do not. however, have to aggregate all infor-
mation together. Just as information about longevity and other indi-
cators of well-being (see below) serve to complement information 
from national income accounts concerning standards of living, so too 
can information about physical environmental measures be used to 
complement information from the extended national income ac-
counts. 
80. There is some concern that excessively broad and long patents 
may actually impede innovation. When technological progress oc-
curs by building on previous innovations, later innovators require the 
permission of earlier innovators to realize the returns on their inno-
vation. Although advocates of broad patent coverage argue that the 
parties always arrive at efficient bargaining solutions, critics point 
out that the outcomes of bargaining models with incomplete infor-
mation often entail large inefficiencies. 
81. Matters are more complicated, since the patent does not reward 
the innovator with his marginal contribution - the increase in the pre-
sent discounted value of benefits as a result of the innovation occur-
ring earlier than it otherwise would have occurred. For a fuller 
discussion, see Stiglitz (1994) and Dasgupta and Stiglitz (1980). 
82. If less developed countries fail to implement fully a set of correc-
tive taxes or tradable permits, or if less developed countries fail to 
adopt and effectively enforce intellectual property rights, there will 
be insufficient incentives to produce energy- and emission-saving in-
novations, particularly those appropriate for the level of technologi-
cal knowledge, human capital, and factor prices in those countries. If 
less developed countries do take these actions, there is concern that 
they will result in higher prices for innovations, and thus the pace 
of adoption will be retarded. An effective form of aid. targeted to 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, might take the form of sub-
sidies directed at producing appropriate energy-saving and emission-
reducing technologies for LDCs. 
83. Edmonds et til. (1994) have studied the importance of available 
advanced energy technologies such as those proposed by Johannson, 
et al. (1993). Edmonds et cri. use the Edmonds-Reilly-Barnes model 
for energy-related greenhouse gas emissions; the MAGICC model 
for atmospheric composition, climate response, and sea level rise; 
the IPCC scenario IS92a (IPCC, 1992) as the reference base case, 
and five alternative energy scenarios that are far more advanced than 
today's energy supply and transformation technologies. The five en-
ergy scenarios are: 
• 
advanced fossil fuel technologies 
• advanced liquefied hydrogen fuel cells 
• advanced hydrogen fuel cells without liquefied hydrogen 
• 
low-cost biomass 
• accelerated rate of exogenous end-use energy intensity im-
provement 
Combined, the energy technologies reduce annual emissions from 
fossil fuel use to levels that stabilize atmospheric concentrations be-
low 550 ppmv (i.e.. double the concentration prior to the Industrial 
Revolution). The tax rate used, which was assumed to apply globally, 
was the marginal cost of stabilizing fossil fuel carbon emissions in 
the reference case. With values reflected for only carbon dioxide 
emission reductions, the estimated cost of global emission reduc-
tions grew from approximately $35 (U.S.) billion in 2005 to $230 
(U.S.) billion per year in the year 2095. With advanced fossil fuels, 
low-cost solar electric power, low-cost fuel cell vehicles, the present 
discounted value of adding low-cost biomass fuel to the energy tech-
Introduction: Scope of the 
Assessment 
4~ 
nology bundle is almost half a trillion dollars (U.S.). The present dis-
counted value of the advanced energy technologies taken together is 
$1.8 trillion (U.S.). 
The introduction of advanced biomass energy production tech-
nology was found to play a key role in reducing emissions. Biomass 
energy at $2.00/GJ, growing to become the core energy supply tech-
nology by 2050, could significantly reduce emissions. This possibil-
ity highlights the potential role of technology development and 
deployment relative to that of fiscal and regulatory intervention. 
These results should be viewed as illustrative rather than predic-
tive. In this analysis, the gains from introduction and deployment of 
advanced energy technologies depend on the sequence of technolo-
gies evaluated in the study. 
84. The literature has identified three types of permit systems. The 
ambient permit system (APS) works on the basis of permits defined 
according to exposure at the receptor points. Each polluter, then, may 
face quite complex markets - different permit markets according to 
different receptor points, and hence different prices. The simpler 
emission permit system (EPS) issues permits on the basis of source 
emissions and ignores what effects those emissions have on the re-
ceptor points. Within a given region or zone, the polluter would have 
only one market to deal with and one price. Finally, there is the pol-
lution offset (PO) system, wherein the permits are defined in terms of 
emissions and trade takes place within a defined zone. However, the 
standard has to be met at all receptor points. The exchange value of 
the permits is then determined by the effects of the pollutants at the 
receptor points. The PO system thus combines characteristics of the 
EPS and the APS (Pearce and Turner. 1990). These distinctions are 
of limited relevance for greenhouse gases, where what is of concern 
is global emission levels. The specific location of the emissions is of 
no concern. 
85. The choice between taxes and tradable permits depends on the 
objectives of the policymaker and the nature of the uncertainty about 
the marginal cost and marginal benefit curves for carbon emission 
reductions (Weitzman. 1974). Theory tells us that if the nature of the 
curves is known with very little certainty, but the marginal cost curve 
is known to be relatively steeper (i.e., a change in the level of pollu-
tion allowed brings about a greater change in the marginal costs of 
mitigation than in the marginal benefits) then taxes should be the 
policy of choice. This is because, in this case, an erroneous estima-
tion of the optimal tax rate will lead to a relatively small deviation 
from the optimal pollution level. On the other hand, an erroneous es-
timation of the optimal level of total emissions in a permit scheme 
will lead to a relatively large deviation from the optimal cost of the 
permits. 
If the marginal benefit curve is known to be relatively steeper 
than the marginal cost curve, however, tradable permits are the better 
option. Here, an erroneous estimation of the optimal tax rate will 
lead to a relatively large deviation from the optimal level of emis-
sions, whereas an erroneous estimation of the optimal level of emis-
sions in a permit strategy will lead to a relatively small deviation 
from the optimal cost of the permits. 
In the case of greenhouse gas emissions, the time horizon for ad-
justment is sufficiently long that many of these uncertainties become 
less important. If the tax rate initially chosen yields too high a level 
of emissions in one year, it can be increased, and the net impact of 
the erroneous initial estimate on global warming (or the total cost of 
achieving a given level of atmospheric concentration) will be negli-
gible. In any case, as the earlier discussion o( sequential decision 
making has emphasized, there is likely to be a need for continued re 
visions in either tax rates or permit levels. 
Still, there is some argument that the required adjustments under 
a permit scheme may be less burdensome (Tietenherg. 1992). I or in 
stance, if the authority feels that the old standard needs some tighten 
ing it may enter the market itself and buy some of the permits, 
holding them out of the market. 
There must be effective, competitive markets in tradable permits 
if such schemes are to achieve efficient outcomes. There are transac-
tion costs of running such schemes, just as there are transaction costs 
associated with collecting tax revenues. Whether transaction costs 
give one system a decided advantage over the other is not clear. 
There seems to he no compelling reason to believe that good markets 
in tradable permits would not develop. 
86. It is possible to design allocations of trading permits that la) on 
average, impose no net burden on developing countries (thus con-
forming to the ability to pay principle): (b) provide those economies 
that are growing faster per capita with commensurately greater per-
mits, thus imposing no net drag on economic growth, provided the 
economy exhibits an increase in fuel efficiency at least equal to the 
average of fast-growing, less-developed countries; and Ic) rewards 
those economies that are able to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
faster than benchmark rates, either through greater control of popula-
tion growth, larger increases in energy efficiency, or switching from 
higher- to lower-carbon fuels. 
The extent to which individual circumstances ol countries should 
be taken into account in setting benchmarks remains a question for 
international negotiations. To the extent that high emissions are due 
to natural endowments (e.g.. the availability of coal rather than nat-
ural gas as a source of energy), a persuasive case can he made for 
benchmarks to reflect initial emission levels. To the extent that high 
emissions are due to inappropriate energy pricing policies, the case 
that benchmarks should reflect initial emission levels is far more ten-
uous. 
87. Similarly, some developing countries have asked, should the de-
veloped countries be given higher levels of permits, simply because 
they have, in the past, been the chief source of greenhouse gases? 
88. Standard tradable permit schemes essentially take the revenue 
from a carbon tax and distribute it to current user emitters, rather 
than using the revenue to reduce other taxes. An alternative to these 
standard schemes is for the government to auction off the tradable 
permits. 
If taxing carbon leads to reduced labour supply or reduced sav-
ings, then government revenues from wage or capital taxes may be 
reduced, more than offsetting the direct revenue gain from the car-
bon tax. Cross-elasticities of this magnitude are unlikely, though any 
such cross-elasticity will reduce the net gain from the carbon tax. 
The magnitude of the double dividend has been the subject of some 
dispute, with Goulder (1994) and Repetto et al. (1992) taking oppo-
site views. 
89. Two main studies provide insights into the root of the variance in 
estimates of the economic effects of carbon taxes: the Energy Model-
ing Forum Study-12 and the OECD comparison project. In each 
case, sophisticated sensitivity analyses were run by standardizing 
key economic assumptions and using these in conjunction with com-
mon reference-case scenarios of reductions. The magnitude of the 
effect on economic growth in these studies depends both on 
4K 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
assumptions concerning the effect of carbon taxes on savings and 
labour supply, and the induced investment to offset the higher energy 
prices. If higher energy prices do not lead to much capital substitu-
tion, and if the cross-elasticity with savings and labour is low, then 
the likely effect on economic growth will he small. 
The OECD model comparison project was conducted to compare 
economy-wide estimates of the effects of carbon taxes. Time hori-
zons as well as the key economic assumptions on growth, popula-
tion, and resource prices, and the reduction scenarios for six global 
models were standardized. The global models compared were the 
GRliliN model, the IEA model, and four North American models 
(the Edmonds-Reilly Model (ERM), the Global 2100 model of 
Manne and Richels (MR), Rutherford's Carbon Rights Trade Model 
(CRTM), and the Whalley-Wigle model) (Dean, 1994). 
because of differing assumptions about several key considerations, 
the models showed significant variation in tax rates and costs for the 
same amount of emission reduction. Several factors explain the differ-
ences between model results. The most important factors are: 
• the degree of substitution between fuels - the ease with which 
producers and consumers can switch from high-carbon-con-
tent fuels to low-carbon-content fuels 
• expectations about future energy prices and taxes 
• the speed of emission reduction 
• the way in which revenue is recycled 
• the treatment of the removal of energy subsidies 
• assumptions regarding backstop technology and a host of 
other technical and economic factors 
Because of the varying approaches to these questions, the range 
of estimated lax rates and costs is quite wide. For a 45% reduction in 
baseline emissions by 2020. the required tax would be in the range of 
$150-325 per tonne of carbon and the cost might be in the range of 
1.5-2.9% of worid GDP. A 70% reduction in baseline emissions by 
2050 could require a tax of between $230 and $880 per tonne and a 
loss in world GDP of 2.4-3.8% (Dean, 1994). 
The required carbon taxes and associated costs vary significantly 
across regions in all of the models. This indicates that the same pro-
portional reductions in emissions across all regions would give rise 
to very different costs in different regions and would thus be globally 
inefficient - with great potential for savings in the global cost of re-
ducing emissions through the use of emission trading between coun-
tries or regions or a global carbon tax. 
Three insights emerging from the OECD study (Dean. 1994) 
are: 
• Small amounts of emission reduction can probably be 
achieved with low taxes: 
• Large reductions can only be achieved at high tax rates (i.e., 
marginal reduction costs rise with emission reductions); 
• Carbon-free backstop technologies are likely to slow the rise 
of the carbon tax. or halt it altogether, if they are available at 
constant marginal cost. 
The Energy Modeling Forum-12 (Impact of Carbon Emission 
Control Strategies) examined the cost of reducing CO, emissions 
(EMF. 1993). A diverse group of economic models, employing com-
mon assumptions for selected numerical inputs, were used to analyze 
a standardized set of emission reduction scenarios. In all, fourteen 
top-down models participated in the study. 
The EMF model comparison provides the most comprehensive 
application of top-down methodologies to date. The study addresses 
a wide range of policy questions. How large are emissions likely to 
grow in the absence of controls'? How much market intervention will 
be required to meet alternative targets? What will be the price tag? In 
exploring economic costs, the modellers were asked to examine the 
impacts of timing, research and development, and revenue recycling. 
The EMF exercise provides a wealth of useful information for 
policymaking. Although the focus was primarily on the U.S., many 
of the insights are applicable to developed countries in general. 
In selecting parameters for standardization, the EMF study fo-
cussed on what were felt to be the most influential determinants of 
mitigation costs. These included GDP, population, the fossil fuel re-
source base, and the cost and availability of long-term supply op-
tions. In addition, although the EMF models differed considerably in 
their technology representation, the study attempted to impose uni-
formity with regard to world oil prices, the oil and gas resource base, 
and the cost of backstop technologies. For its reference case, EMF 
adopted the average of the 1990 IPCC high and low economic 
growth cases (IPCC, 1990c). To be consistent with the IPCC scenar-
ios, the study also adopted the population growth projections of 
Zachariah and Vu (1988). 
The modellers generally used taxes based on the carbon content 
of the fossil fuels to achieve a prescribed emission reduction. The 
magnitude of the tax provided a rough estimate of the degree of mar-
ket intervention that would be required to achieve the carbon emis-
sion target. Estimates ranged from $20 to $140 per tonne for the 
carbon taxes required to hold emissions at 1990 levels in 2010. Esti-
mates of the carbon taxes required to reduce emissions by 20% be-
low 1990 levels in 2010 ranged from $50 to $330 per tonne. 
Two parameters are particularly important in explaining the dif-
ferences in tax projections: the price elasticity of energy demand and 
the speed with which the capital stock adjusts to higher energy 
prices. Neither was controlled in the EMF experiments. Those mod-
els using lower price elasticities required higher taxes to achieve the 
same emission goal. Those models that assumed greater malleability 
of capital required lower taxes. 
90. Rapid capital stock retirement may add to the cost of immediate 
CO: reductions. Also, reductions may be cheaper later because of 
technical changes in the intervening years. 
91. Indeed, the "ratchet effect," a commonly observed phenomenon 
in command and control economies (Stiglitz, 1975b; Weitzman. 
1978), leads firms to do no more than just satisfy the target. 
92. Two examples from the experience of the United States Clean Air 
Act: (1) the expensive and evidently counterproductive requirement 
in the 1977 amendments that coal-burning power plants install stack-
gas scrubbers even if they burn low-sulphur Western coal has been 
attributed to an unusual alliance between environmental activists and 
Eastern U.S. high-sulphur coal interests; (2) the mandates for ethanol 
in the motor fuels market are generally attributed to the political 
power of the corn and ethanol interests. 
93. It has been argued that new species and varieties produced by ge-
netic engineering may be able to more than offset the loss in genetic 
variability from climate impacts, particularly because of the increasing 
capacity to direct those mutations toward socially desirable objectives. 
Introduction: Scope of the 
Assessment 
-7M 
94. Other views represented in the debate on sustainable develop-
ment but not generally accepted in the economics profession include 
those of Daly (1991) and Daly and Cobb (1989), and those of the 
new field of ecological economics (Costanza, 1991). 
References 
Arrow, K.J., 1962: The economic implications of learning by doing, 
Review of Economic Studies 29, 155-173. 
Atkinson, A.B., 1970: On the measurement of inequality, Journal of 
Economic Theory, 2, 244-263. 
Atkinson, A.B., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1980: Lectures on public econom-
ics, McGraw-Hill, New York. 
Baumol, W.J., 1959: Business behavior, value, and growth, chapters 
6-8. Macmillan, New York. 
Birdsall, N., and A. Steer, 1993. Act now on global warming - but 
don't cook the books, Finance and Development 30( 1), 6-8. 
Bohm, P., 1993: Making carbon-emission quota agreements more ef-
ficient: Joint implementation vs. quota-tradability. Paper pre-
sented at Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (1IASA), 
Laxenburg, Austria, October. 
Burniaux, J.M., J.P. Martin, and J. Oliviera Martins. 1992: The ef-
fects of existing distortions in energy markets on the costs of poli-
cies to reduce CO, emissions: Evidence from GREEN. OECD 
Economic Studies no. 19, OECD. Paris. 
Chao, Hung-po, 1992: Managing the risk of global climate catastro-
phe. Electric Power Research Institute, Palo Alto, CA. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal, 1993: Who should abate carbon emis-
sions? An international viewpoint. National Bureau of Economic Re-
search (NBER) working paper no. 4425, Cambridge, MA. August. 
Cline, W.R. 1992: The economics of global warming. Institute for In-
ternational Economics, Washington, DC. 
Clinton, W., and A. Gore, 1993: The climate change action plan. Ex-
ecutive Office of the President, Washington, DC. 
Coase, R., i960: The problem of social cost, Journal of Law and 
Economics 1, October, 1-44. 
Costanza, R., 1991: Ecological economics: The science and man-
agement of sustainability, Columbia University Press, New York. 
Daly, H., 1991: Steady-state economics, 2d ed., Island Press, Wash-
ington, DC. 
Daly, H., and J. Cobb, 1989: For the common good: Redirecting the 
economy toward community, the environment, and a sustainable 
future, Beacon Press, Boston. 
Dasgupta, P., 1982: The control of resources. Basil Blackwcll, Oxford. 
Dasgupta, P., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1980: Industrial structure and the na-
ture of economic activity, Economic Journal 90(358), June, 
266-293. 
Dasgupta, P., and J.E. Stiglitz. 1981: Resource depletion under tech-
nological uncertainty, Econometrica 49( I). January, 85-104. 
Dasgupta, P., R. Gilbert, and J.E. Stiglitz, 1979: Energy resources 
and research and development, in Erschopjbare Ressourcen, 
S. Brand, ed., Duncker and Humboldt, Berlin. 
Dean, A., 1994: The effectiveness of carbon taxes at the international 
level. In Climate change: Policy instruments and their implica-
tions: Proceedings of the Tsukuba Workshop of IPCC Working 
Group III, 17-20 January, 1994, pp. 46-59, Environmental 
Agency of Japan, Tokyo. 
Edgeworth, FY., 1881: Mathematical psychics, C. Kegan Paul & 
Co., London. 
Edmonds, J., and J. Reilly, 1983: Global energy and C0 2 to the year 
2050, The Energy Journal 4, 21-^7. 
Edmonds, J., M. Wise, and C. MacCracken. 1994: Advanced cncrin 
technologies and climate change: An analysis using the global 
change assessment model (GCAM). Global Environmental 
Change Program, Pacific Northwest Laboratory. Washington l)('. 
Draft. 
El Serafy, S., 1989: The proper calculation of income from tic 
pletable natural resources. In Ysuf J. Ahmad. S. El Serafy ami 
E. Lutz, Environmental accounting for sustainable development. 
World Bank, Washington, DC. 
EMF (Energy Modeling Forum), 1993: EMF-12 global climate 
change: Impacts of greenhouse gas control strategies, Stanford 
University, Palo Alto, CA. 
Fankhauser, S., 1994: The social costs of greenhouse gas emissions: 
An expected value approach. In N. Nakicenovic el al. (1994 ). 
Goldemberg, J.. T. Johannson, A. Reddy. and R. Williams. 1"NN: 
Energy for a sustainable world. Wiley Eastern Limited. Now 
York. 
Goulder, L., 1994: Environmental taxation and the "double divi 
dend": A reader's guide, Stanford University Department of Leo 
nomics, Palo Alto. CA. Draft. 
Greenwald, B.. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1984: Pecuniary and markets exter-
nalities: Toward a general theory of the welfare economies ol 
economies with imperfect information and incomplete markets. 
NBER Working Paper No. 1304. National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Palo Alto. CA. 
Greenwald, B., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1988: Pareto inefficiencies of mar-
ket economies: Search and efficiency wage models. American 
Economic Review 78(2), May. 351 -355. 
Greenwald, B., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1989: Impact of the changing tax 
environment on investments and productivity, The Journal of Ac-
counting, Auditing, and Finance 4(3). Summer. 281-301. 
Greenwald, B., J.E. Stiglitz, and A. Weiss, 1984: Informational im-
perfections in the capital market and macrocconomic lluctua-
tions. American Economic Review 74(2). May. 194-199. 
Grossman, S., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1981: Stockholder unanimity in the 
making of production and financial decisions. Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 94, May. 543-566. 
Grubb, M., Thierry Chapuis. and Minh Ha Duong. 1995: The eco-
nomics of climate change: Implications of adaptability and inertia 
for optimal climate policy. Forthcoming. 
Grubb, M., J. Edmonds, P. ten Brink, and M. Morrison, 1993a: The 
costs of limiting fossil-fuel CO, emissions: A survey and analysis. 
Annual Review of Energy and the Environment 18, 397- 478. 
Grubb, M., Minh Ha Duong, and Thierry Chapuis, 1993b: Optimis-
ing climate change abatement responses: On inertia and induced 
technology development, IIASA Workshop on Integrative As-
sessment of Mitigation. Impacts, and Adaptation to Climate 
Change. Laxenburg. Austria, October. 
Hicks, JR.. 1939: The foundations of welfare economics. Economic 
Journal 49, December. 696-712. 
Hotelling, H., 1931: The economics of exhaustible resources, Jour-
nal of Political Economy, April, 137-175. 
Howarth, R., and R. Norgaard, 1992: Environmental valuation 
under sustainability. American Economic Review 82(2), May. 
473-477. 
Hyder, TO., 1992: Climate negotiations, the North/South perspec-
tive. In Confronting climate change: Risks, implications, and re-
sponses, I. Mintzer, ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990a: Cli-
mate change: The IPCC scientific assessment, J.T. Houghton, 
G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraums, eds., Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
50 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990b: Cli-
mate change: The IPCC impacts assessment. Report Prepared for 
IPCC by Working Group I, World Meteorological Organization 
and United Nations Environment Programme, New York. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990c: 
Emissions scenarios prepared by the response strategies working 
group of the IPCC. Report of the expert group on emissions sce-
narios. World Meteorological Organization and United Nations 
Environment Programme, New York. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1992: The 
supplemental report to the IPCC scientific assessment, J.T. 
Houghton. B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varncy, eds.. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1995: Cli-
mate change 1994: Radiative forcing of climate change and an 
evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission scenarios, J.T. Houghton, 
L.G. Meira Hi I ho. J. Bruce. Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, 
L;. Haites, N. Harris, and K. Maskell, eds., Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
Jatt'ee, D., and J.E. Stiglitz. 1990: Credit rationing. In B. Friedman 
and F. Halm, eds.. Handbook of monetary economics, pp. 
837-888, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam. 
Johannson, J., Goldemberg, R. Williams, and H. Kelley. 1993: Re-
newable energy: Sources for fuels and electricity. Island Press. 
Washington. 
Kaldor, N., 1939: Welfare propositions of economics and interpersonal 
comparisons of utility. Economic Journal 49, December. 549-552. 
Kaya, Y., 1989: Impact of carbon dioxide emission control on GNP 
growth: Interpretation of proposed scenarios, Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change/Response Strategies Working Group. 
May. 
Knight, F„ 1921: Risk, uncertainty, and profit. Houghton Mifflin. 
Boston. 
Lind, R.C., 1994: Intergenerational equity, discounting, and the role 
of cost-benefit analysis in evaluating global climate policy. In 
N. Nakicenovic et al. (1994). 
Lind, R.C., K.J. Arrow. G.R. Corey, P. Dasgupta, A.K.. Sen, T. Slauffer, 
J.E. Stiglitz. J.A. Stockfisch. and R. Wilson. 1982: Discounting 
for Time and Risk in Energy Policy. Washington. DC: Resources 
for the Future. 
Lovelock, J.. 1979: Gain: A new look at life on earth, Oxford Uni-
versity Press. London. 
Malthas, T.. 1798: Essay on the principle of population (reprinted 
Macmilkm, London, 1926). 
Mamie, A.S., and R.G. Riehels. 1992: Buying greenhouse insur-
ance: The economic costs of CO, emission Hunts, MIT Press. 
Cambridge, MA. 
March, J., and H. Simon, 1958: Organizations, Wiley. New York. 
Marris, R., 1964: The economic theory of managerial capitalism, 
Macmilkm, New York. 
McKibben, W., and P. Wilcoxen. 1992: The global costs of policies 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Brookings Discussion Pa-
pers in International Economics no. 97, Brookings Institution. 
Washington. DC. 
Meadows, D.H., and D.L. Meadows. 1972: The limits to growth: A 
report to the club of Rome's project on the predicament of 
mankind, Universe Books. New York. 
Mearns, L.O., PAY. Katz, and S.H. Schneider. 1984: Extreme-high 
temperature events: Changes in their probabilites with changes in 
mean temperature. Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology. 
23. December. 1601-1613. 
Mirrlees, .1.. 1971: An exploration in the theory of optimum income 
taxation. Review of Economic Studies 38, April. 175-208. 
Myers, S„ and N. Maljuf. 1984: Corporate financial and investment 
decisions when firms have information that investors do not have. 
Journal of Financial Economics 13(2), June, 187-221. 
Nakicenovic, N., W.D. Nordhaus, R. Richels, and F.L. Toth, eds.. 
1994: Interactive assessment of mitigation, impacts, and adapta-
tion to climate change. Proceedings of a workshop held on 13-15 
October 1993 at the Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Lax-
cnburg. Austria. 
Nash, J.F.. 1955: The bargaining problem, Econometrica 18, 
155-162. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1993: Managing the global commons: The eco-
nomics of climate change, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. and J. Tobin, 1973: Is growth obsolete? Income 
and Wealth, vol. 38. National Bureau of Economic Research. 
New York. 
Parikh, J.K., 1994: Vulnerability vs. responsibility in climate 
change outlook. Proceedings, Australian Bureau of Agricultural 
and Resource Economics (ABARE), 1-4 Feb., 1994, Canberra 
Australia. 
Pearee, D.W., 1989: Sustainable development: Towards an opera-
tional definition and its practical implications. OECD Economics 
and Statistics Department/Environmental Directorate Joint Semi-
nar on the Economics of Environmental Issues. 2-3 Oct., Paris. 
Pearee, D.W., 1991: Evaluating the socio-economic impacts of cli-
mate change: An introduction. In OECD, Climate change: Evalu-
ating the socio-economic impacts, chapter 1. Paris. 
Pearee, D.W., G. Atkinson, and W. DuBourg, 1994: The economics 
of sustainable development, Annual Review of Energy and the 
Environment 19, 457-474. 
Pearee, D.W., and R.K. Turner, 1990: Economics of natural re-
sources and the environment, Johns Hopkins University Press, 
Baltimore. 
Peek, S.. and T. Tcisberg. 1992: CETA: A model for carbon emis-
sions trajectory assessment. The Energy Journal, 13(1). 55-77. 
Peck, S., and T. Teisberg 1993: Global warming uncertainties and 
the value of information: An analysis using CETA, Resource and 
Energy Economics, 15(1). 87-102. 
Peskin, H.. and E. Lutz. 1990: A survey of resource and environmen-
tal accounting in industrialized countries. The World Bank Envi-
ronment Working Paper no. 37. August. 
Polasky, S.. A.R. Solow. and J.M. Broadus. 1993: Searching for un-
certain benefits and the conservation of biological diversity. Envi-
ronmental and Resource Economics 3, 171-181. 
Rawls, J., 1971: Theory of justice, Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Reddy A., and J. Goldemherg, 1990: Energy for the developing 
world. Scientific American, 263(3). 111-118. 
Repetto, R., 1989: Wasting assets: Natural resources in the national 
income accounts. World Resources Institute. Washington, DC. 
Repetto, R.. 1991: Accounts overdue: Natural resource depletion in 
Costa Rica, World Resources Insitute, Washington, DC. 
Repetto, R., R. Dower. R. Jenkins, and T. Geoghegan, 1992: Green 
fees: How a lax shift can work for the environment and the econ-
omy. World Resources Institute. Washington, DC. 
Richels, R. and J. Edmonds. 1993: The economics of stabilizing at-
mospheric CO, concentrations. Draft manuscript. 
Ross, R.. 1973: The economic theory of agency: The principal's 
problem. American Economic Review 63, 134-139. 
Rothenberg, J.. 1993: Time comparisons in public policy analysis of 
global climate change: An economic analysis. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge. MA. 
Salop, S.. 1977: The noisy monopolist: Imperfect information, price 
dispersion, and price discrimination. Review of Economic Studies 
44(3). October. 393^06. 
Introduction: 
Scope 
of the 
Assessment 
M 
Salop, S., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1977: Bargains and ripoffs: A model of 
monopolistically competitive price dispersion. Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 44, October, 493-510. 
Salop, S.. and J.E. Stiglitz. 1982: The theory of sales: A simple 
model of equilibrium price dispersion with identical agents, 
American Economic Review, Dec, 1121-1130. 
Samuelson, P., 1954: The pure theory of public expenditure, Review 
of Economics and Statistics 36, Nov., 387-389. 
Schmalensee, R., 1993: Comparing greenhouse gases for policy pur-
poses, The Energy Journal 14( 1), 245-255. 
Shah, A., and B. Larsen, 1991: Carbon taxes, the greenhouse 
effect 
and developing countries. World Bank. Washington. DC. 
Solow, A.R., 1993: The response of sea level to global warming. In 
The world at risk: Natural hazards and climate change, R. Bras, 
ed. AIP Conference Proceedings 277, pp. 38-42, American Insti-
tute of Physics, New York. 
Solow, A.R., 1990: Is there a global warming problem? In Global 
warming: Economic policy responses, 
R. Dornbusch and J. M. 
Poterba, eds., MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 
Solow, R.M., 1974: Intergenerational equity and exhaustible re-
sources, Review of Economic 
Studies (symposium volume), pp. 
29-45. 
Solow, R.M., 1992: An almost practical step toward sustainability. 
Resources for the Future, Washington. DC. 
Steer, A., and E. Lutz, 1993: Measuring environmentally sustainable 
development, Finance and Development 
30(4). 20-23. 
Stewart, R., and J.B. Wiener, 1990: A comprehensive approach to 
climate change: Using the market to protect the environment. In 
The American Enterprise, 
Vol.1. 
Stewart, R.B., and J.B. Wiener, 1992: The comprehensive approach 
to global climate policy: Issues of design and practicality. Arizona 
Journal of International 
and Comparative 
Law, 9( 1), 83-113. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1974: Incentives and risk sharing in sharecropping. 
Review of Economic Studies 41, April. 2 19-255. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1975a: Information and economic analysis. In Current 
economic problems. 
Parkin and Nobay, eds., pp. 27-52, Cam-
bridge University Press. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1975b: Incentives, risk, and information: Notes toward 
a theory of hierarchy. Bell Journal 
of Economics 
6, Autumn, 
552-579. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1977: Monopoly and the rate of extraction of ex-
haustible resources. American 
Economic 
Review 
66(4), Sept.. 
655-661. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1982: The efficiency of the stock market equilibrium, 
Review of Economic Studies 49, 241-261. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1985: Information and economic analysis: A perspec-
tive, Economic Journal 95, Supplement, 21-45. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1988: Economic organization, information, and devel-
opment. In Handbook 
of Development 
Economics, 
II. Chencn 
and T.N. Srinivasan. eds., pp. 94-160. Elsevier Science Publish 
crs. Amsterdam. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1991: Symposium on organizations in economic. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 
5(2). 15-24. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1994: Whither socialism? 
Wicksell Lectures, MIT 
Press, Cambridge. MA. 
Stiglitz, J.E., and P. Dasgupta, 1971: Differential taxation, public 
goods, and economic efficiency. The Review of Economic 
Sin,I 
ies 37, 151-174. 
Stiglitz, J.E., P. Dasgupta, and G. Heal, 1980: The taxation o! ex-
haustible resources. In Public policy and the tax system, 
(i.A. 
Hughes and C M . Heal. eds.. George Allen & Unwin. London. 
Stiglitz, J.E.. and A. Weiss. 1981: Credit rationing in markets with 
imperfect information, American 
Economic 
Review 71(3). lime. 
393-410. 
Tietenberg, T„ 1992: Introduction and overview. In 
Innovation 
in environmental 
policy: Economic 
and legal aspects of recent 
developments 
in environmental 
enforcement 
and liability. 
In 
T. Tietenberg. pp. 1-17. Elgar. Aldershot. UK. 
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 1992: Human 
development 
report 1992, Oxford University Press. Oxford. 
United Nations, 1989: African alternative framework to structural 
adjustment programmes for socio-economic recovery anil trans-
formation, UNECA/OAU, E/ECA/cm.l5/6/Rcv 3. United Na-
tions. New York. 
United Nations Statistical Office, 1992: SNA draft handbook on in 
tegrated 
environmental 
and economic 
accounting, 
provisional 
version. New York. 
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1989: Sea level 
rise. In Report to Congress on the potential effects oj global cli-
mate change on the United States, Washington. DC. 
Weitzman, M.L.. 1974: Prices vs quantities. Review of 
Economic 
Studies, 41(4). October. 477-491. 
Weitzman, ML.. 1978: Optimal rewards for economic regulation. 
American Economic Review 68(4), Sept.. 683-691. 
Weitzman, M.L., W. Newey. and M. Rabin. 1981: Sequential R&D 
strategy for synfuels. The Bell Journal 
of Economics 
12(2). 
574-590. 
Whalley, J., and R. Wigle. 1991: Cutting CO, emissions: The effects 
of alternative policy approaches. Energy Journal 12( I). 109-124. 
Wilson, C.A.. 1977: A model of insurance markets with incomplete 
information. Journal 
of Economic 
Theory 
16(2), Dec, 167-
207. 
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987: 
Our common future, Oxford University Press, London. 
Zachariah, K.C., and M.T. Vu, 1988: World population 
projections 
1987-88. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 
2 
Decision-Making Frameworks for 
Addressing Climate Change 
Principal Lead Authors: 
K.J. ARROW, J. PARIKH, G. PILLET 
Lead Authors: 
M. GRUBB, E. HAITES, J.C. HOURCADE, K. PARIKH, F. YAMIN 
Contributors: 
P.G. Babu, G. Chichilnisky, S. Faucheux, G. Froger, W. Hediger, F. Gassmann, 
S. Kavi Kumar, S.C. Peck, R. Richels, C. Suarez, R. Tol 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
2.1 Introduction 
2.2 The Context for Climate Change Decision 
Making 
2.2.1 Impact uncertainties 
2.2.1.1 An illustration of uncertainty in climate 
decisions 
2.2.2 Time horizons 
2.2.3 International diversity and climate-
related vulnerability 
2.2.3.1 Ecocentrism vs. anthropocentrism 
2.2.4 Existing decision framework 
2.3 Quantitative Models of Decision Making 
2.3.1 An overview of decision analysis 
2.3.1.1 Assumptions of decision analysis 
2.3.2 Decision analysis and climate change 
2.3.2.1 Selection criteria and risk attitudes 
2.3.2.2 Multiple decision makers 
2.3.2.3 Identification and valuation of 
decision alternatives 
2.3.2.4 Rational choice 
2.3.2.5 Uncertainty 
2.3.2.6 Conclusions about decision analysis 
2.3.3 Negotiating climate change decisions 
2.3.3.1 Collective decisions in 
environmental accords 
2.3.3.2 Collective rationality and the 
negotiation process 
57 
2.3.3.3 Uncertainty and surprise 
66 
2.3.3.4 Uncertainty and strategic behaviour 
67 
59 
2.3.3.5 Sequential decision making under 
uncertainty 
67 
2.3.3.6 The value of improved information 
68 
59 
2.3.3.7 Economic transfers 
6X 
59 
2.3.3.8 Conclusions about negotiated 
decision making 
69 
59 
60 
2.4 Implications for National Decision Making 
Under the FCCC 
69 
60 
2.4.1 The Framework Convention on 
61 
Climate Change 
69 
61 
2.4.1.1 Objectives and commitments 
69 
2.4.1.2 Institutional arrangements for 
61 
decisionmaking 
70 
62 
2.4.2 International transfers in climate 
62 
change 
70 
62 
2.4.3 Sequential climate decisions 
71 
62 
2.4.4 Instruments for international insurance 
71 
63 
2.4.4.1 Financial markets for risk 
72 
2.4.5 Portfolios of climate actions 
72 
63 
2.4.5.1 Climate portfolio options 
72 
64 
2.4.5.2 Choosing the best climate action 
64 
portfolio 
73 
65 
65 
Endnote 
74 
65 
References 
74 
66 
SUMMARY 
This chapter discusses possible decision-making frameworks 
related to climate change. It begins with a review of some of 
the unique features of the climate change problem and their 
implications for decision making. Then two interrelated ap-
proaches to decision making - optimizing quantitative models 
(decision analysis) and negotiation - are described. The chap-
ter concludes by considering the specific implications of the. 
preceding discussion for climate change decisions under the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (FCCC). 
Decision making related to climate change must take into 
account the unique characteristics of climate change: large 
scientific and economic uncertainties; long time horizons; 
nonlinearities and irreversibility of effects; the global nature 
of the problem; social, economic, and geographic differences 
among the affected parties; and an agreed framework to ad-
dress the issue. 
Decision analysis uses quantitative techniques to identify 
the "best" choice from among a range of alternatives. A re-
view of the real world limitations of quantitative decision 
models and the consistency of their theoretical assumptions 
with climate change decision making highlights the following 
points: 
• There is no single decision maker in climate change. 
Because of differences in values and objectives, parties 
participating in a collective decision-making process do 
not apply the same criteria to the choice of alternatives. 
Consequently, decision analysis cannot yield a univer-
sally preferred solution. 
• Decision analysis requires a complete and consistent 
utility valuation of decision outcomes. In climate change, 
many decision outcomes are difficult to value and a 
global welfare function does not exist, so quantitative 
comparisons of decision options are not meaningful. 
• Decision analysis may help keep the information con-
tent of the climate change problem within the cognitive 
limits of decision makers. Without the structure of deci-
sion analysis, climate change information becomes cog-
nitively unmanageable, limiting the ability of decision 
makers to analyze the outcomes of alternative actions 
rationally. 
• The treatment of uncertainty in decision analysis is 
quite powerful, but the probabilities of uncertain deci-
sion outcomes must be quantifiable. In climate change, 
objective probabilities have not been established for 
many outcomes, and subjective probabilities would be 
controversial, so climate change decisions cannot fully 
satisfy this requirement. 
• Because of the large uncertainties and differences be-
tween parties, there may be no "globally" optimal cli-
mate change strategy; nevertheless, the factors thai 
affect optimal single-decision-maker strategies Mill 
have relevance to individual parties. 
The lack of an individual decision maker, utility problems, 
and incomplete information suggest that decision analysis 
cannot serve as the primary basis for international climate 
change decision making. Although elements of the technique 
have considerable value in framing the decision problem and 
identifying its critical features, decision analysis cannot iden-
tify globally optimal choices for climate change abatement. 
Decision analysis suffers fewer problems when used by indi-
vidual countries to identify optimal national policies. 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change estab-
lishes a collective decision-making process within which the 
parties will negotiate future actions. Although some features 
of the decision-making process are set out in the Convention, 
many are still undecided. It becomes important, then, to ex-
amine negotiation and compromise as the primary basis lor 
climate change decisions under the Convention. Important 
factors affecting negotiated decisions include the following: 
• Excessive knowledge requirements in negotiated envi-
ronmental decisions may stand in the way of collective 
rational choice. This difficulty could be reduced h> 
making the negotiation process itself more manageable 
through the use of tools like stakeholder analysis or by 
splitting accords into more easily managed clusters of 
agreements. 
• Since society has no consistent probability threshold lor 
ignoring particular risks, it may be vulnerable to sur-
prise when risks are uncertain. In climate decisions, this 
vulnerability could be reduced by relating event scenar-
ios to explicit probabilities of surprise. 
• In the face of long-term uncertainties, sequential deci-
sion making allows actions to be better matched to out-
comes by incorporating additional information over 
time. Sequential decision making also minimizes harm-
ful strategic behaviour among multiple decision makers. 
• Improved information about uncertain outcomes may 
have very high economic value, especially if that infor-
mation can create future decision options. 
58 
CIimate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
• There are currently no effective mechanisms for the 
sharing of risks related to climate change and their asso-
ciated economic burdens. International risk sharing 
could yield substantial benefits for global economic and 
social welfare. 
The Convention is, first and foremost, a framework for col-
lective decision making by sovereign states. Given this col-
lective decision mechanism and the uncertainties inherent in 
the climate problem, several recommendations emerge. Cli-
mate actions under the FCCC should be sequential; countries 
should implement a portfolio of mitigation, adaptation, and 
research measures; and they should adjust this portfolio con-
tinuously in response to new knowledge. The value of better 
information is potentially very large. To distribute the risks of 
losses related to climate change efficiently, new insurance 
mechanisms may be warranted. 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
59 
2.1 Introduction 
Decision makers face unavoidable choices in addressing the 
threat of climate change - even doing nothing is a choice. 
This chapter attempts to shed some light on the nature and 
context of climate change decisions and effective means of 
making those decisions. It explores quantitative analysis and 
negotiation in climate change decision making and suggests 
ways to enhance the decision process within the Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (FCCC). 
The first section revisits some of the unique features of the 
climate change problem as set out in Chapter 1. These in-
clude: 
• uncertainty about the impacts of climate change, abate-
ment costs, and other factors 
• long time horizons and a substantial time lag between 
emissions and impacts 
• irreversibility of effects 
• the global nature of the problem, which necessitates col-
lective action by sovereign states 
• social, economic, and geographic differences among the 
affected parties 
• an agreed on legal framework for climate change re-
sponses 
The next section describes quantitative analytic models of 
decision making, including their underlying assumptions and 
their applicability to climate change decisions. It discusses the 
real world limitations of quantitative decision models and 
highlights those aspects of climate change decision making 
that are likely to fall outside the theoretical assumptions re-
quired by such models. The discussion explores two inter-
related approaches to decision making: 
• Optimizing quantitative models, where clear decision 
structures and well-understood decision parameters can 
serve as the primary basis for decision making 
• Negotiation, where complex decision structures and 
poorly understood or conflicting decision parameters 
prevent a purely analytic resolution of decision prob-
lems 
Quantitative optimization and negotiation can be comple-
mentary. This section reviews the academic literature on the 
economic, behavioural, and organizational aspects of the de-
cision process, highlighting those aspects of a decision sce-
nario best suited to quantification or negotiation. The context 
of the climate problem and the literature on decision making 
suggest that quantitative approaches are unlikely to produce 
universally acceptable solutions, so negotiation will be impor-
tant in reaching collective climate change decisions. 
The chapter concludes by considering the specific implica-
tions of the previous discussion for climate change decisions 
under the Convention. First and foremost, the FCCC is a 
framework for collective decision making by sovereign states. 
Given this collective decision mechanism and the uncertain-
ties inherent in the climate problem, several recommendations 
emerge. Climate actions under the FCCC should be sequen-
tial; countries should implement a portfolio of mitigation, 
adaptation, and research measures; and they should adjust this 
portfolio continuously in response to new knowledge. To effi-
ciently distribute the risks of losses related to climate change, 
new insurance mechanisms may also be warranted. 
2.2 The Context for Climate Change Decision Making 
All international decisions are complex, but those related to 
climate change are particularly complicated because of soci-
ety's limited understanding of the problem, the long time-
frames involved, and the global nature of climate effects and 
climate treaties. 
2.2.1 Impact uncertainties 
Making decisions about climate change requires an under-
standing of the impact of uncertainties. Although they do nol 
affect the essential need for a decision, these uncertainties 
complicate the decision process and limit the ability of deci-
sion makers to identify superior options. 
There are three principal areas of uncertainly related to cli-
mate change impacts: 
• Scientific uncertainties obscure relationships between 
emissions and atmospheric concentrations of green-
house gases, the dynamics of climate feedback, and ihe 
effects of climate change on global temperature, ecolog-
ical cycles, sea level, and the occurrence of weather 
events. These uncertainties are explored in Volume I of 
this report. 
• Socioecologic 
uncertainties 
obscure 
how 
climate 
change will affect the relationship between human soci-
eties and the biosphere, particularly where human wel-
fare is strongly affected by nature. Such relationships 
include agricultural production, fishing, and the spread 
of disease. These issues are treated in Volume 2. 
• Socioeconomic uncertainties obscure the economic and 
social welfare effects of climate change and abatement. 
These uncertainties, which affect the economic valua-
tion of resources, international trade, technological change, 
and other socioeconomic interactions, are the focus of 
the present volume. 
2.2.1.1 An illustration of uncertainty in climate decisions 
Figure 2.1 illustrates a hypothetical relationship between cli-
mate parameters and impact uncertainty. Using mean temper-
ature change (AT) as a proxy for a set of critical climate 
variables. Figure 2.1 outlines probability distributions for dif-
ferent levels of temperature change. 
As the figure shows, for lesser temperature changes global 
adaptation to climate impacts may be relatively easy, with a 
very small risk of serious social or ecologic damage. The like-
lihood of severe consequences increases with rising tempera-
ture, becoming extremely likely at AT=6"C. As the average 
60 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Probability 
• Adaptation /.one 
, IHscomlbrt and 
( Disaster /one 
i Catastrophic /one i 
, Impacts can have 
' 
' Frequency of extreme ( Irreversible 
( 
, marginal costs, hut ' 
' events increases willi f damages to global ( 
, mosllv avoidable 
' 
' disastrous 
, ecosystem 
, 
i through adaptation ' 
' consequences tor 
, 
, 
No Impact ' 
Increasing Net Impact of Climate Change 
«-' 
Source: Purikh el at. 11W5) 
Figure 2.1: Schematic linkage between scientific uncertainties and 
net impacts. 
temperature change increases, the probability that the impacts 
will remain within the adaptation zone becomes smaller. In re-
ality the shape or magnitude of these probability curves is not 
known, but the illustration is valuable in framing the role of 
uncertainty within the decision problem. 
2.2.2 Time horizons-
Much of the uncertainty associated with climate change arises 
from the extraordinarily long time horizons involved. Few 
other decision problems so obviously require a decision per-
spective spanning many decades or even centuries. 
Long time scales affect both the scientific and the techno-
logical aspects of climate change. Time scales may be similar 
for the development and diffusion of climate change abate-
ment technology. Historically it has taken about 50 years for a 
new energy carrier to move from \7c to 507c penetration of its 
potential market (Hafele et al.. 1981). and that is probably af-
ter several prior decades of research and development. On the 
other hand, long time scales present considerable opportunity 
for innovation - time for the accumulation of incremental im-
provements in abatement techniques or for the emergence of 
revolutionary, environmentally benign technologies. 
Long time scales also increase uncertainties about the so-
cial impacts and proper economic valuation of climate effects. 
Climate impacts will be imposed on future generations and in 
different countries with different value systems from those we 
have now. The values and requirements of future society are 
not known. It is possible that adverse climate impacts 50 years 
from now may be considered incommensurate with some 
level of monetary compensation established today. Schelling 
(1994) has argued that such intergenerational equity is a fun-
damentally political concern, albeit with ethical dimensions. 
But intergenerational issues have practical implications for 
the identification and implementation of climate change 
strategies. For example, Chichilnisky (1993a) has called for 
abatement philosophies that include specification of a "safe 
minimum standard" to avoid "dictatorship of the present" 
over future generations. Decision making may also need to 
address the distinction between passing on future benefits and 
imposing future damages - a distinction found in most ethical 
and legal systems but absent from the conventional economic 
evaluation of future impacts. 
2.2.3 International diversity and climate-related 
vulnerability 
Climate change is a global problem encompassing a diverse 
mix of human societies - each with a distinct geography, cul-
ture, political system, and economic status. These differences 
affect both the exposure and the vulnerability of individual 
countries to climate impacts: 
• Some regions will be subject to above-average temp-
erature, sea-level, storm, or other changes; others will 
experience below-average impacts or even impacts dif-
fering in sign from the global average; 
• The impact on human societies will differ according to 
myriad factors, such as the amount of low-lying or arid 
land they occupy and their degree of dependence on 
agriculture or aquatic resources; 
• The ability of societies to absorb climate impacts will 
differ according to the strength of their infrastructure, 
social structure, and other local factors. 
Many developing countries are in relatively hot climates. 
They are more dependent on farming, and have less well-
developed infrastructures and social structures than devel-
oped countries. As a consequence, developing nations may 
realize much more severe welfare loss due to climate change 
than wealthier nations. Figure 2.2 illustrates hypothetical!) 
how the same degree of climate change may impose greater 
risks and welfare loss on poor countries. The figure outlines 
two probability distributions for the welfare impacts of a given 
climate change: one for a developed nation, the other for an 
underdeveloped nation. Because of its relative poverty, the 
underdeveloped country has fewer adaptatation options and is 
much more susceptible to economic disaster than the devel-
oped country. 
Economic dependence on agriculture could be one good 
indicator of a nation's relative exposure to severe climate-
related welfare losses. As a share of domestic product, agri-
culture ranges between 16% and 64% in low-income developing 
countries compared to between 12% and 37% in middle-
income developing countries, and 3% in the U.S. (World 
Bank, 1994). A study by Parry and Rosenzweig (1994) illus-
trates how climate change is likely to alter the distribution of 
global food production, even if there is little impact on the 
global total. In their scenarios cereal production in developing 
countries could fall by 6-12% by 2050 whereas in industrialized 
countries it could rise by 2-14%. The recent African famines il-
lustrate how critical such changes in distribution can be. 
Agricultural dependence is only one dimension of the dif-
ferences between countries that are likely to be important in 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
61 
Adaptation 
Discomfort 
Disaster 
Catastrophe 
Welfare Impacts 
A A rich country has more resources Tor adapting to climate change and thus has a belter chance of 
avoiding extreme impacts. 
B The same level of climate damage can bring economic disaster to a poor country. 
Source: Parikh el ill. (1995) 
Figure 2.2: Different welfare impacts for the same climatic damage: 
an illustration. 
climate change. Chapter 3 explores these differences among 
countries further, including: 
• wealth and consumption 
• emissions - past, present, and future 
• the distribution of and vulnerability to climate change 
• endowment with resources that may be affected by re-
sponses to climate change 
Such differences will be reflected in the attitudes that 
countries bring to international climate change negotiations. 
For example, European countries may focus most on the pos-
sible costs of abatement, whereas developing countries in 
Africa and South America may be most concerned with the 
burden of adaptation and vulnerability. Island states may be 
most threatened by a major loss of coastal land mass. Oil ex-
porters may be most concerned about their potential loss of 
revenue from abatement strategies that reduce international 
fossil fuel consumption. An understanding of such differences 
in national perceptions, capabilities, and objectives must in-
form the decision process, particularly where those decisions 
must be reached collectively. 
2.2.3.1 Ecocentrism vs. anthropocentrism 
Most international discussions and IPCC reports take a 
strictly anthropocentric view of climate effects: Resources 
are valued only in terms of their value for human recreation, 
medicine, and other aspects of human welfare. Ecocentrism, 
espoused in some religious and environmental philosophies, 
views homo sapiens as just one of the species on Earth, ex-
pected to share the biosphere in balance with others. Climate 
change is likely to affect the habitat of all flora and fauna in 
the integrated global biosphere. An ecocentric viewpoint 
questions society's moral authority to make decisions affect 
ing Nature as a whole. Irrespective of whether one shares such 
a viewpoint - which is a fundamental value judgment - eco-
centrism highlights the complexity of biospheric interactions 
with which climate change may interfere. 
2.2.4 Existing decision framework 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change went into 
effect in 1994. The Convention establishes many general 
commitments for the parties to coordinate environmental 
activities and to review their own policies to see if they en-
courage emissions. It also allows parties' obligations to be 
modified in response to new information. Most important, the 
Convention establishes a general framework for ensuring thai 
implementation is meeting the Convention's objectives. To 
this end it specifies a set of institutional arrangements for 
climate change decision making: a decision-making body, 
advisory groups, administrative support, and a financial 
mechanism. But the Convention's specification of a climate 
decision process is not complete, leaving open many critical 
decision issues for resolution in the future. (The provisions of 
the Convention related to decision making are summarized in 
Section 2.4.) 
2.3 Quantitative Models of Decision Making 
The integration of utility theory, probability, and mathemati-
cal optimization in the study of decision processes has yielded 
quantitative models of decision making. These models seek to 
explain the organization, valuation, and selection that occurs 
when one possible course of action is chosen over others. 
Quantitative decision models attempt to improve decision 
making by clarifying complex decisions and making the best 
use of available information. Although they suffer from prac-
tical limitations, such models can offer valuable insight into 
many aspects of environmental decision problems like the 
climate change problem. Apart from their ability to gener-
ate numerical results, such models '"provide a conceptual 
framework (or several) for relating means to ends . . . for iden-
tifying the existing technical alternatives and for inventing 
new ones" (Raven as quoted in Morgan and Henrion. 1990). 
They can serve as an idealized reference case by which to 
evaluate actual decision structures and decision choices. 
This section reviews the fundamentals of decision analysis 
and its underlying theoretical assumptions. It examines the 
validity of these assumptions and discusses the implications 
of violations of these assumptions in the climate change 
decision context. The discussion shows that, in collective 
decision-making situations with varying decision criteria, 
quantitative analytic models may not be able to identify uni-
versally optimal decisions. In these cases negotiation may 
have the dominant influence on decision making. The section 
concludes with an examination of negotiation in collective 
decision-making situations, such as climate change, which 
have no clear analytic solution. 
62 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
2.3.1 An overview of decision analysis 
Decision analysis is a formal quantitative technique for iden-
tifying "best" choices from a range of alternatives. Decision 
analysis requires the development of explicit influence struc-
tures (trees) specifying a complete set of decision choices 
(nodes), possible outcomes, and outcome values. Uncertainty 
concerning the outcomes of possible choices is incorporated 
into decision structures explicitly by assigning probabilities to 
individual outcomes. 
Figure 2.3 is an example of a simple decision tree for the 
comparison of three climate change abatement alternatives. In 
Figure 2.3, the choice is represented by a square node and un-
certain outcomes by round nodes, with costs and probabilities 
as indicated on the "branches." For example, Option 2 will 
cost $30 to implement. It has an 80% chance of yielding a 
zero value outcome and a 20% chance of yielding an outcome 
of -$300, and so forth. 
Analysis of the decision depicted in Figure 2.3 would pro-
ceed as follows: Option 2 will cost $30 to implement, has an 
80% chance of yielding a zero value outcome and a 20% 
chance of yielding a -$300 outcome, so its "expected value" 
is: 
-$30 + .8($0) + .2(-$300) = -$90. 
Similarly, the expected value of Option 1 is -$110. The ex-
pected value of doing nothing is -$340. If the goal here is to 
minimize cost, then the best choice is to implement Option 2 
since it is expected to cost less than the other options. 
The decision analysis example in Figure 2.3 is trivial. It is 
easy to imagine more elaborate decision trees with many 
more branches, sequential decisions, continuous probability 
distributions, and other complications. Nonetheless, the fig-
ure illustrates all the essential features of decision analysis 
relevant to this discussion. 
2.3.1.1 Assumptions of decision analysis 
It may be apparent from the preceding example that decision 
analysis operates under a restrictive set of assumptions. In 
particular, decision analysis assumes the following: 
• There is a single decision maker. Decision analysis does 
not make the actual decisions, it only lays out the op-
tions in a consistent manner so that they can be com-
pared. In decision analysis an individual (or a perfectly 
cooperating group of individuals) must choose an op-
tion based on some selection criterion. 
• Decision alternatives are limited. To construct a com-
plete decision tree, the number of choices and their pos-
sible outcomes must be finite (and known). 
• Valuation of alternatives is consistent. Decision analy-
sis yields expected values for different options. For 
these values to be strictly comparable, they must be ex-
pressible in the same units (such as dollars, injuries. AT. 
etc.). 
• Choices are rational. Decision analysis assumes that 
decision makers will choose rationally among con-
sistently valued alternatives. 
AT = ffC 
Decision 
Outcome 
Figure 2.3: Simple decision tree. 
• Uncertainties are quantifiable. Uncertainties must be 
quantified in decision analysis models, either discretely 
or continuously, in order to calculate expected values. 
It is generally accepted that these assumptions will not be 
perfectly satisfied in actual decision analyses, but often will 
be satisfied approximately. If violations of these assumptions 
are minor, decision analysis may still yield superior solutions 
compared to other decision-making approaches. If any of the 
violations is serious, the effectiveness of decision analysis as 
a stand-alone decision tool is compromised - decision prob-
lems become intractable due to complexity, ambiguity, or 
incompleteness. In these cases, decision analysis loses its 
ability to generate a specific result (although it retains much 
of its conceptual power). 
2.3.2 Decision analysis and climate change 
As noted at the start of this section, decision analysis can be a 
powerful tool for defining the structure of decision scenarios 
and for understanding the barriers to making optimal choices. 
Thinking about climate choices as decision analysis problems 
may highlight those aspects most likely to affect the decision 
process. This section explores the assumptions of decision 
analysis in climate change and the implications when aspects 
of those decisions fall outside the decision analysis model. 
2.3.2.1 Selection criteria and risk attitudes 
One of the strengths of decision analysis is that it employs a 
uniformly valued set of outcomes, so options can be com-
pared directly. Given a single decision maker and consistent 
comparisons, identifying a superior choice is straightforward. 
"Consistency" in this case means "behaviour in accordance 
with some ordering of alternatives in terms of relative desir-
ability" (Arrow, 1951a; Blaug, 1992). In decision analysis, 
consistency of choice is implied by adhering to an explicit se-
lection criterion when identifying preferred alternatives. 
For analytical purposes it is often (but not always) assumed 
that all important choice attributes can be expressed in mone-
tary terms. Then the choice of action can be based on the 
expected monetary values of alternatives using a particular se-
lection criterion. Different selection criteria point to different 
optimal choices. Some of the most common criteria include 
(after Morgan and Henrion. 1990): 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
6.i 
• Maximizing multiattribitte utility, which specifies a 
function that evaluates outcomes in terms of all their 
important utility attributes (see 2.3.2.3 below), includ-
ing uncertainties and risks. The alternative with maxi-
mum utility is selected (Savage, 1954; Arrow, 1987). 
• Cost-benefit, which estimates the costs and benefits of 
alternatives in economic terms and chooses the one with 
the highest net benefit. (Chapter 5 examines this crite-
rion in greater detail.) 
• Cost effectiveness, which selects a desired performance 
level, perhaps on noneconomic grounds, and chooses 
the option achieving this level at lowest cost. Cost-
effectiveness analysis can aid choice between options 
but, unlike the cost-benefit criterion, cannot indicate 
whether or not any of the options are worth doing (MIT, 
1986).' 
• Minimax loss, which finds the loss associated with the 
extreme event for each alternative, then selects the strat-
egy that minimizes the worst loss. This criterion 
amounts to expecting the worst (very severe impacts or 
very expensive mitigation measures) and avoiding those 
strategies that could generate the worst outcomes (Wald 
1950). 
• Maximin gain, which finds the gains associated with 
each action and tries to maximize the minimum of these 
gains (Wald, 1950). 
• Minimax regret, which chooses measures of "regret" 
and minimizes the maximum regret (Savage, 1951). 
This criterion emphasizes the cost of making the wrong 
decision - for example, the cost of relying heavily on 
new technologies that do not materialize to mitigate cli-
mate change. 
• Bounded cost, which sets the maximum budget to de-
vote to risk management activity. 
The choice of a selection criterion itself is subjective 
and exogenous to the decision analytic model. One of the 
strongest influences on this choice is a decision maker's atti-
tude toward "risk" - his or her exposure to a chance of loss 
(Random House, 1966). Evidence indicates that most (but not 
all) individuals prefer a certain outcome to an uncertain 
outcome, even though both outcomes may have the same 
expected value. Such an attitude reflects "risk aversion." 
Risk-averse individuals would prefer decision criteria that 
minimize the chance of the worst possible outcome, whereas 
"risk-seeking" individuals would prefer criteria that maxi-
mize the chance of the best possible outcome. 
Risk attitudes do not directly affect decision analysis, but 
they can affect the valuation of decision options. When risks 
are known, the expected values in a decision analysis can still 
be used to identify best choices (Ramsey, 1928; von Neuman 
and Morgenstern. 1947). When risks arc not known, however, 
expected values may no longer serve as a reliable indicator of 
relative preferability (Savage, 1951, 1954). This problem is 
exacerbated when changes in the decision environment are ir-
reversible, because irreversible changes may eliminate future 
options. Arrow and Fisher (1974) and Henry (1974) have 
shown that, under such circumstances, selection based on ex-
pected values is inappropriate. 
2.3.2.2 Multiple decision makers 
Decision analysis assumes that there is one decision maker. 
The problem introduced by multiple decision makers is the 
potential lack of a consistent valuation of decision alterna-
tives, with the result that a universally "best" solution cannot 
be identified. Even with a common assessment of the ex-
pected values of possible outcomes, differences in risk atti-
tudes and other factors may cause multiple decision makers to 
prefer different selection criteria. Since any set of decisions 
preferred by one party may not be acceptable to another, the 
parties will have to negotiate an agreed course of action - one 
that is likely to differ from either of the analytically derived 
solutions they originally preferred. This negotiation intro-
duces a host of subjective factors (negotiating skill, for exam-
ple) into the decision process, which decision analysis is ill 
equipped to handle. 
In the case of climate change, there is no single decision 
maker responsible for choosing preferred actions. In fact, 
there are two sets of collective decision makers: one at the in-
ternational level and one at the national level. According to 
the Framework Convention on Climate Change (see Section 
2.4), international parties will collectively negotiate climate 
decisions. There must also be a set of decision makers within 
each country collectively responsible for defining that coun-
try's positions in the international negotiations. As noted in 
Section 2.2, the international parties may be uniquely affected 
by numerous climate change-related factors, so they may not 
share a consistent set of goals and will probably not cooperate 
perfectly. But even within a country different government 
agencies, individuals, and firms may have conflicting views 
about that country's optimal policy for addressing climate 
change. 
2.3.2.3 Identification and valuation of 
decision alternatives 
The economic theory of choice holds that when an individual 
can take a limited range of actions, he or she "has in mind an 
ordering of all possible consequences" and chooses "that ac-
tion whose consequences arc preferred to those of any other" 
(Arrow, 1951a). These individual preferences are often ex-
pressed in terms of multiattribute utility functions, where 
"utility" is defined as an "amount of satisfaction" (Keeney 
and Raiffa, 1976: Eeckhoudt and Collier. 1995). The "attrib-
utes" may include economic value, risk, aesthetics, peace of 
mind, and other criteria affecting an individual's overall satis-
faction. Choice theory assumes that, in evaluating uncertain 
situations, the decision maker uses the monetary value of final 
outcomes as a substitute measure of their utility. (Section 
2.3.2.1 assumed the opposite conversion - of utility to eco-
nomic value. In either case decision options should have the 
same relative values and, given the same selection criterion, 
should lead to the same choices.) The valuation of outcomes 
in terms of utility enables individuals to rank their prefer-
ences. If individuals are perfectly knowledgeable and consis-
tent in their choices, the most valuable option - in terms of 
64 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
utility - is always chosen (Price, 1993). Utility does not de-
fine the decision criteria; it requires only that the criteria be 
consistently applied. Thus, an entrepreneur wishing to maxi-
mize profits will always choose the action that yields the 
highest profit alter accounting for risk and other factors. 
The incorporation of choice theory in decision analysis is 
theoretically appealing since a well-defined set of outcome 
utilities leads to a straightforward analytic solution - a "best" 
choice in terms of expected utility. Unfortunately, expression 
of utility as a function in international decision making is 
problematic. Arrow's general impossibility theorem (Arrow, 
1951a) suggests that a global social welfare function cannot 
exist. Consequently, decisions cannot he based on an analysis 
requiring such a function. Even if such utility functions did 
exist, some decision outcomes, like energy security and bio-
logical diversity, can he difficult to value in economic terms. 
When multiple decision makers are involved, this valuation 
problem may become so severe that quantified decision out-
comes lose their meaning. 
In the context of climate change, the assumption that the 
collective decision makers will he completely informed about 
all possible decision options and consequences is question-
able. As noted earlier in this chapter, climate change may re-
sult in a multitude of subtle and interrelated ecologic, 
economic, and sociologic consequences. The effects of these 
consequences on individual countries will vary widely ac-
cording to their individual vulnerabilities. It appears unlikely, 
therefore, that the international parties will he able to identify 
a complete set of consequences for all affected parties around 
the globe. Furthermore, there is no agreement in the literature 
as to how a utility function (e.g., an index of social welfare) 
would be constructed or applied to such a set of conse-
quences. 
2.3.2.4 Rational choice 
Decision analysis assumes that decision makers will make ra-
tional choices. Dawes (1988) defines rational choice as meet-
ing three criteria: 
• It is based on the decision maker's current state of 
being. 
• It is based on the possible outcomes of the available 
choices. 
• It treats uncertainty in a manner consistent with proba-
bility theory. 
If any of these criteria are violated, it is possible for a deci-
sion maker to reach contradictory conclusions about what to 
choose, even though the conclusions are based on the same 
preferences and evidence. For example, an irrational decision 
maker might prefer one course of action if choices were con-
sidered from first to last, but prefer a different course of action 
if the same choices were considered from last to first. Thus, an 
irrational decision maker can decide that a particular choice is 
simultaneously desirable and undesirable (Dawes 1988). 
Simon (1957) and Arrow (1987) have shown that, since de-
cision makers have finite cognitive resources, their ability to 
gather and process information is limited - that is, their ratio-
nality must be hounded. When information content is within 
human ability to process it. decisions may be rational. But 
when information content exceeds cognitive limits, decisions 
must necessarily be irrational, according to the definition 
above. For example, in situations where it is not possible to 
specify all options and possible outcomes in advance, one 
strategy would be to collect information in a predetermined 
manner for a limited time, then select the best alternative 
(Dawes, 1988). This is a bounded rational approach, since it 
makes the best choice given the limited information. It is not a 
strictly rational approach because it imposes an (arbitrary) 
time constraint to limit the information available to decision 
makers. In this example, it is conceivable that setting a differ-
ent deadline would have resulted in different decisions, even 
though the true set of options and outcomes would be un-
changed. Bounded rationality, then, addresses the ways in 
which the decision process, rather than the decision input, in-
fluences decision making (see also Vercelli, 1991; Faucheux 
and Froger, 1994). 
Simon suggests that cognitive limitations usually stem 
from the limited adequacy of scientific theories to predict rel-
evant phenomena (Simon, 1987). Since climate change faces 
precisely these kinds of prediction problems, it is likely that 
cognitive limitations will have to be addressed in any compre-
hensive climate decision process. 
2.3.2.5 Uncertainty 
Arrow (1971) defines uncertainty as incomplete knowledge of 
the state of the world. This incomplete knowledge implies that 
individuals cannot predict with precision all the consequences 
of their actions. Uncertainty in decision processes is in-
escapable. It "affects all fundamental variables that deter-
mine behaviour, explain choices and bring about decisions" 
(Kessler, in Eeckhoudt and Collier, 1995). Morgan and Hen-
rion (1990) argue that "policies that ignore uncertainty about 
technology, and about the physical world, often lead in the 
long run to unsatisfactory technical, social, and political out-
comes." They view the consideration of uncertainty in deci-
sions as a valuable means of: 
• identifying important decision factors and sources of 
disagreement 
• hedging or planning for contingencies 
• understanding information provided by experts 
• reconsidering repeated decision problems 
One of the most powerful aspects of decision analysis is its 
explicit inclusion of uncertainty in the decision process. If the 
outcomes associated with possible actions are uncertain, 
probabilities can be assigned to those outcomes, based either 
on scientific knowledge (objective) or personal judgment 
(subjective). When it is not possible to arrive at unique proba-
bility distributions for future decision outcomes, they may 
sometimes be constructed from the known probabilities of 
past events. Once outcome probabilities are established for 
possible actions, they are used to calculate the expected val-
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
ues of given decisions. These expected values serve as the ba-
sis for identifying preferred choices using a particular selec-
tion criterion. 
Decision analysis requires that uncertainty be quantified. 
Without probabilities for decision outcomes, expected value 
calculations cannot be made and the technique loses its ana-
lytic foundation. Unfortunately, in the context of climate 
change, objective data on the probabilities of all decision out-
comes are not available. Subjective probabilities could con-
ceivably be used, but it is unlikely given the range of views 
related to climate change held by different interest groups that 
collective agreement could be reached on subjective probabil-
ities for different outcomes. With no historical evidence avail-
able about the occurrence of particular climate events, equal 
outcome probabilities could initially be assigned, then up-
dated when relevant new scientific information becomes 
available (Caselton and Luo, 1994), but Heap et al. (1992) 
have questioned this approach. 
Climate change is not a situation of total ignorance - we 
have some idea of plausible outcomes and their relative prob-
ability. It is inappropriate, therefore, to sacrifice the power of 
decision analysis to address uncertainty simply because some 
uncertainties are not quantifiable. For example, analyses of 
alternative climate change scenarios may reveal that some ac-
tions are preferred to others regardless of uncertainty. It is 
probably more reasonable to use decision analysis, given the 
best objective or subjective probabilities available, as an ele-
ment in a broader decision process that accounts in some 
other way for those phenomena the decision analysis ex-
cludes. 
2.3.2.6 Conclusions about decision analysis 
The preceding sections have touched on a number of impor-
tant considerations in evaluating the climate change problem 
and the application of decision analysis to that problem. 
(These aspects of decision analysis have also been discussed 
in detail in Parikh et al., 1994, 1995.) The main points can be 
summarized as follows: 
• There is no single decision maker in climate change. 
Differences in values and objectives prevent collective 
decision makers from preferring the same selection cri-
terion for decision alternatives - so decision analysis 
cannot yield a universally preferred solution. 
• Decision analysis requires a complete and consistent util-
ity valuation of decision outcomes. In climate change, 
many decision outcomes are difficult to value and a 
global welfare function does not exist, so quantitative 
comparisons of decision options are not meaningful. 
• Decision analysis may help keep the information con-
tent of the climate change problem within the cognitive 
limits of decision makers. Without the structure of deci-
sion analysis, climate change information becomes cog-
nitively unmanageable, limiting the ability of decision 
makers to rationally analyze the outcomes of alternative 
actions. 
65 
• The treatment of uncertainty in decision analysis is 
quite powerful, but it requires that the probabilities of 
uncertain decision outcomes be quantifiable. In climate 
change, objective probabilities have not been estab-
lished for many outcomes, and subjective probabilities 
would be controversial, so climate change decisions 
cannot fully satisfy this requirement. 
• There may be no "globally" optimum climate change 
strategy because of the large uncertainties and differ-
ences between parties, but the factors that affect optimal 
single decision maker strategies still have relevance to 
individual parties. 
The lack of an individual decision maker, utility problems, 
and incomplete information suggest that decision analysis 
cannot serve as the primary basis for international climate 
change decision making. Although elements of the technique, 
such as the construction of influence diagrams, have consider-
able value in framing the decision problem and identifying its 
critical features, decision analysis cannot identify globally 
optimal choices for climate change abatement. Decision 
analysis suffers fewer problems when used by individual 
countries to identify optimal national policies, since decision 
scenarios are probably less complex and differences among 
collective decision makers may be less extreme. Without an 
effective quantitative approach to decision optimization, cli-
mate change decision makers will have to rely on negotiation 
to choose their responses to the problem. 
2.3.3 Negotiating climate change decisions 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change establishes a 
collective decision-making process within which the parties 
will negotiate future actions. Although some features of the 
decision-making process are set out in the Convention, many 
are still undecided. The preceding discussion has shown that, 
since decisions related to climate change involve many deci-
sion makers with different objectives, it may not be possible 
to find a decision-analytic outcome that is "best" from every 
perspective. It becomes important, then, to examine negotia-
tion and compromise as the primary basis for climate change 
decisions under the Convention. 
2.3.3.1 Collective decisions in environmental accords 
Environmental accords tend to be complex integrated pack-
ages addressing a multiplicity of interrelated issues - like pos-
sible actions, implementation procedures, cost sharing and 
enforcement - that are difficult to negotiate internationally. 
Much of the protracted nature of environmental negotiation is 
due to scientific uncertainty and the (a priori) need for contin-
ued learning about causes and effects to establish good collec-
tive policy. These agreements tend to be incremental because 
of the political uncertainty in devising equitable approaches 
to addressing environmental problems at the global level. 
They typically involve a succession of negotiations: before, 
during, and after the accord is reached. 
66 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Although there have been a number of international envi-
ronmental accords in recent years, the negotiation of these ac-
cords has not gotten any easier. Reaching superior decisions 
about environmental problems in a collective decision process 
poses the following theoretical challenges: 
• Collective irrationality - Where nonmarket resources 
and cooperation arc involved, a fully rational collective 
decision cannot be defined (Fillet, 1996). 
• Uncertainty - The literature does not provide general 
procedures for incorporating differing assessments of 
uncertainty into a collective decision-making process 
(Price, 1993). 
• Economic transfers - At this time, there are no effective 
mechanisms for the distribution of economic burdens 
associated with environmental change. 
In addition to these issues, a recent study of environmental 
treaties by Sjostedt (1993) found that the complexity of envi-
ronmental negotiations has been growing over time as a result 
of the following factors: 
• Environmental issues have become increasingly linked 
to other policy concerns, such as trade and economic 
development. The implications of these linkages are of-
ten poorly understood. 
• Many new nongovernment parties have become im-
portant participants in the negotiations. 
• Bridging the differences between industrialized and de-
veloping countries has been a continuing problem, 
given their views on the equity of particular solutions. 
• International environmental accords face excessive na-
tional ratification 
delays and limited compliance 
(IIASA, 1993). 
Negotiations related to climate change share all these theo-
retical and practical characteristics. Inasmuch as the effective-
ness of the FCCC is hampered by these factors, decision 
makers may need to consider ways that these problems can be 
addressed in the collective decision process. 
2.3.3.2 Collective rationality and the negotiation process 
The concept of individual rationality discussed in Section 
2.3.2.4 can be extended to collective rationality in multiparty 
decision scenarios. Economists sometimes accept some form 
of "collective preference" as a means of allowing collective 
decision makers to reach rational decisions (even if the indi-
vidual decision makers are not strictly rational). Other eco-
nomic models, such as game theory models and principal 
agent models, assume that individual agents behave and inter-
act rationally, so the decisions they reach jointly are also ra-
tional. But when individuals are dealing with nonmarket 
resources (like clean air), or when cooperation is required, 
knowledge requirements in related decision problems exceed 
those usually required for rational collective choice. If limita-
tions on knowledge and computational capacity do not apply 
equally to all parties in the collective decision process, it 
makes the problem even worse, since asymmetric information 
introduces gaming and other strategic behaviour which may 
stand in the way of efficient outcomes. 
One way to address these collective cognitive barriers is to 
simplify the process of negotiation itself. A number of tools, 
like cognitive mapping, simulation modelling, rule-based sys-
tems, and stakeholder analysis, have been developed to diag-
nose and facilitate negotiation (HASA, 1993). Stakeholder 
analysis, for instance, uses information on the position, inter-
est, and priorities of stakeholders to identify the range of dif-
ferences among them and to increase the potential for the 
formation of coalitions. As noted in Section 2.3.3, decision 
analysis techniques can also be used to support negotiation. 
For example, multiattribute utility techniques have been reori-
ented by researchers at IIASA to evaluate coalition building 
and preference adjustment in the UN Conference on Environ-
ment and Development. Sjostedt (1993) has suggested even 
more innovative approaches to facilitate negotiation, such as 
using third parties or developing reasoning heuristics. 
For the most part, studies have focussed primarily on nego-
tiation prior to and during the development of an international 
accord. But postagreement negotiation is often required to 
sustain dialogue on issues that cannot, by their nature, be re-
solved by a single agreement. Postagreement negotiations 
present policymakers with somewhat different concerns, such 
as progressive re framing of problems, adjusting strategies and 
perceptions, and refining solutions. Although it has received 
little attention from researchers, postagreement negotiation 
can also be improved, for instance, by involving domestic 
stakeholders in negotiations from the beginning (and not just 
at the postagreement stage), or by modifying the structure of 
the accords themselves to create more manageable clusters of 
single-issue agreements (Sjostedt 1993). Regardless of the 
stage of negotiation, by improving the decision process these 
techniques are intended to help collective decision makers 
reach an acceptable agreement (but not necessarily the best 
agreement). 
2.3.3.3 Uncertainty and surprise 
Decision makers must rely on measures of uncertainty as a 
basis for addressing potential outcomes. But in negotiated 
agreements, the treatment of uncertainty is often very specific 
to the nature of the uncertainty. Without the quantitative 
structure of a decision-analytic model, communicating uncer-
tainty to decision makers in a manner that facilitates more ob-
jective judgments becomes difficult. The literature offers no 
general procedures for incorporating risk in a consensus-
building decision process. Shlyakhter et al. (1995) have ex-
plored a central question along these lines: Are decision 
makers better served by probability distributions for potential 
impacts or by a set of "best-guess" deterministic impact sce-
narios'? 
Probability distributions for different climate change out-
comes (developed subjectively or objectively) provide de-
cision makers with the maximum amount of information 
regarding impact uncertainty. Deterministic scenarios filter 
and discretize that information by assuming that all uncertain-
ties are resolved before decisions are made. For example, a 
"most likely" impact scenario could be generated by project-
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
ing the state of the world when all stochastic variables are set 
at their mean levels. A set of scenarios spanning the range of 
anticipated outcomes could be developed in a similar manner. 
Parties in a collective negotiation process can attach different 
weights to the scenarios, reflecting their particular vulnerabil-
ities in the given scenarios, their preferred decision criteria, or 
other factors. 
Deterministic scenarios and probability distributions are 
distinct forms of addressing uncertainty; they can lead to 
different decision outcomes. According to Shlyakhter el al. 
(1995), these techniques can be reconciled by developing two 
types of deterministic scenarios - those that are probable, and 
those that are possible but improbable: 
Those risks that fall below a particular threshold of proba-
bility - and are thereby ignored by a particular group or so-
ciety - can be called de minimis risks. . . . Although there is 
no clear definition of a de minimis risk, it can generally be 
seen to be closely akin to a related concept, the probability 
of surprise. 
When an event is perceived as extremely improbable, society 
may take no action to avert or otherwise prepare for it. In 
these circumstances, the society is vulnerable to surprise 
should the event occur. If the event is truly improbable, then 
surprise must also be improbable. But if the assumption of de 
minimis risk is based on erroneous estimates of improbability, 
the chance of surprise may be unacceptably high. This leads 
to the question: "At what probability of a serious effect should 
society take action?" 
Shlyakhter et al. (1995) note that "how societies and gov-
ernments decide what constitutes de minimis risk in particular 
situations... is largely a matter of political judgement." In an 
effort to identify a more objective threshold for de minimis 
risks, the authors denote surprise scenarios as those where the 
true value of a particular parameter appears at least 2.6 stan-
dard deviations away from its current "best guess" value. For 
a normally distributed random variable, the probability that 
the "true" value is more than 2.6 standard deviations from the 
best guess is just I %. According to this formula, then, de min-
imis risks would be those with less than a 1% chance of oc-
curring. For comparison, Shlyakhter et al. (1995) report that 
public opinion polls show many people are unconcerned 
about a 5% chance of a climate-related catastrophe within 
their lifetime, but are concerned about a 1% chance of a nu-
clear accident. Shlyakhter, Valverde, and Wilson (1995) fur-
ther report that an airliner with a calculated chance of failure 
around 5% in its 30-year life would not be allowed to fly in 
commercial service. 
2.3.3.4 Uncertainty and strategic behaviour 
Real world decision makers are faced not only with uncertain-
ties but with difficult scientific, technical, ethical, and politi-
cal controversies. Allais (1953) pointed out long ago that, 
apart from increasing the complexity of decision making, un-
certainty creates manoeuvering room for strategic behaviour 
in controversial collective negotiations. For instance, cautious 
parties may feel they can do better in the long run by playing 
it safe for the present and thus increasing the probability that 
67 
they will be able to take advantage of more favourable deals 
in the future (Pratt, 1995). 
Historical lessons from environmental disputes point to 
three pitfalls arising from strategic behaviour: 
• Preemption by the short term of the long term because 
of unchanged current behaviour 
• Dictatorship of the long term over the short term due to 
premature (arbitrary) decisions 
• Paralysis of collective action by endless disputes 
Strategic behaviour in negotiation is possible because the 
valuation of decision outcomes is dynamic - there is a distinc-
tion between long-term and short-term interests, and deci-
sions themselves are made over time. One means of avoiding 
the pitfalls of strategic behaviour is to acknowledge and in-
corporate the dynamic nature of collective decision making 
by means of a sequential decision process. 
2.3.3.5 Sequential decision making under uncertainty 
Sequential decision making is called for when choosing short-
term strategies under long-term uncertainty. Such decision 
scenarios, as pointed out by Grubb, Lave, Dowlatabadi, Hour-
cade, and other authors in HAS A (1994), are often character-
ized by: 
• inertia in technological trends 
• endogenous uncertainties 
• the possibility of surprise 
• diversity of beliefs and expectations 
The specification of the relationships among choices 
makes decision analysis a potentially powerful technique for 
evaluating sequential decisions. Although the intractability of 
complex decision trees has limited the application of this 
technique in environmental problems, several studies have 
analyzed sequential climate change decisions using simple 
models, typically involving two or three decision points, 
choices, and possible outcomes. According to these analyses, 
in the face of uncertain and irreversible outcomes, the best de-
cision lies somewhere between the most extreme options (i.e.. 
doing nothing and aggressive action), given the outcome 
probabilities available at the time (Singer el al., 1991: Manne 
and Richels. 1992, 1993; Hammitt el al., 1992: IUCC. 1993: 
Richels. 1994; Peck, 1994). Such a strategy hedges against 
being surprised by those events that fall below a particular 
threshold of probability. 
This sequential decision strategy can he described as an 
"act-learn-act" approach. Initial actions are taken without 
knowing exactly how the world will respond. As time passes, 
new information is incorporated into the decision process. 
Additional actions are taken based on this updated informa-
tion, and so on. Since global environmental processes, scien-
tific research, and developments related to mitigation and 
adaptation are all continuous, decisions on environmental 
policies should be adjusted continuously in the light of new 
information - and not only at prcspecified intervals. Note that 
the "act-learn-act" approach is distinct from a simple hedg-
68 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
ing strategy, since the latter does not necessarily incorporate 
learning between decisions. 
In climate change, complete information to support long-
term decision making is unavailable, and the costs of delay 
are potentially high (due to forgone abatement opportunities 
and damages due to increased emissions). Given the collec-
tive nature of climate change decisions, the flexibility of 
the international community to react to new information is 
essential. The best decision strategy, then, may be the 
"act-learn-act" strategy, with initial decisions based on the 
best currently available information. In fact, prefatory state-
ments in the FCCC include citations of existing and ongoing 
analysis as the basis of the Convention. So the actions under-
taken in the Convention can already be viewed as the basis of 
an "act-learn-act" approach, with the first action being the 
initiation of studies to inform the decision process. 
2.3.3.6 The value of improved information 
In sequential decision making, additional information on the 
nature or likelihood of potential outcomes may allow actions 
to he better matched to those outcomes. Assuming that subjec-
tive outcome probabilities may be altered by learning, re-
search is valuable to the extent that it refines subjective 
probabilities in a way that improves future decisions. 
The value of new information (perfect and imperfect) can 
be computed. (When parties are risk-neutral, this value is 
equivalent to expected utility as discussed in Section 2.3.2.3.) 
Suppose that expected values for a decision option are as 
follows: 
Without information: 
$150 
With imperfect information: 
$325 
With perfect information: 
$500. 
This hypothetical example illustrates a perfectly general re-
sult: The value of perfect information ($500 - $150 = $350) 
clearly exceeds the value of imperfect information ($325 -
$150 = $175). It also indicates that some information - albeit 
imperfect - is better than no information at all (Eeckhoudt and 
Collier. 1995). Under "act-learn-act" decision making, the 
value of new climate study information depends on changes 
in the probabilities assigned to alternative decision options 
before and after the study. "If the probabilities of (alternative) 
scenarios remain equal, then the value of the study is zero: if. 
on the other hand, only one scenario can be selected, a study 
might be worth as much as 100 billion dollars" (Shlyakhter et 
al.. 1995). 
In "act-learn-act" decision making, uncertainty is not fully 
resolved before a decision is taken, so the resolution of the un-
certainty must be viewed as either unacceptably costly or not 
helpful to the decision. But reducing uncertainty in a way that 
can create future options (without obligating parties to take a 
particular action) should be highly valued. Accordingly, un-
certainty should prompt decision makers to focus on the tim-
ing of crucial investment decisions and to accelerate those 
near-term activities that create options (Dixit and Pindyck, 
1995). Hourcade and Chapuis (1994) have shown that, after 
accounting for climate-related surprises in a sequential deci-
sion model, a resolution of uncertainty had high value relative 
to no-regret potentials and technical innovation. Peck and 
Teisberg (1993) and Manne and Richels (1992) show similar 
results. 
In collective decision making, the choice of actions may be 
strongly affected by friction between the long-term nature of 
the problem (including the required time for resolving uncer-
tainties) and the relatively short tenure of decision makers. 
For example, to avoid negative political repercussions, deci-
sion makers may choose to postpone a costly or otherwise un-
popular abatement activity until after their official terms 
expire. Uncertainty can be an excellent justification for such a 
postponement, even though the delay may be costly in the 
long run. In the case of climate change, for example, it is as-
sumed that the damage potential will remain unknown until 
2010-2020; if that is so, then appropriate emission levels can 
be determined only at the end of this period. To avoid costly 
postponement, emission decision makers should be explicit 
about the decision uncertainties as they are understood at the 
time, as well as the potential long-term implications of their 
short-term decisions. 
2.3.3.7 Economic transfers 
Collective assessments must address international economic 
transfers. The need to compare costs and benefits in collective 
decisions, for example, requires careful consideration of both 
the local and global ramifications of an action. Abatement 
"costs" may include not only domestic expenditures but also 
economic losses in the import/export market, a slowing of in-
dustrial development, and other effects. Similarly, benefits 
may include not only reductions in local impacts but also the 
overall survival of vulnerable states and the stimulation of 
abatement technology development useful to other countries. 
The global aspects of environmental problems require that do-
mestic costs and benefits be defined relative to other abate-
ment opportunities in other regions. Cost-benefit assessments, 
therefore, must be informed by an understanding of different 
perceptions and priorities among countries (Chapter 3). the 
importance of time horizons in different regions (Chapter 4). 
economic transfers, and. perhaps most important, the effects 
of an action on global cooperation itself. 
Although the need to consider the interests of all affected 
parties greatly complicates the collective decision process, 
collective action yields benefits that could not be achieved if 
the problem were addressed in a more fragmented manner. 
One of the important potential gains from cooperating in a 
collective accord is the distribution of risk when outcomes are 
uncertain. A group has much greater possibilities for coping 
with risk than an individual, which is why organizations have 
always been best suited to undertake risky activities. As Eeck-
houdt and Collier (1995) point out: 
This is partly due to the opportunities of diversification 
within the group and partly due to the transfer of risk to-
wards the least risk-averse members (or the richest mem-
bers if absolute risk aversion is decreasing). . . . Without 
this diminution of risk aversion in an economy, thanks to 
the creation of risk pools, many risky projects would not 
have been undertaken and we would undoubtedly not have 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
known the economic expansion that we have observed 
over the last two centuries. 
Since individuals are generally willing to pay for a reduc-
tion in risk, risk itself is costly (apart from the potential losses 
being risked). Transferring risk from one country to another 
or sharing risk collectively does not change the risk itself, but 
it can improve the overall welfare of the parties exposed to 
that risk. The literature indicates that "the transfer of risk is a 
potential source of large improvements in economic effi-
ciency and social welfare" rather than a zero sum game (Eeck-
houdt and Gollier, 1995). 
Unfortunately, effective mechanisms for the appropriate 
redistribution of these international economic burdens are not 
currently available. Economic theory demonstrates that, 
where damages are borne collectively, individual responsibil-
ity for action leads to suboptimal outcomes. There is a strong 
incentive for each party to rely on the others to act - in other 
words, to be a free rider. A conventional approach to reducing 
the cost of risk is insurance, where relatively small premiums 
paid by all parties are able to compensate those who suffer 
losses. But there is no global market for national insurance 
against environmental losses. Even if the institutions were 
available to distribute such risk, expecting agreement on the 
appropriate sharing formula would be unrealistic. 
Given the political and economic ramifications associated 
with international transfers (due to the imposition of pay-
ments on electorates, for example), reaching any collective 
agreement to address climate change will be difficult. Com-
pletely satisfying all parties is probably impossible. Neverthe-
less, there is a clear need to consider fair and feasible transfers 
in any comprehensive decision process in order to attract 
widespread participation and insure international support. 
Sharing the costs of actions in a sequential path of acting and 
learning should lead to collective support for the globally op-
timal climate strategy. (Chapter 3 discusses at some length 
conditions needed for equity among the parties in collective 
decision making.) 
2,3.3.8 Conclusions about negotiated decision making 
The limitations of decision analysis and the collective deci-
sion structure of the FCCC make negotiation the dominant 
element in climate change decison making. The preceding 
discussion has identified several important factors affecting 
these decisons: 
• Excessive knowledge requirements in negotiated envi-
ronmental decisions may stand in the way of collective 
rational choice. This cognitive burden could be re-
duced by facilitating the negotiation process itself 
through the use of tools like stakeholder analysis or by 
splitting accords into more manageable clusters of 
agreements. 
• Since society has no consistent probability threshold 
for ignoring particular risks, it may be vulnerable to 
surprise when risks are uncertain. In climate decisions, 
this vulnerability could be reduced by considering event 
scenarios relative to an explicit probability of surprise. 
69 
• When faced by long-term uncertainties, sequential deci-
sion making allows actions to be better matched to out-
comes by incorporating additional information over 
time. Sequential decision making also minimizes harm-
ful strategic behaviour among multiple decision makers. 
• Improved information about uncertain outcomes may 
have very high economic value, especially if that infor-
mation can create future decision options. 
• There are currently no effective mechanisms for sharing 
the risks related to climate change and their associ-
ated economic burdens. International risk sharing could 
yield substantial benefits for global economic and social 
welfare. 
A consideration of the climate change problem from the 
perspectives of quantitative optimization and collective nego-
tiation has yielded many general insights into the nature of 
climate decision making, the obstacles it faces, and potential 
means of addressing those obstacles. The chapter will now 
conclude with a more specific treatment of key issues cur-
rently faced by the Convention. 
2.4 Implications for National Decision Making 
Under the FCCC 
Because of decision uncertainties and the differing interests 
and values of international parties, there is no unique globally 
optimum response to climate change. Action will be taken as a 
result of collective negotiation under the FCCC. In (his 
process, each party will judge appropriate responses accord-
ing to sometimes different perceptions of what might consti-
tute an optimum strategy both for itself and for the world as a 
whole. This is not a pursuit of unfettered self-interest. The 
purpose of negotiations is for countries to agree to act differ-
ently than they would in the absence of an agreement in order 
to realize the common benefits from collective action. Given 
the decision context set out in Section 2.2. this section elabo-
rates on the implications of the decision-making issues intro-
duced in Section 2.3 in the context of global negotiations on 
climate change. 
2.4.1 The Framework Convention on Climate Change 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change went into ef-
fect on 21 March 1994. As of April 1995. it had been ratified 
by some 128 parties. The Convention provides the legal, insti-
tutional, procedural, and normative framework for the inter-
national community to consider responses to the threat of 
climate change and its impacts. 
2.4.1.1 Objectives and commitments 
The FCCC's objective provides a fundamental reference point 
for decisions by the parties. The objective of the Convention 
(Article 2) is 
to achieve stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations 
in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic interference with the climate system. Such a 
70 
Climate Change J 995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
level should be achieved within a time frame sufficient to 
allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to 
ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable 
economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. 
The objective, and other provisions of the Convention, make 
clear that the parties must consider both mitigation and adap-
tation to climate change. 
The Convention established general commitments which 
bind all parties and specific commitments that apply to devel-
oped country parties. All parties must develop emission in-
ventories, implement 
mitigation/adaptation 
programmes, 
support technology transfer, promote sustainable management 
of greenhouse gas sinks, and account for climate change in so-
cial, economic, and environmental policies, where feasible. In 
addition to these commitments, developed countries must 
"aim" to return to 1990 levels of greenhouse gas emissions 
and take the lead in modifying longer-term emission trends. 
Unfortunately, the language of the Convention leaves unclear 
the precise nature and extent of some of its specific commit-
ments. 
The Convention also requires developed parties to coordi-
nate relevant economic and administrative instruments to 
achieve the Convention's objectives and to review their own 
policies to see if they encourage increased emissions. Each 
country's contribution to emission reduction depends on a 
number of factors, including its economic structure, resource 
base, starting point, individual circumstances, and equity. The 
Convention allows the Conference of the Parties (COP) to 
weaken or strengthen the parties' obligations under the treaty 
in response to scientific information on climate change as 
well as relevant technical, social, and economic information. 
Parties agree to pay particular attention to supporting interna-
tional and intergovernmental efforts to strengthen systematic 
observation and national scientific and technical research ca-
pacities and capabilities. 
2.4.1.2 Institutional arrangements for decision making 
The Conference of the Parties is the supreme decision-making 
body of the Convention, responsible for keeping the imple-
mentation of the Convention under regular review and for 
ensuring that implementation is meeting the Convention's 
objective. The COP is supported by the Subsidiary Body 
for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) and the 
Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SB1). The SBSTA is in-
tended to link the scientific, technical, and technological 
assessments and information provided by competent interna-
tional bodies with the policy-oriented needs of the COP. The 
SB1 is intended to develop recommendations to assist the 
COP in its review and assessment of the implementation of 
the Convention and in the preparation and implementation of 
its decisions. The institutional arrangements for decision 
making also include a financial mechanism which functions 
under the guidance of the COP. 
The COP was intended to adopt rules of procedure for it-
self and its subsidiary bodies by consensus at the first Confer-
ence of the Parties (COP 1). These rules were intended to 
provide decision-making procedures, including procedures 
for matters not covered by the Convention, and could have in-
cluded specified majorities required for the adoption of par-
ticular decisions. Consensus could not be reached on the 
whole set of rules at COP 1 (although decisions were still 
made). Negotiations between parties on the rules of procedure 
continue. 
The Convention's overall decision-making machinery in-
cludes a Secretariat to support the Convention. It also in-
cludes a multilateral consultative process, which has not been 
finalized but is intended to assist resolution of questions re-
garding the implementation of the Convention. COP 1 de-
cided to establish an ad hoc open-ended working group of 
technical and legal experts to study all issues relating to the 
establishment of this process for COP 2. Finally, in the event 
of a formal dispute between parties, the Convention provides 
for the possibility of conciliation, arbitration, or recourse to 
the International Court of Justice. 
The need for sequential decision making is reflected in the 
Convention's provisions for review, assessment, elaboration 
of commitments, and other such procedures. In this context, 
COP 1 established an open-ended ad hoc group of parties "to 
begin a process to enable it [the COP] to take appropriate ac-
tion for the period beyond 2000 . . . through the adoption of a 
protocol or another legal instrument." The FCCC also says 
much about decision-making procedures, including the need 
for transparency, publication of reports, and wide participa-
tion. But the lack of formal, agreed rules of procedure leaves 
open important aspects of how the parties will make deci-
sions. 
2.4.2 International transfers in climate change 
Section 2.3.3.7 raised the issue of international transfer as a 
potential obstacle to reaching collective decisions. Such trans-
fers have already emerged as one of the most difficult issues 
facing the FCCC community. The possible nature, degree and 
role of international transfers related to climate change must 
be considered in any comprehensive climate decision. This re-
quirement arises for a number of reasons, including the fol-
lowing (see also Chapter 3): 
• The FCCC already mandates that developing countries 
will receive the "full agreed incremental costs" of mea-
sures taken under the Convention. 
• Efficiency arguments suggest that some of the cheaper 
abatement opportunities may lie in developing coun-
tries. This has resulted in calls to allow joint implemen-
tation between developed and developing countries as a 
way of meeting emission commitments. 
• Equity arguments based on the concept of "environmen-
tal space" hold that the industrialized world has emitted 
the great majority of persistent greenhouse gases. Con-
sequently, those who have occupied an "unfair" share of 
this space should in some way compensate the others. 
This is one interpretation of the "polluter pays" principle. 
• A more generalized efficiency and equity case for trans-
fers arises from the long-term need to define fair "emis-
sion rights" (tradable quotas) and to allow countries to 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
71 
exchange these on mutually beneficial terms (Parikh, 
1994b; see also Chapter 3). 
• Efficiency considerations suggest that risks associated 
with climate impacts should be shared through an inter-
national insurance mechanism (see below). 
• Ethical arguments and some principles of international 
law suggest that countries should be liable for environ-
mental damage they impose on others. 
International transfers, in one form or another, are likely to 
serve as both the building blocks of globally optimal action 
and the cement of global cooperation. Nevertheless the politi-
cal and managerial difficulties surrounding such transfers 
need to be understood and respected by all parties if the 
process is not to collapse into an unproductive struggle over 
resource transfers (Parikh and Painuly, 1994; Parikh, 1995). 
2.4.3 Sequential climate decisions 
The most important benefit of applying sequential decision 
making to the climate problem is that the FCCC "need not be 
overly concerned with . . . inability to predict the economic 
and technical system several decades into the future: un-
certainty is important only to the extent that it confounds 
near-term decision making. Today's decisions appear to be 
relatively insensitive to some of the more controversial 
longer-term uncertainties in the greenhouse debates" (Manne 
and Richels, 1993). This insensitivity of some short-term cli-
mate decisions to long-term uncertainties is fortunate, since 
diverging expectations about the long run, like appropriate 
economic development time horizons and expert disagree-
ment about the large-scale use of competing energy sources 
(such as biofuels or nuclear energy), could impede the forma-
tion of a consensus for action. 
The FCCC negotiations do not have to resolve controver-
sies on long-term issues like sea level rise or force premature 
agreements on difficult disputes about burden sharing. The 
objective of the first step of the decision sequence is to put so-
ciety as far as possible in the position to postpone technologi-
cal or institutional "lock-in" and to use the extra negotiation 
time to increase options and reach wider consensus on how to 
approach the more difficult longer-term decisions. 
The literature identifies five types of short-term decisions 
apt to improve society's decision-making capabilities in the 
future: 
• Investing in climate research simply because of the high 
economic value of scientific information 
• Financing technology research and development through 
government-led programmes (Chapter 9) 
• Inducing technical change through market incentives 
(Arrow, 1962; Grubb el al., 1995) 
• Making low-cost abatement decisions to increase learn-
ing time where risks are controversial or where the po-
tential for surprise raises the value of information and 
new options (Hourcade and Chapuis. 1994; Chapter 8) 
• Preventing bifurcation toward high carbon-intensive de-
velopment paths (Chapter 8) 
Table 2.1. Natural disasters and associated insured losses 
Event 
Hurricane Gilbert 
Hurricane Hugo 
Winter storms (Europe) 
Summer storms (Colorado) 
Hurricane Bob 
Hurricane Andrew 
Hurricane Iniki 
East coast storms (U.S.) 
Midwest floods (U.S.) 
Year 
1988 
1989 
1990 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1992 
1993 
1993 
Insured Losses 
(billion U.S.$) 
0.05 
5.8 
10.0 
1.0 
0.62 
15.5 
1.6 
1.6 
0.76 
Source: Weilenmann (1994). 
The goal of the near-term effort should be to make these deci-
sions with an eye toward reconciling three long-term needs: 
stable greenhouse gas concentrations, scientific knowledge, 
and technical and consumption patterns that enhance flexibil-
ity in managing transition. 
2.4.4 Instruments for international insurance 
Losses associated with individual natural disasters have been 
rising (even in wealthy countries). Of these losses, those due 
to weather have been rising more quickly than those due to 
earthquakes (Yokohama World Conference on Natural Disas-
ter Reduction, 1994). A list of major storms and associated in-
sured losses over the period 1988-1993 is shown in Table 2.1. 
Storms with insured losses greater than $1 billion were un-
known before 1989, but six of the nine events listed in Table 
2.1 had insured losses in excess of this amount. Hurricane 
Andrew alone involved losses of $15.5 billion. 
The reason why losses due to weather-related events arc 
higher than those due to earthquakes is not clear and cannot be 
conclusively related to climate change. An increase in the fre-
quency and severity of extreme events as atmospheric con-
centrations of greenhouse gases rise is not clear from climate 
models. 
Insurance as a means of sharing risks is well suited to situ-
ations where the likelihood of a damaging event for any indi-
vidual party is relatively small but the potential damages are 
large. Since the relationship between weather-related events 
and climate change is not known, insurance to cover the risks 
of climate change, per se, is probably not feasible or neces-
sary. However, insurance to cover the damages associated 
with weather-related events is desirable. To the extent that the 
frequency or severity of weather events turns out to he af-
fected by climate change, such insurance would be a form of 
climate change insurance. But since a meaningful premium 
for private insurance against climate change losses cannot be 
calculated, insurers have responded to weather disasters by 
withdrawing or restricting coverage in regions that are partic-
ularly prone to such events. If climate change does contribute 
to those events, the affected regions bear the costs of actions 
by the rest of the world. 
72 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Section 2.3.3.7 noted reasons why international insurance 
against climate impacts could enhance welfare. However. 
Wilford (1993), Chichilnisky and Heal (1993), and others 
point out several reasons why commercial insurance markets 
cannot adequately cover risks associated with climate change. 
First, there is no international market in which individuals or 
countries can insure themselves against losses from climate 
change or related abatement policies. Even if such a market 
existed, insurance on a country-by-country basis would miss 
many potential benefits from collectively sharing risks. To the 
limited extent that insurance could cover climate risks, the in-
surance premiums would probably he borne inequitably by 
the parties exposed to those risks. Establishing an appropriate 
form of global insurance could thus increase both efficiency 
and equity by reducing exposure to risk and the cost to indi-
vidual countries of bearing that risk. 
2.4.4.1 Financial markets for risk 
Climate change risks impose particular requirements for in-
surance. One option would he a mutual insurance contract -
an agreement between parties subject to similar risks that 
those who suffer losses will he compensated by others. Such 
insurance is used, for example, in agricultural cooperatives. In 
the context of climate change, this type of insurance contract 
would he a binding agreement in which countries that suffer 
greater-than-average (or expected) climate-related losses 
would be assisted by those suffering less-lhan-average losses. 
A second type of insurance contract acknowledges that the 
overall nature and distribution of some climate-related risks 
are uncertain. In such circumstances, the formal treatment of 
an appropriate insurance structure is complex (Arrow. 1953). 
It requires defining "risk securities" for each possible out-
come that pay out only if that outcome is realized. In climate 
change, such insurance would require each country to make 
compensation commitments as insurance against a particular 
climate outcome. To distribute the risks efficiently, countries 
would then be allowed to trade these securities. To the extent 
that the perception of risks varies, such an approach would 
amount to betting on particular climate outcomes (Fillet. 
1994). 
By allowing for different beliefs about risks, risk securities 
and mutual insurance would permit a more efficient distribu-
tion of those risks. I'oi example, a country genuinely believ-
ing that climate change is unlikely to have serious global 
impacts would be more prone to hold those securities that pay 
out under these conditions (Heal. 1993) A formal two-
country treatment is summarized in Chichilnisky and Heal 
(1993) and Chichilnisky (1994). These studies also note that 
creating risk securities may provide an objective test of the 
honesty of national positions on the risks of climate change. 
If, as part of a negotiating ploy to avoid onerous abatement 
commitments, a country were to argue that climate change 
does not involve substantial risks, that country would have to 
be prepared to hold associated high payoff securities. Hence, 
there would be an economic penalty for misrepresentation of 
true beliefs. These penalties could offset some of the incentive 
to free ride on other countries' efforts to reduce greenhouse 
emissions. Risk securities also have potential for improving 
equity in both decision processes and outcomes. The feasibil-
ity, credibility, and equity of such securities has yet to be es-
tablished and may be an important research topic. 
The international community is a long way from having 
sophisticated instruments like risk securities. Nevertheless. 
there have been proposals for specific international insurance 
funds, particularly to help the most vulnerable countries cope 
with climate impacts. Although it is closer to a liability 
scheme than to an insurance contract, an AOSIS proposal sub-
mitted to the First Conference of the Parties calls for insur-
ance pool contributions to be collected in 2004 - provided the 
rate of global mean sea level rise has by then reached an 
agreed figure. If sea levels have not risen substantially by that 
time, a review of conditions would be undertaken. This 
AOSIS proposal was presented to the negotiators of the Cli-
mate Convention but was excluded from the final treaty. The 
AOSIS and related proposals are outlined in Chapter 3. 
2.4.5 Portfolios of climate actions 
Actions to limit the impacts of climate change may be re-
quired for the next century or longer. Numerous measures are 
potentially available to address these impacts, but their effects 
are uncertain and no single action appears to be clearly supe-
rior to the others. Under uncertainty, a portfolio of measures 
will, on average, yield a better outcome than any individual 
action. The decision problem, then, is to choose a portfolio of 
measures to achieve climate change goals at minimum cost, 
accounting for the risks associated with different measures. 
The portfolio may include some relatively high cost measures 
to diversify the risks. 
Many investment decisions have implications for climate 
change because they may lock in commitments to energy use 
or other greenhouse gas sources for several decades. The po-
tential climate implications of these investments do not jus-
tify delaying such decisions. However, the potential climate 
change implications of transportation infrastructure, land use 
decisions, energy-using equipment, and similar investments 
should be considered when the alternatives are being evalu-
ated. The decisions should be based on the best information 
available at the time and should properly reflect the value of 
future flexibility. 
Some of the measures in the climate change portfolio will 
also have relatively long lifetimes. The extent to which re-
sources are locked in by these measures should be considered 
when their climate change benefits are evaluated. Although 
some individual measures may be inflexible, other measures 
can be chosen to ensure that the overall portfolio has suffi-
cient flexibility. Thus, decision makers will be able to adjust a 
well chosen portfolio frequently in response to new informa-
tion, even though some of the measures are locked in for rela-
tively long periods. 
2.4.5.1 Climate portfolio options 
The key to selecting a climate change action portfolio is to un-
derstand how measures interact over time. Mitigation mea-
sures provide future flexibility, technology research can lower 
the cost of future action, and climate research can provide 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing Climate Change 
73 
better information on the nature of the actions required. In 
principle, the measures available to countries (individually or 
jointly) to limit climate change and its impacts include: 
• Implementing low cost measures, such as energy effi-
ciency, to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases 
• Phasing out existing distortionary policies, such as 
some fossil fuel subsidies, that reduce welfare and in-
crease greenhouse gas emissions directly or indirectly 
• Switching from more to less carbon-intensive fuels or to 
carbon-free fuels to reduce emissions of greenhouse 
gases 
• Enhancing or expanding greenhouse gas sinks or res-
ervoirs, such as forests 
• Implementing existing techniques (and developing new 
ones) for reducing methane and nitrous oxide emissions 
from industrial processes, landfills, agriculture, fossil 
fuel extraction, and transportation 
• Instituting forms of international cooperation, such as 
joint implementation, technology transfer, and tradable 
quotas to reduce the cost of limiting greenhouse gas 
emissions 
• Planning and implementing measures to adapt to the 
consequences of climate change 
• Undertaking additional research on climate change 
causes, effects, and adaptation (Economic studies sug-
gest that such research can yield high returns by re-
ducing uncertainty about actions to address climate 
change) 
• Conducting technological research to enhance energy 
efficiency, minimize emissions of greenhouse gases 
from fossil fuel use, and develop commercial nonfossil 
energy sources (In the long run, the cost and timing of 
availability of nonfossil energy technologies is one of 
the major determinants of the cost of addressing climate 
change) 
• Developing institutional mechanisms, such as insur-
ance, to share the risks of damages due to climate 
change 
The specific policy measures available vary from country 
to country. Countries will select a portfolio of climate change 
measures that reflect, implicitly or explicitly, their individual 
objectives and constraints. A country may look for the eco-
nomically optimal portfolio of climate change measures, but 
the impacts of the portfolio on different economic groups, in-
ternational competitiveness, international equity, and inter-
generational equity are likely to come into play. 
2.4.5.2 Choosing the best climate action portfolio 
There is no operational model with which to identify the optimal 
portfolio of climate change policies for a country. Nonetheless, 
the limited literature offers some insights concerning the costs 
and benefits of possible measures. For example: 
• Analyses of the costs of reducing greenhouse gas emis-
sions have been undertaken for many countries and sec-
tors (see Chapter 9). Once other environmental benefits 
(such as lower emissions of other pollutants) and eco-
nomic benefits (such as reduction of existing dislor-
tionary taxes) are accounted for, nearly every study 
finds some measures to reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions at very low or negative cost. 
• Peck and Teisberg (1993) and Manne and Richels 
(1993) have estimated the value of spending on climate 
research. They use highly stylized models for the analy-
sis, but find that the expected return is several times the 
current level of climate research spending. Peck (1994) 
has also shown that current spending in the U.S. is not 
allocated in an optimal manner. 
• Results from Energy Modeling Forum 12 (Energy Mod-
eling Forum, 1993) suggest that reducing the costs of 
future nonfossil energy technologies could reduce the 
costs of achieving emission reduction targets by as 
much as two-thirds. This suggests a potentially large 
economic return from technology research. Funding for 
technology research related to climate change should be 
considered as a risk premium, not as subsidies to he ran-
domly allocated. 
• Several researchers have compared the costs of unilat-
eral action and international cooperation to address cli-
mate change. The analyses consistently show large 
economic returns from international cooperation. Such 
cooperation, however, requires mechanisms for trans-
ferring resources among countries. Otherwise, countries 
with high marginal costs of emission reduction might 
find it advantageous to be free riders until a complete 
international climate agreement is concluded (Pillet el 
a/.. 1993). 
• Analyses of phasing out existing inefficient emission 
policies suggest that emissions can be reduced with net 
economic benefits. Larsen and Shah (1992) estimate 
that global CO, emissions would be reduced by between 
4 and 5% if all energy subsidies were removed. An 
OECD study estimates that removal of energy subsidies 
would reduce global emissions 18% from projected lev-
els in 2050 while increasing global real incomes by 
0.7% annually (Burniaux el ai. 1992). 
Decision makers need to decide on the level of climate 
change spending and the allocation of that total among the 
available measures. The level of climate change spending is 
likely to reflect both international commitments and domestic-
considerations such as the need for adaptation measures and 
economic development strategies based on mitigation tech-
nologies. 
Conceptually the mix of climate change measures should 
be adjusted so that the risk-cost ratio is equal at the margin. 
However, only sketchy information is available on the costs, 
benefits, and risks of alternative measures. Governments can 
make subjective judgments about the merits of different mea-
sures and adjust the portfolio incrementally as new informa-
tion becomes available. 
74 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Endnote 
1. The ultimate objective ol the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change is "stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the at-
mosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic in-
terference with the climate system. Such a level should be achieved 
within a time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally 
to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened 
and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable 
manner" (Article 2). Conceptually, cost-benefit analysis could be 
used to identify the stabilization level and date that yield the largest 
net benefit, although in practice the information needed to perform 
such calculations is not available. Having chosen a stabilization level 
and date, regardless of how that decision is made, cost-effectiveness 
analysis could he used to choose among strategies for achieving the 
objective. 
References 
Allais, M., 1953: l.e comportement de 1'homme rationnel devant le 
risque, critique des postulats et axiomes de l'ecole amerieaine. 
Economctrica 21: 503-546. 
Arrow, K.J., 1951a: Social choice and individual values, Wiley, 
New York. 
Arrow, K.J., 1951b: Alternative approaches to the theory of choice 
in risk-taking situations. Economctrica 19: 404-437. Reprinted in 
K.J. Arrow, 19S4: Collected papers of Kenneth J. Arrow, 3, Indi-
vidual choice under certainty and uncertainty, pp. 5-41. The 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Arrow, K.J., 1953: The role of securities in the optimal allocation of 
risk bearing. Econometric, Colloques internationally du Centre 
National de la Recherche Scienlifique, 11, 41-47 (original in 
French). Reprinted in K.J. Arrow, 1983: Collected Papers of Ken-
neth ./. Arrow, Volume 2. General equilibrium, pp. 46-57. 
Arrow, K.J., 1962: The economic implications of learning by doing. 
Review of Economic Studies. 29, 155-173. Reprinted in K.J. Ar-
row, 1985: Collected papers of Kenneth ./. Arrow. Volume 5. Pro-
duction and capital, pp. 157-180. 
Arrow, K.J., 1963: Social choice and individual values. 2d ed.. Wi-
ley, New York. Reprinted by Yale University Press. New Haven. 
Arrow, K.J., 1971: Imposition of the theory of choice under uncer-
tainty, In Decision and organization. CM. McGuire and R. Rad-
nor, eds., pp. 19-55, North-Holland, Amsterdam. Reprinted in K.J. 
Arrow, 1984: Collected papers of Kenneth ./. Arrow. Volume 3. In-
dividual choice under certainty and uncertainly pp. 172-208. 
Arrow, K.J., 1983-1985: Collected papers of Kenneth .1. Arrow. The 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Cambridge. MA. 
Arrow, K.J., 1987, 1990: Economic theory and the hypothesis of ra-
tionality, The new Palgrave, pp. 25-37. Norton. New York and 
London. 
Arrow, K.J., 1994: Discounting and climate change prospects. Com-
munication at the 1PCC Working Group III Writing Team II Mon-
treux Meeting, March 3-6. Montreux, Switzerland. 
Arrow, K.J., and AC. Fisher. 1974: Environmental preservation, un-
certainty and irreversibility. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88, 
312-319. Reprinted in K.J. Arrow, 1985. Collected papers of 
Kenneth J. Arrow, Volume 6, Applied economics, pp. 165-173. 
Ayres, R.U., and P.M. Weaver. 1994: The case for proactive risk 
management. In Environmental Hazard: Liability or Opportu-
nity? Report of the SANDOZ/INSEAD Colloquium held 29 June 
1993, Paris: INSEAD. Centre for the Management of Environ-
mental Resources, pp. 3-9. 
Beltratti, A., 1994: Environmental problems and attitudes towards 
risk and uncertainty. In Steps Towards a Decision Making Frame-
work to Address Climate Change. Report of the IPCC Working 
Croup 111 Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. Pi 1 let 
and Gassmann, eds., pp. 67-74. Wiirenlingen & Villigen 
(Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Bjorkman, M„ 1984: Decision making, risk taking and psychologi-
cal time: Review of empirical findings and psychological theory. 
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 25, 31-49. 
Blaug, M., 1992: The methodology of economics - Or how econo-
mists explain, Cambridge surveys of economic literature, 2d ed.. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Bray, M., 1987: Perfect foresight. The new Palgrave, pp. 144-148. 
W.W. Norton & Company, New York and London. 
Broome, J., 1992: Counting the cost of global warming, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Burniaux, J.M., J.P. Martin, G. Nicoletti, and JO. Martins, 1992: 
GREEN. Working Paper 1 15, Organization for Economic Coop-
eration and Development (OECD), Paris. 
BUWAL/OFEFP, 1994: he rechauffement planetaire et la Suisse: 
bases d'une strategic Rationale / Globed warming and Switzer-
land: Foundations for a national strategy, Federal Office of 
Environment. Forests and Landscape (BUWAL/OFEFP), Berne 
(Switzerland). 
Caselton, B. and W. Luo, 1994: Dempster-Shafer theory and deci-
sion making under near-ignorance, Working Paper, University of 
British Columbia and British Columbia Hydro, Vancouver. 
Chichilnisky, G., 1993a: What is sustainable development? Research 
paper, Columbia University, New York. 
Chichilnisky, G.. 1993b: Markets with endogenous uncertainty: 
Theory and policy, Working Paper, Stanford University, Depart-
ment of Economics, Stanford, CA. 
Chichilnisky, G., 1994: Global environmental risks and financial in-
struments. In Steps towards a decision making framework to ad-
dress climate change. Report of the IPCC Working Group 111 
Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6, Fillet and 
Gassmann. eds.. pp. 99-109, Wiirenlingen & Villigen (Switzer-
land): PSI-Bericht 94-10. Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Chichilnisky, G.. and G. Heal. 1992: Financial markets with un-
known risks. First Boston Working Paper Series, Columbia Busi-
ness School, New York. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal, 1993: Global environmental risks. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 7(4), 65-86. 
Choucri, N. (ed.), 1993: Global accord - Environmental challenges 
and international responses, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Cline, W.R.. 1992: The economics of global warming, Institute lor 
International Economics, Washington, DC. 
Cline, W.R.. 1993: Greenhouse policy after Rio: Economics, sci-
ence, and politics. In Costs, impacts, and benefits of'CO^ mitiga-
tion, Y. Kaya. N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus, and F.L. Thoth. 
eds.. Proceedings of a Workshop held on 28-30 September 1992 
at IIASA. Laxenburg, Austria, pp. 41-56, IIASA, Laxenburg. 
Austria. 
Dawes, Robyn M., 1988: Rational choice in an uncertain world. 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Orlando, FL. 
Dempster, A.P.. 1967: Upper lower probabilities induced by a multi-
valued mapping. Ann. Math. Statist. 37: 355-374. 
Dixit, A.K., and R.S. Pindyck, 1995: The options approach to capital 
investment, Harvard Business Review 73 (3): 105-115. 
Dowlatabadi, H., and M.G. Morgan, 1993a: A model framework for 
integrated studies of the climate problem, Energy Policy. 21. 
209-221. 
Decision-Making Frameworks for Addressing 
Climate 
Change 
Dowlatabadi, H., and M.G. Morgan. 1993b: Integrated assessment 
of climate change, Science, 259, 1813 & 1932. 
Edmonds, J.A., and J.M. Reilly. 1986: Uncertainty in future global 
energy use and fossil fuel CO^ emissions 1975 to 2075, Prepared 
for the U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC. 
Edmonds, J.A., and J.M. Reilly, 1993: Global energy and CO, to the 
year 2050, The Energy Journal, 4:21-47. 
Eeckhoudt, L., and C. Collier, 1995: Risk - Evaluation, manage-
ment and sharing. Translated by V. Lambson, Harvester Wheat-
sheaf, New York. 
Energy Modeling Forum, 1993: Reducing global carbon emissions -
Costs and policy options. EMF-12. Stanford University, Stanford. 
CA. 
Fankhauser, S., 1994: Global warming damage and the risk of a cli-
mate catastrophe. In Steps towards a decision making framework 
to address climate change. Report of the IPCC Working Group III 
Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. Pi 1 let and 
Gassmann, eds., pp. 19-29, Wiirenlingen & Villigen (Switzer-
land): PSI-Bericht 94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Faucheux, S., and G. Frogcr, 1994: Decision-making under environ-
mental uncertainty. In Steps towards a decision making frame-
work to address climate change. Report of the IPCC Working 
Group III Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. Pillct 
and Gassmann, eds., pp. 51-65, Wiirenlingen & Villigen 
(Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Fishburn, PC, 1987, 1990: Utility theory and decision theory, The 
new Palgrave, pp. 303-312, Norton, New York and London. 
Fisher, I., 1930: The theory of interest, Macmillan, New York. 
Froger, G., and E. Zyla, 1994: Decision making for sustainable de-
velopment: Orthodox or system dynamics models'? Proceedings 
of the International Symposium on Models of Sustainable Devel-
opment, Universite Sorbonne-Pantheon C3E and afcet, Paris, 
March 16-18, 1994, Volume II, pp. 1061-1074. 
Gassmann, F., 1993: Non-linear dynamical systems, an introduc-
tion. In Some physico-chemical and mathematical tools for un-
derstanding of living systems. Greppin et al., eds.. University of 
Geneva, Geneva. 
Gassmann, F., 1994: Abrupt change scenarios. In Steps towards a de-
cision making framework to address climate change. Report of the 
IPCC Working Group III Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, 
March 3-6. Pillet and Gassmann, eds., pp. 3-9, Wiirenlingen & 
Villigen (Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Grinols, E.L., 1985: Public investment and social risk-sharing, Eu-
ropean Economic Review 29, 303-321. 
Grubb, M., T. Chapuis, and M. Ha Duong, 1995: The economics of 
changing course, Energy Policy. 23(4/5), 417-424. 
Hafele, W., J. Anderer, A. McDonald, and N. Nakicenovic, 1981: 
Energy in a finite world, Ballinger, Cambridge, MA. 
Haites, E.F., 1994: Portfolio analysis model of climate change deci-
sion making. In Steps towards a decision making framework to 
address climate change. Report of the IPCC Working Group III 
Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. Pillet and 
Gassmann, eds., pp. 111-114, Wiirenlingen & Villigen (Switzer-
land): PSI-Bericht 94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Hall, C.A.S. (ed.), 1995: Maximum power: The ideas and applica-
tions of H.T. Odum, University Press of Colorado, Boulder, CO. 
Hammitt, J.K., R.J. Lempert. and M.E. Schlesinger, 1992: A 
sequential-decision strategy for abating climate change, Nature 
357:315-318. 
Heal, G., 1993: Valuing the very long run: Discounting and the envi-
ronment. Discussion paper, Business School, Columbia Univer-
sity, New York. 
75 
Heap, S.H., M. Hollis, B. Lyons, R. Sugolen, and A. Wcale, 1992: 
The theory of choice—A critical guide. Blackwell, Oxford, UK, 
and Cambridge, MA. 
Hediger, W.. 1994: On the opportunity cost of climate change and 
policy. In Steps towards a decision making framework to address 
climate change. Report of the IPCC Working Group III Writing 
Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. Pillet and Gassmann, eds.. 
pp. 41-49, Wiirenlingen & Villigen (Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 
94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Henry, C, 1974: Investment decisions under uncertainly: The irre-
versibility effect, American Economic Review, 64, 1006-1012. 
Hope, C.W., J. Anderson, and P. Weinman, 1993: Policy analysis of 
the greenhouse effect - An application of the PAGE model. En-
ergy Policy 21,327-33*. 
Houghton, J.T.. G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). 1990: Cli-
mate change. The IPCC scientific assessment. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge. 
Hourcade, J.C., 1993: Economic issues and negotiation on global 
environment. Some lessons from the recent experience on green-
house effect. In Trade, innovation, environment, C. Carraro. ed.. 
Kluwer Academic Publ., Dordrecht. 
Hourcade, J.C., 1994: Analyse economique et gestion des risques 
climatiques, Natures, Sciences, Societes 2(3), 202-211. 
Hourcade, J.C.. and T. Chapuis, 1994: No-regret potentials and 
technical innovation: A viability approach to integrative assess-
ment of climate policies. In Integrative assessment of mitigation, 
impacts and adaptation to climate change, N. Nakicenovic, WD. 
Nordhaus, R. Richels, and F.L. Toth, eds.. 1IASA Workshop Pro-
ceedings. Laxenburg, Austria. 
IIASA (International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis), 
1993: IIASA's options. Processes of International Negotiation, 
June 1993,4-12. 
IIASA (International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis), 
1994: Integrative assessment of mitigation, impacts and adapta-
tion to climate change, N. Nakicenovic. WD. Nordhaus. R. 
Richels. and F.L. Toth, eds.. IIASA Workshop Proceedings. 
IIASA, Laxenburg. Austria. 
INSEAD/SANDOZ, 1994: Environmental hazard: Liability or op-
portunity? Report of the SANDOZ/INSEAD Colloquium, 29 
June 1993. INSEAD, Paris. 
IPCC, 1994: IPCC technical guidelines for assessing climate 
change impacts and adaptations. University College London and 
Center for Global Environmental Research. National Institute for 
Environmental Studies. London and Tsukuba. Japan. 
IUCC, 1993: Insurance against climate change'.' The AOSIS pro-
posal, Climate Change Fact Sheet 238. UNEP/WMO. Geneva. 
Johansson, P.O.. 1993: An introduction to modem welfare econom-
ics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Joint Climate Project, 1992: Joint climate project to address deci-
sion makers' uncertainties. Science and Policy Associates. Inc.. 
Washington, DC. 
Jungermann, H.. and F. Fleischer, 1988: As time goes by: Psycho-
logical determinants of time preferences. In The Formulation of 
Time Preferences in a Multidisciplinary Perspective, G. Kirsch. P. 
Nijkamp, and P. Zimmermann, eds., Edward Elgar, Aldershot, UK. 
Kates, R.W., C. Hohenemser, and J.X. Kasperson (eds.), 1985: Per-
ilous progress: Managing the hazards of technology. Westview 
Press, Boulder, CO. 
Kaya, Y, N. Nakicenovic, WD. Nordhaus, F.L. Toth (eds.), 1993: 
Costs, impacts, and benefits of C02 mitigation. Proceedings of a 
workshop held on 28-30 September 1992 at IIASA, Laxenburg, 
Austria. IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
76 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
Keeney, R.L., and H. Rail'fa, 1976: Decisions with multiple objec-
tives: Preferences and value tradeoffs. Wiley, New York. 
Kneese, A.V., 1968: Economics and the quality of the environment -
Some empirical experiences. Reprint Number 71, Resources lor 
the Future, Washington, DC. 
Kohlas, J., L. Cardona, R. Haenni. U. Hiinni, B. Anrig, and N. 
Lehmann, 1994: Defensible reasoning and uncertainty manage-
ment systems. In Research Projects 1993-1994, pp. 11-12, Uni-
versity of Fribourg (Switzerland). Institute of Informatics. 
Krutilla, J.V., 1967: Conservation reconsidered, American Eco-
nomic Review 57, 777-786. Reprinted in Smith (ed.), Environ-
mental resources and applied welfare economics - Essays in 
honor of John V. Krutilla, V. Smith, ed., pp. 263-273, Resources 
for the Future, 1988, Washington. DC. 
Larson, B. and A. Shah. 1992: World fossil fuel subsidies and global 
carbon emissions, Policy Research Working Paper Series, No. 
1002, World Bank. Washington, DC. 
Lind, R.C., K.J. Arrow, Ci.R. Corey. P. Dasgupta, A.K. Sen, T. Stauf-
fer, J.E. Stiglitz, J.A. Stockfisch, and R. Wilson. 1982: Discount-
ing for time and risk in energy policy. Resources for the Future, 
Washington, DC. 
Luce, R.D., and H. Raiffa. 1957: Games and decisions. Wiley, New 
York. 
Mannc, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1992: Buying greenhouse insurance. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Mannc, A.S.. and R.G. Richels, 1993: CO, hedging 
strategies-The 
impact of uncertainty upon emissions. Prepared for the OECD/ 
IEA Conference on the Economics of Climate Change, Paris, 
14-16 June. 
Markandya, A., and D.W. Pierce, 1991: Development, the environ-
ment, and the social rate of discount. The World Bank Research 
Observer 6 (2), 137-452. 
Meyer, A., and A. Sharon |undated]: Equity and survival - Who pro-
vides global benefit; Who causes global disbelief it? A basis for 
the reform of global institutional arrangements. Global Com-
mons Institute. London. 
MIT, 1986: The MIT dictionary of modem economics, D.W. Pearce, 
ed., 3d ed.. Mil Press. Cambridge. MA. 
Molina, M.J.. 1994: Science and policy interface. Business & The 
Contemporary »'«/•/</6(2). 126-128. 
Morgan, M.G., and M. Mention. 1990: Uncertainty. A guide to deal-
ing with uncertainty in quantitative risk and policy analysis. 
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
National Research Council, 1983: Risk assessment in the federal 
government: Managing the process. National Academy Press, 
Washington. DC. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1982: How fast should we graze the global com-
mons' American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings 
72(2). 242-246. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991: To slow or not to slow: The economics of 
the greenhouse effect. 77i<> Economic Journal 101, 920-937. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1992: The DICE model: Background and structure 
of a dynamic integrated climate-economy model of the economics 
of global warming. Foundation Discussion papers 1009 & 1019. 
Yale University. New Haven. 
Nordhaus, W.D., and G. Yohe. 1983: Future carbon dioxide emis-
sions from fossil fuels. In Changing climate. National Research 
Council. National Academy Press. Washington. DC. 
Odum, H.T.. 1983: Systems ecology. Wiley. New York. 
Parikh, J„ 1994a: Joint implementation and sharing commitments: 
A Southern perspective. In Integrative assessment of mitigation, 
impacts and adaptation to climate change. N. Nakicenovic. WD. 
Nordhaus, R. Richels, and F.L. Toth, eds., IIASA Workshop Pro-
ceedings, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Parikh, J., 1994b: North-South issues for climate change, Economic 
and Political Weekly, 5-12 November, 2940-2943. 
Parikh, J., 1995: Joint implementation and North-South cooperation 
for climate change, International Environmental Affairs, 7( I). 
22-41. 
Parikh, J., and J. Painuly, 1994: Population, consumption pattern, 
and climate change: A socio-economic perspective from the 
South, Ambio, 23(7), 434-437. 
Parikh, J., el al., 1993: Natural resource accounting, IGIDR mimeo-
graph, Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Bom-
bay. 
Parikh, J., P.G. Babu, and K. Parikh, 1994: Decision making frame-
work to address climate change. In Steps towards a decision mak-
ing framework to address climate change. Report of the IPCC 
Working Group III Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. 
Fillet and Gassmann, eds., pp. 77-97, Wurenlingen & Villigen 
(Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Parikh, J., K.J. Arrow, G. Pillet, et al., 1995: Decision making 
framework to address climate change. In Poverty, environment, 
and economic development, N.S.S. Narayana and A. Sen, eds.. In-
terline Publications, Bangalore, India. 
Parikh, K., et al., 1988: Towards free trade in agriculture. Kluwci 
Academic Press, Dordrecht. 
Parry, M.L., and C. Rosenzweig, 1994: Potential impact of climate 
change on world food supply, Nature, 367, 133-138. 
Pate-Cornell, M.E., 1992: Risk analysis and relevance of uncertain-
ties in nuclear safety decisions. In Public regulation: New per-
spectives on institutions and policies. E. Bailey, ed., pp. 227-253. 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Peck, S.C., 1993: The implications of non-linearities in global 
warming damage costs. In Costs, impacts, and benefits of CO, 
mitigation, Y. Kaya, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus, and F.L. 
Toth, eds.. pp. 209-210. Proceedings of a Workshop held on 28-
30 September 1992 at IIASA. Laxenburg (Austria). IIASA. Lax-
enburg. 
Peck, S.C.. 1994: Candidate framework for analysis of climate 
change decisions and uncertainties, Communication at the IPCC 
Working Group III Writing Team II Montreux Meeting. 3-6 
March. Montreux (Switzerland). 
Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg, 1993: Global warming uncertainties 
and the value of information: An analysis using CETA, Resource 
and Energy Economics, 15, 71-97. 
Pethig, R. (ed.), 1994: Valuing the environment: Methodological and 
measurement issues. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Amsterdam. 
Pigou, A.C., 1932: The economics of welfare, Macmillan, London. 
Pillet, G., 1994: Betting on climate states - The impact of climate 
change prospects on decision making under "strong" uncertainty 
and collective risks. In Steps towards a decision making frame-
work to address climate change. Report of the IPCC Working 
Group 111 Writing Team 11 Montreux Meeting, March 3-6. Pil-
let and Gassmann, eds., pp. 115-137, Wurenlingen & Villigen 
(Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10. Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Pillet, G., 1996: Welfare economics and social choice within an eco-
logical framework (in French). University of Fribourg, Fribourg 
(Switzerland). 
Pillet, G„ and F. Gassmann (eds.), 1994: Steps towards a decision 
making framework to address climate change. Report of the IPCC 
Working Group III Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, March 
3-6. Wurenlingen & Villigen (Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10. 
Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Decision-Making 
Frameworks 
for Addressing 
Climate 
Change 
Fillet, G., and H.T. Odum, 1987: £•' - Energie, ecologie, 
economie. 
Georg, Geneva. 
Fillet, G., W. Hediger, S. Kypreos, and C. Corbaz, 1993: The eco-
nomics of global warming - National and international 
climate 
policy: The requisites for Switzerland. 
Wurenlingen & Villigen 
(Switzerland): Paul Scherrer Institut, PS I Bericht Nr. 93-02, 2d 
ed., 1994. 
Pratt, J.W., 1995: "Foreword" to L. Eeckhoudt and C. Collier. 1995: 
Risk - Evaluation, 
management, 
and sharing, trans. V. Lambson. 
Harvester Wheatsheaf, New York. 
Price, C., 1993: Time, discounting 
and value, Blackwell, Cambridge, 
MA and Oxford, UK. 
Querner, I., 1993: An economic 
analysis 
of severe industrial 
haz-
ards. Physica-Verlag, Berlin. 
Ramsey, P.P., 1928: A mathematical theory of savings. The Eco-
nomic Journal 38, 543-565. 
Random House, 1966: The Random House dictionary of the English 
language, Jess Stein, ed., Random House, New York. 
Richels, R., 1994: Decision making under uncertainty and the global 
climate debate, Contribution to the IPCC Working Group 111 
Writing Team II Montreux Meeting, 3-6 March. 
Rios, S. (ed.), 1994: Decision theory and decision analysis: 
Trends 
and challenges, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht. 
Safra, Z., 1987: Contingent commodities, The new Palgrave. 
pp. 
22-24, Norton, New York and London. 
Sandmo, A, 1972: Discount rates for public investment under uncer-
tainty, International 
Economic Review 13, 287-302. 
Savage, H.A., 1951: The theory of statistical decisions, 
American 
Statistical Association 
Journal 46, 55-67. 
Savage, H.A., 1954: The foundations 
of statistics, Wiley. New York. 
Schelling, T.C., 1994: Intergenerational discounting. In 
Integrative 
assessment 
of mitigation, 
impacts, 
and adaptation 
to 
climate 
change, N. Nakicenovic, W D . Nordhaus, R. Richels, and F.L. 
Toth, eds. IIASA, Laxenburg (Austria). 
Schmalensee, R., 1993: Symposium on global climate change, Jour-
nal of Economic Perspectives 
7(4), 3-10. 
Schmalensee, R., 1993: Symposium on global climate change. The 
Economic Journal 38, 543-565. 
Schmeidler, D. and P. Wakker, 1987: Expected utility and mathemat-
ical expectation, 77?<? new Palgrave, 
pp. 70-78. Norton. New 
York and London. 
Schubert, R., 1994: Climate change and discount rates. In Steps to-
wards a decision making framework 
to address climate 
change. 
Report of the IPCC Working Group III Writing Team II Montreux 
Meeting, March 
3-6, Fillet and Gassmann, eds., pp. 33-40, 
Wurenlingen & Villigen (Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-10. Paul 
Scherrer Institute. 
Shackle, G.L.S., 1967: Decision, 
determinisme 
et temps, 
Centre 
d'Econometrie 
de 
la 
Faculte 
de 
Droit 
et 
des 
Sciences 
Economiques de Paris, Dunod, Paris. 
Shafer, G., 1976: A mathematical 
theory of evidence. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Shlyakhter, A., L.J. Valverde, Jr., and R. Wilson, 1995: Integrated 
risk analysis of global climate change, Chemosphere, 
30, no. 8, 
1585-1618. 
Simon, H.A., 1957: Models of man. Wiley, New York. 
Simon, H.A., 1987: Bounded rationality, The new Palgrave, 
pp. 
15-18, Norton, New York and London. 
77 
Singer, F., R. Revelle. and C. Starr, 1991: What to do about green 
house warming, Cosmos, pp. 28-33. 
Sjostedt, G. (ed.), 1993: International 
environmental 
negotiation. 
Sage Publications. Newbury Park, CA. 
Smith, K., 1991: Allocating responsibility for global warming: The 
natural debt index, Amino 20(2), 95-96. 
Solow, R.M., 1986: On the intergenerational allocation of natural re 
sources, Scandinavian 
Journal of Economics, 
88, 141-149. 
Solow, R.M., 1992: An almost practical 
step toward 
sustainahility. 
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Sugden, R., and A. Williams, 1990: The principles 
of practical 
cost 
benefit analysis, Oxford University Press (1st publication, 1978). 
Oxford. 
Svenson, O., 1991: The time dimension in perception and communi-
cation of risk. In Communicating 
risk to the public, RE. Kaspei 
son and P.J. Stallen. eds.. Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Tol, R.S.J, 1994: The damage costs of climate change: Towards more 
comprehensive calculations. Environmental 
and Resource 
Eco-
nomics, 5, 353-374. 
Tooley, M.J., 1994: Sea-level changes and impacts. In 
Environ 
mental hazard: Liability or opportunity'.' Report of the SANDOZ/ 
INSEAD Colloquium held 29 June 
1993. pp. 
10-16. IN 
SEAD Centre for the Management of Environmental Resources. 
Paris. 
Ulph A., and D. Ulph, 1994: Global warming: Why irreversibility 
may not require lower current emissions of greenhouse gases. 
Discussion paper, University of Southampton, UK. 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1992: Pub 
Iished by IUCC/UNEP (Information Unit on Climate Change). 
Geneva. 
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 1990: Reduc-
ing risk. Relative Risk Reduction Strategies Committee of the US 
EPA Science Advisory Board. Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC. 
Vercelli, A., 1991: Methodological 
foundations 
of 
macroeconomics: 
Keynes and Lucas, Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
Von Neuman, J., and O. Morgenstern, 1947: Theory of games 
ami 
economic behavior, Princeton University Press. Princeton. NJ. 
Wald, A.. 1950: Statistical decision functions. Wiley, New York. 
Walley, P., 1991: Statistical 
reasoning with imprecise 
probabilities. 
Chapman and Hall. London. 
Weilenmann, U., 1994: Insurable risk associated to climate change 
In Steps towards a decision making framework 
to address 
climate 
change. Report of the IPCC Working Group III Writing Team II 
Montreux 
Meeting, 
March 3-6. Pi 1 let and Gassmann. eds., pp. 
11-17, Wurenlingen & Villigen (Switzerland): PSI-Bericht 94-
10, Paul Scherrer Institute. 
Wilford, M., 1993: Insurance against sea level rise. In The global 
greenhouse 
regime: 
Who pays?, P. Hayes and K. Smith, eds.. 
UNU Press/Earthscan, London. 
World Bank, 1994: World Development 
Report 
1994, The World 
Bank, Washington, DC. 
Yaari, M., 1987: The dual theory of choice under risk, 
Econometrica 
55,95-116. 
Yokohama, 1994: Yokohama World Conference on Natural 
Disaster 
Reduction, 
Information document, International Directorate for 
Natural Disaster Reduction, United Nations, Geneva. 
3 
Equity and Social Considerations 
T. BANURI, K. GORAN-MALER, M. GRUBB, H.K. JACOBSON, F. YAMIN 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
83 
3.1 Introduction 
85 
3.1.1 The role of equity 
85 
3.1.2 Concepts of equity 
85 
3.1.2.1 Procedural equity 
85 
3.1.2.2 Consequentialist equity 
86 
3.1.3 Utility, equity, and economic 
efficiency 
86 
3.2 Equity in International Law and in the 
Framework Convention 
87 
3.2.1 International legal framework 
88 
3.2.2 The ICJ and the concept of equity 
88 
3.2.3 Equity in the context of the 
continental shelf 
88 
3.2.4 The Law of the Sea 
89 
3.2.5 The ozone regime 
89 
3.2.6 The Framework Convention on 
Climate Change 
90 
3.3 Principal Differences Among Regions and 
Countries 
91 
3.3.1 Introduction 
91 
3.3.2 Wealth and consumption 
91 
3.3.3 Patterns of greenhouse gas emissions 
92 
3.3.3.1 Historical and cumulative emissions 
94 
3.3.3.2 Current emissions 
94 
3.3.3.3 Future emissions 
95 
3.3.4 Differential impacts, extreme 
vulnerability, and the valuation of 
impacts 
97 
3.3.4.1 General features 
97 
3.3.4.2 Extreme vulnerabilities 
97 
3.3.4.3 Global valuation of impacts 
98 
3.3.5 Social and institutional dimensions 
99 
3.3.6 Differing resource endowments 
99 
3.3.7 Conclusions 
99 
3.4 Distributing the Costs of Coping: Impacts, 
Risks, and International Insurance 
100 
3.4.1 Nature of impacts and uncertainties 
100 
3.4.2 Paying for the costs of coping 
100 
3.4.3 Sharing risks 
101 
3.4.4 Policy implications 
102 
3.5 Distributing Future Emissions and 
Abatement Costs 
103 
3.5.1 Introduction 
103 
3.5.2 Principles for shorter-term action 
103 
3.5.3 Longer-term allocation: Underlying 
principles 
104 
3.5.3.1 Egalitarianism 
104 
3.5.3.2 Basic needs and Rawlsian criteria 
104 
3.5.3.3 Proportionality and polluter-pays 
principle 
105 
3.5.3.4 Historical responsibilities 
105 
3.5.3.5 Comparable burdens and ability to pay 
105 
3.5.3.6 Willingness to pay 
105 
3.5.3.7 Applications of distribution theory in 
welfare economics 
105 
3.5.3.8 Conclusions 
105 
3.5.4 Specific emission allocation proposals 
106 
3.5.4.1 Ad hoc proposals 
106 
3.5.4.2 Equal per capita entitlements 
106 
3.5.4.3 Status quo 
107 
3.5.4.4 Mixed systems and conclusions 
107 
3.5.5 Proposals for distributing abatement 
costs including international transfers 
107 
3.5.5.1 Transfers on the basis of the Climate 
Convention 
108 
3.5.5.2 Transfers determined by emission 
allocation and tradable entitlements 
108 
3.5.5.3 Direct payment accountability 
approaches 
108 
3.5.5.4 Polluter-pays principle 
108 
3.5.5.5 Historical responsibility and natural 
debt 
109 
3.5.5.6 Incorporating ability to pay 
109 
3.5.5.7 Utilitarian formulation 
110 
3.5.5.8 Application of funds and transfers 
110 
3.5.6 International trade and the incidence 
of abatement costs 
110 
3.5.7 Joint implementation by industrialized 
and developing countries 
111 
3.5.7.1 Allocation issues 
111 
3.5.7.2 Procedural issues 
111 
3.6 Equity Within Countries 
112 
3.6.1 Introduction 
112 
3.6.2 Policy-oriented literature 
113 
&2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
3.6.3 Institution-oriented literature 
114 
3.6.4 The question of ethics 
116 
3.7 Procedural Fairness in International 
Climate Change Processes 
116 
3.7.1 Introduction 
116 
3.7.1.1 Participation 
117 
3.7.1.2 Information 
118 
3.7.2 
Links between internal and 
international processes 
118 
3.8 Conclusions 
118 
Endnotes 
119 
References 
120 
SUMMARY 
Equity and social considerations are central to discussions of 
steps to be taken to implement the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, both intrinsically and because widespread 
participation is essential if the objectives of the Convention 
are to be gained. Countries are unlikely to participate fully un-
less they perceive the arrangements to be equitable. This ap-
plies particularly to equity among regions and countries, but 
equity within countries, and associated social considerations, 
are also important influences on what is possible and desir-
able. Mitigating and adapting to climate change will require 
actions on the part of individuals. Governments will find it 
easier to comply with international obligations if their citizens 
feel that the obligations and benefits of compliance are dis-
tributed equitably. And richer countries are unlikely to burden 
their poorer citizens to benefit relatively rich citizens in poor 
countries. 
Issues relating to equity among regions and countries stem 
from the substantial differences that exist among countries. 
Countries differ not only in terms of size, resources, popula-
tion, and wealth, but also in terms of emissions of greenhouse 
gases, vulnerability to climate change, and institutional capa-
bilities to respond effectively to climate change. In general, 
the implications of climate change for developing countries 
differ from those for developed countries because the former 
are generally poorer, emit much less per capita, have con-
tributed less to past emissions, and have shorter policy time 
horizons. Moreover, their institutions are often weaker, they 
face other urgent priorities, and they are generally more vul-
nerable to climate change. But there are substantial variations 
within both the developed and the developing countries, and a 
rigid delineation of equity issues along developed and devel-
oping country lines is inappropriate and may be highly dam-
aging in the long run. 
The framework convention 
The concept of equity is prominent in the Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change because of the need to gain 
widespread adherence. The Convention itself provides con-
siderable guidance for applying the concept to take account of 
the many differences among countries, particularly those be-
tween developed and developing countries. Such equity con-
siderations are reflected in the requirement for developed 
country parties to take the lead and to assist developing coun-
try parties in coping with both the costs of abatement and the 
costs of adaptation to the adverse effects of climate change 
and, correspondingly, in the recognition that developing coun-
tries' emissions are relatively low and will need to grow to 
meet their legitimate social and developmental needs. Issues 
of procedural equity are reflected in the need for "equitable 
and balanced representation" and transparent governance in 
the financial and other mechanisms. However, the application 
of equity to specific circumstances will require further elabo-
ration of the Convention's principles and obligations, many of 
which were designed to be ambiguous and remain so. 
The role of analysis 
Scientific analyses cannot prescribe how equity and social 
considerations should be applied, but analysis can clarify the 
implications of alternative choices and their ethical basis. 
There are a variety of meanings of equity and different philo-
sophical and policy approaches to it. On some issues many 
different equity principles point to similar implications and 
offer clear guidance, whereas on others they may conflict. In 
either case, there is a need for judgment, drawing on concepts 
of equity. 
Equity concerns both "process" issues and "outcomes" in 
terms of the distribution of costs and benefits internationally. 
Indices such as Gross World Product aggregate wealth inde-
pendently of distribution. However, assessing aggregate wel-
fare (utility) requires valuing and aggregating differential 
impacts among countries. This is an issue of ethics and poli-
tics, not economics. In global assessments, therefore, separa-
tion of international economic analysis from explicit equity 
considerations is only possible if effective institutions exist 
for appropriate (compensating) international redistribution. 
Impacts and the costs of coping 
In general, climate change seems likely to impose greater 
risks and damage on poorer regions. Thus, it may exacerbate 
inequalities in the absence of compensating measures. This 
would violate a number of ethical principles, including poten-
tially those drawing on basic needs and Rawlsian approaches, 
particularly with respect to transboundary impacts of some 
actors upon others. There are few, if any, ethical systems in 
which it is acceptable for one individual knowingly to inflict 
potentially serious harm on another and not accept any re-
sponsibility for helping or compensating the victim. Given 
this, the monetary evaluation of global impacts has an ethical 
dimension in which the willingness of countries to accept 
compensation for imposed climate-related damages is a rele-
84 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
vant consideration. This consideration has not been reflected 
in damage estimates so far. 
An effective international insurance mechanism could be 
one way of reducing both international and intergenerational 
inequities arising from climate change. There is some eco-
nomic as well as ethically motivated literature on this, though 
many practical, institutional, and political issues remain to be 
resolved. 
Distribution of emissions and abatement costs 
The need for emission reductions raises equity issues distinct 
from those of distributing the costs of coping. The Convention 
lays out bases of common but differentiated responsibilities, 
and the initial aggregate implications of this with respect to 
developed and developing countries. Much of the broader de-
bate and literature also focusses on issues of equity between 
developed and developing countries, leaving serious lacunae 
concerning the application of equity within these groups, 
which, are themselves very diverse. This is of immediate con-
cern for developed countries, given their obligations under the 
Convention and the Berlin Mandate to take the lead. 
The literature on possible emission obligations examines 
many different approaches. Many sources highlight the past 
"overuse" of the atmosphere by industrialized nations, but 
others dispute this and/or its relevance to current decisions. 
For future entitlements, the dominant contrast is that between 
approaches that focus on burdens related to changes from cur-
rent emission levels and various interpretations of per capita 
emission entitlements. Debates over potential payments have 
mostly concerned different interpretations of the polluter pays 
principle and indices of ability to pay. In reality, feasible and 
fair criteria are likely to involve a negotiated and evolving 
mix of these approaches. 
Institutional and procedural fairness 
Institutional weaknesses inhibit the ability of developing 
countries to participate effectively in international negotia-
tions. Assistance to help these countries develop a greater ca-
pacity to assimilate and analyze information and proposals, 
and to participate effectively in international discussions, 
would increase the prospects for achieving effective, lasting. 
and equitable agreements on how best to address the threat of 
climate change. 
Social considerations 
Social considerations, and the experience of implementing 
structural adjustment policies, point to the need to consider 
and target specific groups for special consideration. Countries 
(such as island and other low-lying states or dryland regions) 
and special groups within society that are especially vulner-
able to climate change (such as the poor, and sometimes 
women or children, or specific occupations or regions) - in 
other words, those on whom the costs of abatement and cop-
ing would be especially burdensome - merit special attention. 
Overall, concern about equity and social impacts points to 
the need to strengthen institutional capacities, particularly in 
developing countries, to make and implement collective deci-
sions in a legitimate and equitable manner. These institutional 
capacities surely include developing resources to analyze eq-
uity and social issues more thoroughly, and to integrate these 
perspectives better with the insights of other disciplines. 
Equity and Social Considerations 
85 
3.1 Introduction 
In common language equity means "the quality of being fair 
or impartial," or "something that is fair and just" (Flexner, 
1987). It has been a central preoccupation of social and politi-
cal thought through the ages, and it is a consideration of some 
considerable importance in the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (FCCC). 
Although science cannot prescribe or decide what actions 
would be equitable under the Climate Convention, science, 
religion, and philosophy can illuminate the meaning of equity 
and clarify the choices that the parties to the Convention face. 
This is the task of this chapter. It considers concepts of equity 
and issues that must be addressed in efforts to apply these 
concepts. It then views these broad concepts within the tra-
dition of international law and the specific context of the 
Framework Convention, and considers the several ways in 
which this text assigns specific meaning to equity. It next ana-
lyzes in detail several specific aspects of equity: international 
equity in coping with the impacts of climate change and asso-
ciated risks, international equity in efforts to limit climate 
change, equity and social considerations within countries, and 
equity in international processes. Equity among generations 
(or intergenerational equity) is the subject of the next chapter. 
3.1.1 The role of equity 
This analysis focusses on equity issues relating to climate 
change responses that might be considered by the interna-
tional community. Equity issues exist at both the national and 
international levels, but there is an important difference be-
tween these contexts. Within countries institutions exist to ad-
dress a wide range of issues of common interest to members 
of that society. The institutions have developed in part to pro-
vide a way of taking decisions about what constitutes accept-
able behaviour and about the distribution of wealth and re-
sources, which in most countries are redistributed through 
regulation of market structures, backed by legal codes, and by 
taxation with the intent of promoting social good. Equity - in 
the form of views about what constitutes justice - has an im-
portant influence on these institutions and their decisions and 
is a measure of their legitimacy. The actual strength and per-
ceived legitimacy of these institutions vary widely, but they 
nevertheless provide an existing framework within which 
policies to address climate change at the national level can be 
developed and implemented. 
By contrast, institutions at the international level are rela-
tively weak. In responding to climate change, the interna-
tional community faces unavoidable decisions about the 
distribution of effort and burdens and what constitutes accept-
able behaviour in circumstances where the internal behaviour 
of one state may directly affect all others. Although, on a 
modest scale, there are precedents, climate change is unique 
in the scale and scope of its potential implications and the co-
ordinated international responses it requires. Yet international 
institutions dedicated to coordinating such responses are rela-
tively new or in the process of being established as a result of 
the FCCC. Moreover, because the examination of interna-
tional equity issues is still in its infancy, these may need 
greater explicit analysis and consideration by international in-
stitutions. To the extent that they are implemented at the na-
tional level, international response strategies will also have 
implications concerning equity within countries that should 
be considered. Acceptance of burdens decided at the interna-
tional level will depend in substantial measure on their per-
ceived legitimacy at the national level. 
No international agreement has ever been founded purely 
on a logical consideration of equity issues. A host of other fac-
tors, ranging from basic economic and political power struc-
tures to accidents of timing and personalities, influences the 
outcome. But the converse - the cynical view that equity con-
siderations play no role at all in the real world of international 
politics - is not true either. Many authors have argued that the 
long-term, cross-cutting strategic and global nature of the 
climate problem makes equity issues central to any solution. 
Indeed, a broad view of self-interest can also often point 
towards explicit consideration of equitable outcomes because 
of the longer-term risks that grossly inequitable behaviour 
may pose to stability and cooperation in the international sys-
tem. 
3.1.2 Concepts of equity 
Since Confucius, Plato, Aristotle, and the Vedantic and Bibli-
cal texts, theorists who have dealt with economic, political, 
and social issues have developed and explored concepts of eq-
uity. Several broad points emerge from this extensive litera-
ture. The first is that equity applies to two separate categories 
of issues. It applies to both procedural issues - how decisions 
are made - and consequentialist issues - the outcomes of de-
cisions. 
3.1.2.1 Procedural equity 
Procedural equity has two components. The first relates to 
participation, the idea that those who arc affected by decisions 
should have some say in the making of those decisions through 
either direct participation or representation. 
The second relates to process, most notably the principle of 
equal treatment before the law: Similar cases must be dealt 
with in a similar manner, and exceptions must be made on a 
principled basis. In this sense, the principle of equity not only 
requires that law should govern decisions but also provides 
guidance in how laws should be applied. However, all the 
circumstances in which a law would be applied cannot be 
foreseen at the time of its formulation. Thus, starting with 
Aristotle, theorists have argued that laws be applied in an 
equitable manner to achieve what the legislators would have 
intended in the specific circumstances of a particular case 
(Shapiro, 1990). The concept of equity also embodies a higher 
notion of justice that goes beyond the rules, no matter how 
fairly they were devised. The Anglo-American common law-
tradition, for example, often introduces equity into judicial 
decisions to correct a potential injustice by too rigid an appli-
cation of the law. 
The principle of equal treatment before the law is closely 
allied to notions of basic, minimum rights for individuals. For 
#6 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
instance, John Rawls (1971) has argued that all individuals 
have equal rights to as extensive a system of political liberties 
as is possible without diminishing the liberties of others. A 
similar but stronger view has been put forward by Robert 
Nozick (1974), who has argued that all individuals have a 
sphere of moral rights in which no one, including the state, is 
allowed to interfere, irrespective of the consequences that 
might arise. 
It is important to recognize that these particular theories 
were originally developed for dealing with questions of jus-
tice within a state. Rawls, for instance, draws a sharp distinc-
tion between the principles of justice that prevail among 
persons within a society and "justice between states" to which 
his theory was not intended to apply (Stone, 1993). Conse-
quently, the application of these theories to the subject of 
international justice - justice between states - presents 
problems (Van Dyke. 1975; Stone, 1993). Not least is the fact 
that as holders of the rights of sovereignty, it is nation-states, 
rather than individual human beings, that negotiate the nature 
of international commitments. This is so despite the fact that 
there is a huge amount of cross-border interaction between in-
dividuals, corporations, and international nongovernmental 
groups, and such nonstate actors can play important roles. 
Nevertheless, by extrapolation and analogy, these theories 
offer insights about the application of procedural equity 
between states. For example, the notion that procedural 
equity demands that basic rights (of individuals or states), 
however they are defined, must be respected in decision mak-
ing is commonly accepted in domestic and international law. 
Article 2, paragraph 7, of the UN Charter, for instance, stales 
that nothing contained in the Charter shall authorize the 
United Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially 
within the domestic jurisdiction of any state, but that the prin-
ciple should not prejudice the application of enforcement 
measures. Other elements of procedural equity between states 
are discussed in more detail in Section 3.2. on international 
law. 
3.1.2.2 Conseqnentialist equity 
Consequentialist equity has to do with the outcome of deci-
sions, particularly the distribution of burdens and the alloca-
tion of benefits. There are several broad traditions defining 
the meaning of equity in this sense (Young, 1994). They may 
be summarized in the following categories: parity, proportion-
ality, priority, classical utilitarianism, and Rawlsian distribu-
tive justice. 
Parity is a formula for equal distribution of burdens or ben-
efits. Parity demands that all claimants receive equal shares; it 
is closely associated with egalitarianism. 
Proportionality is a principle that dates back at least to 
Aristotle; it asserts that burdens or benefits should be distrib-
uted in proportion to the contributions of claimants. 
Priority argues that those with the greatest need should be 
advantaged. This forms the basis of the "basic needs" ap-
proach, which puts the emphasis on the absolute right of indi-
viduals to goods and services necessary to sustain their lives 
at some minimum standard of well-being. This would include 
potable water, minimum nutrition, and health care and general 
environmental resources. 
Classical utilitarianism proposes that burdens and benefits 
should be distributed to achieve the greatest good for the 
greatest number. This Benthamite formula can be expressed 
mathematically in terms of maximizing total utility, which re-
quires the measurement and comparison of utilities, an issue 
which will be considered below. 
Rawlsian distributive justice (Rawls, 1971) carried the 
concept of utilitarianism a step further, arguing for an equal 
distribution unless an unequal distribution operates to the 
benefit of the least advantaged. 
No society has ever had complete consensus on any one of 
these approaches alone as an adequate criterion for defining 
consequentialist equity. Some (such as basic needs) are in-
complete, prohibiting certain outcomes but not helping 
choices between other options. Single principles may also not 
be appropriate or practical as the only standard because, 
among other reasons, cases and individuals are rarely identi-
cal and burdens and benefits may not be divisible; or, if they 
are, they may not be divisible into shares that are susceptible 
to precise, cardinal measurement, thus making it impossible 
to apply the principles directly. 
In practice, when societies try to achieve equity, they do so 
in nuanced and subtle ways, applying several criteria and 
seeking to achieve a balance among them. The balance is also 
affected by self-interest: In the real world, people tend to seek 
and to emphasize principles that may advantage them. Never-
theless, the principles are useful guides to what might consti-
tute equitable decisions. 
These consequentialist principles were developed in 
the context of specific societies, not internationally. The liter-
ature on theories of international consequentialist equity is 
more recent and is largely derived by extension of the above 
principles (Beitz, 1979; for a review in the context of cli-
mate change, see Paterson, 1994/1996). Illustrating the likely 
consequences of their application may clarify the choices 
that have to be made in seeking equitable solutions in the 
implementation of the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. 
Both procedural and consequentialist equity issues are 
complicated by a wide variety of cultural and societal as-
sumptions about ethics, the environment, and development. 
The existence of these different and sometimes conflicting 
principles, and the need for compromise between them, is 
considered by Rayner (1993, 1994), who argues that a number 
of fundamentally different "world views" are adopted towards 
climate change. These views not only span different ideas of 
equity but also differ concerning basic assumptions about the 
urgency of abatement action and appropriate management 
strategies, and can be correlated with different institutional 
types identified by cultural theory.1 The process of developing 
a response is seen as a process of compromise between these 
different world views, each of which tries to influence polic\ 
to correspond more closely to its own perceptions - percep-
tions which again tend to be influenced by interests. 
3.1.3 Utility, equity, and economic efficiency 
Welfare economics is based on utilitarianism. It requires some 
measure of individual welfare (utility), as a function of van-
Equity and Social 
Considerations 
<S7 
ous factors such as the amount of goods and services that the 
individual can access, different aspects of the individual's 
physical and spiritual environment, and rights and liberties. 
Such a "utility function" aggregates a rather long list of fac-
tors affecting individual well-being into one single measure of 
welfare. However, constructing an aggregate measure of these 
utilities for many different individuals is a much more diffi-
cult task. The definition and aggregation of utilities present a 
complex ethical issue in connection with evaluating the global 
welfare loss associated with climate change impacts and mea-
sures to limit them. 
There is no inherent conflict between economics and most 
conceptions of equity. But a conflict can arise because of 
differing ideas or assumptions, sometimes hidden, about 
how individual utilities should be defined, compared, and 
aggregated. It is important to understand that economics itself 
cannot resolve these differences. Explicit discussions of eq-
uity are essential because they reflect differing ideas about 
how - and indeed whether - individual utilities should be 
measured and aggregated. 
Arrow (1951) addressed the fundamental question of 
whether individual preferences can be aggregated in a reason-
able way into overall societal preferences. He concluded that, 
in general, it is impossible to add individual preferences to-
gether to produce a social welfare function if we require the 
resulting aggregation to satisfy some very natural and reason-
able conditions, such as preventing individuals from holding 
dictatorial powers. Thus, it is generally not possible to deduce 
"objectively" a socially preferred distribution of well-being 
from individual preferences. However, if it is known that 
these preferences are restricted to certain types, then it may 
still be possible to combine them in a consistent and reason-
able way to form a social ordering (see Sen. 1984). 
With respect to certain environmental considerations, there 
does indeed seem to be a rough consensus as to what consti-
tutes an equitable distribution of welfare over time. This is 
suggested by the apparent agreement on the concept of sus-
tainable development, as introduced by the World Conserva-
tion Strategy (IUCN 1980) and popularized in the report of 
the World Commission on Environment and Development -
the Brundtland Commission - in 1987. 
The central idea behind sustainable development is that the 
present generation should not make changes that reduce the 
possibilities for future generations to achieve comparable 
well-being. The concept has received widespread support in-
ternationally, as evidenced by its inclusion in the Rio Declara-
tion and Agenda 21. It is specifically mentioned in paragraph 
5 of Article 3 of the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. Nevertheless, despite its widespread acceptance, 
there is no universal agreement as to the precise meaning of 
the concept, and. as a result, its application is not straightfor-
ward. 
The comparison and aggregation of utilities across differ-
ent countries and across different individuals is also con-
tentious. The Gross National Product (GNP) indicator avoids 
this by focussing simply on the total measured consumption in 
a country: in principle, it lays no claim to represent welfare di-
rectly, nor does it claim that aggregating GNP across different 
countries is a valid measure of global welfare. In practice. 
however, maximizing GNP does often become a primary 
focus of policy and economic analysis. This implicitly em-
bodies an assumption either that a given amount of additional 
wealth is equally valuable to everyone or that the additional 
welfare can and will he redistributed to fulfill some more ex-
plicit measure of aggregate social welfare. The latter goal is 
achieved by a balance between maximizing GNP and the es-
tablishment of institutions and processes charged with redis-
tribution, social protection, and provision of various social 
goods. 
Because such processes and institutions are weak or non-
existent internationally, the debate about whether and how to 
compare national utilities internationally is of central impor-
tance. Views range from asserting that countries should act as 
if they value all countries equally (i.e., assume equivalent util-
ity functions and aggregate all with the same weight) to 
asserting that utilities can and should not be estimated and 
aggregated at all across countries, that countries hear no 
responsibility for the welfare of others. International negotia-
tions are to an extent about trying to reach a compromise be-
tween these two extremes, especially concerning policy on 
issues like climate change, where the activities of one country 
may directly affect another. 
It is in this issue of whether and how to aggregate separate 
utilities that an apparent conflict between equity and eco-
nomic efficiency can arise. Whether it does or not depends on 
how efficiency is defined. "Pareto efficiency," for example, 
describes situations in which no one can be made better off 
without making anyone else worse off. Pareto efficiency is 
thus generally neutral with respect to equity because it allows 
a wide variety of possible distributions. More often, however, 
the term "economic efficiency" describes the maximization of 
"something" with the resources available. Maximizing GNP-
or perhaps "World Product" (WP) - could involve highly in-
equitable outcomes, which might well imply lower global 
welfare, depending on how welfare is defined in relation to 
the distribution of wealth. With appropriate international 
transfers, however, it could also allow a much fairer and ethi-
cally benign world with a real gain in global welfare. 
Equity is thus essential to climate change discussions, be-
cause there is no consensus about whether and how to mea-
sure and aggregate welfare within and, still less, between 
countries. On the contrary, there are fiercely competing views 
grounded in differing interests and beliefs. The optimal policy 
is thus inherently a matter for debate, negotiation, and com-
promise between conflicting interests and ethical philoso-
phies. 
3.2 Equity in International Law and in the 
Framework Convention 
This section examines how the basic rights and obligations of 
states established under international law through treaties, 
custom, general legal principles, and judgments and awards of 
courts and international tribunals provide a framework for 
consideration of issues concerning procedural and distributive 
equity (Cheng. 1990: Franck and Sughrue. 1993: Sands. 1995: 
Schachter. 1977: Tarlock. 1992: Weiss. 1993). In addition, the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change contains princi-
KK 
Climate Chunge 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluinut 
pics and specific provisions concerning equity. These provi-
sions have important implications for the implementation of 
the Convention, including the elaboration of further commit-
ments and mechanisms for burden sharing on an equitable 
basis. 
3.2.1 International legal framework 
One of the basic tenets of international law is the sovereign 
equality of all stales. Each state has jurisdiction over its terri-
tory and has the right freely to choose and develop its politi-
cal, social, economic, and cultural systems, including the right 
to develop its own policies and laws regulating the exploita-
tion of its natural resources. As a corollary to these principles, 
each state has a duty to refrain from threatening the territorial 
integrity of another and the obligation not to intervene in mat-
ters within the domestic jurisdiction of any other state. 
According to Principle 2 of the Rio Declaration on Envi-
ronment and Development: 
States have, in accordance with the Charter of the United 
Nations and the principles of international law, the sover-
eign right to exploit their own resources pursuant to their 
environmental and developmental policies, and the respon-
sibility to ensure that activities within their own jurisdic-
tion or control do not cause damage to the environment of 
other States or of areas beyond the limits of national juris-
diction. (United Nations, 1993) 
Each state may devise its own climate change policies and 
programmes. Accordingly, the extent to which national mea-
sures are equitable in allocating costs and benefits among var-
ious regions, economic sectors, social groups, or individuals 
within its territory is primarily a domestic matter. The alloca-
tion of responsibilities between states for mitigation and 
adaptation and mechanisms to implement these is. however, 
an international matter and subject to the general rules and 
principles of international law. For states that are parties to 
the Framework Convention on Climate Change, the allocation 
of these responsibilities is also subject to the specific equity 
provisions of the Convention. It is important, therefore, to un-
derstand the meaning of equity in international law, in partic-
ular, the factors that have been included in the concept of 
equity and their practical procedural and distributive conse-
quences. 
3.2.2 The ICJ and the concept of equity 
The International Court of Justice (ICJ) explained the legal 
nature of equity in its judgment on the 1982 Continental Shelf 
Case involving Tunisia and Libya. It stated: 
Equity as a legal concept is a direct emanation of the idea 
of justice. The Court whose task is by definition to admin-
ister justice is bound to apply it. (ICJ. 1982) 
The Court explained that "the legal concept of equity is a gen-
eral principal [sic] directly applicable as law." This means that 
equity can be a source of law as well as a consideration for the 
sensible application of the law (Cheng. 1987). In its 1982 
judgment, the Court recognized that equity was relevant when 
it was called on to choose among several possible interpreta-
tions of the law. The Court interpreted this as meaning, not thai 
it could fashion new law, but that when it could choose among 
several interpretations of the law it was bound to choose the 
interpretation "which appears, in the light of the circum-
stances of the case, to be the closest to requirements of jus-
tice" (ICJ. 1982, p. 60, para. 71). The Court also recognized 
that in international law the application of equity must take 
into account all the legal and factual circumstances relevant to 
the case in hand. 
Because individual cases may involve unique procedural 
and distributive elements, the application of equity cannot be 
generalized as a set of principles, and factors relevant to the 
application of equity to one context cannot necessarily be 
transposed and applied in another. The following examination 
of equity in different international environmental contexts is 
intended to provide background information about the role 
of equity in benefit- and burden-sharing arrangements be-
tween states concerning access to and use of natural re-
sources. The legal insights and practical experience gained by 
states and the ICJ in dealing with equity in these contexts may 
be relevant for climate change. It is important to note thai 
these insights and experiences do not bind the parties to 
the FCCC, who may negotiate further agreements about the 
appropriate role to be given equity in the context of the Con-
vention. 
3.2.3 Equity in the context of the continental shelf 
The ICJ has examined the role of equity in a series of cases 
between states concerning use of the continental shelf and 
rights of access to it. In a dispute between Malta and Libya 
(ICJ, 1985), the Court said that the concept of equity included 
the principle of good faith negotiations to resolve disputes be-
tween parties. This interpretation highlights the important 
procedural components of the concept, which, the Court 
stated, also included "the principle of respect due to all such 
relevant circumstances [and] the principle that although all 
States are equal before the law and are entitled to equal treat-
ment, equity does not necessarily imply equality." 
Concerning distributive equity, it went on to declare that 
the application of equitable principles cannot be used for "re-
fashioning geography or compensating for the inequalities of 
nature." The Court pointed out that, so far as the law concern-
ing continental shelf delimitation is concerned, "equity does 
not necessarily imply equality . . . nor does it seek to make 
equal what nature has made unequal." The Court also went on 
to state that equity includes "the principle that there can he no 
question of distributive justice." Accordingly, in that case the 
Court rejected Malta's claim to a greater share of continental 
shelf based on its argument that it was resource-poor and had 
greater socioeconomic and developmental needs than oil-rieli 
Libya. 
In a recent ICJ case between Norway and Denmark (KM. 
1993). the Court again considered the relevance of socioeco-
nomic factors, including population, and rejected these a\ 
irrelevant in determining a state's entitlement to conlinen-
lit/uity and Social Considerations 
S9 
tal shelf resources. In a case between the U.S. and Canada 
(ICJ, 1984), however, the Court indicated that where the 
overall result might entail "disastrous repercussions on the 
subsistence and economic development of the populations 
concerned," it may be inequitable not to take such factors into 
account. 
It is not possible to derive general conclusions about equity 
from the foregoing, as the Court has stressed that each case 
must be examined in the light of its legal and factual circum-
stances. What this body of law does make clear, however, is 
that the Court has not yet had to deal with interpreting obliga-
tions that are related to or conditional on the consideration of 
complex factors such as socioeconomic development or the 
needs of present and future populations. Moreover, a closer 
reading of these cases illustrates the Court's reluctance to use 
equity as a basis to achieve distributive justice on a wider 
scale. This suggests that, in the absence of clear legal rules re-
quiring the consideration of factors such as socioeconomic 
development and population, the ICJ may not necessarily re-
gard them as relevant or of paramount importance in other 
contexts where disputes concerning access to and use of nat-
ural resources raise wide-ranging distributive justice con-
cerns. 
This approach may have significant legal and practical 
consequences in the climate change context, where imple-
mentation of a range of parties' obligations under the Conven-
tion is conditional on taking into account their socioeconomic 
development, national needs, and a wide-ranging list of geo-
graphical factors. It is also particularly important in the con-
text of negotiating future greenhouse gas emission reductions 
or devising joint implementation systems, as both raise funda-
mental distributive questions about the basis on which coun-
tries are entitled to continue their emissions. 
3.2.4 The Law of the Sea 
The role of equity in the legal regime established for the deep 
seabed in Part XI of the 1982 United Nations Conference on 
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) differs markedly from the 
principles and rules concerning the continental shelf. UNC-
LOS aims at distributing the benefits of exploitation as widely 
as possible because it incorporates a notion of equity that in-
cludes a substantial element of distributive justice. The equi-
table principle that inspires this regime is that the "Area" (the 
deep seabed) and its resources are the "common heritage of 
mankind" (Birnie and Boyle, 1992). Article 140 provides, for 
example, that activities in the Area "shall be carried out for 
the benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geo-
graphical location of States, whether coastal or land-locked, 
and taking into particular consideration the interests and 
needs of developing States and of people who have not at-
tained full independence." 
Unlike the law on continental shelf delimitation, these pro-
visions expressly call for the consideration of socioeconomic 
factors and economic needs, particularly those of developing 
countries or other states disadvantaged by geography, in ap-
portioning benefits. However, no definition of equity was in-
cluded in UNCLOS. To give effect to these provisions, parties 
to UNCLOS may have to elaborate equitable criteria for shar-
ing any financial and other benefits arising from exploitation 
of the deep seabed. These criteria may have implications for 
climate change issues. 
3.2.5 The ozone regime 
Perhaps the clearest international example for the application 
of equity is the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that 
Deplete the Ozone Layer, which arose as a result of the 1985 
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer. 
Many developing countries had argued that, in view of their 
marginal contribution to the ozone problem, limited financial 
resources, and more pressing developmental concerns, they 
should not be expected to take on the same commitments as 
richer developed countries whose emissions had caused the 
ozone problem (Franck and Sughrue, 1993; Tarlock, 1992). 
Participation in the Montreal Protocol of a large number of 
developing country parties is widely viewed as a measure of 
its success in addressing the equity concerns of these coun-
tries and in balancing environmental needs with economic 
imperatives and flexibility for industrial producers of ozone-
depleting substances. 
The use of innovative legal techniques to implement these 
equity concerns distinguishes the Montreal Protocol from 
other conventions. The following list provides a brief outline 
of the way in which these concerns are given practical expres-
sion in the Protocol's substantive provisions. These "equi-
table" techniques include: 
• differentiated standards for developed and develop-
ing country parties, including the provision of grace pe-
riods for compliance for the latter, allowing increased 
production by developed country parties to enable de-
veloping country parties to meet their "basic domes-
tic needs," and allowing developing country parties to 
determine their emission entitlements on a per capita 
basis 
• financial assistance to developing country parties, over 
and above overseas development assistance, to cover 
"all agreed incremental costs" and enable compliance 
• transfer of technology, especially of best available, en-
vironmentally safer substitutes under fair and most 
favourable conditions, facilitated by the Protocol's fi-
nancial resources if necessary 
• limited operation of a tradable permit or joint imple-
mentation scheme to achieve "industrial rationaliza-
tion" to minimize economic disruption and provide 
flexibility to producers of ozone-depleting substances 
• an acknowledgment that the ability of developing coun-
try parties to comply is conditional on the "effective im-
plementation" of financial cooperation and technology 
transfer obligations by the developed countries 
As a result of its success in attracting the participation of 
developing countries, the Montreal Protocol approach was ex-
tensively discussed as a "model" for the Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change (Benedick. 1991: Hand!. 1990). 
w 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
3.2.6 The Framework Convention on Climate Change 
What is the rote of equity in the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change so far as rights and responsibilities to protect 
the climate system are concerned? Unlike the Montreal Proto-
col, which mentions equity only once in the Preamble, the 
Climate Convention includes references to equity three times 
in its substantive provisions. The first of these, in Article 3.1, 
states: 
The Parties should protect the climate system for the bene-
fit of present and future generations of humankind, on the 
basis of equity and in accordance with their common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities. 
Accordingly, the developed country Parties should take the 
lead in combating climate change and the adverse effects 
thereof. 
This principle, which is intended to provide guidance in 
implementing all the provisions of the Convention, mentions 
equity in the context of burden sharing between all parties, 
and, in particular, between developed and developing country 
parties. It also suggests that equity requires consideration of 
the responsibilities of present generations to future ones as 
part of burden-sharing arrangements. 
Equity also appears in Article 4.2(a) which requires devel-
oped country parties to commit themselves to 
adopt national policies and take corresponding measures 
on the mitigation of climate change. . . . These policies and 
measures will demonstrate that developed countries are 
taking the lead in modifying longer-term trends in anthro-
pogenic emissions consistent with the objective of the 
Convention . . . taking into account the differences in these 
Parties' starting points and approaches, economic struc-
tures, available technologies and other individual circum-
stances, as well as the need for equitable and appropriate 
contributions by each of these Parties to the global effort 
regarding that objective. 
The use of the term "equitable" in reference to the specific 
commitments of developed countries reflects the intention of 
the parties that equity should be applied not only between de-
veloped and developing countries but among developed coun-
tries as well. Finally. Article 11.2 requires the Convention's 
financial mechanism to "have an equitable and balanced rep-
resentation of all Parties within a transparent system of gover-
nance." 
Equity in this context appears to reflect developing country 
concerns. These concerns are of an essentially procedural na-
ture, reflecting the fact that the implementation of procedural 
elements may be essential for guaranteeing distributive out-
comes that are perceived to be equitable. 
What then is the significance of equity in the Convention 
and what practical consequences flow from its mention? It is 
clear that the application of equity in these contexts is in-
tended to respond to quite different concerns. Equity cannot. 
therefore, have one meaning, as its meaning will depend on 
the legal and factual circumstances o\' particular situations. 
Particular disputes will themselves depend on the interpreta-
tion of the nature and extent of the parties' obligations under 
the Convention. 
The terms "equity" and "equitable" in the Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change are closely related to virtually all 
its other substantive provisions. According to rules set down 
in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969), these 
terms must be interpreted in the light of the Convention's 
overall objective, approach, and context. The Framework 
Convention's objective, as stated in Article 2, is to stabilize 
greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that "would prevent 
dangerous interference with the climate system." It then goes 
on to specify that "such a level should be achieved within a 
time frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to 
climate change, to ensure that food production is not threat-
ened and to enable economic development to proceed in a 
sustainable manner." The objective of the Convention thus 
bounds the way in which its provisions should be imple-
mented and equity should be achieved. 
In addition, the Convention itself requires the parties to use 
the principles contained in Article 3 to achieve its objectives 
and guide implementation of its provisions. Equity is men-
tioned in the context of Article 3.1, which concerns the princi-
ple of common but differentiated responsibilities for the 
climate system, which the preamble states is a "common con-
cern of humankind." However, this is only one of five prin-
ciples found in Article 3. The others include the right to 
promote sustainable development, the precautionary princi-
ple, the need to take into account the specific needs and spe-
cial circumstances of developing country and vulnerable 
parties, and the commitment to promote a supportive and 
open international economic system. 
Much of the meaning of these complex principles, includ-
ing concepts such as "common concern of humankind." re-
mains open to interpretation. It is clear, however, that these 
interlocking concepts and principles bound the way in which 
the parties' obligations can be interpreted and in which equity 
can be applied in a particular case. 
The application of equity is also bounded by the structure 
of differentiated commitments set out in Articles 4.1-4.5 ol 
the Convention, which distinguish between developed and de-
veloping country parties and those with "an economy in tran-
sition." All developed country parties, including those with 
economies in transition (listed in Annex 1 of the FCCC).- are 
required to take the lead in mitigating climate change (Article 
4.2 (a)). These parties 
may implement such policies and measures jointly with 
other Parties and may assist other Parties in contributing in 
the achievement of the objective of the Convention and. in 
particular, that of this subparagraph. 
Developed country parties and other developed partie-
listed in Annex II of the FCCC (the European Union and the 
member countries of the Organization of Economic Coopera-
tion and Development) must transfer technology and financial 
resources to developing country parties to enable the latter to 
implement their more limited commitments to combat climate 
change (Articles 4.3 and 4.5). They are also obligated to assist 
developing country parties that are particularly vulnerable to 
Equity and Social Considerations 
91 
the adverse effects of climate change in meeting the costs of 
adaptation (Article 4.4). In view of their limited financial re-
sources, however, parties with economies in transition are not 
obligated to provide such assistance. 
Articles 4.6-4.10 provide a range of factual or other cir-
cumstances that must be given consideration with respect to 
the implementation of the parties' differentiated commit-
ments. These articles are, therefore, of particular relevance in 
considering what factors might or might not count as relevant 
"equitable factors" in a particular case where implementation 
of commitments is in question. 
For example, Article 4.6 provides that a certain amount of 
"flexibility" must be given to parties with economies in tran-
sition in the implementation of their Article 4.2(a) obliga-
tions. Article 4.7 makes the implementation of the developing 
country parties' commitments conditional on the implementa-
tion of the developed country parties' financial and technol-
ogy transfer commitments and recognizes that "economic and 
social development and poverty eradication are the first and 
overriding priorities of the developing country Parties." 
Article 4.8 requires the parties to give full consideration to 
the specific needs and concerns of the developing country 
parties with respect to a broad list of geographical, biological, 
and economic factors, such as whether a country is a small is-
land, is prone to natural disasters or desertification, or is 
highly dependent on income from fossil fuel consumption or 
production. Article 4.9 provides that full account must be 
taken of the needs of the least developed countries for funding 
and technology transfer. Finally, Article 4.10 provides that 
consideration should be given to all parties whose economies 
are highly dependent on income generated from the produc-
tion or consumption of fossil fuels or energy-intensive prod-
ucts for which there are serious difficulties in switching to 
alternatives. 
By differentiating obligations and by including the forego-
ing factors, the Framework Convention on Climate Change 
appears to have dealt comprehensively with the equity con-
cerns. On a practical level, however, the implementation of 
the Convention on an equitable basis will require further 
agreement between parties about the significance of these fac-
tors, the relative weight to be given to each in particular situa-
tions, and the precise meaning of commitments undertaken by 
each of them. This, in turn, will require agreement about the 
meaning of principles, such as the principle of common but 
differentiated responsibilities, the right to sustainable devel-
opment, and concepts such as "common concern of hu-
mankind," which is a new concept in international law. 
Reaching agreement about these matters will have a critical 
bearing on how the benefits and burdens of combatting cli-
mate change are allocated between states. 
The continental shelf cases and the general rules of interna-
tional law concerning procedural equity suggest that states en-
ter into good faith negotiations to resolve differences about 
access to natural resources and their use. Further negotiations 
between parties to the FCCC would certainly assist the imple-
mentation of the Convention on an equitable basis. To the ex-
tent that the parties do not enter into such negotiations or 
where disagreements persist, the general rules and principles 
of international law will remain relevant to resolving disputes 
about equity. 
3.3 Principal Differences Among Regions 
and Countries 
3.3.1 
Introduction 
Equity is not the same thing as equality, but issues of interna-
tional equity are clearly related to a variety of differences be-
tween countries. This section summarizes ways in which 
countries differ and that are relevant to the question of equity 
between countries in responding to climate change. Subse-
quent sections review some of the issues and conclusions 
that writers have drawn concerning implications for climate 
change policy. Five main dimensions of difference are cited in 
the literature: 
• wealth and consumption 
• emissions - past, present, and future 
• impacts - the distribution of and vulnerability to climate 
change 
• social considerations and institutional capabilities 
• endowment with resources that may be affected by re-
sponses to climate change 
This section of the chapter considers each in turn. 
3.3.2 Wealth and consumption 
Wealth is one of the most obvious and pervasive differences 
between countries. Much of the literature on international eq-
uity starts from this issue, and the statistics need little elabora-
tion. In terms of annual average income, measured by gross 
national product (GNP) at market exchange rates, more than 
half of the world's population (58.7%) live in the forty-two 
countries that are classified as "low-income" in the World 
Bank's World Development Report 1994 (World Bank, 1994). 
These countries have an average per capita gross national 
product (GNP) of $390. The 15.2% of the world's population 
that live in the twenty-three countries that the World Develop-
ment Report classifies as "high-income economies" have an 
average per capita GNP of $22,160, almost sixty times that 
of the low-income economies. The remaining sixty-seven 
"middle-income economies" have an average per capita GNP 
of $2,490, just slightly more than one-tenth that of the "high-
income" countries. 
Such comparisons give an exaggerated impression because 
they do not reflect wide variations in purchasing power be-
tween countries that are not reflected in exchange rates. At-
tempts to correct for this, giving income estimates based on 
"purchasing power parity" as a more accurate measure, still 
highlight very wide disparities in average real per capita in-
come. 
These differences have a direct bearing on the issue of cli-
mate change in various ways. Activities of the poor that result 
in emissions of greenhouse gases are those that relate most 
closely to "basic needs," often at little more than subsistence 
92 
Climate Change 1W5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
levels - energy tor cooking or keeping tolerably warm, emis-
sions from agricultural activities, perhaps energy for light to 
enable reading, and occasionally for travel by public trans-
port. Emissions from the rich tend to be dominated by activi-
ties such as driving private cars, home central heating, and 
energy embodied in a wide variety of manufactured goods and 
the use of such goods. The welfare impacts of cutbacks of 
greenhouse gas emissions may thus differ greatly according to 
the level of personal wealth (WCED. 1987: CDCGC. 1992). 
Cutbacks of greenhouse gas emissions could also have signif-
icant impacts on countries where the production of hydrocar-
bon fuels accounts for a substantial portion of their national 
income. 
Obviously there are great variations within countries, but 
in sum the same broad issues apply concerning wealth dispar-
ities between countries. The aggregate relationship between 
wealth, consumption of a variety of natural resources, and 
emissions of various pollutants has been explored methodi-
cally by a number of authors. Using cross-sectional data, 
Parikh et al. (1992) shows that consumption of a wide variety 
of resources - many of which involve emissions of green-
house gases in their extraction, processing, and application -
is closely related to the level of wealth. Williams et al. (1987), 
Drucker (1986), and others have argued that, in many devel-
oped economies, a decoupling of wealth from the volume of 
material consumption has occurred since the 1970s and that 
this tendency will accelerate. Others have disputed this inter-
pretation, however (Herman et al., 1987). Nevertheless, the 
aggregate relationship at middle and lower income levels 
seems undisputed. The World Development Report 1992 
(World Bank, 1992) notes that emissions of some pollutants 
decline beyond a certain stage of economic development. 
However, the report does not claim that such a point has yet 
been reached in the case of CO-,. 
Not only is wealth one of the most important correlates of 
greenhouse gas emissions (at present), but it also has a very 
important bearing on vulnerability to climate change. Richer 
countries, because they are richer, will tend to find it easier to 
deal with the costs of coping with climate change and mea-
sures to abate climate change. Poorer countries will tend to be 
more vulnerable to climate change for a variety of reasons 
considered below. 
Poverty also has an important hearing on national priorities 
and the time scales considered in policy. Economists have 
long noted that personal discount rates decline with rising in-
come. Richer people can afford to look further ahead, have 
greater security, and can afford to invest more for the future 
(though, in fact, the pattern of investment as a fraction of 
wealth is very variable). Poor people tend to be focussed more 
on short-term concerns, including striving to ensure they can 
meet basic needs. This has important implications for the po-
tential equity impact of policies to address climate change 
within countries, as noted earlier in this chapter, and the same 
applies at the level of national economic and political sys-
tems. 
Thus, in poorer countries interest rates tend to be higher, 
capital is scarcer, and the whole focus of policy and politics 
tends to be on meeting pressing short-term needs, ranging 
from poverty alleviation and employment generation to the 
management of fiscal crises, which are often partly driven by 
the needs of debt repayment. At the industrial level, the focus 
may, for example, be on the scramble to construct infrastruc-
ture and capacity fast enough to meet rapidly rising demand, 
rather than the more considered examination of optimal in-
vestments over longer periods that may be possible in richer 
countries. Thus, the context for both actual investment behav-
iour and broader public policy is strongly affected by national 
wealth in ways that are directly relevant to the climate prob-
lem (Mathur, 1991;Ewah, 1994). 
Some of these issues were addressed by the Special Report 
on Developing Countries of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC, 1990), which stated that "the priority 
for the alleviation of poverty continues to be an overriding 
concern of the developing countries; they would rather con-
serve their financial and technical resources for tackling their 
immediate economic problems than make investments to 
avert a global problem which may manifest itself after two 
generations." Article 4.7 of the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change also recognizes that "economic and social 
development and poverty eradication are the first and overrid-
ing priorities of the developing country Parties" and these will 
influence implementation of their commitments. 
3.3.3 Patterns of greenhouse gas emissions 
A second important dimension of difference is that countries 
vary widely in the nature and degree of their contribution to 
climate change. Contributions to climate change span many 
different gases and sources.3 Countries have different capaci-
ties as sinks for absorbing carbon emissions. Although the 
range of sources and sinks included in analyses or agreements 
may not in itself be regarded as an equity issue, it is clear the 
conclusions that may be drawn from different ways of aggre-
gating and presenting the data can be. This section summa-
rizes the main approaches that have been taken and the results 
obtained. 
During the negotiation of the FCCC, many of these consid-
erations came to be discussed in terms of whether the Conven-
tion should adopt a "comprehensive" approach, and. if so. 
whether it should focus on "gross" greenhouse gas emissions 
or "net" emissions derived by subtracting the removal of 
greenhouse gases by sinks from total emissions by sources 
(Bodansky, 1993). Adoption of the comprehensive approach 
means that all sources and sinks of different greenhouse gases 
have to be considered in formulating policy. Accordingly, 
global warming potentials are calculated for each gas to per-
mit emissions of different gases to be compared according to a 
single metric. 
In the course of the negotiations, many developing coun-
tries viewed the comprehensive approach as inequitable, ar-
guing that methane emissions from subsistence agriculture 
should not be compared with carbon dioxide emissions, be-
cause the former are "survival emissions" which cannot he 
controlled without irreparable social and economic damage 
whereas the latter are due in large part to profligate lifestyles 
in the developed countries (Bodansky, 1993). Subak (lWi 
Equity and Social Considerations 
93 
BOX 3.1: THE WRI DATA CONTROVERSY AND ALLOCATION OF SINK CAPACITY 
In 1990 the World Resources Institute (WRI, 1990) published an extensive set of data on national greenhouse gas emissions 
from which they concluded that responsibility for climate change was shared widely between countries in the industrialized 
and developing world. Their methodology and conclusions were vigorously attacked by Agarwal and Narain (1991). who 
claimed that the analysis was inherently biased against poor countries. They presented an alternative approach, concluding 
that developing countries bore no responsibility for the problem but were, in fact, contributing to cleaning up emissions 
from the industrialized world. The dispute attracted widespread academic, public, and political attention. 
There were important disagreements over the accuracy of data and the range of gases included (Ahuja, 1992; Thery, 
1992), and it has now been recognized that emissions from deforestation, and probably methane, in many developing coun-
tries are much lower than in the original WRI estimates. But the heart of the dispute was over the assignment of "natural 
sink capacity" - the natural processes that remove greenhouse gases. 
Because of all the difficulties associated with estimating, comparing, and projecting greenhouse gas removal over time, 
WRI took the measured increase in concentration of each gas - which gives a direct measure of the radiative change - and 
assigned this to each country in proportion to estimated emissions in that year (or an average of recent years). 
Agarwal and Narain raised two central objections to this measure. First, it took no account of the distribution of historical 
emissions, which are in fact largely responsible for current concentration levels. Second, by distributing the net concentra-
tion in proportion to gross emissions, the natural reabsorption - the "sink capacity" - was implicitly being allocated in pro-
portion to emissions. This, they contended, was a grossly inequitable approach, because the sink capacity was a natural, 
global common resource that should be allocated equally to all people. By dividing the total annual absorption of each 
greenhouse gas (the difference between gross emissions and measured atmospheric increase) in proportion to national pop-
ulation, they showed that most developing countries' shares of the global reabsorption of greenhouse gases on this basis ex-
ceeded their actual gross emissions. Far from bearing any responsibility for the problem, they concluded, developing 
countries were in fact helping to clean up the excessive emissions from industrialized countries. 
A difficulty with Agarwal and Narain's approach is that the rate at which greenhouse gases are removed from the atmos-
phere depends on the concentration gradient and therefore the level of gross emissions: The more that is emitted, the more is 
removed. Thus, it does not follow from Agarwal and Narain's approach that concentrations would decline if all countries did 
emit at the per capita rate of the poorer countries. After a few years it is likely that concentrations would still rise, but at a 
much slower rate. It is a complex process, however, and it is widely believed that the proportion absorbed declines with ris-
ing global emissions and could fall sharply if human emissions started to saturate natural sink processes. The real relation-
ship between "gross" and "net" emissions, and how the latter should be assigned, is thus very complex. 
To avoid this complication, and in keeping with much of the literature, the data in this chapter are given in terms of gross 
emissions in considering current and projected emission rates. Most analysis recognizes that from a policy perspective it 
will also be necessary to consider anthropogenic stimulation of sinks (primarily tree planting) and probably human impacts 
on the ability of natural ecosystems to act as sinks for greenhouse gases. For the present at least, these impacts are not 
thought to be major contributions to the overall flow of greenhouse gases, though the spread of land management for agri-
culture and other purposes, and desertification, have probably reduced the sink capacity in many diverse countries. 
gives more general examples of how different countries might 
prefer different selections of cases to be included according to 
interest. Smith (1994) argues that climate change agreements 
should not incorporate any biotic sources or sinks (even if af-
fected by human actions), both on grounds of practicality and 
equity - the latter argument being that the estimates require a 
baseline date against which to measure carbon accumulation 
or loss, which is likely to favour those regions (i.e., Europe 
and North America) that deforested in earlier ages. 
Developing countries also argued that the Convention 
should include a principle that all states have an equal right to 
ocean sinks, as these are part of the global commons (Bodan-
sky, 1993). This principle did not find its way into the Con-
vention, and the question of entitlements to global sinks 
therefore remains open. The Convention does, however, men-
tion the comprehensive approach favourably in both the pre-
amble and Article 3.3. Notwithstanding this mention, the final 
language of the Convention leaves open the possibility that 
policies and targets for individual gases can be adopted. 
Many of the equity concerns about how sources and sinks 
should be dealt with, and which gases should be controlled on 
what timescale, continue to manifest themselves in fierce 
methodological disputes about the calculation, aggregation, 
and presentation of data. This was vividly illustrated in an im-
portant debate about data relating to emissions and sinks pre-
sented initially by the World Resources Institute (See Box 
3.1). 
In terms of controlling emissions, it is relevant to note that 
CO, is the biggest anthropogenic contributor to radiative 
change to date and is projected to continue to be so. Methane 
is also significant, though it decays much more rapidly, emis-
sions are much more uncertain, and in recent years the growth 
rate in the atmosphere has slowed dramatically. CFC emis-
sions, almost entirely from industrialized countries, grew very 
rapidly until the late 1980s, but the overall impact on radiative 
forcing, taking into account indirect effects, is still uncertain 
(IPCC. 1992, 1995). Also, since these emissions are now 
being rapidly phased out under the Montreal Protocol and 
94 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
amendments, with limited interim growth in developing coun-
tries, they are less relevant to future policy. The replacement 
of CFCs by HCFCs, which have a high radiative impact and 
are not controlled by the Montreal Protocol, however, is a 
matter of concern, and their increased use deserves close 
scrutiny. Similar remarks apply to sulphur dioxide, which, 
though not a greenhouse gas, is thought to have a considerable 
indirect impact on the radiative balance. The role of other an-
thropogenic gases is not big enough to affect the equity issues 
discussed here. 
3.3.3.1 Historical and cumulative emissions 
Cumulative past emissions account for the buildup of gases in 
the atmosphere. Smith (1993) provides the most thorough ac-
count of how indices of past emissions can relate to current 
concentrations and gives data for cumulative carbon emis-
sions in the period 1950-86. From these he has derived esti-
mates of the "natural debt" that each country has drawn from 
(over)use of the atmospheric capacity; he justifies the 1950 
cutoff on both ethical and practical grounds. The most exten-
sive databases for cumulative emissions of CO, and methane 
are those developed by the International Institute of Applied 
Systems Analysis (IIASA). These include estimates of indus-
trial and biotic carbon emissions back to 1800, as well as esti-
mates of methane emissions, presented to a useful but 
manageable degree of regional breakdown. Their results are 
shown in Table 3.1. 
These results suggest that North America accounts for 33% 
of the contribution from fossil fuels, Europe 26%, and the for-
mer USSR 14%. The industrialized countries together account 
for 84% of the total. When estimates of biotic (mostly defor-
estation) emissions are included, the North American figure is 
reduced to about 30%', and the contribution from a number of 
developing countries becomes significant. In total, the indus-
trialized countries account for about two-thirds of cumulative 
carbon emissions. 
Including methane makes very little difference to these 
results, partly because of the shorter residence time in the 
atmosphere. Based on current populations, the ratio of cu-
mulative emissions per capita between the industrialized and 
developing nations is more than 10 to I. 
These estimates can be subjected to the criticisms that 
Agarwal and N a rain (1991) raised in connection with an in-
dex of current net emissions (see Box 3.1). By "discounting" 
emissions to reflect the removal of gases, there is an implicit 
assignment of the earth's past sink capacity in proportion to 
emissions. Fujii (1990) and Meyer (1995) furnish calculations 
to show that if the total CO, absorption were assigned on an 
equal historic per capita basis, most developing countries are 
in fact "in credit" - their cumulative emissions are smaller 
than the global average per capita absorption, and so on this 
basis their past contribution is not merely small but actually 
negative. 
Some logical problems with this latter approach are noted 
in the accompanying box. If a more directly physical definition 
of "relative contribution to the build-up of greenhouse gases is 
used,"4 the contribution of developing countries is positive, 
but probably less than that indicated in Table 3.1. On any mea-
Table 3.1. Historic C02 and methane contributions by region, 
1800-1988 (in percentages) 
Region 
1. OECD North America 
2. OECD Europe 
3. Eastern Europe 
4. Former USSR 
5.Japan 
6. Oceana 
7. China 
8. India 
9. Other Asia 
10. N.Africa & Mid-East 
11. Other Africa 
12. Brazil 
13. Other Latin America 
Developed Countries (1 -6) 
Developing Countries (7-13) 
World 
Industrial 
C 0 2 
33.2 
26.1 
5.5 
14.1 
3.7 
1.1 
5.5 
1.6 
1.5 
2.2 
1.6 
0.7 
3.2 
818 
16.2 
100.0 
Total 
co, 
29.7 
16.6 
4.8 
12.5 
2.3 
1.9 
6.0 
4.5 
5.0 
1.7 
5.2 
3.3 
6.5 
67.8 
322 
100.0 
co,+ 
C H j 
29.2 
16.4 
4.7 
12.4 
2.3 
1.9 
6.3 
4.8 
5.2 
1.8 
5.2 
3.3 
6.5 
66.9 
33.1 
100.0 
Source: Grubler and Nakicenovic, 1991. 
sure, the contribution of the world's poorer regions to the total 
buildup of greenhouse gases over the past century is modest, 
and even more so when considered in relation to population. 
3.3.3.2 Current emissions 
Because of the somewhat more rapid growth of developing 
country emissions in the last two to three decades, responsi-
bility for the problem is much more sensitive to the index 
chosen for current emissions than it is for cumulative contribu-
tions. The most important issue is whether one focusscs on 
total or per capita emission rates. Developing countries tend 
to focus on the latter, as an index that highlights the extent of 
disparities between industrialized and developing societies in 
emissions associated with individual lifestyles, and conse-
quently as a way of emphasizing their argument that pro-
fligate and unsustainable lifestyles in the industrialized 
countries are the root of the problem. Commentators from in-
dustrialized countries more often point out that, in terms of 
climate change, it is total emissions that matter, and that per 
capita indices ignore the important element of gross popula-
tion itself as a causal factor.3 
In reality, both aspects matter, and the most illuminating 
way of presenting the data is in a form that displays both si-
multaneously. This is done in Figure 3.1, in which 1993 emis-
sions of CO, from fossil fuels are illustrated on a graph of per 
capita emissions against population. The area of each block. 
as the product of the two, represents total fossil CO, emis-
sions from the country or region. 
Projection against the per capita axis illustrates the scale of 
these disparities, not only between developed and developing 
countries but also within groups. North America and Australia 
emit between 4.5 and 6.0 tC (tonnes of carbon) per person on 
average. The figure for the industrialized regions of the "Old 
Equity and Social Considerations 
95 
(I 
I hillion 
Scale 
The graph illustrates three of the primary indices cited in the literature relating to the distribution nl 
current emissions among the major countries or regions indicated beneath each block. The height of 
each block shows per capita CO, emissions from fossil fuel consumption (all uses) in 1993;the 
width of each block is proportional to the estimated population in 1993; and the area of each block, 
as the product of per capita emissions and population, is proportional to total fossil CO, emissions. 
The qualitative impact of other sources and gases (for which data arc less well developed) is 
outlined in the text. 
Source: Grubb (1990) updated by the author using data front HI' Slalisliatl Review of World 
Energy, 1994 mi World Population Prospects. 
Figure 3.1: Carbon emissions per capita and population, 1993. 
World" - including Russia and Central and Eastern Europe 
after the contractions of recent years - is between 2 and 3 tC 
per capita. Average per capita emissions in many parts of 
East Asia and Latin America are in the range 0.5-1.0 tC per 
capita, though some of the Asian "tiger" economies have al-
ready risen well above this. Per capita emissions on the Indo-
Pakistan subcontinent and in much of Africa rarely exceed 
0.3tC per capita - a tenth or less of the per capita emissions in 
the industrialized world. Others - such as the Middle East and 
various island states - vary widely within this range. 
Considering the population axis gives a counterpoint to this 
picture. Many of the blocks that are much lower in Figure 3.1 
(low per capita emissions) are also much wider (high popula-
tion). The developing economies of Asia alone account for more 
than half the global population. Despite their lower per capita 
levels, this makes them significant contributors to the total (the 
area of the individual blocks shown in Figure 3.1). Altogether in 
1993 the OECD countries accounted for about 50.5% of global 
fossil carbon emissions, with about half of this being from the 
U.S. The former USSR and Eastern European countries ac-
counted for 17% (with half of this being from Russia), and the 
developing countries contributed just under a third of gross 
fossil carbon emissions (with over 40% of this from China). 
Another basis for comparing emission profiles is to con-
sider the "productivity" of emissions - emissions per unit of 
economic output as conventionally defined. This tends to re-
ceive more emphasis in developed countries, which are gen-
erally more efficient. It again has its counterpart in consider-
ing total economic output, indicating what some developing 
countries characterize as overconsumption. Economists in the 
industrialized countries tend to put the spotlight on the lower 
efficiency levels in developing countries, whereas others at-
tack the overall high level of consumption in the developed 
countries as the root of the problem. Again, it is possible to 
demonstrate both dimensions on a single graph of emission 
intensity versus wealth. In this, a complicating factor arises 
from the uncertainties over appropriate exchange rates: The use 
of purchasing power parities gives a very different impression 
from comparing GNP at market exchange rates (see Box 3.2). 
Data for sources other than fossil CO., (see, for example, 
SEI, 1992) are, as noted, much more uncertain, but in general 
the disparities between industrialized and developing coun-
tries are greater for CFCs. and less for all other sources, than 
those noted here for fossil COn. Most notably, almost all emis-
sions from deforestation - thought to be in the range of 15-
25% of total CO, releases in the early 1990s - are from a 
relatively small group of developing countries; anthropogenic 
methane emissions are probably predominantly from China 
(fossil and agricultural methane) and South and East Asia 
(agricultural methane). However, emissions of this gas are 
fairly broadly distributed, with most continents each con-
tributing about 10% of the anthropogenic total (SEI, 1992; 
Subak, 1993). How the warming contribution of these emis-
sions compares with fossil C02 data depend on the data and 
the basis of comparison chosen, as discussed in the IPCC re-
port, Climate Change 1994. As noted, these regional compar-
isons obscure both large disparities in per capita emissions 
and important national and subnational variations within each 
group (IPCC, 1995; Subak, 1993). 
3.3.3.3 Future emissions 
The pattern of emissions is changing - it has indeed changed 
markedly in the last five years - and is expected to continue 
changing. A very large number of emission scenarios have 
also been prepared by various authorities, with a variety of as-
sumptions, timescales, and degrees of regional breakdown. 
From an equity perspective it is important to distinguish 
"business as usual" projections from assumptions about the 
location of abatement, and to have a sufficient regional break-
down to relate emission patterns to economic and other re-
gional differences. The scenarios of the 1990 IPCC Scientific 
Assessment (unlike the 1992 update) had sufficient clarity on 
both counts, but were criticized for embodying highly in-
equitable assumptions, both in the reference scenario and in 
the apportioning of emission reductions in abatement scenar-
ios. Parikh (1992) noted that the reference scenario "permit-
ted" a substantial increase in North American emissions but 
considered that "cuts for the South are already built into the 
reference models." compared with the rates of growth that 
might otherwise be expected. "The stabilization scenarios," 
she argued, "stabilize the lifestyles of the rich and adversely 
affect the development of the poor." 
The IPCC 1992 scenarios span a very wide range, with lit-
tle geographical detail, and thus do not embody a clear view 
of the distribution of emission trends. A more recent and thor-
ough development of emission scenarios for fossil fuels is that 
96 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
O 
0.(101 
§ 
^ o.axis 
a 
= 0.0004 
BOX 3.2: INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS AND EMISSION INTENSITIES 
The national emission intensity can he defined as the ratio of 
carbon emissions to GNP. International comparisons then 
depend on how GNP in different currencies is compared. If 
market exchange rates are used, output from many of the de-
veloping countries appears very small. The first graph (Fig-
ure 3.2) gives examples of emission intensity for key regions 
and countries, employing a technique similar to that used in 
Figure 3.1 for population and per capita emissions. On this 
basis, emission intensity in China is about five times that of 
the U.S., and in general the emission intensity in the devel-
oping world is much higher than in OECD countries. 
It is well known, however, that exchange rates tend to un-
dervalue the real purchasing power of currencies in poor 
economies, particularly where there are strong exchange 
controls; it is, for example, possible to live quite well in 
some poor countries on the exchange rate equivalent of a 
few U.S. dollars a day. Estimates of purchasing power parity 
(PPP) attempt to compare currencies in a way that equili-
brates purchasing power. For OECD countries the difference 
in GNP calculated at PPP and market exchange rates is mod-
est, usually 10-30%; for some developing countries the dif-
ference in GNP is extremely large. 
The second graph (Figure 3.3) illustrates what happens 
when emission intensities are calculated on a PPP basis, us-
ing estimates from the World Bank. On this basis, emission 
intensities in China and Africa are close to (and straddle) 
that of the U.S., whereas that of India is comparable with the 
European Union. 
For several reasons, however, neither index can be taken 
as giving an authoritative comparison of energy efficiency. 
PPP estimates themselves are not only approximate (they 
can vary considerably between sources) but are not always 
more appropriate for comparing energy intensities. That is 
because fossil carbon emissions arise largely from industrial 
production, often involving goods traded at market ex-
change rates, whereas PPP is driven by consumption com-
parisons. 
Also, carbon intensity can be very different from energy 
intensity, particularly in developing countries, due to the 
high use of biomass fuels. Few would dispute that, overall, 
energy does tend to be used much less efficiently in most de-
veloping countries and that much could be done over time to 
improve efficiencies in these countries, and indeed every-
where. The point is more that glib and aggregated statistical 
comparisons, whether on a GNP or PPP basis, are unlikely to 
help the international debate. 
CHINA 
llNDIA 
us 
EUI2 
• SS AFRICA 
^ ^ ^ M
B R A Z , L 
GNP (1993 U.S. dollars at market exchange rates) 
Scale 
S5,(XX).(KK) Billio 
The graph illustrates some of the economic indices cited in the literature relating to the distribution 
of current emissions, among the major countries or regions indicated beneath each block. The 
height of each block shows CO. emissions intensity (emissions per unit GNP) from fossil fuel 
consumption <;ill uses) in 199.1; the width of each block is proportional to the GNP in 1993; and 
(he area of each block, as the product of emissions intensity and GNP, is proportional to total fossil 
C'(): emissions. GNP is estimated using market exchange rates. Figure 3.3 shows the data for GNP 
on a purchasing power parity basis (see text). The qualitative impact of other sources and gases dm 
which data are less well developed) are outlined in the text. 
Source: Authors, derived from data in HI' Statistical Review of World f-;nerj>y 1994 and World 
Development Report 1W4. 
Figure 3.2: Carbon emissions per unit GNP and total GNP (mar-
ket exchange rates) 
o 
% 0.00020 
u 
US 
. . I;UJ2 
CHINA 
^ B 
SS AFRICA 
Oilier OECD B H H H B 
^ H ^ H ^ H J H H B R A Z H . 
GNP (1992 U.S. dollars using purchasing 
power parity exchange rates) 
Scale-
SMHMI.OOOhillmii 
Note: The graphs show selected regions and countries be-
cause data on PPP are incomplete. Data for formerly cen-
trally planned European countries are not included because 
rapid economic (and emission) changes, incompatible defin-
itions, and statistical inadequacies make comparisons of 
available data of dubious value and rapidly outdated. 
The graph illustrates some of the economic indices cited in the literature relating to the distribution 
of current emissions, among the major countries or regions indicated beneath each block. The 
height of each block shows CO. emissions intensity (emissions per unit GNP) from fossil fuel 
consumption (all uses) in 1993; the width of each block is proportional to the GNP in 1993: and itic 
area of each block, as the product of emissions intensity and GNP, is proportional to total fossil 
CO: emissions. All GNP data are on purchasing power parity basis. The qualitative impact ol'othci 
sources and gases (I or which data are less well developed) is outlined in the text. The more limited 
regions, as compared with Figure 3.1, are due to the limited data and the difficulty of aggregating 
PPP-adjusted GNP from the source data. 
Source: Authors, derived from data in HI' Statistical Review of World Energy 1994 and World 
Development Report 1994. 
Figure 3.3: Carbon emissions per unit GNP and total GNP (pur 
chasing power parity exchange rates) 
Equity and Social Considerations 
97 
by the World Energy Council (WEC, 1993), which developed 
regional scenarios both from a global perspective and with re-
gional teams. Interestingly, their reference scenario was also 
criticized by participants from the developing world and for-
mer USSR for being too optimistic about the prospects for im-
proved energy efficiency in these regions. Taking account of 
these concerns led to a variant of the reference scenario with 
much higher emissions, particularly in South Asia, Central 
and Eastern Europe, and Africa. 
Whichever variant of future scenarios is considered - and 
especially for the higher growth cases favoured by many in 
the developing world - the vast majority contain a clear mes-
sage. The ambiguities about whether the developing world 
holds significant responsibility for contributing to climate 
change will not persist for long. Even in relatively restrained 
scenarios of emission growth from the developing world, such 
as the original WEC reference case, fossil CO, emissions 
alone from these countries will equal those of the OECD 
by 2020. And in many scenarios, fossil CO., emissions from 
the current developing nations will exceed today's total 
global emissions before the year 2050, despite still being 
considerably lower in per capita terms. Furthermore, in terms 
of the distribution of abatement efforts, there are signifi-
cant spillover effects both positive and negative.6 Edmonds 
(1993) has explored the impact of various possible abate-
ment "coalitions," and Bradley et cd. (1994) note on the ba-
sis of a range of abatement scenarios that "anthropogenic 
climate change cannot be controlled by the OECD nations 
alone." 
Emissions from deforestation do not - and probably cannot -
keep pace with projections of fossil fuel emissions. The pro-
jections reviewed in the IPCC 1992 assessment almost all stay 
below 2 GtC/year, and decline after 2030. In comparison, pro-
jections of global fossil fuel emissions rise above 10 GtC/year 
by that date in many "reference" scenarios. Methane projec-
tions are highly uncertain but also suggest slower growth. 
Clearly, neither deforestation nor methane releases is likely to 
alter substantially the overall trend in the distribution of emis-
sion sources. Whatever the past and current responsibilities 
and priorities, it is not possible for the rich countries to con-
trol climate change through the next century by their own ac-
tions alone, however drastic. It is this fact that necessitates 
global participation in controlling climate change, and hence, 
the question of how equitably to distribute efforts to address 
climate change on a global basis. 
3.3.4 Differential impacts, extreme vulnerability, and the 
valuation of impacts 
3.3.4.1 General features 
Another aspect - distinct but again partly correlated with 
wealth - is the likely differential impact of climate change. 
Both Volume 2 of this report and Chapter 6 of the present vol-
ume agree that impacts may vary considerably between coun-
tries. 
These impacts are a product of the degree and nature of the 
physical change, the degree to which the society depends on 
the natural resources affected, and its institutional and social 
capabilities for handling change. Some physical aspects of 
climate change could be beneficial, particularly in cooler cli-
mates and in a long-run equilibrium, but the transition may 
still be difficult, especially if it must contend with increased 
climatic variability. 
In hotter climates and developing countries with econ-
omies that depend more heavily on natural resources, the 
impacts are widely expected to be adverse (albeit to varying de-
grees) for three main reasons: 
(1) 
Most developing countries are in tropical regions, and 
projected climatic changes seem unlikely to improve ei-
ther the quality of the physical environment or agricul-
tural productivity; indeed, modelling studies indicate 
that climate change will reduce relative agricultural out-
put in the developing world (Chapters 2, 6; see also Vol-
ume 2). 
(2) 
Developing economies are much more dependent on 
agriculture and other aspects of natural resource flows. 
(3) 
Institutional and social structures within developing 
countries tend to be weaker and hence less able to cope 
with change. Developing countries also have fewer fi-
nancial resources for investing in more robust infra-
structure. Meyer-Abich (1994) concludes that this on 
its own is sufficient reason "to prevent greenhouse gas-
induced climate change, because if it happens, present 
inequalities would be irresponsibly increased." 
3.3.4.2 Extreme vulnerabilities 
In addition, some regions may be exceptionally vulnerable to 
climate change. Small island states and countries with low-
lying coastal areas are obviously vulnerable, not only because 
of their greater susceptibility to sea level rise but also their 
heavy dependence on natural resources for domestic use and 
for trade that may be affected by climate change (Saha, 1994). 
In addition to these adverse economic impacts, all or part of 
these countries may be destroyed or rendered uninhabitable 
by sea level rise (which is projected to continue well beyond 
the end of the next century, even if action is taken to curb 
emissions) and attendant salt water intrusion. Storm surges 
and other changes (such as subsidence) may exacerbate these 
impacts. The potentially devastating impact of tropical storms 
on low-lying regions was graphically illustrated by the 1991 
Bangladesh cyclone, which claimed more than 200,000 lives 
(del Mundo, 1992) and perhaps twice that number. Such im-
pacts clearly could have profound consequences for both hu-
man communities and entire ecosystems (see, for example, 
Broadhus, 1993). 
Potentially extreme impacts may also occur in very dry re-
gions that may already be on the margins of existence. The 
central fear relates to the adequacy of food and water supply. 
Despite a global food surplus in the 1980s, millions still 
starved because of a lack of local resources, infrastructure, 
and social stability. Although models suggest that global food 
production can be maintained under climate change, agricul-
tural production in the developing world may decline. Indeed, 
most models project a drying of continental interiors, and the 
African region may be particularly vulnerable. Sidibe (1995) 
98 
Climate Change 1W5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
gives a review of possible implications for Mali; see also the 
assessments in Volume 2 of this report. 
If such projections prove true, climatic change will create 
"environmental refugees." Even without the worst projected 
impacts, problems of both domestic and international migra-
tion are likely to he exacerbated. Myers (1993, 1994) cites es-
timates that there are about 10 million environmental refugees 
at present, and on the basis of a survey of projected impacts in 
vulnerable regions, estimates that this figure could rise to 150 
million by the middle of the next century as a result of climate 
change. He sketches the immense social, economic, and polit-
ical costs implicit in such movements, '•pushing the overall 
cost far beyond what we can realistically envisage in the light 
of our experience to date . . . it requires a leap of imagination 
to envisage 150 million destitutes abandoning their home-
lands, many of them crossing international borders." Again, 
the poor seem most likely to suffer, though clearly such move-
ments might also trigger broader ethnic or even international 
conflicts that could envelop whole societies. 
These extreme vulnerabilities raise important equity is-
sues, not only because they represent potentially great suffer-
ing but also because those most vulnerable are to a large 
extent those contributing very little to its causes. For small is-
lands, but also for many other developing countries, adapta-
tion to climate change may be a more important, and more 
urgent, task than planning and undertaking national mitiga-
tion policies. The language of the FCCC does not give mitiga-
tion absolute priority, as it accepts that some countries and 
communities will have to place more emphasis on adaptation. 
However, the acceptance that the developed country parties 
must assist particularly vulnerable developing country parties 
in meeting the costs of adaptation indicates agreement that it 
would he inequitable for members of the international com-
munity that were highly vulnerable to climate change to bear 
the costs of that vulnerability alone. Possible implications of 
this exceptional vulnerability for international responses that 
aimed at coping with climate change and minimizing its im-
pacts are considered further in Section 4. 
The common thread in all the scenarios of extreme vulner-
ability and impacts is the emphasis on the social dimension. A 
society with strong social institutions and some financial re-
sources should, with rare exceptions, be able to develop and 
implement strategic plans for reducing vulnerability, albeit at 
a cost. But these conditions do not exist in some of the most 
vulnerable regions and are not easy to import. Furthermore, 
there is an internal distributional dimension to physical im-
pacts such as storm surges, hurricanes, sea level rise, and 
changing climate patterns. The burden of adapting to these 
events will fall more heavily on the parts of the communities 
that may already he disadvantaged and unable to adapt with-
out further hardship. 
There is also a potentially vicious interaction between so-
cial instability and climate change. Suliman (1994) argues 
powerfully that this has been an important part of the Su-
danese tragedy: What was originally an ethnic and religious 
conflict has evolved over a period of three decades into a con-
flict about resources, driven by a combination of climatic 
change and sometimes inappropriate policies advanced by in-
ternational lending agencies. 
According to Suliman, climatic change (the occurrence of 
which in the area is uncontested; only the cause is disputed) 
altered the distribution of resources around which fragile so-
cial institutions were beginning to develop, thus undermining 
their stability and helping to plunge the Sudan back into civil 
war. 
It may be much more cost-effective for the rich world to 
help protect such regions directly than by additional mitiga-
tion of emissions. However, the scale of existing inequalities, 
the resistance to additional foreign aid, and the mixed efficacy 
of international development assistance suggest that it may be 
facile to rely on this alone. 
3.3.4.3 Global valuation of impacts 
The possibility of extreme physical impacts and complex so-
cial reactions poses dilemmas for evaluating aggregate im-
pacts. As discussed in the introduction to this chapter, there is 
no single right way to do this. It can only be done by making 
ethical judgments about what to measure, and how to measure 
and compare the welfare of different people in different coun-
tries across time. Considering only impacts on World Produc; 
is a poor enough indicator because (as outlined in Chapter 1 
and discussed in Chapter 7) World Product makes no pretence 
to be a real measure of welfare. But if it is predominant!} 
poorer people who are affected, it is even worse as an indica-
tor, because poor people add very little to aggregate wealth. 
and impacts on them are similarly discounted (Ayres and Wal-
ter, 1991). 
Attempts to allow for "nonmarket" impacts, such as those 
on human health, social stability, and environmental quality 
require assumptions to be made about how to value and aggre-
gate such impacts on different people in different countries. 
Economics seeks classically to establish a monetary equiva-
lent for these impacts (e.g., Fankhauser, 1993), as discussed 
further in Chapters 5 and 6. Scaling impact costs according to 
relative GNP implies valuation of human impacts based on 
average earning power. In welfare economics this approach is 
contentious, as it is widely acknowledged to relate poorly 
even to the more established "willingness to pay" criterion, 
and that itself is acknowledged to have major limitations. Par-
ticularly for poorer people, "willingness to pay" to avoid en-
vironmental damage may give a very different (and inuc:i 
lower) valuation than "willingness to accept" compensation 
for such damage. 
The implicit valuation of human welfare, and indeed el 
risk to life itself, differs greatly between countries. This is 
partly because it is constrained by aggregate wealth, and 
partly by the blunt fact that societies clearly do not value peo-
ple in other countries equally. But one of the most significant 
aspects of climate change is that activities of people in one 
country can have destructive consequences for people in oth-
ers. Any aggregation that evaluates and aggregates impacts in 
relation to national wealth (such as impacts on World Product. 
plus nonmarket impacts related to national GNPs) in effect 
yields the result that the impact is less significant if it is poor 
Equity and Social Considerations 
w 
people, or people in poorer countries, who suffer. If poorer 
countries are more vulnerable and are likely to suffer more, 
the dominant impacts are likely to be precisely in those re-
gions. The question of how these impacts are valued thus be-
comes central and cannot be passed off simply as inevitable 
economic logic (Grubb, 1993, 1995). 
The question is even more difficult in the case of those 
small islands and low-lying coastal areas where climate 
change may lead to loss of territory and profound social im-
pacts, including destruction of indigenous cultures and whole 
communities, with the loss of their attendant heritage and 
spiritual, cultural, and social values. This loss in human diver-
sity does not appear to command the attention it deserves. No 
amount of monetary compensation may be sufficient for com-
munities that have had no choice but to suffer such impacts. 
This issue in itself could have important implications for 
the balance between mitigation and adaptation. Although sig-
nificant populations may be involved, particularly if migra-
tory pressures spread the human impacts, their wealth and 
hence "willingness to pay" (constrained by their ability to 
pay) are negligible on a global scale. On most utilitarian for-
mulations, their potential suffering thus registers little. By the 
same token, they have scarcely contributed to the problem 
that threatens them. Some commentators dispute the appropri-
ateness of even attempting economic valuation of such ex-
treme impacts, particularly when they are inflicted by the 
actions of others. Evaluation in terms of "willingness to ac-
cept" compensation for such damages can preserve the ethical 
basis of monetary evaluation of impacts, but impact assess-
ments have not yet been developed on this basis. Also, a claim 
for infinite compensation would return the issue to one of the 
ethics of imposing damages that the victim claims are not 
compensable by money. Adams (1995) argues that seeking to 
monetize impacts in these circumstances risks entrenching 
disputes rather than resolving them, and should be abandoned 
in favour of negotiations that seek to forge greater consensus 
about the appropriate values to employ. 
Evaluating damages from climate change therefore be-
comes a highly political question of how much the world 
cares about imposing such risks on some of the poorest and 
most vulnerable people. If the success of international re-
sponses is measured in terms of aggregate impacts on global 
wealth, their position will not feature. If it is judged by how 
well it protects the weakest, and minimizes the most severe 
suffering, an entirely different approach may be called for 
(Meyer-Abich, 1994). This obviously fundamentally reflects 
the ethical debates surrounding utilitarianism and the Rawl-
sian response outlined above. Thus, it needs to be recognized 
that attempts to quantify the costs associated with climate 
change involve inherently difficult and contentious value 
judgments, and different assumptions may greatly alter the 
resulting conclusions. 
3.3.5 Social and institutional dimensions 
Countries are not equal in their capabilities to deal with the 
challenges posed by climate change. Some are strong nation-
states, with a large degree of societal consensus and strong in-
stitutions that can formulate and implement policy effectively 
and that can act to protect weak and vulnerable groups. Others 
may be riven by internal differences and have fragile govern-
ing institutions that may be unable, or unwilling, to formulate 
and implement effective policy or to protect the most vulnera-
ble groups - indeed, these institutions may themselves be vul-
nerable to the stresses that climate change may bring. 
These differences affect both the vulnerability to climate 
impacts, as discussed, and the ability to formalize and imple-
ment efficient abatement policies. Juma et at. (1994), for ex-
ample, emphasize how these factors affect efforts to transfer 
technologies. Some of these issues are discussed more fully in 
Section 3.6. 
More broadly, the social dimensions of both climate 
change impacts and responses deserve more consideration. 
For example, there is relatively little literature on public per-
ceptions and social responses to climate change and how dif-
ferent social groups view global environmental problems. 
Such research would appear necessary as a first step to in-
creasing public participation in ameliorating these problems 
(Lofstedt, 1994). 
3.3.6 Differing resource endowments 
Finally, countries differ widely in their endowment of re-
sources that may be affected by efforts to mitigate climate 
change and in their current reliance on production or conver-
sion of these resources. Coal resources and production are rel-
atively widespread globally, though with major variations 
within regions. Remaining oil reserves are heavily concen-
trated in the Middle East, North and Central America, and the 
former Soviet Union. For some Middle Eastern countries 
especially, oil is the only significant export and source of 
foreign exchange. Proved gas reserves are also quite con-
centrated in the Middle East and Russia (though their value 
would probably be enhanced by mitigation efforts). Forests 
and timber exports are likewise concentrated, and can eco-
nomically, as well as environmentally and socially, be very 
important to some countries in both the developed and devel-
oping world. The value of such resources can be affected by 
action to limit climate change, though the actual equity impli-
cations may be complex, as discussed later in this chapter. 
3.3.7 
Conclusions 
This section has illustrated several ways in which countries 
differ and that are relevant to formulating climate change re-
sponses. A number of these group along a developed/develop-
ing country axis. The implications for developing countries 
are different because they are generally poorer, have con-
tributed much less to past emissions, and still emit much less 
per capita. They may also have shorter policy time horizons, 
weaker institutions, and be more vulnerable to climate 
change. Yet, in other respects, the divisions arc much more 
complex. There are substantial variations among both devel-
oped and developing countries in terms of absolute and per 
100 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
capita emissions, the likely impacts of climate change, institu-
tional strengths and preferences, and endowment with natural 
resources that may be affected by mitigation. Similarly, in 
the next century some developing countries will continue to 
make marginal contributions to the problem, whereas emis-
sions from others may well start to dominate it. A rigid devel-
oped/developing country delineation of equity issues in the 
debate is thus inappropriate and may indeed be highly damag-
ing in the long run, though it inevitably permeates many com-
ponents of the debate at present. 
The rest of this chapter concerns the implications of the 
various differences for what might constitute equitable re-
sponses. In structuring it, we draw on the observation by Shue 
(1992) that the equity issues in responding to climate change 
comprise at least four distinct questions: 
(1) 
What is the distribution of the costs of coping with cli-
mate change? 
(2) 
What is the distribution of future emissions? 
(3) 
What is the distribution of the costs of measures to limit 
emissions? 
(4) 
What is the background allocation of resources and ca-
pabilities and hence the consequent basis for fair bar-
gaining and fair processes? 
All these questions are interrelated. For example, a fair dis-
tribution of future emissions may depend somewhat on how 
much countries help others with the costs of coping. A fair 
distribution of abatement costs depends on various back-
ground circumstances, and debates about allocating the "bur-
den of abatement" in general, and joint implementation and 
tradable emission quotas in particular, highlight a particularly 
strong link between the second and and third questions. Few 
authors have distinguished these different components as dis-
tinct equity issues (though several note that the distribution of 
paying for abatement could he very different from the distrib-
ution of where abatement efforts - and hence emissions - are 
located). But they are distinct, and it is useful to address the 
equity issues each raises in turn, even if two or more of them 
may in practice be tied or even addressed through the same in-
struments. 
This next section (Section 3.4) considers the question of 
the costs and risks of coping. Section 3.5 considers the com-
mon issues surrounding distributing emissions and the costs 
of abatement before summarizing specific proposals concern-
ing each in turn. The final sections then examine internal eq-
uity and procedural equity issues. 
3.4 Distributing the Costs of Coping: Impacts, 
Risks, and International Insurance 
The previous section has noted the fact, analyzed more fully 
in the 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment, that some countries 
are likely to be much more affected by climate change than 
others. To an important degree, poor countries may be much 
more vulnerable than richer countries. But all projections of 
impacts are fraught with uncertainty, and in some scenarios 
parts of the developed world could also be badly affected. 
Thus, the issue is also about sharing and minimizing risks. 
This section reviews these issues. 
3.4.1 Nature of impacts and uncertainties 
Predictions of climate change remain highly uncertain. The 
uncertainty about the future average temperature is high 
enough, but it is local effects that really matter, and predic-
tions of regional changes are even more uncertain and can 
vary substantially among different climate models. Fluctua-
tions in the frequency of extreme events will not, for the most 
part, be predictable (except in a probabilistic sense), and will 
therefore add to the uncertainty. 
It is not likely that such uncertainties can be resolved 
quickly, and it may always remain impossible to make reliable 
local predictions or to associate particular local impacts with 
human-induced climate change, because to an extent climate 
is inherently chaotic. Variations may be extremely sensitive to 
initial conditions (see Gleick, 1987, for a popular discussion 
of dynamic systems and their inherent unpredictability). 
Thus, in discussing climate impacts it is better to refer to 
"expectations" of costs and benefits, in the mathematical 
sense of an average of possible outcomes, and to recognize si-
multaneously the importance of uncertainties. This implies 
there is another cost item - the cost of bearing risk. Thus, we 
can categorize the distributive issues arising from climate 
change impacts into four groups: 
(1) 
aggregate welfare impacts over time (intertemporal dis-
tribution of expected global utility) 
(2) 
welfare impacts between countries (international distri-
bution of expected utility) 
(3) 
welfare impacts within countries (interpersonal distri-
bution of expected utility within countries) 
(4) 
the distribution of the cost of risk bearing associated 
with each of the above 
The question of aggregate intertemporal distribution is the 
subject of the next chapter. With respect to impacts within 
countries, over and above those arising from policies promot-
ing redistribution, governments generally accept responsibil-
ity for trying to manage, respond to, and mitigate the worst 
impacts of extreme events, as in the case of government relief 
programmes for victims of major storms. In addition, big 
disasters in the developing world will also often mobilize 
international relief efforts, though these tend to be quite short-
lived. After the initial effort, the local people, with some as-
sistance from the government, tend to be left to rebuild their 
lives. 
The new aspects introduced by human-induced climate 
change thus concern the broader impacts on international wel-
fare distribution and the cost of associated risks. We consider 
each in turn. 
3.4.2 Paying for the costs of coping 
If there are no international transfers or other assistance con-
nected directly with the measures to cope with actual or po-
tential impacts of climate change, each nation in effect i-
Equity and Social Considerations 
101 
expected to cope using its own resources. The available litera-
ture appears to be unanimous in considering this inequitable, 
for two main reasons. 
The first arises directly from the observation above that 
poor countries are likely to be much more vulnerable to cli-
mate change. Climatic change is thus likely to exacerbate ex-
isting inequalities. Most ethical systems would in any case 
expect richer parties to contribute more to addressing a com-
mon problem. The rationale is much stronger still when the 
cause is shared but the impacts are disproportionately large on 
the least well-off parties. 
The second factor, which applies irrespective of this in-
equitable distribution of impacts (but is much reinforced by 
it), is the direct causal link: the fact that the actions of some 
people (emitting greenhouse gases) may directly harm others. 
There are few, if any, ethical systems in which it is acceptable 
for one individual knowingly to inflict potentially serious 
harm on another and not accept any responsibility in helping 
or compensating the victim or to pay in some other way. An 
analogous principle in international law provides that a state 
may exploit its resources but has the responsibility to ensure 
that activities in its jurisdiction do not cause harm to the envi-
ronment of other states or to areas beyond its national juris-
diction. This principle is generally accepted as a rule of 
customary international law. Its application to the climate 
change context is problematic, however, as it is extremely dif-
ficult for one state to prove before an international court or tri-
bunal a direct causal link between another state's emissions 
and its own environmental damage. Although, upon signing 
the Framework Convention on Climate Change, a number of 
small island countries indicated that they may rely on tradi-
tional rules of international law to address damage to their en-
vironment from climate change, it is widely recognized that it 
would be factually and legally difficult to use these rules suc-
cessfully. 
This difficulty points to the need to develop general rules 
of international law regarding liability and compensation. 
However, in the absence of new rules of liability, the tradi-
tional '"fault-based" rules of responsibility of international 
law could provide a basis for vulnerable, generally poorer, 
states adversely affected by climate change to receive com-
pensation from richer states whose past and present emissions 
of greenhouse gases have caused environmental harm. The is-
sue of historical emissions could be of direct relevance here, 
as climate impacts are a function of atmospheric concentra-
tions, which depend strongly on cumulative emissions. Al-
though the Convention's preamble recognizes that the largest 
share of historical and current global emissions of greenhouse 
gases originated in developed countries, and that per capita 
emissions in developing countries are relatively low and will 
need to grow to meet their social and development needs, its 
legal ramifications remain unclear. 
3.4.3 Sharing risks 
The question of who should pay is not solely about equity: 
it also concerns more classical economic issues about shar-
ing risks. Chichilnisky and Heal (1993). drawing on Cass. 
Chichilnisky. and Cass el al. (1991). note that the risks in-
volved have four important characteristics. Such risks are: 
(1) 
poorly understood - we cannot assign clear probabili-
ties to different impacts 
(2) 
endogenous - they are created or affected by our own 
actions 
(3) 
collective - given climate impacts may affect large 
numbers of people; consequently, the risks are not sta-
tistically independent and, hence, may not be greatly re-
duced by "pooling" 
(4) 
irreversible - impacts cannot in general be reversed and. 
indeed, we may be committed to these long in advance 
This results in a complex combination of issues of equity and 
decision making under uncertainty. Decision making, when 
the probabilities of different outcomes are known or reason-
ably estimated ("risk"), is a field of extensive economic study. 
Rational decision making when the probabilities of different 
outcomes are not known is more difficult but is still a subject 
of considerable analysis. These issues are discussed further in 
Chapter 2. 
One criterion for decision making under extreme uncer-
tainty is the "minimax" criterion (see Chapter 2), which in-
volves selecting the strategy that minimizes the worst 
outcome. Its basis is similar to that of Rawls's criterion for 
justice. It recommends avoiding those strategies that could 
generate the worst outcomes. The minimax principle bears 
some resemblance to the precautionary principle expressly in-
cluded in the Convention in Article 3.3. which provides that 
The parties should take precautionary measures to antici-
pate, prevent, or minimize the causes of climate change 
and mitigate its adverse effects. Where there are threats of 
serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific cer-
tainty should not be used as a reason for postponing such 
measures, taking into account that policies and measures to 
deal with climate change should be cost-effective so as to 
ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost. 
A philosophic and economic examination of risk bearing, 
including the maximin principle, may provide insights rele-
vant to the application of the precautionary principle. The 
maximin criterion is, however, rather conservative because it 
takes into account only the worst outcome and not the nature 
of the other outcomes from a strategy. In practice, climate 
change is not a situation of total ignorance - we have some 
idea of plausible outcomes and their relative probability. This 
increases the appropriateness of approaches based on subjec-
tive probabilities, combined with an appropriate measure of 
risk aversion to reflect the cost of bearing risk (as outlined in 
Chapter 2). 
Climate risk is an equity issue for several reasons. There 
are good reasons to believe that the distribution of the cost of 
risk bearing is very uneven. First of all. industrialized coun-
tries have, in general, better insurance markets. This means 
that individuals in those countries can reduce their cost of risk 
bearing substantially (but not completely, partly because 
global warming is a collective risk and partly because of the 
incompleteness of markets). These possibilities are not open 
102 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
to most individuals in developing countries, and they there-
fore have a higher cost of risk bearing. Second, the cost of risk 
bearing may be much higher in some developing countries 
than in industrialized countries because of the nature of the 
impacts. For example, when considering sea level rise, a range 
from 20 cm to 60 cm may imply a quite low cost of risk bear-
ing in a country like the U.S., and the expected damage would 
he a good proxy for the total cost of sea level rise. For a coun-
try like Bangladesh, however, the difference between 20 cm 
and 60 cm may mean a substantial difference in utility, which 
is not accounted for in the expected damage. Thus the cost of 
risk hearing in Bangladesh is much higher than in the U.S. 
The same holds true for countries that may be threatened 
by increases in both the frequency and the severity of 
droughts. The variation in utility will probably be much 
greater than the variation in actual damages among different 
outcomes, and therefore the cost of risk bearing will be high. 
In the absence of empirical studies on the cost of risk bearing 
the values involved are highly uncertain, but the nature of the 
conclusions seems reasonable. 
3.4.4 Policy implications 
Most of the discussion of the economic and equity aspects 
of climate change impacts has focussed on the "expected" 
changes over time and between and within countries. But un-
certainties combined with irreversibilities - both in abatement 
and in impacts from climate change - make the issue of risk 
bearing also of great importance. Analysis is technically diffi-
cult but not impossible, and more study is needed. For exam-
ple, the combination of the idea of basic needs and risk 
hearing could have far-reaching implications. If we accept 
that individuals have the right to some basic goods - food, 
shelter, access to environmental resources - and if emitting 
greenhouse gases threatens the availability of these basic 
goods, then those responsible for the emissions should be pre-
pared to protect potential victims against losing the right to 
basic goods. 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change mentions 
the concept of insurance in Article 4.8. which provides that 
Parties shall give full consideration to what actions are 
necessary under the Convention, including actions related 
to funding, insurance and the transfer of technology to 
meet the specific needs and concerns of developing coun-
try Parties arising from the adverse effects of climate 
change and/or the impact of the implementation of re-
sponse measures. 
In addition, Article 4.4 provides that the developed country 
parties must "assist developing country Parties that are partic-
ularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change in 
meeting the cost of adaptation to those adverse effects." 
This is a specific example, but at least two general conclu-
sions can be drawn from the above discussion: 
(1) 
It is necessary to include the cost of risk bearing in any 
equity discussion related to global warming. In particu-
lar, estimates of the costs of impacts should also include 
this cost component in addition to expected cost. 
(2) 
Policy should seek to establish appropriate global insur-
ance against impacts from climate change. 
The appropriate form of insurance is not a simple matter, 
however. The characteristics of climate change discussed 
above lead to particular requirements for approaches to insur-
ance, some economic principles of which are summarized in 
Chapter 2. 
Also relevant is the fact that there are three broad types of 
costs that may be incurred in coping with climate change:7 
(1) 
costs related to preparation (or protection) to minimize 
the potential impacts of climate change, for example. 
through the construction of sea defences, improved wa-
ter storage or water transfer capabilities, or changing the 
kinds or diversity of crops 
(2) 
costs arising directly as a result of changes in the re-
source base (e.g., loss of land to the sea, other loss of 
agricultural land) and the social costs that may follow 
from this (Suliman, 1994) 
(3) 
costs caused directly by extreme events, such as freak 
storms and droughts - which can be considered a com-
ponent of both I and 2 
Although the underlying equity issue of who should pay is 
similar in each case, some of the practical issues differ. Even 
if there is agreement on the underlying equity principles, ma-
jor practical differences and disputes may arise because of all 
the uncertainties surrounding climate change. General protec-
tion measures (type 1 costs) have multiple benefits, and views 
will differ on the extent to which they should be funded pri-
marily on the basis of concerns about climate change. It is 
likely that victims of changes in the resource base (type 2) and 
extreme events (type 3) will attribute their suffering to hu-
man-induced climate change more readily than those respon-
sible for the emissions. This raises important issues about lair 
processes for deciding about the probability of events being 
tied to human-induced climate change, which none of the lit-
erature addresses explicitly. 
The different nature of these costs has also led to different 
proposals about how to tackle them. Notably, there have been 
suggestions (for example, in the Toronto Conference, 198S. 
and the Beijing Declaration, 1992) for a "climate fund" to 
help developing countries pay for protection measures of type 
I. International funding of such measures can be considered 
both as a matter of equity and as a way of reducing overall 
risks. 
Also, the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) has pro-
posed creating an insurance pool to provide some cover 
against the impacts of sea level rise and associated salt intru-
sion and storm surge damage. This was elaborated as a pro-
posed annex to the draft Climate Convention but removed at a 
late stage under pressure of the Rio deadline, and is discussed 
by Wilford (1993). AOSIS proposed that the insurance pool 
be created with international funding from governments. Two 
precedents are noted: 
Equity and Social Considerations 
10.1 
• The 1971 International Convention on the Establish-
ment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil 
Pollution Damage, which is funded by agreed levies on 
oil importers. 
• The 1963 Brussels Supplementary Convention (an OECD 
agreement, amended by a 1964 protocol) to the 1960 
Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the field 
of Nuclear Energy. This is funded half on the basis of 
GNP and half on the basis of nuclear capacity. 
The draft Insurance Annex to the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change proposed, by analogy with the nuclear 
precedent, that funding be based on a combination of GNP 
and CO, emissions. The latter component was suggested both 
on grounds of responsibility and to give an incentive to limit 
emissions. 
The main criterion for entitlement to claim put forward in 
the draft annex was proved loss attributable to sea level rise, 
including storm surges. There is no reason why such an insur-
ance pool should not, in principle, be available for countries 
other than small islands and for damage other than sea level 
rise. It would appear more equitable to extend the scope of 
such a fund to insurance against all kinds of climate impacts, 
though determining cause and effect may be more difficult in 
cases other than sea level rise. The literature does not appear 
to explore this issue, nor 'oes the question of compensation or 
other support for other kinds of climate coping appear to have 
been explored more fully, though some elements are implicit 
in the more general economic treatment of insurance (see 
Chapter 2). 
3.5 Distributing Future Emis ions and 
Abatement Costs 
3.5.1 Introduction 
Issues of how future emissions (or abatement efforts) should 
be allocated, and who should pay for abatement, form some of 
the most contentious equity issues in climate policy. As noted 
above, the two questions are closely intertwined. In the ab-
sence of separate international transfers associated with 
abatement, the initial distribution of emission constraints will 
largely determine the distribution of costs. Much of the liter-
ature has focussed on the question of future emission allo-
cation, but some of it has addressed more directly the 
distribution of costs. This section considers, first, issues 
which are common to both topics, and then, in turn, some of 
the specific proposals for fair allocation of emissions and 
abatement costs. 
The applied research literature on these questions - relat-
ing specifically to climate change policy - is limited com-
pared to that on climate science, impacts, or the economics of 
responses. There are many short articles and statements of po-
sitions made in newspapers, newsletters, "nonpapers" at ne-
gotiating sessions, and similar documents, and also some 
important official declarations developed through extensive 
discussions to reflect consensus positions among groups of 
countries (e.g.. the Beijing Declaration and various regional 
statements). Also, the UNCED agreements themselves con-
tain innumerable references related to equity. Most of this 
discussion is cast in developed/developing country terms, with 
important additions concerning the interests of particular groups. 
This section attempts to reflect this material, although rec-
ognizing the impossibility of ensuring comprehensive cover-
age and drawing heavily on the limited deeper analysis of 
international equity issues in the more conventional academic 
literature of books, substantive reports, and articles in peer-
reviewed journals. Interestingly, of those who have con-
tributed such analyses, few are professionally employed as 
academics in the discipline which might seem to be of great-
est direct relevance - moral philosophy. 
3.5.2 Principles for shorter-term action 
In approaching the topic it is useful to distinguish short-term 
from long-term allocation issues. In the long term, decisions 
will have to be taken - by design or default - about the overall 
allocation of greenhouse gas emissions. The appropriate allo-
cation depends on the conception of equity, and different ethi-
cal approaches may have very different implications. But in 
the short term, the position is simpler. All ethical systems, and 
all the applied literature, appear to point in the same direction. 
As Shue (1992) has put it: 
Even in an emergency one pawns the jewellery before sell-
ing the blankets. . . . Whatever justice may positively re-
quire, it does not permit that poor nations be told to sell 
their blankets [compromise their development strategies] 
in order that the rich nations keep their jewellery | continue 
their unsustainable lifestyles]. 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change certainly 
requires that developed country parties take the lead in com-
batting climate change and its adverse effects. It also recog-
nizes that the extent to which developing countries implemeni 
their commitments under the Convention depends on the ef-
fective implementation by the developed country parties of 
their commitments to transfer financial and technological re-
sources and must fully take into account that, for the develop-
ing countries, economic and social development and poverty 
eradication are the first and overriding priorities. These provi-
sions flow from the Convention's principle of common bin 
differentiated responsibilities and the parties' respective capa-
bilities, rather than being predicated on the rich countries' un-
sustainable lifestyles. 
The observations about what is not fair in the initial distrib-
ution of emission obligations extends to other measures of 
abatement effort. In particular, some earlier and overly simpli-
fied economic studies assumed that a uniform carbon tax, as 
an indicator of abatement effort, would distribute the "bur-
den" equally, fairly, and efficiently. None of these three sup-
positions has stood up to closer scrutiny in the literature: 
• A uniform carbon tax would not impose equal burdens 
on different countries because of differences in existing 
104 
Climate Change IW5 - Hconomie and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
tax structures (Shah and Larson. 1992), resource endow-
ments (Rutherford. 1993). and stages of development. 
• Even in a scheme involving "equal burdens." most ob-
servers argue that a uniform carbon tax would not be 
fair because of the many differences outlined in Section 
3.3, notably differences in historical and current emis-
sions and in current wealth and consequent priorities. 
• A uniform tax would also be Pareto-inefficient in the 
absence of optimal international lump-sum transfers, 
because of the differing marginal utilities between 
countries at different stages of development combined 
with the "global commons" characteristics of climate 
change (Chichilnisky and Heal. 1994). In similar argu-
ments, U/.awa (1994) suggests differentiated carbon 
taxes as an equitable and efficient approach. 
The literature thus demonstrates a degree of consensus about 
relative responsibilities and equitable directions of response 
in the short term and some elements of what would not be eq-
uitable in longer-term allocations. 
A more difficult debate about equity in short-term re-
sponses concerns how to share efforts within the industrial-
ized world. Clearly, the cost of reducing emissions by a given 
amount varies between countries. Factors that can increase 
the costs of reducing energy-related emissions from a given 
baseline date include population growth, development based 
heavily on domestic low-cost resources, or a starting point of 
low per capita emissions due to relatively lower economic de-
velopment or an already carbon-free electricity system. One 
recent study, for example, claims that these factors would 
make emission reductions in Australia and New Zealand more 
costly than for many other OECD countries (Chisholm and 
Moran, 1994). Although the results of any specific modelling 
studies need to he treated with caution because of the inherent 
uncertainties and scope for biasing assumptions towards na-
tional interests, there is no doubt that there are complex issues 
of fair burden sharing among OECD countries that the next 
stage in negotiation will have to start addressing. 
This debate could be usefully illuminated by some of the 
broader literature about longer-term principles for burden 
sharing. For beyond the short term, and in the attempt to de-
velop more precise allocation principles, there is a far wider 
range of perspectives, which derive from a range of ethical 
approaches. We consider first some of these underlying ethi-
cal assumptions, and then consider more specific proposals 
for allocation of future emission entitlements and abatement 
costs. 
3.5.3 Longer-term allocation: Underlying principles 
General ethical principles underlying discussions about fair 
allocation fall into several categories. Several authors have 
sought to classify and in some cases critique equity principles 
applied to this question. Those attempting a fairly broad cov-
erage include d'Argc (1989). Rose (1990), Young (1990), 
Grubb et at. (1992), Rose and Stevens (1993). Ghosh and 
Jaitly (1993). and Bhaskar (1993). Most focus upon direct na-
tional emissions, though Hermann (1993) also raises questions 
about assignment of emissions in traded goods. Rose (1990) 
and Rose and Stevens (1993) provide a very different list of 
allocation categories. The latter translate these to operational 
rules and model their impacts, though the criteria themselves 
comprise a mix of outcome, process, and nondistributional el-
ements that are not always clearly defined, and some of which 
could overlap. Simonis (1994), amongst others, relates some 
simple rules to previous agreements. Some of the principles 
sketched here are in part an attempt to formulate more spe-
cific interpretations of utilitarianism, as well as to apply alter-
native or complementary ethical frameworks. 
3.5.3.1 Egalilarianism 
This reflects the underlying parity principle that each human 
being should have equal rights, in this case with respect to ac-
cess to common global resources. It underlies several specific 
proposals considered in the next section. The Convention 
notes that the per capita emissions of developing countries are 
relatively low, but its substantive provisions do not propose 
equal per capita emissions as a prescriptive criterion for emis-
sion entitlements. 
3.5.3.2 Basic needs and Rawlsian criteria 
A basic needs approach in the present context involves allow-
ing countries the right to emit the minimum levels of green-
house gases needed to meet the basic needs of their citizens, 
defined as the minimum consumption levels needed to sup-
port full participation in society, and then requiring countries 
to buy (or pay taxes on) the rights to emission levels above 
these. It would perhaps be close to the allocation of emission 
permits according to population, although basic needs could 
vary from country to country depending on climate and other 
matters. Chichilnisky (1977) introduced, formalized, and de-
veloped empirically the idea of development aimed at satis-
faction of basic needs while creating a society intrinsically 
compatible with the environment. 
This approach can be related to a Rawlsian philosophy. At 
an absolute minimum it suggests that developing countries be 
left at least as well off under an emissions control regime as 
they would be in its absence; a stronger interpretation is that 
the regime should be used specifically to improve their posi-
tion (Benestad, 1994). 
The only quantitative target in the Convention requires de-
veloped country parties to aim to return their emissions of car-
bon dioxide and other greenhouse gases not controlled by the 
Montreal Protocol to 1990 levels by the end of the decade. 
This objective, which is difficult to regard as a legally binding 
commitment, applies a uniform target based on historical or 
current emissions, and is often referred to as the "grandfa-
thered emissions" approach (Bodansky, 1993). Developed 
country parties with economies in transition are allowed "a 
certain degree of flexibility" with implementation a( this 
obligation. Developing countries are not required to limit 
their current emissions, and the Convention's preamble recog-
nizes that developing countries' emissions will grow to meet 
their social and economic development needs. These provi-
sions could implicitly support some kind of concept of basic 
needs emission entitlements, varied according to national eir-
Equity and Social Considerations 
105 
cumstances. However, it is important to bear in mind that the 
Convention's negotiators could not agree on the bases of pres-
ent and future entitlements to emissions (Bodansky, 1993). 
The Convention does not, therefore, preclude the relevance of 
the basic needs approach to future discussions about emis-
sions entitlements. 
3.5.3.3 Proportionality and polluter-pays principle 
Proportionality reflects the ancient Aristotelian principle that 
people should receive in proportion to what they put in and 
pay in proportion to their contribution to damage caused. This 
idea has a clear potential relationship with the polluter-
pays principle, which is formulated as a principle of economic 
efficiency. In the context of international pollution, this prin-
ciple can be interpreted in a number of ways, as discussed 
below. 
3.5.3.4 Historical responsibilities 
Many authors consider that allocation should be strongly in-
fluenced by the patterns of past emissions. This has been a 
particularly persistent theme in debates between developed 
and developing countries. Hyder (1992) draws together sev-
eral of the underlying rationales in expressing the perception 
of many developing countries: 
It is difficult for most of the developing countries to accept 
the proposition that they should enter into commitments 
which would adversely bind them, either now or later on, 
for the sake of a problem caused by the developed coun-
tries - who neither wish to equitably share the remaining 
emission reserves in the atmosphere, nor to share (even in a 
small way) the benefits and resources that they have built 
up by plundering the world's greenhouse gas reservoir ca-
pacity. 
This statement illustrates that several issues are involved in 
the general assertions about historical responsibility: owner-
ship of the emissions potentially responsible for transbound-
ary impacts, prior use of a finite stock (the atmosphere), and 
current monopolization of the benefits derived from these ac-
tivities. 
3.5.3.5 Comparable burdens and ability to pay 
Another general approach to emission allocation is based on 
the sentiment, frequently stated but not subjected to more de-
tailed analysis, that allocation should affect all countries simi-
larly or involve "comparable burdens" or "sharing the effort 
equally." This is not to imply that countries should incur the 
same monetary costs (e.g.. per capita). Some conceive of it as 
a fixed proportion of GNP (Burtraw and Toman. 1992), others 
in terms of a more general measure of ability to pay. including 
some measures that are more complex (e.g., the UNDP's Hu-
man Development Index or the Physical Quality of Life Index 
noted below in Section 3.5.5.6). 
The Convention's principle of common but differentiated 
responsibilities and respective capabilities embodies elements 
of proportionality and historical responsibility as well as the 
comparable burdens/ability-to-pay approach. 
3.5.3.6 Willingness to pay 
Another principle is simply that countries should bear costs 
based on what they are - or objectively "should" be - willing 
to pay, given the potential damages they face from climate 
change. According to this principle, contributions should be 
determined by a combination of ability to pay (reflecting cur-
rent wealth) and national benefits gained in terms of reduced 
climatic stresses and level of general concern about climate 
change. 
This approach reflects the principle of welfare economics 
that subjectively perceived benefits ought to affect the distrib-
ution of burdens (and hence allocations). Dorfman (1991) 
draws the important distinction that for a common properly 
resource (degradation of the atmosphere), willingness to pay 
should be based not on how a country values a given reduc-
tion in its own emissions, but instead, how much it would 
value a reduction in world-wide aggregate emissions. Pre-
sumably those valuing such reductions to a greater extent 
should be more willing to abate. This basically accords with 
Kant's categorical imperative, which states that one should 
act as if the maxim of one's act were to become a universal 
law of nature. Barrett (1992) analyzes an idealized application 
of this Kantian rule for abatement. 
One concern is that this could lead to a situation of "victim 
pays," though in the greenhouse case the wealthiest countries 
may be both the greatest polluters and the most willing to 
pay. At present an intractable difficulty is the lack of knowl-
edge concerning the regional impacts of climate change, 
and in practice such a criterion would imply piecemeal negoti-
ations in which each country had an incentive to underesti-
mate the potential damages from climate change, and overes-
timate the costs of abatement, to obtain a lax allocation for 
itself. 
3.5.3.7 Applications of distribution theory in 
welfare economics 
A very large welfare economics literature exists on the distrib-
ution of income within countries, and clearly there is limitless 
practical experience on how countries handle distribution is-
sues. It is an interesting question whether and how any of this 
analysis and experience should be brought to bear on the issue 
of climate change. None of the climate change literature at 
present appears to attempt this. 
3.5.3.8 Conclusions 
The various approaches outlined offer general criteria, which 
have been most widely raised in the context of wealth and 
other differences between developed and developing coun-
tries, but which can in principle he extended to reflect other 
differences. Although complex, the provisions of the Conven-
tion are consistent with or reflect a number of these ap-
proaches. Neither the Convention nor these approaches, 
however, give specific rules to determine a unique, maximally 
equitable allocation of emission entitlements or abatement 
costs. We turn now to consider specific, equity-based propos-
als for allocating future emissions and/or abatement costs. 
106 
Climate Change IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
3.5.4 Specific emission allocation proposals 
This section considers proposals for fair distribution of emis-
sions - and by implication abatement effort - separated from 
any substantive financial transfers related to climate change. 
The subsequent section then considers other approaches 
which consider directly the question of "who should 
pay" abstracted from the question of distribution of emis-
sions. 
There are three reasons for dividing the issues in this way. 
First, it provides a useful way of classifying the literature. 
Second, it provides an analytically clear delineation that may 
help to remove some of the confusion in understanding the lit-
erature. Much of the economics literature assumes that an in-
ternational market - mediated by large international transfers 
to produce a global least-cost response - exists or will natu-
rally come into being. This debatable assumption explains 
much of the division between economic and other perspec-
tives. Third, by the same token, it provides a politically useful 
clarification. Many are skeptical of the prospect that an inter-
national fund, with payments through it on some equitable ba-
sis in support of a globally optimal response, will in reality 
ever be created, and this explains much of the fear about in-
equitable global responses. Focussing initially on allocation 
in the absence of separated big international transfers helps to 
clarify these issues. 
3.5.4.1 Act hoc proposals 
Various ad hoc allocation schemes have been proposed. 
Krause et al. (1990) suggest that an overall cumulative limit 
for emissions of 300 GlC over the period 1985-2100 be estab-
lished and divided equally among the current industrialized 
and developing countries. The general characteristics of this 
allocation are argued to be ethically appealing - it requires 
substantial cutbacks from the industrialized world and allows 
for some interim growth for developing countries - but no 
more detailed division is offered and no more formal justifica-
tions for a 50:50 aggregated division of future emissions are 
presented.s Westing (1989) suggests land area as a basis for 
allocation, but without any particular justification and with 
some perverse consequences (Grubb et al., 1992). 
More widely suggested is some proportion of GNP; Wirth 
and Lashof (1990) and Cline (1992). for example, suggest that 
this could be a component of an allocation on the grounds that 
carbon emissions are partially tied to economic activity. One 
difficulty is that the relationship is quite variable between 
countries for a variety of reasons, and pure GNP allocation 
faces the objection that on its own it would directly reward the 
richer countries, thus exacerbating inequalities (especially 
since poorer countries generally have lower GNP/carbon ra-
tios). There could also be technical difficulties associated 
with definitions and manipulation of GNP comparisons 
(Grubb, 1989). 
3.5.4.2 Equal per capita entitlements 
The most widely cited specific proposal for allocation in the 
literature is that derived directly from egalitarianism, suggest-
ing that all human beings should be entitled to an equal share 
of the atmospheric resource. This takes two general forms, 
with minor variations. 
Equal contemporary entitlements - allocation in propor-
tion to national population - is proposed by Grubb (1989). 
Bertram et al. (1989), Bertram (1992), Epstein and Gupta 
(1990), and Agarwal and Narain (1991), among others. The 
net effect in all cases would be to give developing countries, 
with much lower per capita emissions, a substantial excess en-
titlement, whereas the industrialized countries, with emis-
sions well above the global average, would have a deficit. 
The major objections are raised partly on ethical and prac-
tical "comparable-burden" arguments (since this approach 
would imply a huge adjustment burden on developed coun-
tries, to which they are unlikely to agree) and partly on 
grounds of concerns that such allocation might "reward" pop-
ulation and population growth. Proponents tend to argue that 
any such effect would be negligible compared to other factors 
influencing population; but to avoid any inducement to popu-
lation growth, Grubb (1989) suggests that allocations should 
be restricted to population above a certain age. This has been 
criticized for "discriminating against children" (though, like 
all international allocation proposals, it says nothing about 
distribution within countries). Grubb et al. (1992) note a 
wider range of possibilities for avoiding any incentive to pop-
ulation growth, including "lagged" allocations (where the 
allocation for a given year corresponds to the country's 
population a specified number of years before that dale) or al-
locations apportioned to a fixed historical date or including an 
explicit term related inversely to population growth rate. 
The second general form of equal per capita entitlements 
involves several proposals for equal historical or slock entitle-
ments. Fujii (1990), Ghosh (1993) and Meyer (1995) propose 
that everyone should have an equal right to identical emis-
sions, regardless of country and generation. Ghosh (1993) ar-
gues that this can be derived from a range of diverse ethical 
principles including Rawlsianism, traditional utilitarianism, 
and even libertarianism.9 The general justifications for histor-
ical responsibilities in various forms are discussed further 
below. Grubler and Fujii (1991) and Meyer (1995) have 
developed detailed systems of accounts involving intergener-
ational transfer of the responsibility for past excess per capita 
emissions by the industrialized countries, with the former 
allowing for progressive absorption of past emissions: den 
Elzen et al. (1993) apply the idea with an energy model to a 
total carbon budget defined over 1800-2100. All these studies 
indicate that the industrialized countries have "overused" the 
atmosphere in the past, and in most such approaches have 
built up a large "debt" whereas the developing countries are in 
"credit." 
Solomon and Ahuja (1991) propose that allocations should 
be based on "national historical per capita emissions'" - the 
"natural debt" index as introduced by Smith and discussed in 
Section 3.3.3.1 above - but do not elaborate quite what this 
means in terms of emission allocation. (Smith's own applica-
tion of the "natural debt" concept is in terms of obligation to 
pay and is discussed in Section 3.5.5.5 below.) 
Egalitarian allocation, in either the contemporary or histor-
ical form, would be compatible with some of the more general 
Equity and Social Considerations 
107 
principles noted above (such as Rawlsian and basic needs) but 
not others (such as comparable burdens and willingness to 
pay). 
3.5.4.3 Status quo 
At the opposite end of the spectrum, Young and Wolf (1992), 
for example, have suggested, but not necessarily advocated, 
an alternative principle for emission allocation based on the 
"status quo." According to this view, past emitters should not 
only be held harmless but their current rate of emissions 
would constitute a status quo right established by past usage 
and custom. Analogies are drawn with the common law prin-
ciples of adverse possession, such as "squatter's rights." 
Ghosh (1993) rejects this argument emphatically, stating that 
"pollution rights have no common law sanction." 
International law has allowed a state to establish preferen-
tial rights to fisheries, a natural resource that is otherwise a 
common, limited resource, where another state has recog-
nized that state's long-established use and its particular 
economic dependence on that resource. Although the law con-
cerning the allocation of fisheries cannot be transposed to 
the climate change context, it is conceivable that the general 
principles of equity could be invoked to justify developed 
countries' use of the climate system at present day rates, 
particularly in the absence of challenges to such use from de-
veloping countries (Yamin, 1994). Yam in notes that an impor-
tant general equitable principle in this regard is the principle 
of "estoppel," which, according to Franck and Sughrue 
(1993), "imposes a duty on States to refrain from engaging in 
inconsistent conduct vis-a-vis other States" and suggests that 
a failure by developing countries to contest present levels of 
emissions of developed countries could later come to be con-
sidered as an implicit acceptance by them of the right of de-
veloped countries to such emission levels (Yamin, 1994). 
A strict status quo allocation - proportionate to current 
emissions - would violate all the more general principles out-
lined in the previous section. In fact, no one in the literature 
appears to advocate strict status quo as an equity principle in 
its own right. It has, however, received widespread reference 
as a basis or starting point position from analysts taking a 
pragmatic or game-theoretic approach (e.g., Barrett, 1992), in 
that it is the default allocation that would arise in the absence 
of agreement. It is also the only specific allocation basis 
which does not automatically impose big burdens on the in-
dustrialized countries. In such treatments the ethical basis, 
where considered, is usually referred back to concepts of 
equal burdens. It should be emphasized that in this context 
status quo is not a static concept, but rather can refer to start-
ing from a baseline of what emissions would have been in the 
absence of abatement. It could thus allow for more rapid 
growth from developing countries. 
3.5.4.4 Mixed systems and conclusions 
The number of specific, single-criterion proposals for emis-
sion allocation is thus rather limited. A comparative study by 
Burtraw and Toman (1992) also considers just the two main 
dimensions of equal per capita entitlements and equal per-
centage cuts. There arc many other proposals that approach 
t 
the question directly in terms of "who should pay," and these 
) 
are considered below. Before turning to them, we shall touch 
on an emerging theme in the literature, the possibility of com-
bining different criteria. 
Wirth and Lashof (1990) propose allocations based on an 
, 
equal (50:50) mix of population and GDP, and Cline (1992) 
proposes an alternative allocation which consists of a 
: 
weighted combination of population, GNP, and current emis-
t 
sions. 
> 
A form in which historical contributions are considered as 
; 
a determinant of emissions allocation, other than historical 
egalitarianism, is a scheme examined by Grubler and Naki-
cenovic (1991) in which countries have to cut back from cur-
t 
rent levels in direct proportion to their responsibility for past 
increases. In a sense, therefore, this is a mixed system. In re-
quiring cutbacks from all countries - albeit more from the 
i 
richer countries - it is probably inconsistent with the other 
principles sketched in the previous section (though modifica-
r 
tions could be considered to address this). 
Grubb and Sebenius (1992), supported by Shue (1993), ex-
> amine a mixed system in more detail, and an almost identical 
I 
formulation was proposed independently by Welsch (1993). 
1 These authors suggest an allocation which links egalitarian 
and status quo/comparable burden principles by combining 
population and current emission factors. They do not, how-
ever, specify an equal weighting of these components. Rather, 
i 
they argue that the weighting accorded to population should 
: 
increase over time towards a purer per capita allocation. 
i 
Grubb and Sebenius suggest that the weighting would have to 
t 
be determined through negotiation, the outcome of which 
;• would partly reflect the strength of the competing equity argu-
ments employed. Welsch (1993) proposes a 50-year transition 
from current emissions in the year 2000 to per capita alloca-
tion in the year 2050 and presents sample calculations of the 
i 
distribution of costs this could involve. 
The various allocation proposals present an apparently 
: 
confusing array. Paterson (1994/1996) seeks to trace each of 
i 
the main approaches back to different theories of international 
: 
ethics. Grubb (1995) suggests that the single-criterion ap-
i 
proaches can be grouped in terms of two main "focal" ap-
i 
proaches: equal per capita allocation, which subsumes the 
: 
more general Rawls/Beitzian and basic needs principles, and 
i 
approaches related to the status quo, which subsume the prin-
ciples of willingness to pay and comparable burdens. These 
focal approaches could be identified broadly with developing 
: 
and developed country preferences respectively, but in reality 
all the longer-term proposals defy simple delineation along 
such lines. 
3.5.5 Proposals for distributing abatement costs 
including international transfers 
The proposals in the previous section focussed on "fair" ap-
proaches to distributing emission "entitlements." Financial 
transfers were considered only insofar as they might arise 
from exchanging these entitlements. Most analysts, however, 
suggest that both equity and efficiency considerations create a 
case for large international resource transfers as part of any 
108 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
regime for substantial reductions in greenhouse gas emis-
sions. 
Three main approaches have been taken to consider how 
such transfers might occur and how large they should be. 
3.5.5.1 Transfers on the basis of the Climate Convention 
One is based upon the principles outlined in the Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. With respect to paying for 
abatement, the Convention effectively divides the parties into 
three groups. Annex I countries (all the industrialized coun-
tries) are expected to bear their own abatement costs. Those 
also listed in Annex II (industrialized countries minus those 
with economies in transition) agree, in addition, to fund the 
efforts of the third group, the developing countries. The Con-
vention states that Annex II countries "shall provide new and 
additional financial resources to meet agreed full costs in-
curred by developing country Parties" in preparing reports un-
der the Convention (Article 12), and "shall also provide such 
financial resources, including for the transfer of technology, 
needed by the developing country Parties to meet the full in-
cremental costs of implementing measures that are covered by 
paragraph 1 of Article 4 and that are agreed |between that 
country and the funding agency|." 
This wording is very delicate. Exactly how the term 
"agreed full incremental costs" is to be interpreted, and just 
who has to agree and how, are questions that are exercising 
the minds of experts in many different countries and institu-
tions and that raise both process and outcome equity issues in 
their own right. Some of these issues will need to be ad-
dressed by the Convention's Conference of the Parties. 
In addition to using the Convention's financial mechanism 
to channel the financial and other resource flows, a number of 
countries have proposed using its provisions on joint imple-
mentation to permit an additional avenue of funding and tech-
nology to assist abatement efforts in developed and de-
veloping countries. The concept of joint implementation via 
offset investments in third countries and the concept of trad-
able permits or "entitlements," which are the subject of stren-
uous debate at present, are considered further below. 
3.5.5.2 Transfers determined by emission allocation and 
tradable entitlements 
A second approach to international transfers is to let them be 
generated directly by determining a fair initial allocation, and 
allowing these "entitlements" to be traded (UNCTAD, 1992). 
The initial allocation would be the principal means of de-
termining resource transfers. Since most of the allocation pro-
posals noted above would give poorer countries entitlements 
greater than their needs, and leave richer countries with a 
deficit, this would generate a transfer of resources to the 
poorer countries. The "outcome" equity issues involved thus 
parallel those noted above in discussing emission allocation. 
Indeed, many of the specific allocation proposals noted were 
only advanced in the context of their being initial endow-
ments for such a tradable entitlement system, on the grounds 
that this would not only be more efficient but would also be 
the only feasible way of introducing allocations radically dif-
ferent from current emission patterns. 
A number of concerns have been raised about the practical 
and legal aspects of such systems, including their possible 
fairness in operation without institutional safeguards. Several 
analysts, including both those supporting and those opposing 
tradable entitlement schemes, have raised concerns about the 
legal and equity implications of allowing countries to sell for-
ever a "right" to emit (Yamin, 1993a). For this reason, it has 
been proposed that entitlements should be either leasable 
(Grubb, 1989; Agarwal and Narain, 1991) or issued with a fi-
nite lifetime (probably overlapping) and reissued periodically 
according to the agreed allocation scheme (Bertram, 1992: 
Grubb and Sebenius, 1992). Negotiating and overseeing any 
such system would also involve a range of other process eq-
uity issues parallel to those considered below. 
3.5.5.3 Direct payment accountability approaches 
The third approach is to seek a basis to determine directly 
"who should pay" for abatement, rather than treat this as a 
consequence of future emission allocations. To a large extent 
the general equity issues involved parallel those involved in 
considering fair emission allocations, with ideas based, for 
example, on interpretations of Rawlsian criteria, equal bur-
dens, and willingness to pay. But the limited literature ad-
dressing the question in this form places relatively more 
emphasis on two other components: responsibility for emis-
sions (often including past emissions) and ability to pay for 
abatement. Smith ex al. (1993) draw this distinction directly in 
terms of indices of historical responsibility and ability to pay. 
Grubb (1990) draws a more general distinction between re-
sponsibility-based and burden-based criteria. 
3.5.5.4 Polluter-pays principle 
A general basis for responsibility may be considered in terms 
of the "polluter-pays" principle. The OECD formally adopted 
a form of polluter-pays principle in 1974 as a guide to envi-
ronmental policy. It noted, in particular, that the costs of re-
ducing pollution 
should be reflected in the cost of goods and services which 
cause pollution in production and/or consumption. Uni-
form application of this principle . . . would encourage the 
rational use and the better allocation of scarce environmen-
tal resources and prevent the appearance of distortions in 
international trade and investment. (OECD Council. 14 
November 1974 C(1974) 223, Paris, 1974) 
The essential concern of this principle is that polluters should 
bear the costs of abatement without subsidy. The principle 
does not explicitly state that all emitters of a common pollu-
tant should pay in proportion to their emissions, and. in fact. 
the literature seems remarkably opaque about how the princi-
ple should be applied in a context like climate change. The 
principle clearly points towards responsibility-based rather 
than burden-based criteria, proportional in some way to emis-
sions: The polluter should pay, but on what basis, who should 
receive how much, and for what purposes? 
A critical distinction that is rarely clarified is whether the 
principle applies to gross payment or net payment. Burtrav 
and Toman (1992) assume that it applies to net payments, so 
Equity and Social Considerations 
109 
that each country should pay for abatement in proportion to its 
contemporary emissions. This, they note, would be "regres-
sive against national income, a characteristic that is bound to 
spark developing country opposition," and Chichilnisky and 
Heal (1994) and others have pointed out that such allocation 
of payment may be neither efficient nor fair. Other authors as-
sume that the principle means that gross payments should be 
proportional to emissions, leaving how the resulting revenues 
should be distributed as a separate question of efficiency and 
equity. They also consider different bases for payment, which 
we discuss next. 
3.5.5.5 Historical responsibility and natural debt 
Smith et al. (1993) propose that responsibility for paying 
should be determined on the basis of the "natural debt" index 
described in Section 3.3.3.1, namely, in proportion to total cu-
mulative emissions since a specified date. Because this prin-
ciple, in itself, would result in all countries bearing some 
responsibility for paying (though very much less for develop-
ing countries), they suggest a lower threshold for "basic 
needs" emissions. This suggestion is consistent with the argu-
ments of Agarwal and Narain (1991) and others. 
The principle of using cumulative historical emissions di-
rectly as a component in determining payment (or future 
emission allocations) is considered by these authors as a nat-
ural and important matter of equity, and many others also ar-
gue the central equity importance of historical emissions in 
more general terms. Some of these authors recognize a variety 
of potential practical difficulties, such as how far back the 
emission estimates should go; whether the natural decay (re-
absorption) of emissions should be taken into account and, if 
so, how; which gases should be included, given the highly 
variable quality and in some cases complete absence of data; 
and how to relate the emissions to scale (e.g., cumulative pop-
ulation - and, if so, how defined - or current population, etc.). 
In part this reflects different potential definitions of the "nat-
ural debt" concept. However, at the same time as espousing 
the Fujii formulation of intergenerational egalitarianism, 
Ghosh (1993) criticizes the "natural debt" concept as a basis 
of historical responsibility on the grounds that it is an abstract, 
environment-centred focus which "does not acknowledge re-
sponsibility to others for one's actions [and] does not relate to 
fairness across human beings." 
Historical responsibility as an equity principle has strong 
support in the literature and politically in developing coun-
tries (see. for example, the quotation from Hyder in Section 
3.5.3.4). However, Young (1990) and Grubb et al. (1992) note 
three counterarguments about the equitability of what Grubb 
et al. characterize as "making present generations pay. by 
virtue of their geographical location, for the activities of pre-
vious generations" in that country. According to this view: 
• Past generations were largely unaware of the conse-
quences of their actions and had no incentive to limit 
emissions (this issue has some analogies with the issue 
of strict versus fault-based liability in legal regimes). 
• It is not always clear who has benefitted from historical 
emissions, given that the patterns of production, trade. 
consumption, and migration shift over time and are in-
tricately interwoven. In some cases boundary changes 
could also create major difficulties for allocating past 
emissions to current states (as with recent changes in 
Eastern Europe). 
• Although development has generally bequeathed the 
greatest benefits to descendants in the same country, im-
portant benefits have spread much more widely. Posi-
tive externalities associated with development (e.g., 
accumulated knowledge) as well as negative ones (such 
as pollution) can be transmitted both internationally and 
intertemporally.10 
In response to some of these criticisms. Smith et al. (1993) 
defend historical responsibility on the grounds that "we are 
asking the present generation to take responsibility for the fu-
ture. ... If we dismiss historical responsibility, what is to keep 
the next generation from doing so?" Or. as Hayes (1993) puts 
it in the same volume, "the current generation of leaders can-
not disavow its obligation to pay off its natural debt . . . at the 
same time as it claims to be adopting the principle of intc[gen-
erational equity." Ghosh also rejects objections to historical 
responsibility as partly inaccurate" but mostly irrelevant to 
the Fujii principle of equal historical per capita entitlements, 
since the Fujii principle is based not on fault, blame, or com-
pensation but on an egalitarian principle of access. 
These viewpoints, and the different elements noted in the 
quotation from Hyder above, illustrate several different di-
mensions to the debate about historical responsibility. A clear 
statement by Bhaskar (1993) links several of these themes and 
lays the prime emphasis on the fact that 
the current generation [in developed countries| are the 
prime beneficiaries of resource transfers from previous 
generations. . . . Developing countries have a claim to part 
of the transfers, simply because they were made possible 
by the excessive use of global environmental resources in 
previous generations in the developed countries. . . . Ii' the 
current generation accepts assets from their parents, then it 
is incumbent upon them to also accept the corresponding 
liabilities. 
Grubb et al. (1992) in turn note the curious feature that in 
such reasoning, a "primary justification for considering his-
torical emissions is based upon current wealth. And it is in-
tended to compensate for future increased costs to developing 
countries, if they are constrained. . . . Tentatively, we suggest 
that the ethical divide between historical criteria and those fo-
cused upon current emissions and current relative ability to 
pay may not be as large as it appears." 
3.5.5.6 Incorporating ability to pay-
In addressing the question of "ability to pay." several authors 
have made reference to GDP or the UN Scale of Assessments. 
Smith et al. (1993) suggest an ability-to-pay element which is 
proportional to GNP (on a purchasing power parity basis) for 
all countries subject to a threshold value, determined by 
Morris's Physical Quality of Life Index (PQLI). Countries 
with a PQLI below the threshold would be exempt. 
110 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
On the basis of this, the authors argue that countries should 
have an "obligation to pay," based on the two elements of his-
torical responsibility and ability to pay (both with lower 
thresholds). They suggest that equal weight be given to these 
two components and observe that the resulting obligation to 
pay could be either the product or the sum, although they 
favour the latter. 
3.5.5.7 Utilitarian formulation 
A wholly different quantified approach to the question of who 
should pay for abatement is provided by Chichilnisky and 
Heal (1994), who apply the concepts of classical economics to 
construct a strictly utilitarian formulation that seeks to maxi-
mize the sum of utilities across all countries, in other words, 
to aggregate world utility. They argue that the independence 
of distribution and efficiency so central to the welfare eco-
nomics of markets for private goods is not a characteristic of 
markets for environmental public goods such as the atmos-
phere. As mentioned previously, these authors noted that, in a 
situation without international transfers, efficient marginal 
abatement costs would vary between countries. If unrestricted 
lump-sum transfers are allowed, however, in order to recover 
the classical solution in which marginal abatement costs are 
equalized to achieve efficiency, only certain distributions of 
payment can maximize the aggregate utility. Specifically, they 
show thai for the case of two countries in which both have the 
same standardized utility function (i.e., both value a given 
consumption level - and atmospheric quality - equally), then: 
At a Pareto-efficient allocation, the fraction of income 
which each country allocates to carbon emission abatement 
must be proportional to that country's income level, and 
the constant of proportionality increases with the effi-
ciency of that country's abatement technology. 
This is the only distribution-of-abatement effort, for a given 
global total abatement and set of welfare weights, in which no 
country can he made better off without making another worse 
off. (Note, however, that it can only define relative contribu-
tions between different countries when the weights assigned 
to welfare in each country are specified.)'- The result, in turn, 
implies that the total resources each country should put to-
wards abatement would increase as the square of the national 
income. The paper implies (but does not prove) that a similar 
conclusion would hold for the more general case of other util-
ity functions (provided these are still similar between coun-
tries) and more countries. 
3.5.5.8 Application of funds and transfers 
These efforts to address questions of who should pay still do 
not address the questions of who should receive and for what 
purposes. Smith ct al. (1993) imply that the payments they 
consider would go to an international fund, which would then 
be used to finance abatement at the lowest marginal cost. In 
applying this index to evaluating transfers, however, Hayes 
(1993) develops crude aggregate cost curves which combine 
abatement costs with protection against sea level rise (but not 
other components of adaptation), aggregating developed and 
developing country blocs. Combining this index and cost 
function leads him to conclude that "the incremental cost of 
abatement and coastal protection in the South that is justifi-
ably the responsibility of the North" is a few tens of billions 
of dollars annually. (In doing so, he draws on the transbound-
ary impacts as part of the justification for using historical 
emissions. This, as noted, is an important ethical issue but one 
that is distinct from that of paying for abatement.) Chichilnisky 
and Heal (1993) also imply that expenditures would be directed 
towards the global least-cost options, whatever they may be. 
3.5.6 International trade and the incidence of 
abatement costs 
The above analyses all focus on highly simplified pictures of 
the abatement problem, in which the only interrelationship 
between countries is the impact of greenhouse gas emissions 
and deliberate financial transfers associated with paying for 
abatement (or, in the context of Section 3.3, adaptation). In re-
ality, abatement involves actions that affect the consumption 
of many goods that are traded internationally, and this in itself 
has other indirect consequences. 
One concern has been that abatement action by the indus-
trialized world will itself indirectly harm developing coun-
tries by slowing economic growth and thereby lessening 
demand for a variety of traded goods from the developing 
countries. Given the modest estimates of the impact of abate-
ment on economic growth rates - at least for abatement to the 
degree currently being considered (see Chapter 8) - it is likely 
(but remains to be demonstrated) that this second-order effect 
would be negligible compared with three other international 
effects: 
(1) 
the ultimate benefits from reducing the rate of climate 
change itself; for the reasons discussed in this chapter. 
those benefits are likely to be greatest for the develop-
ing countries 
(2) 
the impact on the location of specific industries if coun-
tries take differential actions; for example, if some re-
gions introduce carbon/energy taxes and offset them 
against capital or labour tax reductions, energy-inten-
sive industries will tend to locate elsewhere whilst the 
number of lower-than-average energy consuming indus-
tries may increase 
(3) 
the impact on the traded volume and price of the com-
modities that give rise to greenhouse gases - particu-
larly fossil fuels 
This last factor may introduce substantial variations be-
tween countries, depending on how restrictions are applied. II 
- as is generally assumed - abatement policies are applied to 
consumption, the likely effect is to reduce the international 
trade volume and price of coal and (to a lesser extent) oil.Thh 
effect will tend to benefit net importers of these fuels and re-
duce the revenues to fossil fuel exporters (see Chapter S>. 
More generally, "the relative value of non-fossil energy re-
sources would be increased; that of high carbon resources de-
creased" (Grubb, 1990). Extensive abatement efforts could 
Equity and Social Considerations 
/ / / 
thus have serious implications for those countries that depend 
heavily on coal exports or (to a lesser extent) oil exports - an 
equity issue already raised in international discussions. 
The effects are complex, however, particularly concerning 
oil. First, one initial response to reduce C02 emissions could 
be to burn more fuel oil in power stations in place of coal. 
Furthermore, gas - which in power stations emits about half 
as much CC% as coal - is very likely to be favoured in CO, 
abatement strategies, and gas resources are often associated 
with oil deposits and also with many coal mines. The overall 
impact also depends very much on the time horizon consid-
ered. Heal (1984) noted that, in general, aversion to climatic 
risks would tend to flatten the use of carbon resources over 
time: Peak and initial usage would be lower, but usage would 
also fall more slowly, partly because the resource base would 
be extended over time. Manne and Rutherford (1994) provide 
a more detailed energy analysis, concluding that "carbon re-
strictions tend to depress oil prices in the near term, but to in-
crease them in the long term . . . oil is less carbon-intensive 
than coal-based synthetic fuels, and hence oil enjoys a pre-
mium." They also find that carbon restrictions improve the 
prospects and price for gas exports. 
Such indirect impacts of abatement on fossil fuel exporters 
(and importers) are thus potentially important but are fre-
quently not simple. 
3.5.7 Joint implementation by industrialized and 
developing countries 
Joint implementation (JI) has emerged as one of the major de-
bates in the post-Rio negotiations. The term is generally ap-
plied to the idea that industrialized countries might invest in 
projects in other countries, particularly developing countries, 
to reduce or sequester greenhouse gas emissions. Industrial-
ized countries consider that the main incentives arise if some 
or all of the emission savings can be credited towards the 
donor country's emission target. Many economists tend to see 
JI as a natural way of improving economic efficiency, by al-
lowing industrialized countries to invest in abatement wher-
ever it is cheapest. 
Industrialized/Developing Country Joint Implementation 
(IDCJI) - also referred to in the literature as North-South 
Joint Implementation (NSJI) - might involve project-level in-
vestment, appraisal, and crediting of emission savings by a 
"donor" country on the territory of a "host" country. This in-
volves a number of equity issues that underpin the political 
debate, many of which illustrate equity issues discussed in 
this chapter. (Note that IDCJI avoids some of the equity issues 
concerning proposals for international tradable permits, in 
which the issues would arise primarily, though not exclu-
sively, from the allocation of initial emission rights between 
legally equivalent parties. Dubash (1994) explores the many 
differences and argues that IDCJI is an attempt to lower the 
political costs associated with allocating tradable permits, "at 
the price of higher social and environmental costs.") 
A number of technical and economic concerns about IDCJI 
have been raised, particularly with respect to the need to mea-
sure savings against a "counterfactual" baseline (i.e., an esti-
mate of what would have happened in the absence of the JI 
project), thus raising questions about what is to prevent in-
flated baseline estimates or other distortions. Another concern 
involves uncertainties about project success: Who has the re-
sponsibility for project success, and what happens if it fails? 
Administrative costs arising from both these factors are a fur-
ther issue. Reviews of these technical issues are given by 
Loske and Oberthur (1993) and Selrod and Torvanger (1994), 
the latter being much more optimistic than the former, and in a 
number of books and conference proceedings (e.g., Kuik et 
al., 1994; Ramakrishna, 1994). Here, however, the focus is on 
the underlying equity issues, which can be classified along the 
lines set out in this chapter. 
3.5.7.1 Allocation issues 
Analysts have raised the following concerns about the impli-
cations of IDCJI for emission abatement responsibilities and 
associated costs: 
• IDCJI could impose hidden administrative and/or op-
portunity costs on host countries which are only partly 
recovered through the investment itself (Maya, 1994). 
• IDCJI could "skim off the cheapest projects, so that, if 
and when developing countries are required to adopt 
emission constraints in the future, they will be faced 
with higher marginal abatement costs (e.g., Parikh, 
1994, and many others). 
• If IDCJI allows industrialized countries to continue in-
creasing their own emissions, it will perpetuate - and 
perhaps even exacerbate - global inequalities in per 
capita emissions rather than tending towards any long-
term convergence (Parikh and Gokarn, 1993: Loske and 
Oberthur. 1993). 
• By reducing the pressure on the industrialized countries 
to take domestic action, IDCJI may reduce incentives 
for technical advance and innovation that could lower 
costs for all in future abatement (Loske. 1991). A slower 
pace of technical innovation may itself differentially in-
crease the future costs to developing countries (Ghosh 
and Puri. 1994). 
To each of these concerns there are responses that results 
will depend (in part, at least) on how the framework for IDCJI 
is defined and on how future commitments are structured to 
take account of any previous JI activity (e.g., Vellinga and 
Heintz. 1993: Metz. 1994: Ghosh and Puri. 1994). This does 
illustrate, however, that JI does not really overcome the basic-
political issue of allocating future emission rights, though it 
delays (at the expense of further complication) the need to ad-
dress this core equity issue concerning the role of developing 
countries. 
3.5.7.2 Procedural issues 
Efforts to address the technical and allocation issues also 
highlight concerns about more procedural equity issues. Since 
a JI project cannot (or is unlikely to) proceed without the con-
112 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
sent of the government of the host country, inadequate state 
participation per se is not a primary matter of concern, but is-
sues of information and power asymmetries are raised in the 
literature. 
Concerning information, it has been pointed out that, be-
cause donor countries tend to have a far greater research and 
analysis capability, they have a comparative advantage in any 
negotiations about framing JI projects. Pachauri (1994) com-
ments that "the biggest apprehension that exists on the issue 
of JI relates to small countries that lack the capacity to eval-
uate the implications of specific projects." Such countries 
could accept projects that later prove to he against their inter-
ests. 
Power asymmetries could also result in developing coun-
tries being pushed into projects on disadvantageous terms. 
Short-term financial pressures, for example, could lead to 
host countries giving up land to JI projects that could have far 
greater productive use in later years. JI projects may also be 
driven by the interests of technology suppliers in the donor 
countries, perhaps at the expense of equipment manufacturers 
in the host country (Maya, 1994). 
Again, protection against at least some of these potential 
inequities can be developed, with the emphasis in the litera-
ture being on the need for an open, transparent, and multilat-
eral framework for JI agreements between parties to the 
Convention (e.g., Ghosh and Puri. 1994; Markandya, 1994). 
with clear, legally binding rules (Yamin, 1993b). and also on 
projects that meet a range of development needs (Imbree. 
1994). 
Others, however, express concern that such an extensive 
multilateral framework may involve such high administrative 
costs as to render the idea impotent. And, conversely, it could 
be considered inequitable to expect industrialized countries to 
engage in stronger commitments whilst barring them from ex-
ploring alternative ways of achieving the same global envi-
ronmental benefit. Therefore, there is also an onus on de-
veloping countries to clarify their concerns to allow a basis 
for a regime that is considered fair and practical by all parties. 
The purpose here, however, is not to argue for or against ID-
CJ1, but to illustrate the central place, and range, of relevant 
equity issues in any practical moves towards transnational im-
plementation of measures to address climate change. 
3.6 Equity Within Countries 
3.6.1 Introduction 
This section examines issues within countries. Not only is this 
important in its own right; it can also shed a new light on the 
issues discussed in the other sections of this chapter. As noted 
earlier (Section 3.1.1 above), institutions to address a wide 
range of common interests exist primarily within countries, 
and equity is an important influence and measure of the 
strength and perceived legitimacy of these institutions. Al-
though the nature and strength of these national institutions is 
far from uniform, they do provide the main working model for 
incorporating equity into international relations. 
A national focus also allows lessons to be drawn from the 
experience of economic reform programmes, especially the 
structural adjustment programmes in developing countries, 
but also programmes of economic restructuring in industrial-
ized as well as industrializing countries. Furthermore, unless 
intranational equity issues are addressed explicitly, it may be 
impossible to mobilize public opinion for amelioratory action 
in both developed and developing countries, as it is only at the 
intracountry level that we can begin to explore nontechno-
cratic approaches to collective action. Since policies and ac-
tions to combat climate change would in any event begin at 
the national level, the examination of intracountry considera-
tions could help individual countries by clarifying the range 
of issues involved. 
The provisions on education, training, and public aware-
ness in the Convention call upon the parties to develop educa-
tional programmes, provide public information, and promote 
public participation in addressing climate change and its ef-
fects and developing adequate responses. However, it must be 
acknowledged that intracountry equity does not figure promi-
nently in the Framework Convention on Climate Change. It is 
being introduced here to facilitate the search for optimal na-
tional and international policies. It is not the purpose of this 
section to introduce an entirely new element into international 
negotiation. Nor is its purpose to sidestep the central concern 
of the Convention and also of this chapter - the issue of inter-
national equity and differentiated responsibility. Nor, indeed, 
is the intention to legitimize a new period of colonialism in 
which the scope for sovereign national action is restricted un-
duly by international agreements on the nature and form of in-
tracountry equity. 
As mentioned earlier, equity considerations have become ;i 
part of climate change discussions primarily because of the 
awareness of the diverse situations of both countries and indi-
viduals - not only in terms of their contribution to climate 
change but also of the impact of the change on their well-
being, their individual and collective capacities to cope with 
this impact, and on their abilities to undertake mitigating ac-
tion. Furthermore, there is also a growing awareness that the 
combination of large-scale changes and iniquitous arrange-
ments will necessarily lead to conflicts and even wars, which 
will further aggravate the adverse effect on social well-being. 
Finally, it is also acknowledged that the burden of mitigation 
must not be placed disproportionately on the poor and vulner-
able groups. 
The above considerations have influenced decisions in a 
number of areas. In addition to the agreement to limit emis-
sions to minimize the magnitude of the change, there is also 
an emerging consensus on the need to compensate the worst-
affected groups and countries, especially the small island 
states. There is support as well, through Agenda 21. for the 
strengthening of coping systems in vulnerable countries. The 
agreement to distribute the burden of mitigation in an equi-
table manner also falls into this category. Finally, the aware-
ness of the need for adjustment has also led some to 
recommend that countries should begin addressing major 
sources of inequity. 
Equity and Social Considerations 
113 
To state all of this somewhat differently, equity considera-
tions are germane to the climate change issue in two different 
contexts - equitable distribution of the costs (or benefits) of 
the change, and equitable contribution to amelioratory and 
preventive actions. Neither experience is without precedent in 
national contexts. There is an extensive literature on the dis-
tributional impacts of the business cycles, supply shocks (e.g., 
the oil price increases in the 1970s), economic development, 
and episodes of structural adjustment and liberalization. In all 
such cases, the questions are similar to the ones being raised 
in the present situation, namely, how is the burden of the 
change to be shared, and who should pay for amelioratory or 
preventive actions. This literature can be divided into two 
groups, that which looks at governmental policies within a 
given institutional context, and that which examines the insti-
tutional context itself. In addition to this, there is also a theo-
retical literature on conditions that will give rise to equitable 
outcomes within countries. 
3.6.2 Policy-oriented literature 
The classic example of policy-oriented literature is the 
UNICEF publication on structural adjustment in developing 
countries, Adjustment with a Human Face (Cornia et al., 
1987). To quote the subtitle of this text, the object of the 
exercise is both "protecting the vulnerable and promoting 
growth." This book is a part of a critique that emerged in the 
1980s against the current conventional approaches. Since 
then, the critique has gradually come to represent the new 
mainstream position. 
Structural adjustment or "stabilization" becomes necessary 
when the aggregate expenditure (or consumption) of a coun-
try begins systematically to exceed its aggregate income. The 
result is the accumulation of debt at an unsustainable and un-
serviceable rate. In the 1970s, these difficulties were seen as 
part of the short-term problems of cyclical fluctuations and 
were responded to with the short-term measures of stabiliza-
tion, on the pattern of similar problems and policy responses 
in developed countries. Subsequently, it was recognized that 
the problem was of a longer-term duration and structural 
rather than cyclical; in other words, the problems emerged not 
because of the normal functioning of a business cycle, but be-
cause the economic and political structure of some countries 
was designed to produce these results on a systematic basis. In 
either case, the symptoms were a growing public debt, deficits 
in government budgets and international payments, and accel-
erating inflation. 
In the absence of a policy response, these symptoms were 
likely to be cured through the "classical adjustment" mecha-
nism, in which the debt squeeze brings about an economic 
contraction and thus a reduction in expenditures. Since the 
publication of Keynes's General Theory of Employment, In-
terest, and Money (1936), this has been recognized as a sub-
optimal path because of its high social and economic cost. 
The main policy response in the 1970s and 1980s was that of a 
managed economic contraction through budget cuts (espe-
cially on such "nonessential" items as social services, con-
sumer subsidies, and general administration), reduction in do-
mestic credit, devaluation, and the liberalization of foreign 
trade and payments regimes (see Banuri. 1992). 
The performance of these policies has come under consid-
erable scrutiny (see e.g., Taylor, 1993; Banuri, 1992; Cornia 
and Jolly, 1984; Cornia et al., 1987). Earlier critics argued 
that the orthodox adjustment programmes were both ineffec-
tive and unnecessarily painful. They proposed heterodox, or 
supply-side approaches, which aimed to increase production 
directly through investment promotion, labour training, direct 
export promotion, and income policies. Many of these recom-
mendations are extremely sound, but experience shows that 
they have to be combined in varying proportions with ortho-
dox demand contraction policies. Also, the hope for a win-win 
solution, in which the costs of adjustment would be avoided 
altogether has not been vindicated by experience. The eco-
nomics profession appears to have come to the conclusion 
that some degree of economic contraction is inevitable during 
structural adjustment, if only to dampen the inflationary ex-
pectations built up during periods of prosperity. 
As a result, the attention of many of the critics shifted to 
the protection of important areas during such contractions. 
These critics argue that the conventional approach is subopti-
mal, in that it leads to the marginalization and immiserization 
of vulnerable groups - women, children, the poor, the rural 
population, labour, and the aged population - who are forced 
to carry a disproportionate burden of the adjustment. As part 
of their argument, Cornia and Jolly (1984) and Cornia et al. 
(1987) documented successful cases in which government 
policies managed to protect vulnerable groups while bringing 
structural adjustment. The result of these studies has been a 
remarkable turnaround in the conventional wisdom on struc-
tural adjustment. From a situation of almost total neglect of 
the social sector and vulnerable groups in the 1980s, current 
policies include the protection of these sectors and groups as 
integral elements of structural adjustment programmes. 
However, even the modified approach, which seeks to in-
corporate social and equity concerns, has not been without its 
critics. A number of writers have suggested that government-
directed and targeted programmes are not successful in allevi-
ating poverty or delivering social services in many contexts. 
This criticism has been launched in particular by the Public 
Choice Theory school (Buchanan andToIlison, 1984; Krueger 
and Bates, 1993) and has been accompanied by calls for pri-
vatization and deregulation. Other critics have used similar 
arguments to recommend institutional development pro-
grammes. We shall take up some of these criticisms in the 
next subsection. 
The analogy of structural adjustment to climate change is 
quite striking. The climate change threat has also emerged be-
cause the planetary consumption of certain materials (mainly 
fossil fuels) has begun systematically to exceed sustainable 
levels. In this case, there is the accumulation of global warm-
ing gases in the atmosphere, again at an unsustainable rate. 
The analogy of the classical adjustment mechanism is ecolog-
ical homeostasis, which may bring about a new planetary 
equilibrium, albeit with far fewer humans and after the pay-
114 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
merit of a very high human and social cost. The Framework 
Convention on Climate Change can be seen as analogous 
to an agreement to undertake a structural adjustment pro-
gramme. 
In other words, the experience of structural adjustment in 
developing countries has many lessons to offer for the fore-
seeable adjustment, both at a global level and in industrialized 
countries. 
• The first lesson is that "blind" or neutral policies have 
not performed well. As a result, the need to protect the 
social sector and some targeted groups has become 
widely accepted. In the climate change context, this 
means that such "blind" policies as a carbon tax, or even 
tradable permits, will have to be supplemented with 
policies to protect vulnerable groups and vulnerable 
sectors. 
• In general, the experience of structural adjustment 
shows that policy responses need to be sensitive to the 
economic, political, and institutional contexts of various 
countries. Reliance on a formulaic approach has often 
been ineffective if not counterproductive. 
• The experience with heterodox approaches to stabiliza-
tion suggests that these need to be combined in varying 
proportions with the orthodox, demand-contraction 
policies. In the climate change context this means that 
pure win-win solutions based on technological opti-
mism - namely the expectation that technological im-
provements alone will suffice to reduce emissions to 
sustainable levels - are unlikely to produce the desired 
results unless combined with steps to reduce aggregate 
consumption. 
• Another lesson is that, in many cases, even the modified 
approach may be deficient unless accompanied by insti-
tutional strengthening programmes. 
Structural adjustment and stabilization are, however, the most 
recent of the many arenas for the debate over equity concerns. 
As is apparent from the above remarks, the experience of sta-
bilization was not restricted to developing countries. In indus-
trialized countries, similar questions have been discussed in 
the context of business cycles and stabilization. More gener-
ally, the discussion of trade-offs between equity and giowth 
also falls in this category. 
In this context, equity has been taken to mean income dis-
tribution. There is a literature on the appropriate index to be 
used to measure income distribution. Starting with the Lorenz 
Curve and the Ciini coefficient, a number of improvements 
have been proposed. The Gini coefficient is an index of the in-
equality of relative income shares, with zero representing 
complete equality and one representing complete inequality. 
Subsequently, attention shifted to other indicators, such as 
absolute poverty - measured in terms of the number of peo-
ple below a nutrition-based poverty line and quality of life 
(Morris, 197°) - and basic human needs, namely education. 
food, health, water supply, sanitation, and housing (Streeten, 
1981). 
The conventional view of the relationship between equity 
and growth was derived from Kuznet's (1955) observation of 
an inverted-U relationship (the Kuznet's curve) between GNP 
per capita and the Gini coefficient. This observation was 
based on both time series and cross-section data. However, 
subsequent studies have added substantial qualifications to 
this result (Ahluwalia and Chenery, 1974). 
The thrust of these arguments is that economic develop-
ment and structural transformation affect income distribution 
within countries in specific ways. The earlier view was that 
income distribution would worsen with economic growth be-
fore getting better. However, the more recent evidence sug-
gests that the pattern of change is sensitive to policy choices 
and institutional conditions in individual countries. Countries 
that followed proactive policies, and favoured investment in 
social sectors (education, health, social welfare) were able to 
pursue economic growth and social development simultane-
ously. In other words, at least insofar as the experience of de-
velopment is concerned, a win-win solution is possible. There 
are, however, considerable differences over the factors con-
tributing to win-win solutions. Neoliberal writers (e.g.. Bal-
assa, 1993; Krueger, 1993) attribute the success of newly 
industrializing countries to market-based, outward-oriented 
policies. Others look to institutions of governance as key ele-
ments (see, e.g., Wade. 1992;Alam, 1989; Banuri, 1992). 
3.6.3 Institution-oriented 
literature 
The common element of the above analyses is their rooled-
ness in a technocratic approach to problem solving. As a re-
sult, they are focussed on what the government can or cannot 
deliver, either in terms of policies or of outcomes. Dirigistic 
arguments favour direct interventions by centralized states in 
the form of government investment, protection of domestic 
economic activity, social cost-benefit analyses, and others. 
Even neoliberal arguments that favour market-based ap-
proaches view the government as virtually omnipotent in 
bringing about the structural transformation towards a free 
market economy. 
An alternative to this approach is the literature that takes 
governance as an entry point to the analysis. It covers a broad 
range of ideas, including capacity building and technical as-
sistance (UNDP, 1993), community participation and empow-
erment, people-centred development (Korten, 1987. IWOI. 
and sustainable development (Banuri et al., 1994). Its limb-
ing theme is the emphasis on collective action and develop-
ment of institutional and decision-making capacities. At 
smaller units of aggregation, this focus leads to the analysis oi 
participation, empowerment, and community development. 
At the middle level, it translates into the argument for the 
strengthening of various organs of civil society, including in-
stitutions of education, research, and monitoring. At the go\-
ernmental level, the focus is on administrative reform and 
capacity development. 
The relationship of these approaches to the climate change 
debate on equity issues derives from the analysis that lies be-
hind them. The main idea is that inequitable outcomes are 
Equity and Social Considerations 
115 
produced by institutions that fail to protect the rights of vul-
nerable or marginalized groups in society. Similarly, countries 
cannot take advantage of global opportunities, or suffer dis-
proportionately from adverse global processes, if they lack 
the institutional capacity to protect their interests. Finally, 
countries that exhibit superior performance on one indicator 
of social welfare also perform better on virtually every other 
indicator. This means that rather than trade-offs between dif-
ferent goals, there is a clustering of performance around vari-
ous goals. This can only be explained by institutional factors 
that favour some countries over others. The solution for coun-
tries that perform poorly is to enhance their national institu-
tional capacity to protect their rights and, more generally, to 
pursue collective goals. Analogously, the solution for weak or 
marginalized groups is also to enable them to make collective 
decisions and protect their rights. 
This provides a somewhat different slant on the literature 
cited earlier. It could be argued that the need for structural ad-
justment arises when the sum total of property rights exceeds 
the available aggregate endowment of assets or resources. The 
solution then is to reduce the command over goods and ser-
vices by reallocating or eliminating some property rights. 
These might include the rights of the government (generated 
through money creation), or those of groups favoured by dis-
tributional policies or subsidies, or even of investors who are 
allowed to borrow at highly subsidized rates. The argument of 
the critics is that in this reallocation of rights, it would be dif-
ficult for the vulnerable groups to protect themselves, partly 
because of their very weakness, and partly because many of 
their rights are likely to be informal in character. 
One strand of this argument has been made by Sen (1976) 
and various others in terms of "entitlements." In Sen's ap-
proach, crises, such as famines, occur not because of a short-
age of food but because of a failure of entitlements, namely 
rights to commodities. However, as Gore (1993) has argued, 
in much of his work Sen focuses on entitlements conferred by 
the formal legal system. Although in the examination of in-
trafamily distribution (Sen, 1984) he extends the analysis to 
include informal entitlements as well, this does not seem to 
have affected the exclusive focus on the formal legal system 
in the remaining corpus of his work. 
Be that as it may, two points are significant in this debate. 
First, that it may be more germane to look at property rights, 
whether formal or informal, rather than consumption or pro-
duction patterns alone. Second, that there is an interrelation-
ship between economic and ethical considerations. As Gore 
points out, "for Sen, policies to counter hunger and famine 
must ultimately be justified through foundational arguments 
about what is valuable. Equally, ethical assessment of institu-
tions, such as property rights, requires empirical analysis of 
causes and effects" (Gore, 1993). 
From this perspective, the development process appears as 
a trend towards the formalization of property rights and in 
many cases the expropriation of the customary rights of local 
communities in favour of centralized states. This was justified 
on the grounds that it would facilitate the pursuit of national 
goals, such as development or equity. The institutional per-
spective would argue for the reconstitution of local property 
rights, primarily to enable the protection of the rights of vul-
nerable communities. 
These considerations are relevant for the examination of 
climate change issues. Insofar as the climate change issue is 
also one of property rights (or entitlements) exceeding the to-
tal endowment of planetary sinks, the response will necessar-
ily include a curtailment of aggregate entitlements. The result 
is that blind policies are likely to reallocate the property rights 
in an inequitable manner by curtailing the entitlements of the 
poor disproportionately. This is true for countries as well as 
for groups within countries. Given the fact that the developing 
world will be affected more by climate change, that it has 
lesser flexibility, is closer to subsistence, and lacks the institu-
tional infrastructure to protect lives and livelihoods, its rights 
will be curtailed disproportionately in any adjustment 
episode. The much greater vulnerability of the developing 
countries is starkly apparent when one considers that the 1991 
cyclone in Bangladesh killed more than 200.000 people, 
whereas in 1992 Hurricane Andrew, of the same intensity, 
killed only 34 in the U.S. The same disproportionality affects 
the vulnerability of groups within countries, for example: 
• At an individual level, the choice of protecting the 
rights of various people will be influenced by cultural 
arrangements, which favour men over women. 
• In most countries, declines in food availability will fall 
disproportionately on the politically weaker and rela-
tively passive groups, on the poor, the children, women, 
older people, the unemployed, and the rural people. 
• Not only is this likely to produce conflict, but the emer-
gence of conflict will further discriminate against the 
weaker and more peaceable groups (Suliman. 1992). 
• Major technological or political changes in agriculture 
result typically in expropriation of tenants and landless 
poor. Attempts to offset these consequences through 
land reforms have had only limited impact (Moyo, 
1994;Sobhan, 1993). 
Equally, although there is rhetorical support for ameliora-
tory actions, though often only at elite levels, this has trans-
lated neither into a broad legitimacy of concerted state action 
in industrialized countries nor into change in behaviour to-
wards more conservationist patterns. Similarly, the awareness 
of the primary responsibility of the industrialized countries 
for the ecological threat seems to have absolved the affluent 
groups in the developing countries of their responsibility to 
respond to it. 
In other words, it may be idealistic to expect that the 
nation-state as currently constituted will respond equitably in 
the face of disasters and large-scale dislocations. The same 
considerations apply to the international situation, where the 
degree of institutional weakness, the inability of the vulnera-
ble to fight back, and absence of a collective morality are even 
more pronounced. Writers concerned with this weakness have 
argued that the only solution is to develop the decision mak-
ing capacity of vulnerable groups. This has led to programmes 
116 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
of community development, rural development, and capacity 
building. At national levels, it might ask for a broad-based 
programme, involving the government as well as nongovern-
ment and private sector institutions (see Banuri et ai, 1994). 
This still leaves open the question whether there is an ethi-
cal framework that can enable national societies, and indeed 
the global human society, to respond to the emerging prob-
lems in an equitable manner. 
3.6.4 The question of ethics 
Equity, justice, fair play are all concepts with strong moral 
and ethical overtones. The literature that has been discussed 
exhibits these overtones either explicitly or implicitly. It is 
fair to say, however, that the policy-oriented literature seeks 
an ethically neutral stance. It is based on a technocratic ap-
proach, which focusses on the means or instruments to given 
or agreed goals. In this approach, the only ethical considera-
tions pertain to the goals, not to the means through which the 
goals are to be achieved. The goal of this literature is to deter-
mine a universal formula for decision making. Differences be-
tween philosophers pertain not to this search for a universal 
formula but to the contents of the formula. 
This distinction is not simply that between outcomes and 
processes. For example. Nozick (1974) argues for liberty as 
the primary principle, not only in its own right but as the 
definitive feature of equity. This is generally taken to be an 
example of process-oriented ethics. However, it too is conse-
quentialist, in that it assumes a transcendental goal, which can 
he achieved through the appropriate institutions - in this case 
free markets. Similarly. Rawls (1971) analyzes the concept of 
justice from an individualistic viewpoint to argue for a 
Solomonic veil of ignorance that would induce each individ-
ual to seek a maximin solution. If this could be agreed, pre-
sumably we could also agree to establish institutions (a 
government, a judiciary) that would put our values into ac-
tion. 
Both these perspectives, which are two of the most salient 
recent analyses of the issue of justice, derive from a "conse-
quentialist" position, in which values have to be justified by 
outcomes - even if they are defended by processes. Hannah 
Arendt (1961) has made a scathing critique of such ap-
proaches, by arguing that they are based on a confusion be-
tween meanings and values as well as between values and 
goals. The result is that everything is reduced in the end to 
means. In this approach, culture and values become mere in-
struments for the achievement of particular goals (e.g.. devel-
opment). Indeed, even equity is but an instrument for the 
pursuit of such goals as economic growth or political stability. 
This is not the only possibility however. An alternative ap-
proach, which would be sensitive to Arendt's criticism, sees 
culture and values (including equity) as foundational and as 
developed through experience. This is implicit in Rawls's ar-
gument, when he says that "the primary subject of justice is 
the basic structure of society" (Rawls, 1971). Following this, 
Michael Sandel (1982) has commented that "For a society to 
be just in this strong [Rawlsian] sense, justice must be consti-
tutive of its framework and not simply an attribute of certain 
of the participants' plans of life." This is the definition of a 
moral community and not a society of strangers. 
Arendt herself has argued against transcendental principles 
by invoking judgment as an alternative entry point - contex-
tual, subjective, interactive, and constructive of community. 
Judgment requires being able to judge particulars without 
subsuming them under general rules. Such concepts as justice, 
courage, truth, goodness, are not based on general rules but on 
concrete experiences. If one takes this point of view, the 
search for universal rules is dangerous as well as futile. Jus-
tice lies in experience, not in transcendental rules. Equity and 
efficiency do not collide as contrasting goals. We cannot have 
efficiency in an inequitable society. 
However, this perspective presupposes an alternative insti-
tutional structure, in which the experience of value creation 
can become possible again. This structure must build on 
small, decentralized communities, in which the scope for 
judgment is reestablished. This would go against the broad 
trends of twentieth-century development, which have been in 
the direction of greater centralization and concentration and 
have also been accompanied by the transfer of all collective 
rights to the state. In the realm of economics, therefore, they 
have left an amoral universe, in which equity can only be an 
instrument for the achievement of some other goal, not a 
value in its own right. 
3.7 Procedural Fairness in International Climate 
Change Processes 
3.7.1 Introduction 
The various differences between countries outlined in this 
chapter have implications for the way in which international 
responses to climate change are developed. In the context of 
the different equity issues discussed in the introduction, issues 
of procedural equity are important as well as the conse-
quences of decisions taken. Indeed, the two ultimately ate 
likely to be inseparable. Oran Young (1990) notes that 
One of the most robust findings of the social sciences is 
that... [countries in international negotiations]... can and 
often do fail to realize feasible joint gains, thus ending up 
with outcomes that are suboptimal (and sometimes highh 
destructive) for all concerned. 
Part of the reason is the lack of trust and adequate informa-
tion that can arise from negotiations that are, or are perceived 
as. operating in an unfair or inequitable way. The result can be 
- and often is - that countries do not even agree to things thai 
would benefit each and every one of them. Hence, the impor-
tance of procedural equity. An overview of post-Rio issues b_\ 
Jaitly (1993) illustrates a balance of developing country con-
cerns regarding procedural as well as outcome issues. 
One important element of procedural equity has been men-
tioned in Section 3.2, namely, the principle of sovereignty in in-
ternational affairs, coupled with a responsibility towards the 
impact of internal actions on others. The difficulty with climate 
change is that it is an issue in which the activities of each coun-
try have impacts on all others; hence, the need for processes 
Equity and Social Considerations 
117 
through which states can seek agreement on mutual changes to 
reduce such impacts, and/or to compensate accordingly. 
These principles apply to the negotiations, associated 
processes like the IPCC, and any institutional structures and 
procedures created through negotiations. The principle of 
seeking consensus among all participating states for interna-
tional agreements makes it still more important that partici-
pants feel that negotiations are conducted fairly and that they 
feel able to participate effectively, and that states take part in 
good faith. Countries that do not perceive a process to be fair 
have great power to obstruct it, ensuring that negotiations 
make little progress. 
Procedural equity is an aspect of institutions, and the con-
struction of international institutions is partly about establish-
ing structures that command widespread adherence because 
they offer adequately fair representation. The painstaking 
negotiations over the Global Environmental Facility, for 
example, can be seen largely as negotiation about fair rep-
resentation. 
The overall literature on institutions is very large, and 
there is an extensive literature (especially in the U.S.) about 
institutions for managing global environmental affairs (e.g.. 
Millennium, 1990; WRI, 1991; Choucri, 1994). The academic 
literature specifically on practical aspects of equity in interna-
tional institutions for managing global environmental affairs 
is, however, much smaller. Among the most important studies 
in this corpus is the report of the IPCC Special Committee on 
the Participation of Developing Countries (IPCC, 1990). This 
identified five areas of particular concern that might inhibit 
adequate involvement: "insufficient information, insufficient 
communication, limited human resources, institutional diffi-
culties, and limited financial resources." Here we group these 
more broadly under "participation" and "information," each 
including the question of adequate resources. "Resources" is 
used in the broad sense of the word; it encompasses human re-
sources, financial resources, institutions, and infrastructure 
that can underlie adequate participation in and information for 
effective negotiations. 
These issues are important. The cost of inadequate partici-
pation is likely to be low adherence to any resulting agree-
ment. The cost of inadequate information is likely to be a 
suspicious and obstructive attitude that reduces negotiations 
to a crawl. We consider each in turn. 
3.7.1.1 Participation 
Participation in international processes - at the simple level of 
having nationals or other representatives present - is re-
stricted chiefly by limitations on human and financial re-
sources, though delays in obtaining visas and the sheer 
difficulty of travel from some developing countries can also 
be important constraints. For some processes (like the IPCC). 
financial constraints on travel from poorer countries are ad-
dressed through special funds supported by developed coun-
tries, though inevitably there are recurring concerns about 
their adequacy. The matter of human resources is more diffi-
cult to deal with, since it depends partly on long-run educa-
tion and reflects the contrary priorities in many developing 
countries outlined in Section 3.3.2. 
A related problem can be the appropriateness of partici-
pants and the load on them. Many of the smaller and/or poorer 
developing countries had just a few delegates covering the 
whole range of negotiations surrounding the Rio Earth Sum-
mit, compared with several hundred, for example, from the 
U.S. They could not possibly have had the specialized knowl-
edge required to participate effectively. 
That said, it is obviously unrealistic to expect universal 
participation in everything. Indeed it would be a huge waste 
of scarce human and financial resources and would in a sense 
be unfair to participants with more urgent priorities. In prac-
tice, the smaller countries - in both the industrialized and 
developing world - are selective about their participation 
through choice as well as need, without necessarily adverse 
consequences. Smaller countries may be able to rely on larger 
neighbours that share common interests or may otherwise be 
able to ensure that their concerns are reflected through dele-
gated or grouped responsibilities. Luxembourg, for example, 
generally has little difficulty signing on to agreements in 
whose formation it played no direct part. And, as noted ear-
lier, addressing climate change requires widespread but not 
necessarily universal participation. Where universal partici-
pation is impractical or even undesirable, what matters is en-
suring that a fair balance of interests and perceptions is 
represented. 
A related problem is that of institutional coordination 
within countries. Climate change involves an extraordinary 
diversity of issues and interests, ranging from meteorology to 
international trade. Frequently, governments have trouble co-
ordinating policy between different internal groups - and in 
the international arena it is indeed not uncommon for meteo-
rologists from developing countries to find themselves dis-
cussing issues that have more to do with international trade 
policy. 
Concerns about the ability to participate effectively under-
lie the frequent insistence of many developing countries on 
rules of procedure, such as the development of official nego-
tiating timetables without informal meetings outside this 
agenda. To bigger and more advanced countries this can be an 
intense irritation and may seem an unnecessary brake on 
progress (which such procedures may indeed turn out to be). 
To weaker and poorer participants they are seen as a protec-
tive device to give them a chance to keep up with discussions. 
Again, it is an area where a fair compromise between ade-
quate progress and comprehensive participation is called for. 
Another aspect of participation is that of nongovernmental 
organizations. The Rio processes were marked by unprece-
dented involvement of NGOs. which are widely considered to 
have contributed positively to the process. Brenton (1994) 
lists their involvement as one of the four major forces for in-
ternational cohesion in environmental policy. Their legiti-
macy and impact derive from a widespread membership, 
strong international links, and extensive information, when 
these attributes arc brought to bear positively on the process. 
Environmental NGOs tend to be relatively concerned about 
international ethical responsibilities. In international negotia-
tions, they frequently help to counter financial and political 
pressures that exist in some of the richer countries against 
IIH 
Climate Change 1995 
Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
change or acceptance of international responsibilities. They 
also frequently support the positions of some of the poorer 
countries by providing information and other kinds of logistic 
support. 
3.7.1.2 
Information 
Perhaps a bigger problem than adequate participation is the 
need for adequate information for those who participate. Cli-
mate change issues are complex. The work of the IPCC, for 
example, spans issues ranging from atmospheric science to 
ecology to economics. OECD representatives, in particular, 
can draw on a huge infrastructure of specialist knowledge and 
analysis in developing policy positions and arguing for them 
(even if researchers still feel that insufficient attention is paid 
to their work, and negotiators feel deluged by research much 
of which is peripheral or naive). Many developing countries 
feel seriously disadvantaged by not having adequate research 
capacity to draw on. It is striking, for example, that the Indian 
Minister of Finance expressed such a concern (on a different 
issue), despite India's having one of the most advanced policy 
research capabilities in the developing world (Singh. 1993). 
Communication is a related issue. Heidenreich (1995) illus-
trates how the absence of "mass distribution" communication 
facilities places African researchers at a continuing disadvan-
tage. 
Again this reflects a mix of problems: a lack of human 
and financial resources, limited education infrastructure, and 
weak communications. The IPCC Special Committee recom-
mended a number of steps that could be taken, including sup-
port for regional centres and seminars and the development of 
regional specialists to help improve information and analytic 
capabilities in developing countries, particularly as they affect 
the ability of these countries to get to grips with the climate 
change issue (IPCC. 1990). 
The importance of adequate information cannot be over-
stressed. Many had policy decisions can he traced to inade-
quate information, and so can many of the difficulties in 
international negotiations. The feeling that some participants 
are much better informed than others can. and frequently 
does, lead to a suspicious and obstructive attitude in negotia-
tions that ultimately may be to the detriment of all. It was 
noted above that in international affairs, countries often do 
fail even to reach agreements that would be of mutual benefit. 
Lack of adequate information - compounded by the distrust 
this can help to generate - is one root cause of this. Negotia-
tions are difficult enough when each country is seeking only 
to pursue a narrowly defined self-interest. They can he even 
more difficult when states do not have a clear idea of where 
their self-interest lies. 
3.7.2 Links between internal and international 
processes 
The focus in this discussion has been on state actors and gov-
ernment representatives. But fair representation in interna-
tional discussions also requires that those attending fairly 
represent interests within their own countries, and their effec-
tive participation also requires them to draw on the human 
and other resources of ihe nongovernmental sector. There is 
thus increasing acceptance that nongovernmental organiza-
tions have an important role to play in the process: in harness-
ing and analyzing information; in developing international 
links; in assessing the implications of proposed policies; in 
changing cultural attitudes, including communication across 
different sectors of society; and in observing and monitoring 
the implementation of decisions agreed internationally (e.g.. 
Haas <?/«/., 1993;Brenton, 1994; Choucri 1994). 
A number of these elements have been discussed in Section 
3.6 above. Given the complexity of the climate change issue, 
this points to the ultimate inseparability of issues such as fair 
and informed participation between the national and interna-
tional levels. Addressing climate change - both adaptation 
and abatement - may require changes at many different levels 
of society, and the implementation and acceptance of policy at 
many different levels. 
Thus, we come full circle to the observation at the begin-
ning of this chapter. Perceived justice, in terms of representa-
tion and consideration of different perspectives in processes 
and in big decisions, is one of the basic measures of legiti-
macy for governmental institutions. Equivalent structures in-
ternationally are weak or nonexistent. But the climate issue 
forces recognition of global interdependence. For negotia-
tions to be effective, they need to command widespread ac-
ceptance as fair processes, reaching decisions that are fair 
compromises between widely divergent views of what consti-
tutes an equitable outcome, and thus reflecting the range of is-
sues addressed in this chapter. 
3.8 Conclusions 
Equity and social considerations are central to discussions of 
steps to be taken to implement the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change because widespread participation is essential 
if the objectives of the Convention are to be gained. This is 
why the concept of equity is so prominent in the Convention. 
Countries are unlikely to participate fully unless they perceive 
the arrangements to be equitable. This applies particularly to 
equity among regions and countries, but equity within coun-
tries, and associated social considerations, are also important 
influences on what is possible and desirable. Mitigating and 
adapting to climate change will require actions on the part of 
individuals. Governments will find it easier to comply with 
international obligations if their citizens feel that the obliga-
tions and benefits of compliance are distributed among them 
equitably. And richer countries are unlikely to burden their 
poorer citizens to benefit relatively rich citizens in poor coun-
tries. 
Scientific analyses cannot prescribe how social issues 
should be taken into consideration and how equity should be 
applied in implementing the Convention, but analysis can 
clarify the implications of alternative choices and their ethical 
basis. There are a variety of meanings of equity, and there are 
various principles that have been designed to achieve equity. 
On some issues different equity principles point to similar re-
sponses, suggesting clear guidance, whereas on others tbe\ 
may conflict. In either case, there is a need for judgment, 
drawing on concepts of equity. 
Equity and Social 
Considerations 
119 
Issues relating to equity among regions and countries stem 
from the substantial differences that exist among countries. 
Countries differ not only in terms of size, resources, popula-
tion, and wealth, but also in terms of emissions of greenhouse 
gases, vulnerability to climate change, and institutional capa-
bilities to respond effectively to climate change. There is no 
single method of aggregating these differences and no deci-
sion rule for dealing with them. The Framework Convention 
on Climate Change provides considerable guidance for apply-
ing the concept of equity to take account of the many differ-
ences among countries. However, the application of equity to 
specific circumstances will require further elaboration of the 
Convention's principles and obligations, many of which were 
designed to be ambiguous and remain so. 
Equity issues involved in responding to climate change 
may be divided into four distinct categories: 
• distributing the costs of adaptation 
• distributing future emission rights 
• distributing the costs of abatement 
• ensuring institutional and procedural fairness 
The Framework Convention on Climate Change offers some 
guidance on all these issues. It requires developed country 
parties to take the lead in limiting their emissions whilst rec-
ognizing that developing countries' emissions are relatively 
low and will need to grow to meet their legitimate social and 
developmental needs. It also requires developed country par-
ties to assist developing country parties in coping with both 
the costs of abatement and the costs of adaptation to the ad-
verse effects of climate change. Such assistance must be pro-
vided by the Convention's financial mechanism, which must 
have "an equitable and balanced representation" and transpar-
ent governance to ensure procedural equity between donors 
and recipients. 
This focus on developed/developing country interaction is 
also apparent in much of the literature, which seeks to clarify 
considerations of equity between developed and developing 
countries much more than among developed countries. Since 
developed countries have obligations under the treaty to take 
immediate action, this is a serious lacuna. There are. however, 
a variety of specific analyses that propose schemes for distrib-
uting the costs of coping and abatement as well as emission 
rights and that analyze the distributional effects of these 
schemes across the range of countries. 
Social considerations and the experience of implementing 
structural adjustment policies point to the need to consider 
and target specific groups for special consideration. Countries 
(such as island and other low-lying states or dryland regions) 
and special groups within society that are especially vulner-
able to climate change (such as the poor, and sometimes 
women or children, or specific occupations or regions) - in 
other words, those on whom the costs of abatement and cop-
ing would be especially burdensome - merit special attention. 
Concern about equity and social impacts points to the need 
to strengthen institutional capacities, particularly in develop-
ing countries, to make and implement collective decisions in a 
legitimate and equitable manner. These institutional capaci-
ties surely include developing resources to analyze equity and 
social issues. 
Institutional weaknesses also inhibit the ability of develop-
ing countries to participate effectively in international negoti-
ations. Assistance to help these countries develop a greater 
capacity to assimilate and analyze information and proposals, 
and to participate effectively in international discussions, 
would increase the prospects for achieving effective, lasting, 
and equitable agreements on how best to address the threat of 
climate change. 
Endnotes 
1. Four main views are identified. A "hierarchical" view believes that 
a problem like climate change needs to be managed rationally and 
that this can be achieved by suitable management institutions backed 
by good science and judgment. A "market" view believes that the 
problem should be characterized primarily as an economic external-
ity, and that the solution lies in creating property rights and a market 
structure which enable market actors to internalize these costs in 
their transactions. An "egalitarian collective" view places the em-
phasis on equal rights in a limited and perhaps fragile biosphere, 
emphasizing the need for radical abatement and abstinence from 
excessive consumption. A "fatalist" view considers that humans can 
adapt to whatever changes are caused and probably cannot manage 
abatement effectively anyway; it thus argues for no action. 
2. Annex I lists the European Community and 36 states: the 24 mem-
bers of the OECD in 1992 (Australia. Austria. Belgium, Canada, Den-
mark, Finland, France, Germany. Greece. Iceland, Ireland, Italy, 
Japan. Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portu-
gal. Spain. Sweden. Switzerland. Turkey, the UK, and the U.S.) and 
12 European states that are undergoing the process of transition to 
market economies (Belarus, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, 
Hungary. Latvia. Lithuania, Poland. Romania, the Russian Federa-
tion, Slovakia, and Ukraine). 
3. Smith and Ahuja (1990) present succint and strong reasons for 
considering the range of gases in assessing individual projects, to-
gether with a general framework indicating a basis on which such 
comparisons might be developed. At the aggregate level required for 
international comparisons and considerations of equity, the issues 
are somewhat different. The best data, and most analysis, have fo-
cussed on the major contribution from CO, - especially from fossil 
fuels. I'or which national emissions are generally known to within ± 
59c (uncertainty range of 10%) or better. CFC emissions - measured 
as defined in the Montreal Protocol - are known to similar accuracy. 
Other sources are more uncertain. National estimates of CO, and 
other emissions from deforestation and other land use changes can 
vary by at least ± 30%. both for individual countries and in aggre-
gate. Most methane emissions are similarly uncertain. Contributions 
from other gases (N,0 and various other gases involved in different 
aspects of atmospheric chemistry) are still more uncertain, but the 
global impact of these other emissions probably totals less than 10% 
of the major greenhouse gases. Further difficulties are introduced in 
attempting to compare the radiative impact of different gases, as dis-
cussed in earlier IPCC reports. 
4. This would apply, for example, if one considered the impact of a 
single country's emissions in the absence of any other emissions or 
evaluated the marginal impact of adding each country's emissions in 
turn, with all the others fixed. None of the literature appears to at-
tempt such an assessment explicitly, and scientific understanding of 
the carbon cycle may not be sufficient to perform such calculations 
with confidence. 
120 
Cliiiiuii' (limine 
/W.i - iU-oiioinic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
5. To a degree there are parallels here with the debate over the alloca-
tion of sinks (see box "WRI Data"). Looking only at total emissions 
is similar to the WRI index; focussing on per capita emissions gives 
a very different view more closely related to that o( Agarwal and 
Narain. Considering national per capita emissions relative to the 
global per capita mean (so they can he negative as well as positive), 
as advanced by Mukherjee (1992), is directly equivalent to the ap-
proach advocated by Agarwal and Narain. 
6. Action by one group of countries to limit fossil fuel emissions, for 
example, will lend to depress international fuel prices, which may 
accelerate emission growth elsewhere if other regions do not partici-
pate. Conversely, it is likely to accelerate technology developments, 
which may then diffuse, acting in the opposite direction. The net ef-
fect is difficult to predict and depends on timescales and models of 
elasticities, technology development, and diffusion. 
7. The Coastal Zone Management subgroup of the IPCC Response 
Strategies Working Group suggests slightly different division of "re-
treat," "accommodation," and "protection" in response to sea level 
rise. The classification given here reflects the different kinds of costs 
incurred. A variety o( instruments may he appropriate for seeking to 
share, insure against, or redistribute these different kinds of impact 
costs. 
8. If the remaining global fossil carbon budget were shared accord-
ing to strict person-year equity, including historic emissions, in-
dustrialized countries would not have any emission rights left. A 
reasonable compromise between international equity and practical 
feasibility would he to allocate 150 GtC each to industrialized and 
developed countries (Krause el al., 1990). 
9. Note that this does not imply equal benefits over time, as technol-
ogy development and other factors enable more value to he extracted 
from a given level o\' emissions. The issue has some elements in 
common with issues of natural resource depletion and the intergener-
ational equity issues discussed in Chapter 4. but the literature has not 
explored this in any depth. 
10. As one relevant indication, the peak energy intensities achieved 
by countries in the process of industrialization have steadily declined 
over the century, as countries developing later can draw on better 
(and more recent) technologies developed elsewhere (Hafele el al., 
1981). 
11. Ghosh (1993) agrees in theory that positive as well as negative 
externalities arc associated with development transfer from one 
country to another, but points out that any such application of the 
principle "must he comprehensive. . . . All external contributions of 
all persons over all time must be accounted for . . . allowing for those 
developing countries which were the cradle of civilisation to claim 
resource transfers.... It is difficult to devise practical ways of imple-
menting this principle." 
12. It specifies directly how a country's effort should vary as a func-
tion of its own income level and abatement efficiency. If the welfare 
weights are equal across countries, then it defines directly the opti-
mal relative contribution from each country. 
References 
Adams, J.. 1995: Cost-benefit analysis: part of the problem, not the 
solution. Green College Centre for Environmental Policy and Un-
derstanding. Oxford. 
Agarwal, A., and S. Narain. 1991: Global warming in an unequal 
world. Centre for Science and Environment. New Delhi. 
Ahluwalia. M.S.. and H.B. Chenery. 1974: The economic frame-
work. In World Bank. Redistribution with growth, Oxford Univer-
sity Press. New York. 
Ahuja, DR. 1992: Estimating national contributions of greenhouse 
gas emissions: The CSE-WRI controversy, Global Environmental 
Change 2, 3. 
Alum, M.S. 1989: Governments and markets in economic develop-
ment strategies: Lessons from Korea, Taiwan and Japan, Praeger, 
New York. 
Arendt, H., 1961: Between past and future. Viking Press, New York. 
Arendt, H., 1968: Imperialism. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, New York. 
Arrow, K.J., 1951: Alternative approaches to the theory of choice in 
risk-taking situations, Econometrica 19, 404-437. 
Arrow, K.J., 1953: Social choice and individual values, Coles Foun-
dation Monographs, Wiley, New York. 
Arrow, K.J.. and M. Kurz, 1970: Public investment, the rate of re-
turn and optimal fiscal policy, Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Baltimore, MD. 
Ay res, R.U., and J. Walter, 1991: The greenhouse effect: Damages, 
costs and abatement, Environmental and Resource Economics 1 
(3), 237-270. 
Balassa, B.A., 1993: Policy choices for the 1990s, New York Uni-
versity Press, New York. 
Banuri, T. (ed.), 1992: Economic liberalization: No panacea. 
Clarendon Press. Oxford. 
Banuri, T. G. Hyden, C. Junta, and M. Rivera, 1994: Operationizing 
sustainable human development: A guide for the practitioner. 
UNDP. Bureau of Policy and Programme Evaluation (BPPE). 
New York. 
Barrett, S., 1992: "Acceptable" allocations of tradable carbon emis-
sion entitlements in a global warming treaty. In UNCTAD. Com-
bating Global Warming, UNCTAD, Geneva. 
Beitz, C. 1979: Political theory and international relations, Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton. 
Benedick, RE., 1991: Ozone diplomacy: New directions in safe-
guarding the planet, Harvard University Press, Cambridge. MA. 
Benestad, O. 1994: Energy needs and CO, emissions: Constructing 
a formula for just distributions, Energy Policy 22(9), 725-734. 
Bertram, G.. 1992: Tradeable emission permits and the control of 
greenhouse gases. Journal of Development Studies 28 (3). 423^146. 
Bertram, G.. R.J. Stephens, and C.C. Wallace, 1989: The relevance 
of economic instruments for tackling the greenhouse effect. Re-
port to New Zealand Ministry of the Environment, August. 
Bhaskar, V., 1993: Controlling global wanning: Distributional is-
sues. Delhi School of Economics. New Delhi. 
Birnie, P., and A. Boyle, 1992: International law and the environ-
ment. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Bodansky, 0.. 1993: The UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change: A commentary, Yale Journal of International Law (Sum-
mer) 18,451-558. 
Bradley, R.A.. J. Edmonds. M. Wise, H. Pitcher, and C. Mac-
Cracken. 1994: Controlling carbon: Equity, efficiency and partic-
ipation in possible future agreements to control fossil fuel carbon 
emissions, presented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social 
Considerations. Nairobi. July. 
Brenton, T. 1994: The greening of Machiavelli, Royal Institute of 
International Affairs/Earthscan. London. 
Brierly, J.L.. 1963: The law of nations: An introduction to the inter-
national law of peace, H. Waldock. ed.. Oxford University Press. 
Oxford. 
Broadhus, J.M.. 1993: Possible impacts of. and adjustments to. sea-
level rise: The cases of Bangladesh and Egypt. In Climate and sea 
level change: Observations, projections and implications. R.A. 
Warrick el al.. eds.. Cambridge University Press. New York. 
Brown, P.G.. 1992: Climate Change and the Planetary Trust. Enerp 
Policy 20, 208-222. 
Equity and Social 
Considerations 
121 
Buchanan, J.M., and R.D. Tollison (eds.). 1984: The theory of pub-
lic choice, Vol. 2. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor. 
Burtraw, D., and M.A. Toman, 1992: Equity and international 
agreements for CO, constraint, Journal 
of Energy 
Engineering 
118(2), 122-135. 
Cass, D.G., G. Chichilnisky, and H. M. Wu, 1991: Individual risks 
and mutual insurance, Working Paper CARESS, University of 
Pennsylvania, Department of Economics. 
CDCGC (Commission 
on 
Developing 
Countries 
and 
Global 
Change), 1992: For Earth's sake, International Development Re-
search Centre, Ottawa, Canada. 
Chayes, A., E.G. Skolnikoff, and D.G. Victor, 1992: A prompt 
start: 
Implementing 
the Framework 
Convention 
on Climate 
Change, 
MIT Center for International Studies, Cambridge, MA. 
Cheng, B., 1987: General principles 
of law as applied by 
interna-
tional courts and tribunals, 
Grotius Publications Ltd., Cam-
bridge. 
Cheng, B., 1990: Equity, special considerations and the Third World, 
CoJielp 1, 57. 
Chichilnisky, G., 1977: Economic development and efficiency crite-
ria in the satisfaction of basic needs, Applied Mathematical 
Mod-
eling, 1, (6) 275-304. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal, 1993: Global environmental risks, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 
7(4), 54-86. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal, 1994: Who should abate carbon emis-
sions? An international viewpoint, Economic 
Letters 44, 4 4 3 -
449. 
Chisholm, A., and A. Moran, 1994: Carbon 
dioxide 
emissions 
abatement and burden sharing among the OECD countries, 
Oc-
casional Paper 826, Tasman Institute, Melbourne, Australia. 
Choucri, N. (ed.), 1994: Global accord, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
MA. 
Cline, W.R., 1992: The economics 
of global warming, 
Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC. 
Cornia, G.A., and R. Jolly (eds.), 1984: The impact of world reces-
sion on childhood, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Cornia, G.A., R. Jolly, and F. Stewart. 1987: Adjustment 
with a hu-
man face: Protecting 
the vulnerable 
and promoting 
growth, Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford. 
Craig, P., H. Glasser, and W. Kempton, 1993: Ethics and values in 
environmental policy: The said and the UNCED, 
Environmental 
Values, 2(2), 137-158. 
d'Arge, R., 1989: Ethical and economic systems for managing the 
global commons. In Changing the world environment, 
D. Botkin 
et al., eds., Academic Press. New York. 
Dasgupta, P., and G. Heal, 1979: Economic 
theory and 
exhaustible 
resources, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
delMundo, F., 1992: Bangladesh in the eye of a storm, Refugees, 89, 
29-31. 
den Elzen, M„ M. Janssen, J. Rotmans, R. Swart and B. de Vries, 
1993: Allocating constrained global carbon budgets, 
Interna-
tional Journal of Global Energy Issues 4(4), 287-301. 
Dommen, E. (ed.), 1993: Fair principles 
for sustainable 
develop-
ment, Edward Elgar. Aldershot, UK, and Brookfield VT. U.S. 
Dorfman, R., 1991: Protecting the transnational commons, mimeo. 
Harvard University, June. 
Drucker, F., 1986: The changed world economy, Foreign 
Affairs, 
64(1), 768-791. 
Dubash, N., 1994: Commoditizing carbon: Social and environmen-
tal implications of trading carbon emissions entitlements. Mas-
ter's Thesis. University of California. Berkeley. CA. 
Edmonds, J.. 1993: Carbon coalitions, 
Battelle Pacific Northwest 
Laboratory. Washington DC. 
Engel, JR.. and J.G. Engel. 1990: Ethics of environment 
and devel-
opment: Global challenge and international 
response, 
Belhaven 
Press, London. 
Epstein, J., and R. Gupta, 1990: Controlling 
the greenhouse 
effect: 
Five global regimes compared, 
Brookings Institution, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Ewah, O.E., 1994: Africa's decline and greenhouse politics, Interna-
tional Environmental 
Affairs 6(2), 133-148. 
Fankhauser, S., 1993: The economic costs of global warming: Some 
monetary estimates. In Kaya el al., eds., proceedings of IIASA 
workshop on the costs, impacts and benefits of C 0 2 mitigation, 
International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, 
Austria, 1992. 
Fermann, G., 1993: Climate change, burden-sharing criteria and 
competing conceptions of responsibility, International 
Chal-
lenges 12(4), Norway. 
Flexner, S.B., ed.. 1987: The Random House Dictionary 
of the Eng-
lish Language, 
2d ed. (unabridged). Random House, New York. 
Franck, T., and 0. Sughrue, 1993: Equity as fairness, 
Georgetown 
Law Journal, 81, 563. 
Fujii, Y, 1990: An assessment of the responsibility for the increase 
in the CO, concentrations and intergenerationl carbon accounts, 
IIASA Working Paper WP-05-55, International Institute of Ap-
plied Systems Analysis. Laxenburg, Austria. 
Ghosh, P., 1993: Structuring the equity issue in climate change. 
In The climate 
change 
agenda: 
An Indian perspective, 
A.N. 
Achanta, ed., Tata Energy Research Institute, New Delhi. 
Ghosh, P., and A. Jaitly, 1993: The road from Rio: 
Environmental 
and development 
policy issues in Asia, Tata Energy Research In-
stitute, New Delhi. 
Ghosh, P., and J. Puri (eds.), 1994: Joint implementation 
of climate 
change commitments: 
Opportunities 
and apprehensions, 
Tata En-
ergy Research Institute, New Delhi. 
Gleick, J., 1987: Chaos: Making a new science, 
Penguin Books, 
New York. 
Gore, C , 1993: Entitlement relations and "unruly" social practices: 
A comment on the work of Amartya Sen, Journal of 
Development 
Studies 29 (3): 429-460. 
Grubb, M.J., 1989: The greenhouse 
effect: Negotiating 
targets, 
Royal Institute of International Affairs. London. 
Grubb, M.J., 1990: Energy policies and the greenhouse 
effect, Vol. 
1: Policy appraisal, 
Royal Institute of International Affairs, Lon-
don. 
Grubb, M.J., 1993: The costs of climate change: Critical elements. 
In Proceedings 
of IIASA Workshop on the Costs, Impacts 
and 
Benefits of CO, Mitigation, 
Kaya el al., eds. IIASA, Laxenburg, 
1992. 
Grubb, M.J., 1995: Seeking fair weather: Ethics and the interna-
tional debate on climate change, International 
Affairs 
71(3), 
463^196. 
Grubb, M.J., and J. Sebenius, 1992: Participation, allocation, and 
adaptability in international tradeable emission permit systems 
for greenhouse gas control. In Climate 
change: 
Designing 
a 
tradeable permit system, OECD. Paris. 
Grubb, M., J. Sebenius. A. Magalhaes. and S. Subak, 1992: Sharing 
the burden. In Confronting 
climate change: Risks, 
implications, 
and responses, 
I.M. Mintzer, ed., pp. 305-322, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge. 
Grubler, A., and Y. Fujii, 1991: Intergenerational and equity issues 
of carbon account. Energy 16(11/12). 1397-1416. 
Grubler, A., and N. Nakicenovic. 1991: International 
burden-
sharing in greenhouse gas reduction. Environmental Policy Divi-
sion. World Bank. 
/22 
Climale 
Change 
/ W 5 - l\conomic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Gyawali, D., 1993: Risk in poverty and fairness in development. 
IIASA Workshop on Risk and Fairness. International Institute of 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg. Austria. June. 
Haas, P.M., R.O. Keohane, and M A . Levy (eds.), 1993: Institutions 
for the Earth: Sources of effective 
international 
environmental 
protection, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Hat'ele, W., J. Anderer, A. McDonald, and N. Nakicenovic, 1981: 
Energy in a finite world, Ballinger, Cambridge, MA. 
Hammond, A.. E. Rodenhcrg, and W. Moomaw, 1991: Calculating 
rational accountability for climale change. Environment 
33(1), 
11-35. 
Handl, G., 1990: International efforts to protect the global atmos-
phere: A case of too little, too late? European Journal of Interna-
tional Law 1(1/21,250-257. 
Hayes, P.. 1993: North-South transfer. In Hayes and Smith. 1993. 
Hayes, P., and K. Smith (eds.), 1993: The global greenhouse 
regime: 
Who pays'.' UNU Press/Earthscan, London. 
Heal, G., 1984: Interaction between policy and climate: A frame-
work for policy design under uncertainty. In Advances in applied 
microeconomics, 
V. Smith and A.D. White, eds., pp. 151-158. 
J.A.I. Press, Greenwich, CT. 
Heidenreich, A., 1995: Equity, communication and climate change: 
Access to information and communications networks in Africa. 
presented at 1PCC Workshop on Equity and Social Considera-
tions, Nairobi, July. 
Heintz, R., and H. Markus. 1993: Joint implementation: Exploiting 
resources or sacrifice, Change 17, 1-3. 
Herman, R., S.A. Ardekani. and J.H. Asuhel, 1987: Dematcrializa-
tion. In Technology 
and Environment, 
J.H. Asubel and H E . 
Sladovich, eds.. National Academy Press. Washington DC. 
Hyder, TO., 1992: Climate negotiations: The North/South perspec-
tive. In I. Mint/er. ed.. Confronting climate change: Risks, implica-
tions and responses, Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. UK. 
ICJ (International Court of Justice). 1982: ICJ Reports: Case con-
cerning the Continental 
Shelf (Tunisia/Libya), ICJ. The Hague. 
ICJ (International Court of Justice). 1984: ICJ Reports: 
Gulf of 
Maine case, ICJ. The Hague. 
ICJ (International Court of Justice). 1985: ICJ Reports: Case con-
cerning the Continental Shelf {Malta/Libya). 
ICJ, The Hague. 
ICJ (International Court of Justice). 1993: ICJ Reports: Jan Mayen 
case, ICJ, The Hague. 
Imbree, S., 1994: Investing in less greenhouse gas intensive devel-
opment: What joint implementation could be. In Ghosh and Puri 
(1994). 
1PCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: Report 
of the Special Committee on the Participation of Developing 
Countries. IPCC. Geneva. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1992: Climate 
change 1992: The supplementary 
report to the IPCC scientific as-
sessment. J.T. Houghton. B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney. eds.. 
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1995: Climate 
change 1994: Radiative forcing of climate change. J.T. Houghton. 
E.G. Meira Filho. J. Bruce. Hoesung Lee. B.A. Callander. E. 
Haites, N. Harris, and K. Maskell. eds.. Cambridge University 
Press. Cambridge. 
IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature). 1980: 
World conservation 
strategy. International Union for the Conser-
vation of Nature. UNEP, Geneva. 
Jaitly, A., 1993: An overview of post-Rio political economy issues. 
In Ghosh and Jaitly (1993). 
Junia, C . IB. Ojwang. and P. Karani. 1994: Equity considerations 
in the climate debate: Technology transfer, presented at IPCC 
Workshop on Equity and Social Considerations. Nairobi. July. 
Kaplan, G.T.. and C.S. Kessler. 1989: Hannah Arendt: 
Thinking, 
judging, freedom, Allen and Unwin, Sydney, Australia. 
Keynes, J.M. 1936: The general theory of employment, 
interest and 
money, Macmillan, London. 
Korten, D C , 1987: Community management: 
Asian experience and 
perspectives, 
Kumarian Press, West Hartford, CT. 
Korten, D C . 1990: Getting to the 21st century: 
Voluntary action 
and the global agenda, Kumarian Press, West Hartford, CT. 
Krause, F„ W. Bach, and Jon Kooney, 1990: Energy policy in the 
greenhouse: 
Emm warming fate to warming limit, vol. 1, Earth-
scan, London and IPSET, El Cerrito, CA. 
Krueger, A.O., and R.H. Bates (eds.), 1993: Political and economic 
interactions 
in economic 
policy 
reform: 
Evidence 
from eight 
countries, Blackwell,, Oxford. UK, and Cambridge, MA. 
Kuik, O., P. Peters, and N. Schrijver, 1994: Joint implementation 
to 
curb climate change, Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Kuznet, S.. 1955: Economic growth and income inequality, Ameri-
can Economic Review 45(1) 1-28. 
Lane, C , and R. Moorehead. 1994: Who should own the range: New 
thinking on pastoral 
resource tenure in dryland Africa, 
Interna-
tional Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London. 
Lol'stedt, RE.. 1994: Human dimensions of global warming: They 
should not be ignored. Mimeo, Centre for Environmental Study. 
University of Surrey, UK. 
Loske, R., 1991: Ecological taxes, energy policy and greenhouse gas 
reductions: A German perspective, Ecologist 
21 (July/August). 
173-176. 
Loske, R„ and S. Oberthur. 1993: Joint implementation under the 
Climate Change Convention, International 
Environmental 
Af-
fairs, 6(1)45-58. 
Manne, A.S., and T.F. Rutherford, 1994: International trade in oil. 
gas and carbon emission rights: An intertemporal general equilib-
rium model, The Energy Journal 15(1), 31-56. 
Markandya, A.. 1994: Jl: The way forward or a negotiator's night-
mare? In Joint implementation 
of climate change 
commitments: 
Opportunities 
and apprehensions, 
P. Ghosh and J. Puri, eds.. Tata 
Energy Research Institute, New Delhi. 
Mathur, A., 1991: India: Vast opportunities and constraints. In En-
ergy policies and the greenhouse 
effect, vol. 2, Country studies 
and technical options, M. Grubb et al., eds., pp. 395-430. Royal 
Institute of International Affairs, London. 
Maya, S.. 1994: Joint implementation: Cautions and options for the 
South, paper presented at the International Conference on Joint 
Implementation, Groningen, The Netherlands, June. 
Meier, G.M., 1984: Leading issues in economic 
development, 
Ox-
ford University Press. New York. 
Metz, B., 1994: Joint implementation as a financing instrument for 
global reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. In Ramakrishna 
(1994). 
Meyer, A.. 1995: The unequal use of the global commons, presented 
at IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social Considerations. Nairobi. 
July. 
Meyer-Abich, K.. 1994: Winners and losers in climate change. In 
Global ecology: A new arena of political conflict, W. Sachs, ed.. 
Zed Books. London and Atlantic Highlands. NJ. 
Millennium. 1990: Global environmental change and international 
relations. 19 (Winter). 337-476. 
Morris, M.D. 1979: Measuring 
the condition 
of the world's poor. 
The physical quality of life index. Overseas Development Coun-
cil. Washington. DC; Pergamon, New York. 
Moyo, S.. 1994: Land entitlements, 
tenure and climate change: Tin 
Zimbabwe case. Institute of Development Studies. Harare. 
Mukherjee, N.. 1992: Greenhouse gas emissions and the allocation 
of responsibility. Environment 
and Urbanisation 
4( 1 ). April. 
Equity and Social 
Considerations 
123 
Myers, N., 1993: Environmental refugees in a globally warmed 
world, Bioscience 43,(11). 
Myers, N., 1994: Environmental refugees and climate change: Esti-
mating the scope of what could well become a prominent interna-
tional phenomenon, presented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and 
Social Considerations, Nairobi, July. 
Nozick, R., 1974: Anarchy, state, and Utopia, Basic Books, New 
York. 
Pachauri, R., 1994: The economics of climate change: A developing 
country perspective. In OECD: The economics of climate change, 
proceedings of an OECD Conference, Paris, pp. 171-179. 
Parikh, J., 1992: IPCC strategies unfair to the South, Nature 360, 
507-508. 
Parikh, J., 1994: Joint implementation and sharing commitments: A 
Southern perspective. In Integrative assessment of mitigation, im-
pacts, and adaptation, Nakicenovic et al., eds., IIASA. Laxen-
burg, Austria. 
Parikh, J., 1995: North-South cooperation in climate change 
through joint implementation, International Environmental Af-
fairs, 7(1), 22-43. 
Parikh, J., and S. Gokarn, 1993: Climate change and India's energy 
policy options, Global Environmental Change 3, 276-292. 
Parikh, J., K. Parikh, and S. Gokarn, 1991: Consumption patterns: 
The driving force of environmental stress, IGIDR report prepared 
for United Nations Conference on Environment and Develop-
ment (UNCED), Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Re-
search, Bombay, India. 
Paterson, M., 1994/1996: International justice and global warming. 
Proceedings of 1994 workshop published in The ethical dimen-
sions of global change, B. Holden, ed., Macmillan, London, 
forthcoming 1996. 
Pieterse, J.N., 1994: Globalization as hybridization. Working Paper 
Series No. 152, Institute of Social Studies, The Hague. 
Putnam, R„ R. Leonard!. and R.Y. Nanetti, 1992: Making democracy 
work: Civic traditions in modem Italy, Princeton University 
Press, Princeton. 
Ramakrishna, K. (ed.), 1994: Criteria for joint implementation un-
der the Framework Convention on Climate Change, Woods Hole 
Research Center, Woods Hole, MA. 
Rawls, J., 1971: A theory of justice. Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 
Rayner, S., 1993: Governance and the global commons, discussion pa-
per no. 8, Centre for the Study of Global Governance, LSE, London. 
Rayner, S„ 1994: A conceptual map of values for climate change de-
cision making, presented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social 
Considerations, Nairobi, July. 
Rose, A.. 1990: Reducing conflict in global warming policy - the 
potential of equity as a unifying principle. Energy Policy 18, 
927-935. 
Rose, A., and B. Stevens, 1993: Equity aspects of marketable per-
mits for greenhouse gases: Global dimensions of the Coase Theo-
rem, mimeo, Pennsylvania State University. University Park, PA. 
Rutherford, T, 1992: Welfare effects of fossil carbon restrictions: 
Results from a recursively dynamic trade model. OECD Working 
Paper 112, April. 
Saha, V.L.. 1994: Dilemma of small island and coastal states, pre-
sented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social Considerations. 
Nairobi, July. 
Sandel, M.J., 1982: Liberalism and the limits of justice, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Sands, P., 1995: Principles of international environmental law, Man-
chester University Press. Manchester. 
Sehachter, O., 1977: Sharing the world's resources, Columbia Uni-
versity Press. New York. 
SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute), 1992: National green-
house gas accounts: Current anthropogenic sources and sinks, 
S. Subak. P. Raskin and D. von Hippel. eds., SEI, Boston, MA. 
Selrod, R., and A. Torvanger. 1994: What might be minimum re-
quirements for making the mechanism of joint implementation 
under the Climate Change Convention credible and operational? 
Draft discussion paper. CICERO (Centre for International Cli-
mate and Environment Research), Oslo. 
Sen, A., 1976: Famines as failures of exchange entitlements, Eco-
nomic and Political Weekly 11, 31-33. 
Sen, A., 1984: Resources, values and development, Basil Blackwell, 
Oxford. 
Shah, A., and B. Larsen, 1992: Carbon taxes, the greenhouse effect 
and developing countries. World Bank Working Paper series no. 
957, World Bank, Washington DC. 
Shapiro, I., 1990: Political criticism. University of California Press, 
Berkeley, CA. 
Shue, H.. 1992: The unavoidability of justice. In The international 
politics of the environment: Actors, interests and institutions, A. 
Hurrcl and B. Kingsbury, eds.. pp. 373-397, Clarendon Press, 
Oxford. 
Shue, H., 1993: Subsistence emissions and luxury emissions, Law 
and Policy, 15(1), 39-59. 
Sidibe, H., 1995: Impact des variations climatiques sur revolution 
des conditions de vie dans les communautes pastorales touareg et 
fulbe de la region lacustre de ITssa-Ber au Mali, presented at 
IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social Considerations, Nairobi, 
July. 
Simonis, U., 1994: Towards a Houston Protocol, or how to allocate 
CO, emissions reductions between North and South, Wis-
senschaftszentrum Berlin (WZB), Science Centre Berlin, Ger-
many. 
Singh, Hon. S.M.. 1993: Valedictory address. In Ghosh and Jaitly 
(1993). 
Smith, K.R.. 1993: The basics of greenhouse gas indices. In Hayes 
and Smith (1993). 
Smith, K.R., 1994: Preindustrial missing carbon and current green-
house responsibilities. In Preindustrial human environmental im-
pacts, D.K. Kammen, K.R. Smith, A.T. Rambo, and M.A.K. 
Khalil, eds., pp. I 135-1143, Special Issue of Chemosphere 29(5), 
827-1143. 
Smith, K.R., 1995: The natural debt: North and South. In Cli-
mate change: Developing Southern Hemisphere perspectives, T. Gi-
ambelluca and A. Henderson-Sellers, eds., Wiley, Chichester, UK. 
Smith, K.R., and D. Ahuja. 1990: Toward a greenhouse equivalence 
index: The total exposure analogy. Climatic Change 17(1). 1-7. 
Smith, K.R.. J. Swisher, and D. Ahuja. 1993: Who pays to solve 
the problem and how much? In Hayes and Smith (1993); also 
working paper no. 1991-22. World Bank Environment Depart-
ment. 
Sobhan, R.. 1993: Agrarian reform and social transformation: Pre-
conditions for development. Zed Books. Atlantic Highlands, NJ. 
Solomon, B.D.. and DR. Ahuja. 1991: International reductions of 
greenhouse-gas emissions: An equitable and efficient approach. 
Global Environmental Change. 1(5). 343-350. 
Stephan, G.. R. van Nieuwkoop. and T Wiedner, 1992: Social inci-
dence and economic costs of carbon limits, Environmental and 
Resource Economics, 2, 569-59 I. 
Stone, C. 1993: The gnat is older than man. global environment and 
human agenda, Princeton University Press. Princeton. NJ. 
Streeten, P.. 1981: Eirsl things first, Oxford University Press. New 
York. 
Subak, S.. 1993: Assessing emissions: Five regimes compared. In 
Haves and Smith (1993). 
724 
Climate Change /VV.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Suliman, M., 1992: Civil war in Sudan: The impact of ecological 
degradation, Institute for Africa Alternatives, London. 
Suliman, M., 1994: Climate change and conflict, presented at IPCC 
Workshop on Equity and Social Considerations, Nairobi, July. 
Tarlock, D., 1992: Environmental protection: The potential misfit 
between equity and efficiency, University of Colorado Law /((-
view, 63, 871-900. 
Taylor, L„ 1988: Varieties of stabilization experience. Clarendon 
Press, Oxford. 
Taylor, L., 1993: The rocky road to reform: Adjustment, income dis-
tribution, and growth in the developing world, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 
Thery, D., 1992: Should we drop or replace the WRI global index? 
Global Environmental Change 2(3), 88-89. 
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development), 
1992: Combating global 
warming, 
UNCTAD/RDP/DFP/I, 
Geneva and New York. 
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 1993: Rethinking 
technical cooperation: Reforms for capacity building in Africa 
Annex. Statistics on technical cooperation, UNDP, New York. 
United Nations, 1993: Earth summit. Agenda 21, The United Na-
tions programme of action from Rio: The final text of agreements 
negotiated by governments at the United Nations Conference on 
Environment and Development (UNCED), 3-14 June 1992. Rio 
dc Janeiro, Brazil. United Nations, New York. 
Uzawa, H., 1994: Equity in economic theory: Implications for cli-
mate change, presented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social 
Considerations, Nairobi, July. 
Van Dyke, V., 1975: Justice as fairness: For groups? The American 
Political Science Review 69(2) (June), pp. 607-614. 
Vellinga, P., and R. Heintz, 1994: Joint implementation: A phased 
approach. In Ramakrishna (1994). 
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969:1LM 8, 679. 
Wade, R., 1992: Governing the market: Economic theory and the 
role of government in East Asian indust.rialization, Princeton 
University Press. Princeton. 
Walzer, M.. 1983: Spheres of justice: A defense of pluralism and 
equality, Basic Books, New York. 
WCED (World Commission on Environment and Development), 
1987: Our common future, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
WEC (World Energy Council), 1993: Energy for tomorrow's world, 
Kogan Page, London. 
Weiss, E.B., 1993: International environmental law: Contemporary 
issues and the emergence of a new world order, Georgetown Law 
Journal 81, 675-710. 
Welsch, H., 1993: A CO, agreement proposal with flexible quotas. 
Energy Policy 21(7), 748-756. 
Westing, A.H., 1989: A law of the air, Environment 31, (3) (April). 
Wilford, M., 1993: Insuring against sea level rise. In Hayes and 
Smith (1993). 
Williams, R.H., ED. Larson, and M.H. Ross, 1987: Materials, afflu-
ence, and industrial energy use, Annual Review of Energy 12, An-
nual Reviews Inc., Palo Alto, CA. 
Wirth, DA., and D.A. Lashof, 1990: Ambio 19 (October), 305-310. 
World Bank 1992: World Development Report, 1992. World Bank. 
Washington, DC. 
World Bank, 1994: World Development Report, 1994, World Bank. 
Washington, DC. 
World Council of Churches, 1994: Accelerated climate change: 
Sign of peril, test of faith, WCC, Geneva, Switzerland. 
WRI (World Resources Institute), 1990: World resources 1990-91, 
Oxford University Press, New York. 
WRI (World Resources Institute), 1991: Greenhouse warming: Ne-
gotiating a global regime, WRI, Washington, DC. 
Yamin, F„ 1993a: Joint implementation and the Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change: Legal, institutional and procedural 
issues, FIELD Working Paper, Foundation for International Envi-
ronmental Law and Development, London. 
Yamin, E, 1993b: The Framework Convention on Climate Change: 
The development of criteria for joint implementation, FIELD 
Working Paper, Foundation for International Environmental Law 
and Development, London. 
Yamin, F., 1994: Principles of equity in international environmental 
agreements with special reference to the Climate Change Con-
vention, Presented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and Social Con-
siderations, Nairobi, July. 
Young, HP., and A. Wolf, 1992: Global warming negotiations: Does 
fairness count? The Brookings Review 10(2). 
Young, OR., 1990: Global environmental change and international 
governance, Millennium 19. 
Young, P., 1994: Equity in theory and practice, Princeton University 
Press, Princeton: NJ. 
4 
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and 
Economic Efficiency 
K.J. ARROW, W.R. CLINE, KG. MALER, M. MUNASINGHE, 
R. SQUITIERI, J.E. STIGLITZ 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
4.1 Introduction 
4.1.1 Areas of agreement and disagreement 
4.2 Prescriptive Approach 
4.2.1 Discount rate estimates - Prescriptive 
approach 
4.3 Descriptive Approach 
4.3.1 Formulation of the descriptive 
approach 
4.3.2 Returns to investment and discount 
rate estimates - Descriptive approach 
4.4 Conflicts Between the Two Approaches 
4.5 Conclusion: What Can Discounting 
Contribute to Climate Change Analysis? 
129 
Annex 4A: Methodological Notes on 
130 
130 
131 
131 
132 
132 
133 
133 
Endnotes 
Discounting 
134 
4A. 1 Intertemporal maximization of 
well-being 
134 
4A.2 Consumption versus investment 
discount rate 
135 
4A.3 The social rate of time preference 
136 
4A.4 The social welfare function 
137 
4A.5 Departures from "first-best" 
assumptions 
138 
4A.6 Special considerations for discounting 
in government projects 
139 
4A.7 The environment and discounting 
139 
4A.8 Discounting and sustainable 
development 
140 
133 
References 
141 
142 
SUMMARY 
The discount rate allows economic effects occurring at differ-
ent times to be compared. It plays a vital role in public policy 
analysis of actions with varying time paths of costs and bene-
fits. It is particularly important in climate change: Because of 
the very long times involved in climate change decisions, the 
choice of a discount rate powerfully affects the net present 
value of alternative policies, and thus the policy recommenda-
tions that emerge from climate change analysis. 
Two major approaches are used to determine the appropri-
ate discount rate for climate change analysis. The normative 
or ethical perspective (called the prescriptive approach in this 
chapter) begins with the question, "How (ethically) should 
impacts on future generations be valued?" The positive per-
spective, called here the descriptive approach, begins by ask-
ing, "What choices involving trade-offs across time do people 
actually make?" and, "To what extent will investments made 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions displace investments else-
where?" 
The prescriptive approach tends to generate relatively low 
discount rates and thus favours relatively more spending on 
climate change mitigation. The descriptive approach tends to 
generate somewhat higher discount rates and thus favours rel-
atively less spending on climate change mitigation. 
Although economists support the concept of discounting 
for climate change analysis, they continue to debate which of 
the two approaches is correct, and the parameters to be used in 
calculating the rate. These choices in turn significantly affect 
the conclusions of the analysis. 
150 
Climate (lian^e 
1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
4.1 Introduction 
The discount rate allows economic effects occurring at differ-
ent times to be compared. Discounting converts each future 
dollar amount associated with a project into the equivalent 
present dollar amount. The discount rate is generally positive 
because resources invested today can he transformed into, on 
average, more resources later; this holds for investments in 
both physical capital (e.g., machines) and human capital (e.g., 
education). 
Greenhouse gas control programmes may be viewed as an 
investment: Money is spent today to reduce the costs of cli-
mate change tomorrow. If the real rate of return on investment 
in greenhouse gas controls exceeds the rate of return on in-
vestment in machines or education, then future generations 
would be better off if less were invested today in machines 
and education and more in controlling greenhouse gas emis-
sions. The converse also holds, provided that the money is 
spent on investment rather than consumption. 
Because of the very long times involved in climate change 
decisions, the choice of a discount rate powerfully affects the 
net present value of alternative policies, and thus the policy 
recommendations that emerge from climate change analysis.1 
The benefits of greenhouse gas abatement accrue decades 
or even centuries in the future. For this reason, use of a high 
discount rate results in a low present value of actions that 
slow climate change. For example, at a discount rate of 7% 
annually (as is commonly used in short-horizon project analy-
sis), damages of $1 billion 50 years hence have a present 
value of only |$1 x l()''|/| l.()75"| = $33.9 million; the same 
damages 200 years hence have a present value of only $1300. 
Thus the use of too high a discount rate will result in too little 
value placed on avoiding climate change and too little invest-
ment in climate change programmes. Conversely, applying too 
low a discount rate to climate change programmes will result 
in too much investment in them and crowd out better uses of 
the resources. 
Determining the appropriate discount rate involves issues 
in normative as well as positive economics. These two per-
spectives raise very different questions. From a normative or 
ethical perspective, the key question might be: "How (ethi-
cally) should impacts on future generations be valued?" From 
a positive perspective, the appropriate question might be: "To 
what extent will investments made to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions displace investments elsewhere?" 
The debate is often confusing, in part because three sepa-
rate issues are being addressed: how to discount the welfare or 
utility of future generations, how to discount future dollars. 
and how to discount future pollution. Further, the argument 
often combines questions of efficiency and questions of 
ethics. Although economists can make no special claim to 
professional expertise in questions of ethics, they have devel-
oped rigorous methods for analyzing the implications of ethi-
cal judgments. 
Climate policy raises particular questions of equity among 
generations, as future generations are not able to influence di-
rectly the policies being chosen today that will affect their 
well-beinu (Mishan. lL)7.v Broome. 1992). Moreover, it mav 
not be possible to compensate future generations for reduc-
tions in well-being caused by current policies, and, even if 
feasible, such compensation may not actually occur.2 
4.1.1 Areas of agreement 
and 
disagreement 
Economists are in general agreement that cost-benefit analy-
sis, including discounting, is useful in examining policies 
with long or complex time paths, or policies whose effects 
extend across generations (see, for example, Layard, 1976; 
Cline, 1992; Lyon, 1994). At the same time, cost-benefit 
analysis, and the techniques that go with it, including dis-
counting, focus on economic efficiency, and therefore have 
limitations as a guide to policy.3 
The trade-off between consumption today and consump-
tion in the future raises two central questions: first, how to 
think about this trade-off; second, what numerical value to at-
tach to it. Many economists subscribe to a general framework 
that focusses on the social marginal utility of consumption to-
day compared with consumption in the future. In this frame-
work, the discount rate can be expressed as: 
d = p+8g, 
(4.1) 
where d is the discount rate, p is the rate of pure time prefer-
ence (also called the utility discount rate, a measure of the dif-
ference in importance attached to utility today versus utility in 
the future),4 0 is the absolute value of the elasticity of mar-
ginal utility (a measure of the relative effect of a change in 
income on welfare), and g is the growth rate of per capita 
consumption. Equation 4.1 provides a way to think about 
discounting that subsumes many related subtopics, including 
treatment of risk, valuing of nonmarket goods, and treatment 
of intergenerational equity. 
This equation sets out explicitly the two reasons for dis-
counting future consumption: either (1) one cares less about 
tomorrow's consumer than today's, or about one's own wel-
fare tomorrow than today (reflected in the first term, p): or 
else (2) one believes tomorrow's consumer will be better off 
than today's (reflected in the second term, Og). For a discus-
sion of the derivation of equation 4.1, see Annex 4A. 
Economists are in general agreement about several empiri-
cal issues that affect the discount rate, including the range of 
returns to investment, and the average interest rates earned 
and paid by consumers. 
There is also a general consensus about certain basic prin-
ciples of discount rate analysis. Most economists believe that 
considerations of risk can be treated by converting outcomes 
into certainty 
equivalents, 
amounts that reflect the degree 
of risk in an investment,5 and discounting these certainty 
equivalents. There is general agreement that in evaluating 
competing projects, all spending, including investment, is to 
be converted into consumption equivalents first, then dis-
counted (Arrow and Kurz. 1970; Lind et «/.. 1982). Environ-
mental impacts may be incorporated by converting them to 
consumption equivalents, then discounting. Many people ex-
pect the relative price of environmental goods to increase over 
time, which would have consequences equivalent to adopting 
a lower discount rate for such goods at unchanged prices. 
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency 
However, given appropriate estimates of relative prices, there 
is no reason to explicitly modify the discount rate for environ-
mental goods (see Annex 4A). In addition, economists gener-
ally believe that future generations could be compensated for 
some loss of environmental amenities by offsetting accumula-
tions of capital/1 
Economists disagree, however, about several other issues 
that affect the choice of a discount rate, including key parame-
ters such as the likely rate of future per capita economic-
growth and the changing relative scarcity of environmental 
goods. These calculations require economic judgments about 
the degree of economic efficiency reflected in market out-
comes, the extent of constraints on policy, and the proper ap-
proach to distributional concerns. Disagreements on these 
points drive the differences in conclusions about the discount 
rate. 
The next section presents the two most prominent ap-
proaches to discounting for climate change analysis, together 
with the reasons for their differing conclusions. The two 
approaches start from very different places. What is called 
below the prescriptive approach begins with ethical con-
siderations. What is called the descriptive approach, on the 
other hand, begins with evidence from decisions that people 
and governments actually make.7 
4.2 Prescriptive Approach 
The prescriptive approach, which is usually associated with a 
relatively low discount rate, begins with a social welfare func-
tion (an algebraic formulation that "adds up" the consumption 
of different individuals, yielding a measure of the well-being 
of society as a whole) constructed from ethical principles. 
Those who hold the prescriptive view typically argue that 
market interest rates often provide a poor indicator of the mar-
ginal trade-offs to society, because of market imperfections 
and suboptimal tax (and sometimes expenditure) policy, and 
because of constraints on policy, especially the difficulty in 
making transfers to future generations. 
In the absence of such limitations, the social marginal util-
ity of consumption would be the same at each point in time, 
and the social marginal rate of substitution between consump-
tion today and consumption tomorrow would equal the mar-
ket rate of interest. In the presence of such limitations, the 
social marginal rate of substitution will in general differ from 
market rates of interest. 
Some advocates of the prescriptive approach use the term 
social rate of time preference (SRTP) to refer to the discount 
rate they derive. In this chapter, the term SRTP will be re-
served for the discount rate derived from the prescriptive ap-
proach. Using this new expression, equation (4.1) is 
SRTP = p+ % 
The first term. p. reflects discounting of the utility of future 
generations. This term is sometimes said to represent dis-
counting for impatience or myopia: alternatively, it may rep-
resent discounting for empathetic distance (because we may 
feel greater affinity for generations closer to us). See Annex 
4A.3 for more discussion on the pure rate of time preference. 
131 
The second term, tig, reflects discounting for rising con-
sumption (or consumption equivalents). If per capita con-
sumption is growing at rate g, then an extra unit of consump-
tion in the next period should be discounted by the term Og to 
take account of the lower marginal utility of consumption at 
higher consumption levels. Even if present and future genera-
tions are given equal weight, so that pure time preference is 
zero (p = 0), future consumption would still be discounted if 
later generations are expected to he better off; in this case, an 
extra unit of consumption would not be worth as much in the 
future as it is today. For example, if technical change contin-
ues at the pace of the last century, with productivity and living 
standards doubling about every thirty years, then this high 
value of g would push up the SRTP. This means that an addi-
tional unit of consumption by future generations, who would 
be much richer than we are, would count much less than an 
additional unit of consumption today." 
The SRTP approach values the total change in consump-
tion at each date, not just the direct outputs of the project. 
Where mitigation projects displace other investment, future 
consumption must be reduced by the consumption that the 
displaced investment projects would have generated. (This 
requires an explicit analysis of the project's effects on con-
sumption and investment.) The SRTP is then applied to net 
consumption. In effect, all results are converted to their con-
sumption equivalents, then discounted at the SRTP. 
The prescriptive approach arrives at the following conclu-
sions: 
(1) 
It is appropriate to apply a discount rate to public and 
private investment, including regulatory decisions. This 
discount rate should be derived from ethical considera-
tions, reflecting society's views concerning trade-offs of 
consumption across generations. 
(2) 
Because of practical limits on the feasibility of intergen-
erational transfers, and in the absence of optimal tax 
policy.1' the SRTP will in general fall below the producer 
rate of interest. 
(3) 
The cost of a greenhouse mitigation project must in-
clude the forgone benefits of other competing invest-
ments not undertaken. This means that costs should be 
adjusted for the shadow price of capital, the present 
value of the future consumption yielded by a unit of 
capital. If a mitigation project would displace private in-
vestment, and returns to both projects accrue to the 
same generations, then it is appropriate to use the op-
portunity cost of capital - the return that the private in-
vestor would have received from the forgone capital 
investment. Only after doing this will it be appropriate 
to use the social rate of time preference to discount con-
sumption. 
4.2.1 Discount rate estimates - Prescriptive approach 
If the pure rate of time preference (p) is zero, then high rates of 
productivity increase (and thus high g). of the order of 1.5'/r. 
plus high (absolute) values of the elasticity of marginal utility 
(ti)w imply a social discount rale of about y/<. With low rates 
132 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
of productivity increase, of the order of 0.5%, and low (ab-
solute) values of the elasticity of marginal utility, the social 
discount rate is of the order of 0.5%. In a gloomy scenario, in 
which future output and consumption decline, then g and thus 
the SRTP may be negative (Munasinghe, 1993). Also, the dis-
count rate need not he constant over time even if p and 0 are 
constant, since g need not he constant. 
The economic literature on global warming has used a 
range of discount rates. To follow the approach suggested by 
d i n e (1992), with a zero rate of pure time preference (p), and 
using the central case consumption growth rate of 1.6% per 
capita from the IPCC scenarios (IPCC, 1992), multiplied by 
an elasticity of marginal utility (0) of 1.5, gives an SRTP of 
2.4%. If, instead, it is assumed that per capita growth is only 
1% (perhaps because of slower growth after 100 years), or if 
0 = 1 , then the SRTP becomes 1.5%. After taking account of 
the share of resources coming out of capital (20% economy-
wide versus 80% out of consumption) and taking into account 
the opportunity cost of displaced capital and depreciation, the 
effective discount rate becomes 2 to 3% . 
A higher SRTP may apply to developing countries with 
higher rates of productivity growth. If labour productivity in-
creases by 5-8% per year, as experienced by the high-growth 
countries of Asia, and with an elasticity of marginal utility of 
2, discount rates of the order of 10 to 16% could be justified. 
Similarly, low-income countries close to subsistence levels 
could have high elasticities of marginal utility (this assumes 
a rapid fall-off of marginal utility from the extremely high 
initial levels associated with privation), so that their SRTPs 
could he high even if they were experiencing slow growth 
over long periods. These distinctions imply that developing 
countries may he less willing than industrialized countries to 
assume abatement costs now in anticipation of climate change 
benefits later.11 
These discount rates apply to consumption 
only. They can 
be used only after the forgone benefits of other investments 
not made (i.e.. the opportunity costs) have been included in 
the costs of the programme. If the forgone investments would 
have produced a high return, then calculated output and future 
consumption will suffer, making the mitigation programme 
relatively less attractive. 
Critics of the prescriptive approach note that the opportu-
nity cost of capital (the market rate of return) usually exceeds 
the SRTP. This suggests that society should not make deci-
sions on the basis of a 2% discount rate, because in doing 
so we would be forgoing better alternative investments. Pre-
scriptionists argue that the SRTP does not equal the market rate 
of interest because important alternatives are not feasible - in 
particular, because society cannot set aside investments over 
the next three centuries, earmarking the proceeds for the 
eventual compensation of those adversely affected by global 
warming. Accordingly, if the SRTP is I to 2%. a climate 
change investment returning 2% is better than no investment 
at all. Critics of the prescriptive approach also point out that a 
discount rate o( 2% is glaringly inconsistent with observed 
behaviour (e.g.. government spending on education or re-
search, or development assistance by donor countries). To 
this, prescriptionists reply that just because the government 
fails to allocate resources in one area on the basis of ethical 
considerations, that is no reason to insist that decisions in other 
areas be consistent with that initial decision. 
4.3 Descriptive Approach 
The other widely employed approach focusses on the (risk-
adjusted) opportunity cost of capital. Most global warming 
optimization models (e.g., Nordhaus, 1994; Peck and Teis-
berg, 1992; Manne et al., 1993) rely on the descriptive ap-
proach, which rests on three arguments: 
(1) 
Mitigation expenditures displace other forms of invest-
ment. Advocates of the descriptive approach advise de-
cision makers to choose the action that leads to the 
greatest total consumption (Nordhaus, 1994).12 
(2) 
If the return on mitigation investments lies below that of 
other investments, then choosing other investments 
would make current and future generations better off. 
Transfers to future generations, if necessary, are to be 
considered separately. 
(3) 
The appropriate social welfare function to use for in-
tertemporal choices is revealed by society's actual 
choices (hence the name, descriptive approach). Believ-
ing that no justification exists for choosing an SWF 
different from what decision makers actually use, ad-
vocates of the descriptive approach generally call for in-
ferring the social discount rate from current rates of 
return and growth rates (Manne, 1994). 
Critics have questioned all three arguments.13 
4.3.1 Formulation 
of the descriptive 
approach 
The descriptive approach looks at investments in the real 
world, and sets the discount rate accordingly. The descriptive 
approach implicitly aims to maximize the economic resources 
available to future generations, allowing them to decide how 
to use these resources. Nordhaus (1994), Lind (1994), Bird-
sail and Steer (1993), Lyon (1994), and Manne (1994), among 
others, have all stressed the importance of the opportunity 
cost of capital, noting that even apparently small differences 
in rate of return result in large differences in long-run results. 
Over 100 years, an investment at 5% returns 18 times more 
than one at 2%. Thus, where some redistribution of future re-
turns is possible, society would be foolish to forgo a 5% re-
turn for a 2% return. 
Birdsall and Steer of the World Bank (1993) explain the 
need to direct investment to the most productive uses, warn-
ing against use of too low a discount rate: 
We feel that meeting the needs of future generations will 
only be possible if investable resources are channelled to 
projects and programmes with the highest environmental, 
social, and economic rates of return. This is much less 
likely to happen if the discount rate is set significant!} 
lower than the cost of capital.14 
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, 
and Economic 
Efficiency 
/ J J 
Wildavsky (1988) explains the point in the context of health 
and safety regulations: 
Insofar as we today should consider the welfare of future 
generations, our duty lies not in leaving them exactly the 
social and environmental life we think they ought to have, 
but rather in making it possible for them to inherit a cli-
mate of open choices - that is, in leaving behind a larger 
level of general fluid resources to be redirected as they, not 
we, see fit. 
To advocates of the prescriptionist approach who claim 
that on ethical grounds, it is difficult to support a rate of pure 
time preference much above zero (Cline, 1992), advocates of 
the descriptive approach point to actual behaviour of individ-
uals and nations. For example, development assistance bud-
gets for the OECD countries average about 0.25% of GDP -
certainly inconsistent with the ethical arguments used to jus-
tify the assumption that p = 0.15 
Further, as Manne (1994) demonstrates, a low SRTP im-
plies a high rate of investment: A discount rate of 2% implies 
far more investment than actually occurs in any country now, 
and thus would require a big jump in savings rates to finance. Ih 
But tax policy in most OECD countries significantly de-
presses investment, which raises the return to investment at 
the margin, and is therefore inconsistent with a low SRTP. 
What conclusion to draw from this evidence depends on 
whether tax policy is viewed as a constraint or as the result of 
optimizing an SWF. Most advocates of the descriptive ap-
proach hold the latter view. Descriptionists also emphasize 
that in the presence of multiple departures from perfect com-
petition, the piecemeal fix proposed in the prescriptive ap-
proach may make matters worse rather than better. 
Advocates of the descriptive approach have debated 
whether to use the producer interest rate / (the private rate of 
transformation between investment today and investment in 
the future), the consumer interest rate /- (equal to the producer 
rate after taxes), or something in between. The choice de-
pends in large part on the degree of distortion introduced in 
the tax system. 
The rate of return on corporate capital, equities, and even 
bonds can be thought of as including a risk premium for vari-
ous uncertainties, including the risk of inflation. The very low 
return on short-term government bonds has the lowest risk 
component and, some would argue, is closer to the risk-ad-
justed rate we are seeking. 
4.3.2 Returns to investment 
and discount rate estimates 
-
Descriptive approach 
A review of World Bank projects estimated a real rate of re-
turn of 16% at project completion: one study found returns of 
26% for primary education in developing countries. Even in 
the OECD countries, equities have yielded over 5% (after cor-
porate and other taxes) for many decades, which is compara-
ble to a pretax rate of at least 7% (see Table 4.1).17 Note that 
although average rates of return are observed, decisions are 
based on marginal rates of return. 
Table 4.1. Estimated returns on financial assets and direct 
investment 
Asset 
Period 
Real return (%) 
High-income industrial 
countries 
Equities 
1960-84 (a) 
5.4 
Bonds 
1960-84 (a) 
1.6 
Nonresidential capital 
1975-90 (b) 
15.1 
Govt, short-term bonds 
1960-90 (c) 
0.3 
Equities 
All private 
capital, pretax 
Corporate capital. 
posttax 
Real estate 
Farmland 
Treasury bills 
Developing countries 
Primary education 
Higher education 
1925-92 (a) 
1963-85 (d) 
1963-85 (e) 
1960-84 (a) 
1947-84 (a) 
1926-86 (c) 
various (f) 
various (f) 
6.5 
5.7 
5.7 
5.5 
5.5 
0.3 
26 
13 
Sources: Quoted in Nordhaus, 1994: (a) Ibbotson and Brinson, 1987. 
updated by Nordhaus, 1994; (b) UNDP, 1992, Table 4, results for 
G-7 countries; (c) Cline, 1992; (d) Slockfisch, 1982; (e) Brainard el 
«/., 199l:(f)PsacharopouIos, 1985. 
4.4 Conflicts Between the Two Approaches 
Much of the disagreement between the prescriptionist and de-
scriptionist views turns on the question of compensation 
among generations. The descriptive approach assumes com-
pensation from one generation to another for any loss of envi-
ronmental amenities, implicitly leaving unanswered whether 
compensation is likely to occur.IS The prescriptionist view im-
plies not only that transfers to future generations are con-
strained, but that climate change policies are the only way to 
make these transfers (Manne. 1994). The descriptionist view 
argues for choosing the path that maximizes consumption, 
making transfers among generations separately out of the 
larger present value of consumption. The alternative - over-
riding market prices on ethical grounds - opens the door to ir-
reconcilable inconsistencies. If ethical arguments, rather than 
the revealed preferences of citizens, form the rationale for a 
low discount rate, cannot ethical arguments be applied to 
other questions? If it is argued, on ethical grounds, that it is 
unethical to pay rents (royalties) to oil companies, does that 
mean that cost-benefit calculations should use $2 for the price 
of oil (Nordhaus, 1994)? 
4.5 Conclusion: W h a t Can Discounting Contribute 
to Climate Change Analysis? 
The prescriptive approach can be interpreted as doing as 
much as is economically justified to reduce the risk of climate 
change: the descriptive approach can be interpreted as maxi-
134 
Climate Change IW5 - luononiie and Soeial Dimensions of Climate Change 
BOX 4.1: EXAMPLE OF PROJECT 
EVALUATION USING PRESCRIPTIVE AND 
DESCRIPTIVE APPROACHES 
Suppose a greenhouse mitigation project is under consid-
eration. If undertaken now, it will cost $1 million. If not 
undertaken, a new sea wall might be required in year 50, 
costing $10 million. If it is necessary, building a sea wall 
would avoid damages of $1 million per year. 
Capital cost 
$1 million 
Time until damages begin 
50 years 
Cost of sea wall, year 50 
$10 m 
Avoided damages, years 50, 51, 52, 5 3 , . . . 
$1 m/yr 
Opportunity cost of capital 
5% 
The decision maker has four options: 
(a) Do nothing (year 0), do nothing (year 50) 
(b) Do nothing (0), build sea wall if necessary (50) 
(c) Mitigation project (0), do nothing (50) 
(d) Other investment (0), build sea wall if necessary (50) 
The stream of benefits is as follows: 
Option (year) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
0 
0 
0 
-1 
-1 
50 
0 
-10 
1.0 
11.5 
-10 
= 1.5 
51 
0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
52 
0 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
At discount rates below 10%, option (b) dominates option 
(a) - if the sea level rises, it is better to build the sea wall 
than do nothing. Option (d) dominates option (c), as invest-
ing the $1 million in year 0 at 5% yields $11.5 million in 
year 50, enough to build the sea wall with $ 1.5 million left 
over. Thus, the descriptive approach would point to option 
(d) or (b). But option (d) may he institutionally infeasible. 
as there may be no way to put aside $1 million today and 
leave it untouched for 50 years as a Fund for Future Green-
house Victims. If (d) is infeasible, as advocates of the pre-
scriptive approach might suggest, then the decision maker 
must choose between (b) and (c). In summary, then, de-
scriptionists would choose between (b) and (d), whereas 
prescriptionists would choose between (b) and (c). In ei-
ther case, the choice will depend on the value attached to 
the consumption between years 1 and 49. which depends 
on the consumption rate of discount. 
mizing the economic resources available for future genera-
tions and allowing them to decide how to use the resources. 
Both include the opportunity cost of capital - directly in the 
case of the descriptive approach, indirectly in the case of the 
prescriptive approach, which takes account of the full impact 
on consumption and. thus, of the cost of any displaced invest-
ment (see example of project evaluation in Box 4.1). The pre-
scriptive approach looks at the risk-adjusted marginal return 
to capital, which may be considerably lower than observed 
average rates of return to capital. Refinements to the descrip-
tive approach would take into account limitations on inter-
generational transfers, including the absence of lump sum re-
distributive taxes. 
The discount rate is particularly important in climate 
change analysis. Because of the very long times involved in 
climate change decisions, the choice of a discount rate power-
fully affects the net present value of alternative policies, and 
thus the policy recommendations that emerge from climate 
change analysis. 
The prescriptive approach tends to generate relatively low 
discount rates and thus favours relatively more spending on 
climate change mitigation. The descriptive approach tends to 
generate somewhat higher discount rates and thus favours rel-
atively less spending on climate change mitigation. 
Although economists support the use of discounting for 
climate change analysis, they continue to debate which of the 
two approaches is correct, and the parameters to be used in 
calculating the rate. These choices in turn significantly affect 
the conclusions of the analysis. 
Annex 4A: Methodological Notes on Discounting 
4A.1 Intertemporal maximization of well-being 
In an influential series of articles, Koopmans (1960) con-
ducted a series of thought experiments on intertemporal choice 
to see the implications of alternative sets of ethical assump-
tions in plausible worlds. He suggested that we can have no 
direct intuition about the validity of discounting future well-
being, unless we know something concrete about feasible de-
velopment paths. 
Koopmans considered the set of feasible consumption 
paths (from the present to the indefinite future) and the corre-
sponding set of welfare or "well-being" paths. These paths 
could then be ordered to select the optimum path of well-
being, according to the criterion: 
: = J%oW(c,)g-"^ 
(4A.I) 
with p > 0, where IV is welfare, and c( is consumption at time /. 
Correspondingly, the discount rate for the time path of con-
sumption is: 
/, = i(c, ) = p+ B(ci) [dc/clt ;/c, 
(4A.2) 
where 0(c;) is the elasticity of marginal well-being, or mar-
ginal utility, at time / (Arrow and Kurz, 1970). (Note that 
whereas the main text treats this term as a constant, it is ex-
plicitly considered to vary with the level of consumption in 
the treatment here.) Along a full optimum path, the consump-
tion rate of discount equals the productivity of capital (i.e.. the 
social rate of return on investment; in this case, /( equals the 
producer rate of interest). This is the Ramsey Rule (Ramsey. 
1928). 
A convenient form of W is one giving a constant elasticity 
of marginal utility, such as: 
W(c) = r " 
(4A.3i 
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency 
135 
As discussed in the text, the greater the rate of pure time 
preference (p), the lower the weight accorded to future gen-
erations' well-being relative to that of the present genera-
tion. Mirrlees' (1967) computations introduced this possibility 
(p > 0) as a way of countering the advantages to be enjoyed 
by future generations should the productivity of capital and 
technological progress prove to be powerful engines of 
growth. 
A higher value of 6 means greater emphasis on intergenera-
tional equity. As 0->°°, the well-being function in (4A.1) re-
sembles more and more the Rawlsian max-min principle; in 
the limit, optimal growth is zero. 
In (4A.3), W(c) has no minimum value. If p = 0, this en-
sures that very low future consumption rates would signifi-
cantly affect aggregate intertemporal welfare. On the other 
hand, if p were positive, low rates of consumption by genera-
tions sufficiently far in the future would not be penalized by 
the optimal path criterion in (4A.1). This means that unless the 
economy is sufficiently productive, optimal consumption will 
tend to zero in the very long run. Dasgupta and Heal (1974) 
and Solow (1974a) showed in a model economy with ex-
haustible resources that optimal consumption declines to zero 
in the very long run if p > 0 and in the absence of technical 
change, but that it increases to infinity if p = 0. 
It is in such examples that notions of sustainable develop-
ment can offer some analytical guidance. If by sustainable de-
velopment we mean that the chosen consumption path should 
never fall short of some stipulated positive level, then it fol-
lows that the value of p would need to be adjusted downward 
in a suitable manner to ensure that the optimal consumption 
path meets the requirement. This was the substance of 
Solow's remark (see Solow, 1974b) that in the economies of 
exhaustible resources the choice of p can be a matter of con-
siderable moment. 
So far an assumption underlying this discussion has been 
that well-being or utility has not been bounded. If we impose 
bounds on well-being, other results obtain, because of the 
mathematical properties of the space of bounded sequences. 
For such sequences present value calculations are not rich 
enough to capture all the subtleties of evaluation of a util-
ity stream. Instead, one must add another term to the pres-
ent value. This second term will in general have the form 
of a long-term average. It could be approximated by mini-
mum requirements for the long-run stocks of environmental 
resources. This formulation attempts to account for both 
basic levels of human needs and limitations on total re-
sources. 
4A.2 Consumption versus investment discount rate 
Sandmo and Dreze (1971) address the choice of the correct 
rate of discount to use in the public sector when there are dis-
tortions in the economy, for example, in the form of taxes, 
which prevent the equalization of marginal rates of substitu-
tion and transformation in the private sector. Under certain 
assumptions, the corporate tax drives a wedge between 
the marginal rate of time preference of consumers and the 
marginal rate of transformation in private firms. 
They find that for a closed economy: 
!+/•< l+/< \+[r/(\ -t)] 
(4A.4) 
where r is the consumer interest rate, / is the tax rate, and / is 
the public sector's discount rate. This rate should thus be a 
weighted average of the rate facing consumers and the tax-
distorted rate used by firms. Since 1 + r measures the mar-
ginal opportunity cost of transferring a unit of resources from 
private consumption, and since \+lr/(\-t)] 
is the measure 
for transfers from private investment, a unit of resources 
transferred from the private to the public sector should be val-
ued according to how much of it comes out of consumption 
and how much out of investment.19 
The general idea of the prescriptive approach is to calcu-
late impacts on consumption and to find the appropriate dis-
count factor for discounting those changes. We are, in effect, 
taking consumption as our standard of measure. This is con-
venient and natural, but there are other ways of performing 
the calculations, using other measures. If these other measures 
are used, relative prices over time (discount factors) will dif-
fer from those associated with the consumption measure. 
By the same token, if, for example, systematic relation-
ships exist between the outputs and inputs of a project and the 
total changes in consumption they induce, and if consumption 
changes over time, then instead of discounting total consump-
tion impacts at the SRTP, one could calculate the direct im-
pacts using another discount factor. The discussion above of 
the Sandmo-Dreze formulation is a case in point. These alter-
natives do not provide prescriptions, only alternative formulas 
for arriving at the same point. 
The discrepancy between public evaluation of a marginal 
dollar to future generations and individuals' own intertempo-
ral evaluations can arise even in the case of very simple social 
welfare functions. Thus, assume that there is a utilitarian 
social welfare function, which simply adds up the utility of 
successive generations, and for simplicity, assume each gen-
eration lives for only two periods. The /''' generation's utility 
is represented by a utility function of the form: 
t/Yc',.r%,J 
(4A.5) 
where the first argument refers to consumption during the first 
period of the individual's life, the second to consumption dur-
ing the second period. Then observed market rates of interest 
refer to how individuals are willing to trade off consumption 
over their own life. These may or may not bear a close corre-
spondence to how society is willing to trade off consumption 
across generations. The former (the investment discount rate) 
corresponds to U'n/U'r whereas the latter (the consumption 
discount rate) corresponds to U'+'/U'\. 
If the government has engaged in optimal intertemporal re-
distribution and does not face constraints in imposing lump 
sum (i.e., nondistorting) taxes on each generation, then the 
two discount rates will be the same and equal to the marginal 
rate of transformation (in production, i.e.. the return to in-
vestment). But whenever either of these conditions is not 
satisfied, then market rates of interest facing consumers 
(measuring their own marginal rates of substitution) need bear 
no close relationship to society's marginal rate of substitution 
136 
Climalc Change IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
across generations. Diamond and Mirrlees (1971) show that if 
the only reason for the discrepancy between producer and 
consumer interest rates is optimally determined commodity 
taxes, and there are no after-tax profits, possibly because there 
is a 100% pure profits lax, then the government should use the 
producer rate of interest. Stiglitz and Dasgupta (1971) have 
shown that this result does not hold if either of these assump-
tions is dropped. 
Under certain circumstances (in particular, the existence of 
optimal intergenerational lump sum transfers), asymptotically 
the producer rate of interest will equal the pure rate of time 
preference of society. More generally, when the government 
must resort to distortionary taxes, not only is this not true, but 
the rates of discount employed may reflect distributional con-
siderations (see Stiglitz, 1985). 
4A.3 The social rate of time 
preference 
As stated in the main text, the social rate of time preference 
(SRTP) is composed of pure time preference (p) and a dis-
count rate that takes into account falling marginal utility as 
the level of consumption rises (%): or SRTP - p + %. 
Pure time preference. The earliest economics literature, in 
addressing these issues, argued that the appropriate value of p 
was zero (Ramsey, 1928). Ramsey based his argument on the 
ethical presumption that all individuals, including those living 
in different generations, should he valued the same. The argu-
ment since then has advanced only slightly. Some have argued 
that the discount rate should he adjusted for the probability of 
extinction. Plausible estimates of this effect would add very 
little to the discount rate. Others have pointed out that a posi-
tive discount rate is needed for acceptable optimization re-
sults: In the absence of a discount factor, the sum of future 
utilities may be infinite, so that the mathematics of maximiz-
ing a social welfare function are ill-defined. Because even a 
very small positive discount rate, however, would resolve the 
mathematical issue, this objection has little practical moment. 
In a society in which income levels are not expected to rise. 
impatience may still cause a household (or the present genera-
tion) to discount the future (generation), that is, to prefer con-
sumption today to consumption tomorrow: in discounting 
terms, this means equating a smaller amount of consumption 
today with a larger amount in the future. In his classic paper 
on optimal saving, Ramsey (1928) judged that any allowance 
for pure time preference (/> > 0) "is ethically indefensible and 
arises merely from the weakness of the imagination." Corre-
spondingly, he argued that future generations should have 
equal standing with the current generation: there was no 
moral or ethical basis for giving less weight to the welfare of 
future generations than to that of the current generation. 
For an individual, some nonzero value of pure time prefer-
ence can make sense, because he or she has a finite life and 
thus uncertainty about being alive to enjoy future consump-
tion. Nonetheless, for a life span of 70 years, pure time prefer-
ence at even l'< per annum implies that consumption at the 
end of life is worth only half that at the beginning. Evidence 
also siiiiiiests that individuals' discount rates may change over 
time, with lower discount rates being used for longer time 
horizons. 
Considerations for society as a whole are different. The so-
cial welfare function approach asks: If society values different 
generations in a particular way (reflected in the social welfare 
function), how should changes in consumption in different 
generations be compared? Ramsey's analysis focussed on the 
ethical presumption that consumption by all generations 
should have equal value. But this does not exclude the possi-
bility that, as a matter of description, 
the current generation 
gives less value to consumption of future generations. 
Diminishing 
marginal utility. The second term on the right 
side of equation (4.1) (6g) raises two questions. First, what 
are reasonable expectations concerning increases in per capita 
income (growth rate g in the equation)? Second, how should 
intertemporal differences in expected consumption per capita 
be translated into social weights, that is, marginal valuations 
of dollars of future income? This second question refers to the 
parameter 6, the elasticity of marginal utility, which tells how 
rapidly the additional utility from an extra unit of consump-
tion drops off as consumption rises. 
No consensus on the first question has emerged. Although 
no consensus has emerged on the answer to the second ques-
tion, there is a generally accepted method for approaching the 
issue. The evaluation of any individual's consumption can be 
summarized by a utility function of the form U = U(c) where 
the parentheses indicate that U, utility, is a function of c. per 
capita consumption. Marginal utility is positive (U'(c) > 0). 
but declines as consumption rises (U"(c) < 0). A new shirt, for 
example, benefits a pauper more than a prince. That is why if 
consumption of some future generation is higher, the marginal 
valuation of its consumption will be lower. The question is. 
how much lower? Formally, the answer is given by the elas-
ticity of marginal utility (6) or: 
Individuals in their day-to-day decision making reveal in-
formation about their perceptions concerning their own utility 
functions in at least two different contexts: behaviour towards 
risk and behaviour towards intertemporal allocation of con-
sumption. In both contexts, there seems to be a consensus that 
elasticities of marginal utilities lie in the range of 1 to 2. even 
though the empirical studies require strong assumptions about 
the specific form of the utility function (symmetric and time 
separable). Thus, one of the most commonly used utility func-
tions, the logarithmic, implies 0 = 1. meaning that if income 
rises by \c/c the marginal utility of consumption falls by \c,'c. 
Attempts by Fellner (1967) and Scott (1989) to estimate this 
elasticity place it somewhat higher, at 1.5, whereas recent es-
timates reviewed by Pearce and Ulph (1994) place it in the 
vicinity of 0.8. 
Just as the choice of the rate of pure time preference (p) has 
important implications for intergenerational equity, as dis-
cussed above, so does the choice of the elasticity of marginal 
utility. The more weight the society gives to equity between 
generations, the higher the value of 0. Thus, a value of. say. 3. 
would mean that it would require a 30c/c rise in the next genet-
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency 
137 
ation's per capita consumption to warrant a 10% reduction in 
that of the present generation; or, under a bleaker outlook, that 
if the future generation is expected to be poorer than the pre-
sent, the present would be prepared to accept a 30% reduction 
in consumption to secure a 10% increase in that of the future 
generation (so long as the two relative consumption levels did 
not reverse). Even 8= 1 gives some emphasis to equity, how-
ever. When 0 = 1 , a 10% reduction in the richer generation's 
income will be an acceptable trade-off for a 10% increase in 
that of the poorer generation, even though the absolute reduc-
tion of the one exceeds the absolute increase of the other (be-
cause the absolute consumption base of the one is larger than 
that of the other). 
Risk. Utility may also be discounted for risk. The standard 
treatment of risk in models involving impacts over a single 
individual's life is not to raise the discount rate for riskier 
projects, but instead to convert probabilistic consumption 
patterns into their certainty equivalents and then discount the 
results at the standard rate. The same should be true for the 
pure time preference component of the SRTP when discount-
ing across generations. This component should remain un-
changed with respect to risk, and the influence of risk should 
instead be incorporated in the stream of expected consump-
tion effects. 
There would seem to be an argument for varying the 
growth-based component of the SRTP with respect to risk, 
however. If there is uncertainty about the rate of per capita in-
come growth, g, then consider the effect on the component Og 
in the SRTP. Suppose two scenarios each have 50% probabil-
ity: per capita income growth of 1% and per capita growth of 
2%. There will be two resulting possible streams of marginal 
utility over time. The stream of expected value of marginal 
utility will be the average of these two streams. But if mar-
ginal utility is a convex function of consumption, this average 
will be greater than the stream of marginal utility generated 
by considering the simple average growth rate over time, 
1.5%. That is, with diminishing marginal utility, at any point 
in time marginal utility along the path for 1.5% growth will be 
closer to that of the 2% growth path than to that of the 1 % 
growth path. Correspondingly, the expected marginal utility 
path lying halfway between the two scenarios will coincide 
with the marginal utility stream for a growth rate closer to 1 % 
than to 2%. Essentially, the expected value of marginal utility 
is greater than the marginal utility of expected income. On 
this basis, there would be grounds for reducing the growth-
based component of the SRTP under circumstances of risk. 
Because the risk in predicting per capita growth on centuries-
scale horizons is high, this consideration is particularly rele-
vant for the problem of global warming. 
Other arguments. Empathetic distance provides another 
rationale for discounting. Rothenberg (1993) and Schelling 
(1993) have suggested that although nonzero pure time pref-
erence might make sense for an initial two or three decades, 
beyond a certain future point it makes no sense to apply fur-
ther discounting of consumption for pure time preference. 
Thus, "as the future recedes . . . single generations come to be 
perceived more and more as homogeneous entities" (Rothen-
berg). Similarly, "time may serve as a kind of measure of dis-
tance. . . . Beyond certain distances there may be no further 
depreciation for time, culture, geography, race, or kinship" 
(Schelling). A graph of the fraction of face value accorded to 
each successive generation (for constant real consumption) 
would thus be a series of declining, successively shallower 
steps that eventually reach a horizontal plateau. A deep pla-
teau signifies major discounting for empathetic distance; a hor-
izontal line beginning and remaining at unity is the zero pure 
time preference rate across generations recommended by 
Ramsey. Policy based on empathetic distance (a shelf lower 
than unity) may be more defensible in a normative sense when 
the action is refraining from conferring a windfall gain (as in 
penurious aid budgets) than when it involves the imposition 
of windfall damage (as in global warming's effects on future 
generations). 
Another argument for nonzero pure time preference is that 
setting the rate at zero could imply that the present generation 
should accept near-starvation consumption levels and corre-
spondingly low utility because, with even very small returns 
on investment, an endless stream of future generations could 
enjoy increased consumption and (to a lesser degree) utility as 
a result. To some extent, however, this concern is already ad-
dressed in the overall discount rate equation (4.1). As noted, 
the first term in that equation discounts utility (pure time pref-
erence), but the second term additionally discounts consump-
tion to take account of falling marginal utility. The present 
generation is protected against an optimizing programme set-
ting its consumption near zero if the elasticity of marginal 
utility (0) is large enough and marginal utility drops off fast 
enough to rule out impoverishment of the present generation 
for gains to future generations. 
Koopmans (1966) and Mirrlees (1967) have expressed the 
concern that zero time preference would imply unacceptably 
low levels of current consumption, and even no consumption 
under some circumstances. Even positive but very low dis-
count rates might, in the absence of technological progress, 
lead to unreasonably high savings rates. (This illustrates a 
general problem with models founded on utilitarianism: They 
may imply very large sacrifices from one generation or group.) 
These models might well be seen as providing arguments that 
the rate of time preference is greater than zero, though they do 
not go far in specifying its proper magnitude.20 
4A.4 The social welfare function 
Economists have long debated the equity of discounting dis-
tant future benefits (Ramsey. 1928; Mishan, 1975; Rawls, 1971; 
Sen. 1982). The usual approach to issues of equity since Berg-
son (1938) has involved the choice of a social welfare func-
tion, and arguments about the choice among alternative social 
welfare functions have turned on the ability to derive a partic-
ular function from sound theoretical principles (seemingly 
plausible axioms) and on the resulting reasonableness of its 
derived implications. 
Although all social welfare functions have been criticized 
for assuming interpersonal comparability of utility, there seems 
/J,S' 
Climate Change I9i)5 
Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
to be no way of addressing the ethical issues involved in mak-
ing decisions affecting different generations without making 
some assumptions implicitly or explicitly about interpersonal 
comparability. Two polar views are represented by the utilitar-
ian approach, in which social welfare is the sum of utilities, 
and the Rawlsian approach, in which social welfare reflects 
the welfare of the worst-off individuals. Whereas the utilitar-
ian approach can he derived from what many view as a per-
suasive axiomatic (theoretical) structure (Harsanyi, 1955), the 
Rawlsian approach is derived from a "max-min" strategy 
(maximize the minimum outcome for any given party). Al-
though this strategy is popular in game theory, it does not rest 
on widely accepted axiomatic principles. 
The Rawlsian max-min principle is the strongest in assur-
ing (the least fortunate groups of) future generations levels of 
consumption at least as great as thai of (the least fortunate 
groups of) the current generation. It is consistent with the 
Brown-Weiss (1989) approach noted below. The max-min cri-
terion permits inequality in consumption between individuals 
(or in this case, between generations) only if it improves the 
position of the poorest. In the absence of technical change this 
would imply that consumption per head should be the same 
for all generations. By contrast, the utilitarian criterion allows 
future consumption, in principle, to fall below current con-
sumption, provided the current generation is made suffi-
ciently better off as a result. Correspondingly, it also allows 
for decreases in present consumption, provided the future 
generation is made sufficiently better off as a result. 
The Rawls and utilitarian social welfare functions can be 
viewed as limiting cases of more general social welfare func-
tions embracing social values of equality (Atkinson, 1970; 
Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1973). In practice, so long as there is 
sufficient scope for technological change, optimizing any 
egalitarian social welfare function over time yields increases 
in consumption per capita. Moreover, with any of the ap-
proaches, earlier generations are entitled lo draw down the 
pool of exhaustible resources so long as they add to the stock 
of reproducible capital. 
Within the individualistic utilitarian social welfare ap-
proach, there is still the question of the appropriate value of p. 
the pure rate of discounting future utility relative to current 
utility. Ramsey and others have argued that there exists no 
ethical basis for treating different generations differently; thus 
p should be zero. The individualistic social welfare function. 
accepted by most economists as the basis of ethical judg-
ments, accepts individuals' own relative valuations of differ-
ent goods. It does not place separate valuations on unequal 
access to particular goods, other than through their effects on 
the affected individuals. Although this probably represents the 
consensus view, some economists have insisted that for par-
ticular goods, individuals' valuations need not be the basis of 
societal valuations. For instance. Tobin (1970). in what he 
called specific egalitarianism. argued that society might argue 
for greater equality in distribution of health care than would 
he reflected in individuals' own evaluations. Most econo-
mists, however, reject this view. 
Sen (I9S2) similarly suggests a basis for not discounting 
when environmental effects are in question. He argues that a 
fundamental right of the future generation may be violated 
when the environment is degraded by the present generation, 
and that the resulting "oppression" of the future generation is 
inappropriate even if that generation is richer than the present 
and has a lower marginal utility of consumption. In this 
framework, intertemporal equity for environmental questions 
requires "a rejection of 'welfarism,' which judges social states 
exclusively by their personal welfare characteristics." It 
should he noted that this recommendation leads to paradoxes 
and inconsistencies. 
4A.5 Departures from "first-best" 
assumptions 
Analysis of optimal tax and expenditure policy occurs in a hy-
pothetical "first-best" world, with complete markets and opti-
mal redistribution policy (i.e., in which redistribution occurs 
only through lump sum taxes that do not change relative 
prices). In such a world, the discount rate will equal the mar-
ginal product of capital (i.e., the value of the additional output 
resulting from an additional unit of investment), which will 
equal the interest rate faced by both producers and consumers 
(Lind ?/«/., 1982). 
Because the real world economy may differ in important 
respects from the first-best world, the literature also addresses 
departures from the first-best assumptions. Taxes drive a 
wedge between /, what producers pay to borrow, and r, what 
consumers receive on their savings. If money for public in-
vestment comes entirely from other investment, then the dis-
count rate should be the producer interest rate /. If the money 
comes entirely from consumption, then the discount rate 
should be the consumer interest rate r. If the money comes 
partly from investment and partly from consumption, then the 
appropriate discount rate will fall somewhere between y and r. 
the exact answer requires an explicit analysis of how climate 
policy affects investment and consumption. 
In the general case in which costless intergenerational trans-
fers are not possible, no single discount rate can be applied. 
Rather, project-specific discount rates are required. Market 
rates are no longer a reliable indicator of the appropriate dis-
count rate, which may be greater than or less than the before-
tax return on investment (Stiglitz, 1982). In this general case. 
no theoretical rule connects the discount rate to any observed 
market rate, although market rates still contain valuable infor-
mation that should be used in arriving at a discount rate. 
Economists have long recognized that a competitive mar-
ket equilibrium yields a Pareto-efficient outcome under ap-
propriate conditions (perfect competition, no externalities, 
etc.). The distribution of income that it yields, however, does 
not in general maximize any particular social welfare func-
tion. It is a well-recognized function of government, there-
fore, to intervene in the distribution of income, for example, 
by establishing programmes for the very poor. Prescriptionists 
note that the intertemporal 
distribution of welfare that 
emerges from the market will not. in general, maximize any 
particular social welfare function either. Although it is a legit-
imate function of government to intervene to change the inter-
generational distribution of welfare, there is no presumption 
that the government has in fact intervened to make the oh-
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, 
and Economic 
Efficiency 
139 
served resource allocations maximize intertemporal social 
welfare. Moreover, in the case of climate change, no one gov-
ernment exists to make these decisions. 
Prescriptionists emphasize that the market rate of interest -
the relative price of consumption of one generation in one 
year of its life to its consumption in another year - will not in 
general equal the SRTP. In standard life-cycle models, with 
no technological progress and an economy in steady state, 
there would be no discounting for society's purposes: Each 
generation is identical, so the marginal utility of consumption 
of each is the same. Nonetheless, the market rate of interest 
will be positive in any efficient equilibrium under certain 
reasonable assumptions about utility functions (such as indi-
vidual impatience and zero bequest motive; Diamond, 1965). 
In such models the market rate of interest would thus always 
overestimate the SRTP. Under some special conditions, with 
governments intervening with nondistorting taxation to opti-
mally redistribute income across generations, observed mar-
ket rates of interest will accord with the SRTP. But these are 
highly specialized conditions (see Stiglitz, 1985; Pestieau, 
1974). The market rate of interest remains relevant because it 
reflects the opportunity cost of capital, which strongly affects 
the changes in consumption generated by any change in 
policy. 
4A.6 Special considerations 
for discounting 
in 
government 
projects 
A large literature has debated whether, for small changes in 
consumption levels, observed rates of interest provide the ap-
propriate basis of trading off government expenditures and 
changes in consumption of individuals of different genera-
tions at different dates. In the simplest case, in which there is 
no taxation, there are no market distortions, and a single indi-
vidual living forever (or else "dynastic'" utility functions in 
which individuals take full account of their descendants' wel-
fare), society's intertemporal discount rate will correspond to 
that of the representative individual, and his or her trade-offs 
across time would be given by the market rate of interest. But 
these assumptions are not generally satisfied, as evidenced 
by the marked discrepancy between the lower interest rates 
on savings typically facing consumers and the higher rates 
earned on investments by producers. 
Some of the disagreement arises from confusion about 
what is being discounted. The social discount rate approach 
discounts changes in consumption at different dates. The pro-
ducer interest rate approach discounts direct cash flows from 
the project. The two need not be inconsistent. 
If a government is comparing two projects of equal cost, 
producing a result in the same year, then a comparison of the 
rates of return would provide an appropriate basis for choos-
ing among projects. Cline (1992) proposes using a shadow 
price of capital set equal to the present discounted value of an 
annuity paying equal annual installments over a lifetime of/V 
years (set at 15 years for the lifetime of typical capital equip-
ment), with a return of r equal to the rate of return on capital, 
and discounted at the SRTP. With plausible ranges for N, r, 
and SRTP, the shadow price of capital can range from 2 to 
over 10 units of consumption equivalent per unit of capital 
(Lyon, 1994). 
If a public project were to displace a private project of 
equal cost, the same reasoning would imply that the govern-
ment should only undertake the public project if the rate of re-
turn exceeded the rate of return in the private sector (Stiglitz, 
1982). More generally, when the government undertakes a 
project, complex general equilibrium effects can be expected. 
The full consumption effects of these changes (or their con-
sumption equivalents) need to be calculated, and then dis-
counted using the SRTP (Arrow and Kurz, 1970; Feldstein, 
1970; Bradford, 1975; Stiglitz, 1982). This approach uses a 
shadow price of capital to convert all investment effects into 
their consumption equivalents, and then uses the SRTP to dis-
count the resulting stream of consumption equivalents (Lind 
etai, 
1982;Gramlich, 1990). 
For some projects, an adjusted discount factor, the public 
sector discount rate, is appropriate. A large literature ad-
dresses how the adjustment is to be made. One approach 
emphasizes the effects on consumption versus investment, de-
riving a weighted average of the consumption and investment 
rates of return, with weights depending on the respective im-
portance of the sources of finance (Sandmo and Dreze, 1971). 
4A. 7 The environment 
and 
discounting 
The essence of social discounting is to convert all effects into 
their consumption equivalents at the proper relative prices and 
then to discount the resulting stream of consumption equiva-
lents at the social rate of time preference. Incorporating envi-
ronmental effects thus does not change the discount rate itself, 
but does require special attention to the proper relative pricing 
of environmental goods over time. Although there is a gener-
ally accepted approach to valuing goods, there is less consen-
sus concerning valuation of environmental impacts, other 
than those valued solely for their impacts on the production of 
goods. 
The question is addressed within the public finance litera-
ture in terms of the valuation of public goods. Assume con-
sumers have utility functions of the form U = U(c,Ci) where G 
is some public good (e.g., quality of the environment). Then 
marginal rates of substitution between different values of c at 
different dates may bear no correspondence to marginal rates 
of substitution between different values of G at different 
dates. This implies that there is no justification for discount-
ing environmental degradation at market rates of interest. The 
appropriate procedure entails converting the environmental 
change into equivalent contemporaneous consumption bene-
fits and discounting those. 
Technical progress and structural change over the past sev-
eral decades have resulted in improvements in several mea-
sures of environmental quality in the developed countries. 
Moreover, recorded reserves of many "exhaustible resources" 
have actually increased over the past century, accompanied by 
a fall in their real prices. This provides evidence that contin-
ued growth in per capita incomes will result in improved envi-
ronmental quality in at least some dimensions. Some have 
supposed, however, that environmental degradation will oc-
140 
('linidic Change 1995 - lu-onomic ami Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
cur as society grows (Weit/.man, 1993). If this occurs or if the 
environment is an income elastic good on which people are 
willing to spend relatively more as their income rises, then the 
marginal rate of substitution between environmental quality 
and private goods will systematically change over time, to-
wards a higher relative marginal value of the environment. The 
result is equivalent to using a low (or even negative) discount 
rate for environmental amenities with prices unchanged. 
However, this process involves properly valuing future envi-
ronmental benefits in arriving at the future flow of equivalent 
consumption, and does not change the discount rate to apply 
to the consumption stream. 
Much of the environmental literature critical of cost-bene-
fit analysis, in contrast, argues for a zero discount rate without 
seeming to recognize the distinction between a zero rate of 
pure time preference (p) and a zero discount rate (see, e.g., 
Daly and Cobb. 1989). But from equation (4.1), so long as 
consumption growth is positive there will be a nonzero SRTP. 
Similarly, some modern philosophers seem to make the same 
mistake (e.g., Parfit, 1983; Cowen and Parfit, 1992). 
Finally, there has been considerable discussion about the 
proper discounting method for environmental projects of in-
stitutions such as the Global Environmental Facility of the 
World Bank (see, e.g., Munasinghe, 1993). The method that 
follows from the social cost-benefit approach is to obtain con-
sumption equivalents of the environmental effects over time 
and then apply the appropriate discount rate. Within a fixed 
institutional investment budget, it may he that the collection 
of potential projects that successfully passes a cost-benefit 
test on this basis more than exhausts available funds. If so, ef-
ficient trade-offs within the menu of projects will appropri-
ately involve cutoffs at a higher shadow price in funds drawn 
from the institutional budget - but always with benefit evalua-
tion based on the consumption equivalence principle just out-
lined. 
4A.8 Discounting and sustainable development 
The Brundtland Commission called for "sustainable develop-
ment," defined as economic activity that "meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future genera-
tions to meet their own needs" (United Nations. 1987). Simi-
larly, Brown-Weiss (1989) argued from the standpoint of 
international law that "each generation is entitled to inherit a 
planet and cultural resource base at least as good as that of 
previous generations." 
A consensus exists among economists that this does not 
imply that future generations should inherit a world with at 
least as much of every resource. Such a view would preclude 
consuming any exhaustible natural resource. The common in-
terpretation is that an increase in the stock of capital (physical 
or human) can compensate for a decline in the stock of a nat-
ural resource. Under most calculations, given the savings 
rates of all but the lowest-saving countries in the world, most 
countries now pass this test of sustainability. 
Economics has recognized the concept of sustainability for 
some time. Hicks (1938) used the idea in defining net national 
income. Neoclassical growth theory (Phelps. 1961: Robinson. 
1962) advanced the idea of sustainability in its formulation of 
the "Golden Rule," which is that configuration of the econ-
omy giving the highest level of consumption per head that can 
be maintained indefinitely. A recent extension has proposed 
the "Green golden rule" (Beltratti et ai, 1993). The recent 
economic debate on sustainable development has focussed on 
two issues: (I) intertemporal equity and (2) capital accumula-
tion and substitutability. The extent to which natural and cul-
tural resources are substitutable is critical to this analysis and 
is contentious. Many economists (for example, Pearce and 
Turner, 1990) stress the need for sustainability limits on the 
use of resources that future generations will need but cannot 
create. 
Robert Solow's definition of sustainable development 
(Solow, 1992) focusses on intertemporal equity: Sustainable 
development requires that future generations be able to be at 
least as well off as current generations. Sustainable develop-
ment does not preclude the use of exhaustible natural re-
sources, but requires that any use be appropriately offset. 
Likewise, any environmental degradation must be offset by an 
increase in productive capital sufficient to enable future gen-
erations to obtain at least the same standard of living as those 
alive today. 
Solow's definition, and much of economic theory to date, 
implicitly assumes that substitutes exist or could be found for 
all resources. If substitution possibilities are high, as most ev-
idence from economic history indicates, then no single re-
source is indispensable, and intertemporal equity stands as the 
only crucial issue (Pearce and Turner, 1990). If, on the other 
hand, human and natural capital are complements or only par-
tial substitutes, then different classes of assets must be treated 
differently, and some assets are to be preserved at all costs. 
In many developing countries, Solow's definition would 
not be viewed as acceptable, since it seems to place no weight 
on their aspirations for growth and development. Further, for-
mal models analyzing optimal development paths using a 
max-min (Rawlsian) criterion would focus exclusively on the 
welfare of the less developed countries. (Note that in Rawls' 
formulation, 8 = °°.) But the remedy would be simple: imme-
diate massive redistribution from the developed to the devel-
oping countries, with no environmental justification required. 
Even if there were limits on the transfers, this remedy would 
suggest that all the costs of mitigation - including those oc-
curring within the developing economies - be borne by the 
developed countries. 
Even the utilitarian approach (6 < °o) would tend to lead 
to higher general income transfers to poor countries than 
presently observed. Adherents of the descriptive approach 
might ask why the utilitarian construct is appropriate when 
considering intergenerational equity (as in the identification 
of the SRTP suggested in equation (4.1)) if it is not applied in 
practice across or even within countries now. In one sense, 
this question is another application of the principle suggested 
above, that in the absence of optimal redistribution interven-
tion by government, observed market rates (in this case of 
transfers from rich to poor nations) will not necessarily or 
likely equal social rates. Alternatively, the equity norm sug-
gested here may not be widely shared by governments or voters. 
Intertemporal Equity, Discounting, and Economic Efficiency 
Despite the political constraints on present-day transfers 
from rich to poor countries, the time-discounting concepts of 
the utilitarian approach (and the SRTP in particular) remain 
valid. Thus, consider a matrix with two rows, developed na-
tions and developing nations, and two columns, present and 
future. The SRTP can appropriately be applied between the 
two columns along each row, even if there is a barrier to its 
application between the two rows. Leaders and electorates in 
developing countries have cause for concern about their de-
scendants just as do their counterparts in developed countries. 
As noted above, however, the value of the SRTP is likely to be 
higher for the developing nations than for the developed. 
Endnotes 
1. Identifying the appropriate discount rate has been discussed in 
the context of general cost-benefit analysis (Chapter 5) for many 
years (Dasgupta et al., 1972; Harberger, 1973; Little and Mirrlees, 
1974; Sen, 1967; Stiglitz, 1982). More recently, social scientists 
have debated the precise rate to use for global climate analysis 
(Broome, 1992; dine. 1992; Nordhaus, 1991). 
2. Direct intergenerational transfers could be made through a fund 
to compensate future greenhouse victims; without some such mech-
anism, however, there is no guarantee that such transfers will be 
made. Compensation will occur indirectly, however, if we bequeath a 
richer economy to our children and grandchildren. 
3. In particular, an efficient policy is unequivocally better than an 
alternative only if those who are made better off under the efficient 
policy actually compensate those made worse off. More general 
treatments of cost-benefit analysis do incorporate distributional con-
siderations. 
4. When applied to discounting the utility of different generations, p 
is referred to as the social rate of pure time preference. 
5. The certainty equivalent is the certain result that would make an 
individual indifferent between it and the uncertain outcome. Issues 
of equity can be treated analogously through the use of "equity 
equivalents" (Atkinson, 1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz, 1973). 
6. The alternative view, which could be called environment-specific 
egalitarianism, says that each good must be valued in isolation from 
all others. This view stresses the need for limits to the use of re-
sources that will be needed or desired, but cannot be created, by fu-
ture generations (Pearce and Turner, 1990). In the extreme, this 
belief, known as specific egalitarianism. argues that environmental 
goods (and in some cases, each environmental good) must be treated 
separately from all other goods and that each generation should en-
joy the same level of environmental benefits as previous generations. 
The mainstream view in economics holds that future generations 
can be compensated for decreases in environmental goods by offset-
ting accumulations of other goods (though increasing scarcity of 
some environmental goods will require increasing amounts of capital 
to offset the loss of an additional unit of the environmental good). 
Environmentalists may favour restricting the use of nonreproducible 
environmental resources in a way entirely consistent with the main-
stream view, in that risk aversion in the matter of environmental 
quality will affect the rate at which society trades environmental 
goods for other goods. Only in the limiting case of infinite risk aver-
sion will no trade-offs be made. Thus, adherents of environment-
specific egalitarianism may back the same policies as risk-averse 
adherents of the mainstream view. 
A related issue is whether decision makers should accept the cur-
rent generation's valuation of the future benefits of environmental 
goods, as reflected in the market. Even those who believe the answer 
141 
is no may accept trading off environmental for other goods, though 
those trade-offs may not he well reflected in current market prices. 
7. The economist Thomas Schclling (1993) argues against the 
way discounting is generally applied to climate change projects. 
Schclling notes that discussions of discounting within the context of 
climate change policy often confuse three ideas: (I) discounting for 
consumption enjoyed in the future; (2) discounting for risk; and (3) 
discounting for consumption by others. 
Schclling points out that one thinks differently about one's own 
consumption than about the consumption of others, and that a key 
feature of the climate change problem is that those likely to bear the 
cost of mitigation (the developed countries) differ from those likely 
to enjoy the benefits (the currently developing countries). Thus, says 
Schelling, we should recognize that climate change mitigation is 
more like foreign aid than it is like the usual public investments to 
which we apply discounting. Foreign aid budgets are low because 
the donors do not have strong feelings of concern for the beneficia-
ries. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, says Schelling. there 
is no reason to impute much stronger moral sentiments to those who 
will be paying for climate change mitigation. 
8. The empirical problem of uncertainty in forecasting #, the growth 
rate, has yet to be resolved. The post-1973 slowing of productivity 
increases in many OECD countries suggests the need for a reexami-
nation of historical trends and perhaps a reduction in the recom-
mended discount rate. These considerations have become particu-
larly important with the addition of intergenerational distributional 
effects. Low-income groups within developed countries have seen a 
sharp reduction in per capita income growth; this would lead to 
lower discount rates. On the other hand, some developing countries 
now enjoy high per capita income growth, suggesting a higher dis-
count rate. At 7% per capita income growth, and with 0 = 1.5. the 
discount rate would exceed 10% even with p set to zero. 
9. Optimal tax policy is intertemporally and distributionully opti-
mal. 
10. Standard estimates put this elasticity between one and two. Such 
estimates are based on an additive social welfare function using elas-
ticities of marginal utility revealed by behaviour toward risk. Though 
specialists debate the appropriateness of the assumptions, no gener-
ally accepted view supports a different value oi 0. 
11. Other factors, however, might push the calculations the other 
way, such as the likelihood of higher relative future damage from 
global warming for the developing countries (see Chapter 6). 
12. This will he the path that satisfies the intertemporal efficiency 
conditions (Lind el al., 1982): 
(1) 
Production: the marginal rate of transformation in production 
between one period and the next, and thus the marginal prod-
uct of capital, equals the producer rate of interest for all goods: 
MRT (t,t + \) = i, that is, the marginal rate of transformation 
for any good j from period ; to period / + I equals the producer 
rate of interest i. 
(2) 
Consumption: the ratio of the marginal utility of consumption 
in period / to the marginal utility oi consumption in period 
/ + 1 equals I plus the consumer interest rate /; or MUt\(t)/ 
MUCk(t+ l)= I +/: 
(3) 
Overall: the consumer interest rate equals the producer inter-
est rate for all goods, for all consumers, in all time periods: 
that is. /• = /. 
13. Critics have noted (a) that is is not in general the case that mitiga-
tion expenditures displace other forms ol investment on a dollar-for-
dollar basis: (b) that the second argument can he read as a statement 
of the compensation principle, which holds that one need not ask if 
compensation has actually been paid, only whether it could he paid. 
142 
('limaic < 'haii^e /W.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
so that questions of distribution and efficiency can he separated; and 
(c) that the third argument assumes the presence of lump sum redis-
tributive mechanisms (in the absence of which the social marginal 
rate of substitution may not equal the opportunity cost of capital) and 
a degree of rationality in collective decision making that may not be 
plausible. Society may not engage in optimal intergenerational redis-
tribution; yet in evaluating a policy, it may still wish to consider ex-
plicitly intergenerational effects. Taken to an extreme, argument (c) 
would suggest that the social marginal utility of the rich must equal 
that of the poor; otherwise, governments would have redistributed 
income already. 
14. It might he argued that resources could still he channelled to the 
best projects using a lower discount rate, by employing a shadow 
price of capital, reflecting the scarcity of capital. The issues of the 
intertemporal price and the current scarcity price of capital can. in 
principle, he separated. 
15. Technically, indifference to inequality between countries at a 
given time implies instead that the other key parameter, the elasticity 
of marginal utility (0), is zero. 
16. That is, if the social welfare function implied a 29c discount rate. 
and the government employed policies to maximize social welfare, 
then the savings rate would he very high. 
Manne uses a standard growth model to examine the relation be-
tween discount rates and savings rates in the context of developed 
economies. He finds that discount rates of 1 or 2% imply an unrealis-
tically rapid near-term increase in the rate of investment. Manne thus 
concludes that a discount rate this low is grossly inconsistent with 
observed or plausibly anticipated behaviour. On the other hand, pre-
scriptionists might interpret Mamie's analysis as showing simply that 
the intertemporal equilibrium established by market economies dif-
fers markedly from that corresponding to the solution of an intertem-
poral maximization problem based on a social welfare function 
derived from ethical considerations. But even if savings could be in-
creased enough to drive the discount rate to 1 or 2'7r. climate change 
investments would still have to compete with many other public and 
private investments offering higher returns. 
17. Some care must he taken in inferring the appropriate opportunity 
cost of capital from observed market rates of return. First, many stan-
dard measures reflect average rates of return rather than the relevant 
marginal rates. Second, most investments carry some risk. Cline 
(1992) observes that investors purchase both safe government bonds 
yielding about l..V/< real, and stocks, yielding 5-7'7c real: he argues 
that this suggests a risk premium o( 3.5-5.5'7c. Thus, if the average 
observed return to capital is 79c. and if the marginal return is less 
than the average (as one would expect), then the certainty equivalent 
opportunity cost would he less than 3.5c7c. On the other hand, it has 
also been argued that this calculation holds only if it is assumed that 
households allocate assets efficiently (an assumption that prescrip-
tionists deny in other contexts); that bonds have risks quite different 
from either stocks or climate mitigation investments: and. thus, that 
this comparison is invalid (Nordhaus. 1994). 
18. In contrast, the predominant view fifty years ago held that a pro-
ject should he considered desirable if the winners could possibly 
compensate the losers, whether or not this compensation actually oc-
curred (Kaldor. 19.19; Hicks. 1939). This "compensation principle" 
(which is no longer accepted) would support the view that the dis-
count rate should he the producer cost o\' capital - the rate that in-
vestments would have earned elsewhere in the economy. If a dollar 
invested in education, research and development, or new factories 
yields a return o\' 10';. and climate mitigation yields 5r'<. then con-
verting climate mitigation investment to something more productive 
would yield higher total returns, implying that everyone could he 
made better off. The compensation principle would be satisfied. Bui 
compensation may not actually be paid, and future generations will 
probably not benefit from knowing that they might have been made 
better off. 
Economists consider two cases: (I) Pareto improvements - changes. 
including compensation actually paid, that make everyone belter oil: 
these are obviously desirable; and (2) changes that produce some 
winners and some losers. To address the second case, economists 
generally use a social welfare function, typically showing some pref-
erence for greater income equality (that is, increasing equality raises 
social welfare). A considerable literature, building on the work of 
Rothschild and Stiglitz (1973) has added precision to this idea. In 
choosing an SWF, economists also generally assume separability. 
That is. the SWF can be written W = W(UV . . .). The ethical idea un-
derlying this assumption is that society's willingness to substitute 
consumption between individuals / and j does not depend on the util-
ity or income of individual k. a form of the assumption of the inde-
pendence of irrelevant alternatives. Economists also generally 
assume consumer sovereignty. That is, each individual's utility (en-
tering the SWF) is determined by that person's own judgments, not 
the judgments of society more generally. 
19. For an open economy, the elasticity-adjusted rate on foreign 
loans also enters the calculus. However, for analysis of a global is-
sue, this extension is probably inappropriate, as globally the econ-
omy is closed. 
20. Alternatively, these models may suggest that the problem lies in 
the assumption about technical change. If little or no technical 
change had been the rule in recent centuries, society might have 
evolved toward the high savings rates that seem so implausible given 
actual historical experience. 
References 
Arrow, K.J., and M. Kurz, 1970: Public investment, the rale of re-
turn and optimal fiscal policy, Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Baltimore. 
Atkinson, A.B., 1970: On the measurement of inequality, Journal of 
Economic Theory, 2, 244-263. 
Beltratti, A., G. Chichilnisky, and G. Heal, 1993: Sustainable 
growth and the green golden rule, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, Working Paper 4430, August. 
Bergson, A., 1938: A reformulation of certain aspects of welfare 
economics. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 52, 310-334. 
Birdsall, N., and A. Steer, 1993: Act now on global warming - But 
don't cook the books, Finance and Development, 30( 1), 6-8. 
Brainard, W.C., M. Shapiro, and J. Shoven, 1991: Fundamental 
value and market value. In Money, macroeconomics, and eco-
nomic politics: Essays in honor of James Tobin, W.C. Brainard. 
WD. Nordhaus. and H.W. Watts, eds„ pp. 277-307, MIT Press. 
Cambridge MA. 
Bradford, D.F.. 1975: Constraints on government investment oppor-
tunities and the choice of discount rate, American Economic Re 
view 65(50). 887-899. 
Broome, J.. 1992: Counting the costs of global warming. While 
Horse Press. Cambridge. 
Brown-Weiss, E.. 1989: In Fairness to future generations: Interna-
tional law. common patrimony, and intergenerational eouity. 
United Nations University. Tokyo. 
Cline, W.R.. 1992: The economics of global warming. Institute lor 
International Economics. Washington DC. 
Cline, W.R.. 1993: Modelling economically efficient abatement of 
Intertemporal 
Equity. 
Discounting, 
and Economic 
Efficiency 
143 
greenhouse gases, paper presented at the United Nations Univer-
sity Conference on Global Environment. Energy, and Economic 
Development, September 1993, Tokyo. 
Cowen, T., and D. Part it, 1992: Against the social discount rate. In Phi-
losophy, politics and society: Series 6, Future Generations. 
In P. 
Laslett and J. Fishkin (eds.), Yale University Press, New Haven CT. 
Daly, H.E., and J.B. Cobb, 1989: For the common good. Beacon 
Press, Boston MA. 
Dasgupta, P., S.A. Marglin, and A.K. Sen, 1972: Guidelines for pro-
ject evaluation, UNIDO, New York. 
Dasgupta, P., and G.M. Heal, 1974: The optimal depletion of ex-
haustible resources. Review 
of Economic 
Studies, 
Symposium 
volume. 
Diamond, P.A., 1965: The evaluation of infinite utility streams, 
Econometrica 33, 170. 
Diamond, P., and J. Mirrlees, 1971: Optimal taxation and public pro-
duction, 1 and 2, American 
Economic 
Review, 61 (March and 
June), 8-27, 261-278. 
Feldstein, M.S., 1970: Financing in the evaluation of public expen-
diture, Discussion Paper No. 132, Harvard Institute for Economic 
Research (August), Cambridge MA. 
Fellner, W„ 1967: Operational utility: The theoretical background 
and a measurement. In Ten economic 
studies in the tradition 
of 
Irving Fisher, John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
Gramlich, E.M., 1990: A guide to cost-benefit analysis, 2nd ed., 
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs NJ. 
Harberger, A.C., 1973: Project evaluation: Collected essays, Markham, 
Chicago. 
Harsanyi, J.C., 1955: Cardinal welfare, individualistic ethics, and 
interpersonal comparisons of utility, Journal of Political 
Econ-
omy, 63, 309-321. 
Hicks, J.R., 1938: Value and capital. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Hicks, JR., 1939: The foundations of welfare economics, 
Economic 
Journal 49, (December). 696-712. 
Ibbotson, R.G., and G.P. Brinson, 
1987: Investment 
markets, 
McGraw-Hill, New York, updated in Nordhaus (1994). 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1992: 77i<? 
supplementary 
report to the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, 
J.T. 
Houghton, B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney, eds.. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Kaldor, N. 1939: Welfare propositions of economics and interper-
sonal comparisons of utility. Economic 
Journal 49 (December), 
549-552. 
Koopmans, T.C., 1960: Stationary ordinal utility and impatience, 
Econometrica 28, 287-309. 
Koopmans,T.C, 1966: On the concept of optimal economic 
growth, 
econometric approach to development, 
Rand McNally. Chicago. 
Layard, R. 1976: Introduction. In Cost-benefit 
analysis. 
Baltimore. 
MD: Penguin Books, Baltimore. 
Lind, R.C., 1994: Intergenerational equity, discounting, and the role 
of cost-benefit analysis in evaluating global climate policy. In In-
tegrative assessment 
of mitigation, 
impacts, 
and adaptation 
to 
climate change. Proceedings of a workshop held on 13-15 Octo-
ber 1993. N. Nakicenovic. W.D. Nordhaus. R. Richels. and F.L. 
Toth. eds.. International Institute o( Applied Systems Analysis. 
Laxenburg. Austria. 
Lind, R.C.. K.J. Arrow. O.K. Corey. P. Dasgupta. A.K. Sen. T. Stauffer. 
J.E. Stiglitz. J.A. Stockfisch. and R. Wilson. 1982: 
Discounting 
for time and risk in energy policy. 
Resources for the Future. 
Washington. DC. 
Little, I.M.D.. and J. A. Mirrlees. 1974: Project appraisal and plan-
ning in developing countries. 
Heinemann. London. 
Lyon, R.M., 1994: Intergenerational equity and discount rates for 
climate change analysis, prepared for IPCC WG III meeting, 
Nairobi. Kenya, 18-23 July, 1994. draft. 
Manne, A.S.. 1994: The rate of time preference: Implications for the 
greenhouse debate. In Integrative 
assessment 
of mitigation, 
im-
pacts, and adaptation 
to climate change, Proceedings of a work-
shop held on 
13-15 October 
1993, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. 
Nordhaus, R. Richels, and F.L. Toth, eds., International Institute 
of Applied Systems Analysis. Laxenburg, Austria. 
Manne, A S . , R. Mendelsohn, and R.G. Richels, 1993: MERGE - A 
model for evaluating regional and global effects of greenhouse 
gas reduction policies. Electric Power Research Institute, Palo 
AltoCA. 
Mirrlees, J.A., 1967: Optimum growth when technology is chang-
ing, Review of Economic Studies 34, 95-124. 
Mishan, E.J., 1975: Cost-benefit 
analysis: An informal 
introduction, 
Allen & Unwin. London. 
Munasinghe, M., 1993: Environmental 
economics 
and 
sustainable 
development. 
World Bank. Washington DC. 
Nakicenovic, N., W.D. Nordhaus. R. Richels, and F.L. Toth (eds.), 
1994: Integrative 
assessment 
of mitigation, 
impacts, and 
adapta-
tion to climate change, Proceedings of a workshop held on 13-15 
October 1993, International Institute of Applied Systems Analy-
sis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991: To slow or not to slow: The economics of 
the greenhouse effect, Economic Journal 101(407), 920-937. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1993: Reflections on the economics of climate 
change, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
7(4), 11-25. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1994: Managing the global commons: The eco-
nomics of climate change. Mimeo. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Parfit, D., 1983: Energy policy and the further future: The identity 
problem. In Energy and the future, D. MacLean and P.G. Brown, 
eds., pp. 38-58. Rowman and Littlefield, Totowa, NJ. 
Pearce, D.W.. and R.K. Turner. 1990: Economics 
of natural 
re-
sources and the environment. 
Harvester Wheatsheaf, London. 
Pearce, D.W.. and D. Ulph. 1994: Estimating a social discount rate 
for the United Kingdom, mimeo. Centre for Social and Economic 
Research on the Global Environment. University College London 
and University of East Anglia. 
Peck, S.C.. and T.J. Teisberg. 1992: CETA: A model for carbon emis-
sions trajectory assessment. Energy Journal 13(1), 55-77. 
Pestieau, P.M., 1974: Optimal taxation and the discount rate for pub-
lic investment in a growth setting. Journal of Public 
Economics, 
3,217-235. 
Phelps, E„ 1961: The golden rule of accumulation: A fable for growth 
men, American Economic Review 51 (September), 638-643. 
Psacharopoulos, G., 1985: Returns to education: A further interna-
tional update and implications. Journal of Human Resources 
20 
(Fall), 583-604. cited in Nordhaus (1994). 
Ramsey, F.P.. 1928: A mathematical theory of saving, 
Economic 
Journal 138(152). 543-559. 
Rawls, J.. 1971: A theory of justice. Harvard University Press, Cam-
bridge MA. 
Robinson, J.. 1962: A neo-classical theorem, Review of 
Economic 
Studies 29 (June). 219-226. 
Rothenberg, J.. 1993: Economic perspectives on time comparisons. 
In Global accord: Environmental 
challenges 
and 
international 
responses. C. Na/li.. ed.. MIT Press. Cambridge MA. 
Rothschild, M.. and J.E. Stiglitz. 1973: Some further results in 
the measurement of inequality. Journal of Economic 
Theory. 6, 
188-204. 
Sandmo, A., and J.II. Dre/e. 1971: Discount rales tor public invest-
144 
C 'liniatc ( 'limine IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
ment under uncertainty. International Economic Review 2, 169-
208. 
Schelling, T.C., 1993: Intcrgenerational discounting, mimeo. Uni-
versity of Maryland, College Park (November). 
Scott, M.F., 1989: A new view of economic growth. Clarendon Press. 
Oxford. 
Sen, A., 1982: Approaches to the choice of discount rates for social 
benefit-cost analysis. In Discounting for time and risk in energy 
policy, R.C. Lincl el al., eds., pp. 325-353, Resources for the Fu-
ture, Washington, DC. 
Sen, A., 1967: Isolation, assurance and the social rate of discount, 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 81. 
Solow, R., 1974a: Intcrgenerational equity and exhaustible re-
sources. Review of Economic Studies, Symposium volume. 
Solow, R., 1974b: The economics of resources or the resources of 
economics, American Economic Association: Papers and Pro-
ceedings 64(2), 1-14. 
Solow, R., 1992: An almost practical step toward sustainability, Re-
sources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Stiglitz, J.E., 1985: Inequality and capital taxation, mimeo, IMSSS 
Technical Report #457. Stanford University. (July). 
Stiglitz, IE., 1982: The rate of discount for cost-benefit analysis and 
the theory of the second best, in Discounting for time and risk in 
energy policy, R.C. Lind et al., eds., pp. 151-204, Resources for 
the Future, Washington DC. 
Stiglitz, J.E., and P. Dasgupta, 1971: Differential taxation, public 
goods, and economic efficiency, The Review of Economic Studies 
37(2), 151-174. 
Stockfisch, J. A., 1982: Measuring the social rate of return on private 
investment. In Discounting for time and risk in energy polity, 
R.C. Lind et al., eds., pp. 257-271, Resources for the Future, 
Washington, DC. 
Tobin, J., 1970: On limiting the domain of inequality, Journal of 
Law and Economics, 13 (2) (October), 263-277. 
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), 1992: Human 
development report 1992, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
United Nations, 1987: Our common future, The Report of the World 
Commission on Environment and Development (Brundtland Re-
port), Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Weitzman, M.L., 1993: On the environmental discount rate, Journal 
of Environmental Economics and Management, 26, (2), 200-209. 
Wildavsky, A., 1988: Searching for safety: Studies in social philoso-
phy and policy, Series, No. 10, Bowling Green State University, 
Bowling Green, OH. 
5 
Applicability of Techniques 
of Cost-Benefit Analysis 
to Climate Change 
M. MUNASINGHE, P. MEIER, M. HOEL, S.W. HONG, A. AAHEIM 
The authors would like to acknowledge the helpful comments provided by P. Brown. li. Huites. L. Lorentsen. I. Mini/er. .(.(I. Oh. 
and R. Raufer. 
# 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
5.1 Introduction 
5.2 Cost-Benefit Analysis 
5.2.1 Basic concepts 
5.3 Unique Features of Climate Change 
5.3.1 The complex chain of causality 
5.3.2 Other special features 
5.4 Cost-Benefit Analysis in the Context of 
Climate Change 
5.4.1 Estimates of the marginal cost curve 
5.4.2 The marginal benefits curve 
5.4.3 Measuring costs and benefits 
5.4.4 The joint products problem 
149 
150 
150 
152 
152 
153 
153 
5.4.5 The aggregation problem 
5.4.6 Systemic evaluation 
5.5 Issues 
5.5.1 Risk, uncertainty, and irreversibility 
5.5.2 Valuation 
5.5.2.1 Discount rate 
5.5.2.2 CBA and equity 
5.5.3 Multicriteria analysis 
5.6 Conclusion 
154 
Endnotes 
155 
155 
References 
156 
157 
157 
158 
159 
159 
162 
166 
166 
167 
170 
171 
174 
in 
! 
SUMMARY 
In public policymaking, decision makers routinely compare 
the perceived costs and perceived benefits of an action. Cost-
benefit analysis (CBA) provides an analytical framework that 
seeks to compare the consequences of alternative policy ac-
tions on a quantitative rather than a qualitative basis. The ba-
sic principles are well understood and straightforward: For an 
action to be justified, the costs of the action should be less 
than the benefits derived therefrom. 
Traditional cost-benefit analysis requires that all costs and 
all benefits be expressed in a common monetary unit to facili-
tate the comparison. Modern cost-benefit analysis also in-
cludes techniques such as cost-effectiveness analysis and 
multicriteria analysis to analyze trade-offs when some of the 
benefits and/or costs can be quantified but cannot be ex-
pressed in monetary units. 
This chapter examines how and under what circumstances 
CBA can make a contribution to the resolution of the follow-
ing central questions now facing decision makers about global 
climate change. 
By how much should emissions of greenhouse gases be 
reduced? 
Provided costs and benefits can be estimated with adequate 
accuracy, this question is answerable by CBA: The measures 
whose marginal costs are less than the marginal benefits 
should be implemented. The marginal benefits are the mar-
ginal damage costs avoided. However, the difficulty of esti-
mating the marginal damage costs of climate change make the 
practical application of CBA difficult. Although such analyses 
could be performed from a national perspective, it is a funda-
mental premise of CBA that the global perspective is the 
proper one. 
When should emissions be reduced? 
This question is more complicated because it also involves 
judgments about uncertainty. If the marginal damage cost 
(benefit) is known with certainty, and if future technological 
advances that might significantly change the marginal cost 
curve are known with certainty, then the timing of abatement 
is given by that portfolio of implementation options that max-
imizes the present value of avoided damage costs (benefits) 
less abatement costs. This is a relatively straightforward cat-
culation; however, neither damages nor costs are known with 
certainty. Consequently, extensions of CBA- such as decision 
analysis - are required. 
How should emissions be reduced? 
This is closely related to the question of how much emissions 
should be reduced and is directly addressed by CBA. At-
tempts to determine the extent of reductions must usually con-
sider the specific methods that might be used to reduce 
emissions. A bottom-up, empirical estimation of the marginal 
cost curve involves analysis of the broad spectrum of possible 
abatement options from which marginal cost curves can be 
derived. Top-down models also require explicit consideration 
of specific policy or technology options. Clear economic 
analysis and identification of the most cost-effective abate-
ment options through the use of CBA are critical for practical 
policymaking. 
Who should reduce emissions? 
None of the family of techniques considered in this chapter 
can by itself resolve the question of who should reduce emis-
sions - which involves considerations of equity. However, 
these techniques do provide a framework for understanding 
the trade-offs to be made between equity and economic effi-
ciency. 
The value of CBA 
Practical application of cost-benefit analysis to climate 
change is difficult because of the global and intergenerational 
nature of the problem. It is further complicated by the difficul-
ties of valuing some categories of ecological, cultural, and hu-
man health impacts. Nevertheless. CBA remains a valuable 
framework for identifying the essential questions that policy-
makers must face when dealing with climate change. The 
CBA approach forces decision makers to compare the conse-
quences of alternative actions, including that of no action, on 
a quantitative basis. Indeed, the most important benefit of ap-
plying CBA may be the process iiself (which forces a rigorous 
approach to decision making) rather than the predicted out-
come (which always depends on the particular assumptions 
and techniques used). 
150 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
5.1 Introduction 
In public policymaking, decision makers routinely compare 
the perceived costs and perceived benefits of an action. Nev-
ertheless, their decisions are frequently made on intuitive and 
qualitative grounds. Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) provides an 
analytical framework that seeks to compare the consequences 
of alternative policy actions on a quantitative rather than a 
qualitative basis. The basic principles are well understood and 
straightforward: For an action to he justified, the costs of the 
action should he less than the benefits derived therefrom.1 If 
there are several alternatives, then one ought to pick that op-
tion whose benefits most exceed the costs.2 Traditional cost-
benefit analysis requires that all costs and all benefits be 
expressed in a common monetary unit to facilitate the com-
parison. Modern cost-benefit analysis also includes tech-
niques such as cost-effectiveness analysis and multicriteria 
analysis to analyze trade-offs when some of the benefits 
and/or costs can be quantified but cannot be expressed in 
monetary units. 
The objective of this chapter is to examine how and under 
what circumstances CBA can make a contribution to the reso-
lution of the central questions now facing decision makers 
about global climate change: 
(1) 
By how much should emissions of greenhouse gases be 
reduced? 
(2) 
When should emissions be reduced? 
(3) 
How should emissions be reduced? 
(4) 
Who should reduce emissions? 
CBA can at least theoretically and conceptually answer the 
first three questions. The fourth question is one of equity and 
is not amenable to resolution by CBA, even in simple, tradi-
tional applications not complicated by the complexities of the 
climate change problem.•' 
Section 5.2 defines more carefully what is meant by CBA. 
The term has come to encompass a wide variety of specific 
techniques. We also review the basic concepts. In Section 5.3 
we examine the unique features of global warming and cli-
mate change as they pertain to decision making. Section 5.4 
presents a discussion of the application of CBA to the climate 
change problem in light of these unique features. In Section 
5.5 we discuss the key issues: risk, uncertainty, irreversibility, 
valuation, discounting, equity, and multiple criteria. 
5.2 Cost-Benefit Analysis 
Cost-benefit analysis is a generic term that presently sub-
sumes a wide body of specific techniques. The method was 
developed initially as a means to evaluate projects that were 
limited in scale, geographic extent, and time span. Such tradi-
tional project level CBA (see Box 5.1) is too narrow to be rel-
evant for evaluating climate change issues. However, the 
original technique has been extended to cover applications of 
increasing complexity. Modern CBA. more widely defined, 
includes a family of approaches that are more useful in assess-
ing climate change options. Indeed, one of these approaches. 
cost-effectiveness analysis, has been widely used in climate 
change studies. 
However, to evaluate cost-effectiveness, it is crucial to 
clarify how the policy target is defined, because there are sev-
eral options in the global climate change context. Most recent 
analyses of mitigation costs have focussed on a target based 
on future emission levels,4 such as stabilization of the emis-
sion of certain greenhouse gases by a given year. However, it 
might be more relevant to express the targets in terms of con-
centrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases at some future 
time. 
To change the target for climate policy from emissions to 
atmospheric concentrations indicates a radically different 
cost-effectiveness strategy. A stabilization of CO., emissions 
at present levels is not sufficient to stabilize the atmospheric 
concentrations. Richels and Edmonds (1995) have compared 
the costs of reaching a particular concentration by 2100 for a 
variety of strategies. They show that a given concentration 
in 2100 could be achieved at a considerably lower cost 
if emissions were not stabilized immediately. The reason is 
that a more gradual reduction of emissions would avoid the 
economic shock that would follow a sudden stabilization, en-
able future advanced technologies to be utilized to a larger ex-
tent, and facilitate the postponement of sizable abatement 
costs. 
Another possible target, also affecting the cost-effective-
ness of alternative measures, refers to the physical conse-
quences of climate change. Apart from the fact that pre-
dictions of these consequences are far more difficult to 
make than forecasts of emissions and atmospheric concentra-
tions of greenhouse gases, the effects of regional differences 
would have to be included if targets were based on the conse-
quences. For instance, whether climate change contributes to 
sea level rise or to an increase in the frequency of rain storms 
will be of quite different importance to people in Nepal and 
the Netherlands. In this context, an additional problem arises 
as to how to assess benefits from abatement of different con-
sequences for different countries. 
A further refinement of modern CBA is multicriteria analy-
sis (MCA), a body of techniques developed to deal with the 
difficulties of economically valuing certain types of impacts 
(see box). Indeed, even if one attempted to place economic 
value on certain impacts - such as human life - not everyone 
would agree that it is appropriate to do so.5 Moreover, cost-
benefit analysis presupposes that the relevant costs and bene-
fits are those that ultimately affect human welfare.6 
Such views further support the need for MCA-based ap-
proaches to decision making. Similarly, there are concern'. 
that monetized values themselves may be inaccurately esti-
mated, and. in any case, such values might not reflect welfare. 
However, the question of who is affected, and how they will 
perceive the impact, is an issue that needs careful definition 
within an MCA analysis. 
As noted earlier, conventional CBA cannot provide an-
swers about the optimum level of equity in the same way thai 
it provides answers about the optimum level of economic effi-
ciency. But MCA can identify the trade-offs 
between equity 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
151 
BOX 5.1: TECHNIQUES OF MODERN COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS (CBA) 
Traditional project level CBA 
CBA evolved as a technique to evaluate and compare project alternatives. In the early years of its application, there was lit-
tle concern with externalities, and the analysis took into account just the direct costs of projects and the direct benefits. As it 
was originally developed for use in industrial market economies, market prices provided appropriate guidance on how to 
evaluate benefits. When the World Bank began to apply the technique to nonmarket economies, where prices were subject to 
significant distortions, shadow pricing techniques provided simple corrections. For example, if an oil-importing country 
kept the domestic price of oil at artificially low levels, CBA would require the use of the border price, not the domestic 
price, as a basis for valuing oil. 
One of the central concepts in CBA is that of discounting, which addresses the fact that costs and benefits may not occur 
at the same point in time. For example, whereas costly actions to avoid future climate change may need to be taken in the 
near future, most of the benefits of such actions will occur in the distant future. Discounting enables one to take into account 
the time value of money. In the case of evaluating simple investment alternatives over shorter time horizons (e.g., 15 years), 
the use of the opportunity cost of capital as the discount rate to be applied to both costs and benefits is well established and 
uncontroversial. However, in the case of complex public policy applications, particularly those whose time horizons are 
very great and involve environmental impacts or the depletion of natural resources - essential characteristics of the global 
climate change issue - there is sharp disagreement as to what discount rate is appropriate. This issue is dealt with in Section 
5.5.2.1. 
Cost-effectiveness analysis 
As CBA began to be applied to much broader contexts, and particularly to the comparison of alternative portfolios of proj-
ects and to broad policy choices, the increasing complexity made it desirable to keep the level of benefits constant and to an-
alyze the problem simply in terms of finding the most effective, or "least-cost" option to meet the desired level of benefits. 
This has the additional advantage that benefits in some cases need not be explicitly valued. For example, in power sector 
planning, models are applied to identify the capacity expansion plan whose present value of system costs is minimized, 
given some exogenously specified time path of electricity demand and some exogenously specified level of reliability. As 
we shall see below, this is the variant of CBA that has seen the most widespread application to the climate change problem, 
in which one seeks to identify the least-cost option to achieve given levels of greenhouse gas emission reductions, without 
any explicit attempt to specify what the benefits of that level of emission reduction may be. 
Multicriteria analysis 
The most basic requirement for the application of CBA is that both costs and benefits can be given economic value. This is 
typically a two-step process: first the costs and benefits must be quantified in terms of the physical measures that apply, and 
then those physical impacts must be valued in economic terms. Some applications of valuation techniques are likely to be 
controversial. Putting a value on human health and illness has been a major problem in the practical application of cost-
benefit analysis in the past, even in those situations where one can agree on the levels of increased morbidity and mortality 
that might be caused by some policy or project. Efforts to place economic value on the loss of biodiversity have been 
equally difficult. Recognizing this problem has led to the development of so-called multicriteria analysis (MCA) tech-
niques. These are expressly designed to deal with multiple objectives, of which economic efficiency may be only one. MCA 
is a particularly powerful tool for quantifying and displaying the trade-offs that must be made between conflicting objec-
tives. 
Decision analysis 
MCA addresses certain shortcomings of conventional CBA (like valuation problems), but it does not necessarily deal more 
effectively with uncertainty. This complication has led to the development of a further extension of CBA known as decision 
analysis. Here the focus is expressly on how one makes decisions under conditions of uncertainty. These techniques find ap-
plication in a wide variety of situations, from decision making in the high-risk field of wildcat oil drilling to analysis of fi-
nancial options. As we shall see below, such techniques provide a rational approach for dealing with irreversibility, one of 
the more important characteristics of the climate change problem. 
152 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
© 
< [ ® . 
fi, 
< , ® 
1 
1 i ?® 
1 
• 
1 L 
BI:ST 
_ 
. 
WORST 
Equity 
Figure 5.1: Multicriteria analysis. 
objectives and economic efficiency, as suggested by Figure 
5.1. Thus, the best equity result (indicated by option 1, say an 
equal per capita sharing of the burden of greenhouse gas 
emission reduction) may have the highest cost, whereas the 
worst equity result (indicated by option 5, say based on the 
present distribution of emissions) may have the lowest eco-
nomic cost.7 Nevertheless, even MCA requires a quantifi-
cation or at least an ordinal ranking of the noneconomic 
efficiency criteria, as suggested in the figure. However, even 
such a noncardinal ranking may prove problematic when a 
global issue like climate change requires comparisons across 
countries and cultures.H 
More generally, it is increasingly accepted that the pursuit of 
sustainable development will require recognition of goals re-
lated to economic efficiency, social equity, and environmental 
protection (Munasinghe, 1993). Economic valuation of the im-
pacts of climate change on certain social and environmental as-
pects (e.g.. biodiversity or cultural assets) will be difficult, and 
MCA-related approaches will be needed to make the trade-offs 
among otherwise noncompensable costs and benefits. 
5.2.1 Basic 
concepts 
An economically efficient policy for emissions reduction is 
one that maximizes the net benefits (i.e.. the benefits of re-
duced climate change less the associated costs of emissions 
reductions).'1 Economic theory indicates that emission reduc-
tion efforts should be pursued up to the level where the envi-
ronmental benefits of an additional unit of reduced warming 
(the marginal benefit) is equal to the cost of an additional unit 
of emission reduction (the marginal cost). Figure 5.2 illus-
trates the concepts of total and marginal costs in simplified 
form - the marginal cost at any level of emission reduction is 
equal to the slope of the total cost curve at the same level. 
The shape of the total cost and benefit curves reflects the 
idea of diminishing returns. Each additional unit of emission 
reduction will have a higher unit cost: The first 10'( reduction 
can be done cheaply, but the next 10'; will cost considerably 
more, and so on.1" Thus, the abatement cost curve is upward 
sloping as shown in Figure 5.2. Similarly, the marginal benefit 
(avoided greenhouse gas damages) falls as emission levels are 
reduced. The consequence of the foregoing is that the total 
cost ( T O has a minimum at the point where the positive slope 
GHG Emission Reduction 
Optimal Reduction Level 
GHG Emission Reduction 
Figure 5.2: Total and marginal costs and emission reductions. 
of the abatement cost curve equals the negative slope of the 
damage cost curve." 
The foregoing analysis ignores many complications. For 
example, the emission of a unit of CO, may give rise to a 
varying stream of environmental costs that must be dis-
counted to yield a present value aggregate. The environmental 
damage function may be discontinuous and nonconvex. Be-
cause of technological progress, abatement costs may change 
over time, depending on when the technologies are applied. 
Similarly, abatement costs may exhibit economies of scale 
(e.g., mass production of solar photovoltaic cells), resulting in 
a marginal cost curve that actually declines beyond a certain 
point. Finally, the abatement costs are net costs, to the extent 
that certain technologies (e.g., renewables) may produce other 
(nonclimate-related) benefits and costs - the so-called joint 
products complication (discussed below). 
5.3 Unique Features of Climate Change 
Several important characteristics define the context in which 
traditional CBA is applied. The first is that costs and benefits 
arise within a time span typically no more than 15 to 25 years. 
corresponding roughly to the physical life of most projects 
over which benefits are derived. The second is that the ele-
ments of uncertainty are relatively tractable and can often he 
characterized by probability distributions. 
These characteristics are very different in the context of 
climate change. The relevant time spans extend to a century or 
more. The uncertainties are extremely large, and few element* 
of uncertainty are amenable to characterization as probability 
distributions. Moreover, the cascaded uncertainty implied in 
Applicability oj Techniques oj Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
J 53 
each link of the chain of causality greatly amplifies the total 
uncertainty in the final outcome, namely, the extent of dam-
age caused by climate change. 
5.3.1 The complex chain of causality 
Figure 5.3 shows the chain of causality. It begins with emis-
sions of greenhouse gases. Although the most important of 
these is C02, it should be noted that there are many other 
gases that contribute to the climate change phenomenon, in-
cluding methane and CFCs. Estimates of C02 emissions from 
fossil fuel combustion are fairly straightforward, but emis-
sions from other sources are subject to much higher uncer-
tainty. Moreover, the separation of anthropogenic and natural 
causes of climate change is much more difficult than in the 
case of other important regional/global pollution issues (such 
as CFCs or nuclear wastes). Indeed, the calculus of CBA may 
be significantly affected by natural events such as major vol-
canic eruptions. 
The first link in the chain of causality (1 in the diagram) is 
between emissions and the resultant ambient concentration 
of C02 in the atmosphere. Unlike other pollutants, which are 
subject to complex chemical transformations in the atmos-
phere,12 the calculation of the ambient concentration increase 
that follows from a given increment of emissions of C02 is 
relatively simple. However, because of the role of natural 
sources and sinks (particularly the ocean), even this calcula-
tion is subject to a considerable degree of complexity and un-
certainty.13 
The next link (2), between atmospheric concentration and 
temperature, is subject to much greater scientific uncertainty. 
The greenhouse effect itself - the trapping of outgoing in-
frared radiation - is subject to additional factors that are 
highly complex, particularly feedback effects, such as those 
from clouds, that complicate the calculation of equilibrium 
temperatures. 
The subsequent link (3), between temperature increase and 
physical effects such as sea level rise, involves many different 
components, all of which are somewhat difficult to calculate. 
For example, calculating the rise in sea level associated with 
increases in mean sea temperature proves to be far from sim-
ple in some cases (as noted in Volume 1 in the case of the West 
Antarctic ice sheet). There are also large time lags associated 
with sea level rise, which are likely to continue for several 
centuries after the concentration of greenhouse gases has been 
stabilized. Even more complicated are estimates of how pre-
cipitation patterns might change, especially the spatial and 
temporal distribution of rainfall. Perhaps of even greater con-
cern in developing countries will be the changes in the pat-
terns of extreme weather events, to which they are partic-
ularly vulnerable. 
If these physical effects (climatic and sea level changes) 
are understood in general terms, quantifying their impacts on 
flora, fauna, and human beings (link 4) is much more difficult. 
To illustrate, suppose it were possible to predict the change in 
precipitation and temperature regime for some given region. 
Emissions 
I® 
Ambient concentrations 
of GHG in atmosphere 
I© 
Economic valuatio#@#'' 
Figure 5.3: The chain of causality. 
What can be said about the shifts in vegetation patterns? Al-
though general poleward shifts of vegetation and agricultural 
production zones can be predicted, quantifying the effect is 
quite difficult. What is the impact on biodiversity? On wet-
lands? On the water table? On human communities? Clearly 
these are very difficult assessments to make. 
Finally, to estimate the damage costs, one must be able to 
value these effects (link 5). Some valuation tasks will be rela-
tively straightforward: For example, the cost of engineering 
structures to protect against sea level rise is relatively easy to 
establish, given the existing experience in this field (in such 
countries as the Netherlands). Other calculations will be more 
complex, but at least tractable, as, for example, the calculation 
of increased cooling and decreased heating costs or the impact 
on electricity demand of increased irrigation pumping re-
quirements associated with drier climates in some regions. 
But a very large number of potentially important impacts will 
be very difficult to value - such as the impacts on forests, wet-
lands, and biodiversity, especially if the physical, biological, 
and social effects have not been accurately quantified. 
5.3.2 Other special features 
Beyond the complexity of the causal chain and the high de-
gree of uncertainty surrounding the issue, what makes the 
analysis of climate change so different from other environ-
mental analysis problems? The main reasons can be summa-
rized as follows. 
Greenhouse gases are stock, not flow, pollutants. Many 
pollutants (e.g.. sulphate aerosols) have relatively short at-
mospheric lifetimes. As a result, the damages they cause are 
closely related to the current rate of emissions, and reducing 
emissions at major sources will likely have a relatively rapid 
impact on atmospheric concentrations and their associated ef-
fects. Greenhouse gases, however, have relatively long atmo-
spheric lifetimes, and concentrations therefore respond slowly 
to changes in emissions. Consequently, the damages they 
154 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Cluing 
cause are a result of the current atmospheric concentrations 
that have built up due to all past emissions - in other words, 
they are related to the stock of the pollutant, not to the current 
rate of emissions.14 Similarly, a change in emissions of a 
greenhouse gas at any time will affect the atmospheric con-
centrations of this gas, and thus the climate, in all future peri-
ods. Therefore, in the context of the climate problem, global 
climate change is a lagged function of the emissions of the 
various greenhouse gases. At any time, atmospheric concen-
trations (or stocks) of these gases depend on the whole history 
of their emissions up to that time. 
To calculate the marginal environmental cost of increased 
current emissions of a greenhouse gas, one must first calculate 
the physical impact of such an emission increase on the future 
atmospheric concentration of the gas. This will depend on the 
physical characteristics of the gas, which affect how rapidly an 
increased atmospheric concentration depreciates. There are 
large differences between different greenhouse gases, with 
atmospheric lifetimes varying from roughly fifteen years for 
methane15 to more than 100 years for N,0 and some CFCs. 
Once the impact of current emissions of a greenhouse gas 
on future atmospheric concentrations has been calculated, one 
can in principle calculate the effect of the increase in current 
emissions on future climate development. If one has specified 
a function which measures the monetary cost of climate 
change, one may calculate the incremental costs and thus ob-
tain a present value measure of the marginal cost of increased 
current emissions of a greenhouse gas. 
It is clear from the description above that the marginal 
monetary cost of greenhouse gas emissions is a complex con-
cept. Several assumptions of an economic nature must be 
made, such as the appropriate discount rate and the monetary 
costs of climate change for the whole future. In particular, the 
relative importance of different greenhouse gases is much 
more complex than is implied by a simple physical conver-
sion index such as the global warming potential (GWP) dis-
cussed in Volume 1 of this report. In the context of the climate 
problem, a reasonable definition of the importance of a green-
house gas relative to, say, CO,, is the marginal environmental 
cost of current emissions of this gas relative to the corre-
sponding marginal cost of CO,. It follows from the discussion 
above that the relative importance of greenhouse gases de-
pends on a number of economic assumptions that must be 
made.1" 
Inertia and irreversibility. 
Since emissions of greenhouse 
gases in any one year represent a relatively small fraction of 
the total global stock, the system has great inertia. This means 
that even if all emissions went to zero, it would be decades, if 
not centuries, before the stock of greenhouse gases was re-
duced significantly. Therefore, decisions about emission lev-
els are effectively irreversible, at least over the 100-200-year 
timespan o( interest. In other words, failure to reduce emis-
sions in the short to medium term may be irreversible in the 
sense that once the effects of climate change become appar-
ent, it will then be too late to do anything about it. 
Global 
characteristics. 
Most 
environmental 
pollution 
problems are local or regional in scale. r Thus, the benefits of 
emission reductions generally accrue to the same geographic 
areas as bear the costs. The damages associated with green-
house gases, however, depend on the global greenhouse gas 
concentration, which is largely independent of the regional 
meteorological patterns that usually define the geographic 
scope of other transnational environmental problems such as 
acid rain. Therefore, the distribution of the benefits of emis-
sion reduction is global, not local. Per contra, even a country 
that emits no greenhouse gases can incur the damages of 
emissions by other countries. 
Geographical 
distribution 
of impacts. Poorer nations are 
likely to be the most vulnerable to the impacts of climate 
change, since they lack the resources to protect themselves 
against sea level rise, extreme weather events, or desertifi-
cation. In contrast, the impacts of acid rain from emissions 
in some poorer countries or regions may be concentrated in 
richer countries'* (e.g., the effects of emissions from Eastern 
Europe on western Germany19). These richer areas therefore 
have powerful incentives to promote emission reduction pro-
grammes in the source areas, including the provision of finan-
cial assistance.-" However, in the case of greenhouse gas 
emission reductions, countries such as the U.S. (where there 
is the perception 
that the direct impacts of climate change on 
the U.S. itself are relatively small) may have fewer obvious 
economic incentives to reduce emissions.21 Considerations of 
humanitarian solidarity and equity alone are unlikely to be 
sufficient motivators. 
Absence 
of actual 
impact data. In the case of climate 
change, unlike almost all other environmental externalities, 
actual impact data are scarce, and estimates of physical im-
pacts are based entirely on the predictions, judgments, and 
models of scientists.-- Only once (or if) climate change does 
in fact occur, will the impacts be known. The evidence of 
cause and effect will be difficult to substantiate, because of 
the likelihood that, at least initially, changes will be incremen-
tal. It should be noted, however, that there does exist a signifi-
cant body of verifiable scientific theory that underlies the 
estimates and models of scientists. 
Nonlinearity. Global climate change is determined by com-
plicated interactions involving a chain of nonlinear linkages 
(i.e., greenhouse gas emissions, atmospheric concentration, 
temperature change, climate system feedbacks, and physical 
impacts). Therefore, climate change phenomena and risks are 
likely to be much more nonlinear than the relationship be-
tween conventional emissions and more local pollution. 
Very long timeframe. 
The very long time frames involved 
in climate change cause some normally external variables to 
become internal factors of change. For example, the economic 
impact of sea level rise depends on the size of the population 
living in low-lying coastal areas, which may decrease once a 
sea level rise becomes evident. The costs of such adaptation 
mechanisms may be especially difficult to estimate. 
5.4 Cost-Benefit Analysis in the Context of 
Climate Change 
In light of these unique characteristics of the climate change 
problem, what can we say about the suitability of CBA'.' Ho« 
and under what circumstances can CBA make a contribution 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
J 55 
to the central questions now facing decision makers, in partic-
ular: 
• By how much should emissions be reduced? 
• When should emissions be reduced? 
• How should emissions be reduced? 
The fundamental problem in applying CBA to the climate 
change problem follows directly from the chain of causality 
discussed in Figure 5.3 above: whereas estimating the costs of 
emission reduction involves the beginning of the chain, esti-
mating the benefits (the avoided damages) involves the very 
end of the chain. Since there is some level of uncertainty asso-
ciated with each of the links, estimates at the last stage of the 
chain are subject to compound uncertainties that may be very 
large indeed. 
5.4.1 Estimates of the marginal cost curve 
Marginal abatement cost (MAC) curves for greenhouse gas 
emission reductions have been derived for many industrial-
ized countries, but for only a few developing countries.23 Fig-
ure 5.4 shows such a curve for Thailand. This curve is derived 
by a rank ordering of the individual measures by cost per 
tonne of C02 saved (the height of each block), with the width 
of each block representing the tonnes of CO, so saved. The 
shape of the MAC curve, when smoothed, is indeed of the 
type indicated in Figure 5.2, a result confirmed by many other 
examples.24 Generally, these studies rely on known or near-
term technical options and ignore effects due to joint products 
(see Section 5.4.4). economies of scale, and capacity building 
that might reduce the upward slope of the cost curve. Such 
marginal cost curves depend on discount rate and price as-
sumptions and may evolve over time as options are taken up 
and new technologies develop. A more detailed discussion of 
estimates of the MAC curves is contained in Chapters 8 and 9. 
What is interesting in these (and other studies25) is the 
significance of "below the line" options (i.e., where MAC is 
negative but still upward sloping). These are measures that ap-
pear to have negative costs associated with them - in other 
words, when these options are implemented, both costs and 
emissions go down, relative to the reference case.26 Compact 
fluorescent lighting, other energy-efficient 
devices, and 
demand-side management measures typically fall into this 
category, and in developing countries, measures such as re-
ducing electricity transmission and distribution losses or insti-
tuting vehicle maintenance programmes also appear here. 
These, then, are measures that should be implemented in any 
least-cost energy development strategy, even in the absence of 
any desire to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The fact that 
they are not implemented reflects either market failures, the 
influence of powerful vested interests, or other factors, such 
as high transaction costs (which might exceed the potential 
benefits).27 Indeed, in developing countries, there may be 
more such "below the line" options because education and in-
formation about the availability and benefits of options in this 
segment of the MAC curve are less available than in devel-
oped countries. 
1. Efficient air conditioning (residential) 
2. Efficient air conditioning (commercial) 
3. Electronic ballast (commercial) 
4. Efficient electric motor (industrial) 
5. Electronic ballast (residential) 
6. Natural gas combined cycle 
7. CFL (commercial) 
K. Efficient refrigerator 
9. CFL (residential) 
10. Nuclear 
11. Conventional natural gas steam 
12. Efficient gasoline car 
13. Retrofit of old car 
,< ' 
' 
f - r ^ 
_U^~ 
10 
1.1 
11 
r-1 
1 
I) 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
C02Reduction (million tonnes) 
Figure 5.4: The marginal abatement curve for Thailand. 
This issue highlights a practical problem for the Global En-
vironment Facility (GEF). The GEF has been set up as the 
funding mechanism, on an interim basis, to provide financial 
resources needed by developing countries to meet the "full in-
cremental costs incurred" in complying with their obligations 
under the Framework Convention on Climate Change.28 If the 
GEF is to fund the "incremental costs" of greenhouse gas re-
duction measures, this presupposes that a baseline can be un-
ambiguously defined, against which such incremental costs 
are to be measured.29 But under such a definition, should 
demand-side management (DSM) programmes that have neg-
ative incremental costs - such as energy-efficient lighting -
be funded by the GEF?-1" 
5.4.2 The marginal benefits curve 
It follows from the discussion of the previous section that the 
level of uncertainty in benefits is much greater than the level 
of uncertainty in costs. The practical implication of this, de-
picted in Figure 5.5, is that the optimum point of emission re-
duction is also subject to significant uncertainty. Whether the 
marginal benefits curve is MB,, or MB,, or MB., has a much 
greater impact on the location of the optimum point of emis-
sion reduction (indicated by points A, B, and C) than the 
much smaller uncertainties in the marginal cost curve. There-
fore, with such wide uncertainty about the economic opti-
mum, CBA may not be very helpful. In this situation, an 
arbitrary level of emission reduction at Phas a very high prob-
ability of at least meeting the criterion that MB (marginal ben-
efit) > MC (marginal cost). By contrast, C may represent a 
risk-averse, "precautionary" level of abatement, in which the 
expected value of MC may be greater than the expected value 
of MB (see Section 5.5 and Figure 5.10 for further details). 
In fact, there exist few if any estimates of the benefits 
curve, and most of the estimates that do exist are not much 
more than single point estimates for some presumed level of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. A complete discussion of 
benefit estimates is provided in Chapter 6. 
156 
Climate Change I99.~) - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Level of Emission Reduction 
Figure 5.5: Uncertainty in the benefits curve. 
A number of estimates (see, for example, Nordhaus, 
1994b) suggest that the economic impact of climate change 
on the industrialized countries is quite small. However, Nord-
haus, as well as others, is quick to concede that such results 
may not apply to developing countries, where typically much 
larger shares of national income are in agriculture, and much 
of it in subsistence farming in marginal areas where even 
small changes in climate may have devastating effects and 
where the ability of the farming population to adapt may be 
very small indeed." The types of human settlements most 
vulnerable to climate change are concentrated in developing 
countries, including low-income communities, residents of 
coastal 
lowlands and tropical 
islands (such as coastal 
Bangladesh or the Maldives), populations in areas already 
significantly affected by desertification, and the urban poor in 
squatter settlements.,: 
Unfortunately, to date, most of the discussions of impacts 
of climate change on the developing countries have been 
qualitative in nature.11 and there is an urgent need for more 
quantitative estimates. According to a recent GEF survey of 
country studies (Fuglestvedt et ai, 1994),34 there are now al-
most as many studies underway on effects as on mitigation, 
but it is difficult to ascertain how many of these studies will 
result in the sort of quantitative information necessary to con-
struct an impact cost curve. Certainly none of the studies and 
papers published to date for developing countries contains 
quantitative estimates of the type derived by Nordhaus for the 
U.S.35 
5.4.3 Measuring 
costs and 
benefits 
Most of the work on the benefit (avoided cost) side, and much 
of the work on the cost side, assumes that the relevant mea-
sure by which to evaluate options is loss of GDP. This raises a 
separate set o\' questions about the extent to which GDP (or 
loss of GDP growth) is the appropriate measure.36 It is well 
established (Weitzman, 1976;Brekke, 1994) that GDP is not a 
welfare measure per se, but rather a convenient way to aggre-
gate goods and services that clearly contribute to welfare. 
Nevertheless, Figure 5.6 summarizes some of the estimates 
that have been made for GDP impacts. Chapter 9 discusses 
such estimates in more detail. 
Since GDP is an imperfect measure of social welfare, it 
should not be surprising that the cost-effectiveness of policy 
options can differ significantly when analyzed in terms of 
their impact on GDP and on social welfare. Recent studies 
have found this to be the case for industrialized countries such 
as Norway (Alfsen et ai, 
1992) as well as for developing 
countries such as Sri Lanka (Meier etai, 
1993; see Table 5.1). 
The "consumer impact" is an estimate of the impact or social 
welfare not reflected in traditional GDP measures. At 10-50% 
of the total, the consumer impact is clearly a significant frac-
tion of social welfare. 
Of course, the magnitude of such impacts as those shown 
in Table 5.1 is a function of how much of the technology is 
adopted, how soon, and what discount rate is used. The effect 
of a single 25 MW wind plant will obviously be much less 
than if a 300 MW wind farm displaces a plant using imported 
coal in the near term. Generally, what these results do under-
score is the need for great caution when interpreting the so-
called costs of greenhouse gas emission reductions attribut-
able to specific technologies. 
Equally important are the concerns over the extent to 
which conventional measurements of GDP growth take into 
account the depletion of natural resources ("green account-
ing"). For many developing countries this is a particularly 
important issue, and there is a growing literature suggesting 
that conventional accounting substantially overstates GDP 
growth. The corollary is that estimates of GDP impacts of cli-
mate change that/a// to take account of changes in the rate at 
which natural resources are depleted, or changes in environ-
mental impacts, may be understating the true effect of these 
impacts.37 
Some of these problems are evident from the numerical es-
timates. In Figure 5.6 we display the results of recent studies of 
the impact of emission reduction strategies on loss of GDP.!J 
As is evident, these estimates show considerable variation. 
Even so. none of these estimates reflects "green accounting" or 
any margin for no-regrets options, and only one (Glomsrod ei 
ai, 1990) takes into account joint products. Most of these stud-
ies are national studies. Many researchers argue that unilateral 
actions by the U.S. or by OECD countries are likely to be less 
effective than global action, and that unilateral actions are 
likely to exaggerate the impact on GDP.39 However, these stud-
ies also neglect the benefits of the development of advanced 
technologies in the market economies, which could then be 
more quickly adapted in the developing world. 
Traditional CBA basically relies on a partial equilibrium 
analysis, in which only the relevant portion or subsystem of 
the more complete economic system is studied in depth, and 
many parameters (and prices) outside this system are taken a* 
exogenously fixed. For questions relating to climate change 
(whose consequences may have major effects on pricesi. 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate 
Change 
9 
157 
0 
"o 
§ 
1 -
10 
• Egypt 2007 
• USA 2020 
Egypt 2007 
»USA 2025 
• Japan 2005 
• Oil-exporting LDC 2030 
i former USSR 2010 
• Canada 2005 
• USA 2100 
• Norway 2010 
• USA 2100 
(former USSR 2020 
i China 2020 
• Australia 2000 
(Belgium 
• USA 2025 
2005 
' Brazil 2050 
Hun gary2; :005 
* UK 2005 
• Poland, 2005 
• China 2050 
• India 2050 
•Sweden 2020 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
CO- Emission Reduction (as % from baseline) 
Figure 5.6: Impact of GHG emission reduction on GDP. 
Table 5.1. Welfare losses due to different greenhouse 
gas 
abatement options in Sri Lanka (in $/tonne of avoided 
carbon) 
No coal 
Wind 
CFL" 
Supply cost impact 
Consumer impact 
Total 
16 
10 
26 
67 
66 
131 
-472b 
-66 
-538 
aCompact fluorescent lighting. 
''Negative numbers indicate a benefit. 
Source: Meier et al. (1993) 
the more far-reaching and inclusive general equilibrium ap-
proach - in which the properties and relationships of the en-
tire economic system are analyzed - is appropriate. For this 
reason, computable general equilibrium models are widely 
used in climate change studies. 
5.4.4 The joint products 
problem 
A related question concerns the joint benefits and costs of 
emission reduction. Options that reduce greenhouse gas emis-
sions may also provide significant changes in other pollutants 
whose impacts are of a quite different scale. For example, the 
substitution of renewable energy technologies for coal will re-
duce not just CO, emissions - a global benefit - but also SO, 
and particulate emissions, thus brinsins a reduction in local 
environmental damages. On the other hand, the increased use 
of renewable energy technologies (such as hydroelectric gen-
eration), which also reduce CO, emissions, may also impose 
new and different local environmental costs (such as loss of 
biodiversity associated with reservoir inundation).40 
Estimates of the importance of joint benefits and costs vary 
widely (in part, because valuing the costs and benefits of other 
environmental impacts may be subject to similar difficulties of 
valuation and scientific uncertainty as greenhouse gas emis-
sions).41 A recent study (Alfsen et al., 1992) found that the 
joint products of carbon reduction (reduction in environmental 
damages to forests and lakes, health damages, reduced traffic 
congestion, road damage, etc.), offset about 30-50% of the ini-
tial abatement costs in the case of Norway.42 A British study 
(Barker, 1993) found that the secondary benefits exceeded the 
cost of the greenhouse gas abatement measures. 
Adding the benefits of reductions in conjoint pollutants to 
the MB measure is one possibility. The other is to subtract 
these benefits from the MC measure. Since most of such ben-
efits go to the country that bears the costs of abating the CO, 
emissions, while the benefits of lower CO, emissions go to all 
countries, it follows that the preferred approach is to adjust 
the marginal cost curves. 
5.4.5 The aggregation 
problem 
We now turn to the matter of implementing policy. Consider 
first Figure 5.7. which depicts the situation faced by a hypo-
I5S 
Climate Change J 995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
I 
MBW, Global Marginal Benefits 
Optimal Reduction 
from Country 
Perspective 
Country Benefits 
t M B , 
MB, 
Optimal Reduction 
World Perspective 
MAC=Marginal Cost 
of GHG Reduction 
Reduction in GHG 
I 
I 
^ v 
MBW, Global Marginal Benefits 
Optimal Reduction 
from Country 
Perspective 
\ M B 
C o u n t r y ^ ^ 
Benefits 
v ^ 
^S 
' ' 
^ ~ ^ s ^ 
Optimal Reduction 
World Perspective 
MAC=Margina: COM 
of GHG Reduction 
' r 
N 
B 
D Reduction in GHG 
Figure 5.7: The marginal cost and benefits curve for an industrial 
F i g u r e 5 8. T h e marginal cost and benefits curve for a developing 
country. 
country. 
thetical country. Its marginal cost curve is upward sloping, in 
the manner discussed above. It begins with negative values 
(the "no-regrets" or "win-win" options), again in the manner 
indicated earlier. 
Suppose Figure 5.7 depicts the situation for an industrial-
ized country, say the U.S. Suppose that indeed Nordhaus is 
correct in his estimates that the benefits to the U.S. are rather 
small. If MB, were true, then the optimal policy would be to 
implement only the win-win policies - demand-side man-
agement, more efficient end-use devices, economically effi-
cient pricing, and the like. If MB, were true from the U.S. 
perspective, then perhaps only small emission reductions are 
warranted. We assume, of course, an appropriate adjustment 
for the evaluation of the benefits of the reduction of joint 
costs. 
However, the benefits of emission reductions are likely to 
be much higher to the rest of the world, and hence the curve 
MBw lies as shown, far above the MB, and MB, curves. 
Therefore, when the global benefits of emission cost reduc-
tions are taken into account, the optimum level of emission re-
duction shifts to the right, as shown. How one persuades 
decision makers in the U.S. (and in other industrialized coun-
tries) to take a global perspective is the main question.43 
Consider now the situation for a developing country (Fig-
ure 5.8). Again the global benefits curve lies far above the 
curve for an individual country. Evidence from empirical 
studies suggests that a far larger portion of the MC curve is in 
the no-regrets /one. Several multicountry studies point to this 
result." 
In the case of developing countries, the GEF funding 
mechanism provides the means for shifting the level of emis-
sion reduction undertaken by any specific country to the right. 
But in what range does the (IFF mechanism operate'.' Concep-
tually, it should operate in the range CD: that is. it should pro-
vide funding only beyond the optimal level from the country 
perspective. But since the MB curve is so difficult to deter-
mine, an easier definition, operationally, is for the GEF to 
operate in the range BD; that is, from the conventional 
"least-cost" point that would normally apply, and in which 
any benefits, even locally, from greenhouse gas reductions are 
simply taken as zero. For example, wind plants would not nor-
mally lie in the least-cost expansion path for an electric utility 
(if environmental externalities are valued at zero); GEF pro-
vides the mechanism to fund such technologies. Yet. in fact. 
the GEF has also funded projects in the range AB - such as 
the energy-efficient lighting project in Mexico.45 
The difference between the optimal level of reduction from 
the national perspective and that from the global perspective 
lies at the heart of the practical problem of implementation. A 
related but different issue - involving equity - concerns one 
of the premises of CBA, namely that sunk costs and past ac-
tions are not relevant. Yet developing countries argue thai in 
the case of the climate change problem, past emissions are rel-
evant, because it is the industrial countries, not the developing 
countries, that have accounted for the bulk of the anthro-
pogenic greenhouse gases present in the atmosphere (e.g.. see 
Munasinghe. 1991). 
5.4.6 Systemic 
evaluation 
The comparison of abatement cost estimates shown in Table 
5.2 also points to the importance of systemic evaluation. The 
cost per tonne of avoided emissions for both wind and the no-
coal option are much lower in the Sri Lankan than in the GEF 
or Indian estimates for the exact same technology. The reason 
lies in the fact that the incremental cost of. say. wind power. 
depends on what technology is being substituted, and this will 
be very different from case to case. For example, in Sri Lank.;. 
imported coal base load plants largely determine the future 
system expansion cost. This is much more expensive ihan ir. 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate 
Change 
Table 5.2. Comparisons of cost estimates for C02 abatement 
$700 
(in$/tonneofC02) 
159 
Study type 
Wind 
No coal 
Sri Lanka 
Systemic, single 
67-131 
16-26 
300 MW 
wind farm 
GEF 
Generic 
116-223 
45-89 
India 
Supply cost 
150-600 
Sources: For Sri Lanka, Meier et al. (1993); for India, Hossein and 
Sinha (1993). The generic estimate is from London Economics 
(1992). 
50 
100 
150 
200 
Cumulative Offset (Mt of carbon) 
India, which has available relatively large quantities of low-
cost domestic coal. Similarly, in the generic cost estimates 
made by the GEF for no-coal options, the presumed substitute 
fuel is domestic oil or gas, not imported oil (as is the case for 
Sri Lanka). The point is that there likely exist very large, 
country-specific variations in estimates of the cost of green-
house gas emission abatement through given technologies. 
Joint costs and benefits that are local in nature will very likely 
vary even more from place to place. 
Another way of making the same point is by noting that 
single-point cost estimates for many technologies can be quite 
meaningless, because the supply curve for even an individual 
technology is not flat. For example, as Hossein and Sinha 
(1993) have shown in a recent study of wind and hydro for In-
dia, the supply curves have the expected classical upward 
sloping shape as illustrated in Figure 5.9 for the supply cost of 
wind farms in India. Such static cost curves neglect the coun-
terargument that, in a more dynamic analysis, cost may de-
cline due to economies of scale and technological advances. 
5.5 Issues 
5.5.7 Risk, uncertainty, 
and 
irreversibility 
Our knowledge about how anthropogenic emissions of green-
house gases affect global temperature, what kind of effects a 
change in global temperature may have, and how efforts to 
mitigate climate change may work is clearly restricted. How 
different greenhouse gases react in the atmosphere is not fully 
understood, and even if exact predictions of the average in-
crease in global temperature could be made, the different re-
gional effects of these increases will be exceedingly difficult 
to foresee. There is also considerable uncertainty about the 
economic and social effects of abatement measures, which are 
decisive for determining their associated costs and benefits. 
One cannot, therefore, evaluate climate measures without 
taking these uncertainties into account. On the other hand, ac-
knowledgment of vast uncertainties should not lead to an inert 
attitude but rather to the development of rational strategies for 
acting under uncertainty. Economic analysis under uncer-
tainty aims at developing strategies for decision makers who 
face uncertainties in future costs and benefits. The uncertainty 
Figure 5.9: Supply cost curve for wind farms in India. 
in the outcome of a variable is often described by a probabil-
ity attached to each possible outcome. In some cases, the 
probability distribution is objectively presented; in such cases 
one normally talks about risk. More often, subjective proba-
bility distributions are assumed, in which case one talks about 
uncertainty. 
In Section 5.4 we noted that the level of uncertainty is 
greater in the benefits curve than in the cost curve (recall Fig-
ure 5.5). Figure 5.10 illustrates the practical consequence of 
uncertainty in a different way. Figure 5.10a depicts the cost-
benefit analysis of the optimum level of emission reduction. 
The optimal reduction, R n l, is given by the point at which 
MB = MC. If the marginal mitigation cost and marginal dam-
age cost functions were known with certainty or if, in the ab-
sence of risk aversion, one were to use expected values of the 
uncertain mitigation cost and damage functions, then the opti-
mum degree of emission reduction would be as shown. 
However, given uncertainty in the marginal mitigation cost 
and damage functions, the optimal emission reduction cannot 
be determined precisely. It could lie anywhere within a rela-
tively wide range. Uncertainly in the damage function and 
risk aversion lead one to a "precautionary approach," which 
requires more stringent emission reductions, lying to the right 
of the expected value Rn { and roughly determined by the in-
tersection of the cost curve and some notional upper envelope 
estimate of the damage function, as indicated by C in Figure 
5.5. 
Figure 5.10b illustrates the case in which the damages are 
sufficiently uncertain that a marginal damage function cannot 
be defined. The risks associated with various emission levels 
are considered, using the best available evidence. This infor-
mation, together with the associated costs, is used to select an 
emission reduction, RASM. that constitutes an affordable 
safe 
minimum standard. Analytically, such a standard would have 
to be based on a multicriteria analysis. 
Finally, in Figure 5.10c the emission reduction RAS is 
based solely on a scientific assessment. This corresponds to 
the first of the two views of the sustainability approach dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. Since the obligation to avoid harm is ab-
solute, the cost of avoiding harm is irrelevant. The benefits of 
160 
Climate Change IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
a) Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 
Marginal 
Damage 
Cost 
a 
I 
1 
g 
Marginal 
Mitigation 
Costi 
GHG Emission 
Reduction 
b) Affordable Safe Minimum 
Standard 
6 1 
•c 
1 
I 
Marginal 
Mitigation 
CostJ 
ASM 
GHG Emission 
Reduction 
:) Absolute 
Standard 
3 
I 
I 
Unacceptable 
Risk Zone 
Acceptable 
Risk Zone 
R AS GHG Emission 
Reduction 
Figure 5.10: Methods and rules for determining mitigation targets. 
control are so large that consideration of costs is unhelpful. 
This can be termed the absolute standards approach. 
The attitude towards risky outcomes is often expressed in 
terms of a risk premium, which is the minimum compensation 
required to accept a lottery with expected return .v compared 
to a certain return of .v. Such a premium may be required be-
cause the decision maker prefers certain to uncertain out-
comes, but may also occur if the net benefit of his investment 
is nonproportionate in quantity. For instance, suppose a coun-
try commits itself to reduce emissions by 100 tonnes and con-
siders two alternative measures. One alternative reduces 
emissions by 100 tonnes with certainty. The other measure 
has a 50% chance of reducing emissions by 200 tonnes. Even 
if the expected reductions are equal (i.e., 100 tonnes), it is ev-
ident that a decision maker will prefer the certain alternative 
unless the uncertain alternative is considerably less costly, as 
there is a chance of having to impose additional measures if 
unlucky. Assessments of the uncertainty involved in the 
analysis of climate change may therefore be of great impor-
tance to decision making. 
However, given the uncertainty it is also important to em-
phasize that some actions will be less attractive than others. 
The mirror of the above argument is that some actions may be 
acceptable, even with negative net expected benefit, if they 
reduce the uncertainty. One way to do so is to spread the risk 
among several measures. Then, if one fails to meet its ex-
pected target, another may satisfy the achievements that were 
expected. The total risk would thus be lower than if all efforts 
were concentrated on one single measure. 
One is scarcely able to account for all the uncertainties in-
volved when analyzing climate change. In some cases it may 
be equally difficult to assess a probability distribution of a 
variable as a single expected estimate. Ignorance about cer-
tain effects of a measure indicate that they should be left out 
of the analysis. However, CBA may be of great help to deci-
sion making even when limited to effects on which reasonably 
well-founded value estimates can be provided. 
One issue that has attracted a lot of interest in the literature 
of environmental economics is the problem of making irre-
versible decisions under conditions of uncertainty. Because 
of the long atmospheric lifetimes of greenhouse gases, irre-
versibility is a central characteristic of the climate change prob-
lem. A former, more benign climate cannot be reestablished if 
decisions lead to worse-than-expected climatic outcomes. 
To incorporate the cost of irreversible effects in the CBA. a 
vast amount of information is required about such factors as 
how the uncertainty evolves over time. Such information is 
rarely available, but we may assume that increased knowledge 
about climate change will narrow the range of uncertainties 
in the future. This possibility also enhances the importance 
of keeping future options open. This is an extra cost of irre-
versibility - the so-called quasi-option value - and it suggests 
that decision makers should follow flexible strategies when 
faced with uncertainty. 
The strategy that leaves most future options open is diffi-
cult to determine, however. Investing in abatement of climate 
change opens possibilities for increasing emissions at a later 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
161 
stage if the effects turn out to be less serious than expected. 
On the other hand, it reduces the potential use of adaptation. 
In addition, it is difficult to predict the effect of increased 
knowledge, especially whether anticipated outcomes will be-
come more certain. When dealing with many of the effects of 
climate change, ignorance is perhaps a more appropriate con-
cept than uncertainty. Increased knowledge may change igno-
rance to uncertainty, but the range of possibilities will not 
necessarily narrow for that reason. 
In applying CBA to the global climate change problem, 
and in particular to the evaluation of alternative policies to op-
timize net benefits, several major sources of uncertainty need 
to be considered:46 
• Uncertainty about the actual rates of emission.41 Most of 
the many studies cited earlier make assumptions about 
current and future rates of emissions, taking some 
"business-as-usual" case as a starting point. Current CO, 
emissions from fossil fuel use may be reasonably well 
known, but the level of uncertainty increases as one con-
siders levels of possible fossil fuel use in the more 
distant future,48 the impact of deforestation,49 or the 
emissions of other greenhouse gases such as methane.50 
• Uncertainty about the costs of emission reduction. 
Again there are significant differences between estimat-
ing such costs in electric utility systems (which are rela-
tively well known for conventional technologies) and 
those elsewhere, particularly for reforestation. 
• Uncertainty about scientific linkages. As already noted 
in Section 5.3, there exists a chain of scientific uncer-
tainty (see Figure 5.3). The extent to which these uncer-
tainties can be resolved by further research is itself 
subject to uncertainty (especially in light of the previ-
ously noted fact that by its very nature, e.x ante verifica-
tion of models by actual data is difficult). Thus, it is 
unclear that similar arguments invoked in the context 
of other environmental problems have validity for glo-
bal climate change. In contrast, the argument that fur-
ther understanding of atmospheric chemistry, or of the 
chemistry of lake acidification, or of the exact nature of 
forest damage mechanisms was necessary before very 
costly efforts were undertaken to control S02 and NOx 
emissions did at least have the merit that data on the ac-
tual damage of acid rain could be found. 
• Uncertainty in valuing the costs and benefits of the 
physical impacts. Here there may exist quite large varia-
tions in the level of uncertainty: For example, evaluat-
ing the cost of protective dikes to protect against sea 
level rise or estimating the opportunity cost of inun-
dated land is subject to significantly less uncertainty 
than estimating the impact on agriculture or on biodi-
versity. However, estimating the costs of more extreme 
climate conditions (e.g., more intense storms) will be 
very difficult. 
• Uncertainty about the assumptions underlying policy 
options. A number of studies, for example, have esti-
mated the impact on greenhouse gas emissions of elimi-
nating subsidies on coal or electricity, using assumed 
values of price elasticity.51 General equilibrium models 
require all kinds of assumptions about the elasticities of 
substitution: The actual values used in these numerical 
simulations are either based on historically estimated 
elasticities or on the judgment of the modeller. In either 
case, there is uncertainty about the extent to which such 
values match actual behaviour. 
• Uncertainly about the effectiveness of policies. For ex-
ample, the proposition that a certain level of carbon tax 
will in fact result in a certain hypothesized fuel substitu-
tion makes a number of assumptions about the function-
ing of markets. As noted earlier, the very fact that many 
apparently "no-regret" options are not being imple-
mented suggests a higher level of market imperfection 
than economists like to admit, and/or substantially 
higher transaction costs or discount rates. 
• Uncertainty about joint benefits and costs. As noted ear-
lier, joint benefits and costs may be a very significant 
factor in evaluating options for greenhouse gas abate-
ment. However, these joint benefits and costs are also 
subject to significant uncertainties (and also measure-
ment problems). 
The application of valuation techniques is difficult even 
where the impacts themselves can be quantified with relative 
confidence. But in the case of global climate change, uncer-
tainties in economic valuation techniques may be signifi-
cantly smaller than the scientific uncertainties that surround 
the impacts of increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases. 
Advocates of immediate mitigation action to reduce emis-
sions argue that even if the probabilities of some of the impor-
tant impacts are unknown and subject to great uncertainty, 
they are not zero. Low probability/high impact events are es-
pecially complex to model, and concern about such events 
may also provoke extreme risk-averse behaviour. Further, the 
process of climate change, once underway, will be irreversible 
(at least during a period measured in centuries), and the dam-
ages that may result are so catastrophic that action may be 
warranted even in the absence of more precise scientific 
knowledge about the impacts. 
A good analogy is a nuclear power plant accident. The 
Chernobyl incident notwithstanding, the risk of a catastrophic 
accident is extremely small. But the cost of a major accident is 
undoubtedly very large. Both the probabilities52 and the costs 
of the impacts are very difficult to estimate. But even if one 
could agree on appropriate values to use, and one were able to 
calculate an expected value, decision making on the basis of 
the expected value may still not reflect the preferences either 
of the public or of decision makers. The consequences of even 
an extremely unlikely event may be perceived as so undesir-
able (especially in the case of extreme risk aversion), that 
"normal" decision rules may simply not be viewed as appro-
priate. In other words, cost-benefit analysis must deal not just 
with expected values, but also with the risk preferences of the 
decision makers and those they represent. 
162 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chant; 
The traditional and simple way of incorporating uncer-
tainty considerations in CBA has been through sensitivity 
analysis. Using optimistic and pessimistic values lor different 
variables can indicate which variables will have the most pro-
nounced effects on benefits and costs. Although sensitivity 
analysis need not reflect the probability of occurrence of the 
upper or lower values, it is useful for determining which vari-
ables are most important to the success or failure of a project. 
Indeed decision makers often assign probabilities (even if 
only implicitly) to the various outcomes. Admittedly, the 
sheer magnitude of the costs of catastrophic climate change 
will make the sensitivity analysis problematic. 
One might note that for certain types of uncertainty, some-
thing akin to risk insurance is available in the form of futures 
and options markets. For example, one can hedge against un-
certainty in the future price of oil by transactions in the oil fu-
tures markets, but their efficient functioning depends on there 
being some balance between those who are buyers of oil (who 
are primarily interested in protecting themselves against a rise 
in the price), and sellers of oil (who are interested in protect-
ing themselves against a fall in the price).51 (See Box 5.2.) 
Finally, extreme uncertainty might also influence the na-
ture of the economic instruments employed for policy pur-
poses. For example, a price-oriented mechanism (such as a 
carbon tax) which limits economic dislocation might be pre-
ferred over a quantity-based mechanism (such as tradable per-
mits) in a situation where there are both uncertain control 
costs and an uncertain environmental response (see Lave and 
Gruenspecht, 1991 ).M 
5.5.2 
Valuation 
The robustness of a cost-benefit analysis depends critically on 
how reliable the values attached to each item are. The prices 
of marketable goods and services express social values as 
long as the goods in question are not rationed and there are no 
externalities.55 For nonmarketed goods and services, such as 
many environmental services, values have to be estimated in 
order to aggregate costs and benefits and obtain an overall 
evaluation of choice of policy. Estimated prices may depend 
on the methodology chosen to create them, and one should 
therefore interpret with caution results which include such 
prices. 
One reason why avoiding climate change may have a value 
is that climate change will cause a change in economic activi-
ties. Sea level rise will force people to move, for example, or 
more turbulent weather conditions may increase the need to 
rebuild damaged structures or replace damaged materials. A 
second reason is that people attach subjective values to the 
climate where they live - values that are to some extent re-
flected in the notions of "good" and "bad" weather. 
However, it is difficult to assess these values. To simplify 
somewhat, one may base an estimate on the anticipated costs 
of achieving a certain target at observed market prices: for in-
stance, the minimum abatement cost of attaining the same 
level o'i greenhouse gas emissions as a previous year. Alter-
natively, one may estimate the willingness to pay for reach-
ing such a target. In neither of the cases, however, would one 
be able to assess the benefits in terms of avoided future dam-
ages. 
Valuation of environmental effects in CBA may be helpful 
in attaining cost-effective decisions. However, the valuation 
should be based on a reasonably well-founded methodology. 
Speculative assumptions will not contribute to decision mak-
ing. A measure that yields negative net benefits according to 
an analysis may be worthwhile if effects that are assumed to 
be positive but not explicitly valued in the calculation are well 
documented. Decision makers will normally manage to con-
sider more than one measure simultaneously. CBA usually 
simplifies the decision by aggregating several effects, but 
there is no necessity for all effects to be aggregated into one 
single measure. 
There are several fundamentally different types of costs 
and benefits that must be addressed, each of which requires 
somewhat different approaches to quantification and valua-
tion: 
• Mitigation 
actions taken before the actual impacts are 
observed. 
These are primarily a matter of reducing 
emissions or of removing greenhouse gases through 
reforestation. The vast majority of the applications of 
cost-benefit analysis have addressed the question of 
how best to achieve given levels of emission reduction. 
Valuation issues generally do not arise in this category. 
• 
Costs of mitigation actions taken after impacts become 
apparent. These will necessarily occur in the future, and 
would be undertaken only if (1) climate change actually 
does occur and (2) climate change does indeed result in 
specific impacts. The cost of dikes to prevent inunda-
tion of coastal areas is a typical example in this cate-
gory. Based on actual experience (such as in the 
Netherlands), the cost of such mitigation actions are 
relatively easy to establish.56 Climatic engineering op-
tions, such as painting roads and roofs white or putting 
particles into the stratosphere also fall into this cate-
gory. Again, there are few valuation issues here. 
• 
Costs (and benefits) of adaptation. 
Society will adapt 
with varying degrees of pain to many of the impacts of 
climate change - indeed, society has already adapted to 
changes in climate that have occurred in the past. For 
example, climate change will affect crop yields and may 
result in poleward shifts in the distribution of cultivated 
land. Some areas will gain, and some will lose, and the 
consequences become an equity issue (between regions 
and countries) as much as a cost issue. Estimates of net 
losses for U.S. agriculture, for example, suggest a toler-
able impact for the U.S. as a whole, but significant re-
gional variations.57 Some of the costs of adaptation will 
vary, depending on ex ante actions (e.g., the develop-
ment of drought- or saline-resistant crops).58 
• 
Costs (and benefits) of nonadaptation. 
In some cases. 
adaptation may not be possible or the cost of mitigation 
may be higher than the loss incurred in its absence. For ex-
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Cliniiite 
Clum^e 
InJ 
BOX 5.2: APPLICATIONS OF DECISION ANALYSIS 
Option analysis 
In conventional CBA analysis, the usual decision rule is to take some action if the expected benefits exceed the expected 
costs. Depending on the degree of irreversibility present, a more appropriate rule is to take the action when benefits exceed 
costs by an amount at least equal to the value of the forgone option. Suppose some investment depends on some assumptions 
that are subject to great uncertainty - such as future world oil prices. If one makes an investment decision that is largely ir-
reversible - such as building a large hydroelectric power project - then one loses the flexibility associated with waiting to 
learn more about the factors that affect oil prices. Preserving that flexibility has some economic value, namely the so-called 
option value. In financial and commodity markets such options to buy (and sell) are traded, with option prices determined 
by the market itself. But option value theory is now being applied to other fields involving capital-intensive investments, 
such as power generation.1 
In applying these concepts to the climate change problem, there are many key differences. First, in one sense the problem 
is exactly opposite to that faced by, say, the power sector. In climate change, one loses flexibility if one does not make short-
term investments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, investment in reductions now is not free: Resources have to 
be diverted from other uses, and better emission technologies may be available in the future. Thus to some extent, commit-
ting now to current technology restricts the option to use better technology later. Second, unlike the financial and commod-
ity context, there is no marketplace to set the value of the option.-
Decision analysis and hedging strategies 
Among the early attempts at applying decision analysis to the climate change problem are those of Manne and Richels,1 who 
have developed an approach for determining the optimal hedging strategy. The paradigm they use is that of a portfolio of in-
surance options:4 What combination of insurance should be bought, if indeed any at all? What portion goes to R&D to re-
solve scientific uncertainties? What portion goes to the development of new supply and conservation technologies to reduce 
abatement costs? And what portion goes to immediate abatement of emissions? In particular, they focus on the value of in-
formation5 and on how much accuracy is needed in climate modelling and impact assessment. Clearly, with perfect 
informa-
tion, the best course of action can be charted immediately, and there is no need to hedge bets. Manne and Richels conclude 
that the need for precautionary near-term emission reductions is inversely related to the sustained commitment to R&D to 
develop better climate information (which reduces the need to hedge against an uncertain and potentially hostile future). 
However, given the inherent predictive uncertainty of climate change (and in particular the reliability of indicators), the lim-
itations of such approaches need to be recognized. 
'See. for example. Crousillat and Martzoukos (1991). This study reviewed power sector investment decisions in Costa Rica, Hungary, 
and West Africa. For a general review, see Dixit and Pindyck (1994). 
-A marketplace might emerge if a tradable emission permit system were to be instituted. Chao and Wilson (1993) outline a means of us-
ing option values to quantify the flexibility associated with the purchase of a tradable emission permit instead of fixed capital investment 
in control technology. 
'See, for example. Manne and Richels (1992). 
JLave(1991) notes that the concern about global climate change is not concentrated just in the rich nations but in the upper income 
groups in those nations. These are the same groups that voluntarily purchase insurance to protect themselves against other losses, such as 
those related to health, floods, and earthquakes. Persuading poor people to buy flood or earthquake insurance is exceptionally difficult 
even in the developed countries. 
5The value of information under uncertain conditions is a concept much used in the private sector. For example, before embarking on the 
expensive proposition of drilling a wildcat well, oil drillers must decide how much ought to be spent on much less expensive prior sur-
vey work: Will general magnetic surveys suffice or are more expensive seismic surveys needed? Neither yields perfect information. For 
details of how such decision-theory models are applied in this field, see, for example, Newendorp (1976). 
164 
Climate Change IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Table 5.3. Potential impacts to be valued (for the U.S.)f 
Total economic value 
Systems 
Potential Impacts 
Forests and 
terrestrial vegetation 
Species diversity 
Coastal wetlands 
Aquatic ecosystems 
Coastal resources 
Water resources 
Agriculture 
Human health 
Energy 
Transportation 
Weather-related 
damages 
Migration of vegetation 
Reduction in inhabited range 
Altered ecosystem composition 
Loss of diversity 
Migration of species 
Invasion of new species 
Inundation of wetlands 
Migration of wetlands 
Loss of habitat 
Migration to new habitat 
Invasion of new species 
Inundation of coastal development 
Increased risk of flooding 
Changes in supplies 
Changes in drought and floods 
Changes in water quality + 
hydropower production 
Changes in crop yields 
Shifts in relative productivity 
and production 
Shifts in range of infectious disease 
Changes in heat-stress and cold-weather 
afflictions 
Changes in fertility due to stress 
Increase in cooling demand 
Decrease in heating demand 
Changes in hydropower output 
Fewer disruptions in winter transportation 
Increased risk for summer inland 
transportation 
Risks to coastal roads 
Damages related to changes in the 
frequency and severity of extreme 
weather events like storms 
^Systems and potential impacts 
weather-related damages. 
as listed in OTA (1993). except for 
ample, in some areas, the cost of construction of dikes may 
be far higher than the value of the land lost to coastal flood-
ing; in such a case, the relevant cost to be estimated for 
purposes of CBA is the value of the land lost. 
It is thus in the third and fourth of these categories that val-
uation issues arise. Table 5.3 lists the specific categories of 
impacts that may be encountered as a result of global climate 
change. 
Conceptually, the total economic value (TEV) of a resource 
consists of its use value (UV) and non-use value (NUV).^' Use 
values may be broken down further into the direct use value 
(DUV). the indirect use value (IUV). and the option value 
(OV) (potential use value)."" One needs to be careful not to 
double-count both the value of indirect supporting functions 
and the value o\' the resulting direct use. One major category 
of non-use value is existence value (/:T). Thus 
1 
Direct use 
values 
1 
1 
Output that 
can be 
consumed 
directly 
1 
1 
Use values 
Indirect use 
values 
1 
1 
Functional 
benefits 
1 
Option 
values 
1 
1 
Future direct 
and indirect 
use values 
| 
Non-use 
1 
1 
Existence 
values 
1 
1 
Value from 
knowledge of 
continued 
existence 
1 
values 
Other non-use 
values 
• Food 
• Ecological 
• Biomass 
functions 
• Recreation 
• Flood control 
• Health 
• Storm protection 
Biodiversity 
• Habitats 
• Conserved 
• Endangered 
habitats 
species 
Decreasing 'tangibility' of value to individuals 
Figure 5.11: Categories of economic values attributed to environ-
mental assets. 
TEV=UV 
+ NUV 
or 
TEV =[DUV+ 
IUV +OV] + [NUV] 
Figure 5.11 shows this disaggregation of TEV in schematic 
form. Below each valuation concept, a short description of its 
meaning and a few typical examples (based on a tropical rain-
forest) of the environmental resources underlying the per-
ceived value are provided. Option values, non-use values, and 
existence values are shaded as a caution that some ambigui-
ties are associated with defining these concepts. (As shown in 
the examples, they can spring from similar or identical re-
sources, and their estimation can be interlinked also.) How-
ever, these concepts of value are generally quite distinct. 
Option value is based on how much individuals are willing to 
pay today for the option of preserving the asset for future (per-
sonal) direct and indirect use (see Box 5.3). In the context of un-
certainty, quasi-option value is said to define the value of 
preserving options for future use in the expectation that knowl-
edge - about the potential benefits or costs associated with the 
option (see Pearce and Turner, 1990; Fisher and Hanemann. 
1987) - will grow over time. This approach may be quite rele-
vant, given the great uncertainties associated with climate 
change. Existence value is the perceived value of the en\ iron-
mental asset unrelated either to current or optional use (i.e.. the 
value it has simply because it exists). A variety of valuation tech-
niques may he used to quantify the above concepts of value."1 
The basic concept of economic valuation underlying all 
these techniques is the willingness to pay (WTP) of individu-
als for an environmental service or resource.62 As shown in 
the box. valuation methods can he categorized according to 
which type of market they rely on and by considering how 
they make use of actual or potential behaviour. 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
165 
BOX 5.3: TAXONOMY OF VALUATION TECHNIQUES 
Type of Behaviour 
Based on actual behaviour 
Based on intended 
behaviour 
Conventional market 
Effect on production 
Effect on health 
Defensive or preventive costs 
Replacement cost 
Shadow project 
Type of Market 
Implicit market 
Travel cost 
Wage differences 
Property values 
Proxy marketed goods 
Constructed market 
Artificial market 
Contingent 
valuation 
Effect on production. An investment decision often has environmental impacts, which in turn affect the quantity, quality, 
or production costs of a range of productive outputs that may be valued readily in economic terms. 
Effect on health. This approach is based on health impacts caused by pollution and environmental degradation. One prac-
tical measure related to the effect on production is the value of human output lost due to ill health or premature death. The 
loss of potential net earnings (called the human capital technique) is one proxy for forgone output, to which the costs of 
health care or prevention may be added. 
Defensive or preventive costs. Often, costs may be incurred to mitigate the damage caused by an adverse environmental 
impact. For example, if drinking water is polluted, extra purification may be needed. Then, such additional defensive or pre-
ventive expenditures after the fact could be taken as a minimum estimate of the benefits of mitigation beforehand. 
Replacement cost and shadow project. If an environmental resource that has been impaired is likely to be replaced in the 
future by another asset that provides equivalent services, then the costs of replacement may be used as a proxy for the envi-
ronmental damage - assuming that the benefits from the original resource are at least as valuable as the replacement ex-
penses. A shadow project is usually designed specifically to offset the environmental damage caused by another project. For 
example, if the original project was a dam that inundated some forest land, then the shadow project might involve the re-
planting of an equivalent area of forest elsewhere. 
Travel cost. This method seeks to determine the demand for a recreational site (e.g.. number of visits per year to a park) 
as a function of variables like price, visitor income, and socioeconomic characteristics. The price is usually the sum of entry 
fees to the site, costs of travel, and opportunity cost of time spent. The consumer surplus associated with the demand curve 
provides an estimate of the value of the recreational site in question. 
Property value. In areas where relatively competitive markets exist for land, it is possible to decompose real estate prices 
into components attributable to different characteristics like house and lot size, air and water quality. The marginal WTP 
(willingness to pay) for improved local environmental quality is reflected in the increased price of housing in cleaner neigh-
bourhoods. This method has limited application in developing countries, since it requires a competitive housing market, as 
well as sophisticated data and tools of statistical analysis. 
Wage differences. As in the case of property values, the wage differential method attempts to relate changes in the wage 
rate to environmental conditions, after accounting for the effects of all factors other than environment (e.g., age, skill level, 
job responsibility, etc.) that might influence wages. 
Proxy marketed goods. This method is useful when an environmental good or service has no readily determined market 
value, but a close substitute exists which does have a competitively determined price. In such a case, the market price of the 
substitute may be used as a proxy for the value of the environmental resource. 
Artificial market. Such markets are constructed for experimental purposes, to determine consumer WTP for a good or 
service. For example, a home water purification kit might be marketed at various price levels, or access to a game reserve 
may be offered on the basis of different admission fees, thereby facilitating the estimation of values. 
Contingent valuation. This method puts direct questions to individuals to determine how much they might be willing to 
pay for an environmental resource, or how much compensation they would be willing to accept (WTA) if they were de-
prived of the same resource. The contingent valuation method (CVM) is more effective when the respondents are familiar 
with the environmental good or service and have adequate information on which to base their preferences. Recent studies 
indicate that CVM, cautiously and rigorously applied, could provide rough estimates of value that would be helpful in eco-
nomic decision making, especially when other valuation methods are unavailable. 
Source: Munasinghe (1993). 
/AG 
Climate Change 1W5 - Economic anil Social Dimensions of Climate Clu;iv>i 
Valuation techniques obviously need to be selected with 
some care, and in particular one must recognize that a given 
valuation technique may not necessarily capture the entire 
value. For example, if the replacement cost approach is being 
used to value the loss of forest area being inundated by a dam, 
it would likely capture only the use value. The value of biodi-
versity loss involved in the loss of primary forest, or a devel-
oped ecosystem, may not he included/'1 
We note that these valuation techniques have been devel-
oped for more conventional environmental impact analysis 
and would require significant modification and/or careful 
interpretation when applied to issues connected with global 
climate change (e.g., long-term inlergenerational impacts, 
biodiversity loss, welfare comparisons across cultures or 
where there are wide gaps between gainers and losers, etc.). 
Nevertheless, whatever the difficulties, the importance of val-
uation remains, and the development of better techniques 
should be viewed as an important item in the overall climate 
change research agenda. Certainly, ignoring an impact be-
cause it cannot he satisfactorily valued carries high risk and is 
one of the reasons for the use of MCA (see below). 
5.5.2.1 Discount rate 
We noted in the introduction that CBA requires a very specific 
and explicit way of dealing with time. The first principle is 
that past (or "sunk") costs are ignored, based on the premise 
that, since past decisions cannot he changed, they have no 
bearing on decisions regarding the efficiency of resource use 
that are to be made in the present or in the future/'4 
The second principle is that a discount rate is applied to fu-
ture costs and benefits to yield their present values. The issue 
of choosing an appropriate discount rate has been discussed in 
the context of general CBA for many years (Dasgupta et «/., 
1972; Harberger, 1976; Little and Mirrlees, 1974; Sen. 1967). 
The long-term perspective required for sustainable develop-
ment suggests that the discount rate might play a critical role 
in intertemporal decisions concerning the use of environmen-
tal resources (Arrow, 19X2). We briefly discuss below several 
key issues relating to discount rates. The topic is dealt with 
more fully in Chapter 4. 
Compared with most other economic investment decisions, 
the time perspective of measures aimed at mitigation of cli-
mate change is considerably longer. Cline (1992) suggests 
a 200-300-year time horizon for climate policy decisions. 
whereas investments in economic activities seldom need more 
than a 25-year horizon. This longer time horizon makes as-
sumptions about how the economic and the environmental 
systems will develop and the discounting of future values crit-
ical to the evaluation of measures. 
The discount rate denotes the social opportunity cost of 
capital. It reflects the net impact on total social benefits if one 
unit of present output is withdrawn from consumption and in-
stead is invested elsewhere (for instance, in production or 
abatement). The criterion for optimal social and economic de-
velopment is that the marginal total benefits from the different 
investments should be equal regardless of what the invest-
ments are aiming at. In other words, the social discount rate 
should be equal for all investments. If not. it would be possi-
ble to reallocate resources and attain a higher social benefit 
without any cost. Thus, the discount rate expresses a condition 
for dynamic (or intertemporal) efficiency. 
The discount rate also provides a signal to decision makers 
who evaluate single projects or measures to take decisions in 
accordance with dynamic efficiency (over time). Even if one 
accepts the requirement to apply the same discount rate for 
marginal projects within a given time period, there are many 
potential optimal levels of the discount rate. This leve1 de-
pends, inter alia, on the social preferences about present ver-
sus future consumption that may be reflected in an inter-
temporal welfare function. The formulation of this function 
has been the subject of an extended debate in which questions 
about intertemporal comparisons as well as the current distri-
bution of welfare have been raised. 
It is worth emphasizing that, although externalities related 
to climate change will affect the social rate of discount, it is 
not sufficient merely to adjust this discount rate to take full 
account of climate change in a CBA. One must include also 
the "price" of the environment, which may increase substan-
tially over time. As a consequence, future impacts from cli-
mate change may be quite important to present day decisions, 
even in "discounted terms": A 5% increase in the price of the 
environment will fully counteract the effect of a 5% discount 
rate. 
To conclude, discounting is necessary in order to compare 
costs and benefits at different time periods. Attempts to avoid 
discounting or to apply a different discount rate for climate 
measures than for other investments will inevitably result in 
an inefficient policy. However, it is difficult to pick out the 
correct social discount rate, as there are no practical observa-
tions of such a rate. Furthermore, discount rates may depend 
on the future scenario that is assumed, and could vary over 
time - in particular, very long-term discount rates may be 
lower as economic growth rates saturate and decline (see 
Munasinghe. 1993). 
5.5.2.2 CBA and equity 
The benefits and costs of climate change mitigation strategies 
may accrue to different countries (and to different regions 
within larger countries) in different ways and at different 
times. How one reconciles these differences is therefore one 
of the central dilemmas facing policymakers, and it involves 
some crucial equity issues (see Chapter 3). 
Thus, although CBA can provide answers on who should 
engage in how much abatement based solely on the criterion 
of maximizing economic efficiency, it must be recognized that 
some deviation from the global least-cost solution as obtained 
by CBA may have to be accepted to get international agree-
ment. As indicated earlier in Figure 5.1, there will likely be a 
trade-off between equity objectives and economic efficiency. 
CBA can help define the trade-off curve, but it cannot provide 
an answer to what combination of economic efficiency and 
equity is necessary to get international agreement. However, 
whether there is a trade-off between equity and efficiency, and 
what the properties of this trade-off are, depend on what pol-
icy instruments are available. For example, if one permits side 
payments (in lump sum form) between countries, the efficient 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate Change 
/67 
allocation of emissions across countries could be achieved in-
dependently of the equity issue. 
Several concerns shape equity perceptions and the ability 
to obtain international agreements. Effective action to control 
climate change depends on a degree of international agree-
ment. Therefore, a first obstacle to whatever mechanism 
might be agreed on is national sovereignty - to what extent 
will sovereign nations subject themselves to enforcement ac-
tions by others? Even simple agreements for joint implemen-
tation of projects involving two countries have run into 
difficulties (as discussed later in this section). 
The second obstacle is the heterogeneous nature of the ef-
fects of green^ .use warming. Although the most widely cited 
measure ol climate change is the average increase in global 
temperature, climate change affects different countries differ-
ently. In addition, the costs or response measures and their 
economic implications van greatly among countries, particu-
larly as a function of the level of development. Therefore, per-
ceptions of the benefits of global cooperation will differ 
greatly. 
A third obstacle is posed by strategic incentives. If some 
countries take the lead and set up a greenhouse gas control 
agreement, others have an incentive to free-ride and abstain 
from joining, as they cannot be excluded from the benefits 
such an agreement creates. If countries act selfishly in this 
way, few will become party to an agreement. Instead, most 
countries will not cooperate, and no general agreement will be 
reached even if all countries were to benefit from it. (This is 
the well-known prisoner's dilemma from game theory.65) 
Some argue that the overwhelming historical contribution to 
the build-up of greenhouse gases from developed countries 
constitutes an "environmental debt," that cannot be conve-
niently ignored using the traditional "sunk cost" approach. If 
past contributions to greenhouse gas emissions are considered 
from an equity viewpoint, establishment of appropriate side 
payment mechanisms from developed to developing coun-
tries, including financial assistance and technology transfer, 
could facilitate more enthusiastic cooperation by developing 
countries in efforts to mitigate climate change. 
The question of joint implementation illustrates the limits 
of CBA in this regard. The motivation for joint implementa-
tion is a straightforward result of CBA. If a country - say the 
U.S. - decides to make an effort to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions, and if reductions can be obtained at lower costs 
abroad, then the U.S. should initiate projects in other coun-
tries to minimize overall costs (Aaheim, 1993). The receiving 
country has nothing to lose if the additional cost of such a 
joint implementation project is covered by the investing na-
tion. Yet many countries and organizations have reacted with 
skepticism to such an approach, for reasons that are political 
and based on equity concerns rather than on economic effi-
ciency. The reasons include mistrust of the true willingness of 
the industrial countries to mitigate climate change, the belief 
that the ultimate reduction in greenhouse gases under sucn a 
regime would be negligible, and the suspicion that joint im-
plementation gives industrial countries an opportunity to "buy 
themselves out of their problems" at the expense of the devel-
oping countries.6'' Indeed, some developing countries fear that 
Table 5.4. Criteria for choosing a strategy 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
Flexibility 
Urgency 
Low cost 
Irreversibility 
Consistency 
Economic efficiency 
Profitability 
Political feasibility 
Health and safety 
Legal and administrative feasibility 
Equity 
Environmental quality 
Private vs. public sector 
Unique or critical resources 
Source: EPA (1989). 
joint implementation investment might partly substitute for 
traditional forms of financial and donor assistance, and that 
such agreements might preclude the right of their own future 
generations to emit greenhouse gases. 
Brazil and other countries have advanced a further reason 
for host country skepticism of joint implementation projects, 
namely that Annex I countries to the Framework Convention 
on Climate Change would invest in all the low-cost/high-
return projects, and thus when non-Annex I countries were 
eventually required to curb emissions they would find the 
cheapest and best options already taken up. 
5.5.3 Multicriteria analysis 
Even the staunches! advocates of cost-benefit analysis would 
concede that economic efficiency (or economic value) is not 
the sole criterion in setting public policy, and that policymak-
ers rightfully need to consider a broader set of objectives. Un-
fortunately, there is much confusion about what constitutes a 
coherent set of objectives. Table 5.4, taken from a major 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) study, 
lists the criteria suggested as constituting the basis for select-
ing public policy. The authors point out that the first four cri-
teria listed - flexibility, urgency, irreversibility, and low cost -
"would generally be given the highest priority." Note that 
many of these criteria overlap each other, and economic effi-
ciency is among them! 
Simple applications of CBA tend to focus only on eco-
nomic efficiency. However, in more recent extensions, tradi-
tional CBA concepts are embedded in MCA, which expressly 
allows more than one objective and expressly addresses risk 
and uncertainty, thereby providing an integrating mechanism 
for most of the criteria listed. Multicriteria analysis tech-
niques first gained prominence in the 1970s, when the intangi-
ble environmental externalities lying outside conventional 
cost-benefit analysis (CBA) methodologies were increasingly 
recognized. It also met one objective of modern decision mak-
ers, who preferred to be presented with a range of feasible al-
ternatives, as opposed to one "best" solution. MCA also 
/G<S' 
Climate Change /W5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chanel 
allows for the appraisal of alternatives with differing objec-
tives and varied costs and benefits, which are often assessed 
in differing units of measurement. 
Of the criteria listed in Table 5.4, criteria 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 
can all be treated by modern decision analysis. Indeed, ques-
tions of timing (urgency), flexibility (or robustness), capital 
constraints ("low cost") are all central elements of the ap-
proach. Also, criterion 13 is really part of 6. (In the text, the 
authors of the EPA report amplify the criterion as follows: 
"Does the strategy minimize governmental interference with 
decisions best made by the private sector?") Furthermore, 
modern valuation techniques permit substantial parts of crite-
ria 9 and 12 to he included in the economic analysis as well. 
As conceded by the EPA report (p. 393), "if the principal costs 
and benefits can he quantified in monetary terms, economic 
theory provides a rigorous procedure for making trade-offs 
between present and future costs, and for considering uncer-
tainty, profitability, and most of the other criteria." 
There is also a need to separate the basic goals of public 
policy - such as economic efficiency and equity - which 
surely have primacy, from implementation issues such as le-
gal and administrative feasibility, which are generally sec-
ondary. The premise of CBA analysis is that one looks first at 
the primary objectives and then asks how many of the primary 
objectives one may have to sacrifice to achieve practical 
implementation. This principle has become accepted in many 
areas of policymaking. For example, the starting point for 
setting electric utility rates is to calculate the economically ef-
ficient tariff (based on marginal costs) and then make adjust-
ments to protect low income groups (through lifeline rates, 
special provisions for disconnection in the event of nonpay-
ment, etc.). The essence of the approach is not that noneco-
nomic issues are ignored, but that the trade-offs between 
economic efficiency and equity (or indeed other objectives not 
readily monetized) are explicitly quantified and displayed in 
such a manner that decision makers are made aware of how 
much of one objective is traded off in the interests of the other. 
Indeed, one of the advantages of MCA is that it forces po-
litical decision makers to look at the trade-offs between their 
major objectives rather than attempting to boil down every-
thing into a single number, particularly where valuation tech-
niques may be controversial. Nowhere is this more important 
than in the valuation of risk to human life.''7 
The application of MCA methods involves the following 
steps: 
(1) 
Selection and definition of attributes, say Ar / = ! . . . . n, 
selected to reflect important planning objectives. Al-
though the two major relevant attributes in the context 
of the global climate change problem are cost and 
greenhouse gas emission reductions, we have already 
noted that strategies to control emissions may have 
other side effects, some positive and some negative, that 
may also be difficult to value and that might therefore 
require consideration of additional attributes (such as 
biodiversity and equity). 
(2) 
Quantification o( the levels .-\„ of the / attributes esti-
mated for each of the / alternatives. In this quantification. 
Table 5.5. Technology interventions for greenhouse 
gas 
emission 
reductions 
Option 
Comments 
Symbol 
Wind energy 
Minihydro 
DSM: energy 
efficient 
refrigerators 
DSM: compact 
fluorescents 
Transmission & 
distribution 
loss reduction 
Max hydro 
Clean coal 
technology 
Clean fuels 
305 MW total 
FGD systems 
No coal 
10% T&D loss goal 
(in place of 12%) by 2000 
12% goal delayed to 2003 
Builds both reservoirs in the Upper 
Kotmale project; 144 MW high dam 
version of Kukule 
Pressurized fluidized bed 
combustion-combined cycle units; 
assumed for all coal units after 2000 
With pessimistic capital cost 
assumptions 
Use imported low-sulphur residual 
oil for diesels (0.5% S by weight 
rather than 2.5% S) 
Use low sulphur (0.5%) coal 
(rather than 1% S coal) 
Model free to choose optimal 
generation mix; coal plants 
must have FGD systems 
FGD systems forced onto basecase 
solution 
Model free to choose least-cost 
combination of diesels + hydro 
wind 
miniHy 
EEF 
CFL 
TD+ 
TD-
maxHy 
PFBC 
PFBC-
lovv S 
oil 
lowS 
coal 
FGD 
*FGD 
noCoal 
full consideration must be given to discounting issues, for 
noneconomic and economic attributes alike. At this stage 
of the analysis, trade-off curves are powerful tools for 
communicating with decision makers. They are particu-
larly relevant in a situation, such as the climate change 
problem, where the quantification of benefits may be dif-
ficult and where decision makers must act largely on the 
basis of trading-off short-term costs against certain levels 
of greenhouse gas emission reduction. 
(3) 
Determination and application of a decision rule, which 
amalgamates the information into a single overall value 
or ranking of the available options or which reduces the 
number of options for further consideration to a smaller 
number of candidate plans. Where amalgamation h 
contemplated, attribute levels are first translated into a 
measure of value. vj(Aj.) (also known as the attribute value 
function).'18 This is sometimes combined with a normJiza-
tion procedure, usually on a scale of 0 to 1 (in which the 
lowest value of the attribute value function is assigned 0. 
the highest 1). Subsequently, weights u\ for each attribute 
must be determined to arrive at the overall amalgamation. 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate 
Change 
WORST 3500 
/69 
3400 
<+H 
0 
(I) 
3 
•—< 
(0 
> 
<D 
V) 
(1) 
& 
a 
C/1 
o 
U 
ft 
<*-> y 
r/i 
o 
'fi 
o 
<U 
3 
fi 
3300 
3200 
3100 
3000 
2900 
2800 
2700 
BEST 
2600 
maxHy+noCoal+low S oil 
O maxHy 
noCoal+low S oil 
noCoal 
EXAMPLE: 
DOMAIN OF OPTIONS 
COMINATED BY PFBC 
O *FGD 
O FGD O wind 
PFBC 
TRADE-OFF CURVE 
z. z /_ 
O PFBC 
low S coal 
low S oil C?TD-
r, •REFERENCE 
EEF CASE 
TD+ 
CFL 
14 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
30 
BEST 
Present Value of C0 2 Emissions0 
WORST 
(tonnes, discounted at 10%) 
Calculating the present value of tonnes of CO? emissions over the life of each measure is equivalent to 
assuming that the damage due to a tonne of CO? remains constant over this period. It is not necessary 
to know the monetary value of the damage due to CO, emissions since the analysis only involves a 
comparison of options. 
Figure 5.12: The trade-off curve. 
Trade-off curves are a particularly useful tool for the analysis 
of energy-environmental policy options. Figure 5.12, taken 
from a recent study of options for greenhouse gas emission re-
ductions in Sri Lanka (Meier et al., 1993), illustrates the es-
sential concepts. The figure is a plot of two attributes -
greenhouse gas emissions and total system costs - for the 
technology options identified in Table 5.5. Each point repre-
sents a perturbation of the reference case, defined as the offi-
cial 1993 basecase capacity expansion plan of the national 
power company, the Ceylon Electricity Board (CEB). 
The trade-off curve is the set of options that are not domi-
nated by others (sometimes referred to as the "noninferior 
set"). These are the options that are "closest" to the origin, 
and therefore represent the "best" set of options that merit fur-
ther attention.69 
Several useful concepts arise here. First is the concept of 
dominance.10 Pressurized tluidized bed combustion (PFBC -
a clean coal technology) is said to dominate the options in the 
sector shown, namely flue gas desulphurization (FGD) and 
wind. PFBC has better costs and better (i.e.. lower) green-
house gas emissions, and is thus preferred over the other op-
tions under both criteria. If only these two attributes mattered, 
there would be no reason to select any of the dominated op-
tions in place of PFBC. 
Another perspective is gained by dividing the solution 
space into quadrants with respect to the reference case (Figure 
5.13). The options that fall into quadrant III are the "win-win" 
options, which are better than the reference case in both at-
tributes. In this case, minihydro, energy-efficient refrigera-
tors, transmission and distribution system loss reduction, and 
compact fluorescents all fall into this quadrant, providing 
both cost and emission gains. Such win-win 
solutions 
were mentioned earlier, in Section 4. in connection with the 
empirical estimates of the MAC curves (e.g., Figure 5.4). 
These "below-the-line" options in the MAC curves are equiv-
alent to the options in quadrant 111 of a multiattribute analy-
sis.71 
Finally one should note that MCA leads to implicit valua-
tions whenever two options are compared. For example, in the 
case of Figure 5.13. a decision maker who prefers option Y 
(maximum hydro + no coal) to option X (no coal + low sul-
phur oil) makes an implicit valuation of the concomitant re-
170 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
3500 
3400 
<+H 
o 
<D 
3 
CO 
> 
•i—i 
c 
<u 
f (\> 
& 
M 3300 
+-> 
co 
O 
U 3200 
t - i 
2 
8 3100 
CO 
•C 3000 
o 
<D 
W 2900 
cd 
-w 
£ 2800 
2700 
2600 
14 
maxHy+noCoal+low S oil 
tunaxHy+noCoal 
maxHy 
noCoal+low S oil 
O *FGD 
I QUADRANT HI 
"WIN-WIN" 
OPTIONS 
QUADRANT I | 
"LOSE-LOSE" 
OPTIONS 
low S coal 
TD-
OPTIONS 
INVOLVING 
TRADE-OFFS 
16 
18 
20 
22 
24 
26 
28 
30 
Present Value of C02 Emissions a 
(tonnes, discounted at 10%) 
a Calculating the present value of tonnes of C0 2 emissions over the life of each measure is equivalent to 
assuming that the damage due to a tonne of C0 2 remains constant over this period. It is not necessary 
to know the monetary value of the damage due to CO> emissions since the analysis only involves a 
comparison of options. 
Source: Meier el al. (1993). 
Figure 5.13: "Win-win" options. 
duction of greenhouse gas emissions in terms of the increased 
costs (i.e., equal to the slope of the trade-off curve between X 
and Y or about 200$/ton of CO,).72 
It must also be noted that the choice of criteria in an MCA 
will depend on each country's short- and long-term develop-
ment plans. Despite a common global objective of stabilizing 
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, developing 
countries may use different criteria because of immediate or 
urgent needs to ensure food supplies and service debt require-
ments. Consequently different countries may place different 
weights on the attributes. 
5.6 Conclusion 
Cost-benefit analysis has many advocates but also many de-
tractors. Certainly the rather narrowly defined traditional ap-
proaches to I HA. developed originally for project-level 
decision making with planning horizons typically no more 
than 20 years, clearly have difficulty in dealing with the very 
long time frames and high levels of uncertainty encountered 
in the climate change context. This chapter has interpreted 
modern CBA more broadly to encompass a family of deci-
sion-analysis 
techniques 
that includes 
cost-effectiveness 
analysis, multicriteria analysis, and decision analysis, in addi-
tion to traditional cost-benefit analysis. 
Despite the current limitations of these various techniques, 
modern CBA (broadly defined) remains the best framework 
for identifying the essential questions that policymakers must 
face when dealing with climate change. The CBA approach 
forces decision makers to compare the consequences of alter-
native actions, including that of no action, on a quantitative 
basis. To the extent that some impacts and measures cannot he 
valued monetarily (e.g., biodiversity), extensions of the tradi-
tional CBA approach, such as multicriteria analysis, permit 
some quantitative expression of the trade-offs to be made 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate 
Change 
171 
Decision analysis also provides many insights for dealing 
with uncertainty. Flexible policies are essential when faced 
with large uncertainties. Increased knowledge may narrow 
uncertainty, but the range of options may not necessarily in-
crease. 
Finally, the most important benefit of applying CBA is not 
necessarily the predicted outcome (which always depends on 
assumptions and the particular technique used) but the 
process itself (which establishes a framework for gathering 
information and forces an approach to decision making that is 
based on rigorous and quantitative reasoning). 
Endnotes 
1. However, it is not universally accepted that cost-benefit analysis is 
appropriate to the analysis of policy options to address global cli-
mate change. A major report recently issued by the U.S. Office of 
Technology Assessment (OTA, 1993) contains an extensive discus-
sion of how adaptation strategies should be chosen, yet manages to 
avoid all mention of cost-benefit analysis per se. It talks about how 
one might minimize vulnerability to climate change and about insur-
ance strategies, but avoids the central question of how one might de-
termine the amount of insurance one wishes to buy. Similarly, 
priorities may be set on nonecoiiomic grounds, and CBA could be 
used in a secondary role (see e.g.. Turner, 1991). 
2. Although this needs a bit of modification in the presence of capital 
constraints, which may limit selection of the "best" single project. 
3. However, as we shall see later, extensions of CBA can help in 
identifying the trade-offs between economic efficiency and equity. 
4. The degree of emission abatement is reported in such studies in 
two rather different ways. The first is as a reduction from some base-
line-itself defined as the trajectory of greenhouse gas emissions for 
some postulated business-as-usual scenario. The second is in terms 
of reductions from some reference year (e.g.. "reduce greenhouse 
emissions to 80% of their 1990 levels by 2010"). 
5. The ethical and epistemological aspects of the climate change 
problem are not addressed here. For further discussion, see, for ex-
ample, Brown (1992). 
6. A recent survey of economists and scientists knowledgeable about 
the climate change problem elicited typical views at the extremes of 
this spectrum (Nordhaus. 1994a). One respondent argued, "the exis-
tence value of species is irrelevant - I don't care about ants except 
for drugs," while another cautioned that "loss of genetic potential 
might lower the income of the tropical regions substantially." In Sec-
tion 5.5 we address the different types of values - use. option, exis-
tence-in more detail. 
7. But see below for a discussion of the difficulties of making cross-
country comparisons of costs. 
8. There may also be some outcomes that are inefficient, namely 
those that lie inside the frontier of efficient points shown in Fig-
ure 5.1. Such an inefficient point is represented by option 6. This 
is discussed further in the presentation of multicritcria analysis, be-
low. 
9. It should be noted that the algebra of cost-benefit analysis can be 
expressed in many different ways: the cost-benefit ratio, net present 
value, or the internal rate of return are all different ways of doing the 
arithmetic. However, particularly in situations involving portfo-
lios of potential actions, and where shortages of capital may con-
strain the choice, great care must he paid to rigorous application of 
the principles: otherwise, different methods may yield different 
decisions. Maximizing net present value subject to applicable re-
source constraints is the most useful approach for climate change 
analysis. 
10. Perhaps the simplest and most intuitive example of why the mar-
ginal cost of emission reduction increases with increasing levels of 
reduction is the removal of pollutants from wastewater. The first 
60% can be easily removed by a settling basin: Large particles sim-
ply settle by gravity, and all that is required is a structure in which 
the process can take place. The next 30%. however, requires biologi-
cal treatment. This involves not just a physical structure, but pumps 
to aerate the water to promote the growth of aerobic bacteria. The 
next 5-6% requires chemical treatment, with high operating costs 
arising from the use of chemical agents. Although 100% removal is 
theoretically possible, it would require complete distillation, which 
is extremely expensive. 
11. Although we show the marginal cost and benefits of emission re-
duction as linear in Figure 5.2, this need not be so. For example, 
where abatement costs are subject to economies of scale, there might 
be sections of the MAC curve that have a form other than that shown 
in Figure 5.2. But as noted elsewhere (e.g., Figure 5.4), empirical 
studies of the marginal cost curves frequently do exhibit the stylized 
shapes shown in Figure 5.2. 
12. The acidity of precipitation is influenced by complex interactions 
between sulphur oxides, related oxidation products, and NOx. 
13. For example, the presence of CFCs could affect climate change 
not only directly through their global warming potentials, but also in-
directly through the impact of stratospheric ozone depletion on 
biota-like nanoplankton - which in turn influence oceanic CO, up-
take. Similarly, the degree of reliance on fossil fuels would affect 
CO, emissions directly and CO, absorption indirectly - via the ef-
fects of acid rain on forests and hiomass. 
14. There are some exceptions, notably for radioactive wastes, which 
also have extremely long lifetimes. Thus the total environmental 
risk, and the scale of the disposal problem at any one time, is not so 
much dependent on current rates of production of nuclear wastes as 
on the total stock. 
15. IPCC (1995) estimates the lifetime of methane at 14.5 ±2.5 years. 
16. See. for example. Hoe I and Isakscn (1993, 1994) for a further 
discussion and numerical calculations. 
17. There are exceptions here as well, most notably the phenomenon 
of acid rain, which is largely a long-range phenomenon often involv-
ing emissions in one country and acid rain damage in another. How-
ever, to the extent that lake acidification completely destroys aquatic 
ecosystems, one could argue that at least some of the impacts are ir-
reversible, although even here the impacts are generally of a fairly 
local nature. Long time periods may also elapse between the onset of 
acid rainfall and actual visible damage. 
18. For new data on emissions and acid deposition rates in Asia, see 
World Bank (1993). 
19. To be sure, there are exceptions. Even the richer countries of Eu-
rope are affected by mutual pollution problems (e.g., acid rain in 
Scandinavia from the UK. or the severe water pollution problems in 
the Rhine Basin involving Switzerland. Germany, France, and the 
Netherlands, or the dumping of wastes in the North Sea). However, 
in most cases where international pollution issues involve richer 
countries, much better institutional mechanisms exist for addressing 
these problems (e.g.. the EU in Europe) than are available for resolv-
ing environmental disputes between rich and poor. 
20. For a discussion of the relationship between economic assistance 
for restructuring in Eastern Europe and assistance to guarantee de-
sired environmental standards, sec. for example, Amman el al. 
(1992). 
21. However, the indirect impacts (for example, large-scale immigra-
/72 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
tion from Mexico that might follow from agricultural devastation in 
that country) may ultimately prove to he much more serious for the 
U.S. than the direct consequences of sea level rise or higher energy 
bills for air conditioning, but such impacts arc also very difficult to 
quantify and many regard them as speculative. Proper CBA analysis 
would correct for such distorted perspectives. 
22. In some cases laboratory experiments - such as growing plants in 
C02-enriched atmospheres - do provide some actual data for predic-
tions. 
23. A recent UNEP review of greenhouse gas abatement costing 
studies concluded that "the state of abatement costing studies in de-
veloping countries is wholly inadequate even to draw preliminary 
conclusions concerning possible costs and the impact of different 
abatement options. It is a body of analysis which is only just begin-
ning, and which may lake many years to mature towards consensus 
even on very rough estimates and understanding of the key issues" 
(UNEP, 1992). 
24. See, for example, the review of eleven studies by London Eco-
nomics (1992). 
25. See, for example, Moreira et al. (1992) for Brazil; Sitnicki et al. 
(1991) for Poland; or Meier et al. (1993) for Sri Lanka. 
26. Unfortunately, there is some confusion in terminology with re-
spect to this point. Some (e.g., London Economics, 1992) use the 
term "no regrets" to describe policies for which MB > MAC, that is, 
for which the marginal benefits exceed the marginal costs. Others 
use the term only where MAC < 0, that is, for those options that are 
"below the line" in the empirical cost curves of the type shown in 
Figure 5.5. However, since on both the cost and the benefit side there 
will be some netting out (e.g.. to account for joint costs and benefits), 
the criterion MAC< 0 is arbitrary, whereas MAC< MB is well de-
fined. 
27. The fact that such "no-regrets options" are in fact observed is 
much debated. What may be calculated as monetary benefits need 
not necessarily be regarded as benefits by decision makers - there 
may be other, nonmonetary costs involved. The huge subsidies given 
to European agriculture illustrate the point that more than monetary 
benefits might affect decisions. In the case of developing countries, 
the unavailability of finance may constrain the ability to implement 
some of these options. For example, until recently, obtaining finance 
through export credits for power generation expansion has been 
much easier than financing energy efficiency measures. 
28. These methodological problems have been recognized by the 
GEF, which has initiated a research programme to find an opera-
tional approach for measuring and agreeing on full incremen-
tal costs within the context of the Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change. This is the so-called PRINCE study (Programme 
for Measuring Incremental Costs for the Environment); see King 
(1993). 
29. Another problem here is that the concept o( "least cost." as well 
as the integrated planning process to achieve it, may he quite com-
plex (see, for example. Munasinghc. 1990; Meier. 1990; Crousillal, 
1989). Such a solution, typically obtained by fairly sophisticated op-
timization models, may he "least-cost" only for a very narrow band 
of input assumptions; and if these assumptions prove to he different. 
then an investment programme predicated on the "least-cost" plan 
may ultimately be distinctly nonoptimal. 
30. In the words of king (1993). 
How can the adoption of apparent win-win solutions he stimu-
lated? Such solutions arc sometimes referred to as negative incre-
mental cost projects because they are economically viable in their 
own right. The dilemma arises because these projects are often 
not being funded. On the one hand, it' the CH-F restricts itself to 
those projects (hat have positive incremental cost while the bulk 
of negative incremental cost options remains unfunded, it risks 
becoming irrelevant to the main solution to the global environ-
mental problem. On the other hand, providing grant finance for 
economically viable projects effectively makes a net transfer to 
the country, which is not the purpose of new and additional fund-
ing; worse, it provides a perverse incentive to potential recipient 
countries to delay economic reform. 
31. This is likely to be true even though higher CO, concentration it-
self may promote plant growth. 
32. For further discussion, see, for example, IPCC (1990) or Lave 
and Vickland (1989). However, as also noted by Nordhaus (1994b). 
the fertilizing effect of atmospheric CO: is a particularly strong miti-
gating factor for agricultural nations, particularly where water is a 
limiting factor. Although the extent and quantitative importance of 
CO, as a fertilization agent are controversial, the balance of the evi-
dence is positive. 
33. See. for example, Glieck (1989) or Pachauri (1991). 
34. This report identifies thirty-nine studies (or elements of studies) 
focussed on inventories of greenhouse gases, forty-eight studies of 
effects, and forty-six studies of mitigation. 
35. For example, in a report prepared by the Tata Energy Research 
Institute for the India Ministry of Environment and Forests (TERI. 
1991), the chapter "Adaptive Strategies for India in the Perspec-
tive of Climate Change," which elaborated on the impacts associ-
ated with given levels of sea level rise and mean temperature, was 
entirely qualitative in nature, and no cost estimates were at-
tempted. Similarly, neither the volume on climate change pub-
lished by the Asian Energy Institute (Pachauri and Behi, 1991) nor 
the country studies conducted by UNEP (reported in UNEP, 1992) 
contains any country-specific estimate of costs associated with 
specific levels of greenhouse gas accumulation in the atmosphere. 
The Asian Development Bank is currently sponsoring a mullicoun-
try project in Asia that is attempting to establish costs of potential 
effects. 
36. There are several related issues. For example, should one use 
nominal exchange rates, trade-weighted rates, or purchasing power 
parity rates in making cross-country comparisons of costs or im-
pacts'? 
37. The question of "green accounting" is one of valuing and aggre-
gating marketable and nonmarketable goods (see. for example. 
United Nations. 1993, or Munasinghe et al., 1995). The many differ-
ent proposals for "green accounting" reflect the difficulties involved. 
Rather than speculate about valuation or poorly founded proxies for 
nonmarketable goods, MCA provides an alternative approach. 
38. These results are for studies that estimate both emission reduc-
tions and GDP impacts relative to some baseline, i.e., relative to the 
trajectory of emissions in the absence of the policies followed. For 
many countries, particularly the developing nations, even significant 
reductions from such baselines may still imply increases in the ab-
solute quantity of greenhouse gases emitted. Other studies report re-
sults in terms of greenhouse gas emissions in some future target year. 
relative to emissions in some prior year (e.g., 2010 emissions 10'r 
less than 1990 emissions). 
39. For further discussion see UNEP (1992), p.72. Studies that have 
examined the question of unilateral vs. multilateral approaches 
include Proost and van Regemorter (1990), Edmonds and Reilb 
(1985). and Rutherford (1992). 
40. Additionally one might note that, although the environmental 
risks of current technologies are fairly well established, those that 
apply to new technologies - including some (such as fusion or new 
nuclear reactor cycles) that are sometimes proposed as solutions to 
the climate change problem - are less certain. 
41. See Chapter 6 (Section 6.7) for a more extensive discussion cl 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate 
Change 
173 
the secondary benefits of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Re-
sults reported there range from $2/tonne of carbon abated to over 
S500/IC. 
42. For example, in one alternative (the "Treaty Alternative"), Alfsen 
eiul. (1992) estimated the loss in GDP at 3.1 billion Kroner and the 
loss of private consumption at 2.6 billion. However, joint product 
benefits were estimated at 2.4 billion (with a range of 1.0-3.8 billion). 
43. For purposes of clarity, we have drawn only a single marginal 
cost curve (MAC) in Figure 5.7. It is quite possible, however, that 
different countries will also have different marginal cost curves (al-
though the differences in costs are likely to be smaller than the dif-
ferences in benefits). 
44. For example, studies by Burgess (1990) and Larsen (1993) ad-
dress the impact of eliminating price subsidies. They estimate the 
level of reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by applying assumed 
price elasticities to the difference between the subsidized and unsub-
sidized prices. Burgess, using the difference between the actual aver-
age cost of electricity and the estimated long-run marginal cost 
(LRMC) and applying an assumed long-run price elasticity of -1. es-
timates the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions for eleven coun-
tries, including the U.S.. China. India, and some small developing 
countries such as Tanzania and Peru. Not surprisingly, the bulk of the 
total carbon emission savings o\' 124 million tons/year (mtpy) comes 
from coal fuel savings, of which India accounts for 11.9 mtpy, China 
26.6 mtpy, and the U.S. 85.4 mtpy. Larsen, performing the same 
analysis but from the perspective of fuel prices, applies estimated 
own- and cross-price elasticities for the different fossil fuels to 
the difference between an appropriately adjusted border price and the 
domestic subsidized fuel price, and, more significantly, includes 
the countries of the former USSR and Eastern Europe. In this analy-
sis, the former USSR (917 mtpy) and Poland (105.2 mtpy) dominate 
the results; indeed, the combined estimated impact of India (54 
mtpy) and China (45.4 mtpy) together is less than that for Poland. 
45. The GEF has recently introduced the term "type I project" for 
those which operate in the range AC (i.e., for which national eco-
nomic benefits are greater than national costs) and "type II project" 
for those in the range CD (i.e., for which national economic benefits 
are less than national economic costs, but global benefits are such 
that the project is justified under GEF criteria). For further discus-
sion, and arguments for why the GEF should give priority to type II 
projects, see, for example. Anderson and Williams (1993). 
46. This is a partial list. Other problems include the assumption that 
noncarbon-based materials are benign with respect to the greenhouse 
gas problem, uncertainty concerning natural sources, and uncertainty 
over the spatial distribution of physical impacts. 
47. See IPCC (1995), Chapter 6, for further discussion of uncertainty 
in future emissions. 
48. One need only remember how dramatically growth rates and en-
ergy/GDP ratios fluctuated in the decade following the 1973 oil cri-
sis to recognize the hazards of such forecasts. 
49. This issue is made more complicated by the fact that much defor-
estation is presently driven by the need to expand pasture land, 
which in turn implies higher methane emissions from livestock. 
50. For a full discussion of uncertainty in emissions, see. for exam-
ple. Ebert and Karmali (1992). 
51. See note 45. 
52. The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission has made repeated at-
tempts to establish probabilities for specific kinds of accidents 
through a technique known as fault tree analysis. Despite the appear-
ance of scientific rigour, the resultant probability estimates remain 
highly controversial. For examples of the use of cost-benefit analysis 
by the U.S. NRC. see. for example. Mubayi el ul. (1991) or Abra-
hamson et al. (1989). 
53. Precautionary expenditures may also be influenced by aversion 
to catastrophic risks. A recent example is the hundreds of billions of 
dollars per year spent in the U.S. to avert nuclear attack. 
54. Perhaps there is a possible role for financial markets in insuring 
(and pricing) environmental risks (just as utilities can insure or self-
insure against environmental damages caused by accidents at plant 
sites), but since the damage estimates related to climate change arc 
very difficult to assess, the opportunities for such an approach seem 
limited, even if occurrence probabilities for various damages could 
be estimated more accurately. 
55. If prices of marketed goods are distorted (e.g., due to arbitrary 
taxes and subsidies), it will be necessary to use shadow prices - usu-
ally the set of economic opportunity costs or efficiency prices - to 
determine their correct economic value (for details, see Dasgupta el 
ai, 1972; Little and Mirrlees. 1974). 
56. It should be noted that the distinction between a mitigation mea-
sure and an adaptation measure may not always be clear cut. 
57. "Preliminary results suggest that although U.S. crop production 
could decline, supplies would be adequate to meet domestic needs" 
(EPA, 1989). It might well he pointed out. however, that this reflects 
the very narrow perspective of the study: U.S. grain exports repre-
sent a significant supply of food for developing countries, and were 
the U.S. surplus to decline, developing countries might well be con-
cerned about the use of food exports as a political weapon. 
58. Particularly difficult to value is the cost of forced adaptation and 
population movements - a problem already encountered in cost-ben-
efit analyses of the impact resulting from the creation of large reser-
voirs where significant numbers of individuals must be forcibly 
relocated (World Bank, 1994). 
59. For further details, see Munasinghe (1993) and Pearce and War-
ford(1993). 
60. The issue of option values and irreversibility in CBA has re-
ceived increasing attention in the literature, starting with Arrow and 
Fischer (1974) and continuing more recently with Chichilnisky and 
Heal (1993). 
61. For a recent overview of techniques suitable for valuing environ-
mental costs and benefits, especially in developing countries, see 
Munasinghe (1993). 
62. The theoretically correct measure of WTP is the area under the 
Hicksian demand curve, which describes the relationship between 
the price and quantity demanded of the environmental resource, 
keeping the level of consumer utility intact. Problems of measure-
ment may arise because the commonly estimated demand function is 
the Marshallian one. which indicates how demand varies with the 
price of an environmental good, while keeping the user's income 
level constant. In practice, it has been shown that the Marshallian 
and Hicksian estimates o\' WTP are in good agreement for a variety 
of conditions, and in a few cases the Hicksian function may be de-
rived once the Marshallian demand function has been determined 
(Willig. 1976; Braden and Kolstad, 1991). What people are willing 
to accept (WTA) in the way of compensation for environmental dam-
age is another measure of economic value that is related to WTP. 
WTA and WTP could diverge (Cropper and Gates, 1992). In practice, 
either or both measures are used for valuation. 
63. Contingent valuation methods in particular are somewhat contro-
versial and need great care in their application to produce credible 
results. 
64. One also needs to take note of the fact that this principle is also 
not universally accepted, particularly by political leaders. The princi-
ple that "past sacrifices ought not to be in vain" is frequently invoked 
as relevant to present decisions. Indeed, in the climate change de-
bate, developing countries correctly note that it is the developed 
countries that are largely responsible for the present levels of green-
774 
Climate Change /W.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
house gases in (he atmosphere and that this past behaviour is relevant 
in the search for equitable solutions in the future. However, these ob-
servations point to the equity dimension of the problem and do not 
affect how one ought to seek the economically efficient options. 
65. However, for a criticism of this argument, see Brown (1992), 
who points out that some European countries have already taken uni-
lateral action to reduce greenhouse gases in the hope that others will 
follow. Moreover, other game-theory paradigms have been proposed 
for modelling international environmental negotiations. For exam-
ple, Carraro and Siniscalo (1992. 1993) propose a "chicken game" 
framework belonging to the class of coordination games. 
66. For a discussion of these issues, and a discussion of how CBA 
can make a contribution to the evaluation of such projects, see Aa-
hcim (1993). Concerns about "market justice" and related considera-
tions are outlined in Rose (1990). 
67. Differential valuation of human lives is strenuously opposed by 
some: if a U.S. life is worth $1.5 million, then so is everyone else's. 
On the other hand, when making comparisons of per capita GDP. 
economists are increasingly turning to purchasing power parity ad-
justments in an attempt to make more valid comparisons of eco-
nomic level. MCA avoids these difficulties by moving judgments 
about the value of human life from the domain of technical assess-
ment into the domain of political decision making, where such judg-
ments properly belong. 
68. MCA deals with attitudes towards risk and uncertainty at this 
stage by the use of multiattrihute utility functions, which explicitly 
capture attitudes towards risk. See Keeney and Raiffa (1976) for an 
application in water resource planning, or Keeney and von Winter-
feldt (1987) for application to electric utility planning. 
69. We note also that the trade-off analysis and surfaces will be much 
more complex as the number of attributes increases. 
70. Decision analysis distinguishes among several types of domi-
nance - such as strict dominance and significant dominance. See, for 
example, Meier and Munasinghe (1994) for an application of these 
concepts to environmental decision making. 
71. In general, the trade-off curve may extend into quadrant II, and 
quadrant III may contain fewer solutions or none at all. 
72. However, because of the presence of joint products - each repre-
sented by a different dimension in the multidimensional trade-off 
space - valuations that look only at two dimensions need to be inter-
preted with some caution. 
References 
Aaheim, A., 1993: Benefits and costs of climate measures under 
joint implementation. Centre for International Climate and Envi-
ronment Research, University of Oslo. 
Abrahamson, S.. el al.. 1989: Health effects models for nuclear 
power plant accident consequence analysis. NUREG/CR-4214. 
Sandia National Laboratories, Washington, DC. 
Alfsen, K H., A. Brendemoen, and S. Glomsrod. 1992. Benefits of 
climate policies: Some tentative calculations. Discussion Paper, 
Central Bureau of Statistics. Oslo. 
Amman, M.. L. Hordijk. G Klaasen. W. Schopp. and L. Sorensen. 
1992: Economic restructuring in Eastern Europe and acid rain 
abatement strategies. Energy Policy. 20, 1187-1198. 
Anderson. D.. and R. H. Williams. 1993: The cost-effectiveness of 
GEF projects. Global Environment Facility. Working Paper 6. 
Washington. DC. 
Arrow, K.J.. 1906: Discounting and public investment criteria. In 
Kncese and Smith. 1966. 
Arrow. K.J.. 1982: The rate of discount on public investments with 
imperfect capital markets. In Discountini; for time and risk in en-
ergy policy. R.C. Lind, cd.. Resources for the Future, Washington. 
DC. 
Arrow, K.J., and A. Fischer, 1974: Environmental preservation, un-
certainty and irreversibility, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88, 
312-319. 
Arrow, K.J.. and M. Kurtz, 1970: Public investment, the rate of re-
turn and optimal fiscal policy, Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Baltimore. 
Asian Institute of Technology, 1993: UNEP greenhouse gas abate-
ment cost studies: The case of Thailand, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Barker, T., 1993: Secondary benefits of greenhouse gas abatement: 
The effects of a UK carbon/energy tax on air pollution. Energy 
Environment Economy Modelling Discussion Paper No. 4. De-
partment of Applied Economics, University of Cambridge. 
Baron, W., and P. Hills, 1990: Greenhouse gas emissions: Issues 
and possible responses in six large lower income Asian nations, 
Working Paper No. 45, Centre for Urban Planning and Environ-
mental Management, University of Hong Kong. 
Bernstein, M.. 1992: Costs and greenhouse gas emissions of energy 
supply and use. Environment Department, Working Paper 1993-
40, World Bank, Washington DC. 
Blitzer, C, R. Eckhaus. S. Lahiri, and A. Meeraus, 1993: Growth 
and welfare losses from carbon emissions restrictions: A general 
equilibrium analysis of Egypt, Energy Journal, 14, I. 57-81. 
Bohm-Bawerk, E. von. 1989: Kapital and Kapilalzins: Zwcile 
Ahteilitng: Positive Theorie des Kapitals. Wagner, Innsbruck. 
Braden, J.B. and CD. Kolstad, eds., 1991: Measuring the demand 
for environmental quality. North Holland/Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Brekke, K. A., 1994: Net national product as a welfare indicator. 
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 96, 2, 241-252. 
Bromley, 0., 1986: Natural resource economics: Policy problems ami 
contemporary analysis. Kluwer/Nijhoff Publishing, Boston, MA. 
Brown, P. G., 1992: Climate change and the planetary trust. Energy 
policy, 20, 208-222. 
Burgess, J., 1990: The contribution of efficient energy pricing to re-
ducing carbon dioxide emissions, Energy Policy, 18, 449-455. 
Butlin, R. (ed.), 1981: Economics of the environment and natural re-
source policy, Westview Press, Boulder CO. 
Carraro, C. and 0. Siniscalo, 1992: The international dimension of 
environmental policy, European Economic Review, 36, 379-387. 
Carraro, C, and D. Siniscalo, 1993: Strategies for the international 
protection of the environment. Journal of Public Economics. 52. 
309-328. 
Center for Energy and Environment, University of Pennsylva-
nia, 1992: Costs and Greenhouse gas emissions of energy supply 
and use. 
Chao, H. P., and Wilson. R., 1993: Option value of emission al-
lowances. Journal of Regulatory Economics. 5, 233-249. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal, 1993. Global environmental risky 
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 7(4), 65-86. 
Cline, W.R., 1992: The economics of global warming, Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC. 
Coppel, J. 1991: An analysis of energy policy measures and their im-
pact on CO, emissions. In Jones and Wheeler. 1992. pp. 263-286 
Cropper, M.L.. and W.E. Gates. 1992: Environmental economies: A 
survey. Journal of Economic Literature. 30 (June). 675-740. 
Crousillat, E.. 1989: Incorporating risk and uncertainty in power 
sector planning. Industry and Energy Department Working Paper. 
Energy Series Paper 17. World Bank. Washington. DC. 
Crousillat, E.. and S. Martzoukos. 1991: Decision making under un-
certainty: An option valuation approach to power planning. In-
dustry and Energy Department Working Paper. Energy Serie-
Paper 39. World Bank. Washington. DC. 
Applicability 
of Techniques 
of Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 
to Climate 
Change 
175 
Crousillat, E. and H. Merrill, 1992: The trade-off/risk method: A 
strategic approach to power planning. World Bank, Industry and 
Energy Department, Washington, DC. 
Dasgupta, P., S. Marglin, and A.K. Sen, 1972: Guidelines for project 
evaluation, UNIDO, New York. 
Dixit, A.V. and R.S. Pindyck. 1994: Investment 
under 
uncertainty, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ. 
Dreze, J.H., and A. Sandmo, 1971: Discount rates for public invest-
ment in closed and open economies. Economica, 
38, (November), 
395-412. 
Ebert, C, and A. Karmali 1992: Uncertainties in estimating green-
house gas emissions. Environment Working Paper 52. World 
Bank Environment Department. World Bank, Washington, D C . 
Edmonds, J., and J. Reilly, 1985: Global energy: Assessing 
the fu-
ture, Oxford University Press, New York. 
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1989: The potential effects 
of global climate change on the United States, EPA-230-05-89-
050, Washington, DC, December, p. 390. 
Fisher, A.C., and M. Hanemann. 1987: Quasi-option value: Some 
misconceptions dispelled, Journal of Environmental 
Economies 
ami Management, 14, 183-190. 
Fuglestvedt, J., T. Hanisch, I. Isaksen. R. Selrod, J. Strand, and 
A. Torvanger, 1994: A review of country case studies on climate 
change, Global Environment Facility, Working Paper 7, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Glieck, P., 1989. Climate change and international policies: Prob-
lems facing developing countries. Ambio, 18, 6, 333-339. 
Glomsrod, S., H. Vennemo, and T. Johnson, 1990: Stabilization of 
emissions of CO,: A computable general equilibrium assessment. 
Central Bureau of Statistics. Discussion Paper 48, Oslo. 
Goto, N„ and T. Sawa. 1993: An analysis of the macro-economic 
costs of various CO, emission control policies in Japan. The En-
ergy Journal, 14, 1.83-110. 
Gregory, R., S. Lichtenstein, and P. Slovic, 1993: Valuing environ-
mental resources: A constructive approach. Journal of Risk and 
Uncertainty, 6, 177-197. 
Hanemann, W.M.,1989: Information and the concept of option 
value, Journal of Environmental 
Economics 
and 
Management, 
16. 23-37. 
Harberger, A.C., 1976: Project evaluation: 
Collected papers, 
Uni-
versity of Chicago Press. Chicago. 
Heal, CM. (1981): Economics and resources. In Butlin. 1981. 
Hobbs, BE, 1991: The "most value" test: Economic evaluation of 
electricity demand-side management considering customer value. 
The Energy Journal, 12, 2, 67-92. 
Hoeller, P., and M. Wallin. 1991: The role and design of a carbon tax 
in an international climate agreement in climate change. In De-
signing a practical tax system, OECD. Paris. 
Hoel, M., and l.S.A. Isaksen. 1993: Efficient abatement of different 
greenhouse gases. Memorandum No. 5/93 from Department of 
Economics. University of Oslo. Oslo. 
Hoel, M, and l.S.A. Isaksen, 1994: The environmental costs of 
greenhouse gas emissions, mimeo. Department of Economics. 
University of Oslo. Oslo. 
Hogan, W.. 1990: Comments on Manne and Richels: CO, emission 
limits: An economic cost analysis for the USA. Energy 
Journal, 
11, 2, 75-85. 
Hossein, J„ and C. Sinha. 1993: Limiting CO, emissions in the 
power sector of India. Energy Policy, 21, 1025-1034. 
Hueting, R.. P. Bosch, and B. dc Boer. 1992: Methodology for the 
calculation of sustainable national income. Statistical Essays. 
M44. Centraal Bureau for dc Stalistiek. The Hague. 
ICF. Inc., 1990: Preliminary technology cost estimates of measures 
available to reduce U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by 2010, Re-
port by ICE to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
International Energy Agency, 1988: Emission controls in electric-
ity generation and industry, Paris. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: Climate 
change: 
The IPCC scientific 
assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. 
Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraums, eds.. Cambridge University Press. 
Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1995: Climate 
change 1994: Radiative forcing of climate change and an evalua-
tion of the 1S92 emission scenarios, 
J.T. Houghton, E.G. Meira 
Filho. J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris, 
and K. Maskell. eds.. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Jackson, T., 1991: Least-cost greenhouse planning: Supply curves 
for global warming abatement. Energy Policy, 19, 35-46. 
Jones, B., and E. Wheeler (eds.). 1992: Greenhouse research initia-
tives in the ESCAP region. Proceedings of the ESCAP Confer-
ence on Greenhouse Research. Bangkok, August 1991, Economic 
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United Nations, 
New York. 
Keeney, R.L., and H. Railfa, 1976: Decisions 
with multiple 
objec-
tives: Preferences and value trade-offs, Wiley, New York. 
Keeney, R.L., and D. von Winterfeldl. 1987: Optimal procedures 
to 
evaluate decisions with multiple objectives, EPRI EA-5433, Elec-
tric Power Research Institute. Palo Alto. CA. 
King, K., 1993: Issues to be addressed by the program for measuring 
incremental costs for the environment, Global Environment Fa-
cility, Working Paper 8, Washington. DC. 
King, K., and M. Munasinghe. 1992: Global warming: Key issues 
for the bank. World Bank Environment Department Divisional 
Working Paper 1992-36. Washington. DC. 
Kneese, A.. 1984: Measuring 
the benefits of clean air and water, Re-
sources for the Future, Washington DC. 
Kneese, A., and S.C. Smith (eds.). 1966: Water research, Johns Hop-
kins University Press for Resources for the Future, Baltimore, MD. 
Koopmans, T.C., 1960: Stationary ordinal utility and impatience, 
Econometrica. 
28 (2). 287-309. 
Kreps, D.M.. and E.L. Porteus. 1979: Temporal von Neumann-
Morgenstern and induced preferences. Journal of Economic 
The-
ory, 20,81-109. 
Larsen, B., 1993: World fossil fuel subsidies 
and global 
carbon 
emissions 
in a model with inter-fuel 
substitution, 
World Bank, 
Washington. DC. 
Lave, L.. 1991: Are economists relevant? The efficiency of a carbon 
tax. In Global warming: Economic policy responses, 
Dornbusch 
and Poterba, eds., MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 
Lave, L.. and Gruenspecht. H.. 1991: Increasing the efficiency and 
effectiveness of environmental decisions: Benefit-cost analysis 
and effluent fees: A critical review. Journal of the Air Waste Man-
agament Association, 
41(5). 680-693. 
Lave, L.. and K. Vickland. 1989: Adjusting to greenhouse effects: 
The demise of traditional cultures and the cost to the USA, Risk 
Analysis. 9, 283-291. 
Lind, R.C.. 1984a: Discounting 
for time and risk in energy 
planning, 
Johns Hopkins University Press for Resources for the Future, 
Baltimore. MD. 
Lind, R.C.. 1984b: A primer on the major issues relating to the dis-
count rate for evaluating national energy options, in Lind, 1984a. 
Little, I.M.D.. and J.A. Mirrlees. 1974: Project appraisal and plan-
ning in developing 
countries, 
Heincmann, London. 
London Economics, 1992: Economic costs of carbon dioxide reduc-
tion strategics. Global Environment facility Working Paper Sc-
ries 3. Washington. DC. 
176 
Climate Change IW5 
Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate CluiiVji 
Marine, A.. 1992: The rate of time preference - Implications for the 
greenhouse gas debate, mimeo. Stanford University. Stanford. CA. 
Mannc, A., A. Mendelsson, and R. Richels, 1992: MERGE - A 
model for evaluating regional and global effects of GHG reduc-
tion policies, mimeo. Stanford, Yale, and ERR. 
Manne, A., and R. Richels. 1990: CO, emission limits: An economic 
cost analysis for the USA. Energy Journal, 11,2, 51-74. 
Manne, A., and R. Richels, 1992: Buying greenhouse insurance: The 
economic costs of carbon dioxide emission limits, MIT Press, 
Cambridge. MA. 
Marglin, A., 1963: The social rate of discount and the optimal rate of 
investment. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 77, 95-111. 
Markandya, A., 1990: Environmental costs and power system plan-
ning. Utilities Policy. 1, 13-27. 
Markandya, A., and 15. Pearce, 1988: Environmental considerations 
and the choice of the discount rate in developing countries, Envi-
ronment Department Working Paper 3, World Bank, Washington, 
DC. 
Meier, P., 1990: Power sector innovation in developing countries: 
Implementing investment planning under capital and environ-
mental constraints. Annual Review of Energy, 15, 277-306. 
Meier, P., and M. Munasinghe. 1994: Incorporating environmental 
concerns into power sector decision-making, World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC. 
Meier, P.. M. Munasinghe, and T. Siyambalapitiya. 1993: Energy 
sector policy and the environment: A case study of Sri Lanka, En-
vironment Department, World Bank. Washington, DC. 
Moreira, JR., A.D. Poole, D. Zylber/tajn, and J. Fries, 1992: Brazil 
country study. In UNEP Greenhouse Gas Abatement Costing 
Studies, UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environ-
ment. R1SC5 National Laboratory. Denmark. 
Mubayi, V., L. Neymotin, and V. Sailor. 1991: Cost-benefit consid-
erations in backfit analysis, Brookhaven National Laboratory, 
Upton, NY. 
Munasinghe, M.. 1990: Energy analysis and policy, Butterworths 
Press, London. 
Munasinghe, M.. 1991: Sustainable energy options for developing 
countries. World Energy Council Journal, 1, December, 69-87. 
Munasinghe, M., 1993: Environmental economics and sustainable 
development. World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Munasinghe, M., I5.W. Pearce. K. Hamilton. G. Atkinson, R. 
Dubourg. and C. Young. 1995: Measuring sustainable develop-
ment, draft. World Bank. Washington. DC. 
Newendorp, P.. 1976: Decision analysis for petroleum exploration, 
Pennwell, Tulsa. OK. 
Nordhaus, W.. 1991: Economic approaches to greenhouse warming. 
In Global warming: Economic policy responses, Dornbusch and 
Poterba. eds.. pp. 33-69, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.. 1993: Running the DICE: An optimal transition path 
for controlling greenhouse gases. Resources and Energy Econom-
ics. 15. 27-50. 
Nordhaus, W.. 1994a: Expert opinion on climatic change. American 
Scientist. 82. 45-51. 
Nordhaus, W.. 1994b: Climate change and economic development: 
Climates past and climate change future. In Proceedings of the 
World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, M. 
Bruno and B. Pleskovic. eds.. pp. 355-376. World Bank. Wash-
ington. DC. 
Ogawa, V. and H. Awata. 1991: Simulation study of greenhouse gas 
emissions due to future energy consumption. In Jones and 
Wheeler. 1992. pp. 234-262. 
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 1992: Ending develop-
ment: Energy technologies for developing countries, OTA-E-516. 
Washington, DC. 
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment), 1993: Preparing for cm 
uncertain climate, OTA-O-568, Washington, DC. 
Pachauri, R.K., 1991: Global warming: Impacts and implications 
for South Asia, Tata Energy Research Institute. New Delhi. 
Pachauri, R.K., and A. Belli (eds.), 1991: Global warming: Mitiga-
tion strategies and perspectives from Asia and Brazil, Tata En-
ergy Research Institute/McGraw-Hill for Asian Energy Institute. 
New Delhi, India. 
Page, T., 1977: Conservation and economic efficiency, Johns Hop-
kins University Press, Baltimore. 
Pearce, D.W., and R.K. Turner, 1990: Economics of natural re-
sources and the environment, Harvester Wheatsheaf, London. 
Pearce, D.W.. and R.K. Turner, 1991: The role of carbon taxes in 
adjusting to global warming, Economic Journal, 101, July, 
938-948. 
Pearce, D.W.., R.K. Turner, and J. Warford, 1993: World without 
end: Environment, economics and sustainable development, Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford. 
Proost, S., and 0. van Regemorter, 1990: Economic effects of a car- 
; 
bon tax: With a general equilibrium illustration for Belgium, Pub-
lic Economic Resources Paper No. 11, Katholieke Universiteit. 
Leuven, Belgium. 
Putta, S.. 1990: Weighing externalities in New York State, Electric-
ity Journal. 3(6), 42-47. 
Ramsey, F., 1928: A mathematical theory of saving, The Economic 
Journal, 38, 152, 543-559. 
Randall, A., 1986: Valuation in a policy context. In Bromley, 1986. 
pp. 163-200. 
Rawls, J., 1972: A theory of justice, Oxford University Press. Oxford. 
Repetto, R., 1989: Wasting assets: Natural resources in national in-
come accounts, World Resource Institute, Washington, DC. 
Richels, R., and J. Edmonds, 1995: The economics of stabilizing at-
mospheric CO, concentrations, Energy Policy, 23(3/4), 373-379. 
Rose, A., 1990: Reducing conflict in global warming policy: The 
potential of equity as a unifying principle, Energy Policy, 18, 
927-935. 
Rutherford, T., 1992: The welfare effects of carbon restrictions: Re-
sults from a recursively dynamic trade model, Working paper. 
OECD. Paris. 
Ryder, H., and G. Heal, 1973: Optimal growth with intertemporal!) 
dependent preferences. Review of Economic Studies, 40, 1-31. 
Sen, A., 1967: Isolation, assurance, and the social rate of discount. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 81, 112-124. 
Sen, A.. 1979: Personal utilities and public judgments: Or what's 
wrong with welfare economics?, The Economic Journal, 89, 
537-558. 
Sen, A.. 1984: Approaches to the social discount rates for social 
benefit-cost analysis. In Lind, 1984a. 
Sitnicki, S.. K. Budzinski. J. Juda, J. Michna, and A. Szpilewicz, 
1991: Opportunities for carbon emissions control in Poland, En-
ergy Policy, 19,995-1002. 
Steinberg, M.. and H. Cheng. 1985: A systems study for the re-
moval, recovery and disposal of carbon dioxide from fossil fuel 
power plants in the U.S. Brookhaven National Laboratory, BNL 
35666. July. 
Sterner, T.. 1994: Discounting in a world of limited growth. Envi-
ronmental and Natural Resource Economics, 94, 4. 
TERI (Tata Energy Research Institute). 1991: Report on global 
warming and associated impacts. Report to the Ministry of Envi-
ronment and Forests. New Delhi. India. 
Applicability of Techniques of Cost-Benefit Analysis to Climate 
Change 
177 
Turner, R.K., 1991: Environment, economics and ethics. In Blue-
print 2: Greening the world economy, D. Pearce, ed., Earthscan, 
London. 
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme), 1988: Assess-
ment of multiple objective water resources projects: Approaches 
for developing countries, New York. 
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme), 1992: UNEP 
greenhouse gas abatement costing studies, Riso National Labora-
tory, Denmark. 
United Nations, 1993: Integrated Environmental and Economic 
Accounting, Department of Economic and Social Development, 
Statistical Division, New York. 
Weitzman, M., 1976: On the welfare significance of national prod-
uct in a dynamic economy, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, 
156-162. 
Williams, R.H., 1993: Comment on "Climate and Economic Devel-
opment" by Nordhaus. In Proceedings of the World Bank Annual 
Conference on Development Economics, M: Bruno and B. 
Pleskovic. eds., World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Willig, R.D., 1976: Consumer surplus without apology, American 
Economic Review, 66(4), 589-597. 
World Bank, Asia Technical Department. 1993: Interim report, in-
ternational collaborative project on acid rain and emissions re-
duction in Asia, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
World Bank, 1994: Resettlement and development, World Bank, 
Washington, DC. 
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987: 
Our common future, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Yamagi, K., R. Matsuhashi, Y. Nagata, Y. Kaya, 1993: A study on 
economic measures for C0 2 reduction in Japan, Energy Policy, 
21,123-132. 
6 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: 
Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits 
of Control 
D.W. PEARCE, W.R. CLINE, A.N. ACHANTA, S. FANKHAUSER, 
R.K. PACHAURI, R.S.J. TOL, P. VELLINGA 
I 
;: 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
183 
6.4 Climate Catastrophes and Surprises 
207 
6.1 Conceptual Framework 
6.1.1 Scope and limit of the analysis 
6.1.2 The nature of damage assessment 
6.1.3 The valuation of market and 
nonmarket impacts 
6.1.4 Temporal aspects 
6.1.5 Adaptation 
6.1.6 Recent scientific evidence 
6.2 Damage Estimates for Benchmark Warming 
(2xC02) 
6.2.1 Agriculture 
6.2.2 Sea level rise 
6.2.3 Forests 
6.2.4 Water supply 
6.2.5 Space cooling and heating 
6.2.6 Insurance 
6.2.7 Other market sectors 
6.2.8 Health 
6.2.9 Air pollution 
6.2.10 Water pollution 
6.2.11 Migration 
6.2.12 Human amenity 
6.2.13 Ecosystem and biodiversity loss 
6.2.14 Extreme weather events 
6.2.15 Summary of damage estimates 
184 
184 
184 
186 
186 
187 
188 
188 
189 
191 
192 
193 
193 
194 
195 
195 
198 
199 
199 
199 
200 
201 
203 
6.5 Regional Implications of Climate Change 
6.5.1 
Regional damage estimates 
6.5.2 
Japan 
6.5.3 
Africa 
6.5.4 
Bangladesh 
6.5.5 
India 
6.5.6 
Indonesia 
6.5.7 
Malaysia 
6.5.8 
Thailand 
6.5.9 
Latin America 
6.5.10 Small island states 
6.5.11 Conclusions on regional impacts 
6.6 From Greenhouse Damages to Abatement 
Benefits 
6.7 The Secondary Benefits of Abatement 
Strategies 
6.8 Conclusions 
Endnotes 
References 
209 
209 
209 
210 
210 
211 
211 
212 
212 
212 
212 
213 
213 
215 
218 
218 
219 
6.3 Damage Estimates for Longer-Term 
Warming 
205 
II 
SUMMARY 
This chapter is concerned with the socioeconomic assessment 
of climate change impacts. Estimates of damage related to 
these impacts can make an important contribution to decision 
making about climate change responses. 
Monetary values reflecting human preferences can provide 
useful information for decision making. The cost-benefit ap-
proach, in particular, requires that the damages from climate 
change be represented, as far as possible, in terms of money 
units. To the extent that this is possible, the chapter expresses 
impacts in these terms; that is, human preferences are ex-
pressed by people's willingness to pay (WTP) to secure a ben-
efit or their willingness to accept compensation (WTA) for a 
cost. Such monetary estimates only measure the impact on in-
dividual welfare. Aggregating individual damages to obtain to-
tal social welfare impacts requires difficult ethical decisions. 
Many of the impacts of climate change will not be revealed 
directly in the marketplace. These are the so-called nonmarket 
impacts. In these cases WTP and/or WTA are measured 
through "surrogate markets" or "hypothetical markets." Surro-
gate markets are real markets in which environmental change 
has an influence: A house price or land value may be higher 
because of an environmental amenity, for example. Hypothet-
ical markets reflect people's responses to questions put to 
them about their willingness to pay. Monetary estimates are 
thus able to cover both market and nonmarket impacts, al-
though estimates of the latter are more controversial and less 
confidence is placed in them. 
The level of sophistication in socioeconomic assessments 
of climate change impacts is still rather modest. Damage esti-
mates are tentative and based on a number of simplifying and 
often controversial assumptions. Most estimates are for equi-
librium climate change associated with a doubling of the 
preindustrial C02-equivalent concentration of all greenhouse 
gases. Best-guess central estimates of global damage, includ-
ing nonmarket impacts, are in the order of 1.5=2.0% of world 
GNP for 2xCO, concentrations and equilibrium climate 
change. This means that if a doubling of C02 occurred now, 
it would impose this much damage on the world economy 
now. This chapter stresses the uncertain character of these 
estimates. The figures are best-guess results, and several im-
pact categories could not be assessed for lack of data. More-
over, the range reflects variations in the best-guess estimates 
and cannot be interpreted as a confidence interval. Particu-
larly vulnerable sectors include agriculture, the coastal zones, 
human mortality, and natural ecosystems. The possibility of 
catastrophes (low probability/high impact events) and sur-
prises cannot be ignored. 
The regional variation in damage is substantial. The avail-
able studies estimate damages for developed countries at 
between 1 % and 2% of GNP for a 2xC02 climate. Central es-
timates of the damage in different developing regions range 
from a minimum of 2% of GNP to a maximum of 9%. For in-
dividual nations, or if alternative assumptions are used about 
the value of a statistical life (see Box 6.1), the figure could be 
even higher. Small island states and low-lying coastal areas 
are especially vulnerable. Most impact work is confined to de-
veloped nations, however. The confidence in estimates for de-
veloping countries is much lower. 
The chapter emphasizes the need for a long-term perspec-
tive reaching beyond a 2xCO,, scenario, even though socio-
economic forecasts over more than a century are highly 
uncertain. Most models assume a nonlinear (convex) damage-
temperature relationship, resulting in damages of 6% or 
higher for 10°C warming. These figures are illustrative only. 
Doubled-C02 damage estimates usually form the basis for 
the calculation of marginal damage - the extra damage done by 
one extra tonne of carbon emitted. Marginal damage is esti-
mated at $5-$ 125 per tonne of carbon emitted now. The wide 
range reflects variations in model assumptions, as well as the 
high sensitivity of figures to the choice of discount rate. Al-
though estimates based on a social rate of time preference 
(discount rate) of the order of 5% tend to be about $5-$ 12, fig-
ures assuming a rate of 2% or less can be almost an order of 
magnitude higher. Current models are simplistic and provide 
poor representations of dynamic processes. The effect of cli-
mate change adaptation in particular is poorly understood. 
Marginal climate change damage is equal to the marginal 
climate change benefits of emission control. However, the 
benefits of greenhouse gas abatement will not be limited to re-
duced climate change costs alone. A reduction in CO, emis-
sions will often also reduce other environmental problems 
related to the combustion of fossil fuels. The size of these so-
called secondary benefits is strongly site dependent. Studies 
for Norway, the UK and some other countries indicate that the 
benefits of reduced air pollution could offset between 30% 
and 100% of abatement costs. 
/w 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate ('hum, 
6.1 Conceptual Framework 
6.1.1 Scope and limit of the analysis 
This chapter is concerned with the nature of the damage from 
climate change. Damages here refer to the consequences of 
climate change for individual and social welfare from an eco-
nomic point of view. That is, climate change damage is de-
fined as the the difference in social welfare between a sce-
nario with and one without anthropogenic climate change. 
The chapter assesses the possible aggregate scale, the geo-
graphical distribution, and the nature of those damages. It 
raises some issues relating to decision-making rules, since al-
ternative ethical approaches to harm done to future genera-
tions have implications for damage assessment (see also 
Chapters 3 and 5). It should also be borne in mind that 
• Damage costs are distinct from the costs of climate 
change response measures (which are discussed in 
Chapters 8 and 9). 
• Absolute damage levels are not necessarily identical to 
the benefits of mitigation measures, as will be discussed 
in Sections 6.6 and 6.7. 
• In describing damages in individual countries and re-
gions, no implication is made about the ethical question 
of who should bear these costs or the costs of measures 
to avoid them. This issue is dealt with in Chapter 3. 
The level of sophistication of climate change damage 
analysis is comparatively low. Damage estimates are gener-
ally tentative and based on several simplifying and often 
controversial assumptions. The degree of uncertainty is corre-
spondingly high, with respect to both physical impacts and 
their consequences for social welfare. No attempt has been 
made to specify confidence intervals. Rather, estimates are best 
guesses, depicting the most likely damages currently associ-
ated with a particular climate scenario. Moreover, studies 
often impose climate change onto the current world, thus ig-
noring the effect of future economic development and popula-
tion growth on climate vulnerability. 
This low level of sophistication implies that climate 
change damage analysis is a particularly worthwhile area for 
further research (see also Chapter 10). Especially needed 
is a better understanding of regional damage (particularly 
in developing countries), nonmarket damage, and nonequi-
librium (transient) damage. The impact of climate change 
adaptation is also still poorly understood. 
6.1.2 The nature of damage assessment 
Two broad anthropocentric perspectives have emerged on 
ways to analyze decisions which have adverse effects on gen-
erations yet to be born: the cost-benefit framework and the 
sustainability framework. These perspectives initially appear 
to be very divergent, but they have features in common. 
The cost-benefit framework requires that the future dam-
ages and adaptation costs be weighed, integrated into an 
overall assessment, and then compared to the costs of mitiga-
tion measures undertaken now. In turn, there are two perspec-
tives on the way in which benefits and costs should be com-
pared: 
(1) 
The. judgmental cost-benefit framework, in which gains 
and losses are compared but without being reduced m 
common units. In this approach, the monetary costs of 
control might be compared with some wide-ranging en-
vironmental impact statement representing the best stale 
of knowledge about climate change impacts, together 
with assessments of the distributional incidence of those 
impacts both geographically and across time 
(2) 
The monetized cost-benefit framework, in which the 
common unit of money is used to "reduce" the benefits 
of climate control to the same units as costs to permit di-
rect comparison, but only as far as "monetization" is 
credible 
Approach (1), which often reduces to multicriteria analysis, is 
discussed in Chapter 5 (see also the discussion of integrated 
assessment in Chapter 10). Approach (2) is characterized by 
the following features: 
(a) 
Benefits and costs are defined in terms of human prefer-
ences. A benefit is anything that improves an individ-
ual's well-being; a cost is anything that reduces that 
well-being. 
(b) 
Those preferences are expressed in the marketplace by 
willingness to pay (WTP) for a benefit and willingness 
to accept compensation (WTA) for a cost. Although die 
two concepts are not identical and WTP and WTA esti-
mates may vary by more than a factor of two. they are 
often used interchangeably (for a comparison of the two 
concepts, see, e.g., Shogren el al., 1994). 
(c) 
Where markets do not exist - for example, with respect 
to ecosystem change - WTP and/or WTA are estimated 
through "surrogate markets" or "hypothetical markets." 
Surrogate markets are real markets in which environ-
mental change has an influence: a house price or land 
value may be higher because of an environmen-
tal amenity, for example (the hedonic property price 
method). Hypothetical markets reflect people's re-
sponses to questions put to them about their willingness 
to pay (the contingent valuation method). Although con-
troversial, these approaches are well established in the 
literature (for an introduction and assessment, see. e.s.. 
Mitchell and Carson, 1989: Braden and Kolstad. IWII. 
(d) 
Future generations' preferences count at least insofar as 
they are assumed to want what current generations 
want. If there is evidence that they will want more of the 
environmental assets affected by climate change, then 
this "rising relative preference" can be accommodated1 
by cost-benefit approaches by allowing benefits or cosh 
to rise through time. Future generations' preference* 
may count equally with current generation preference* 
if the discount rate is set accordingly (see Chapter 4i. 
(e) 
Since WTP is constrained by income, it is likely to k 
less for low income groups than for high income group* 
This may appear to give rise to unfairness, since the 
preferences of low income groups (countries) will earn 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
w 
less weight than the preferences of high income groups. 
One way to address these ethical issues is to give differ-
ent weights to different income groups in the aggrega-
tion process (see Box 6.2). Another way might be to 
adopt the valuations of the higher income groups and 
apply them to all countries (e.g., Hohmeyer and Gart-
ner, 1992; see also Box 6.1). 
(f) 
Aggregation of damages is also a hallmark of cost-benefit 
studies. Aggregation poses difficult problems regarding 
the comparability of individual welfare. Care has also to 
be exercised in interpreting such aggregate figures since 
they clearly mask substantial regional variations in im-
pact within a country and between countries as well as 
redistribution effects between positively and adversely 
affected regions and sectors. 
The second overall perspective - the sustainability 
approach 
(e.g., Howarth and Monahan, 1992; Spash, 1994) - gives the 
highest priority to the avoidance of "unacceptable" damage to 
future generations. Proponents of sustainability would argue 
that: 
(a) 
There is reasonable evidence to suppose that actions 
now in emitting greenhouse gases could cause signifi-
cant damage to future generations, including unborn gen-
erations. 
(b) 
Future generations are defenceless against actions taken 
now in the knowledge that those actions may cause 
harm. 
(c) 
Current generations are linked to future generations at 
the very least through parents to children, from children 
to their children, and so on (Howarth, 1992), or, more 
generally, current generations have obligations to fu-
ture generations because future generations have rights, 
even when those generations are not identifiable and 
even when their existence is contingent upon actions 
taken now. 
(d) 
Probable improvements in the well-being of future gen-
erations cannot be treated as "compensation" for harm 
knowingly inflicted on future generations by current 
generations any more than harming the poor now can be 
excused by paying them compensation after the event 
(Spash, 1994). 
(e) 
Hence, doing harm is not reversible by doing good. 
Benefits and costs cannot be "traded off in the sense 
advocated by cost-benefit analysis regardless of whether 
the cost-benefit analysis is monetized or not. There is a 
duty to avoid future harm. 
As with the cost-benefit approaches, all the propositions in 
the sustainability approach are open to dispute. Controversial 
assumptions include the idea that harm can accrue to individ-
uals whose existence is contingent on actions taken now, and 
the belief that trade-offs can be avoided, since any action now 
incurs a cost of abatement, and any abatement cost involves 
losses for others, which in turn implies that other individuals' 
rights may be impaired. 
Within the sustainability approach there are two contrast-
ing perspectives: 
(1) 
Since the obligation to avoid harm is absolute, the cost 
of avoiding harm is irrelevant: The benefits of control 
are so large that inspection of costs is unhelpful. This is 
the absolute standards approach. 
(2) 
Harm should be avoided subject to a constraint that 
avoiding harm does not itself impose "unacceptable 
cost" - the safe minimum standards approach. 
The sustainability approach takes a long-term view and 
stresses the need to sustain a viable global ecological system. 
It therefore tends to be characterized by 
• the avoidance of unacceptable risk where risks are 
known 
• 
the "precautionary principle" - whereby actions giving 
rise to possible but quantitatively unknown and poten-
tially very large risks are avoided or corrected 
• 
the view that what is unacceptable is only partly mea-
sured by reference to individuals' preferences, since in-
dividuals are not well informed about climatic risks, 
experts are similarly not well informed due to uncer-
tainty about climate change and its effects, and human 
preferences may not capture other values, for example, 
the intrinsic value of ecosystems 
• 
very low discount rates of the order of a few percentage 
points and maybe even zero 
Whereas the cost-benefit approach seeks to measure the scale 
of damage, the sustainability approach assumes that damage 
will be "significant." so much so that action is warranted re-
gardless of quantification. 
The sustainability approach often tends to have as its ob-
jective a concern to avoid exceeding some target rate of tem-
perature rise, often quoted as 0.1°C per decade, and some 
absolute overall rise in temperature, such as 2-3°C. Examples in-
clude Krause et al. (1989) and Rijsberman and Swart (1990). 
The costs of achieving these constraints are assumed to be 
worth incurring to avoid the risks to future generations. 
With reference to the cost-benefit approach, it is well 
known that a timepath in which the present value (i.e., the 
discounted value) of benefits minus costs is maximized need 
not be a sustainable path, and that a sustainable path could, 
in turn, be unacceptable in terms of its implied living stan-
dards for each generation (Page. 1977: Pearce et al, 
1994; 
Pezzey, 1994). The choice between cost-benefit approaches 
and sustainability approaches therefore depends crucially on 
(a) attitudes to uncertainty, (b) the degree of concern for the 
well-being of future generations, and (c) beliefs about the 
damage function, that is, the way in which warming relates to 
damages. 
A third approach is a consensus 
viewpoint, which stresses 
the following common features of both the sustainability and 
the cost-benefit approaches. The principal arguments of this 
viewpoint are that 
• The existence of uncertainty cannot justify doing noth-
ing. Action on climate change is justified, because the 
damage costs could he very high, the "coefficient of 
concern" for the future is not zero, and there arc costs of 
/W) 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chaivn 
delayed action since greenhouse gas impacts may not be 
reversible. 
• The right cost-benefit perspective is one that investi-
gates the benefits and costs of taking actions. Such ac-
tions could yield benefits of a similar order of magni-
tude as the costs of the actions for some time to come. 
since avoided climatic damages arc not the only benefits 
of those actions (Section 6.6). This underlines the dif-
ference between damage estimation and abatement ben-
efits: The latter include the avoided damages estimated 
by the former concern, but also include other benefits 
from greenhouse gas abatement (see Section 6.7). 
• Neither sustainability nor "maximizing net benefits" is 
an obviously noncontroversial objective. Sustainability 
cannot be an overriding objective, independent of the 
quality of life that is sustained or the costs of achieving 
it. Maximizing net benefits cannot he an overriding ob-
jective, since it may be consistent with an approach that 
discriminates against future generations (for example, 
by applying an excessive discount rate; see Chapter 4). 
This suggests an approach in which the best features of 
both approaches are taken: a concern for the well-being 
of future generations and acknowledgment of the lim-
ited resources that all societies have at their disposal to 
tackle global problems. Such approaches come closest 
to the "safe minimum standards" approach: taking a 
precautionary approach in favour of the environment, 
unless the demonstrated costs of so doing are very high. 
Precaution would have its justification in very high 
damage costs. Damage costs must therefore be investi-
gated. The acceptability of control costs is dealt with in 
Chapters 8 and 9. 
6.7.3 The valuation of market and nonmarket impacts 
The cost-benefit approach requires that the damages from cli-
mate change be expressed, as far as is possible, in terms of 
money units reflecting human preferences. Many of the im-
pacts of climate change will not be revealed directly in the 
marketplace - the so-called nonmarket impacts. The absence 
of markets does not mean that nonmarket impacts are any less 
important than market impacts. The point is to ensure that 
nonmarket impacts arc adequately accounted for. 
Nonmarket impacts may take a variety of forms. One im-
portant example is the impact of warming on human health. 
Human health care is, generally, publicly provided without 
full charge. In some cases, there are surrogate markets for 
risks to life. Occupations arc subject to varying degrees of 
risk of accident and ill-health, and that risk is sometimes com-
pensated for by variations in wages. The "risk premium" in 
the wage can then be interpreted as a valuation of the risk (see 
Box 6.1). Valuation of morbidity is more complex: Contin-
gent valuation approaches arc best suited to such indicators 
but. as yet. lew studies exist outside the U.S. In their absence, 
second-best measures such as the costs of treatment tend to be 
used. 
The general approach in cost-benefit studies is to treat mar-
ket and nonmarket impacts on the same footing. Nonmarket 
costs can be high, between 30 and 80% of the total, as shown 
below. To I (1994a) suggests, however, that the way nonmar-
ket impacts are treated has further significance. The reasons 
are: 
(a) 
They affect human well-being directly (through the .nil-
ity function rather than through production. 
(b) 
They are liable to be less substitutable. 
(c) 
Their value will rise relative to other (production) dam-
ages. 
Market price (in the case of market goods) and elicited 
WTP (for nonmarket goods) reflect people's appreciation for 
the marginal (last) unit of a good or service consumed. In-
utility gained from consuming the first unit of a good is usu-
ally much higher than that from consuming the last unit. 
however. Especially for food and other products with price-
inelastic demand - where the appreciation of the first, essen-
tial units consumed is extremely high - the value lost from a 
cutback in availability will be understated if the quantity loss 
is evaluated at the original (e.x ante) price. Price increases as a 
consequence of climate change then become important. The 
correct measure to assess the costs of climate change in such 
cases is the change in producer and consumer surplus. Con-
sumer surplus is the excess of what consumers would be 
willing to pay, if necessary, above what they actually pay. Pro-
ducer surplus is what producers receive in excess of their ac-
tual costs of production. This consideration also means that ii 
can be misleading to gauge the potential impact of climate 
change by the present size of a sector in the economy. In in-
dustrial countries agriculture is typically on the order of 3\r of 
GDP, but a reduction of x% in agricultural output could cause 
far more than 0.03.v% of GDP economic loss because o:' the 
induced price increase and loss of consumer surplus. 
6.1.4 Temporal aspects 
Climate change impacts have many temporal aspects. First, 
ocean thermal lag causes realized equilibrium warming from 
a given steady-state increase in greenhouse gas concentrations 
to be delayed by at least two. and perhaps several, decades. 
Hence, advantages and disadvantages associated with emis-
sions and emission reductions occur immediately, whereas the 
impacts of climate change occur only after a significant lag. In 
addition, emissions in a given year typically generate a one-
year flow of advantages, but create a stock of climate change 
that then produces a recurrent annual flow of impacts poten-
tially into the indefinite future. Decision making on climate 
change thus involves intertemporal issues, of which the ques-
tion of discounting may be the most crucial one (see Chapter-
2.4. and 5). 
Second, the difference between transient and equilibrium 
climate change is important. The former refers to the transi-
tion, the latter to the new stable state of the climate. The large 
majority of the estimates presented in this chapter refer to 
equilibrium climate change, particularly the climate assoei-
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
IS7 
ated with an atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide of 
approximately 600 ppm (2xC02). This arbitrary and abstract 
assumption is necessary in order to estimate climate change 
damage with existing models. In reality, however, society will 
face a changing (rather than a changed) climate. Sections 6.3 
and 6.4 present some preliminary findings on nonequilibrium 
and long-run aspects. One important implication is that tran-
sient warming may not follow a smooth path between the pre-
sent climate and a future equilibrium climate. Transient 
climate change in a particular region cannot, therefore, be as-
sumed to be a steadily rising fraction of equilibrium impact; 
instead, there could be discontinuities and reversals. Damage 
is likely to be sensitive to such variability. Continual climate 
shocks would affect the ability of economic and natural sys-
tems to adjust and to recover. 
Third, the faster climate changes, the greater will be the 
economic impacts. That is, damage is a function of the rate as 
well as the magnitude of climate change. Adjustments by nat-
ural systems and social institutions are not instantaneous. 
Species and forests need time for migration, just as agricul-
ture and other climate-sensitive human activities need time 
for adaptation. Systems are generally more flexible in the 
long run than in the short run. 
Fourth, the world is bound to change profoundly even in 
the absence of climate change. Sections 6.2 and 6.5 below in-
dicate that the poorer regions are more vulnerable to climate 
change than the richer (see Box 6.3 for an overview of rea-
sons). Most of these regions are projected to experience rapid 
economic growth in future years (see Chapter 12). This could 
mean that their vulnerability to climate change might fall. On 
the other hand, human activities cause increasing stress to 
many natural and social systems, which could make them 
more vulnerable to climate change. At the extreme, climate 
change could be "the straw that breaks the camel's back." 
Changes in human prosperity also imply changes in prefer-
ences. Intangible impacts constitute a large part of the total 
impacts, and increased economic wealth could well imply 
higher human valuation of intangible impacts. In addition, 
technological change can profoundly alter the options avail-
able for low-cost adaptation. 
However, most of the estimates presented below concern 
the impact of an equilibrium climate change on present-day 
society. This body of information by and large reflects the 
state of the art of this relatively young research area. Despite 
its shortcomings, equilibrium climate change analysis can be 
a useful point of departure for further analysis of this ex-
tremely complex issue. 
6.1.5 Adaptation 
Adaptation offers a means to reduce the possible impacts of 
future climate change. Measures to adjust to climate change 
will be taken both on an individual level and by society as a 
whole. The search for more resilient crops will be intensified, 
for example, vulnerable coastlines will be defended by sea 
walls, and improved weather forecasts will permit better 
preparation for extreme weather events. On an individual 
level, farmers will change crops or adjust planting dates, 
households will increase their demand for air conditioning, 
people may stop building in or move away from flood plains, 
and so on. These and other aspects of adaptation are discussed 
further in Chapter 7 and in Volume 2 of the present report 
(IPCC. 1996b). 
However, the degree of adaptation in developing countries 
is likely to be far less than in developed countries due to lack 
of financial resources and lack of institutional capacity (for a 
discussion of adaptation in developing countries see Jodha, 
1989). Where it is feasible, adaptation can potentially be a 
very powerful option. In a stylized cost-benefit model of cli-
mate change policies, Hope et al. (1993) found strongly posi-
tive cost-benefit ratios for an "aggressive adaptive policy" in 
Europe, mainly in the form of coastal protection. The benefits 
of adaptation exceed the costs by more than a factor of 
20. Fankhauser (1994a) calculates that in OECD countries 
it could be economic to protect between 50 and 100% of 
affected coastlines. In a series of country studies IPCC 
(1994) found that, through appropriate adaptation measures, 
the number of people at risk from flooding could on average 
be reduced by a factor of about 8. 
Agricultural studies provide a similar picture. In a case 
study of the Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-Kansas (MINK) region, 
Easterling et al. (1993) found that low-cost adaptation mea-
sures, like earlier planting or increased irrigation, could suc-
ceed in reducing agricultural damages to the region by 30% or 
more (see also Section 6.2.1). A comparable range was found 
by Rosenzweig et al. (1993) and (using the same yield data) 
Reilly et al. (1994). In the Rosenzweig et al. study a change 
of -1.2 to -7.6% in worldwide cereal production without adap-
tation is reduced to 0 to -5.0% with moderate farm-level adap-
tation and +1.0 to -2.5% with a more comprehensive man-
agerial adjustment. As a consequence, the global welfare loss 
reduces from -$0.1 to -$61.2 billion without adaptation to 
+$7.0 to -$37.6 billion in the case of a moderate response 
(Reilly etai. 1994). 
Adaptation will, in general, not be costless and may require 
extensive planning. The need for integrated and forward-look-
ing coastal zone management has been identified as an essen-
tial prerequisite for the future development of coastal zones 
(IPCC, 1994). The significance of adaptation will also depend 
on institutional factors. Limited availability of irrigation wa-
ter or of sufficient capital to finance increased input require-
ments (e.g.. more fertilizer) may limit the scope of agricul-
tural adaptation in poorer regions (Rosenzweig et al., 1993). 
Conceptually, the costs of climate change impacts in the 
presence of costly adaptation consist of two parts: the costs of 
adaptation (e.g., for coastal protection) plus the costs of the 
remaining unmitigated damage (e.g., the loss of unprotected 
land). The estimates reviewed in Section 6.2 for many cate-
gories of climate change damage also incorporate considera-
tions of adaptation. Damage from sea level rise, for example, 
is partly comprised of the cost of building coastal protection 
structures. Similarly, the impacts on the electricity sector 
caused by climate change amount to costs required or induced 
by adaptation (space cooling). A prime exception is loss of 
M\S' 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
biodiversity, for which there are few adaptation options. Im-
plicitly or explicitly, however, most of the estimates incorpo-
rate both effects: costs of plausible adaptation plus the 
remaining damages of unmitigated impacts. 
The question of the optimal level of adaptation is strongly 
linked to that of optimal mitigation. The most desirable level 
of adaptation will depend on the amount of greenhouse gas 
abatement undertaken, and vice versa. Abatement and adapta-
tion policies should therefore he carefully coordinated. For 
example, if significant abatement can be achieved at reason-
ably low cost, less action may be needed with respect to adap-
tation. Conversely, if the consequences of climate change 
could easily and cheaply be accommodated by adaptation, 
there would be less need for preventive carbon abatement. 
However, as the hybrid damage-cum-adaptation nature of 
most of the cost estimates suggests, assuming a strict di-
chotomy between abatement and adaptation would be mis-
leading. Indeed, climate change is likely to require both types 
of actions. Even with the most ambitious abatement policy, 
some climate change seems likely to occur. Conversely, even 
the most extensive adaptation strategy is unlikely to fully mit-
igate the adverse impacts of climate change. This is particu-
larly the case if warming is subject to discontinuities and re-
versals. A strategy relying primarily on adaptation rather than 
abatement could then have significantly higher costs than im-
plied by calculations assuming a smooth warming path. Adap-
tation is primarily a complement, not an alternative, to green-
house gas abatement. 
6.1.6 Recent scientific evidence 
The literature reviewed below largely takes as its point of de-
parture the scientific appraisal of IPCC (1990a). It is impor-
tant to consider whether changes in the scientific assessment 
since then provide grounds for altering the economic evalua-
tion of the greenhouse effect. In Volume 1 of the present re-
port (IPCC 1996a), IPCC Working Group I has identified the 
following changes in the underlying impact science that might 
affect the measurement of damage. 
First, although the climate sensitivity range remains at 1.5-
4.5°C for equilibrium 2xCO,. transient realized global mean 
surface temperature is now expected to rise a further 1.0-
3.5'C between 1990 and 2100. based on the full range of IS92 
scenarios. This is in addition to the increase observed to 1990 
(0.3-0.6 C) but is about one-third lower than the 1990 esti-
mates, mainly due to the inclusion of the "cooling" effect of 
aerosols. 
Second, there is increasing emphasis on regional differ-
ences. These stem from the differential impact of ocean ther-
mal lag. In the Northern Hemisphere, where the proportion of 
land to ocean is greater than in the South, realized warming 
may be about twice the global mean estimate. In the centres of 
large land masses the warming rate may be several times the 
global mean. 
Third, taking the effect of sulphate aerosols into account, 
the central estimate for sea level rise by the year 2100 is now 
placed at about 50 cm for lS92a. compared to 66 cm in IPCC 
(1990a), with other IS92 scenarios giving estimates ranging 
from 15 to 95 cm. 
The broad thrust of these changes is to moderate the ex-
pected pace of mean global warming but also perhaps to in-
tensify the role of variability and surprises at the regional 
level. For mid-continental areas in the Northern Hemisphere, 
the new estimates would seem to leave even the mean pace of 
warming close to that in IPCC (1990a). Increasing ocean-land 
differentials could suggest greater precipitation changes and 
higher storm damages. This result is controversial, however. 
Significantly the incorporation of sulphate aerosol effects also 
carries the implication of potential acceleration from baseline 
warming if there is greater progress than expected in the re-
duction of these pollutants (Wigley and Raper, 1992). 
These considerations may affect the estimates presented 
below. In which direction they would change, though, is un-
clear. On the one hand, the revised IPCC analysis indicates a 
possibility of increased damage associated with variability 
and unpredictability, as well as giving greater attention to the 
high regional warming coefficients for the Northern Hemi-
sphere and for mid-continental areas. On the other hand, dam-
ages could be reduced due to the revised timetable of mean 
warming. The net effect is hard to predict. The revised assess-
ments might imply somewhat later damages for the Southern 
Hemisphere (and thus, broadly, for developing countries). 
6.2 Damage Estimates for Benchmark Warming 
(2xC02) 
Most available damage estimates are concerned with the 
impact of an equilibrium climate change associated with a 
doubling of the pre-industrial carbon dioxide equivalent 
concentration of all greenhouse gases (referred to here as 
benchmark warming). Long-run impacts have gained little at-
tention. Nor have the possible impacts of the approximately 
0.5°C warming already observed over the past century been 
studied in much detail. 
Monetary values for 2xCO: damage have been estimated 
for a number of sectors in the market economy. In addition, 
there are estimates for some nonmarket damages, which are 
typically more difficult to quantify (e.g., species loss), and for 
combined market and nonmarket effects in some sectors (e.g., 
forest loss in lumber and public use value). Table 6.1 provides 
an overview of the categories of damages that might be 
caused by climate change and associated sea level rise. It 
clearly shows that the estimated damages are not complete. 
For some categories, monetary estimates of damages have not 
been attempted. For other categories, the estimated damage* 
only partially reflect the potential welfare loss. In many case*. 
the preferred measure of welfare impacts - willingness to 
pay - is approximated by other indicators. 
A further source of inaccuracy results from the use of dif-
ferent climate models and scenarios. Although all results re-
ported in this section assume benchmark CO, warming 
estimates may be based on different GCM results. In addition. 
some authors have "normalized" impacts to a standard warm-
ing assumption (usually 2.5°C). others have not. This variety 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: (ireenhoitse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
Table 6.1. Overview of climate change impacts 
IS') 
Damages 
Fully 
estimated, 
based on 
willingness to 
pay 
Fully 
estimated, 
using 
approximations 
Partially 
estimated 
Not estimated 
Primary 
economic sector 
damage 
Agriculture 
Forestry 
Fisheries" 
Market 
Other 
economic sectoi 
damage 
Water supply 
Energy 
demand 
Leisure 
activity 
Insurance 
Construction 
Transport 
Energy supply 
Impacts 
Property loss 
Dryland loss 
Coastal 
protection 
Urban 
infrastructure 
Damage from 
extreme events 
Hurricane 
damage 
Damage from 
droughts* 
Nontropical 
storms 
River floods 
Hot/cold spells 
Other 
catastrophes 
Ecosystem 
damage 
Wetland loss 
Forest loss 
Species loss 
Other 
ecosystem 
loss 
Nonmarket Impacts 
Human 
impacts 
Human life 
Air pollution 
Water 
pollution 
Migration 
Morbidity 
Physical 
comfort 
Political 
stability 
Human 
hardship 
Damage from 
extreme 
events 
Hurricane 
damage 
Damage 
from 
droughts* 
Nontropical 
storms 
River floods 
Hot/cold 
spells 
Other 
catastrophes 
"Often included in wetland loss. 
'Primarily agricultural damage. 
in assumptions can be the cause of significant variation in 
damage estimates (see Smith et ai, 1993). 
Estimates are predominantly for the U.S. and other OECD 
countries. Material relating to other countries is sparse al-
though increasing. All the estimates are subject to consider-
able uncertainty. Furthermore, estimates are usually based on 
(he present-day economy and expressed as a percentage of 
GDP. Projections then apply these percentage impacts to 
future world product (e.g., to 2060 for realized benchmark 
warming). Simply projecting percentage losses to the future is 
a somewhat unsatisfactory approximation. Future impacts 
will depend on economic, demographic, and environmental 
developments. Some of the effects are likely to grow more 
than proportionately with GDP (e.g., the economic value of 
nonmarket goods) and others less than proportionately (e.g.. 
agriculture). Future demographic developments may change 
current vulnerability and migration patterns in an unknown 
way. 
The incomplete nature of the damage estimates presented 
here must be borne in mind when evaluating the full welfare 
implications of climate change. 
6.2.7 Agriculture 
Climate change is expected to damage agriculture in some 
areas but aid it in others. The principal damage will arise from 
heat stress, decreased soil moisture, and an increased inci-
dence of pests and diseases. In addition, warmer temperatures 
could cause the growing cycle of many plants to accelerate, 
allowing less time for plant development before maturity. In-
creased rainfall intensity could increase soil erosion in some 
areas, whereas other regions could be affected by drought. 
Rind et al. (1990) use GCM results to calculate that for many 
mid-latitude locations (e.g., the U.S.) the incidence of severe 
droughts that currently occur only 5% of the time would rise 
to a 50% frequency by the 2050s, based on the difference 
between precipitation and potential cvapotranspiration (E ). 
They find that 
Ei increases most where the temperature is highest, at low-
to mid-latitudes, while precipitation increases most where 
the air is coolest and easiest to saturate by the additional 
moisture, at higher latitudes. 
The principal beneficial impacts from climate change would 
be longer growing seasons in some regions and for some 
crops, and the fertilization effect of greater atmospheric car-
bon dioxide. Higher atmospheric carbon concentrations are 
expected to increase photosynthesis, which combines carbon 
dioxide and water to produce carbohydrates. Laboratory ex-
periments suggest that a doubling of C02 from 330 to 660 
ppm could raise yields by 34% for C, crops (wheat, rice, soy-
beans, fine grains, legumes, root crops, most trees) and 14% 
190 
Climate Change /W.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
for C4 crops (maize, sorghum; see Schneider and Rosenberg, 
1989). However, open-field conditions may not necessarily 
achieve the same yield increases (Parry, 1990; Evans el ai, 
1991; Korner and Arnonc, 1992; Erickson, 1993). Bazzaz and 
Fajer (1992) note that the laboratory experiments depend on 
availability of fertilizer and water and conclude that because 
of "competitive interference and limited nutrients . . . we do 
not expect that agricultural yields will necessarily improve in 
a C02-rich future." Moreover, the doubled-CO, experiment is 
conceptually wrong for calculating the effects of benchmark 
(equilibrium) warming. This is because, after taking account 
of other greenhouse gases, the equilibrium CO, concentration 
in the 2.\C(),-c(iiiivalcnt 
atmosphere is only 440 ppm (Cline, 
1992a, calculated from IPCC, 1990a). 
Agriculture is a relatively well-studied area of climate 
change impact research. Nevertheless, available results are 
still very diverse and often contradictory. Agricultural models 
are highly sensitive to a number of key assumptions. This sen-
sitivity can, to a large extent, explain differences in model re-
sults. The most important elements of dispute include: 
• the effect of CO, fertilization, as mentioned above 
• the assumed climate scenario (particularly changes in 
temperature and precipitation) 
• the potential and scope for adaptation 
• 
the inclusion of trade effects 
The rest of this section summarizes the major contributions to 
this research so far. 
The importance of trade flows is illustrated in a study by 
Kane el al. (1992), which uses the U.S. Department of Agri-
culture's Static World Policy Simulation (SWOPSIM) model 
of agricultural trade. Even in a "very adverse" scenario in 
which yields fall by 5-40% in most developed countries, the 
former Soviet Union, and China, and remain unchanged in 
most other developing countries, net global welfare declines 
by only 0.47% of GDP. World food prices are expected to in-
crease in the order of 40% or more, with repercussions on 
both producer and consumer welfare. In a food exporting 
country like the U.S., for example, consumers are expected to 
lose $40 billion annually in consumer surplus (at 1986 
prices), whereas U.S. farmers gain $19 billion annually in 
producer surplus because price increases more than offset 
yield reductions. The implication is that a corresponding loss 
of consumer surplus occurs for importing nations, associated 
with terms-of-trade gains on U.S. farm exports. The main 
loser identified in this particular model run is China, with eco-
nomic losses of more than 5% of GDP. Increased world food 
prices also heavily affect consumers in the former Soviet 
Union. In a second, more optimistic scenario, worldwide im-
pacts are practically zero, with negative results in Canada, 
Japan, and Europe being offset by gains in Australia, and now 
also the former USSR and China. The Kane a al. figures, av-
eraged over all scenarios, are used for the agricultural damage 
estimates reproduced in Table 6.5. 
In another global study. Rosenzweig et al. (1993) coordi-
nated research applying crop simulation models in 18 coun-
tries to examine the impact o( benchmark 2xCO,-equivalent 
warming on yields for wheat, rice, maize, and soybeans b\ 
2060 (see also Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994). Linking the re-
sults in a world trade model (Basic Linked System), they cal-
culated the impact on production levels, prices, and the 
number of people at risk from hunger. The study found thai 
crop yields would decline in the low latitudes, where they are 
currently grown near their limits of temperature tolerance. 
However, yields could increase at middle and high latitudes 
when carbon fertilization is included. In the case of moderate 
adaptation, output rises in developed countries by 4-14% but 
falls by 9-12% in developing countries (which must import). 
Depending on the GCM used, global output falls by 0-55. 
prices rise by 10-100%, and the number of people at risk 
from hunger rises from a baseline of 640 million to a range of 
680-940 million. Although the results are open to the criti-
cism that the climate models used (GISS, GFDL, UKMOi 
have sensitivity parameters higher than the IPCC's 2.5 C 
(Reilly and Hohmann, 1993), from another standpoint the 
results are optimistic. They employ a carbon dioxide concen-
tration of 555 ppm, which is essentially a transient concept 
for the year 2060, rather than a 2xCO,-equivalent equilib-
rium concept (where the carbon dioxide concentration is 
440 ppm).1 
The Rosenzweig et al. study has been supplemented by 
Reilly et al. (1994), who used the Rosenzweig et al. yield data 
as an input for SWOPSIM. The study estimated global wel-
fare losses at $0.1-$61.2 billion in the scenario without adap-
tation. In the moderate adaptation scenario welfare changes 
range between +$7.0 and -$37.6 billion. 
The number of additional people suffering from hunger has 
also been estimated by Hohmeyer and Gartner (1992). Their 
estimate of 900 million deaths over a 20-year period up to 
2030 is based on a rather ad hoc line of reasoning though. 
Their figure, which measures actual casualties, also appears 
rather high, compared to the more sophisticated Rosenzweig 
et al. (1993) estimates of people at risk. 
On a regional level, a study for the European Union pre-
dicts that overall agricultural yields in Europe are likely to in-
crease as a result of increased temperature and precipitation. 
Welfare gains of ECU 3.2 billion are predicted for 1°C warm-
ing and ECU 12.2 billion for 4°C (CRU/ERL, 1992). Gains 
would mainly occur in the north, whereas the outcome for 
southern Europe would be more mixed. 
For the U.S.. Adams et al. (1993) estimated the combined 
economic effects of climate change on agricultural producers 
and consumers under different scenarios. Impacts were gener-
ally negative if based on the 2xCO, predictions of the L'K 
Meteorological Office. The more benign GISS and GFDL 
forecasts yielded mostly positive impacts, except for the case-
without CO, fertilization: Producer gains, particularly in the 
North, were generally large enough to offset the losses laced 
by consumers and producers in the South. In their "standard" 
scenario, with a CO, concentration of 550 ppm and no trade 
and adaptation effects, the estimated agricultural impact-
ranged from -$18 billion (UKMO) to +$10 billion (GISS'. 
Substantial economic losses are predicted in all scenario-
once temperatures rise by 4°C. Based on earlier estimates b\ 
the U.S. EPA (1989). Nordhaus (1991) and dine ( I W J 
Tlic Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
191 
have estimated U.S. impacts of roughly zero and -$17.5 bil-
lion, respectively. The former estimate is based on a 660 ppm 
scenario, whereas Cline assumes 440 ppm, consistent with 
C02-equivalent doubling. 
A study of the Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-Kansas (MINK) 
area introduces the further influence of farmer adaptation 
(earlier planting, use of longer season varieties, changes in 
tillage to conserve water; see Easterling et «/., 1993; Rosen-
berg, 1993). Using actual climate conditions of the 1930s as 
an analogue for a 2030s climate, the study found that, without 
carbon fertilization, climate change cuts agricultural produc-
tion in the area by 17.1 %, but only by 12.1 % with on-farm adap-
tations. Adaptation thus reduces losses by about one-third. If 
100 ppm carbon fertilization is added as an offsetting factor, 
output is reduced by only 8.4%. This loss is cut further to 
3.3% by adding the influence of adaptation. Considering that 
regional temperatures were only about 1°C higher than today 
in the 1930s, and adjusting for commensurate carbon fertiliza-
tion, the MINK results suggest losses in the order of 10% for 
benchmark 2xCO., warming, even with farmer adaptation. 
Another paper emphasizing adaptation is Mendelsohn et 
ul. (1993), who argue that the production function method 
commonly used in crop models inadequately captures induced 
producer responses. They suggest that existing cross-section 
data for different climatic regions can provide a better guide 
to total effects incorporating these responses. They use county-
level U.S. data to regress farmland values on climate and a 
number of other relevant variables. To simulate the overall 
impact of climate change on U.S. agriculture, they postulate a 
rise of 2.8°C (5°F) in mean temperature and 8% in rainfall.-
Under these assumptions, U.S. agriculture experiences losses 
of $6 billion to $8 billion annually if county results are 
weighted by shares in cropland area, but gains of $ 1 billion to 
S2 billion if the weights are shares in crop revenue (which 
gives much more weight to irrigated lands of the West and 
South). The study shows that agricultural land value is 
strongly influenced by climate, even after taking adaptation 
into account. The cross-sectional data used in the study reflect 
agricultural practices that are highly adapted to the local cli-
mate, and yet the authors still find large productivity differ-
ences related to climate. The evidence indicates that warmer 
summers have a negative impact on land values and, by impli-
cation, productivity. This is persuasive empirical evidence 
that adaptation is unlikely to completely offset the effects of 
climate change on agriculture. 
6.2.2 Sea level rise 
IPCC Working Group I in Volume 1 of the present report 
(IPCC. 1996a) estimates a central value for sea level rise by 
the year 2100 of about 46 cm, compared to 66 cm in IPCC 
(1990a). The impacts of sea level rise are discussed in detail 
in Volume 2 (IPCC. 1996b), but the main areas threatened are 
coastal zones and small islands. These are characterized by 
highly diverse ecosystems that are important as a source of 
food and as habitat for many species. They also support a va-
riety of economic activities, some of which put the natural 
coastal systems under stress. 
Both the original and updated IPCC estimates refer to the 
transient rather than the equilibrium impact of sea level rise. 
Unlike other damage categories, the equilibrium effects for 
sea level rise are far greater and take much longer to occur 
than the point estimates corresponding to the first year of 
equilibrium warming suggest. For a discrete warming shock, 
the sea level continues to rise for up to 500 years (Titus, 1992; 
Manabe and Stouffer, 1993; see also Wigley, 1995). Some 
studies crudely convert this growing long-term effect into a 
point estimate of a 1-m sea level rise for a doubling of CO,, 
even though realized increases by 2100 are estimated to be 
lower. Others ignore long-term effects and, in a similar arbi-
trary fashion, associate a doubling of CO, with a sea level rise 
of about 50 cm. 
The literature usually divides the costs of sea level rise into 
three types: capital costs of protective constructions, the re-
current annual cost of forgone land services, and the costs as-
sociated with increased flood frequencies. Coastal protection 
is a form of adaptation used to avoid land loss and loss from 
increased flood frequencies. Land loss and flood losses thus 
depend on the chosen level of protection. Note that the preser-
vation of drylands could imply more rapid loss of wetlands. 
Other, not fully assessed damages include loss of sovereignty, 
cultural heritage, and national identity of small island states 
(see Box 6.2), and the creation of a potentially large refugee 
population (see Section 6.2.11). 
Protection costs. The U.S. EPA estimated that for the U.S., 
a 1-m rise in sea level by the year 2100 would require $73 bil-
lion to $111 billion cumulative capital costs to protect devel-
oped areas through the building of bulkheads and levees, 
pumping sand, and raising barrier islands (U.S. EPA, 1989). 
Assuming that capital costs would be spread over a 100-year 
period, Cline (1992a) estimated costs in the order of $1.2 bil-
lion for capital construction. Gleick and Maurer (1990) es-
timated capital construction and maintenance costs for pro-
tecting San Francisco Bay from a 1-m rise at $200 million 
annually, or a sixth of the U.S. total estimated in Cline (1992a). 
Fankhauser (1995) estimated annuitized costs of coastal pro-
tection against a 50-cm rise in the order of $1 billion world-
wide, with about half occurring in non-OECD countries. 
Land loss. The U.S. EPA (1989) report estimates that under 
a 1-m rise scenario unprotected dry land amounting to 6,650 
square miles would be lost in the U.S., and 49% of today's 
13,000 square miles of wetlands would be lost (Titus et al., 
1991). Titus et al. indicate that wetlands preservation pro-
grammes typically cost up to $30,000 per acre. Using a more 
conservative $10,000 capital cost per acre of wetlands, plac-
ing coastal dryland value at $4,000 per acre, and applying a 
rental opportunity cost of 10%. Cline (1992a) estimates the 
annual U.S. losses from a 1-m rise at $4.1 billion for wetlands 
and $1.7 billion for dryland. Assuming only a 50-cm rise in 
sea levels, but doubling wetland costs to $20,000 per acre, at 
least in developed countries, Fankhauser (1995) obtains a cost 
estimate of $45.6 billion annually for forgone land services 
worldwide, assuming a 33% loss of all remaining wetlands 
under a 50-cm rise. With over 85% of coastal wetland loss oc-
curring in developing countries, low income regions are by far 
the most heavily affected areas. For the OHCD (excluding 
/92 
Cliiiuiic Change /W> - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Canada, Australia, and New Zealand) Rijsberman (1991) esti-
mates a loss of coastal wetlands in the order of 48.000-64,000 
km- for a 1-m rise, more than 50% of the remaining area of 
coastal wetland habitats in these countries. 
Sea surges. A 1-m rise in sea levels could increase the num-
ber of people subject to annual flooding by about 20%, ac-
cording to estimates in IPCC (1994). Particularly at risk 
would be coastlines along the Indian Ocean, in the South 
Mediterranean, and in Africa, as well as small island stales. A 
number of case studies exist which quantify the impact of sea 
level rise on sea surges in the U.S. (see Titus. 1987). The an-
nual average damages in Charleston. South Carolina, could 
double due to an 88-cm sea level rise: the damages of a 100-
year storm in Galveston, Texas, could triple. (Note, however, 
that cost-effective protection measures can mitigate this loss.) 
The U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency and Fed-
eral Insurance Agency (U.S. FEMA-FIA. 1991) estimate that 
the area inundated by a 100-year flood will increase from 
19,500 square miles to 23,000 and 27,000 square miles for a 
1-foot and 3-foot sea level rise, respectively, by the year 2100 
if no protective measures are taken. The region most signifi-
cantly affected would be the Louisiana coast. The expected 
annual flood damage in 2100 increases by 36-58% ($150 mil-
lion) for a I-foot rise and by 102-200% ($600 million) for a 
3-foot rise in sea level. For the European Union, CRU/ERL 
(1992) calculate that periodic flooding would increase the 
costs of sea level rise by as much as a factor of 2.7. 
6.2.3 Forests 
The impact of climate change on forests is uncertain. Impacts 
may be beneficial for some regions and species and detrimen-
tal for others. IPCC (1996b) identifies three major changes of 
consequence to the forestry sector. They are 
(1) 
changes in seasonal climate patterns, which differ with 
latitude 
(2) 
water shortages during the growing season 
(3) 
rate of climate change 
The most significant changes over the next fifty years or so 
are, however, likely to be caused by nonelimate effects, in 
particular by land use change. No attempt is made within this 
section to quantify none I i mate impacts (e.g., deforestation 
and human-caused fires). Although these factors interact with 
climate, damage estimates here are restricted to impacts at-
tributable to anthropogenic climate change. 
Simulations for baseline climate change to 2050 suggest 
that boreal forests will be more impacted by climate change 
than tropical forests, which are more affected by changes in 
land use. It is also anticipated that the impact of climate 
change on temperate forests would be lessened through ame-
liorative action. Models neglecting land use effects generally 
suggest relatively benign impacts. It was estimated that global 
forest area could increase as much as 9% in this case (IPCC, 
1996b). 
Furthermore, forests could be adversely affected by an in-
crease in the frequency or intensity of wildfires that may oc-
cur as a consequence of changes in thunderstorm and drought 
conditions. Estimates by Price and Rind (1994) for the south-
western U.S. suggest that a doubling of CO\ could lead to a 
60% increase in the number of lightning-caused fires. The an-
nual area burned could increase by over 140%. 
Current models have a number of deficiencies, however. 
Current studies of forest responses to climate change are at 
the ecophysiological level and the ecosystem level. Only the 
latter impacts, arising from changes in existing forest area, are 
assessed in this section. Furthermore, models are mostly con-
cerned with equilibrium climate change. It is not currently 
possible to predict the transient responses at the global scale. 
Some of the static vegetation models used to estimate poten-
tial forest losses under changed climate include the Holdridge 
vegetation model. IMAGE 2.0, BIOME, and MAPSS (sec 
IPCC. 1996b). In spite of the inability of these models to deal 
with transient responses, they do provide quantitative esti-
mates of changes in equilibrium vegetation classes under fu-
ture climate. Because the number of vegetation classes in the 
models is limited, however, it is believed that they underesti-
mate actual changes. 
Most studies concerned with the economic impacts on 
forests and forestry are based on earlier, perhaps more pes-
simistic, model runs. A study often used is Sedjo and Solomon 
(1989), who calculated that steady-state 2xC02 warming 
could reduce boreal forests by 40% and temperate forests by 
1.3% in biomass, but increase tropical forests by 12%. The net 
change would amount to a decline of 3.7% globally in bio-
mass, and 5.8% in area. Based on these figures. Fankhauser 
(1995) has estimated annual forestry damages of $1.8 billion 
in OECD countries and $2 billion worldwide, using forest val-
ues of 2000, 400, and 200 $/km2, respectively, for high, mid-
dle, and low income countries. Because of the positive impact 
on tropical forests and the use of higher forest values in devel-
oped nations, most forestry damage occurs in OECD coun-
tries. 
Compared to equilibrium estimates, transient effects over 
as much as three centuries would be much more severe. 
Whereas the latitudinal borders of potential location forgiven 
species would migrate poleward by 600 to 1,000 km over the 
next century, the actual migration pace could be as low as 100 
km (U.S. EPA, 1989). Dieback along low-latitude boundaries 
would thus exceed additional growth on the poleward bound-
aries. Over the next 100 years U.S. forests could lose 23-.vlf< 
of standing biomass in the Great Lakes region and 40% in the 
West. 
On this basis. Cline (1992a) estimates a loss of W,i for 
U.S. forests. Estimating the value of annual wood extraction 
at $10 billion, and allowing for some limitation of lcsse> 
through reforestation, he estimates net U.S. forest loss from 
benchmark warming at $3.3 billion annually, solely for com-
mercial wood products. 
Titus (1992) places U.S. forest damages an order of magni-
tude higher, at $44 billion annually (central estimate). He esti-
mates a median percentage biomass loss of 34% in the thirty 
states he examines. His much higher damage estimates thu-
stem not from greater biomass loss but from a higher valua-
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
/ 9 j 
tion of unit forest area. Using a comprehensive measure that 
includes recreation and other value, Titus values forested area 
at $45 to $150 per acre per year of forest (above raw land 
value). The Titus estimates would make U.S. forest loss the 
largest damage category. 
A more recent U.S. study by Callaway et al. (1994) pro-
vides a more differentiated picture. A decrease in softwood 
yields in practically all areas (except the Northwest) is partly 
offset by increased yields in hardwood in most regions. Al-
though producers would gain from price increases, consumers 
would face substantial losses. On aggregate, annual losses to 
the U.S. forestry sector are estimated to be between $2.5 bil-
lion (for 2.5°C warming, including C 0 2 fertilization) and $12 
billion (4°C, no CO, fertilization). This corresponds to a 4-
19% welfare reduction in the U.S. forestry sector. 
6.2.4 Water supply 
Some regions may benefit, but climate change could in many 
areas put considerable stress on water supply as a result of 
changes in the timing, regional pattern, and intensity of pre-
cipitation events. This, in turn, will affect the magnitude and 
timing of runoff, while higher temperatures will at the same 
time lead to changes in evapotranspiration, soil moisture, and 
infiltration conditions (IPCC, 1996b). In areas and/or periods 
where precipitation declines or does not rise by enough to 
compensate for higher evapotranspiration (from warmer tem-
perature), the widening gap would reduce soil moisture and 
water levels and flows. In coastal regions, saltwater intrusion 
could affect current freshwater sources. At the same time, the 
demand for water would tend to rise with warming, because 
of increased needs for irrigation and for cooling in electric 
power production (U.S. EPA, 1989) and because of higher 
residential demand. 
Although confidence in projected water runoff is still low, 
model runs project increased runoff in high latitude regions 
due to increased precipitation, whereas lower latitudes could 
experience decreased runoff due to the combined effects of in-
creased evapotranspiration and decreased precipitation. The 
current arid and semi-arid regions, in particular, could experi-
ence some of the largest decreases in runoff (IPCC, 1996b). 
River basin runoff is very sensitive to small variations in cli-
matic conditions, because runoff is a residual of precipitation' 
on the one hand and soil absorption or evaporation on the 
other. Consequently, small changes in any of the underlying 
variables can cause a much larger proportionate impact on 
runoff. 
For the U.S., water basin simulation models show that in a 
warmer, drier climate (+2°C. - l()<7r precipitation), water sup-
ply in 18 major water regions covering the bulk of national 
supply would decline by approximately one-third (calculated 
from IPCC, 1990b). The U.S. EPA (1989) predicts that 2xCO, 
warming would reduce annual water deliveries in California's 
Central Valley basin by 7-169f, in a region where baseline wa-
ter demand is expected to rise by over 50% as early as 2010 
(i.e.. before a doubling of CO, is likely to occur). For the 
Sacramento basin. Gleick (1987) estimates that a 4°C increase 
in temperature would decrease summer runoff by 55%, even 
if there were a 10% rise in precipitation. For the Boston area, 
Kirshen and Fennessey (1992) applied water balance models 
to GCM projections for benchmark warming and found that 
reliable water yields of existing water systems could fall by as 
much as one-third (based on the GISS and GFDL projections) 
but could also rise (if the UKMO and OSU projections are 
used). The difference arises because some models predict 
falling precipitation and others rising. If zero change in pre-
cipitation is imposed, the result is a decline of 18% in reliable 
water yield. 
Cline (1992a) sets 10% as a central estimate for water sup-
ply reduction in the U.S. from benchmark warming. He esti-
mates national annual withdrawals at 0.4 billion acre-feet and 
unit price at $250 per acre-foot. The resulting estimate of an-
nual damage is $7 billion. Titus (1992) uses a larger volume 
impact but lower unit prices to reach a central estimate of 
$11.4 billion annual losses. For the European Union, CRU/ 
ERL (1992) estimate that the costs of reduced water runoff 
would amount to ECU 5.8 billion for 1 C warming and ECU 
18.8 billion for 4°C. 
Fankhauser (1995) uses a somewhat lower percentage vol-
ume loss than the U.S. studies but. at least for OECD coun-
tries, a unit price more than twice as high as Cline's. He 
estimates annual losses at $34.8 billion for the OECD, and 
$46.7 billion worldwide. Again, the high share of OECD dam-
ages is due to differences in valuation between regions. In 
physical units, about three-quarters of water losses occur in 
non-OECD countries (see Table 6.5). 
Adjustments in water management practices can help to 
ease impacts. More efficient water allocation, for example, 
with less low-priced water allocated to agriculture and more 
to urban use could attenuate losses in water supply. On the 
other hand, it could aggravate prospective agricultural output 
losses. 
Gleick (1992) and Homer-Dixon et at. (1993) have empha-
sized another dimension of water supply effects: the potential 
for political conflict, such as the dispute over the Jordan River 
basin that contributed to the 1967 war in the Middle East. 
From this standpoint, associated damages might appropriately 
include higher defence costs or. perhaps more appropriately, 
some unquantified social cost arising from the increased prob-
ability of regional wars. 
6.2.5 Space cooling and 
heating 
Climate change would impose higher air conditioning (space 
cooling) costs but would reduce heating costs. The net effect 
on energy costs is ambiguous and will be highly variable 
across regions. For space cooling costs in Japan, Nishioka et 
al. (1993) report estimates of a 2% increase in electricity de-
mand per "C warming for temperatures between 24°C and 
30CC. and a 1% increase for temperatures between 17°C and 
24°C. No significant change in demand was found for temper-
atures above 30 C. 
On the basis of detailed energy projections, the U.S. EPA 
(1989) has estimated that a warming of 3.7"C by 2055 would 
194 
('lii)uih' Chmi^r 1995 - i.conomic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chun-
result in a net increase in U.S. electricity demand of about 
one-fifth above baseline, requiring additional annual operat-
ing costs of $53 billion and cumulative capital cost increases 
of $224 billion. Scaling back these estimates for consistency 
with present-day economic size and for a warming of only 
2.5°C, Cline (1992a) estimates annualized damages of $11.2 
billion from higher net electricity requirements under bench-
mark warming. Arguably, this estimate is understated, be-
cause with global mean warming of 2.5"C, U.S. warming 
would amount to 3.9°C. Titus (1992) uses the same underly-
ing study to reach a central estimate of $5.6 billion. 
More informal estimates of the corresponding savings on 
space heating are considerably lower, in the range of $1 bil-
lion annually (Nordhaus, 1991; Cline. 1992a). A lower gain 
from reduced heating relative to increased cooling is consis-
tent with the analysis of Loveland and Brown (1992). They 
find that "annual cooling loads will increase at a much greater 
rate than heating loads will decrease," and they stress the ex-
tra costs of peak cooling loads. However, the expenditure base 
on which a greater proportionate increase in cooling costs 
would operate is about 2.3 times lower than the expenditure 
base of the smaller percentage cut in heating costs (Rosenthal 
et ai, 1994). The net effect is thus ambiguous. 
Based on regional GISS warming results reported in Love-
land and Brown, Cline (1993a) estimates that for the U.S. the 
number of cooling degree days would rise by about 100% un-
der 2xCO„ compared to a 40% fall in heating degree days. As 
this ratio for change is approximately the inverse of the ratio 
for the expenditure base, the overall result would be that the 
reduction in heating costs would be approximately equal to 
the increase in cooling costs. On this basis, the Nordhaus 
(1991) and Cline (1992a) heating cost reductions would ap-
pear substantially understated. 
Rosenthal et at. (1994) go further and estimate that U.S. 
savings on heating would exceed increased cooling costs by 
$7.6 billion for 2.5°C U.S. warming. With nearly equipropor-
tionate changes in heating ( - 1 4 % for 1°C) and cooling 
(+16%), their results significantly deviate from the Loveland-
Brown estimates and stress greater proportionate change in 
cooling. For higher temperatures, the savings on reduced 
heating could be expected to fall, and the costs of increased 
cooling to rise (given the falling base of the former and the 
rising base of the latter). 
For most of the developing countries, because of their lo-
cation and base climate, savings from reduced heating would 
tend to be limited even for benchmark warming. Increased 
cooling costs for these countries would tend to be larger, espe-
cially where baselines are already incorporating greater pene-
tration of air conditioning as per capita income rises. Extrapo-
lating the ll.S. EPA (1989) data to other geopolitical regions. 
Fankhauser (1995) assumed an increase in electricity demand 
of 3.2% in all regions considered, except for the former Soviet 
Union, where electricity demand was assumed to decrease by 
1%. This resulted in increased space cooling costs of about 
$20 billion in the countries of the OECD and $23 billion 
worldwide. 
Based on estimated changes in heating and cooling degree 
davs. CRU/ER1. (1992) calculated significant benefits from 
reduced heating expenses in the European Union. Gains in 
Northern Europe were only partly offset by increased costs in 
Portugal, Spain, and Greece. A 1°C rise in temperature would 
yield net benefits in the order of ECU 13 billion. For ,VC 
warming, the figure would rise to about ECU 32 billion. 
These rather optimistic results appear to be mainly due to the 
dominance of heating over cooling degree days in the baseline 
case without warming. 
6.2.6 
Insurance 
The property insurance industry protects other economic sec-
tors from the financial consequences of unexpected or uncer-
tain events, including weather extremes. As such, it is highly 
exposed to changes in these extremes and thus to climate 
change (see Section 6.2.14). The basic function of insurance 
is to transfer financial risk from an individual to a group, that 
is, to spread a specific individual loss over the entire group of 
potentially affected people. At present, natural hazard insur-
ance has a capacity to absorb damages of about $100 billion. 
For comparison, in 1992 Hurricane Andrew alone caused eco-
nomic damage of $30 billion, about half of which was insured 
(Dlugolecki et al., 1994). The impact of climate change on 
other branches of insurance, such as life and liability, and on 
the wider financial sector (e.g., banking) are discussed in Vol-
ume 2 (IPCC, 1996b). 
Since 1987, after a relatively quiet period of about twenty 
years, the insurance industry has been confronted with a large 
number of major weather-related catastrophes, that is. events 
that involved insured losses of over $1 billion. This increase 
was caused by a variety of factors, including population 
growth, higher standards of living, concentration of people 
and capital in large conurbations, the development of ex-
tremely exposed areas, and environmental changes. Although 
there is no clear connection to anthropogenic climate change. 
the reaction of the sector is illustrative of what would happen 
if climate change were to lead to an increase in the number 
and intensity of extreme weather events (Berz and Conrad. 
1993: Dlugolecki et al., 1994; IPCC, 1996b; Leggett. \Wl 
Premiums were increased and cover was restricted, but 
with some delay, as the insurers wanted to make sure that 
the increase in risk was permanent. In some areas, such as 
the Southeast states of the U.S., the Caribbean, and the 
Pacific, insurance and reinsurance supply was withdrawn 
after a sequence of hurricanes in the late 1980s and early 
1990s. As a further reaction, the insurance sector has the 
following broad options (Dlugolecki et al., 1994; Tol et al.. 
1994): 
(a) 
altering the way in which premiums are determined by 
incorporating more knowledge of the actual risk (so far. 
premiums have primarily been determined by competi-
tion and recent claims) 
(b) 
changing the product to limit the insurer's exposure 
(c) 
extending the available funds through further pooling 
and accumulation, particularly in cooperation with gov-
ernments and banks. This may require alterations ol ex-
isting fiscal and institutional regulations 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
195 
(d) 
risk management, that is, getting involved in restricting 
the damage caused by weather events 
(e) 
lobbying for and investing in environmentally sound 
policies and projects 
Points (a) and (b) are being implemented, (c) and (d) are un-
der consideration, and (e) awaits further evidence on the rela-
tionship between environmental policies and insured risks. 
Although a number of these points help reduce the overall ex-
posure of society to weather hazards, many merely affect the 
exposure of the insurance sector itself. Limiting only the in-
surers' exposure obviously leads to greater exposure for oth-
ers. Little research has been done to assess the consequences 
of such a policy on households, industry, and government. 
6.2.7 Other market 
sectors 
Construction. Nordhaus (1991) suggests that the construction 
sector in temperate climates would be favourably affected by 
climate change because of a longer period of warm weather. 
However, although construction is adversely affected by frost, 
it is also inhibited by rainfall, and GCMs typically predict an 
increase in global mean precipitation by about 8% as the con-
sequence of benchmark 2xC0 2 warming (1PCC, 1990a). The 
IPCC notes the adverse effect of rainfall on economic activity 
more generally and points out that "rainfall is responsible for 
more delays than any other climatic variable" for UK industry 
(IPCC, 1990b). However, estimates are not available on the 
net effects of warming and increased precipitation on con-
struction or industry more generally. 
Tourism and leisure activities. 
Studies by the Canadian 
Climate Program Board suggest that, as a consequence of a 
shortened period of snow cover, Quebec could lose 40-70% of 
ski days. In Ontario, the shorter skiing season may cause a 
loss of up to $50 million in revenue (Canadian Climate Pro-
gram Board, 1988a, b). Losses would presumably be larger in 
relative terms in U.S. ski areas, where the temperature base is 
already higher. Annual U.S. ski activity amounts to an esti-
mated $5.6 billion and 53 million skier visits (Waters, 1990). 
Assuming a 60% reduction from benchmark warming, and 
allowing for released productive labour and capital, Cline 
(1992a) estimates ski industry losses at $1.7 billion annually. 
The tourist industry will also be affected by beach erosion 
and the inundation of beaches (Baan et al., 1993), as well 
as likely coral reef death and other ecosystem loss (U.S. 
EPA, 1989).3 These impacts could be particularly significant 
for small island states, where tourism frequently accounts for 
over a third of GDP (see Turner et al.. 1994). On the other hand, 
there could be gains from climate change in other leisure sec-
tors such as camping, boating, and sunbathing. The Ontario 
case study, for example, predicts an increase in the camping 
season of up to 40 days in some areas (Canadian Climate Pro-
gram Board, 1988b). In many regions, however, an increase in 
summer activities could be hampered by increased rainfall. 
CRU/ERL( 1992) developed a "comfort index," using temper-
ature, sunshine, and rainfall as indicators of the suitability of 
climates for leisure activities. Using this index and figures on 
current European tourist revenues, they estimate that 1°C 
warming could benefit tourism in the EU by about ECU 4.7 
billion. As temperature rises though, the impact, at least in 
Southern Europe, soon becomes negative. 
Urban infrastructure. 
Adaptation and/or protection of in-
frastructure from extreme weather events like floods, extreme 
rainfall, or landslides could cause increased costs under cli-
mate change (IPCC, 1996b). The U.S. EPA (1989) has exam-
ined the impact of climate change on urban infrastructure 
costs. For coastal cities, sea level rise or more frequent 
droughts would increase the salinity of coastal aquifers and 
tidal surface waters, requiring a response where these are the 
sources of a metropolitan water supply. In addition, more fre-
quent and intense storms would likely overload existing storm 
sewer systems. Using U.S. EPA studies for New Orleans, New 
York, Philadelphia, and Miami, Cline (1992a) suggests that 
annualized damages of benchmark warming for U.S. urban in-
frastructure could amount to $ 100 million yearly. 
6.2.8 
Health 
There are many potential health impacts arising from climate 
change, some beneficial and some adverse. Although gener-
ally difficult to foresee and quantify, these impacts could arise 
from diverse events, including disturbances in natural or man-
aged ecosystems. They could either be direct, as in the case of 
heat wave deaths, or indirect, as when caused by changes in 
the range and transmissibility of vector-borne infectious dis-
eases. Also, it is expected that different populations with vary-
ing levels of natural, technical, and social resources would 
differ in their vulnerability to climate-induced health impacts. 
The range of health impacts is discussed in more detail in 
IPCC (1996b). 
Given the current state of knowledge, and the influence of 
environment, socioeconomic circumstances, population den-
sity, and nutritional status, among other factors, it is possible 
to apply only a quantitative cost-assessing approach to a mi-
nority of such impacts. In this section monetized health dam-
ages reflect only mortality due to heal stress. Other health 
impacts of climate change are excluded. This is not to imply 
that these are necessarily the most significant expected health 
impacts (see IPCC, 1996b). 
There is a U-shaped relationship between mortality and 
outdoor air temperature. Death rates increase as a conse-
quence of both heat waves and very cold weather. The lowest 
mortality rates are found at temperature levels of about 16-
25°C (Kunst et al.. 1993; Haines and Parry, 1993). Climate 
change could lead to an increase of heat-related deaths from 
coronary disease and stroke, which is likely to more than off-
set a reduction in winter mortality. Air pollution increases the 
occurrence of respiratory diseases (such as emphysema and 
asthma), and longer, warmer summers are expected to in-
crease the severity of air pollution. 
Kunst et al. (1993) have analyzed the statistical relation-
ship between mortality and air temperature in the Nether-
lands. They found that a 30-day increase in air temperature 
of I T above its ideal level would lead to a rise in mortality 
of 1.1-1.9%. A I C drop from the optimum would cause a 
slightly lower rise of about 0.8-1.3%. For the UK. Landlord 
/% 
(Innate ( 'han'^c / Wi - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chaw:, 
BOX 6.1: ATTRIBUTING A MONETARY VALUE TO A STATISTICAL LIFE 
Attributing a monetary value to a "statistical life" is controversial and raises a number of difficult theoretical and ethical is-
sues. It is important to understand that what is valued is a change in the risk of death, not human life itself. In other words. 
the issue is how a person's welfare is affected by an increased mortality risk, not what his or her life is worth. If 100,000 
people are exposed to an annual mortality risk of 1:100.000. there will, statistically, be one death incidence per year. Re-
moving the risk would thus save one statistical life. It is this statistical life that has an economic value. It would make no 
sense to ask an individual how much he or she is willing to pay to avoid certain death. Nor is that the context of social deci-
sion making. But it can make sense to ask what individuals are willing to pay to reduce the risk of death or what they are 
willing to accept to tolerate an increased risk of death. 
The reality is that safety is not "beyond price." If it were, most of the world's wealth would be spent trying to save lives 
by reducing accidents and preventing disease. Risks are taken every day, both by individuals and by governments in choos-
ing their social and economic expenditures, some of which are specifically directed at protecting and extending human life. 
For example, if a government introduces a programme of inoculation for childhood diseases that costs $10,000,000 per year 
and saves an average of 80 lives per year, a statistical life is implicitly valued at $125,000 at a minimum. 
Several methods have been applied to calculate the value of a statistical life (VOSL). None of them is without problems. 
The prescriptive view 
j 
Under a prescriptive or normative approach, the VOSL is not set according to observed behaviour but is based on ethical and 
political considerations. It poses the question: At how much ought a statistical life be valued according to ethical or other 
criteria? An obvious implication of this approach is that all lives will be treated equally. Each statistical life saved should 
have the same value. However, the question of what this uniform value should be is difficult to answer from a purely pre-
scriptive point of view. In the context of climate change it has been argued that, since the developed countries have caused 
the greenhouse problem, OECD VOSLs should be used for all lives under the polluter-pays principle. An example of such 
an approach is given by Hohmeyer and Gartner (1992). Based entirely on a "moral imperative," the theoretical economic 
basis of this approach is weak. 
The descriptive view 
The alternative is to take a descriptive stance and ask how much people are actually willing to spend to avoid the risk of 
death. Most studies that attempt to estimate damage due to climate change (see Table 6.4) are based on a descriptive per-
spective. Two approaches are commonly used in the economic literature: the human capital approach and the willingness-to-
pay approach. 
The hitman capital approach: This method involves treating an individual as an economic agent capable of producing an 
output that is valued in monetary terms. A life lost is then the loss of that output, less any consumption that the individual 
would have made. One problem with this approach is that it tends to produce extremely low values for those with low earn-
ings, clearly discriminating against the already poor. Another problem is that the approach has no particular relationship to 
an individual's willingness to pay to reduce his or her risks of mortality. The human capital approach is not properly founded 
in economic theory. 
The willingness-to-pciy/wiHingness-to-accept method: The theoretically preferred approach is to value a statistical life on 
the basis of what individuals arc willing to pay or accept for risk changes. Such values can be based on methods such as 
"contingent valuation," where individuals are asked directly how much they would be willing to pay to reduce risks. Other 
measures include finding out how much people are spending on safety and disease-preventing measures, or by how much 
wages differ between safe and risky jobs (the "hedonic approach"). For example, suppose 100,000 workers are paid an addi-
tional $15 each to tolerate an increased risk of mortality of 1/100,000. The increased risk will result in one statistical life 
lost, valued at $ 15 X 100,000 = $ 1.500.000. 
One problem with the willingness-to-pay approach is that it relies on individuals having an adequate perception of the 
risks undertaken. This will not always be the case, particularly in developing countries. Another disadvantage of the VVTP 
approach is that the resulting figures depend on factors that may be distributed in a way that is not considered just. Most im-
portant, the estimates depend on a person's income. Rich people are better able to afford safety expenditures, whereas 
poorer people's WTP may be constrained by their ability to pay. WTP estimates will reflect this discrimination against the 
less well off. 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage ami the Benefits of Control 
19, 
BOX 6.1 (cont.): 
Descriptive VOSL estimates 
Studies of the contingent valuation and hedonic wage risk approaches suggest VOSLs in the order of about $1.8-$9 million 
in the developed world, with a best guess of $3.5 million (Viscusi, 1993; ORNL/RFF, 1994). Few studies exist for the de-
veloping world, and it is difficult to say what the results would be for these techniques. Since WTP is constrained by ability 
to pay (wealth and income), the results are likely to be very much lower. A preliminary study for India places "own valua-
tions" at perhaps $ 120,000 (Parikh et al., 1994). 
In the absence of developing country studies, various rough and ready approximations have been tried. However, "bor-
rowing" VOSLs from developed economy studies is hazardous. For example, developing country valuations could be esti-
mated as 
where Idc = less developed or developing economy, dc = developed economy, E either denotes the income elasticity of de-
mand or the elasticity of the marginal utility of income, and Y is income (corrected for purchasing power parity). Develop-
ing countries' VOSLs would simply be "scaled down" by the ratio of incomes raised to the power E. If E= 1, then the 
scaling down is simply done by the ratio of incomes. The above formula reduces to VOSLUk/YUh. = VOSLd/Ydc, that is, the 
VOSL in a developing country is the same proportion of income as it is in the developed economy. In the light of existing 
developing country estimates, this seems a reasonable first approximation. But it still leaves the absolute VOSL lower in de-
veloping countries. Many would therefore argue that interregional comparisons of WTP estimates should be avoided. If 
comparisons are made, the aggregation of individual damages is crucial. 
It can also be argued, however, that the growing international mobility of skills and services will make national differ-
ences in VOSL increasingly less relevant over the next half century (R.K. Pachauri, personal communication, 1995). 
Aggregation 
Aggregation in this context is a political and ethical process, based on rules such as those set out in Chapter 3 (see also Box 
6.2). The aggregation process makes it possible to correct for factors not reflected in individual WTP estimates, such as the 
injustice in the underlying income distribution or different responsibilities for the climate change problem. The process may 
thus result in changes in monetary values based on income levels as they are computed conventionally. For example, if 
VOSL is scaled in proportion to income, as suggested above, and aggregation weights are inversely related to income, 
weighted VOSLs will effectively be equal across countries, as proposed by the prescriptive school. 
Sensitivity analysis 
Fankhauser (1995) estimates 2xCO, damages for all effects at about $ 180.5 billion (1.3% of GDP) for OECD countries and 
about $89.1 billion (1.6% of GDP) for non-OECD countries (see Table 6.6). Of these damages, human mortality accounts 
for $34 billion for OECD countries and $ 15 billion for non-OECD countries. If all mortality damages were valued at a uni-
form average VOSL of $ 1 million, OECD mortality damage would fall to $22.7 billion and the non-OECD figure would rise 
to $115 billion. This change would reduce the overall OECD damage only marginally to 1.22% of GDP but would approxi-
mately double the non-OECD damage estimate to 3.4% of GDP. 
However, because this approach would be premised on a "moral imperative" rather than WTP, for consistency it would 
seem also to require uniform VOSLs across time as well as across countries. An important implication is that by the time the 
damage occurred (e.g., in the middle of the next century), a constant life valuation of $ 1 million would represent a substan-
tially lower fraction of GDP than it would today, especially for developing countries where per capita income should grow 
more rapidly. The sensitivity estimate here would thus tend to overstate damage as a percentage of GDP at the time relevant 
for damage assessment. Similar intertemporal adjustments for moral imperative considerations would generally not be rele-
vant for other damage. 
I9H 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
and Benlham (1993) estimate that the higher temperatures 
predicted for 2050 (about 2.5"C) could result in some 9,000 
fewer winter deaths per year. 
Most economic studies use Kalkstein (1989) as a basis. 
Kalkstein has used statistical methods to analyze the mortal-
ity impact of changed weather conditions under 2xCO, for 
15 major U.S. cities (U.S. EPA, 1989; Kalkstein, 1989). Even 
after accounting for induced acclimatization (based on mor-
tality statistics for control cities with comparable present cli-
mate conditions), he finds that increased summer deaths 
substantially exceed decreased winter deaths. Cline (1992a) 
and Fankhauser (1995) weight these results by population and 
extrapolate that benchmark warming would increase mortality 
by about 27-40 persons per million population, depending on 
the warming scenario. Without acclimatization this figure 
would be about six times higher. For the United States the 
more conservative figure including acclimatization translates 
into 6,600 to 9,800 additional deaths annually for the present 
U.S. population. 
Mortality effects could be particularly damaging in the 
more vulnerable countries of the developing world, where 
mitigating technologies like air conditioning will be less read-
ily available. In Shanghai, for example, death rates from heat 
stress are currently over twice those in New York City (Haines 
and Parry, 1993). Health problems associated with hot spells 
are also significant in Bangladesh (Asaduzzaman, personal 
communication, 1994) and Pakistan (Asian Development Bank, 
1994). Using uniform mortality rates, Fankhauser estimates 
that about 115.000 additional casualties per year could occur 
in non-OECD countries, compared to some 23,000 additional 
annual deaths in the OECD (for 2.5"C warming; see Table 
6.5). Tol (1994b), using the same estimates but without scal-
ing to 2.5 "C warming, arrives at a figure of 215,000 additional 
casualties worldwide. 
Expressing the value of this loss in monetary terms is con-
troversial (see Box 6.1). Cline (1992a) uses lifetime earnings 
to place statistical life valuation at a conservative $595,000 
and reaches a corresponding estimate of $5.8 billion in annual 
U.S. losses from benchmark warming. Using higher values. 
Titus (1992) obtains annual damages of $9.4 billion for the 
U.S. Fankhauser uses value-of-statistical-life estimates of 
$0.1 to 1.5 million, depending on regional income levels, and 
obtains mortality damages of $10 billion in the U.S.. $34 bil-
lion for the OECD. and $49 billion worldwide. If an identical 
value of $1 million for all lives were used worldwide, this lat-
ter figure would rise to almost $140 billion. Tol (1995) as-
sesses a statistical life at $250,000 + 175 x (annual income per 
capita). With worldwide mortality costs of $188 billion. 
health damages account for more than half his aggregate esti-
mate of warming damages. 
In addition to direct heat-related health effects, there could 
be indirect losses from increased vector-borne diseases like 
malaria or yellow fever, as their insect vectors adjust to new 
climate conditions and their risk areas shift (Haines and Parry. 
1993). WHO (1990). for example, suggests that the so far dis-
ease-free highlands o( Ethiopia. Indonesia, and Kenya might 
be invaded by vectors. A study for Indonesia predicts a four-
fold increase in the incidence of deniuie fever and a 2()-25'/r 
increase in malaria cases (Asian Development Bank. 1994) b> 
the latter half of the next century. Global simulations by Mat-
suoka et at. (1994) indicate a 10-30% increase in the number 
of people at risk from malaria under 2xC0 2 conditions. 
Hohmeyer and Gartner (1992) estimate that an extra 200 mil-
lion people could be exposed to malaria worldwide. Martens 
et at. (1994) expect several million additional malaria cases 
by the year 2100. Vector-borne diseases may also spread into 
developed countries. Simulations dealing with a possible in-
crease of malaria in the U.S. are, however, inconclusive (U.S. 
EPA, 1989). 
The increased occurrence of flooding could lead to a 
higher incidence of diseases associated with poor sanitation 
standards, particularly in developing countries. For Indonesia 
it has been estimated that, by the year 2070, cases of diarrhoea 
could rise to over 900 per 10,000 inhabitants, compared to 
300 cases per 10,000 people in 1989 (Asian Development 
Bank, 1994). 
The emerging picture of health impacts thus indicates that 
the indirect effects could by far exceed the direct losses. 
6.2.9 Air 
pollution 
A warmer climate could aggravate some urban pollution prob-
lems. In the U.S., tropospheric ozone is the most severe prob-
lem in terms of the number of persons living in areas with air 
quality indexes that violate national standards (75 million per-
sons in 1986). Total suspended particulates (TSP) and carbon 
monoxide are also important (41 million each). TSP is also 
implicated in widespread health damage in the developing 
world and the economies in transition. 
Numerous studies confirm that ozone concentrations rise 
with temperature (see, e.g., IPCC, 1990b). The U.S. EPA. al-
ter summarizing various U.S. estimates, concluded that a 4CC 
rise in temperature (about what could be expected for the U.S. 
under 2.5°C global mean warming) could cause an increase in 
peak ozone concentrations of 10%. The result would be to 
double the number of cities in violation of the air quality stan-
dards from 68 to 136, causing most midsize and some small 
cities in the Midwest, South, and East to be added to the list of 
those presently in violation. 
Applying its past models relating ozone concentrations lo 
emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), the U.S. 
EPA estimates that it would be necessary to reduce V0C 
emissions in the U.S. by 700,000 tonnes from a year-2000 ex-
pected base of 6 million tonnes to offset the effects of 2\C0. 
warming on ozone formation. At an estimated cost of $5,000 
per tonne, the agency calculates that the resulting costs would 
amount to $3.5 billion annually (U.S. EPA, 1989). Cline (1 Wm 
uses this figure as an estimate of U.S. air pollution damage to 
be expected from benchmark warming. In comparison, air 
pollution control expenditure in 1987 was $27 billion (U.S. 
EPA. 1990). 
Titus (1992) estimates U.S. tropospheric ozone damage 
from benchmark warming at $27.2 billion annually. This i> al-
most an order of magnitude higher than Cline. although both 
figures are based on the U.S. EPA (1989) estimate. The differ-
ence appears to be that Titus projects a high baseline of V0C 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Bene/its of Control 
IW 
emissions at 3% growth and reaching an implied 70 million 
tonnes by 2060, whereas the U.S. EPA estimate is based on 
the present scale of emissions. Although some allowance for 
growth in the base is appropriate, it seems unlikely that the 
pollution baseline would grow faster than GDP and energy 
output. 
Instead of calculating the additional expenditures needed 
to maintain present air quality standards, Fankhauser (1995) 
estimates the extra damage occurring if air quality standards 
were allowed to deteriorate. Assuming increases in NOx and 
SO, emissions of 5.5% and 2% (based on U.S. EPA, 1989) re-
spectively, he estimates additional air pollution damages of 
$12 billion in the OECD and $15 billion worldwide (see also 
Table 6.13 for cost of air pollution estimates). 
6.2.10 Water pollution 
Titus (1992) and Nishioka et al. (1993) have identified water 
pollution as a category with potentially large damages due to 
climate change. They predict a likely decline in river flow be-
cause of lesser water runoff. Because rivers carry away waste, 
reduced river flow leaves more waste to be removed by emis-
sion controls. In addition, a higher water temperature could 
affect water quality through a reduction in the level of dis-
solved oxygen (ECLAC, 1993). Nishioka et al. also discuss a 
poss^le decrease in the water quality of lakes through in-
cre; ied algae growth. 
In assessing the impact of water pollution on the U.S., Ti-
tus assumes that the discharge of pollutants would change by 
the same proportion as river flow. He cites U.S. EPA estimates 
to establish a base of $64 billion for U.S. water pollution con-
trol costs in the year 2000 (at constant 1990 prices). Accord-
ing to his calculations, runoff declines by 2-4% if either 
precipitation decreases by 1% or temperature increases by 
0.4°C. Setting the elasticity of control costs (percent change 
for a 1% change in river flow) at 1 to 1.7, Titus concludes that 
water pollution control costs imposed on the U.S. by bench-
mark climate change would be in the range of $15 billion to 
S67 billion annually, with a central estimate of $34 billion. 
Like Titus's estimate for forest damage, this estimate dwarfs 
typical damage calculations for most other individual cate-
gories. Yet water pollution is one of the most underresearched 
aspects of economic damage. 
6.2.11 Migration 
Shoreline erosion, river and coastal flooding, and severe 
drought could displace millions of people. Less dramatically, 
an accelerated decline in soil quality could also induce addi-
tional migration (IPCC, 1996b). Myers (1993) calculates that 
there will be 150 million additional refugees, or 1.5% of the 
world population in 2050, as a result of climate change, but 
many assumptions are behind this estimate. Schelling (1983) 
views migration as an efficient adaptive response to climate 
change. However, presumably a cost should be imputed to the 
utility loss by families compelled to migrate (Jansen. 1993). 
Indeed, historically, peoples have often fought wars to avoid 
being forced to leave their homelands. Tol (1995) arbitrarily 
puts this loss at three times the average annual income per 
capita in the region of departure. This is reflected in Table 6.6. 
There is also a cost to the recipient host country. In many 
countries, for example, European countries and the U.S., the 
costs of incorporating immigrants into the social welfare in-
frastructure are already a politically sensitive source of social 
and budgetary pressure. 
Cline (1992a) reports estimates that 640,000 legal immi-
grants have entered the U.S. annually in recent years, in addi-
tion to perhaps 130.000 illegal immigrants (Goering, 1990). 
He hypothesizes an increase of 25% in illegal immigration 
and 10% in legal immigration as a consequence of benchmark 
warming. Based on total per capita spending by state and local 
governments, and assuming 18 months before an immigrant's 
tax payments cover the family's social infrastructure costs, 
Cline estimates costs at $4,500 per immigrant; Ayres and 
Walter (1991) similarly cite a figure of $4,000 per refugee 
accepted by the U.S. Cline (1992a) estimates annual immigra-
tion costs to the U.S. from 2xCC\ warming at $450 million. 
The hardship and stress suffered by refugees remain un-
counted, though. Fankhauser (1995) has extended the Cline 
estimates to the world as a whole, assuming that current mi-
gration patterns continue to hold (see Table 6.5). 
6.2.12 Human amenity 
Mearns et al. (1984) use statistical distributions of current 
temperatures to explore the impact of climate change on ex-
treme temperature events for the U.S. In their base case, they 
increase mean temperature by 3°F (1.7°C) and hold the vari-
ance and autocorrelation of daily temperatures constant. Un-
der these assumptions, they calculate that the frequency of 
heat waves (defined as 5 consecutive days with a maximum 
temperature of at least 35°C) would multiply threefold (esti-
mated for Des Moines, Iowa). There is reason to believe that 
people would be willing to pay something to avoid a threefold 
increase in the incidence of heat waves. At the same time, cli-
mate change would reduce the disamenity of severe winters in 
colder areas. The net balance under benchmark warming is 
unclear. As suggested below, however, for much higher warm-
ing over the very long term, the amenity damages would be 
more likely to dominate. 
Cline (1992a) provides an order of magnitude estimate of 
the value of the disamenity caused by a sharp increase in the 
number of hot spells in the U.S. Assuming that people are 
willing to pay 0.25% of their income to avoid this and other 
disamenities. a $10 billion loss per year results.4 
Leary (1994) has surveyed the available empirical evi-
dence on the implicit valuation of amenity due to local cli-
matic variation in the U.S. The results of this study are that: 
• Individuals value changes in climate and are willing to 
accept lower wages, or pay more for property, in return 
for an improved local climate. Some migratory patterns 
are explained by climate differences. 
• In the U.S. these values appear to be substantial, rang-
ing from hundreds to thousands of U.S. dollars per 
household (in present value terms). 
200 
('limale Change /VV.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cliniv.:< 
• 
Households prefer sunny, mild climates. Increases in 
winter temperature and the number of sunny days are 
favoured, whereas higher summer temperatures deter 
migrants, so that hot summers appear to be a disamenity. 
These findings are intuitively appealing, but characterization 
of "climate preferences" is not robust across the studies evalu-
ated, and it is not possible, therefore, to say whether climate 
change will, on balance, increase or decrease climate amenity. 
As with other aspects of the economics of climate change, 
these results are relevant only to the U.S. and perhaps to other 
temperate industrialized zones where housing and labour mar-
kets respond to differentials in housing and work characteris-
tics. 
Amenity effects would vary by region, tending towards 
damages in presently warm areas and gains in presently cold 
areas. Potentially, amenity valuations could be large in ab-
solute terms, because they apply to the entire income base of 
the population. However, the tendency towards neutralization 
by the differential effects among geographic regions and be-
tween seasons would tend to reduce the overall magnitude of 
amenity effects. 
6.2.13 Ecosystem and biodiversity 
loss 
Perhaps the category in which losses from climate change 
could be among the largest, yet where past research has been 
the most limited, is that of ecosystem impacts. Uncertainties 
arise both because of the unknown character of ecosystem im-
pacts, and because of the difficulty of assessing these impacts 
from a socioeconomic point of view and translating them into 
welfare costs. Existing figures are all rather speculative. There 
is a serious need for conceptual and quantitative work in this 
area. 
The U.S. EPA (1989) has noted in general terms the risk of 
increased species extinction from climate change, because of 
changes in habitat, predator/prey relationships, and physio-
logical changes. It cites the poleward migration of forests as a 
major reason to expect stress on species, especially in view of 
natural and manmade barriers to species migration. Another 
category of likely species loss is that of coral reefs, as sug-
gested by recent instances of coral death from El Nino warm-
ing (Glynn and de Weerdt. 1991). 
Economists identify three types of value: direct and indi-
rect use value (e.g.. plant inputs into medicine and the role of 
mangrove forests in coastal protection): option value (pre-
serving a species to retain the possibility that it may be of eco-
nomic use in the future): and existence value (e.g.. the value 
of knowing that there still are blue whales). Table 6.2 (based 
on Pearce. 1993) summarizes the results of "contingent valua-
tion" sample survey estimates of what the public would be 
willing to pay to preserve an endangered animal species. Av-
erage values range from $1 to $18 per person per year for 
preservation of an individual species, with a maximum of $40 
to $64 obtained for humpback whales. The willingness to pay 
figure for the preservation of entire habitats is somewhat 
higher, with a range of $9 to SI07 per person and year. 
The economic value of plants is dominated by their poten-
tial significance for medicinal purposes. Pearce (1993) notes 
Table 6.2. Preference valuation for endangered species and 
prized 
habitats 
Country 
Species or Habitat 
Value 
(1990$/year/person) 
Norway 
Brown bear, wolf, 
and wolverine 
15.0 
United States 
Australia 
UK 
Conservation of rivers 
against hydroelectric 
development 
Bald eagle 
Emerald shiner 
Grizzly bear 
Bighorn sheep 
Whooping crane 
Blue whale 
Bottlenose dolphin 
California sea otter 
Northern elephant seal 
Humpback whale" 
Grand Canyon 
(visibility) 
Colorado wilderness 
Nadgee Nature Reserve 
(NSW) 
Kakadu Conservation 
Zone (NT)'' 
Nature reserves' 
59.0-107.0 
12.4 
4.5 
18.5 
8.6 
1.2 
9.3 
7.0 
8.1 
8.1 
40-48 
(without information) 
49-64 
(with information) 
27.0 
9.3-21.2 
28.1 
40.0 (minor damages 
93.0 (major damages 
40.0 
"Respondents divided into two groups, one of which was given video 
information. 
'Two scenarios of mining development damage were given to re-
spondents. 
'Survey of informed individuals only. 
Note: People's willingness to pay (WTP) to preserve all listed 
species is not necessarily identical to the sum of individual WTP es-
timates, because of the so-called "embedding effect" (WTP estimates 
elicited in surveys depend on the "bundle of goods" presented to the 
interviewee; see Mitchell and Carson, 1989). 
Source: Pearce (1993). 
that in the U.S. about 40 plant species accounted for plant-
based prescription sales of some $15-20 billion per year dur-
ing the 1980s (at 1990 prices). This would imply an economic 
value of at least $300 million per successful species and year. 
The figure could rise up to several billion dollars if values 
were calculated using statistical life valuation on the basis of 
deaths avoided. These are averages, and some species are 
clearly more valuable than others. Nevertheless, the figure 
can provide some indication of the lost pharmaceutical value 
from disappearing species. Some 60,000 plant species are ex-
pected to become extinct over the next fifty years. Given tlu: 
the probability of a plant species yielding a successful drug i-
between 1:10.000 and 1:1.000. between 6 and 60 plant specie-
with potential drug value could thereby be lost. With a mean 
loss of 30 such species, and applying the price range \u< 
Tlw Social Costs of Climate Change: (lrceiilwii.se Damage atu 
noted, Pearce (1993) calculates that the annual losses for the 
U.S. could amount to between $8.8 billion and $180 billion 
(assuming there are no synthetic substitutes). By implication, 
if climate change were to increase these expected losses by 
just 10%, loss of plant species alone could cause annual U.S. 
losses from climate change in the order of $1 billion to $18 
billion in gross value terms (or less, once production costs are 
allowed for). 
Monetary estimates of ecosystem damages through climate 
change are invariably ad hoc. Fankhauser (1995) cites the 
Pearce (1993) survey (see Table 6.2) to arrive at a willing-
ness-to-pay estimate of $30 per person per year to avoid 
species and habitat loss from climate change. Total costs 
amount to about $40 billion annually for the world as a whole, 
with about one-third occurring in developing countries. Cline 
(1992a) arrives at an estimate of about $4 billion annually as a 
notional value of species loss from benchmark global warm-
ing for the U.S., but suggests that the figure could as easily be 
an order of magnitude higher ($40 billion). The estimate is 
based on an extrapolation of observed U.S. public expendi-
tures for the preservation of one particular species (the spotted 
owl). 
6.2.14 Extreme weather events 
Along with changes in the mean climate, there will most 
likely also be changes in the extremes. Changes in the ex-
treme values of meteorological variables are not necessarily 
proportional to changes in the mean (IPCC, 1996b). Also, ex-
tremes are of more importance in studying the socioeconomic 
impacts of climate change. Most societies, in accommodating 
to the environment they live in. have developed strategies to 
cope with only a limited range of climatic events. Within this 
range, the "normal" variability is regarded as a resource, 
whereas the extremes constitute hazards (Heathcote. 1985). 
All kinds of adaptation mechanisms, such as dikes, shelters, 
and insurance, exist to deal with these extremes. However, 
adaptation requires investment (capital, time, skills) and is, 
therefore, limited. 
Measures to adapt to natural hazards comprise a mix of 
physical, economic, and societal features. At the physical 
level, these include building design and protective structures 
such as dikes. At the economic level, personal savings and in-
surance help to cover the cost of damage. At the societal level, 
there are social safety nets, charity, and the government. Dif-
ferent adaptation mechanisms exhibit different degrees of 
flexibility: An insurance policy is valid for one year; an aver-
age Dutch dike has a lifetime of about two centuries. Flexi-
bility to adapt is enhanced through constant changes in pop-
ulation and industrialization, as well as through changes in the 
legal, economic, financial, and social systems (Berz and Con-
rad. 1993; see also Section 6.2.6). In addition, climate itself 
constantly changes. 
It is clear from the above that the qualification "extreme 
event" or "disaster" is a social construct. Such constructs are 
hard to measure, and the difficulty is increased by continuous 
change in the mechanisms for coping with natural disasters. 
Also, although the direct impacts of natural disasters may 
be harmful, indirect impacts are hardly measurable on a 
the Benefits of Control 
201 
macroscale (Albala-Bertrand. 1993). and the event might set 
in motion a chain of beneficial changes, compensating for the 
initial losses. Finally, a disaster is not only local in a social 
and temporal sense but also in a spatial sense. The current 
generation of GCMs is not capable of reproducing present ex-
tremes very well, certainly not without spatial filtering, nor 
is it capable of deriving changes in extremes due to the en-
hanced greenhouse effect (IPCC, 1996b). 
Little systematic research into the impact of changes in ex-
treme weather events has been carried out. The natural disas-
ter impact community, structured by the United Nations' 
International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, mainly 
studies present risks, although it is aware of the enhanced 
greenhouse effect (Olsthoorn ct ai. 1994). The climatic change 
impact community focusses on changes in the mean, although 
attention is increasingly paid to extremes. So far, most atten-
tion has been paid to tropical cyclones, changes in which ap-
pear to be one of the most controversial questions of climate 
change research. 
Tropical cyclones. The impact of climate change on tropi-
cal storms is still unclear. Hansen el al. (1989) concluded 
that climate change would bring "increased intensity" of 
"both ordinary thunderstorms and mesoscale tropical storms." 
Wendland (1977) has provided empirical support for the 
relationship of hurricanes to ocean surface temperatures. 
From monthly data for 1971-81, the frequency of hurricanes 
is closely related to the size of ocean area with temperature 
over 26.8°C. and the relationship is exponential. Similarly. 
Emanuel (1987) argues that tropical cyclones are "particularly 
sensitive to sea surface temperature." and expects a 40-50% 
increase in the destructive potential of hurricanes under 
2xCO,. Houghton (1994) estimates an increase in both the 
frequency and severity of tropical and other storms. Haarsma 
et al. (1993). Ryan ct al. (1992). and others come to similar 
conclusions. 
Other results, on the other hand, give a less clear-cut pic-
ture (see, e.g.. Broccoli and Manabe, 1990; Maunder, 1994; 
Rape,. 1993; Lighthill et al.. 1994). Idso et al. (1990), for ex-
ample, argue that tropical sea surface temperatures would in-
crease very little with global warming, whereas the tropical 
tropopause could become more stable, leading to less intense 
cyclones. Bengtsson et al. (1995). using a transient ocean-
atmosphere GCM, find a decrease in tropica! cyclone num-
bers under enhanced greenhouse conditions. IPCC (1990a) 
judges that the impact of climate change on storm intensity is 
"ambiguous." 
The available economic estimates, based on earlier clima-
tological findings, lend to include increased hurricane damage 
as part of the damage to be expected from climate change (see 
Tables 6.4 to 6.6). Thus. Cline (1992a) reviews past hurricane 
damage for the U.S. and applies the 5(Y/t increase implied by 
Emanuel to estimate that benchmark warming would impose 
average annual damages of $750 million. 
In an average year about 70 to 80 tropical cyclones are 
recorded worldwide, causing damages of about $1.5 billion, 
with a death toll of 15.000 to 23.000 lives (Smith. 1992; 
Bryant. 1991). The occurrence of tropical cyclones is distrib-
uted unevenly over the globe. Northern regions like the former 
Soviet Union and Europe, lor example, arc only marginally 
202 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Client 
Table 6.3. Reported fatalities due to weather events, 
1989-1992 
Region 
Africa 
Asia 
South America 
Central and North 
America 
Southwest 
Pacific 
Europe 
Total: 
All events 
Excluding major 
disasters 
1989 
31 
>4,300 
>35 
>75 
17 
>52 
>4,483 
>4,483 
Total Number 
1990 
138 
>3,280 
26 
>57 
804 
>129 
>4,434 
>4,434 
1991 
>621 
> 142,000 
>3,000" 
>117 
>86 
6,640 
296 
>65 
> 149,529 
>4,185 
1992 
>360 
>69« 
>7,766 
>2,766& 
108 
>131 
90 
>424 
>8,879 
>3,588 
Average 
>288 
>215« 
>39,337 
>3,337* 
>72 
>87 
1,888 
302' 
>161 
>41,831 
>4,173 
"Excluding the Madagascar 1992 drought and famine. 
''Excluding the Bangladesh 1991 and Pakistan 1992 Hoods. 
'Excluding the Philippines 1991 slorm. 
Source: Limbert (1993). 
affected. Based on the natural hazard map of Berz (1990), 
Fankhauser (1995) has estimated that the U.S. is affected by 
7% of all tropical cyclones, while another 1% occur in China, 
and 29% in OECD nations other than the U.S. (Australia, 
Japan, New Zealand). Combining this distributional pat-
tern with the Smith and Bryant figures and the Emanuel 
estimate, Fankhauser (1995) arrives at an additional 8,000 
cyclone casualties, practically all in developing countries. Us-
ing the same value-of-life estimates as for health dam-
ages, and adding in $630 million additional property damages, 
total worldwide hurricane damage amounts to about $2.7 bil-
lion. 
These average figures arc overshadowed, however, by the 
disastrous consequences of individual events, with poorer 
countries, especially small islands, being particularly vulner-
able (see Box 6.3). In 1970 a cyclone caused more than 
500,000 deaths in what is now Bangladesh. In 1985 a similar 
disaster in the same region killed another 100.000 people 
(Bryant. 1991). The $2.7 billion figure may therefore underes-
timate the true costs. 
Extratropical storms. Dlugolecki et al. (1994: see also Mu-
nich Re. 1993) report that worldwide losses due to major 
windstorm events have averaged $2.0. $2.9. and $3.4 billion 
(1990 prices) for the decades of the 1960s. 1970s, and 1980s 
respectively. For 1990-92 this figure has risen to $20.2 bil-
lion. The larger part of these damages is due to tropical cy-
clones, however. The 1990 storms in Europe (Daria. Herta. 
Vivian, and Wiebke) resulted in a total loss of DM 25.3 billion 
(Munich Re. 1993). However, although storm damages have 
clearly increased over the last decades, it is not clear how 
much of this rise is attributable to climate change. The results 
of Changnon and Changnon (1992) and CATMAP (Clark. 
1 OSS; ll)9|) indicate that most (if it is probably due to socioe-
conomic developments. 
River floods. Little information is currently available re-
garding the socioeconomic impact of changes in the fre-
quency and intensity of river floods (see Arnell and Dubourg. 
1994). 
Droughts. The impact of drought on agriculture has al-
ready been treated in Section 6.2.1. As an alternative way to 
estimate agricultural damage, Cline (1992a) reports an annual 
loss imposed on U.S. agriculture by increased drought of SIB 
billion/year. Water supply in general is dealt with in Section 
6.2.4. The effect of decreased water runoff is partly dealt with 
in the section on water pollution (6.2.10). A further impact of 
drought is land subsidence. The 1975-76 drought in England 
and Wales, for example, led to a cost of £ 100 million to the in-
surance industry (Doornkamp, 1993). By 1979 the costs had 
amounted to £220 million. Finally, drought has implications 
for hydropower productivity. The 1987-91 drought in Califor-
nia cost an estimated $3 billion (Gleick and Nash. 1991). 
Dracup et al. (1993) report a potential loss in Northern Cali-
fornian hydroelectricity of 40%, or $370 million per year, for 
their drought scenario. Nash and Gleick (1993) highlight the 
high sensitivity of hydropower production to changes in 
runoff. 
Hot and cold spells. The impacts of hot and cold weather 
spells on health and human amenity were treated in Section-
6.2.8 and 6.2.12 above. 
Total losses. Table 6.3 (after Limbert. 1993) provides total 
fatalities attributed to weather events between 1989 and \K 
as reported for the six WMO regions. The average number of 
lives lost to natural hazards is more than 4.000 per year, with 
the highest proportion occurring in Asia. This is likely to be 
an underestimate, because some major events are not in-
cluded. As already mentioned in Section 6.2.6. losses due to 
natural hazards have increased dramatically over the past 
decade. Whether anthropogenic climate change has eon-
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
26U 
Table 6.4. Monetized 2xC02 damage to present U.S. economy 
(base year 1990; billion $ of annual 
damage) 
Damage Category 
Agriculture 
Forest loss 
Species loss 
Sea level rise 
Electricity 
Non-elec. heating 
Human amenity 
Human morbidity 
Human life 
Migration 
Hurricanes 
Construction 
Leisure activities 
Water supply 
Availability 
Pollution 
Urban infrastructure 
Air pollution 
Trap. 0 3 
Other 
Mobile air cond. 
Total 
Cline 
(2.5°C) 
17.5 
3.3 
4.0 + a'' 
7.0 
11.2 
-1.3 
+ bc 
+ cc 
5.8 
0.5 
0.8 
±d c 
1.7 
7.0 
— 
0.1 
3.5 
+ec 
— 
61.1 
+ a + b + c ± d + ec 
(%ofGDP) 
(1.1) 
Fankhauser 
(2.5"C) 
8.4 
0.7 
8.4 
9.0 
7.9 
— 
— 
— 
11.4 
0.6 
0.2 
— 
— 
15.6 
— 
— 
7.3 
— 
— 
69.5 
(1.3) 
Nordhaus 
(3"C)« 
1.1 
small 
c 
12.2 
1.1 
id 
55.5 
(1.0) 
Titus 
(4"C) 
1.2 
43.6 
— 
5.7 
5.6 
— 
— 
— 
9.4 
— 
— 
— 
— 
11.4 
32.6 
— 
27.2 
— 
2.5 
139.2 
(2.5) 
Tol 
(2.5°C)A 
10.0 
— • 
5.0 
8.5 
— 
— 
12.0 
— 
37.4 
1.0 
0.3 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
74.2 
(1.5)* 
Transformed to 1990 base. 
'U.S. and Canada, base year 1988. 
'Costs that have been identified but not estimated. 
'Not assessed categories, estimated at 0.75% of GDP. 
Note: Figures represent best guesses of the respective authors. Although none of the studies reports 
explicit confidence intervals, figures should be seen as reflecting orders of magnitude only. 
Sources: Clme (1992a), Fankhauser (1995), Nordhaus (1991), Titus (1992), Tol (1995). 
tributed to this death toll and, if so, to what extent, is, how-
ever, unclear. The strong trends in losses allow us to display 
only short-term averages. 
6.2.15 Summary of damage 
estimates 
Tables 6.4 to 6.6 summarize the principal existing estimates 
of climate change damage for major regions of the world. In 
the U.S., losses from benchmark 2xCO, equivalent warming 
reach over 1 % of GDP in the Cline, Fankhauser, and Tol com-
pilations, and some 2.5% of GDP in the central Titus esti-
mates. Titus specifies a lower and upper end of his range of 
estimates, at 0.8% and 5.4% of GDP, respectively. It should 
also be noted that the Titus estimates are based on GCMs with 
average warming projections of about 4"C. higher than the 
IPCC's best guess of 2.5QC. Estimates for other OKCD coun-
tries are mostly of the same order of magnitude of 1-2% of 
GDP (see Table 6.6). 
204 
Climate Change IW5 - Economic ami Social Dimensions oj Climate Cluing 
Table 6.5. 2xC01 damage in physical units: different world regions (2.5°C 
warming) 
Type of 
Damage 
Agriculture 
Forestry 
Fishery 
Energy 
Water 
Coastal 
protection 
Dryland loss 
Wetland loss 
Ecosystem loss 
Health/mortality 
Air pollution 
Trop. O, 
SO, 
Migration 
Hurricanes 
Casualties 
Damages 
Damage Indicator 
Welfare loss (% GNP) 
Forest area lost (km2) 
Reduced catch (1,000 t) 
Rise in electricity demand 
(TWh) 
Reduced water availability (km1) 
Annual capital costs (m$/yr) 
Area lost (1,000 km2) 
Area lost (1,000 km2) 
Number of protected habitats lost, 
assuming 2% loss (Section 3.2.12) 
Number of deaths (1,000) 
Equivalent increase in emissions 
(1,000 tNOx) 
(1,000 t sulphur) 
Additional immigrants (1,000) 
Number of deaths 
m$ 
EU 
0.21 
52 
558 
54.2 
15.3 
133 
1.6 
9.9 
16 
8.8 
566 
285 
229 
0 
0 
USA 
0.16 
282 
452 
92.0 
32.7 
176 
10.7 
11.1 
8 
6.6 
1,073 
422 
100 
72 
115 
Ex-
USSR 
0.24 
908 
814 
54.6 
24.7 
51 
23.9 
9.8 
N/A 
7.7 
1,584 
1,100 
153 
44 
1 
China 
2.10 
121 
464 
17.1 
32.2 
24 
0 
11.9 
4 
29.4 
227 
258 
583 
779 
13 
Non-
OECD 
0.28 
334 
4,326 
142.7 
168.5 
514 
99.5 
219.1 
53 
114.8 
2,602 
1,864 
2,279 
7,687 
124 
OECD 
0.17 
901 
2,503 
211.2 
62.2 
493 
40.4 
33.9 
53 
22.9 
1,943 
873 
455 
313 
506 
World 
0.23 
1,235 
6,829 
353.9 
230.7 
1,007 
139.9 
253.0 
106 
137.7 
4,545 
2,737 
2,734 
8,000 
630 
Source: after Fankhauser (1995). 
Less comprehensive estimates by Nordhaus (1991), again 
for the U.S., arrive at a direct calculation of only 0.26% of 
GDP, primarily from sea level rise; but Nordhaus also sets 1% 
of GDP as a reasonable central estimate. The CRU/ERL 
(1992) estimates for the European Union, on the other hand, 
are significantly higher, with costs in the order of 1.6% of na-
tional income per degree of warming. The principal reason for 
this is a very high assessment of sea level rise damages, aug-
mented by a factor of 2.7 to account for storm surges. On the 
other hand, their assessment of non-sea level rise impacts is 
less pessimistic, with an overall beneficial outcome in these 
categories. 
However, these damage figures are likely to deviate from 
the "true" impacts, for three main reasons. First, several ef-
fects arc not adequately quantified (e.g.. nontropical storms. 
droughts, floods, morbidity, transport). Second, adaptation is 
not fully taken into account. Third, the figures are far from ex-
act, and one should allow for a considerable margin of error. 
Many arc deliberately kept conservative. Species loss valua-
tion in particular could be far higher. The economic figures 
presented also suffer from the fact that they are based on ear-
lier climate and impact research. 
It should also be emphasized that the estimates in Tables 
6.4 to 6.6 refer to central warming expectations. The corre-
sponding damages for upper-bound warming would be higher. 
and more than linearly so. Also, when moving from the ques-
tion of damage estimation to that of abatement benefits, a 
number of benefits not related to climate change need to be 
taken into account (see Section 6.7). 
Regional differences can be substantial, as exemplified by 
the estimates for developing regions and the former USSR 
(see also Section 6.5). For the former Soviet Union, damage 
could be significantly below average, or even negative (i.e.. 
climate change would be beneficial). A generally beneficial 
impact, as, for example, estimated by Tol (1995). mainly 
stems from large beneficial impacts in the agricultural sector. 
In the Fankhauser study, on the other hand, possible beneficial 
yield impacts are more than offset by the adverse impact of in-
creased world prices on food imports. The region will also 
suffer from particularly high health and air pollution cosh 
The extremely high estimate for the Asian regions and Africa. 
on the other hand, are predominantly due to the severe 
life/morbidity impacts. As explained above, both the quantitative 
assessment and the underlying value-of-stalistical-life estimate-, 
are very volatile, and the probability range of total damage h 
particularly wide for these regions. 
Damage is likely to be more severe in developing countries 
than in developed countries, as is shown in Table 6.6 and dis-
cussed in Box 6.3. Table 6.6 reports damages for the non-
OECD region of about 1.6-2.7% of GDP. some 5(K higher 
than the OECD average. The main causes for this high esti-
mate are health impacts and the high proportion of natural 
habitats and wetlands found in developing countries. Al-
though the data for the non-OECD estimates are significant!) 
weaker, they provide a clear indication that climate change 
will have its worst impacts in the developing world. 
In general, the estimates in Tables 6.4 to 6.6 show a rela-
tively narrow band for central damage calculations for the 
U.S. and for developed countries in general. It is importantte 
recognize, however, that this field of estimates is probabh hi-
The Social Costs oj Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
20.S 
Table 6.6. Monetized 2xC07 damage in different world 
regions (annual damages) 
Region 
European Union 
United States 
Other OECD 
OECD America 
OECD Europe 
OECD Pacific 
Total OECD 
E. Europe/ 
former USSR 
Centrally 
planned Asia 
South and 
Southeast Asia 
Africa 
Latin America 
Middle East 
Total non-OECD 
World'' 
Fankhauser(1995) 
bn$ 
%GDP« 
63.6 
61.0 
55.9 
180.5 
18.2* 
16.7f 
89.1 
269.6 
1.4 
1.3 
1.4 
1.3 
0.7* 
4.7C 
1.6 
1.4 
bn$ 
74.2 
56.5 
59.0 
189.5 
-7.9 
18.0 
53.5 
30.3 
31.0 
1.3 
126.2 
315.7 
Tol(1995) 
%GDP" 
1.5 
1.3 
2.8 
1.6 
-0.3 
5.2 
8.6 
8.7 
4.3 
4.1 
2.7 
1.9 
"Note that the GDP base may differ between the studies. 
'Former Soviet Union only. 
'China only. 
'Percentage of GDP figures are based on market exchange rate GDP. 
The order of magnitude of estimates does not change if uncorrected 
damage categories are purchasing-power-parity adjusted and ex-
pressed as a fraction of PPP-corrected GDP. 
Sources: As shown. 
ased towards convergence. The reason is that, with the excep-
tion of CRU/ERL (1992), the underlying sources of many of 
the estimates are the same, particularly U.S. EPA (1989). The 
convergence tends to become extrapolated to other regions, 
too, considering that several of the international estimates in 
Fankhauser (1995) and Tol (1995) are obtained by extrapola-
tion of the U.S. estimates. The similarity of the estimates 
should therefore not be interpreted as evidence of their robust-
ness. A substantial degree of uncertainty remains. Neverthe-
less, the relative ranking of regions appears to be reasonably 
robust, with the most severe impacts to be expected in Asia 
and Africa, and northern and developed regions suffering less. 
The worldwide estimates of Table 6.6 are expressed as the 
total sum of regional damages relative to the global sum of 
GDP. As discussed in Box 6.2. this is one of many possible 
ways to calculate global damages from regional or individual 
estimates. It can also be argued on equity grounds that there 
should be greater weights placed on impacts for low income 
countries than would result from simply applying their shares 
in the global income base. 
It is useful to consider the results of an opinion survey of 
nineteen climate change experts from both the physical sci-
ences and economics (Nordhaus. 1994a: see Table 6.7). For a 
3 C actual warming by 2090 (scenario A), estimated global 
damages ranged from zero to 21% of gross world product. 
with a mean value of 3.6%. For a more rapid and severe 
warming (scenario C) the mean increases to 10.4% of GDP. 
Diverging from the estimates of Table 6.4, virtually all the re-
spondents judged that more than half of the damages would 
occur in the market sectors (such as agriculture) rather than in 
sectors outside the standard system of national accounts (bio-
diversity, amenity). 
6.3 Damage Estimates for Longer-Term Warming 
The benchmark of a doubling of the atmospheric COy-equivalent 
concentration could be reached around the middle of the next 
century. Yet it is unlikely that greenhouse gas emissions and at-
mospheric buildup would stop at that point. A long-term view 
on climate change impacts is therefore important, even though 
the need for socioeconomic forecasts over more than a century 
makes this task extremely problematic (see also Section 6.2). 
Sundquist (1990) has estimated that there are sufficient 
fossil fuel reserves to permit emissions of carbon dioxide to 
rise to the point where its atmospheric concentration might 
reach 1,600 ppm by the year 2200. After that, the exhaustion 
of reserves would reduce emissions and allow concentrations 
to plateau through the year 2300 and then moderate back to 
about 1,200 ppm over a 400-year period as a consequence of 
deep-ocean mixing. With preinduslrial concentrations of 280 
ppm, this scenario amounts to a potential rise of nearly sixfold 
in carbon dioxide concentrations alone. Cline (1992a) uses 
a 300-year time horizon to investigate the very long-term 
impacts of climate change. On the basis of fossil fuel (pri-
marily coal) reserves estimated by Edmonds and Reilly 
(1985), he concludes that as much as 14,000 Gt of car-
bon (GtC) could be available for use at reasonable economic 
cost. He applies three leading energy-carbon models (Reilly et 
«/., 1987; Nordhaus and Yohe, 1983; Manne and Richels. 
1992) that project carbon emissions until the year 2100, and 
extrapolates their growth rates through to 2275. Average 
emissions rise from 7 GtC today to 20 GtC by 2100 and 56 
GtC by 2275. 
Under the assumption that atmospheric retention remains 
at its recent 50% level. Cline estimates carbon concentrations 
on the order of 2,200 ppm by 2275. or about eight times pre-
industrial levels. The corresponding increase in radiative forc-
ing would reach about 13 Wm - from carbon alone, or some 
19 Wm"2 from all greenhouse gases. With the central IPCC 
climate sensitivity of 2.5°C for 4 Wm :, the resulting mean 
warming would be almost 12 C. On this basis, Cline (1992a) 
sets 10°C (the lowest range from the three emission models) 
as a tentative benchmark for ultimate warming over a 300-
year period. 
Warming of this magnitude would take the earth back to 
the climate of the mid-Cretaceous period 100 million years 
ago. when mean temperatures were an estimated 6-12'C 
higher than today (Hoffert and Covey. 1992). If the upper-
bound climate sensitivity of 4.5'C is applied instead, very 
long-term warming could reach approximately 18"C. The cor-
responding lower-bound estimate would be 6"C if the climate 
sensitivity were 1.5 C. 
Recent simulations using the GFDL (Geophysical Fluid 
Dynamics Laboratory) general circulation model at Princeton 
206 
Climate Change 1W5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluwj-
BOX 6.2: DAMAGE AGGREGATION ACROSS COUNTRIES AND INDIVIDUALS 
Cost-benefit analysis assumes that the monetary values of damage can be aggregated across (a) individuals and (b) coun-
tries. This aggregation process raises an important problem of so-called interpersonal comparisons of utility, where utility is 
simply another word for "welfare" or "well-being." Basically, introspection allows any one individual to assess his or her 
own preferences, but perhaps not others' preferences. Each individual knows by how much he or she is better off in situation 
X compared to situation Y, but he or she cannot assess how this change compares to the extent to which someone else is bet-
ter off for the same change of situation. This inability to assess other minds produces the theorem that it is impossible to 
make comparisons of well-being between individuals and hence, by extension, between countries. There are, therefore, end-
less numbers of ways in which individuals' assessments of their own well-being can be aggregated to yield a measure of so-
cial welfare change. 
Measuring social welfare change requires interpersonal welfare comparisons, comparisons that require ethical judgments 
about individuals' preferences. Such judgments could include one to the effect that preference measures should not be un-
duly influenced by income differences. In this case, the individual measures of preference - willingness to pay - could be 
weighted so as to reflect the preference of someone with an average income. One way to proceed is to indicate the outcomes 
of the cost-benefit analysis according to differing value judgments about the weights attached to preferences - a kind of 
"value sensitivity analysis." Thus, whether a change in the state of the world raises or lowers social welfare depends on the 
impacts on individual welfare as well as on normative criteria for making interpersonal welfare comparisons. Measures of 
social welfare change are, therefore, not objective but normative. See Chapter 3 for a more extensive discussion of ethical 
issues in relation to the enhanced greenhouse effect. 
The equation below provides an example of "equity-corrected" aggregation: Total damage D is the weighted sum of indi-
vidual damage ci\ the weights are some power E of the ratio of the reference income Ya to the individual income Y.. (Both in-
come terms are purchasing-power-parity corrected.) 
In the literature, E is usually either the income elasticity of demand or the elasticity of the marginal utility of income. 
Other ways of determining equity weights could also be used. 
There is also the question of what per capita income figure to use. The obvious choices are those based on purchasing 
power parity and exchange rate. For low income countries, the former tend to be about three to five times as high as the lat-
ter, whereas the two are approximately equal for rich countries. 
Consideration of welfare-weighted impacts helps show how extreme effects for some countries might count for relatively 
more than minor effects summed over a larger block of countries (e.g., welfare effects for an island state expected to be in-
undated might be larger than would be attributed solely on the basis of its income or even population). 
University tend to confirm this range of 6-18°C for baseline 
warming in the long term. Manabe and Stouffer (1993) exam-
ine the effects of a quadrupling of preindustrial carbon diox-
ide equivalent, a concentration that would be achieved 140 
years from now as a result of a \c/c annual increase in CO-,-
equivalent concentration, consistent with the IPCC "business-
as-usual" scenario. The resulting equilibrium mean surface air 
temperature increase reaches 7 C. whereas the actual transient 
warming is 5 C. Manabe and Stouffer do not argue that at-
mospheric concentrations will, in fact, stop rising after 140 
years. Instead, their interest is in examining the consequences 
of this specified century-scale scenario. They find that sea 
level rise from thermal expansion alone reaches 1.8 m by the 
500th year, and would presumably be much greater if the 
melting of ice sheets were taken into account. Similarly. 
Wigley (1995) finds that a sea level rise in the order of 2-3 m 
could occur up to 500 years after greenhouse gas concentra-
tions had been stabilized. 
After first conducting an economic analysis of climate 
change using comparative static techniques with carbon diox-
ide doubling as the benchmark. Nordhaus (1991: 1993a, b: 
1994b) has also adopted a centuries-scale horizon for his dy-
namic model DICE. However, Nordhaus's baseline involves 
warming of only 5.5°C by 2275, because of lower emissions 
(31 GtC by 2275) and lower atmospheric retention. Lower 
emissions stem from lower growth expectations, as Nord-
haus's model assumes a progressive slowdown in technologi-
cal change that has the effect of limiting growth. Global 
product by the year 2275 is only 7 times today's output in the 
DICE baseline but 26 times in Cline (1992b), suggesting thai 
diverging economic assumptions may be even more important 
than different assumptions about the scientific parameters for 
such long-term analysis. 
If 10°C is used as a guideline to potential warming overs 
300-year horizon (or much sooner if the upper end of the cli-
mate sensitivity range proves valid), the corresponding eco-
nomic damages could be very large. The central reason is thai. 
in many categories, damage is likely to rise nonlinearly wilt 
warming. As one example. Yohe (1993) finds that, at interme-
diate sea level rise, a doubling of the rise causes damages to 
rise about 2/:-fold, and above 60 cm, a doubling of the rk 
causes a tripling of damage. 
It seems likely that the damages of high, very long-ten: 
warming would be especially pronounced in the nonmarke: 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
207 
BOX 6.3: RELATIVE DAMAGE IN DEVELOPING AND INDUSTRIAL COUNTRIES 
Various factors influence climate change damage (as a fraction of GDP) in less developed countries (LDCs) as opposed to 
industrial or developed countries (DCs). 
• Location. In general, warming is expected to be greater at higher latitudes. Because LDCs tend to be located closer to 
the equator, one would expect them to be less affected than industrial countries. 
• Economic structure. On the other hand, LDCs have a much higher share of GDP in agriculture and, therefore, a larger 
share of output directly exposed to climatic influences. Consequently, one would expect a greater impact on LDCs 
than on DCs from this standpoint. 
• Coastal vulnerability. Coastal vulnerability to sea level rise and the possibility of an increase in tropical cyclone dam-
age are probably greater in LDCs than DCs. Although vulnerable areas can be found in industrial countries (for ex-
ample, Louisiana in the U.S.), vulnerability is particularly high for such LDCs as Bangladesh, Egypt, and China. 
Low-lying island states tend to be LDCs. Of 50 countries or territories identified as having shore protection costs 
above 0.5% of GDP annually as a consequence of a 1-m rise in sea level, all but one (New Zealand) are LDCs (IPCC, 
1990b). 
• Rigidities. Capacity to adapt to climate change may be more limited in developing countries. Adaptation requires an 
investment outlay, and low income communities tend to have lower savings rates and less flexibility to undertake 
these investments. Thus, Rosenzweig et al. (1993) identify greater relative damage to agriculture in LDCs, partly be-
cause crops are already grown nearer to heat tolerance limits but also because of lesser expected capacity to adapt than 
in DCs. A possible consideration in the other direction is that the economy that is growing more rapidly has a lower 
fraction of past fixed investment in its total capital stock, and can thus make an easier adjustment. 
• Human life. Because of poorer nutrition and health infrastructure, proportionate loss of life from climate change (e.g., 
from heat waves, increased hunger risk, and a possible increase in tropical storm damage) seems likely to be greater in 
LDCs than in DCs. 
• Valuation. Monetary damage estimates are based on people's willingness to pay and thus vary according to people's 
income. People's appreciation for nonmarket goods like ecosystems, for example, is often assumed to rise more than 
proportionately with income. That is. a given ecosystem's loss affects the welfare of rich people more than that of poor 
people. However, in many damage estimates, willingness to pay was assumed to be a constant fraction of income. In-
come differences do not then affect impacts expressed as a fraction of GDP in those estimates. 
sectors. Human amenity could face major losses, even after 
accounting for adaptation. For example, in the event of a 
10°C global mean warming, Clinc (1992a) estimates that 
among 66 major U.S. cities the number with average daily 
temperatures exceeding 90°F in July would rise from 18 at 
present to 62. Sea level rise in the order of 2-3 m (Wigley. 
1995) could lead to a loss of cultural heritage and national 
sovereignty in small island states and multiply the stream of 
climate refugees. 
Attempts to quantify long-term damage are rare and highly 
speculative. Most often, long-term damage estimates are sim-
ple extrapolations of the 2xCO, equilibrium case, using dif-
ferent assumptions about the degree of nonlinearity in the 
damage-temperature relationship. Cline (1992a) uses a rela-
tively modest degree of nonlinearity for most effects, with an 
overall damage function exponent of 1.3. Nordhaus (1993a, b) 
applies a quadratic damage function in his main scenario, 
whereas Peck and Teisberg (1992) consider several specifica-
tions, including quadratic and cubic functions. Table 6.8 re-
ports the central estimates in Cline (1992a) for U.S. damage 
from I0°C warming. Against the present economic scale, they 
amount to $335 billion annually, or 6% of GDP. However, the 
figure is only illustrative. 
Assuming a quadratic temperature-damage relationship. 
LS. damage from 10 C warminsi would amount to over 17% 
of GDP. If more allowance is made for such categories as 
species loss, the central range could rise to 2% of GDP for 
2xCO, at 2.5°C and 12% of GDP at 10°C. With upper-bound 
warming, the very long-term damage reaches 20% of GDP. In 
the long-term scenario in the Nordhaus (1994a) poll of ex-
perts, respondents predicted a mean damage of 6.7% of GDP 
for 6 C warming by 2175. Answers ranged from negligible 
damages to 35% of GDP (see Table 6.7). 
In addition, warming on this scale could trigger some of 
the catastrophic (low probability/high impact) results some-
times mentioned. These are treated in the following section. 
6.4 Climate Catastrophes and Surprises 
The discussion so far has focussed on the impact of the best-
guess climate change and some reasonable upper and lower 
bounds in the next century (Section 6.2) and in the longer-
term (Section 6.3). This section makes some statements on the 
impact if all the climatic dice roll the wrong way, that is. if the 
enhanced greenhouse effect leads to rather unlikely but possi-
ble changes. Where some information on the physical mecha-
nisms is available, these changes are referred to as climate 
catastrophes: where the mechanisms are unknown, (hey are 
referred to as surprises. Also, the impact of benchmark cli-
mate chance could be far more dramatic than best-miess esti-
2WS' 
Climate Change IW> - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cham 
Table 6.7. Expert opinion on climate change 
damage 
Scenario A 
Scenario B 
Scenario C 
3°C Warming 
6°C Warming 
6°C Warming 
by 2090 
by 2175 
by 2090 
Table 6.8. Illustrative damages from long-term 
climate 
change, present U.S. economy (base year 1990; billion $ of 
annual 
damage) 
Damage 
relative to 
world GDP 
(%ofGDP) 
Mean answer 
Median answer 
Range of 
answers 
Probability of 
damage > 25% 
ofGNP(%) 
Mean answer 
Median answer 
Range of 
answers 
3.6 
1.9 
0.0-21.0 
4.8 
0.5 
0.0-30.0 
6.7 
4.1 
0.0-35.0 
12.1 
3.0 
0.2-75.0 
10.4 
5.5 
0.8-62.0 
17.5 
5.0 
0.3-95.0 
Source: Poll of experts, Nordhaus (1994a). 
mates suggest. The second part of this section briefly dis-
cusses impact catastrophes and surprises. 
Most attention will be paid to the catastrophes, as surprises 
are, by definition, unknown. Col lard (1988) distinguishes be-
tween weakly and strongly catastrophic risks. The former cat-
egory refers to the case in which the product of the likelihood 
of an event multiplied by its consequences tends to zero as 
events become more and more disastrous; in other words, the 
probability of the event declines more rapidly than its impact 
grows. A strongly catastrophic risk describes the converse sit-
uation, where the severity of an event rises more rapidly than 
the probability of its occurrence declines. Which category 
best applies to climate change risks is unclear (Tol. 1995). 
Three main types of climate catastrophes are identified in 
the literature, all associated with strongly nonlinear responses 
to changed forcing: (1) the runaway greenhouse effect, (2) 
disintegration of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, and (3) struc-
tural changes in ocean currents. These three categories have a 
small but unknown probability of occurrence. 
A "runaway" greenhouse effect refers to the scenario in 
which one or more of the positive feedbacks dominate the 
negative ones such that the climate changes much more and 
much faster than the common consensus indicates. The main 
causes are a rapid increase in natural emissions of greenhouse 
gases (e.g.. through methane and carbon dioxide releases 
from melting permafrost or methane clathrates). a shutdown 
of major greenhouse gas sinks (e.g.. through reduced plankton 
activity or the reduction of growth or dieback of forests), and 
changes in atmospheric chemistry. 
A "runaway" greenhouse effect not only brings much 
larger and faster climate change, it also considerably enlarges 
the possibility of other catastrophes and surprises. The disin-
tegration of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet refers to a rapid 
Damage Category 
Long-Term Warming (10%) 
Agriculture 
Forest loss 
Species loss 
Sea level rise 
Electricity 
Nonelectric heating 
Human amenity 
Human morbidity 
Human life 
Migration 
Hurricanes 
Construction 
Leisure activities 
Water supply 
Availability 
Pollution 
Urban infrastructure 
Air pollution 
Tropospheric ozone 
Other 
Total 
(%ofGDP) 
95.0 
7.0 
16.0 +at 
35.0 
64.1 
-4.0 
+ bt 
+ ct 
33.0 
2.8 
6.4 
±dt 
4.0 
56.0 
0.6 
19.8 
+ et 
335.7 +a+b+c±d+ef 
(6.1) 
'Costs that have been identified but not estimated. 
Source: Cline (1992a). 
melting of this ice sheet, which could be unstable, leading to 
an additional sea level rise of 5 to 6 m (Revelle, 1983) within 
the next century, causing large land losses along coastlines 
and inundating many low-lying islands (Schneider and Chen. 
1980). 
Changes in ocean currents have regional and global im-
pacts. Potential changes in the thermohaline circulation and 
Gulf Stream are discussed in Section 4.3.3 of Volume 1. Re-
constructions of past climates (Dansgaard el al.. 1989) and 
model experiments (Manabe and Stouffer, 1993) reveal thai 
the energy transport in the North Atlantic can be weakened, 
start to fluctuate, or even stop completely, possibly as a result 
of climate change. This would lead to a sharp drop in Euro-
pean mean temperatures. In the 4xCO, experiment of Manabe 
and Stouffer (1993) circulation almost shuts down, suggest-
ing that under long-term warming without intervention thi-
phenomenon may become the base case rather than a low-
probability event. 
Rapid climate change brings forward the impact of lone-
term warming (see Section 6.3). leaving less time to adapt and 
thereby increasing the impact enormously. Table 6.8 provide-
an illustration of the possible impacts of a 1()°C increase ir, 
the global mean temperature (four times the temperature rk 
associated with 2 x C O j and suggests that this might lead to 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
20V 
about a sixfold increase in the costs compared to a 2.5°C rise. 
This figure cannot readily be applied to a 10°C temperature 
rise in the shorter term, though, since the estimates assume a 
moderate level of adaptation, and adaptation will be much less 
successful in the case of rapid climate change. Section 6.1.5 
indicates the effectiveness of adaptation in preventing the 
larger part of the losses due to sea level rise in the OECD and 
mitigating agricultural losses at a moderate cost. This adapta-
tion cost is likely to be much higher for fast or sudden 
changes, and some measures might be impossible to imple-
ment. The long-term figure stated above thus at best repre-
sents the lower bound of the actual costs of a catastrophe. 
Unfortunately, it is largely beyond the ability of today's 
climate science to quantify catastrophic impacts or their likely 
variation with climate change. Hence, only a few attempts 
exist. In one example, Tol (1995) splits the damage costs of 
climate change, inter alia, into those due to the rate of temper-
ature change and those due to the magnitude of temperature 
change. The damage module of his model FUND yields tangi-
ble damages of 0.33%, 0.55%, and 1.09% of gross world 
product for a 2.5°C warming in 2095, 2057, and 2031, respec-
tively. However, no figures for a more rapid temperature in-
crease are reported there. The 1CAM2 model (Dowlatabadi 
and Morgan, 1993) also considers the pace as well as the 
amount of warming in the damage cost functions, but explic-
itly adds adaptation. A warming of 8°C at high latitudes and 
2.8°C at low latitudes would lead to tangible losses of 6.0% of 
GDP in the industrialized countries and 6.6% of GDP in the 
less industrialized countries (Kandlikar, 1994). 
Nordhaus's (1994a) poll of experts provides the most di-
rect information: A doubling of the warming by 2090 from 
3°C to 6°C almost triples the costs of climate change. The 
probability of an impact catastrophe (i.e., damages greater 
than 25% of GNP) could also be considerable. The average 
probability stated in the survey varies between 4.8% and 
17.5%, depending on the underlying warming scenario (see 
Table 6.7). It is interesting that natural scientists were far 
more pessimistic in their assessment than economists (see 
also Section 6.2.15). 
Even less is known about impact catastrophes than climate 
catastrophes. The upper-bound damage in the Nordhaus 
(1994a) survey is 20% of gross world product for a tempera-
ture rise of 3°C by the year 2090. Such a high loss could 
be brought about by strong nonlinearities in the damage 
due to climate change, for instance, through rapid deteriora-
tion of agriculture due to drought, floods, or pests; rapid loss 
of species; rapid spread of vector-borne diseases; collapse of 
the financial sector; large-scale migration; and armed con-
flict. The last two categories are more likely, should either of 
the other ones occur. Impact catastrophes are more likely to 
occur on a regional scale. Their valuation therefore raises 
questions of equity and damage aggregation (see Box 6.1). 
Catastrophic impacts, even if limited to certain regions, may 
be considered undesirable from an equity point of view. The 
notion of possible catastrophes is particularly profound among 
advocates of the sustainability approach and the precaution-
ary principle. 
6.5 Regional Implications of Climate Change 
6.5.1 Regional damage 
estimates 
Section 6.2 surveyed the available literature on comprehen-
sive damage estimates of climate change. These are heavily 
biased towards the U.S. and, to a lesser extent, Europe, due to 
the concentration of work on these areas. This section looks at 
case studies available for other regions. Focussing mostly on 
agricultural impacts and sea level rise, regional studies predict 
impacts ranging from slightly beneficial to truly catastrophic. 
It is difficult to compare studies across regions, though, due to 
different underlying assumptions in the GCMs used, the na-
ture of the model runs (transient or equilibrium), the models' 
capabilities for simulating control conditions for the relevant 
country (e.g., precipitation), and differences in assumptions 
and scenarios between damage areas. Some scenarios include 
assumed adaptation measures, others do not. Moreover, stud-
ies do not examine interlinkages between areas and thus are 
not truly integrated assessments. 
6.5.2 
Japan 
In terms of agriculture, research has focussed on the effects 
of climate change and increased CG\ on rice production 
(Nishioka et «/., 1993). Laboratory experiments with in-
creased C 0 2 concentrations (a rather high 700 ppm) produced 
grain yield increases of 23-71 %. 
An increase in effective accumulated temperature in most 
of the country (except parts of Hokkaido) would reduce the 
vulnerability of rice to cool summer weather in the north of 
Japan, perhaps stabilizing production. Rice-producing regions 
may themselves be extended. Commercial rice cultivation in 
Japan could shift northward by 200-500 km by the end of the 
next century. In the north. 2xCO\ conditions could open up 
most of the land below 500 m elevation for rice cultivation. 
Currently most cultivated areas are at elevations below 200 m. 
In light of the altered climate predicted by the GISS model, 
the transplanting date of rice would be advanced by 20-30 
days and the maturing period would be reduced by 25-50 
days. For spring wheat and winter wheat respectively, the 
heading date would advance by 2-5 days and 30 days, and the 
maturing period would reduce by 3-5 days and 3-6 days. For 
forests, some replacement of the understory is expected due to 
the inability of forests to migrate in the short term. 
Japan's economic activities are concentrated along the 
coast. Major cities like Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya are all lo-
cated in the coastal zone. Together the three cities account for 
more than 50% of Japan's industrial production. Already 
about 860 km' of coastal land - an area supporting 2 million 
people and with physical assets worth 54 trillion yen ($450 
billion)- is below mean high water level. For a 1-m rise in sea 
level, this area would expand by a factor of 2.7 to embrace 4.1 
million people and assets worth 109 trillion yen ($908 bil-
lion). The same sea level rise would expand the Hood-prone 
area from 6.270 knr to 8.900 km2, with an additional 3 million 
people at risk (Nishioka et al., 1993). Coastal protection will 
210 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chan:, 
be central to the country's response strategy. The costs of ad-
justing existing protection measures have been estimated at 
about $80 billion. However, extensive coastal protection 
would put additional pressure on Japan's remaining natural 
shorelines (IPCC, 1992b). 
6.5.3 
Africa 
Very little work has been done on impact assessment in 
Africa. Magadza (1991) predicts reduced precipitation in the 
rain forests of Zaire and Uganda under doubled C 0 2 concen-
trations. On the basis of general relationships between pre-
cipitation and herbivores, Magadza predicts reductions in 
populations of large herbivores, such as buffaloes and ele-
phants, as savannah productivity is reduced. Shallow lakes, 
such as Lake Abiata in Ethiopia and Lake Turkana in Kenya, 
and savannah wetlands are likely to be reduced, affecting res-
ident wildlife and bird migrations. 
Ominde and Juma (1991) emphasize the greater vulnera-
bility of Africa to climate change due to high agricultural de-
pendence and limited capacity for adaptation. For Egypt. 
Rosenzweig et al. (1993) predict aggregate yield losses in the 
order of 25-507- for 2xCO,. The implications of agricultural 
damages on consumer welfare in Africa are expected to be 
negative even in the most optimistic scenarios (Reilly et al., 
1994). 
Sea level rise is predicted to affect some 2()7r of Egypt's 
35,000 km- of arable land. A l-m rise in sea level could de-
stroy up to 25% of the Nile Delta's agricultural land and dis-
place about 8 million people. Cotton and rice would be the 
main crops affected (El-Racy. 1990). Awosika et al. (1990) es-
timate that sea level rise would greatly exacerbate existing 
erosion at Lagos Beach in Nigeria, and even a modest rise will 
affect mangroves and wetlands that support timber and fish-
ing industries. In the absence of protection, a l-m rise in sea 
level could flood over 18,000 km- of Nigeria's land, damag-
ing assets currently worth at least $18 billion, including much 
of the country's oil industry, which is mostly located near the 
coast. In addition, over 3 million people would have to be re-
located. Protecting at least the highly developed areas would 
cost $550-700 million (IPCC. 1994. 1992b). A similar case 
study for Senegal estimates that, in the absence of protection, 
over 6,000 knr of land - some 37r of the country's total area -
would be lost under a l-m rise. Two-thirds of the population 
and 907 of the industry are located in the coastal zone. Pro-
tecting these areas would cost $250-850 million, about three-
quarters of which would go towards beach nourishment 
(1PCC, 1994. 1992b). 
6.5.4 
Bangladesh 
Climate change impacts in Bangladesh were analyzed in de-
tail in the context o\' a multicountry study on climate change 
in Asia (Asian Development Bank. 1994). Taking the coastal 
zone of Bangladesh to be defined by districts with a mari-
time boundary the /one is a delta of the combined Ganges-
Januma-Mcdina river system and accounts for some 227 of 
Table 6.9. Losses of rice output due to sea level rise in coastal 
zones of 
Bangladesh 
Year 
2020 
2050 
2070 
SLR 
('000 
tonnes) 
125 
2,122 
2,619 
by 2070:45 cm 
(% coastal 
output) 
2 
28 
28 
SLR 
('000 
tonnes) 
412 
7,708 
9,514 
by 2070:100 cm 
('/( coastal 
output) 
4 
49 
50 
Source: Asaduzzaman (1994). 
the total land area and 16% of the population (Asaduzzaman. 
1994). It also accounts for 24% of agricultural value added. 
40% of manufacturing fixed assets, and 22% of manufactur-
ing employment. A 45-cm rise in sea levels along the Bay 
of Bengal coast would submerge some 15,700 km- of land 
(about 11% of the total land area), including some 75% of the 
Sundarban mangrove forests. Several ports would also be af-
fected. A l-m rise would affect nearly 30,000 km- or about 
21% of the land area (Asaduzzaman, 1994). This is somewhat 
higher than earlier estimates by the Commonwealth Secre-
tariat (1989), which predicted a loss of just under 167 of total 
land area for a l-m rise. A l-m sea level rise would result in 
all the Sundarban mangrove forests disappearing. Sea level 
rise will result in saline intrusion further inland than the exist-
ing freshwater-saltwater interface. Changes in cyclone fre-
quency appear to be small, and soil erosion effects are un-
known. 
Impacts on agriculture remain difficult to predict. A study 
by the Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies suggest 
losses of rice output due to sea level rise as shown in Table 
6.9. 
Asaduzzaman (1994) suggests that the overall macroeco-
nomic impact of sea level rise would amount to some 307 of 
current GNP in the coastal zone, or some 5% of overall 
Bangladesh GNP. Damages in absolute terms would be per-
haps $4.8 billion in terms of "lost" output in 2070. 
The loss of the Sundarbans would be particularly severe 
for the poorest people of Bangladesh, relying as they do on 
the mangroves for fish, fuel wood, timber, and many other 
raw materials. Biodiversity losses are incalculable due to the 
extensive lack of knowledge about the ecological functioning 
of the Sundarbans. Many shrimp fisheries are likely to disap-
pear, offset to some extent by the emergence of new estuarine 
fisheries as sea levels rise. Salinization will also affect indus-
tries relying on freshwater intakes, including electricity gen-
erating plants, raising costs of production. Other industries 
would have to move and some would be irretrievably lust. 
such as those relying on shrimp processing. Road and rail 
links between Dhaka and Chittagong/Khulna would be dis-
rupted by sea level rise, seriously affecting the country's in-
ternational trade. Asaduzzaman (1994) suggests that a 45-cm 
sea level rise would affect 195.000 jobs and some 790 km o: 
roads: a 100-cm rise would affect 735.000 jobs and 1.460 km 
of roads. 
The Social Co.sls of Climate Change: (Ireenhoitse Damage ami the Benefits of Control 
: / / 
Population displacement would be dramatic if impacts are 
assumed to be "sudden." Some 5% of people would be dis-
placed by a 45-cm rise, and 13.5% by a 1 -m rise or, in terms of 
projected 2070 population, 12 million and 32 million people, 
respectively. In practice, migration away from the likely-to-
be-affected areas is already taking place, partly for weather-
related reasons. 
6.5.5 India 
Abroad analysis of climate change impacts in India has been 
provided as a part of two multicountry studies on climate 
change in Asia, commissioned by the Asian Development 
Bank (ADB, 1994) and the South Asian Association for Re-
gional Cooperation (SAARC, 1992). Some 70% of India's an-
nual rainfall occurs in the June-September monsoon season. 
Chakraborty and Lai (1994) project increases in precipitation 
in most parts of India due to doubled CO, concentrations. The 
Central Plains and East Coast might expect pronounced in-
creases in annual average precipitation (1 mm/day) and this 
may be 2 mm/day in the monsoon period in the former region. 
An increase of 2 mm/day is also estimated for West Bengal in 
the premonsoon season. Monsoons thus intensify for many re-
gions, and more frequent heavy rainfall events are predicted. 
In agriculture, yields may be lowered as a result of en-
hanced temperatures. Seshu and Cady (cited in SAARC, 
1992) suggest a decline in rice yields of 0.7 t/ha for an in-
crease in minimum temperature from 18°C to 19°C, a de-
crease of 0.4 t/ha for 22°C to 23°C, and 0.04 t/ha for 27°C to 
28°C. As for wheat, it has been estimated that each 0.5°C in-
crease in temperature would reduce productivity in Punjab. 
Haryana, and Uttar Pradesh by about 10%. In Central India, 
where productivity is lower, the decrease would also be lower 
(SAARC, 1992). In comparison, the global study by Rosen-
zweig et al. (1993) predicts changes in aggregate agricultural 
yields for India of+3% to -33% under 2xCO, (including CO, 
fertilization). 
Sea level rise will affect many regions, with the Andaman 
and Nicobar islands and the coral atolls of the Lakshadweep 
archipelago among the most vulnerable areas. The east coast 
would be more subject to storm surges than the west coast. 
The western coastline south of 12° North is likely to become 
more eroded. No overall estimates of macroeconomic impact 
are available, though. In a case study of the Orissa and West 
Bengal region, IPCC (1992b) estimated that in the absence 
of protection a 1-m sea level rise would inundate an area 
of 1.700 km2, predominantly prime agricultural land, and 
displace 700,000 people. Protecting the area would require 
the construction of an additional 4,000 km of dikes and sea 
walls. 
The Asian Development Bank country study for India 
(ADB. 1994) reports estimates by Asthana (1993) of the costs 
of a 1-m sea level rise. In the absence of protection, approxi-
mately 7 million people would be displaced and some 5.763 
knr of land and 4.200 km of roads would be lost. The domi-
nant cost is land loss, which accounts for 83% of all damages. 
Although the annuitized cost is reported to be 0.18% of GNP, 
it appears to be net of the value of land loss. Inclusive of land 
loss, the correct percentage appears to be 1 % of GNP. 
6.5.6 Indonesia 
Based on calculations by the Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), the Asian Devel-
opment Bank's country study for Indonesia (ADB, 1994) pre-
dicts an increase in mean annual temperature in Indonesia of 
1.5°C (0.4-3.0°C) by 2070 under baseline conditions. Sea lev-
els could rise by 45 cm (with a range of 15-90 cm). In compar-
ison, Parry et al. (1991) suggest that 2xC02 could raise the 
mean annual temperature by as much as 3°C and produce a 
rise in sea levels of 60 cm. Precipitation under 2xCO, is likely 
to decline in some regions but might generally increase. In-
creases in rainfall could lead to a 30% increase in the area un-
der irrigation in the Brantas and Citarum basins in western 
Java. Soil erosion might increase by 14%, 18%, and 40% in 
the Citarum, Brantas, and Saddan watersheds respectively, 
with resulting soybean production losses of 2,000 to 2,700 
tonnes in each region. 
Enhanced temperatures and. at certain sites, reduced water 
availability could reduce rice yields, especially for early sea-
son rice. This could be offset to some extent by increases in 
late season rice. Net yields might decline by 4%. Soybean 
production might decline by around 10%, largely due to lower 
yields in the early season. Appropriate adaptive measures may 
lead to productivity increases that could offset potential 
losses, and overall yields may increase. The biggest yield ef-
fects are likely to be on maize output, with declines of 25-
65% (Parry et al., 1991). 
Indonesia is the world's largest archipelagic state, with 
nearly 17,000 islands and a shoreline of approximately 81,000 
km (ADB, 1994). Sea level rise will affect coastal ecosys-
tems, industrial production, and agriculture alike. In the Kra-
wang and Subang districts, 95% of the predicted reduction in 
local rice supply (about 300,000 tonnes) and half of the loss in 
maize output is due to the inundation of coastal land. As a 
consequence, over 81,000 farmers in the Subang district alone 
may lose their source of income, and about 43,000 farm 
labourers could lose their jobs (Parry et al.. 1991). Under the 
baseline assumption of a 15-90 cm sea level rise by 2070, and 
assuming that the Indonesian population will stabilize be-
tween 2030 and 2045. ADB (1994) predicts that about 3.3 
million people will be displaced. Some 800,000 households 
would have to be relocated at a cost of $8 billion. In the ab-
sence of protection, a total area of 3.4 million hectares could 
be inundated. 
Indonesia is one of the few countries for which tentative 
health impact estimates are available. ADB (1994) expects 
that the incidence of malaria could increase by about 20%, 
from 2.700 cases per 10.000 people in 1989 to 3,200 cases in 
2070. The incidence of diarrhoea and dengue fever could each 
increase by as much as a factor 3 or 4. The resulting increase 
in health expenditures for all three diseases could amount to 
approximately $64.5 billion annually (excluding the costs of 
death and disrupted livelihoods). 
212 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Cluing 
6.5.7 
Malaysia 
The expected impact of a CO, doubling on annual mean tem-
perature in Malaysia ranges from 1-2 C (ADB. 1994) to 3-4°C 
(Parry et al., 1991). Rainfall increases are likely in January-
February in the coastal regions of Sarawak, and in March-
May in southwestern peninsular Malaysia. Runs of the 
CERES rice model predict a 12-22% yield decline for rice in 
the largest rice growing region of Muda. A 10% reduction in 
solar radiation in the Serdang region could result in maize 
production losses of about 20%. Rainfall increases in March-
May could increase oil palm productivity in alluvial coastal 
areas. Temperature and rainfall changes on the eastern coast 
of Malaysia could make the area too wet for rubber cultiva-
tion. Rubber yield is roughly inversely proportional to total 
annual rainfall. A 10% increase in rainfall could reduce yields 
by 13%, a figure which could rise to 25-40% due to interfer-
ence with tapping (ADB, 1994). Marginal rubber cultivations 
in areas such as the northern states may become uneconomic 
due to drought. National yield levels could decline by 15%, 
but improved varieties could more than offset this loss. 
The frequency of peak discharges in the Kelantan river 
basin in northeastern peninsular Malaysia could increase by 
9% under 2xCO:, implying more flood damage and a 5% in-
crease in the population affected by floods. About 3 million 
people currently live in flood-prone areas. In terms of flood 
occurrence, the present once-every-50-years flood would re-
turn every 30 years (ADB. 1994). Water deficits in the dry 
season, on the other hand, are likely to increase due to higher 
evaporation, reducing water availability for irrigation. 
About 70% of the total population of Malaysia live in the 
coastal /one. which is also the centre of most of the country's 
economic activities. In addition, important natural ecosystems 
are located along the coast, with 44 of the 1000 islands desig-
nated as marine parks. Sea level rise could have significant 
consequences for the low-lying coastal plains of Malaysia. 
Parry ct al. (1991) report that a 1-m rise could lead to a land-
ward retreat of the shoreline of as much as 2.5 km. Midun and 
Lee (1989) suggest that such a rise could result in the near 
total loss of existing mangroves, with little chance of inland 
migration. Mangrove forests are already under severe stress 
from human interference. Sea level rise thus aggravates an al-
ready urgent environmental problem. 
6.5.8 
Thailand 
Parry ct al. (1991) suggest that a CO, doubling could result in 
a 3-6'C mean annual temperature change in Thailand, al-
though this appears to be a rather high estimate. GCM predic-
tions for rainfall diverge, but generally show a reduction 
under the G1SS scenario. Northern Thailand will tend to be 
drier in most months except July. For Ayuthaya Province, the 
GISS model predicts rainfall reductions in August-September, 
but other models do not produce this result. With respect to 
agriculture, preliminary runs using current climate data with 
the CFRF.S agricultural model lor Ayuthaya province showed 
higher yields for transplanted rice and lower than expected 
yields for directly seeded rice in comparison to observed val-
ues. Under the 2xCO, climate, rice yields in this provinu' 
would generally increase. The analysis suggested an 8'i in-
crease in cultivation in the province, substantially less than 
the currently observed year-to-year fluctuations. Off-season 
rice showed average yield increases of 5%. Model validation 
is weak, however, and the results should be treated with cau-
tion. Results for Chiang Mai, for example, suggest average 
yield reductions of 5%. 
For the Suratthani province in southern Thailand, a case 
study calculated that 37% of the area would be affected b\ a 
1-m rise in sea level, with losses of over 4,200 ha of agricul-
tural land and many shrimp ponds (Parry et al., 1991). 
6.5.9 Latin 
America 
IPCC (1992b, 1994) summarizes sea level rise case studies for 
several 
Latin American 
countries, 
including Argentina. 
Uruguay, and Venezuela. In Argentina a 1-m sea level rise 
would inundate an area of about 3,400 km2 (0.1 % of the coun-
try's total area). Erosion would claim assets and land worth 55 
billion. Venezuela could lose about 5,700 km- or 0.6% of its 
area under a 1-m rise (assuming no protection). Particularly 
at risk would be the country's low-lying coastal plains and 
deltas. Although only a small area would be at risk in 
Uruguay, the coastlines affected would be highly valuable 
tourist beaches. Uruguay's tourist industry creates over $200 
million in revenue per annum, and attracts over 1 million visi-
tors each summer. Protecting the beaches would be expensive. 
The capital costs of protecting developed areas (mainly beach 
nourishment) were estimated at $2.9-8.6 billion, or more than 
five times the costs expected for Venezuela. If spread over 50 
years, this would correspond to annual investments of 6-19*7 
above 1987 gross investments (Nicholls et al., 1992). 
The impacts of climate change on agriculture are less well 
studied. Using climate analogues, Magalhaes and Glantz 
(1992) illustrate the consequences of climate extremes on 
Brazilian agriculture and society. In the semi-arid northeast of 
Brazil, agriculture is characteristically vulnerable to droughts. 
Drops in agricultural production cause mass unemployment in 
the agricultural sector, followed by malnutrition and hunger. 
Increased migration to urban centres is one of the conse-
quences. In the global agricultural model of Rosenzweig ci«l. 
(1993), yield impacts in Brazil are among the most severe 
for all regions. Under 2xCC\, yields are expected to fall b; 
17-33% with CO, fertilization and 38-53% without. Similar 
reductions are also reported for Uruguay. 
6.5.70 Small island states 
The small island states (SISs) are clearly among the regions 
that would be most affected by climate change, not only be-
cause of their high vulnerability to sea level rise but also be-
cause of their strong dependence on natural resource> that 
may be affected by climate change. Pernetta (1989) suggests; 
ranking of SISs in the Pacific in terms of their extreme vulner-
ability to sea level rise. "Profound impacts." including disap-
pearance in the worst cases, could be felt by Tokelau. the 
Marshall Islands. Tuvalu, the Line Islands, and Kiribati. Se-
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Crcenlioiisc Damage ami the Benefits of Control 
21.1 
Table 6.10. Vulnerability index for different 
categories 
of countries (high vulnerability 
is indicated by values 
closer to 1) 
vere impacts resulting in major population displacement 
would be experienced by Micronesia, Palau, Nauru, French 
Polynesia, the Cook Islands. Nine, and Tonga. Moderate to se-
vere impacts would be felt by Fiji. American Samoa, New 
Caledonia, the northern Marianas, and the Solomon Islands. 
while local severe to catastrophic events would be experi-
enced by Vanuatu, Wallis and Futuna, Papua New Guinea, 
Guam, and Western Samoa. 
Pernetta (1992) outlines various impacts that SISs may suf-
fer. These include increased frequency of tropical cyclones in 
areas not normally affected by them; an altitudinal shift in 
vegetation zones, affecting alpine grasslands in Papua New 
Guinea and threatening mid-montane rain forests as they 
come under pressure for cultivation; some increased capillar-
ity in limestone soils, reducing soil fertility in some areas; 
some increases in disease due to drier conditions in some 
countries and longer wet seasons in others; and increases in 
humidity and hence human discomfort and adaptation costs. 
Sea level rise will also affect agricultural activity, which now 
occurs mostly on the coasts, and push it inland onto less suit-
able soils, thus increasing erosion. In addition, exclusive eco-
nomic zones based on outlying islands will be affected as 
some of the islands disappear under the rising ocean waters. 
Protection measures are limited and expensive. For the Mar-
shall Islands, for example, IPCC (1992b) reports that protect-
ing the Majuro atoll alone would cost 1.5 to 3 times the 
country's present GDP. 
Since many hermatypic corals are growing at their limit of 
(hernial tolerance, any rise in sea water temperature could re-
sult in increased coral bleaching, with consequent loss of 
coral fishery resources and tourism. Although the reactions of 
corals to such changes appear not to be known in any detail, 
consequences could be significant. In the Maldives, for exam-
ple, dependence on the corals is high: they are mined for 
building materials; fish and marine products account for most 
of the islands' exports. Tourism based on the corals is also vi-
tal. Coral deaths have already occurred, probably due to in-
creased lagoon temperatures, but pollution is also implicated. 
6.5.77 Conclusions on regional 
impacts 
Economic analyses of damage to developing countries from 
climatic change remain limited. Nonetheless, the preceding 
overview supports the general finding of the broader eco-
nomic studies by showing that impacts on developing coun-
tries are likely to be more severe relative to the wealth of 
those countries. In some cases, sea level rise alone results in 
dramatic impacts on the economies and may threaten the exis-
tence of whole communities and nation states. The relatively 
greater vulnerability of the developing countries is relevant 
to any discussion of the equity case for controlling climate 
change (see Chapter 3). 
Table 6.10 summarizes the results of computing a vulnera-
bility index for different categories of countries. Vulnerability 
is defined in terms of exposure to foreign economic condi-
tions (export dependence), insularity and remoteness, and 
proneness to natural disasters. The table illustrates the high 
vulnerability of developing countries to climate change. In the 
Country Categories 
Number of Countries 
Index 
All countries 
113 
0.376 
Developed countries 
22 
0.208 
Developing countries 
91 
0.417 
Small island developing 
countries 
20 
0.590 
Other island developing 
m,,nlri», 
9R 
0.539 
Note: The index is calculated as the average of three variables (i = 
1, 2, 3): export dependence, insularity and remoteness, and prone-
ness to natural disasters. Variable / for country j is calculated as 
V = (Xv - minXi)/(maxXi - minX.) 
where Xr is the value of component ;' obtained for country j , maxXi 
denotes the highest value for component / observed in any country, 
and minXj likewise the lowest value observed in the sample. For 
example, in the case of export dependence, X;j measures the export 
dependence of country j , maxX] is the value observed in the country 
with the highest export dependence, whereas /»mX; reflects the lowest 
export dependence observed. Therefore, in the country with the high-
est export dependence, V' is equal to 1. In the country with the lowest 
export dependence, Vf = 0. 
Srwnr.-Briguglio(1993). 
full list for 113 countries, 9 out of the 10 most vulnerable 
countries are island states (Briguglio, 1993). 
6.6 From Greenhouse Damages to Abatement Benefits 
There is a distinction between climate change damage and the 
benefits of policy measures, although the two concepts are re-
lated. In general, the benefits of greenhouse action are at least 
equal to the amount of damage avoided, that is, to the extra 
damage which would have occurred in the absence of action. 
In addition, there may also be ancillary benefits that are not 
related to climate change (sec Section 6.7). The principal rule 
cited above is complicated somewhat by the dynamic charac-
ter of climate change, however. 
Figure 6.1 considers schematically the development of 
greenhouse gas emissions and damage over time under differ-
ent scenarios. In the base case, annual emissions are assumed 
to continue rising over the next 100 years or so (curve labelled 
"baseline" in the emissions graph). Global mean temperature 
levels will therefore rise as well, and so too will annual cli-
mate change damage (including the influence of adaptation, 
see Section 6.1.5). The upper curve in the damage chart shows 
how annual damages may rise in the baseline case. The esti-
mates of benchmark warming damage of Section 6.2 relate to 
only one particular point on this time path: the point t:x(()i, 
when the warming assumptions underlying the estimates arc 
realized. In a baseline scenario, this may. for example, he in 
the year 2060. If damage levels grow in proportion to GNP 
All countries 
Developed countries 
Developing countries 
Small island developing 
countries 
Other island developing 
countries 
2/4 
Clinitiic Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Time 
In the baseline, annual greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise over time (upward sloping line 
in the emissions graph). As a eonsei|uence, annual climate change damage rises over time as well 
(upper line in the damage graph). II instead emissions arc stabilized at time tn (the horizontal 
"stabilization" line in the lower graph), the annual damage curve will follow a Halter trajectory 
(the lower curve in the upper diagram). The benefit of this stabilization policy is represented by 
the shaded area: the sum ol avoided damages in all time periods. Stabilizing emissions constitutes 
a significant change in policy. Analysts are often interested in the benefits obtained through only 
a marginal deviation from the baseline - the marginal benefit per tonne of carbon abated or the 
marginal cost of an additional tonne emitted. Marginal changes arc conceptually calculated in the 
same way. i.e., as the difference in the two damage trajectories with and without the abated tonne 
(not drawn in the figure). The two emission paths with and without marginal abatement would he 
identical, except for a slight deviation at lime t(|. 
Figure 6.1: 
Doubled CO, damage vs abatement benefits. 
and assuming the earlier assessment is correct, damage at time 
t2xCOi will be in the order ol' 1.5-2.0 cfc of gross world product 
(GWP) (abstracting from possible differences between tran-
sient and equilibrium damage). Before this date, annual dam-
age levels (relative to GNP) are lower. In subsequent decades 
they are higher, due to the rising atmospheric CO, concentra-
tion. 
The 2.\CO\ benchmark is contrasted with the consequences 
of a particular greenhouse gas abatement strategy, say a stabi-
lization ol" emissions at time t0 (represented by the lower 
emission and damage curves). Due to the thermal inertia of 
the climate system, annual damage levels will react only grad-
ually to this policy change, and will initially continue to grow 
unabated. Eventually, however, damage will start to deviate 
from the baseline. The level to which the trajectory will con-
verge in the long run is unclear, and depends on the exact 
character and source of the damages. 
What. then, are the benefits of the stabilization policy? 
They are represented by the shaded area in Figure 6.1. which 
depicts the difference in annual damage levels between the 
base case and the control scenario, summed up over the rele-
vant time horizon. In each future time period damage is lower 
than it would have been otherwise, and the benefit of green-
house gas abatement is the (discounted! sum of these avoided 
future damages. 
As l-'imire 0.1 makes clear, there is thus no direct connec-
tion between damage associated 
with 2xC02 and the benefm 
of greenhouse gas abatement. 
The benefits of abatement oc-
cur as a stream of reduced damage over time, while 2xC0, 
concerns only one point. Annual damage reduction levels will 
generally not coincide with the 2xCO, assessment either, for 
two reasons: first, because even the most stringent abatement 
scheme is unlikely to succeed in avoiding all damage (since 
some damage has already been done and may be irreversible); 
second, because damage reductions will chiefly concern years 
in which the base case damage would not be that of 2xC0,. 
Despite this difference, 2xCO, assessments still provide 
some indication of the size of abatement benefits. For a more 
precise assessment much more information would be neces-
sary, though. A careful analysis would in particular require a 
better knowledge about the slope of the damage trajectory, 
that is, about how climate change damage alters over time as a 
consequence of both climate change and economic and popu-
lation growth. A further need would be information about the 
degree of damage that can be avoided through a particular 
policy measure, that is, the distance between the two damage 
trajectories of Figure 6.1. The answer here depends chiefly on 
the exact character of impacts - whether they are reversible or 
not, whether damage depends on the rate of change or on ab-
solute temperature levels, whether damage is persistent or a 
transitional adjustment cost, and so on. 
Knowledge about damage beyond the 2xC0 2 benchmark is 
very limited. The small literature aiming at estimating the 
benefits of greenhouse gas abatement relies on several rather 
ad hoc assumptions. In older studies, damage costs were typi-
cally specified as a polynomial (usually linear to cubic) func-
tion of global mean temperature, calibrated around the 2xC0, 
estimates. Damage is usually fully reversible and typically as-
sumed to grow with GDP. More recently, studies have started 
to emerge that explicitly incorporate regionally diversified 
temperatures and sea levels and that model individual damage 
categories (e.g., agriculture) separately, or at least distinguish 
between damages related to absolute temperature level and 
those related to the rate of change (e.g., Dowlatabaei and 
Morgan, 1993; Hope et al.. 1993; Tol, 1994. 1995). 
Table 6.11 provides a list of estimates of the marginal ben-
efits of CO, abatement. In terms of Figure 6.1 these numbers 
represent the shaded area that would occur if emissions were 
to deviate marginally from the baseline path, say by one tonne 
in period t(), but remain unaltered otherwise. The estimate* 
are mostly based on models with simple polynomial damage 
functions. Several of them are derived from optimal control or 
dynamic cost-benefit models. In these models, the marginal 
benefit from abatement, or the "shadow price of carbon." is 
calculated as the carbon tax necessary to keep emissions on 
the trajectory that is considered socially optimal by the model. 
In other models the marginal benefits are calculated directly 
as in Figure 6.1. by comparing the present value of the stream 
of damages associated with a certain emissions scenario to 
that of an alternative scenario with marginally different emis-
sions in the base period. Estimates vary widely, mainly as; 
consequence of different assumptions about the discount rate 
They rise over time as a consequence of economic growth anc 
increasing concentration levels. 
The Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
Table 6.11. The social costs of CO, emissions in different decades (in 1990 $/tC) 
215 
Study 
Nordhaus (1991) 
Ayres and Walter (1991) 
Nordhaus (1994b) 
Best guess 
Expected value 
Cline (1992b, 1993d) 
Peck and Teisberg (1992) 
Fankhauser( 1994b) 
Maddison(1994) 
Type 
MC 
MC 
CBA 
CBA 
CBA 
MC 
CBA/ 
MC 
1991-
2000 
5.3 
12.0 
5.8-124 
10-12 
20.3 
(6.2-45.2) 
5.9-6.1 
2001-
2010 
7.3 
(0.3-65.9) 
30-35 
6.8 
18.0 
7.6-154 
12-14 
22.8 
(7.4-52.9) 
8.1-8.4 
2011-
2020 
8.6 
26.5 
9.8-186 
14-18 
25.3 
(8.3-58.4) 
11.1-11.5 
2021-
2030 
10.0 
n.a. 
11.8-221 
18-22 
27.8 
(9.2-64.2) 
14.7-15.2 
MC = marginal social cost study. 
CBA = shadow value in a cost-benefit study. 
Figures in parentheses denote 90% confidence intervals. 
Sources: As shown. 
Using the base case in DICE, Nordhaus (1993a, b) finds 
that the shadow price begins at about $5 per tonne of carbon 
in 1995. rises to about $10 by 2025, and reaches $21 by 2095 
(at 1990 prices). Peck and Teisberg (1992, 1993a, b) find val-
ues of a similar order of magnitude. Tol's (1995) alternative 
specification of DICE yields shadow prices of $13 for 1995, 
rising to $89 for 2095. These model runs assume that parame-
ter values are known with certainty. In the case of DICE, 
expected shadow prices more than double once uncertainty 
is added to the model. This result arises because of the 
skewedness in the damage distribution, which allows for low 
probability/high impact events (Nordhaus. 1994b). All three 
authors assume a pure rate of time preference (or utility dis-
count rate, see Chapter 4) of 3<7r. In contrast. Cline (1992b, 
1993d) finds significantly higher shadow prices by using a 
zero utility discount rate. His reproduction of the DICE model 
generates a path of shadow prices beginning at about $45 per 
tonne, reaching about $243 by 2100. Other parameter specifi-
cations provide even higher values. 
In comparison, Fankhauser (1994b) identifies a lower and 
Matter trajectory for the shadow price of carbon, rising from 
$20 per tonne in the decade 1991-2000 to $28 per tonne by 
2021-30, with confidence intervals of $6-$45 and $9-$64 re-
spectively. Fankhauser uses a probabilistic approach to the 
range of discount rates, in which low and high discount rates 
are given different weights. His sensitivity analysis of the dis-
count rate suggests that moving from high (3%) to low (0%) 
discounting could increase marginal costs by a factor of 9. 
from S5.5 to $49 per tonne of carbon emitted now. 
6.7 The Secondary Benefits of Abatement Strategies 
The benefits of greenhouse gas abatement will not be limited 
to reduced climate change costs alone but arc likely to spill 
over to other sectors. This is a further reason why the cost of 
greenhouse damage differs from the benefits of greenhouse 
gas abatement (see Section 6.6). For example, efforts to halt 
deforestation to reduce the emission of C 0 2 will contribute to 
the conservation of the world's biological diversity. Other an-
cillary benefits could occur in the form of local and regional 
air quality improvements, a reduction in traffic-related exter-
nalities like accidents or congestion, and the reduced risk of 
tanker accidents and oil spills. These problems are tied to cli-
mate change in that they are caused by largely the same activ-
ities, in particular, the consumption of fossil fuels. Because 
CO,-removal technologies are presently not economical, at-
tempts to limit CO, emissions currently by and large concen-
trate on reducing the use of fossil fuels. A reduction in CO, 
emissions will therefore also reduce other environmental 
problems related to fuel combustion." These effects are often 
called the secondary benefits of carbon abatement. 
Secondary benefits from air quality improvements may he 
quite large. Table 6.12 provides estimates of benefits from re-
duced air pollution levels as a consequence of carbon abate-
ment (see also Box 6.4). The estimates are not necessarily 
comparable since the assumed abatement policies differ from 
study to study, although they all roughly aim at stabilizing 
CO : emissions at about 1990 levels. 
What is the value of these emission reductions'? Estimates 
that measure the social costs of each pollutant vary widely be-
tween regions, depending on local factors like baseline air 
quality standards, ecosystem vulnerability, and population at 
risk. Figures may also differ because impacts caused by a 
combination of gases are attributed to the initial sources in 
different ways. A selection of illustrative results is given in 
Table 6.13. The average secondary benefits implied by these 
estimates vary widely, from about $2 per tonne of carbon 
abated to over 500 S/tC in absolute terms. Secondary benefits 
offset about 30-50% of the initial abatement costs in the case 
216 
('limine ( 'hani;e 1W5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Char.. 
Table 6.12. Reduced air emissions due to CO, abatement (% reduction from 
baseline) 
(a) Regional studies 
Country 
Year 
Policy/Scenario 
CO, 
so. 
NO 
CO 
TSP" 
VOC* 
Secondary 
Benefits 
($/tC) 
Sources 
World 
U.S. 
Japan 
EU 
Other OECD 
China 
Ex-USSR 
India 
E. Europe 
OECD 
U.S. 
Japan 
EU 
Other OECD 
Europe1' 
2000 
2000 
2000 
World C0 2 emissions 
stabilized at 1990 level 
C02 emissions in OECD 
stabilized at 1990 level 
EU carbon/energy tax 
Current structure 
Cost-efficient regime 
9 
8 
4 
5 
10 
18c 
17^ 
17' 
Uc 
18 
14 
14 
21 
9.4 
9.7 
14 
13 
4 
7 
14 
19 
21 
17 
11 
28 
12 
18 
29 
7.4' 
9.3' 
10 
8 
3 
4 
11 
19 
18 
16 
11 
25 
15 
15 
32 
6.2 
6.4 
6.1 
6.6 
Complainville/ 
Martins (1994) 
Complainville/ 
Martins (1994) 
Alfsen el al. 
(1993) 
(b) Country studies 
Country 
Year 
Policy/Scenario 
Secondary 
Benefits 
CO, 
SO 
NO, 
CO 
TSPfl 
VOCfc 
($/tC) 
Sources 
Norway 
2000 
Emission stabilization 
(at 1989 level) 
UK 
2005 
EU carbon/energy tax 
U.S. 
2000 
Emission stabilization 
Through carbon tax 
Through Btu tux 
15.0 
20.8' 
10.8 
24.1 
4.3 
_ 
40-14C 
Alfsen e/a/. 
(1992) 
12.1 
38.3' 
10.6 
9.6 
30.3 
1.1 
40-1,040 
Barker (1993) 
8.6 
1.9 
6.6 
1.5 
1.0/1.8* 
1.4 
2.0-20 
Scheragaand 
8.6 
2.2 
6.6 
3.4 
1.6/2.2* 
2.7 
3.5-28 
Leary(1994) 
"Total suspended particles. 
^Volatile organic compounds. 
'The study uses the hypothetical scenario of a global carbon tax. Note that the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change does not con-
tain any obligations for developing countries to reduce their CO, emissions. Economies in transition are granted a "certain degree of flexi-
bility." 
•'Western and Eastern Europe (UN ECE region). Tax in six EU countries (France, Germany, UK, Italy, Netherlands, Denmark) and three 
Nordic countries (Norway, Finland. Sweden) only. 
'SO,. 
/Including road traffic benefits (reduced congestion, noise, accident, and road damage costs). 
.«PM|0/TSP(PM|0 refers to fine particles less than 10"6m in diameter). 
Sources: As shown. 
of Norway (Alfsen et ah, 1992) and over 100% in the UK 
(Barker, 1993). Extending the Alfsen et al. study, Amano 
(1994) has found a similar result for Japan. 
The calculations by Complainville and Martins (1994), 
based on the OECD GREEN model, suggest that secondary 
air quality improvements may be as significant in developing 
nations as they arc in OECD nations. This is confirmed by 
Amano (I944), who has calculated secondary benefits for 
several Asian regions, using the same benefit-abatement ra-
tios (air quality benefits, in percent of GDP. per percentage 
cut in air pollution) as Alfsen et al. (1992). For India, the esti-
mated secondary benefits exceed the primary costs of stabiliz-
ing emissions at 1990 levels. For China and the group oi 
"Dynamic Asian Economies" (Hong Kong. Philippines. Sin-
gapore, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand) secondary bene-
fits are estimated to offset about one-third of the initial 
abatement costs. The Amano results should be interpreted 
with caution, however. Using the Norwegian ratios of Alts" 
et al. for developing economies almost certainly biases if-
results. 
I'lw Social Costs of Climate Change: Greenhouse Damage and the Benefits of Control 
217 
BOX 6.4: VALUATION OF ELECTRICITY-RELATED EXTERNALITIES IN CALIFORNIA 
The importance of secondary air quality benefits can be illustrated at least in part from the practices of some regulatory 
commissions in the U.S. A growing number of these now require that electric utilities take into account the value of air emis-
sions in their cost-benefit analyses of alternative supply- and demand-side resources. 
The monetary air quality values used in these assessments do not usually represent actual marginal damages, however. 
CO, values, for example, are mostly based on avoided costs, such as the cost of planting trees on otherwise unforested land. 
The environmental cost adders for the other pollutants are also mostly based on control costs. The conceptual basis for this 
method is rather weak: Using abatement costs as a proxy for the damage costs could involve substantial error. The use of 
damage control costs as a proxy is justified by many regulatory commissions on the basis that damage cost estimates are 
themselves uncertain. 
A study commissioned by the California Energy Commission that does use consistently estimated damage-cost-based ex-
ternality values is shown below. These estimates for the Los Angeles area imply that for every dollar in benefits resulting 
from the reduction of CO, emissions, there is another $3 benefit to the area resulting from the reduction of conjoint pollu-
tants. It is a reasonable conclusion, therefore, that joint benefits can significantly affect the overall cost-benefit assessment 
of climate policies. 
Environmental 
Emission Rate 
Total Benefits 
Benefits ($/t) 
(lbs/MWh) 
($) 
co2 
Joint products 
NO, 
SO, 
TSP 
Total joint products 
26' 
14,483 
7,425 
57,620 
1,820 
6 
6 
0.3 
23 
43 
22 
9 
74 
' Benefits in the form of avoided costs of carbon sequestration. 
Source: Emission rates are based on a notional, new coal-fired plant meeting 
new source performance standards (NSPS). Externality values for NOx, S02, 
and particulates (TSP) are in 1989 U.S. dollars, based on Hashem and Haites 
Table 6.13. The social costs of air pollution ($/tonne) 
Country 
SO 
NO 
CO 
Particulates 
VOC 
Source 
UK 
UN ECEy 
Norway 
U.S. 
367 
637 
500-7,600 
4,800 
124 
490 
1.600-31,400 
2,000 
15 
n.a. 
1-13 
n.a. 
21,333 
21,333 
2.100-27,700 
2,700 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
U.S. 
300-1,800 
10-100 
Pearce(1994) 
Pearce(1994) 
Alfsen etal. (1992) 
Ottinger el al. (1990) 
n.a. 
400-10.900 
360-2,400 
Scheraga and Leary (1994) 
Damage done by a tonne of UK emissions to Western and Eastern Europe, including UK (UN ECE region). 
Sources: As shown. 
An alternative way to measure secondary benefits is by 
estimating the change in the costs of meeting air quality stan-
dards. Many industrialized countries are committed to signifi-
cant cuts in the emission of air pollutants. The Helsinki Proto-
col of 1985 required a cut in sulphur emissions of 30% by 
1993. compared to 1980 levels, for selected European coun-
tries. Under the "Second Sulphur Protocol" further reductions 
will be required up to 2010. The Sofia Protocol on nitrogen 
dioxide commits signatories to a freeze on emissions at 1987 
levels. Greenhouse gas abatement will lower the amount of 
traditional air pollution abatement needed to meet these 
targets. Alfsen etal. (1993). for example, calculate that the in-
traduction of a carbon/energy tax would reduce the cost of tra-
ditional SO, and NOs abatement in the nine countries intro-
ducing the tax by 25-30% and 12-25 % respectively, implying 
average secondary benefits of about 2.5 $/tC for NOx and 4.0 
S/tC for SO,. These results are low compared to those of the 
previous estimation procedure. 
It is important to underline the different character of sec-
ondary benefits and primary (warming damage avoidance) 
benefits. Most critically, secondary benefits do not depend on 
climate variables but only arise in connection with green-
house gas abatement. They occur locally or regionally and do 
not share the slobal character of <zreenhouse damages. The 
2 IS 
Climate Change IW5 - i'.eoiiontie and Social Dimensions of Climate CIUUK<. 
question of secondary benefits from carbon abatement should 
also be distinguished from the more comprehensive issue of 
the optimal abatement mix with respect to all pollutants. The 
secondary benefit argument is characterized by an implicit 
primacy of the greenhouse problem, in that improvements in 
other areas are seen as welcome side effects of a climate 
change policy, but are not considered or sought in their own 
right. This is not necessarily the ideal way to proceed. Strictly, 
each pollutant should be taxed in proportion to the environ-
mental damage it causes. If there are interdependencies be-
tween them, as is the case with climate change and air pol-
lution, these would have to be reflected in the relative tax 
rates. The currently considered abatement strategies may then 
no longer constitute the optimal approaches. Once secondary 
benefits are taken into account, location will also matter. Al-
though it is not the case for greenhouse gases, for most other 
air pollutants it matters where they are emitted. Emission reduc-
tion measures should therefore he concentrated in those places 
where the joint benefits of reducing all emissions is highest. 
6.8 Conclusions 
This chapter has been concerned with the measurement of cli-
mate change damage and with the benefit of policies designed 
to reduce this damage. Climate change impact assessments 
are an integral input to cost-benefit studies and other decision-
making frameworks (see Chapters 2 and 5). Economic models 
comparing the costs and benefits of greenhouse gas abatement 
are discussed in Chapter 10. 
Social cost estimates are necessarily uncertain. Apart from 
the scientific uncertainty of climate change, there are addi-
tional uncertainties associated with 
(a) 
Limited knowledge of regional and local impacts 
(b) 
Difficulties in measuring the economic value of im-
pacts, even where the impacts are known. This is partic-
ularly the case for nonmarket impacts and the impacts in 
developing countries 
(c) 
Difficulties in predicting future technological and so-
cioeconomic developments 
(d) 
The possibility of catastrophic events and surprises 
This uncertainty must be emphasized when interpreting the 
social cost figures in this chapter. 
Most impact analysis has been based on equilibrium cli-
mate change associated with a doubling of the pre-industrial 
CO, concentration or its equivalent for all greenhouse gases. 
These studies have usually used the IPCC's 1990 best-guess 
value for climate sensitivity of 2.5 C and are generally based 
on the IPCC 1990 impact assessment. The available studies 
estimate damages for a doubling of CO, as follows: 
. 
World impact: 1.5-2.0% of world GDP 
• 
Developed country impact: 1-1.5'7r of GDP 
• 
Developing country impact: 2-9'r of GDP 
These are hest-gness central estimates, including both market 
and nonmarket impacts, and in some cases also adaptation 
costs. They are based on a large number of simplifying and of-
ten controversial assumptions. The range does not represent 
the confidence interval around the estimates, but the spread 
of the best guesses in existing studies. No attempt has been 
made to quantify a confidence interval. There will be consid-
erable differences in regional damage figures, with potential!) 
higher impacts for some individual countries, such as small 
island states. Alternative assumptions about the value of a sta-
tistical life (Box 6.1) could further increase regional differ-
ences. The regional variability of the social costs underlines 
the important issues of equity discussed in Chapter 3. 
These cost estimates are for 2xC0 2 concentrations, but 
concentrations may continue rising above this level. Such 
long-term warming damage may rise more than linearly. The 
damage associated with 1()°C might be 6% of world GDP or 
more. The probability of a climate catastrophe also increases 
with the speed and amount of warming. 
The marginal damage, that is, the extra damage done by 
one extra tonne of carbon emitted now. is estimated to be in 
the order of $5-$ 125 per tonne of carbon. The value will rise 
for marginal emissions in later periods. The range appear* 
wide but reflects variations in models, discount rates. anJ 
other factors. The numbers are particularly sensitive to the 
choice of the discount rate. Estimates based on a positive so-
cial rate of time preference (discount rate) of approximately 
5% are usually in the order of about $5-12 per tonne of carbon 
emitted now, whereas figures assuming a rate of 2% or less 
are almost an order of magnitude higher. The models on 
which these estimates are based remain simplistic and are lim-
ited representations of the actual processes. But they represent 
the state of the art at this moment. 
The marginal damage of an extra tonne of emissions is not 
necessarily the same as the marginal benefits of abating an ex-
tra tonne. Abatement measures will yield additional benefits 
besides avoided climate change damage. These are the .«•<• 
ondary benefits, which occur, for example, in the form of lo-
cal air quality improvements. The size of secondary benefits 
depends on local circumstances. Studies for European coun-
tries and the U.S. indicate that secondary benefits could offset 
between 30% and 100% of abatement costs. Whether the ben-
efits of climate policies are high enough to justify the costs of 
abatement is an issue not addressed here. 
Endnotes 
1. The eventual equilibrium warming consistent with the 2060green-
house gas concentrations would be higher than benchmark warniin; 
(because of ocean thermal lag. which would cause a delay of we 
decades or more between committed and realized warming). 
2. These parameters apply to the global mean effects of 2vC0 
warming. However. U.S. warming and precipitation may be l<y 
favourable than the global mean (IPCC, 1990a). Moreover, the 
simulations assume that irrigation water will be readily available 
whereas its availability is expected to become more constrained ir. 
the future, even without climate change (Waggoner el til.. 1W2). 
3. Some of these impacts may be included, as forgone use value, i" 
estimates for ecosystem loss (see Section 6.2.13). 
4. As the estimate is purely speculative, it is excluded from the an-
tral estimates of that study and from Table 6.4. 
5. This is not the only connection between climate change and.' 
The Social Costs of Climate 
Change: 
Greenhouse 
Damage 
and the Benefits 
of 
Control 
2 / 9 
pollution. The two issues are heavily intertwined. For example, sul-
phur abatement, if achieved through the installation of end-of-pipe 
scrubbers, could lead to a lower system efficiency and thus higher 
CO, emissions. The accumulation of sulphur aerosols in the atmos-
phere causes a reduction in mean temperature, thus masking the 
extent of warming. Warmer temperatures, on the other hand, will ag-
gravate photochemical air pollution. 
References 
Adams, R.M., C. Rosenzweig, R.M. Peart, J.T. Ritchie, B.A. Mc-
Carl, J.D. Glyer, R.B. Curry, J.W. Jones, K.J. Boote, and L.H. 
Allen Jr., 1990: Global Climate Change and U.S. Agriculture, Na-
Mre345(17 May), 219-223. 
Adams, R.M, R.A. Fleming, C.C. Chang, B.A. McCarl, and C. 
Rosenzweig, 1993: A reassessment of the economic effects of 
global climate change on U.S. agriculture, report prepared for the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington DC (Sep-
tember). 
Adger, N., and S. Fankhauser, 1993: Economic analysis of the green-
house effect: Optimal abatement level and strategies for mitiga-
tion, International Journal of Environment 
and Pollution 3( 1-3), 
104-119. 
Agarwal, A., and S. Narain, 1991: Global warming in an unequal 
world. A case of environmental colonialism, mimeo, Centre for 
Science and Environment, New Delhi. 
Albala-Bertrand, J.M., 1993: The political 
economy 
of large nat-
ural disasters. Clarendon Press. Oxford. 
Alfsen, K.H., H. Birkclund, and M. Aascrud. 1993: Secondary 
bene-
fits of the EC carbon/energy 
tax, Research Department Discus-
sion Paper No 104. Norwegian Central Bureau of Statistics, Oslo. 
Alfsen, K.H., A. Brendemoen. and S. Glomsrod, 1992: Benefits 
of 
climate policies: Some tentative 
calculations, 
Discussion Paper 
No. 69. Norwegian Central Bureau of Statistics. Oslo. 
Allen, B.D., and R.Y. Anderson, 1993: Evidence from Western North 
America for rapid shifts in climate during the last glacial maxi-
mum, Science 260(25 June), 1920-1923. 
Amano, A., 1994: Estimating secondary benefits of limiting CO, 
emissions in the Asian region, mimeo. School of Business Ad-
ministration, Kobe University. 
Anklin, M„ et «/., 1993: Climate instability during the last inter-
glacial period recorded in the GRIP ice core, Nature 364(15 July), 
203-207. 
Arnell, N.W.. and W.R. Dubourg, 1994: Implications for water sup-
ply and water management. In Economic 
implications 
of climate 
change in Britain, M.L. Parry and R. Duncan, eds., Earthscan. 
London. 
Asaduzzaman, M.. 1994: Economic and social impacts of climate 
change: A case study of Bangladesh coastal zone, mimeo. 
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies. Dhaka. 
Asian Development Bank, 1994: Climate change in Asia, Asian De-
velopment Bank. 8 Country Studies. Manila. 
Asthana, V., 1993: Report on impact of sea level rise on the islands 
and coasts of India, report to the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests, Government of India, New Delhi. 
Awosika, L„ A. Ibe. and M. Udo-Aka. 1990: Impact of sea level rise 
on the Nigerian coastal zone. In Changing climate and the coast. 
Vol. 2. J.G. Titus, ed.. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Washington DC. 
Avres. R.. and J. Walter. 1991: The greenhouse effect: Damages. 
cosh and abatement. Environmental 
and Resource Economics 
1: 
237-270. 
Baan, P.J.A., H. van der Most. G.B.M. Pedroli. and H. van Zuijlcn, 
1993: Systeemverkenning 
Gevolgen 
van Klhnaatverandering 
(in 
Dutch: System exploration 
impact of climatic change). Delft Hy-
draulics, Delft. 
Barker, T.. 1993: Secondary benefits of greenhouse gas abatement: 
The effects of a UK carbon/energy tax on air pollution. Energy 
Environment Economy Modelling Discussion Paper No. 4, De-
partment of Applied Economics, University of Cambridge. 
Batie, S.S.. and H.H. Shugart, 1989: The biological consequences of 
climate changes: An ecological and economic assessment. In 
Greenhouse 
warming: abatement and adaptation, 
N.J. Rosenberg 
ff a/., eds., Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Bazzaz, F.A., and E D . Fajer, 1992: Plant life in a CO,-rich world, 
Scientific American, 
266( 1): 68-74. 
Bengtsson, L„ M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1995: Will Greenhouse Gas-
Induced Warming Over the Next 50 Years Lead to Higher Fre-
quency and Greater Intensity of Hurricanes'? Report No. 139. 
Max Planck Institute, Hamburg. 
Berz, G., 1990: Natural disasters and insurance/reinsurance, UNDRO 
News, January/February: 18-19. 
Berz, G., and K. Conrad, 1993: Winds of change, The Review, June: 
32-35. 
Bigford, T.E., 1991: Sea level rise, ncarshore fisheries, and the fish-
ing industry. Coastal Zone Management 
19: 417-437. 
Braden, J.B., and C D . Kolstad. 1991: Measuring 
the demand 
for 
environmental 
quality, Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Briguglio, L., 1993: The economoc vulnerabilities of small island 
developing states, report to UNCTAD. Geneva. 
Broccoli, A.J., and S. Manabe, 1990: Can existing climate models be 
used to study anthropogenic changes in tropical cyclone climate?, 
Geophysical 
Research Letters 17(11): 1917-1920. 
Broome, J.. 1992: Counting 
the costs of global warming. 
White 
Horse Press. Cambridge. 
Bryant, E.A.. 1991: Natural hazards, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge. 
Callaway, M., J. Smith, and S. Kcefe. 1994: The economic effects of 
climate change for US forests, report prepared for the U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, RCG/Haglcr Bailly, Boulder, CO. 
Canadian Climate Program Board, 1988a: Implications of climate 
change for downhill skiing in Quebec, Climate Change Digest 
Report, CCD 88-03, Downsview, Ontario. 
Canadian Climate Program Board, 1988b: Implications of climate 
change for tourism and recreation in Ontario, Climate Change Di-
gest Report. CCD 88-05, Downsview. Ontario. 
Chakraborty, B., and M. Lai. 1994: Monsoon climate and its 
change in doubled carbon dioxide atmosphere as simulated by 
CSIRO 9, mimeo. unpublished. 
Changnon, S.A., and J.M. Changnon. 1992: Temporal fluctuations 
in weather disasters: 1950-1989. Climatic Change, 22: 191-208. 
Clark, KM.. 1988: Predicting insurance getting easier, 
National 
Underwriter, 29, August. 
Clark, K.M.. 1991: Catastrophe reinsurers need more, better data. 
National Underwriter. 
September. 
Cline, W.R.. 1991: Scientific basis of the greenhouse effect. Eco-
nomic Journal 101(407): 904-919. 
Cline, W.R.. 1992a: The economics 
of global warming. Institute for 
International Economics, Washington. DC. 
Cline, W.R.. 1992b: Optimal carbon emissions over time: Experi-
ments with the Nordhaus DICE model, mimeo. Institute for Inter-
national Economics. Washington. DC. 
Cline, W.R.. 1993a: A note on the impact of global wanning on air 
conditioning and heating costs, mimeo. Institute lor International 
Economics. Washington. DC (January). 
220 
('innate Change 
IW5 
- Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Chan-
Cline, W.R., 1993b: The impact ol' global wanning on the United 
States: A survey of recent literature, mimco. Institute lor Interna-
tional Economics, Washington, DC (April). 
Cline, W R . 1993c: The costs and benefits of greenhouse abatement: 
A guide to policy analysis, paper presented at the OECD/IEA Con-
ference on "The Economics of Global Warming." (June). Paris. 
Cline, W.R., 1993d: Modelling economically efficient abatement of 
greenhouse gases, paper presented at the United Nations Univer-
sity Conference on "Global Environment, Energy and Economic 
Development," (September) Tokyo. 
Cline, W.R., and C.T. Hsieh, 1993: Optimal carbon emissions in the 
Nordhaus DICE model under backstop technology, mimco. Insti-
tute for International Economics. Washington. DC (July). 
Compluinville, C , and J O . Martins, 1994: NOv and SOs emissions 
and carbon abatement, Economic Department Working Paper No. 
151, OECD. Paris. 
Collard, D., 1988: Catastrophic risk: Or the economies of being 
scared. In Economies, 
growth and sustainable 
environments: 
Es-
says in memory of Richard I.eeomher, D. Collard, D.W. Pearce 
and D. Lllph, eds., Macmillan, New York. 
Commonwealth Secretariat, 1989: Climate change: Meeting the 
challenge, report of a Commonwealth Group of Experts, Com-
monwealth Secretariat, London. 
CRU/ERL, 1992: Development of a framework for the evaluation of 
policy options to deal with the greenhouse effect: Economic eval-
uation of impacts and adaptive measures in the European Com-
munity, report for the Commission of European Communities, 
Climate Research Unit (CRU), University of East Anglia, and En-
vironmental Resources Limited (ERL), London. 
Daily, G.C., PR. Ehrlich, H.A. Mooncy. and A.M. Ehrlich, 1991: 
Greenhouse economies: Learn before you leap. Ecological 
Eco-
nomics 4, 1-10. 
Dansgaard, W„ J.W.C. White, and S.J. Johnsen. 1989: The abrupt 
termination of the younger dry as climate event. Nature 339 (15 
June), 532-534. 
Darmstadter, J., and M.A. Toman (eds.). 1993: Assessing 
surprises 
and nonlinearities 
in greenhouse 
warming. Resources for the Fu-
ture, Washington. DC. 
den El/cn, M.G.J., and J. Rotmans. 1992: The socio-economic im-
pact of sea-level rise on the Netherlands: A study of possible sce-
narios. Climatic Change 20, 169-195. 
Dlugolecki, A., D. Clement, C. Elvy. G. Kirby. J. Palutikoff. R. Salt-
house. C. Toomer. S. Turner, and D. Witt. 1994: The impact of 
changing weather patterns on property insurance, report. Char-
tered Insurance Institute, London. 
Doornkamp, J.. 1993: Clay shrinkage induced subsidence. Geo-
graphical Journal 159(2), 196-202. 
Dowlatabadi, H.. and G. Morgan. 1993: A model framework for in-
tegrated studies of the climate problem. Energy Policy 21, 209-
221. 
Dracup, J.A.. S.P. Pelmulder. R. Howitt. G. Horner. W.M. Hane-
mann. C.F. Dumas. R. McCann. J. Loomis. and S. Ise, 1993: Inte-
grated modeling 
of drought and global warming - Impacts on 
selected 
California 
resources. 
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency. Washington. DC. 
Easterling III. W.E.. PR. Crosson. N.J. Rosenberg. M.S. McKenney. 
L A 
Kat/. and K.M. Lemon. 1993: Agricultural impacts of and 
responses to climate change in the Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-
Kansas (MINK) region. Climatic Change 24(1/2). 23-62. 
ECLAC" (Economic 
Commission 
for Latin America and 
the 
Caribbean). 1993: Climate 
change and water management 
in 
Latin America 
aiul the Caribbean. 
Economic Commission for 
Latin America and (he Caribbean. Santiago. Chile. 
Edmonds, J., and J. Reilly, 1985: Global energy. Assessing the fu-
ture, Institute for Energy Analysis, New York. 
El-Raey, M., 1990: Responses to the impacts of greenhouse-induced 
sea level rise on the Northern coastal regions of Egypt. In Chant;-
ing climate and the coast, Vol. 2. J.G. Titus, ed.. U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency, Washington DC. 
Emanuel, K.A., 1987: The dependence of hurricane intensity on cli-
mate, Nature 326, 483-485. 
Erickson, J.D.. 1993: From ecology to economics: The case against 
CO : fertilization. Ecological 
Economics 8, 157-175. 
Evans, D.J. etal., 
1991: Policy implications 
of greenhouse warming 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Fankhauser, S.. 1994a: Protection vs. retreat. The economic costs of 
sea level rise. Environment 
and Planning A, 27, 299-319. 
Fankhauser, S., 1994b: The social costs of greenhouse gas emis-
sions: An expected value approach, Energy Journal 15(2), 157-
184. 
Fankhauser, S.. 1995: Valuing climate change. The economics of tk 
greenhouse, 
Earthscan, London. 
Fellner, W., 1967: Operational utility: The theoretical background 
and a measurement. In Ten economic 
studies in the tradition oj 
Irving Fisher, John Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Fisher, A C . and W.M. Hahnemann. 
1993: Assessing climage 
change risks: Valuation of effects. In Assessing 
surprises anil 
nonlinearities 
in greenhouse 
warming, 
J. Darmstadter and M. 
Toman, eds.. Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Gleick, PH., 1987: Regional hydrologic consequences of increases 
in atmospheric CO, and other trace gases. Climatic Change 10: 
137-161. 
Gleick, PH.. 1992: Water and conflict, project on Environmental 
Change and Acute Conflict. University of Toronto and the Ameri-
can Academy of Arts and Science, Cambridge. MA. 
Gleick, PH., and E.P. Maurer, 1990: Assessing the costs of adapting 
to sea level rise. A case study of San Francisco Bay, mimco, Pa-
cific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment and Se-
curity, and Stockholm Environment Institute. Berkeley. CA and 
Stockholm. 
Gleick, PH., and L.L. Nash, 1991: 77«? societal and environmental 
costs of the continuing 
California 
drought. 
Pacific Institute for 
Studies in Development, Environment and Security, Oakland CA. 
Glynn, P.W.. and W.H. de Weerdt, 1991: Elimination of reel-build-
ing hydrocorals following the 1982-83 El Nino warming event. 
Science 253 (5 July), 69-71. 
Goering, J.M.. 1990: The causes of undocumented migration to the 
United States: A research note. Working Papers No. 52. Commis-
sion for the Study of International Migration and Cooperative 
Economic Development. 
Goklany, I.M.. 1989: Climate change effects on fish, wildlife and 
other DO! programs. In Coping with climate change, J.C. Top-
ping. Jr.. ed.. Climate Institute. Washington. DC. 
Grubb, M.. 1993: The costs of climate change: Critical elements. In 
Costs, impacts and benefits of CO, mitigation. 
Y. Kaya. N. Naki-
cenovic. WD. Nordhaus. and F. Toth, eds., IIASA Collaborative 
Paper Series. CP93-2, Laxenburg. Austria. 
Gutowski, W.J.. G.F. McMahon. S.S. Schluchter. and PH. Kirshen. 
1992: Effects of global warming on hurricane-induced flo.idinc. 
paper prepared for U.S. Department of Energy. Washington. DC 
Haarsma, R.J.. J.F.B. Mitchell, and C A . Senior. 1993: Tropical dis-
turbances in a GCM. Climate Dynamics 8, 247-257. 
Haines, A., and C. Fuchs. 1991: Potential impacts on health of at-
mospheric change. Journal 
of Public 
Health Medicine 13(2 
69-80. 
Haines, A., and M. Parry. 1993: Climate change and human health-
Ilw Social Costs of Climate 
Change: 
Greenhouse 
Damage 
and the Benefits 
of 
Control 
221 
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 
86(December), 707-
711. 
Han, M., J. Hou and L. Wu, 1990: Adverse impact of projected one 
meter sea level rise on China's coastal environment and cities, 
inimeo, University of Maryland. 
Hansen, J. et al., 1989: Regional greenhouse climate effects. In: 
Coping with climate change, J.C. Topping, Jr., ed., pp. 68-81, 
Climate Institute, Washington, DC. 
Hashem, J., and E. Haitcs, 1993: Status report: State 
requirements 
for considering environmental 
externalities 
in electric utility de-
cision making, Association of DSM Professionals, Boca Raton, 
FL. 
Heathcote, R.L., 1985: Extreme event analysis. In Climate 
impact 
assessment, R.W Kates, J.H. Ausubel and M. Berberian, eds., 
John Wiley and Sons, Chichester. 
Hoffert, M.I., and C. Covey, 1992: Deriving global climate sensitiv-
ity from paleoclimatc reconstructions. Nature 360( 10 December), 
573-576. 
Hohmeyer, 0., and M. Gartner. 1992: The Costs of Climate 
Change, 
Report to the Commission of the European Communities, Fraun-
hofer Institut fur Systemtechnik und 
Innovations-Forschung, 
Karlsruhe, Germany. 
Homer-Dixon, T.F.. J.H. Boutwell, and G.W. Rathjens, 1993: Envi-
ronmental change and violent conflict, Scientific 
American, 
268(2), 38-45. 
Hope, C..J.Anderson, and P. Wenman, 1993: Policy analysis of the 
greenhouse effect. An application of the PAGE model. Energy 
Mfcy 21(3), 327-338. 
Houghton, J., 1994: Global warming. 
The complete 
briefing. 
Lion 
Book. London. 
Howarth, R.B.. 1992: International justice and the chain of obliga-
tion, Environmental Values, 1, 133-140. 
Howarth, R.B.. and P.A. Monahan, 1992: Economics, ethics, and 
climate policy, mimco, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, 
CA. 
Idso. S.B.. R.C. Balling Jr.. and R.S. Cerveny. 1990: Carbon dioxide 
and hurricanes: Implications of Northern Hemispheric warming 
for Atlantic/Caribbean storms. Meteorology 
and 
Atmospheric 
Physics 42, 259-263. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990a: Cli-
mate change, the IPCC scientific assessment, report from Work-
ing Group I. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1990b: Cli-
mate change, the IPCC impacts assessment, report from Working 
Group II, Australian Govenment Publishing Service. Canberra. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990c: Strate-
gies for adaptation to sea level rise, report of the Coastal Zone 
Management Subgroup, The Hague. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1992a: Cli-
mate change 1992. The supplementary report to the IPCC scien-
tific assessment, Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1992b: Global 
climate change and the rising challenge 
of the sea. 
Supporting 
document for the IPCC update 1992, WMO and UNEP. Geneva. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1994: Prepar-
ing to meet the coastal challenges of the 21 st century. Conference 
report of the World Coast Conference. Nordwijk. November 
1993, WMO and UNEP. Geneva. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1996a: The sci-
ence of climate change, vol. 1 of Climate change 1995: IPCC sec-
ond assessment report. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1996b: Scien-
tific-technical analyses of impacts, adaptations, 
and mitigation 
of 
climate change, Vol. 2 of Climate change 1995: IPCC second as-
sessment report, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Janscn, H.M.A.. 1993: Are we underestimating, when valuing 
the benefits of greenhouse gas reduction? In GMJ.V, impacts 
and 
benefits 
of CO, mitigation. 
Y. Kaya. N. Nakicenovic. W D . 
Nordhaus. and F. Toth. eds.. IIASA Collaborative Paper Series, 
CP932. International Institute for Systems Analysis, Laxenburg. 
Austria. 
Jodha, N.S., 1989: Potential strategies for adapting to greenhouse 
warming: Perspectives from the developing world. In Policy op-
tions for adaptation 
to climate change, N.J. Rosenberg, ed., Re-
sources for the Future Discussion Paper ENR 89-05, RFF, 
Washingon, DC. 
Kaiser, H.M., S.J. Riha, D.S. Wilks. D.G. Rossiter, and R. Sampath, 
1992: A farm-level analysis of the economic and agronomic im-
pacts of gradual climate warming, mimeo, Department of Agri-
cultural Economics, Cornell University. Syracuse, NY (May). 
Kalkstein, L.S.. 1989: The impact of CO, and trace gas-induced cli-
mate changes upon human mortality. In The potential 
effects of 
global climate change on the United States. Appendix 
G: Health, 
J.B. Smith and D.A. Tirpak, eds., EPA. Washington DC. 
Kandlikar, M„ 1994: Catastrophic climate damage: Results from 
ICAM-2. mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh. 
Kane, S., J. Reilly. and J. Tobey. 1992: An empirical study of the 
economic effects of climate change on world agriculture, Cli-
matic Change 21, 17-35. 
Kimball, B., and N.J. Rosenberg, eds., 1990: The impact of CO,, 
trace gases, and climate change, Publication No. 53, American 
Society of Agronomy, Madison. WI. 
Kirshen, PH.. and N.M. Fennessey, 1992: Potential impacts of cli-
mate change upon the water supply of the Boston Metropolitan 
Area, mimeo. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washing-
ton. DC (October). 
Klinedinst, PL., D.A. Wilhite. G.L. Halm, and K.G. Hubbard, 1993: 
The potential effects of climate change on summer season Da it 
cattle milk production and reproduction. Climatic Change, 23( I), 
21-36. 
Knox, L.. C.A. and V.K. Smith. 1985: Microeconomic analysis. In 
Climate 
impact assessment. 
R.W Kates. J.H. Ausubel and M. 
Berberian, eds., John Wiley and Sons, Chichester. 
Kiirner, C . and J.A. Arnone III. 1992: Responses to elevated carbon 
dioxide in artificial tropical ecosystems. Science 257 (18 Septem-
ber). 1672-1675. 
Krause, F . W. Bach, and J. Kooney. 1989: Energy policy in the 
greenhouse. 
Earthscan. London. 
Kunst, A.E.. C.W.N. Looman, and J.P. Mackenbach, 1993: Outdoor 
air temperature and mortality in the Netherlands: A time-series 
analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology 
137(3). 331-341. 
Langford, I.H.. and G. Bentham. 1993: The potential effects of cli-
mate change on winter mortality in England and Wales. Centre 
for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment 
(CSERGE), Working Paper GEC 93-25. University of East An-
glia and University College London. 
Leary, N.. 1994: The amenity value of climate: A review of empiri-
cal evidence from migration, wages and rents. U.S. Environmen-
tal Protection Agency, discussion paper (July). 
Leggett, J.. 1993: Climate change and the insurance 
industry. 
Soli-
darity among the risk community. 
Greenpeace International. Am-
sterdam. 
Lighthill, J.. G.J. Holland. W.M. Gray. C. Landsea. G. Craig. J. 
Evans. Y. Kurihara. and C'.P. Guard. 1994: Global change and 
tropical cyclones. Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Soci-
ety IS: 2147-2157. 
222 
Climate 
Change 
IW5 
- Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate Char. 
Limbert, D.W.S., 1993: The human and economic impacts of 
weather events in 1992, WMO Bulletin 42(4). 333-341. 
Lind, R.C. (eel.), 19X2: Discounting for time and risk in energy pol-
icy, Resources for the Future. Washington, DC. 
Loveland, J.Li., and G.Z. Brown. 1992: Impacts of climate change 
on the energy performance of buildings in the United States. 
minieo. U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, Washington, DC. 
MacDonuld, G.J., 1990: Role of methane clathrates in past and fu-
ture climates. Climatic Change 16: 247-2X1. 
Maddison, D.J., 1994: The shadow price of greenhouse gases and 
aerosols, mimeo. Centre for Social and Economic Research on 
the Global Environment (CSERGE), University College London 
and University of East Anglia, Norwich. 
Magadza, C U D . . 1991: Some possible impacts of climate change 
on African ecosystems. In Climate change. Science, impacts and 
policy. Proceedings 
of the Second World Climate Conference, 
J. 
Jager and H.L. Ferguson, cds. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge. 
Magalhaes, A.R., and M.H. Giant/, (cds.). 1992: Socioeconomic 
im-
pacts of climate variations and policy responses in Brazil, United 
Nations Environmental Programme. Nairobi, and Esquel Brazil 
Foundation, Brasilia. 
Manabe, S., and R.J. Stouffer. 1993: Century-scale effects of in-
creased atmospheric CO, on the ocean-atmosphere system, Na-
ture 364(15 July), 215-2IK. 
Mannc, A.S., R. Mendelsohn, and R.G. Richels, 1993: M E R G E - A 
model for evaluating regional and global effects of greenhouse 
gas reduction policies, mimeo. Electric Power Research Institute, 
Palo Alto. CA. 
M a n n c , A S , and R.G. Richels, 1992: Buying greenhouse 
insurance, 
MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 
Martens, W.J.M.. J. Rotmans. and L.W. Niessen, 1994: 
Climate 
change and malaria 
risk: An integrated 
modelling 
approach, 
GLOBO Report No. 3. Dutch National Institute of Public Health 
and Enviromenlal Protection (RIVM). Bilthoven. The Nether-
lands. 
Matsuoka, Y„ K. Kai, and T. Morita. 1994: An estimation of climate 
change effects on malaria. AIM Interim Paper. National Institute 
for Environmental Studies. Tsukuba. Japan. 
Maunder, W.J., 1994: Tropical cyclones in the South Pacific: An his-
torical overview regarding the intensity, tracks, and frequency 
of 
tropical cyclones in the South Pacific dining the last 100 years, 
and an analysis of any changes in these factors. 
Institute for En-
vironmental Studies. Free University Amsterdam. 
McLean, DM.. 19X9: A mechanism for greenhouse-induced col-
lapse of mammalian faunas. In Coping with climate change, J.C. 
Topping Jr.. ed., pp. 263-267. Climate Institute. Washington. DC. 
Mearns, L.O.. R.W. Katz. and S.H. Schneider. 1984: Extreme high 
temperature events: Changes in their probabilities with changes 
in mean temperature. Journal of Climate and Applied 
Meteorol-
ogy 23, 1601-1613. 
Mendelsohn. R.. W. Nordhaus. and D. Shaw. 1993: The impact of 
climate on agriculture: A Ricardian approach. In Costs, 
impacts 
and benefits of CO, mitigation. 
Y. Kaya. N. Nakiccnovic'. W.D. 
Nordhaus. and I. loth. cds.. 11ASA Collaborative Paper Scries. 
CP93-2. l.axenburg. Austria. 
Midun. /... and S. l.ec. 19X9: Effect of climate change and sea level 
rise on Bangladesh, report to the Commonwealth Group of Ex-
perts. Commonwealth Secretariat. London. 
Milliman. I D . J.M. Broadus. and F. Gable. 19X9: Environmental 
and economic implications o\' rising sea level and subsiding 
deltas: The Nile and Bengal examples. Ambio 18(6). 340-345. 
Mitchell. R.. and R. Carson. 19X9: Csing surveys to value 
public 
goods: The contingent 
valuation method. Resources for the Fu-
ture, Washington. DC. 
Morgenstern, R.D., 1991: Towards a comprehensive approach m 
global climate change mitigation, American 
Economic Review, 
Papers and Proceedings 
81(2), 140-145. 
Munich Re, 1993: Winter storms in Europe - Analysis of 1990 lime, 
and future loss potential, 
Munich Re, Munich. 
Myers, N., 1993: Environmental refugees in a globally warmer 
world, BioScience, 
43(11). 752-761. 
Nash, L.L., and PH. Gleick, 1993: The Colorado River Basin and 
climate change, report No 230R-93-009, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, DC. 
Nicholls, R., K. Dennis, C. Volonte, and S. Leatherman, 1992: Mali-
ods and problems 
in assessing 
the impacts of accelerated M 
level rise, proceedings of the workshop "The World at Risk: 
Natural Hazards and Climate Change," American Institute for 
Physics, New York. 
Nishioka, S., H. Harasawa, H. Hashimoto, T. Ookita, K. Masuda. 
and T. Morita, 1993: The potential 
effects of climate change in 
Japan, Centre for Global Environmental Research, and National 
Institute lor Environmental Studies, Tsukuba (Japan). 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991: To slow or not to slow: The economics of 
the greenhouse effect, Economic Journal 101(407), 920-937. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1993a: Optimal greenhouse gas reductions and la\ 
policy in the "DICE" model, American Economic Review, Paper* 
and Proceedings 
83(2), 3 13-317. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1993b: Rolling the "DICE": An optimal transition 
path for controlling greenhouse gases. Resources 
and EIIMJ'V 
Economics 
15( I), 27-50. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1993c: Reflections on the economics of climate 
change, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
7(4), 11-25. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1994a: Expert opinion on climate change. Ameri-
can Scientist (January-February). 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1994b: Managing 
the global commons: The t» 
nomics of climate change, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.D., and G.W. Yohe. 1983: Future carbon dioxide emis-
sions from fossil fuels. In Changing 
climate. National Research 
Council, National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and U.S. Department ni 
Agriculture (USDA). 1989: Climate impact response functions 
report of a workshop held at Cool font. West Virginia. Sept. 1144. 
Olsthoorn, A.A.. P.E. van der Werff. and J. de Boer. 1994: The nat-
ural disaster reduction community and climate change polio 
making, an inquiry among participants of the IDNDR World Con-
ference in Yokohama, 1994. Institute for Environmental Studies 
W94/14, Vrije Universiteit. Amsterdam. 
Ominde, S.H.. and C. Juma. 1991: A change in weather. Africa 
Centre for Technology Studies. ACTS Press. Nairobi. 
ORNL/RFF, 1994: Benefits from reducing risk of death fuel cycle 
externalities, paper No 10 in Fuel cycle externalities: 
Amil\m. 
methods and issues. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Oak Ridge. 
TN. and Resources for the Future. Washington. DC. 
Ottinger, R.L. DR. Wooley. N.A. Robinson. DR. Hodas. and SI 
Babb. 1990: Environmental 
costs of electricity. 
Pace UntveNt; 
Center for Environmental and Legal Studies. Oceana Publica-
tions. New York. 
Page, T . 1977: Conservation 
and economic 
efficiency. Johr.s Hop-
kins University Press. Baltimore. 
Parikh, K... J. Parikh. T. Muralidharan. and N. Hadker. 1994: Yahmff 
pollution in Bombay, Indira Gandhi Insitute of Development Research. 
MEZP Project. The World Bank. Bombay and Washington DC. 
Parry. M.. 1990: Climate change and world agriculture. LiartlK-" 
London. 
The Social Costs of Climate 
Change: 
Greenhouse 
Damage 
and the Benefits 
of 
Control 
22.i 
Parry, M.. 1993: Climate change and the future of agriculture. Inter-
national Journal of Environment 
and Pollution 3( 1-3), 13-30. 
Parry, ML., M. Blantran de Rozari, A.L. Chong, and S. Panich, 
1991: The potential socio-economic 
effects of climate change in 
South-East Asia, 
United Nations Environmental 
Programme, 
Nairobi. 
Parry, M.L., T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijn (eds.), 1988: The impacts 
of climate variations on agriculture, 
2 Volumes. Kluwer. Dor-
drecht. 
Pearce, D.W., 1992: The secondary benefits of greenhouse gas con-
trol. Global Environmental Change Working Paper GEC 92-12, 
Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environ-
ment. University College London and University of East Anglia, 
Norwich. 
Pearce, D.W., 1993: Economic values and the natural world. Earth-
scan. London. 
Pearce, D.W., 1994: Costing the environmental damage from energy 
production, mimeo, Centre for Social and Economic Research on 
the Global Environment, University College London and Univer-
sity of East Anglia. Norwich. 
Pearce, D.W., G. Atkinson, and R. Dubourg, 1994: What is sustain-
able development?, Annual Review of Energy 19, 457-474. 
Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg. 1992: CETA: A model for carbon emis-
sions trajectory assessment. Energy Journal 13( 1). 55-77. 
Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg. 1993a: CO, emissions control: Com-
paring policy instruments, Energy Policy 21(3). 222-230. 
Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg, 1993b: Global warming uncertainties 
and the value of information: An analysis using CETA, Resource 
and Energy Economics 15( 1), 71-97. 
Penner, J.E., R.E. Dickinson, and C.A. O'Neill, 1992: Effects of 
aerosol from biomass burning on the global radiation budget. Sci-
ence 256{5 June). 1432-1433. 
Pernetta, J.C., 1989: Projected climate change and sea-level-rise: A 
relative impact rating for the countries of the Pacific Basin. In Im-
plications of expected climate changes in the South Pacific: 
An 
overview, J.C. Pernetta and P.J. Hughes, eds., UNEP Regional 
Seas Reports and Studies 128, United Nations Environmental 
Programme, Nairobi. 
Pernetta, J.C, 1992: Impacts of climate change and sea level rise on 
smalt island states. Global Environmental 
Change, 2(1), 19-31. 
Peters, R.I.. and T.E. Lovejoy (eds.), 1992: Global warming and bi-
ological diversity, Yale University Press, New Haven. 
Pezzey, J., 1994: The optimal sustainable depletion of non-renew-
able resources, mimeo, Department of Economics, University 
College London. 
Price, C, and D. Rind, 1994: The impact of a 2xCO, climate on 
lightning-caused fires. Journal of Climate 7, 1484-1494. 
Raper, S.C.B.. 1993: Observational data on the relationships be-
tween climate change and the frequency and magnitude of severe 
tropical storms. In Climate and sea level change, W.W. Warrick. 
E.M. Barrow, and T.M.L. Wigley, eds., Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
Reilly, J., J.A. Edmonds, R.H. Gardner, and A. L. Brenkert, 1987: 
Uncertainty analysis of the IEA/ORAU CO, emissions model. 
Energy Journal, 8(3). 1-29. 
Reilly, J., and N. Hohmann. 1993: Climate change and agriculture: 
The role of international trade. American 
Economic Review, Pa-
pers and Proceedings 83( 2), 306-312. 
Reilly, J. N. Hohmann, and S. Kane. 1994: Climate change and agri-
cultural trade: Who benefits, who loses?. Global 
Environmental 
Change 4( I). 24-36. 
Revelle, R.R.. 1983: Probable future change in sea level resulting 
Irom increased atmospheric carbon dioxide. In Changing 
climate. 
National Research Council. National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Rijkswaterstaat, 1991: Rising waters. Impacts of the greenhouse 
ef-
fect for the Netherlands, 
Dutch Ministry of Transport and Public 
Works, The Hague. 
Rijsberman, F, 1991: Potential costs of adapting to sea level rise in 
OEOD countries. In Responding 
to climate change: Selected 
eco-
nomic issues, OECD. Paris. 
Rijsberman, E, and R.J. Swart (eds.), 1990: Targets and 
indicators 
of climate change, Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm. 
Rind, D., D. Goldberg, J. Hansen, C. Rosenzweig, and R. Ruedy, 
1990: Potential cvapotranspiration and the likelihood of future 
drought, Journal 
of Geophysical 
Research 
95(D7), 9,983-
10.004. 
Ritchie, J.T.. B.D. Baer, and T. Y. Chou. 1989: Effect of global cli-
mate change on agriculture: Great Lakes Region. In The potential 
effects of global climate change on the United States, U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. 
Roberts, L., 1991: Costs of a clean environment, Science 251 (8 
March), 1182. 
Rosebrock, J., 1993: Time-weighting emission reductions for global 
warming projects - A comparison of shadow price and emission dis-
counting approaches, mimeo. The World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Rosenberg, N.J., 1992: Adaptation of agriculture to climate change. 
Climatic Change 21(4). 385-405. 
Rosenberg, N.J., 1993: Towards an integrated impact assessment of 
climate change: The MINK study, Climatic Change 24(1/2). 
Rosenberg, N.J., and PR. Crosson. 1991: The MINK project: A new 
methodology for identifying regional influences of, and re-
sponses to, increasing atmospheric CO, and climate change, En-
vironmental 
Conservation 
18(4), 313-322. 
Rosenberg, N.J., P. Crosson, W.E. Easterling III, K. Frederick, and 
R. Sedjo, 1989a: Policy options for adaptation to climate change. 
Resources for the Future Discussion Paper ENR 89-05, Re-
sources for the Future, Washingon, DC. 
Rosenberg, N.J., W.E. Easterling III, PR. Crosson, and J. Darm-
stadter (eds.). 1989b: Greenhouse 
warming: 
Abatement 
and 
adaptation, 
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Rosenthal, D.H., H.K. Gruenspecht. and E.A. Moran, 1994: Effects 
of global warming on energy use for space heating and cooling in 
the United States, mimeo. U.S. Department of Energy, Washing-
ton, DC (March). 
Rosenzweig, C . and D. Hillel, 1993: Agriculture in a greenhouse 
world. National Geographic 
Research & Exploration 
9(2), 208-
221. 
Rosenzweig, C , and M L . Parry. 1994: Potential impact of climate 
change on world food supply. Nature 367(13 January), 133-138. 
Rosenzweig, C , M. Parry. K. Frohberg. and G. Fisher, 1993: Cli-
mate change and world food supply. Environmental Change Unit, 
Oxford. 
Rothenberg, J.. 1993: Economic perspectives on time comparisons. 
In Global accord: Environmental 
challenges 
and 
international 
responses. C. Na/li. ed., MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Ryan, B.F.. I.G. Watterson. and J.L. Evans. 1992: Tropical cyclone 
frequencies inferred from Gray's Yearly Genesis Parameter: Vali-
dation of GCM tropical climates. Geophysical 
Research 
Letters, 
19(18), 1831-1834. 
SAARC, 1992: Regional study on greenhouse effect and its impact 
on the region, report. South Asian Association for Regional Co-
operation, Kathmandu. 
Sehelling, T.C.. 1983: Climatic change: Implications for welfare and 
policy. In Changing 
climate. 
National Research Council. Na-
tional Academy Press. Washington. IX 
224 
Cliiiniic 
('luuiiic 
/ W i 
l-A-ononiif 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate Char:: 
Schelling, T.C.. 1992: Some economics of global wanning. Ameri-
can Economic Review 82( I ). 1-14. 
Schelling, T.C.. 1993: Intergeneralional discounting, mimeo. Uni-
versity of Maryland, College Park (November). 
Scheraf-a, J.D., and N.A. Leary. 1994: Costs and side benefits of us-
ing energy taxes to mitigate global climate change. In Proceed-
ings of die H6th Annual Conference, 
National Tax Association, 
Washington, DC. 
Scheraga, J.D., N.A. Leary, R.J. Goettle, D.W. Jorgcnson, and P.J. 
Wilcoxen. 1993: Macroeconomic modelling and the assessment 
of climate change impacts. In Costs, impacts and benefits 
of 
CO, mitigation, 
Y. Kaya, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus, and 
F. foth, eds., IIASA Collaborative Paper Series. CP93-2, Laxen-
burg, Austria. 
Schlesinger, M.E., and X. Jiang, 1990: Simple model representation 
of atmosphere-ocean GCMs and estimation of the time scale of 
CO,-induced climate change. Journal of Climate 3( December). 
12." 
Schneider, S.H., and R. S. Chen. 1980: Carbon dioxide warming and 
coastline flooding: Physical factors and climatic impact. Ameri-
can Review of Energy 5, 107-40. 
Schneider, S.H.. and N.J. Rosenberg. 1989: The greenhouse effect: 
Its causes, possible impacts, and associated uncertainties. In 
Greenhouse 
warming: Abatement 
and adaptation, 
Resources for 
the Future, Washington, DC. 
Scott, M.K, 1989: A new view of economic growth. Clarendon Press. 
Oxford. 
Sedjo, R.A., and A.M. Solomon. 1989: Climate and forests. In 
Greenhouse 
warming: Abatement 
and adaptation, 
N.J. Rosen-
berg. W.E. Easteiiing III. PR. Crosson. and J. Darmstadter, eds.. 
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Shogren, J.F.. S.Y. Shin. D.J. Hayes, and J.B. Kliebenstein. 1994: 
Resolving differences in willingness to pay and willingness to ac-
cept, American Economic Review 84( I). 255-270. 
Smith, .IB.. S. Ragland. and E. Trabka. 1993: Standardized esti-
mates of climate change damages for the United States, mimeo. 
RCG/Hagler Bailly. Boulder. CO (December). 
Smith, J.B.. F.D. Stern. C.A. Yermoli. and W.S. Breffle. 1994: The 
impact of climate change on thermoelectric power use in Egypt 
and Poland, mimeo. RCG/Hagler Bailly. Boulder, CO (February). 
Smith, K.. 1992: Environmental 
hazards. Assessing risk and reduc-
ing disaster. Routledge. London. 
Spash, C , 1994: Double CO, and beyond: Benefits, costs and com-
pensation. Ecological Economics. 
10, 27-36. 
Sundquist, E.T.. 1990: Long-term aspects of future atmospheric 
CO, and sea-level changes. In Sea-level change. R.R. Revelle et 
al.. National Research Council. National Academy Press. Wash-
ington. DC. 
Titus, J.G.. 1987: The causes and effects of sea level rise. In The im-
pact of sea level rise on society. H.G. Wind. ed.. A. A. Balkema. 
Rotterdam. 
Titus, J.G.. 1991: Greenhouse effect and coastal wetland policy: 
How Americans could abandon an area the size of Massachusetts. 
Environmental 
Management 
Journal I5| I). 39-58. 
Titus, J.G.. 1992: The cost of climate change to the United States. In 
Global climate change: Implications 
challenges 
and 
mitigation 
measures. S.K. Majumdar. L.S. Kalkstein. B. Yarnal. E.W. Miller. 
and L.M. Rosenfeld. eds.. Pennsylvania Academy o\' Science. 
Easton. PA. 
Titus, J.G.. R.A. Park. S.P. Leatherman. JR. Weggel. M.S. Greene. 
PAY. Mausel.S. Brown. C. Gaunt. M. Trehan. and G. Yohe. 1991: 
Greenhouse effect and sea level rise: The cost of holding back the 
sea. Coastal Zone Management 
19, 172-204. 
Tol, R.S.J., 1994: The damage costs of climate change: A note on 
tangibles and intangibles applied to DICE. Energy Policy 22(5i. 
436-438. 
Tol, R.S.J., 1995: The damage costs of climate change: Towards 
more comprehensive calculations. Environmental 
and Resoum 
Economics, 
5, 353-374. 
Tol, R.S.J., C. Dorland, E. van der Hul, F.P.M. Leek, A.A. Olsihoorn. 
P. Velinga. and RE. van der Werff, 1994: Climate extremes, risk 
and risk management. In Climate change and extreme weather 
events: Scenarios 
of altered hazards for further 
research, T.E. 
Downing, D.T. Favis-Mortlock, and M.J. Gawith, eds.. Environ-
mental Change Unit Research Report 7. University of Oxford. 
Oxford. 
Turner, R.K., S. Subak, N. Adger. and J. Parfitt. 1994: How are so-
cio-economic systems affected by climate-related changes in the 
coastal zone?, report to 1PCC Working Group II, Subgroup B. 
Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environ-
ment (CSERGE), University of East Anglia and University Col-
lege London. 
UK Climate Impact Review Group, 1991: The potential effects of 
climate change in the United Kingdom, report prepared at there-
quest of the Department of the Environment. HMSO, London. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1989: The potential effects 
of global climate change on the United States, J.B. Smith and 
D.Tirpak, eds.. EPA, Washington, DC. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1990: Environmental in-
vestments: The cost of a clean environment. 
EPA, Washington DC. 
U.S. FEMA-FIA, 1991: Projected 
impact of relative sea level risi 
on the national flood 
insurance 
program. 
Federal Emergency 
Management Agency and Federal Insurance Administration. 
Washington DC. 
Viscusi, W.K., 1993: The value of risks to life and health. Journal«j 
Economic Literature, 31 (December), 1912-1946. 
Waggoner, P.E., 1990: Climate change and U.S. water resources. 
Wiley, New York. 
Waggoner, P.E., 1994: How much land can ten billion people spare 
for nature'.', Report No. 121. Council for Agricultural Science and 
Technology, Ames, IA. 
Waggoner, RE. et ai. 
1992: Preparing U.S. agriculture for global 
climate change, report No. 119. Council for Agricultural Science 
and Technology. Ames, IA. 
Waters, S.. 1990: The Travel Industry World Yearbook: The higpic-
ture. World Tourism Organization, Madrid. 
Wendland, W.M.. 1977: Tropical storm frequencies related to sea 
surface temperatures. Journal 
of Applied 
Meteorology 16(51. 
477-481. 
Wigley, T.M.L.. 1995: Global mean temperature and sea level conse-
quences of greenhouse gas concentration stabilization, Geophysi-
cal Research Letters 22( I): 45-48. 
Wigley, T.M.L.. and S.C.B. Raper, 1992: Implications for climate 
and sea level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature 357, 
293-300. 
World Health Organisation, 1990: Potential 
health effects of cli-
matic change. WHO. Geneva. 
Yohe, G.W.. 1993: Sorting out facts and uncertainties in economic 
response to the physical effects of global climate change. In .4J-
sessing surprises and non-linearities 
in greenhouse warming J 
Darmstaedter and M. Toman, eds.. Resources for the Future. 
Washington. DC. 
7 
A Generic Assessment of 
Response Options 
C. J. JEPMA, M. ASADUZZAMAN, I. MINTZER, R.S. MAYA, 
M.AL-MONEEF 
Contributors: 
I Byrne, H. Geller, C.A. Hendriks, M. Jefferson, G. Leach, A. Qureshi, W. Sassin, 
R- A. Sedjo, A. van der Veen 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 A Conceptual Framework 
7.2.1 Mitigation options 
7.2.2 Adaptation options 
7.2.3 Indirect policy options 
7.3 Criteria for Assessment 
7.4 Mitigation Options 
7.4.1 Energy conservation and efficiency 
improvement 
7.4.2 Fossil fuel switching 
7.4.3 Renewable energy technologies 
7.4.4 Nuclear energy 
7.4.5 Capture and disposal 
229 
232 
232 
233 
233 
234 
234 
236 
7.6 An Integrating Approach 
7.7 Regional Differences and International 
7.4.6 Enhancing sinks: Forestry options 
7.4.6.1 Costs 
7.4.7 Methane 
7.5 Adaptation Options 
7.5.1 Adaptation to what? 
7.5.2 How to adapt 
7.5.3 Adaptation measures in developing 
countries 
7.5.4 Modelling adaptation 
245 
247 
249 
249 
250 
251 
252 
252 
236 
240 
241 
242 
245 
References 
Cooperation 
Endnotes 
253 
254 
256 
258 
SUMMARY 
In this chapter, current response options for dealing with cli-
mate change are assessed on the basis of their feasibility, ac-
ceptability, cost-effectiveness, and applicability. As much as 
possible, specific attention has been given to the applicability 
of these various options in the developing countries and coun-
tries in transition. The chapter does not. however, contain an 
evaluation of the (macro)economic effects that large-scale ap-
plications of the various options might have in different re-
gions of the world. 
Conceptually a distinction must be made between mitiga-
tion and adaptation options on the one hand, and indirect op-
tions-that is, options not designed to have an impact on the 
greenhouse effect but that nevertheless do - on the other. In-
deed, many technological developments and various policies 
have an impact on energy use and thus on the global climate. 
An effective climate change response strategy should there-
fore preferably pay attention to possibilities of joining climate 
response options with responses to other socioeconomic tran-
sition phenomena, as in the application of an integrated sys-
tems approach. 
The various response options can be assessed in fundamen-
tally different ways. At one extreme is the engineering effi-
ciency approach, which focusscs only on costs and how these 
are related to internal and external economies of scale and 
learning effects. At the other extreme is the welfare economic 
approach, which, in addition, considers such welfare aspects 
as social, political, or environmental resistance to the option's 
application. Costs associated with the diffusion of technolo-
gies, public education, and lifestyle changes are also taken 
into account. 
A number of C02 mitigation options have been proposed, 
including 
• Energy conservation and efficiency improvement 
• Fossil fuel switching 
• Renewable energy technologies 
• Nuclear energy 
• Capture and disposal technologies 
• Enhancing sinks and forestry options 
Attention has also been focussed on reducing emissions of 
methane. 
With respect to energy conservation and efficiency im-
provement, reductions in energy intensities during recent dec-
ades have varied widely across countries and also within the 
group of developing countries. Some of this variation, how-
ever, reflects differences in how the underlying variables have 
been measured. 
Because reductions in national energy intensities are re-
lated to structural changes in national economies, the growth 
of the secondary sectors in developing countries may give a 
biassed view of their energy efficiency improvement results. 
In most industrial countries, in contrast, a trend towards "de-
materialization" (i.e., a shift away from the highly energy-
intensive secondary towards the less energy-intensive tertiary 
sector) has favoured lower energy intensities. 
There is a broad consensus in the literature in favour of 
efficiency improvement, because it is seen as directly benefi-
cial irrespective of any impact on greenhouse warming and 
because it has significant scope for negative net cost (i.e.. 
no-regret) applications. The potential for energy efficiency 
improvements in production seems promising, especially in 
the power production, transportation, steel and cement pro-
duction, and residential sectors. However, because the end use-
phase is the least efficient part of an energy system, improve-
ments in this area would produce the greatest benefits. The 
potential for efficiency improvements in the developing coun-
tries is roughly similar in magnitude to that in industrialized 
countries. By contrast, energy conservation may be achieved 
somewhat more easily in the industrialized countries. 
Optimism about the scope for no-regret options with re-
spect to energy efficiency varies considerably and depends to 
a large extent on the discount rate that is employed. Revealed 
consumer discount rates for household investments can be 
very high indeed. Similarly, in developing countries a lack of 
access to information and limitations of institutional capacity, 
human skills, and financial resources may cause the revealed 
time preference to he much higher than commercial interest 
rates. 
The potential for energy savings is estimated at 10-40% 
for production and 10-50% for residential use. However, to 
achieve such results, institutional and information factors are 
crucial. So too is the degree to which the option may help in 
deriving other environmental benefits. 
With respect to fossil fuel switching, relatively little infor-
mation about costs is available, although it is recognized that 
fossil fuels will remain the dominant energy source for sev-
eral decades yet. Estimates of the costs of switching vary to a 
large extent, depending on the type of measure, the fraction of 
natural gas lost to the atmosphere from leakage during pro-
duction and distribution, and the opportunity costs of the op-
tion (which depend to a large extent on the availability of, for 
instance, coal reserves). 
2M) 
Climate (limine /VV.i Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Char: 
These opportunity costs may be particularly large in popu-
lous countries with massive coal reserves, such as China and 
India. In fact, in developing countries growth may even result 
in a transition from less carbon-intensive biomass to more 
carbon-intensive fossil fuels. 
Renewable energy technologies may be sustainable with 
respect to energy inputs but may not always be socially and 
environmentally benign in other respects. This is particularly 
so in the case of large-scale applications (for example, of ma-
jor hydro or biomass projects) in developing countries. 
The technical potential of the renewable options not cur-
rently utilized varies from 50% for biomass to 75% for hydro 
to several thousand per cent for wind. Many renewable tech-
nologies, however, tend to he site-specific (i.e.. their appli-
cation is limited to a finite number of specific sites). Other 
problems include potential environmental risks, technological 
readiness, and cost-effectiveness. 
Though some renewable options are almost mature, others 
are still in the demonstration stage. Practicable potentials 
therefore vary to a large extent, although much will depend on 
the costs of the various options. 
Cost estimates diverge widely, mainly due to the time hori-
zon adopted, the discount rate chosen, and the capacity and 
useful lifetime assumed. Moreover, costs are strongly influ-
enced by site-specificity, variability of supply, and the form of 
final energy delivered. Other aspects that influence cost be-
haviours are learning effects, economies of scale, and the need 
for immediate storage or transport of the energy generated. 
The promise of renewables lies mainly in their large poten-
tial and modest price on the spot. These factors are particu-
larly relevant for developing countries, which, by using local 
renewables, could reduce their dependence on imported fossil 
fuels. Local communities could benefit significantly from 
small-scale applications and their net positive side effects. 
In view of these considerations, the future role of renew-
ables is hard to predict precisely; the share of renewables in 
the 2020 energy mix will, however, probably not exceed 25%. 
Nuclear energy technology is long past the demonstration 
stage, but the issue of the safe storage of nuclear waste re-
mains unresolved. Because of their long design and construc-
tion time (10-15 years) and the enormous investment costs of 
nuclear power plants, the nuclear option is also rather inflexible. 
In view of the waste disposal problem and the consequent 
lack of public support, the share of nuclear energy in total en-
ergy use is expected to increase only to a limited extent during 
the coming decades. 
Capture and disposal have potential in cases where a 
switch from coal to other fossil fuels is difficult for one reason 
or another. Some technologies already exist; others are being 
developed. 
The disposal option is ultimately limited not only for tech-
nical reasons but also because disposal cannot permanently 
prevent the reentry of carbon into the atmosphere. This is irre-
spective of the way in which disposal would take place. The 
practicability of this option is still a matter of discussion, be-
cause in some types of disposal (e.g.. in aquifers or oceans) 
environmental impacts are uncertain. 
The scope of forestry options is determined by the large ex-
pected potential, modest costs, low risk, and positive side ef-
fects. However, there is still a large amount of uncertain!; 
with respect to the net carbon release from deforestation and 
land use changes on the one hand and the long-term carbon 
absorption capacity of afforestation efforts on the other. Basi-
cally, forestry measures, like removal options, are to be seen 
as an intermediate response policy. 
Uncertainties in assessments of the global potential lor 
halting or slowing deforestation and for reforestation are 
linked to the extent of human encroachment into the forests. 
the area available for forestry measures, and the annual and 
cumulative carbon uptake per hectare. 
Mitigation policies using forests are generally considered 
relatively cost-effective, especially if applied in developing 
countries. With the costs of afforestation, much depends on 
whether one assumes that the forests can be exploited sustain-
ably or, instead, should be left alone to mature, and on the ac-
ceptance of the newly planted forests by the local population. 
Halting or slowing deforestation is probably one of the 
most urgent and cost-effective options. However, social, po-
litical, and infrastructural barriers may restrict this option as 
well as the scope of reforestation. 
Estimates of cost-effectiveness of forestry measures de-
pend strongly on whether one takes a static or dynamic point 
of view. There is a clear tendency to focus increasingly on 
cost functions rather than point estimates; the former ap-
proach seems clearly more relevant in the case of large areas. 
Moreover, the cost assessment methodology has been increas-
ingly refined (for example, by the inclusion of discounting 
procedures). Cost estimates, which are now probably more 
realistic, tend to fall within a range of $30-$60/tC for large 
annual uptakes. 
With respect to methane, the emission data available re-
veal wide discrepancies between various regions. Information 
about methane leakage and distribution is also rather scanty. 
and some of it is unreliable. The same applies to information 
about the costs of methane control options. 
Information about the cost functions of the various mitiga-
tion options is still weak, because the functions are not only 
time-specific but also region- and context-specific. The weak-
ness of information also relates to the remarkable fact that the 
scope for no-regret options seems to be significant, especially 
in developing countries. This apparent scope is most likely 
due to the high actual time preference rates, lack of informa-
tion, and limitations of human capacity. All this and the differ-
ent assessment perspectives mentioned earlier may explain 
why virtually no studies exist in which the optimal mix of op-
tions is designed on the basis of their underlying cost func-
tions and feasibility. 
The few studies of this kind that have been done provide 
only tentative results but do indicate - given present knowl-
edge about the cost functions of the various options - that the 
pure application of the cost minimization principle would re-
quire a significant share (probably more than half i of the 
emission reduction targets to be achieved via the applicative 
of options outside the OECD area. In addition, in terms of the 
1 Generic Assessment of Response Options 
231 
size of the emission reduction, energy conservation and effi-
ciency improvements and the forestry option seem to provide 
the largest potential from a cost minimization point of view. 
The potential of the forestry option is widely debated, however, 
because of the limitations of net absorption in time and because 
much depends on forest exploitation and local acceptance. 
To illustrate how an optimal mix of response options might 
look, the result of a (linear programming-based) cost mini-
mization simulation using the available cost-function infor-
mation disaggregated by region is presented in Table 7.13 for 
a predetermined emission reduction target of 2.4 GtC. In view 
of the tentative and uncertain character of the underlying data, 
the outcomes can only be seen as an illustration of what an op-
timal policy mix might be (recognizing that marginal costs 
per option per region generally tend to increase to the point 
where they eventually become prohibitive). Obviously tech-
nological or political breakthroughs may significantly affect 
the optimal mix. 
Adaptation options can be surveyed in many ways. One is 
to consider what should be adapted to and how it should 
be done. No systematic cost data on the various adaptation 
options are available, although information about land pro-
tection costs against flooding and sea level rise is rapidly 
increasing. Many efforts are now underway, however, to re-
duce the vulnerability of agricultural production to climate 
change through adaptation policies. Especially in developing 
countries there is an urgent need for both more information 
and a better infrastructure for the actual implementation of 
adaptation techniques. 
Finally, the point has to be made that when it comes to the 
introduction and application of the various options, the devel-
oping countries occupy a special position. The application and 
acceptance of these options often crucially depends on the in-
ternational transfer of technologies as well as the countries' 
own local institutions and abilities to build their human capac-
ity. Therefore, the conditions needed to ensure the success of 
these processes, such as joint implementation and technology 
transfers from developed to developing countries, deserve a 
high priority on the academic research agenda. 
2J: 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
7.1. Introduction 
In recent years a host of response options has been proposed 
to cope with possible climate change. These options can be 
classified in many ways, including by technology, by sector, 
by impact, and by strategic approach. This chapter is based on 
classification by strategic approach, that is, mitigation, 
adap-
tation, and indirect policy options. Many response options are 
thoroughly discussed in Volume 2 of this report, with a major 
emphasis on technological feasibility. Some aspects of these 
options will be taken up here and assessed generically, that is, 
not only from an engineering efficiency point of view but also 
from that of welfare economics.1 
The present chapter surveys the set of options that are fea-
sible from a comparative economic perspective in order to as-
sess the scope and priorities of potential policies. The main 
purposes are 
• To set up a structure so the various options can be put 
into proper perspective and the assessment to be made 
can be truly generic (Section 7.2) 
• To discuss the various criteria that can be used in assess-
ing the options and the degree to which different criteria 
can produce different choices in terms of optimal use of 
the options (Section 7.3) 
• To review the various options in terms of (technical and 
practical) applicability, cost-effectiveness, and social ac-
ceptability, both as far as mitigation options (Section 
7.4), and adaptation options (Section 7.5) are con-
cerned; special attention will be given to the case of the 
developing countries and countries in transition, be-
cause of their particular circumstances 
• To evaluate the scope for integrating response options, 
in particular, with respect to mitigation options on the 
basis of information about regional cost functions (Sec-
tion 7.6) 
• To analyze to what extent currently available informa-
tion about various options might provide a basis for in-
ternational policy cooperation (Section 7.7) 
Sections 7.1 to 7.3 therefore provide the methodological 
base; Sections 7.4 and 7.5 survey the mitigation and adapta-
tion options, and Sections 7.6 and 7.7 deal with response op-
tions and policy application. In this chapter the applicability, 
feasibility, and cost-effectiveness of the various response op-
tions are surveyed; however, a maeroeconomic effects assess-
ment of the various options has not been carried out here. (See 
in this respect also the sections in this report dealing with inte-
grated response options.) 
7.2. A Conceptual Framework 
Figure 7.1 shows the policy options available to counter 
greenhouse warming and their possible feedbacks. The dia-
gram may serve to illustrate that one can basically distinguish 
between three strategic categories of options to deal with the 
greenhouse issue: 
Indirt'cl Policy Options tC) 
Mitigation Options Ml 
(il.OUAI. K(ONOMIC TRENDS 
• Reduce population growth 
« Alter resource demands 
and supply 
• Change technology 
RKMTK EMISSIONS 
• Change demands 
• New technology 
• Change energy sources 
• Kfllciencv and conservation 
EMISSION RATES 
ATMOSPHERIC 
CONCENTRATIONS 
CLIMATE CHANGES 
\ 
POLICY 
RESPONSE 
GEOLOGICAL FACTORS 
- * - 
SEA LEVEL CHANGES 
PASSIVE.ADAPTATION 
• Let society adapt 
• Research 
/ 
v 
Adaptation 
Options IB) 
ACTIVE ADAPTATION 
Decrease vulnerability 
• Change crops 
• Alter land use 
Modify effects 
• Relief/aid 
• Insurance 
Source: After Viner and Hulme (1994). 
Figure 7.1: Schematic overview of available options to counter Ik 
greenhouse effect and their possible feedbacks. 
(1) 
Mitigation 
options (Block A in the figure) are options 
that, amongst others, strive to prevent climate change. 
or combat any reinforcement thereof, by reducing the 
net emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, 
either by reducing greenhouse gas emissions (source-
oriented measures) or by increasing the sinks for green-
house gases (effect-oriented measures). See also Chap-
ter 8, Section 8.2.2.2. 
(2) 
Adaptation 
options (Block B) are options that focus on 
reducing the expected damages due to rapid climate 
change by combatting or avoiding their detrimental ef-
fects. 
(3) 
Indirect policy options (Block C) are options that are 
not directly related to the emission or capture of green-
house gases but that can have a considerable indirect 
effect on greenhouse gas emissions or greenhouse gas 
uptake. 
Obviously, the various types of options are not mutual!; 
exclusive, nor can they be fully separated. Indirect policy op-
tions, adaptation options, and mitigation options may even re-
inforce each other. For example, a population policy, as pari 
of a broader policy mix that slows down population growth in 
a densely populated country, may contribute to finding cost-
effective and acceptable opportunities for mitigation optiotiv 
Similarly, if policies designed to decrease the intensity of en-
ergy and materials use of economic activity are instituted in J 
country, many technically feasible options for emission re-
ductions may become cost-effective. Technological prngre^ 
•\ Cniwric Assessmenl of Response 
Options 
col) as well as a variety of measures for reducing emissions of 
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N,0). and other greenhouse 
gases. 
Since the energy sector (in terms of both energy production 
and consumption) is the single largest source of carbon, much 
of the C 0 2 mitigation effort can be concentrated here. Each of 
the four source-oriented options addresses elements of the en-
ergy conversion process, from primary energy production to 
end-use services. 
Both energy conservation and energy efficiency aim to re-
duce total energy use without changing the current fuel mix or 
the fundamental structure of the energy conversion process. 
Energy conservation is used here to mean a reduction in en-
ergy needs resulting from a change in the nature or level of 
energy services (e.g.. lighting areas only when they are occu-
pied rather than during specified periods). Energy efficiency 
means providing the same type and level of energy service 
with less total energy (e.g.. using more efficient lamps to pro-
vide the desired lighting level). Since energy conservation is 
strongly linked to the preferences and behaviour of various 
economic agents (such as households, firms, and govern-
ments), policies aimed at achieving it are more likely to lead 
to ambiguous conclusions. Consequently, most studies focus 
on energy efficiency.2 
A fossil fuel switch alters the mix of fossil fuels in favour 
of the less carbon-intensive ones such as natural gas (and per-
haps oil) and away from coal. Nuclear energy substitutes for 
fossil fuels as primary energy. Renewable energy is character-
ized by an extensive natural supply, which is vast compared to 
current levels of commercial energy use, and by a large long-
term potential because of its regeneration capability. Mobi-
lization of this natural supply can in some cases result in 
severe environmental and societal impacts. 
Removal technologies (option 5) extract carbon in one 
form or another from an energy conversion process even be-
fore it has entered the atmosphere. Subsequently, the carbon 
has to be utilized, stored, or disposed of. Option 6 is in 
essence outside the energy area. It aims at binding carbon af-
ter it is combusted and dispersed throughout the atmosphere 
by combatting deforestation or by afforestation.3 It may also 
refer to activities designed to preserve or enhance carbon up-
take by soils. 
will obviously improve the scope for adaptation and other op-
tions. For conceptual reasons, however, the preceding distinc-
tion between the various types of options seems a useful 
starting point. Before moving on to the details, though, it 
would be only proper to point out what this chapter is not 
about. Only the broad principles underlying the response op-
tions are emphasized here. Their actual application would de-
pend on a host of factors that are very much country-specific 
and include many economic, social, political, and legal con-
siderations. Thus, they would need to be analyzed on a country-
by-country basis for policymaking at national levels. 
7.2.7 Mitigation 
options 
In the literature about greenhouse policy options, mitigation 
options receive by far the most attention. Most commonly the 
various options are discussed separately and from the engi-
neering perspective. Information about the cost-effectiveness 
of the various options, for example, in terms of $/tC not re-
leased into the atmosphere, is rapidly increasing. The mar-
ginal cost-effectiveness of the various options is probably 
highly dependent on the scale of application, the sector, the 
country or region of application, and whether or not addi-
tional options are applied. Moreover, learning curves, and 
therefore cumulative application and time, almost invariably 
play a dominant role in determining the options' economic vi-
ability. All these factors point in the same direction, namely, 
that the mitigation options' cost functions may change in the 
course of time, sometimes quite rapidly. The same applies 
with respect to the various options' social and political accept-
ability. Conclusions about the economic, social, and political 
viability of various options are therefore highly scale-, time-
and location-specific. 
In discussing the potential of the various mitigation options 
a distinction has been made between measures concerning 
CO, and measures concerning other greenhouse gases, be-
cause the former are in actual practice largely associated with 
energy-related activities (i.e., both energy production and 
consumption) whereas the latter are also associated with other 
types of activities. Thus, except for some "exotic," mainly 
effect-oriented options such as geoengineering, orbital shades, 
iron fertilization, creating algal blooms, and weathering rocks, 
mitigation options can generally be divided into those af-
fecting CO, and those affecting other greenhouse gases. 
Measures concerning CO, include the following: 
(a) 
Source-oriented measures 
(1) 
energy conservation and efficiency 
improvement 
(2) 
fossil fuel switching 
(3) 
renewable energy 
(4) 
nuclear energy 
(b) Sink-enhancement measures 
(5) 
capture and disposal of CO, 
(6) 
enhancing forest sinks 
Measures concerning other greenhouse gases include phas-
ing out HFCs (in addition to HCFCs. via the Montreal Proto-
7.2.2 Adaptation 
options 
Adaptation options have two purposes: 
(1) 
To reduce the damages from climate change 
(2) 
To increase the resilience of societies and ecosystems to 
the aspects of climate change that cannot be avoided 
Clearly, adaptation measures are interlinked with mitigation 
measures. The more one succeeds in limiting climate change, 
the easier it will be to adapt to it. This is notwithstanding the 
fact that there can be reasons for supporting adaptation mea-
sures in their own right. Three types of adaptation measures 
arc commonly distinguished: protection, retreat, and accom-
modation. 
2S4 
Clinuilc Change /V9_i - Economic and Social Dimensions ofCliinaie Clnm^ 
As far as the costs of adaptation options are concerned, one 
can either locus on the opportunity cost, in other words, as-
sess the welfare implications of no-action scenarios, or on the 
net investment cost involved with adaptation measures. Since 
Chapter 6 of this report focusscs on the former, Section 7.5 of 
this chapter will mainly consider the latter. 
7.2.3 Indirect policy options 
Potential climate change is perceived as a problem, mainly 
because it would interfere with the world's economic, social, 
and ecological systems, and eventually with its political sys-
tem. Just as the precise scope and risks of climate change are 
subject to uncertainty, so is the future development of technol-
ogy, resources, and the organization and structure of the eco-
nomic, social, and political systems. However, it seems most 
likely that the changes in the global climate and the structural 
changes in the economic and political system differ signifi-
cantly in at least one respect: the speed or time lag of changes 
to be expected. Whereas possible severe global climate 
change generally is expected to take approximately 50 to 100 
years (although exceptions can be possible), the economic, 
social, and political systems may change several times within 
a similar period. 
This difference poses a fundamental dilemma when assess-
ing the various response options to climate change: The 
changing climate system has to he superimposed on eco-
nomic, social, and political systems that are in constant flux 
due to numerous factors, with (potential) climate change be-
ing only one of them. This dilemma significantly complicates 
the assessment process, and even more the process of formu-
lating policy options based thereon. However, recent history 
has taught that if there is a strong political consensus about 
the need to take action, such actions can be undertaken vigor-
ously, as in the case of the Montreal Protocol (see Benedick. 
1991) and the Convention on International Trade in Endan-
gered Species. 
Indeed, climate and ecological change are by no means the 
only factors that will enforce a deep modification of the pres-
ent economic situation and that may pose serious problems to 
society. Other evolutionary trends and structural adjustment 
processes - driven by such forces as population growth. 
urbanization, information technologies and their dissemina-
tion, the international mobility of labour and capital, the com-
petition for natural resources, and the pattern and speed of 
technological progress (e.g.. in waste management and in 
redesigning products) - may also be expected to play an im-
portant role in shaping the economic, political, and social 
systems of tomorrow, especially if the policymakers' time 
horizon is at most a few decades if not shorter. To illustrate. 
Western nations may well face a combination of problems. 
such as urban decay, unemployment, massive migration, and 
changing patterns of economic competitiveness that may eas-
ily attract more public and political attention than the climate 
change issue. 
All these problems already call for response options, for 
instance, in the sphere of consumption and lifestyle policies. 
population and migration policies, technology and environ-
mental policies, structural and sectoral adjustments or trade 
policies, or redistribution policies. Virtually all these policies 
will also, albeit indirectly, greatly affect energy use and thus 
the global climate. 
An effective climate change response strategy should 
therefore pay attention to the possibilities of joining climate 
change response options with responses to other socioeco-
nomic transition phenomena, and thus increase the probabili-
ties of actual implementation. 
Examples of this approach can be found in applications of 
the integrated systems approach. For instance, in many devel-
oping countries crop agriculture is at present highly depen-
dent on energy use. both directly and indirectly, and fanners 
have to depend on outside sources for much of their energy 
supply. In addition, many of these agricultural systems are 
based on monocultures (e.g., high-yielding varieties of wheat 
and rice, which increase soil exhaustion and are more vul-
nerable to massive infestations of pests and disease). Alterna-
tives like low-external-input sustainable agriculture reportedly 
lower the need for external and energy-intensive inputs and 
increase productivity in farming in an ecologically robust way 
while at the same time reducing concerns for national food se-
curity (Reijntjes et al., 1992). 
Yet another example of a "multifunctional system" is wave 
energy. In that case the production of energy is combined with 
other functions, such as coastal protection or water desalina-
tion. However, this technology may also have adverse envi-
ronmental side effects. All these systems can be particularly 
promising if applied on a relatively small scale in developing 
countries. 
7.3. Criteria for Assessment 
In discussing the assessment of response options, the appli-
cation possibilities of the options themselves are evaluated 
rather than the policies that may be expected to cause the var-
ious options to be applied or withdrawn. Insofar as the assess-
ment of these policies is concerned, the reader is referred to 
Chapter 8. 
From a methodological point of view one can distinguish 
between two fundamentally different approaches for assess-
ing response options. These approaches, however, should not 
be confused with the distinction - which has drawn a lot of at-
tention in the literature - between top-down and bottom-up 
modelling (see also Chapter 8). On the one hand, the financial 
costs of the various technologies can be expressed in terms of 
CO, emission reduction/absorption. This could be called the 
"engineering efficiency" approach. On the other hand, an as-
sessment of the various options could be made in the tradition 
of welfare economics. According to this line of thinking, de-
termining the costs and benefits of the application of any 
particular technology should include an assessment of the op-
portunities forgone by the allocation of the resources. Tbi-
could he called the "welfare economic" approach. Other cate-
gorizations of the assessment approach are also conceivable 
In Chapter 8. for instance, the assessment is differentiated ac-
cording to the level of aggregation (e.g.. the aggregate na-
1 Generic Assessment of Response 
Options 
235 
tional level or the level of a single project). However, such a 
differentiation was not considered crucial lor the purpose of 
the present chapter, which is to provide a generic assessment 
of the various response options. 
An afforestation programme may serve to illustrate the dif-
ferences between these approaches. What investment has to 
be made to achieve a predetermined target in terms of net CO, 
absorption during some time interval? Using the engineer-
ing efficiency approach, one would try to determine the dis-
counted value of the costs of land acquisition, tree planting, 
maintenance, security, and other needs. Any future (sustain-
able) harvesting returns would equally be discounted, so that 
the net levelized costs could be determined in dollars. On 
the basis of this information, and by comparing this option 
with other options' cost-efficiencies, one could then decide 
whether or not to proceed. 
However, if the welfare economic approach is taken, the 
overall assessment may be quite different. By using the land 
for afforestation purposes, the possibility of using the same 
land for agricultural purposes is forgone. It therefore matters a 
great deal if the area has agricultural potential or not. If so, the 
local population may well be forced to migrate or else to suf-
fer income losses. Moreover, the afforestation programme, if 
applied on a large scale, may have additional impacts, either 
positive or negative (e.g., through its effect on local climate 
and soil fertility, social and cultural life, on infrastructure, 
tourism, etc.). Ensuring that such side effects are beneficial 
depends on the establishment of effective monitoring and ex-
tension services at the local level. In the assessment, attention 
can also be paid to the distorting impact of government mea-
sures, such as subsidies and taxes, on the efficiency of the 
forestry option. If all the direct and indirect welfare conse-
quences of the envisaged afforestation programme are going 
to be assessed, an extensive and complicated social cost-
benefit type of analysis may well be called for, because not all 
aspects can be quantified or monetized (see also Chapter 5). 
A priori, there is no reason why the outcomes of the engi-
neering efficiency and welfare economic assessments of the 
same project would coincide. The costs of the land in mone-
tary terms may not fully reflect the land-use opportunity costs 
in welfare terms, because in the former no full account is 
taken of indirect effects, nonmalerial consequences, distribu-
tional impacts, and externalities. 
In short, the major distinction between the cost assessment 
methodology in both approaches is that the engineering effi-
ciency approach basically starts from the evaluation of a proj-
ect from the narrow perspective determined by the project 
boundaries, whereas the welfare economic approach attempts 
to account fully for the various interests and impacts inside 
and outside the societies concerned, including the external ef-
fects and the social and political acceptability of the options. 
A welfare economic approach would therefore imply an as-
sessment based on a general equilibrium model, an exercise 
conspicuous by its almost total absence in the literature. In 
this chapter, therefore, response options are evaluated on the 
basis of important opportunity costs and externalities. 
In actual practice, even public agents may not be fully 
aware of the various externalities and indirect, nonmaterial. 
and distributional impacts of the application of response op-
tions. For one reason (e.g., pressure from special interest 
groups), they may not want to take these various aspects into 
account. For another, the information available for a full wel-
fare assessment may simply be insufficient. What is more, 
even if all information for assessing the various options is 
available, obstacles in setting up the institutional machinery 
can impose serious bottlenecks, so that appropriate action will 
not follow. 
As preceding chapters have already noted extensively, a 
welfare economic assessment of climate change response op-
tions faces some large practical obstacles, particularly in the 
developing countries. First, the policy priorities, especially 
with respect to the greenhouse issue, will often differ from 
those in industrialized countries. Second, information about 
externalities at the local level may not fully reach the public-
sector because of limitations in data collection, processing, 
and communication; on the other hand, policies dealing with 
externalities may fail to reach part of the local population. 
Third, most developing countries face a severe lack of institu-
tional and human capacity to deal with these issues. 
The general impression also arises that optimism about the 
potential of technology is larger in the engineering efficiency 
approach than in the welfare economic approach; in the latter 
the emphasis is more on the obstacles in society to absorbing 
and applying new technologies. This distinction can be related 
to various aspects of the economy-of-scale concept, notably: 
(a) 
Average costs may decrease at a larger scale of applica-
tion (internal economies of scale). 
(b) 
Costs of a given option may decrease when other op-
tions are applied on a larger scale because of positive 
external effects (external economies of scale). 
(c) 
Costs may decrease as the application time progresses 
(learning effects). 
(d) 
Costs may increase at a larger scale of application due 
to increasing resistance and bottlenecks related to so-
cial, political, and environmental concerns and to in-
creasing opportunity costs; afforestation projects often 
provide a clear example. 
(e) 
Costs may increase because achieving the required rate 
of diffusion of technologies, public education, and life-
style changes may become increasingly difficult on a 
larger scale; this problem may be particularly relevant if 
response technologies require a high level of technical 
expertise. 
If one focusses mainly on items (a) to (c), optimism about 
the options' economic potential may rise. This is the perspec-
tive taken by the engineering efficiency approach. If, however, 
one focusses instead on items (d) to (c). one might easily take 
a much more pessimistic view, associated with the welfare 
economic perspective. 
A separate issue in comparing the feasibility of these op-
tions is that the various studies differ in the extent to which 
they take the energy costs and benefits of the options into ac-
count. The application of some options, such as capture and 
disposal, requires significant energy inputs, which are often 
denoted as energy penalties; other options, such as nuclear or 
2J6 
Climate Change /W.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chan: 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Emission Reduction 
(percent) 
Source: TNO (1992). 
Figure 7.2: Options for CO., emission reduction in the EU, net and 
gross costs, and effectiveness. 
renewable energy, besides achieving a carbon emission reduc-
tion, also produce energy and are therefore substituting for 
traditional fossil energy resources. This consideration implies 
that one could distinguish between gross and net energy costs, 
the latter being gross costs minus the benefits of avoided 
fossil energy production. In TNO (1992) both cost functions 
have been derived for the EU (sec Figure 7.2). Differences be-
tween gross and net costs turned out to be notably relevant for 
the options of energy saving, rcnevvables, nuclear energy, and 
energy farming. 
A comparable issue is how costs have to be ascribed to the 
various reductions that are achieved with the help of the 
investment made. More often than not. investments made 
for economic and/or environmental reasons have changes in 
greenhouse gas emission as a side effect. Many no-regrets 
options belong to this category. The question then becomes 
how precisely to relate the investment costs to the greenhouse 
effect. 
In any case, from the above it is clear that an assessment 
based on the engineering efficiency approach alone may eas-
ily create a biassed view. A more complete assessment must 
recognize different priorities within countries, the impact of 
externalities, the political acceptability at various levels, and a 
variety of distributional aspects. In this respect it seems that. 
although both approaches raise analytical concerns that need 
to be addressed, a high priority item for both should be to pay 
attention to the special position of developing countries as 
well as countries in transition. 
In other chapters (especially Chapters 8 and 9) the need to 
reconcile the various types of analyses of the costs of energy-
related greenhouse gas mitigation has been underlined. There 
is indeed a growing convergence of detailed (bottom-up) 
analyses of technological options and more aggregate (top-
down) analyses of economic effects, so that differences in re-
sults can increasingly be attributed to differences in input 
assumptions rather than to differences in model structure. 
However, notwithstanding the current progress in greenhouse-
related modelling, there are fewer studies for economies in 
transition or developing country economies. Moreover, where 
the potential for political, social, and economic change in 
these economies is great, future predictions are probably more 
uncertain. In view of the structural changes that are underway 
in these regions, it is imperative to improve further the under-
standing of the potential for reducing or absorbing greenhouse 
gas emissions in these economies, particularly their sensitivi-
ties to other important considerations such as economic and 
technological development. 
7.4. Mitigation Options 
This section will treat in some detail the mitigation options 
listed in Section 7.2.1, along with their costs and potential. 
7.4.1 Energy conservation and efficiency improvement 
In order to put the energy efficiency option into a proper per-
spective, the Kaya identity (Kaya, 1989) may provide a useful 
starting point: 
CO, = (CQ,/Ej X (f/GD?) X (GDP/P) X P 
where E = energy consumption; GDP = gross domestic prod-
uct; P = population. 
If population growth is given and the future levels of GDP 
per capita are predetermined, a given CO: emission reduction 
target can only be achieved by a reduction in carbon intensity 
{COJE) and/or energy intensity (E/GDP). The need to reduce 
carbon and energy intensities becomes stronger, the higher the 
growth rate of population and the more ambitious the targets 
set with respect to GDP increase. This relationship obviously 
reinforces the need to pay specific attention to developing 
countries. 
Historically, carbon and energy intensities in most coun-
tries have tended to decline due to ongoing technological 
change and evolution. Energy intensity per unit of value 
added has been decreasing at a rate of about 1 % per year since 
the 1860s and at about 2% per year (2.6% in IEA member 
countries during 1980-1984) in most Western countries in the 
1970s and much of the 1980s (Nakicenovic el al, 19931. 
However, the differences between the various countries are 
enormous, both in terms of the levels of energy intensity and 
its direction in the course of time. Moreover, the carbon and 
energy intensity in a number of large rapidly growing devel-
oping countries today is much higher than in virtually all 
presently industrialized countries at a similar stage of techno-
logical development (Nakicenovic el al.. 1993). Also, in con-
trast to the postwar trend noticed in industrialized countries 
some developing countries have not succeeded in reducing 
energy intensities. 
Indeed, within each group, countries do vary in terms of 
the capacity, whether potential or realized, to restrict carbon 
emissions through energy efficiency. Moreover, within a 
given country, not all sectors have a similar energy efficiency 
During 1973-1988. for example, the estimated energy inten-
1 Generic Assessment oj Response 
Options 
2J7 
sity in Japan fell by more than 35% (Ogawa. 1992), with the 
energy intensity of electric refrigerators falling by nearly 677c 
between 1973 and 1987 and the efficiency of motorcars in-
creasing from around 9.4 to about 13 km/litre (49%). During 
the same period, the U.S., (the then) West Germany, and 
France lowered their energy intensities by 27%, 22%. and 
17% respectively, and IEA member countries by 25% (IEA/ 
OECD, 1991). In most cases, changes have been most ap-
parent in the industrial sector. However, low oil prices and 
economic recession caused a slowdown in energy intensity re-
duction in the late 1980s and early 1990s. 
Over the 1980s, various developing countries managed to 
lower their industrial energy intensity: China by approxi-
mately 30% (Huang, 1993), Taiwan (between 1970 and 1985) 
by some 40% (Li, Shrestha. and Foell. 1990), and the Repub-
lic of Korea by 44% (Park. 1992). However, in other coun-
tries, such as Nigeria (Nakicenovic et «/., 1993), Egypt 
(Abdel-Khalek, 1988). and Mexico (Guzman et cd., 1987), 
energy intensity actually increased. In addition. Imran and 
Barnes (1990) have reported energy intensity increases in 
Brazil (+20%), Pakistan (+26%). India (+25%), and Malaysia 
(+48%) for the period 1970-1988. 
Changes in aggregate energy intensity must be viewed 
with caution, however, as they depend on how energy use and 
economic output are measured. In Brazil, for example, official 
figures show overall energy intensity remaining roughly con-
stant during 1973-1988. However, if hydropower is counted 
based on its direct energy content and GDP is corrected to re-
flect purchasing power parity with the dollar, then overall en-
ergy intensity declined 21% during 1973-1988 (Geller and 
Zylbersztajn. 1991). 
Carbon intensity, the other variable in the Kaya identity, 
also shows a declining trend globally. From 1860 to the pres-
ent, carbon emissions per unit of primary energy consumed 
have come down by about 0.3% per year, or from over 0.8 
to somewhat over 0.5 tC/kWyr (Nakicenovic et ai, 
1993). 
Clearly, decarbonization can be achieved by a variety of op-
tions, such as fossil fuel switching and using nuclear and re-
newable energy as fossil fuel substitutes. However, various 
projections with respect to developing countries indicate that, 
without serious policies and changing trends, not only will to-
tal emissions increase rapidly but also carbon emissions may 
increase faster than GDP because demand for energy services 
is switching from regenerating biofuels to fossil fuels (for 
India, for instance, see Mongia et al., 1991). 
The two factors that underlie reduced energy intensities are 
improvements to the energy efficiency of individual produc-
tion processes and structural changes in the economy (in par-
ticular, the increasing economic predominance of less energy-
intensive sectors, such as many of the service sectors, and the 
energy efficiency of spatial planning). Only a few studies ex-
plicitly incorporate the impact of structural changes. Most 
focus on energy efficiency measures, which are generally 
considered to be the most relevant factor.4 To illustrate, it was 
estimated that energy efficiency improvements were responsi-
ble for about three-quarters of the 26% reduction in U.S. en-
ergy intensity during 1973-1986 (Schipper. Howarth. and 
Geller. 1990). 
Disregarding the impact of structural shifts on energy inten-
sity in an intercountry comparison may easily create a biassed 
view, because the industrialized economies have generally 
shifted away from the highly energy-intensive secondary to-
wards the less energy-intensive tertiary sector (a process 
known as "dematerialization"). whereas the developing coun-
tries in general are increasingly entering the secondary sector. 
Among virtually all studies, there is a broad consensus on 
the virtue of energy efficiency improvement. Moreover, it is 
seen as directly beneficial, irrespective of whether greenhouse 
warming will take place or not, as long as reductions are 
achieved at a negative net cost (no-regrets policy). 
One basic reason why the energy efficiency improvement 
potential is considered substantial is that the ratio of useful 
energy (i.e.. the amount of energy that provides useful ser-
vices) to overall primary energy (i.e.. the amount of energy 
recovered or gathered directly from natural sources) is 
estimated at only 34% globally. It is lowest, at 22%, in the de-
veloping countries and highest, at 42%, in the countries in 
transition (Nakicenovic and Griibler, 1993). This ratio, in 
turn, is the product of two other ratios: 
• The final energy (energy delivered to the point of con-
sumption) to primary energy ratio (with a global aver-
age of 74%, a maximum of 80% in the developing 
countries, and a minimum of 69% in the countries in 
transition) 
• The useful energy to final energy ratio (with an average 
of 46% globally, 28% in the developing countries, 53% 
in the industrialized countries, and 60% in the countries 
in transition) 
These numbers suggest that the scope for improving energy 
efficiency is particularly promising with regard to increasing 
the useful-to-final energy ratio. Efficiencies are lowered fur-
ther if seen from an "exergy" point of view, that is, if the ac-
tual services (work) supplied by the energy source are related 
to the corresponding inputs minimally required: The exergy 
efficiency of primary inputs in the market economies is only a 
few percent (i.e.. of the order of 2.5-5%) if the energy service 
is fully taken into account. 
Indeed, a back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that, if 
energy efficiencies of the current structure of the OECD tech-
nologies were disseminated throughout the world, global pri-
mary energy requirements would come down by 17%, from 
12 to 10 TWyr/yr. If, instead, the best available technologies 
instantaneously replaced the current ones, without altering the 
energy system structure, global annual primary energy re-
quirements would decline to 7.2 TWyr/yr (Nakicenovic and 
Griibler. 1993). A similar exercise assuming that Japanese in-
dustrial efficiency levels would diffuse globally shows an esti-
mated industrial carbon reduction potential of some 730 MtC 
worldwide, mainly in the steel, chemical, and cement indus-
tries (Matsuo. 1991). 
Clearly, energy end use is the least efficient part of energy 
systems, and it is in this area that improvement would bring 
the greatest benefits. Most studies suggest that a large poten-
tial for reducing energy consumption exists in many sectors 
2.M 
Climate Change 199.-) - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Table 7.1. Energy efficiency potential: summary of opportunities and barriers 
Residential space heating 
& conditioning 
Residential water heating 
Residential refrigeration 
Residential lighting 
Commercial space heating 
& conditioning 
Commercial lighting 
Industrial motors 
Steel'' 
Chemicals'' 
Pulp and paper' 
Cement'' 
Passengers cars 
Goods vehicles 
(A) 
Estimated Share 
of Total Final 
Consumption 
(%) 
11.4 
3.4 
1.1 
0.6 
6.1 
1.5 
4.5 
4.1 
8.4 
2.9 
0.1 
15.2 
10.1 
(B) 
Estimated Share 
of Total CO, 
Emissions 
(%) 
11 
3.6 
2.1 
1.2 
6.8 
3.4 
9.0 
4.6 
5.9 
1.2 
0.9 
13.7 
9.1 
(C) 
Total Energy 
Savings Possible" 
(%) 
10-50 
Mixed 
30-50 
over 50 
Mixed 
10-30 
10-30 
15-25 
10-25 
10-30 
10-40 
30-50 
20-40 
(D) 
Existing 
Market/Inst. 
Barriers* 
(%) 
Some/Many 
Some/Many 
Many 
Many 
Some/Many 
Some/Many 
Few/Some 
Few/Some 
Few/Some 
Few/Some 
Few/Some 
Many 
Some 
(E) 
Potential 
Energy Savings 
Not Likely to Be 
Achieved'" 
(%) 
Mixed 
Mixed 
10-30 
30-50 
Mixed 
Mixed 
0-10 
0-15 
0-20 
0-10 
0-10 
20-30 
10-20 
"Based on a comparison of the average efficiency of existing capital stocks to the efficiency of the best available new technology. This esti-
mate includes the savings likely to be achieved in response to current market forces and government policies as well as those potential savings 
(indicated in Column E) not likely to be achieved by current efforts. 
''Extent of existing market and institutional barriers to efficiency investments. 
'Potential savings (reductions per unit) not likely to be achieved in response to current market forces and government policies (part of total in-
dicated in Column C). 
''Energy use only. 
Note: How to read this table: For example, for residential lighting, over 50% per unit savings would result if the best available technology 
were used to replace the average lighting stock in use today over the next ten to twenty years. Some of these savings would take place under 
existing market and policy conditions. But due to the many market and institutional barriers, there would remain a 30-50% potential for sav-
ings that would not be achieved. 
Source: 1EA/OECD (1991). 
and regions, at the same time acknowledging that institu-
tional, economic, and social barriers may delay or inhibit the 
achievement of full efficiency potentials in the near future. A 
review of twelve studies of long-term energy efficiency poten-
tial found that in many regions of the world full adoption of 
cost-effective energy efficiency measures could reduce carbon 
emissions by 40% or more over the medium to long term, 
compared to business-as-usual trends (Geller. 1994). An illus-
trative example that is related to the OECD area is IEA/OECD 
(1991). as shown in Table 7.1. In this respect it should be 
mentioned that several policy and regulatory reforms have re-
cently begun to address some of these barriers. In the U.S., for 
example, more than 30 states have adopted or experimented 
with regulatory reforms since 1989 to promote demand-side 
management (DSM) and to encourage integrated resource 
planning (IRP). 
Other studies locus on the energy efficiency improvement 
potential by analyzing major energy end use (e.g.. Blok et ai, 
1991; OTA. 1991: COSEPUP. 1991; Coldemberg et ai. 1988; 
kaya et ai. 1991; Gupta and Khanna. 1991; and ESCAP. 
1991) or focus on specific sectors. To illustrate, recent esti-
mates for the U.S. show energy saving potentials of 45% in 
buildinus. 30% in industries, and 30% in cars (Rubin et ai. 
1992; DeCicco and Ross, 1993). In rural areas of developing 
countries, to give another example, the efficiency of wood and 
charcoal-fuelled cook stoves can be increased from a range of 
10-20% to 25-35% using improved stove designs at a capital 
cost of under $ 10 per stove. Cooking efficiency can be further 
increased to the 40-65% range by shifting from biomass-
based fuels to kerosene, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG). or 
electricity, but at a significantly higher capital cost (U.S. Con-
gress, 1992). 
Energy efficiency gains may be particularly promising in 
the following sectors: power production, transportation, steel 
and cement production, and residential. However, the relative 
ranking of sectors in terms of energy efficiency improvement 
potential is highly dependent on whether or not both the direei 
and indirect requirements of energy are taken into account, in 
other words, if interindustry demands are included during sec-
toral comparisons. A comparative study of India (Parikh and 
Gokarn, 1993) shows, for instance, that if direct carbon emis-
sion due to fossil fuel use is considered, then electricity gener-
ation tops the list of total emissions (one-third of the total' 
However, if direct and indirect emissions are taken into con-
sideration, the construction sector emerges as the largest 
carbon-emitting sector in India (22% of total). 
.1 Generic Assessment of Response 
Options 
Table 7.2. Regional potentials for reducing industrial carbon emissions by cost categories (in Mt Carbon) 
2J9 
Cost Saving or 
at Moderate Cost 
Cost(< 100$/tC) 
Cost (> 100$/tC) 
Sum+ 
Market economies 
Efficiency improvement 
15 
Structural change/recycling 
95 
Fuel substitution 
6 
Process technology process 
0 
Reforming economies 
Efficiency improvement 
48 
Structural change/recycling 
165 
Fuel substitution 
10 
Process technology process 
0 
Developing countries 
Efficiency improvement 
12 
Structural change/recycling 
19 
Fuel substitution 
3 
Process technology process 
0 
World 
Efficiency improvement 
75 
Structural change/recycling 
279 
Fuel substitution 
19 
Process technology process 
0 
116 
223 
34 
372 
45 
n/a 
n/a 
2 
41 
29 
n/a 
r 47 
f-78 
238 
84 
25 
n/a 
98 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
46 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
56 
84 
>25 
n/a 
200 
f-207 
>46 
>56 
309 
382 
J-168 
920 
'Total reduction potential could be higher because not all measures have been assessed. 
Note: n/a = not assessed. 
Source: Griibler et al. (1993a). 
The issue of energy conservation and efficiency in the de-
veloping countries differs in some respects from the issue in 
industrialized countries. First, a substantial part of the de-
mand for energy is often met from renewable energy sources 
like biomass. This is likely to remain so in the short to the 
medium run, and there are estimates to show that the scope for 
conservation of biomass is enormous in these countries. One 
reason is that cooking with traditional biomass fuels is techni-
cally very inefficient, although not necessarily from a socio-
economic perspective (U.S. Congress. 1992). Second, energy 
efficiency in industrial activities generally showed little or no 
improvement (Imran and Barnes, 1990). Third, the demand 
for electricity is growing at a rate that is often hard to keep up 
with. There are developing countries that have allocated a 
quarter to a third of public investment to generation of power. 
and even this is sometimes inadequate to meet the growing 
demand (World Bank. 1993). However, due to the presently low 
level of energy efficiency in the developing countries and the 
consequently large scope for improvement, the potentials for 
energy saving in these countries are considered somewhat 
similar in magnitude to those in industrialized countries at 
present, notwithstanding adverse factors such as the fast 
growth in commercial energy use and the increasing weight of 
the industrial sectors (Ewing. 1985: Levine et al.. 1991: U.S. 
Congress. 1992). Finally, the the energy market in developing 
countries is often distorted by energy pricing policies. 
By contrast, energy conservation may be achieved some-
what more easily in the industrialized countries, insofar as a 
trend towards lower material and energy consumption appears 
to be underway. Various indicators, such as the increasing ser-
vice orientation of the industrial economies, seem to point in 
this direction. 
Much of the discussion seems to focus increasingly on the 
extent to which improved energy efficiency and conservation 
can be economically viable in the present while saving energy 
and reducing CO, emissions (a no-regrets option). Optimism 
about the scope for no-regret options generally is much 
greater among proponents of the bottom-up approach than 
amongst those adhering to top-down methodologies.5 
Various studies have been carried out focussing on both the 
potential for carbon emission reduction via energy efficiency 
improvement and the net costs involved. An overview of the 
potential for emission reductions in the industrial sector is 
presented by Griibler et al. (1993a) in Table 7.2. They argue 
that a potential reduction of 920 MtC (over 40% of current 
emissions) could he achieved overall. Of this, 372 MtC could 
he achieved at net negative or modest positive costs (with 
about two-thirds of this amount coming from the countries in 
transition). These estimates disregard the potential for fuel 
switching and for decarbonizing the electricity supply and 
assume an annuity rate of 10% throughout the lifetime of the 
investment. 
The choice of a financial discount rate is an important fac-
tor in evaluating the cost-effective energy efficiency potential 
in a particular sector or region. Studies that have tried to 
assess the implicit consumer discount rates of household in-
vestments in energy efficiency reveal ranges that vary (de-
pending on income classes and other factors) from only a few 
240 
Climate (lian^e / W5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluuv. 
percent to well over 50%. Train (1985) found a range of 10-32% 
for improvements to the thermal integrity of buildings, 4-36% 
for space heating and fuel type, 3-29% for air conditioning, 
39-100% for refrigerators, and 18-67%- for other home appli-
ances. 
Thus, it is clear that the scope estimated for no-regrets op-
tions is crucially dependent on the discount factor employed. 
If one were to use an interest rate (whether based on market or 
normative considerations) that was considerably lower than that 
applied by the actual investor or consumer, a no-regrets option 
would not materialize, even if access to information and the 
availability of human capacity and financial resources did not 
provide any serious bottlenecks. However, the practical situa-
tion, especially at the grassroots level in developing countries 
and countries in transition, is such that even the latter condi-
tions are seldom fulfilled. 
Consider, for example, the problem of how to increase 
energy efficiency in the consumption of wood fuels in the de-
veloping countries. Here institutional measures and proper 
distribution (keeping in view local societal and cultural fac-
tors) are probably quite important. Popularizing energy-
efficient cooking stoves among hundreds of thousands of 
households would necessitate efforts at many levels. Suitably 
designed credits and, if necessary, subsidies or tax breaks may 
help in manufacturing the new stoves in large numbers, but 
dissemination may be difficult (Hurst. 1990). Nongovernment 
efforts in this area may go a long way towards solving the 
problem (Asaduzzaman. 1995). 
As a general remark with respect to the above, it should be 
noted that a high implicit discount rate does not mean that 
substantial energy efficiency improvements and consequent 
benefits for the economy are not possible. Rather it suggests 
that significant policy intervention will he required to achieve 
such improvements. For example, in spite of a high implicit 
discount rate, the average energy efficiency of new refrigera-
tors sold in the U.S. nearly tripled between 1972 and 1993. 
This large and steady improvement was due primarily to the 
adoption of minimum efficiency standards, first at the state 
level and then at the national level (Geller and Nadel. 1994). 
The choice of a discount rate can affect the overall magni-
tude of energy efficiency improvements that are considered 
economical. Meier (1991) argued that by assuming an annual 
discount rate of 10% more than a quarter of U.S. electricity 
demand for refrigerators could be reduced by cost-efficient 
measures: using a 30% rate results in positive costs for all 
these measures. Similarly, the Committee on Science. Engi-
neering, and Public Policy (COSEPUP. 1991) has shown how 
the percentage savings in electricity, at the point where the 
costs of conserved electricity equal the typical operating costs 
for an existing U.S. power plant, vary according to the dis-
count rate: At a 3% rate the electricity saving potential is al-
most 45%: at a 10% rate, it is about 30%: and at a 30% rate, it 
is about 20%. 
Notwithstanding the above, a host of studies has emerged 
suggesting a considerable scope for no-regrets options, espe-
cially in the household and tertiary sector (e.g.. Springmann. 
1991; Mills <7 <;/.. 1991; Rubin et <;/.. 1992: Jackson. 1991: 
Blok ,/<;/.. 1993; UNEP. 1993: Robinson et ai. 1993). 
Table 7.3. Energy mix: Annual past and future global fuel use 
(Gt oil equivalent) 
Coal 
Oil 
Natural gas 
Nuclear 
Large hydro 
Renewables 
"Traditional" 
"New" 
Total 
1960 
1.4 
1.0 
0.4 
— 
0.15 
0.5 
— 
3.3 
1990 
2.3 
2.8 
1.7 
0.4 
0.5 
0.9 
0.2 
8.8 
A 
4.9 
4.6 
3.6 
1.0 
1.0 
1.3 
0.8 
17.2 
in 2020 
Bl 
B 
3.8 
3.0 
4.5 
3.8 
3.6 
3.0 
1.0 
0.8 
1.0 
0.9 
1.3 
1.3 
0.8 
0.6 
16.0 
13.4 
c 
2.1 
2.9 
2.5 
0.7 
0.7 
1.1 
1.3 
11.3 
Source: WEC Commission (1993). 
Finally, in addition to the potential for energy efficiency 
improvement, there clearly is also considerable scope for con-
servation options, even if their assessment often can only be 
somewhat qualitative and impressionistic. There seems to be 
ample opportunity for increasing energy conservation in the 
industrialized countries through the imposition of stricter 
standards with respect to energy and materials use and. most 
of all, through alterations and adjustments in lifestyles. 
7.4.2 Fossil fuel switching 
According to most studies, the present dominance of fossil 
fuels in global (primary and noncommercial) energy consump-
tion will continue to exist in the decades to come. According to 
recent authoritative World Energy Council scenarios'' (WEC 
Commission, 1993) (Table 7.3), fossil fuels will account for be-
tween 66% (scenario C, where renewables are fully explored) 
and 76% (scenario A, where fossil fuels remain dominant) of 
world energy consumption in 2020, compared to 77% in 1990. 
All the scenarios reflected in the table show that: 
• Fossil energy remains dominant 
• The share of natural gas, environmentally the least dam-
aging of the fossil fuels, increases from the present 
quarter to one-third at most 
• The share of nuclear remains modest 
• The relative potential of the presently modest "new" re-
newables is not insignificant, as opposed to the limited 
size of the projected shifts for large hydro and "tradi-
tional" energy sources (in this respect, see also Chapter 
9 and. for a different point of view. Kassler. 1994). 
The remaining dominance of fossil fuels is due to the large 
resource base.7 the strongly vested position of the current vin-
tage of technologies, and price distortions that externalize the 
environmental costs. Estimates point out that total identified 
fossil fuel reserves will suffice to provide for current (1990 
levels of energy consumption for the next 130 years/Thi> 
time span may become considerably shorter, as energy use r 
the developing countries will increase rapidly. 
.1 Generic Assessment of Response Options 
241 
Of the three fossil fuels, natural gas is the least and coal 
the most carbon-intensive.9 Natural gas also produces mini-
mal sulphur emissions and virtually no airborne particulates 
(World Resources Institute, 1994). Therefore, a switch from 
coal and/or oil to natural gas is seen as a response option with 
multiple benefits. Current estimates of the natural gas re-
source base, which will likely be revised upwards in the fu-
ture, allow for a massive switch-over for the next century or 
so to come. If so, the entailed transition of the current vintage 
of energy technology would, as an additional beneficial side 
effect, pave the way for a broad diffusion of gas from biomass 
or coal gasification, or of hydrogen, a potentially massive re-
newable energy source for later in the next century.10 
The costs of this fuel stem from retrofitting or replacing the 
current vintage of energy technology and, in some cases, 
building additional transport grids to connect more remote ur-
ban areas with gas fields. Estimates of the costs of switching, 
even without extending the existing networks, depend to a 
large extent on the type of measure. For example, switching 
building heating from electric to natural gas (improving over-
all efficiency by 60-70%) would, according to Rubin et al. 
(1992), yield a net benefit of $90/tCO2 in constant 1989 dol-
lars (assuming a 6% real discount rate). According to the same 
source, however, switching coal consumption in industrial 
plants to natural gas or oil, where technically feasible, would 
involve net direct implementation costs of some $60/tCO2 in 
constant 1989 dollars. 
Ettinger et al. (1991) have estimated the investment costs 
of exploration and extraction for a fuel switch scenario in-
volving a natural gas supply growth rate of 3.3% per year be-
tween 1988 and 2005 plus the costs of extending the existing 
supply network into a global gas distribution system (based on 
1989 data from the Dutch Gas Union and an average transport 
distance of 2500 km). They calculate that total costs would be 
in the order of $70 billion gross per year, corresponding to 
S70AC on average. 
However, two caveats should be mentioned. First, much of 
the attractiveness of natural gas as a less carbon-intensive fos-
sil fuel is lost if a sizable fraction evaporates into the air by 
leakage during production and distribution. This is due to the 
substantially higher global warming potential of methane 
(CH,), which is about 24.5 times that of CC\." Estimates of 
common current leakage rates range from 0.3% to 4% for dis-
tribution and from 0.13% to 6% for production (Simpson and 
Anastasi. 1993).'- The break-even point, that is, the rate at 
which the reduced total warming potential is just offset by 
leakage of methane, occurs at 7%L1 for switching from coal to 
gas and at 3% for switching from oil to gas (adopting a global 
warming potential index for CH4 of 24.5 for a 100-year time 
horizon). These figures point to the need for strict control of 
leakage rates.14 Additional questions revolve around what 
happens to leakage rates in the case of a large-scale fuel 
switch and whether leakage rates of newly built and/or addi-
tional grids (i.e., marginal leakages) can be reduced. 
Second, the costs of the fuel switch option can also be ap-
proached on the basis of the opportunity cost concept. For 
countries such as China and India that dispose of massive 
M'A reserves and that may contribute increasingly in an ah 
solute sense to the global greenhouse problem, the opportu-
nity costs of fossil fuel switching may be considered large, es-
pecially if the environmental costs of coal are not taken into 
account. 
7.4.3 Renewable energy technologies 
Today many technologies have been developed to provide en-
ergy on a sustainable basis, in the sense that they harness 
energy resources that are practically unlimited and require 
relatively little additional energy input. Moreover, exploitation 
of renewable energy resources with appropriate technologies 
has the advantage of releasing relatively little carbon in net 
terms.I5 Consequently, a switch from fossil fuels to renewables 
will result in reduced absolute greenhouse gas emissions. 
However, renewable technologies are not always sustain-
able in the sense of being socially and environmentally be-
nign. Particularly in the case of large-scale applications in 
developing countries, notably of hydropower and biomass, 
adverse effects may arise for the local population. Moreover, 
adverse environmental side effects may occur, such as smog 
from the use of traditional biomass fuels (fuelwood, dung, 
and crop residues) or changes in biological habitats and local 
climate. 
The following classes of renewable energy resources are 
commonly distinguished: solar, wind, hydro, geothermal, 
ocean, and traditional and modern biomass."'To understand the 
main factors that underlie the costs and energy potential of re-
newables as a group, a detailed treatment of their diversity is re-
quired.17 Most of them, with the exception of biomass, are 
variable in supply, and some of them (especially traditional 
biomass, wind, and solar) are relatively more cost-competitive 
with fossil sources when they are produced on a small scale 
and near the spot of consumption. These latter aspects make 
them a potentially attractive option in remote and under-
developed areas. 
Further, large differences exist in the technical and economi-
cal readiness of these options. Hydro, wind, and traditional 
biomass are relatively well-developed, whereas some ocean 
technologies are still in a demonstration stage, although tidal and 
wave technologies may soon become more practical economi-
cally. Solar, modern biomass. and geothermal are in between, 
and photovoltaics may become competitive with fossil-fuel 
power plants within a decade or so (Mills et al., 1991). 
Table 7.4 breaks down the contribution of the various tech-
nologies to renewable energy production in 1990 and makes 
clear that traditional biomass and large hydro are presently the 
most prominent renewable energy sources. 
Some estimates of "practicable"1* potentials (relative to 
current use) are given in Table 7.5. It clearly shows how small 
current use is when related to various estimates of practicable 
potential, whatever discrepancies may exist in estimates of 
that concept. Notable exceptions are large hydro and tradi-
tional biomass. which, according to the data presented, are ex-
ploited at about a quarter to half of probable capacity. Judging 
by these figures only, the potential contribution lor renew-
ables is promising. However, a truly comprehensive assess-
ment must also consider the costs involved. 
242 
Climate Change /VVi - l-lconomic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chaw: 
Table 7.4. Contribution 
of various technologies 
to renewable 
energy production in 1990 
Energy 
Technology 
New renewable* 
Solar 
Wind 
Geothermal 
Modern biomass 
Ocean 
Small hydro 
Total new renewables 
Traditional 
biomass1 
Large hydro 
Total 
MtOil 
Equivalent 
12 
1 
12 
121 
0 
_L8 
164 
930 
465 
1559 
% of Total 
0.8 
0.1 
0.8 
7.8 
0.0 
LI 
10.5 
59.6 
29.8 
100 
^Includes fuel wood and dung. 
Source: WEC, 1993. 
Table 7.6 gives a selective overview of cost estimates of 
renewable energy technologies. As usual, figures diverge 
widely. This variation is mainly due either to (1) the calcula-
tion method used or (2) the inherent peculiarities of the tech-
nology. As for (I), the time horizon adopted, the level of 
discount rate chosen, and the assumed capacity and useful 
lifetime are important factors. As for (2), costs arc strongly in-
fluenced not only by the site specificity and temporal vari-
ability of supply as mentioned above but also by the form of 
final energy delivered.'1' 
Other aspects relevant to cost behaviour arc learning ef-
fects, economies of scale, and the need for immediate storage 
or transport of the energy generated (the costs of which are 
very difficult to assess with any precision). Immediate storage 
or transport needs occur not only when the timing of supply 
and demand fail to coincide, as is commonly the case with so-
lar and wind, but even more when sources and points of end 
use are far apart. Preferably, generated electricity should be 
fed into a linked distribution system of sufficient capacity to 
handle its intermittent supply. Different, but equally difficult 
to assess, are the problems of location and transportation as-
sociated with storable biofuel. 
On the basis of the prices in Table 7.6. it has been con-
cluded that hydro, wind, and some solar and biomass tech-
nologies are already becoming more competitive with con-
ventional sources. Although many wind and solar power 
applications are still subsidized or legislatively supported. 
substantial cost reductions are to be expected within the next 
few decades.:" Whether these technologies actually become 
competitive, however, will also depend on local conditions 
that shape a renewable's attractiveness and complementarity 
between renewables and nonrenewables. 
In contrast to fossil fuels, renewable energy at the moment 
is less portable: Consumption currently seems to be more 
strongly hound to the production location. Whereas fossil 
fuels can be relatively easily stored or transported with the 
existing infrastructure, similar exploitation o( the new re-
newables would in most cases require new investment. The 
competition between renewables is generally more complex 
than that between fossil fuels. Solar and geothermal energy, 
for example, can only be produced on the basis of comple-
mentarity by using temporal variation of supply. 
Conversely, what often makes up the main part of a renew-
able's promise are its large potential and modest price on the 
spot relative to the availability and prices of conventional 
sources. Moreover, by using local renewables, countries could 
reduce their dependence on imported fossil fuels and also re-
duce foreign exchange constraints. In addition, in the case of 
biomass, local communities could significantly benefit from 
small-scale applications and their net positive side effects. In 
this respect, local renewables, like energy efficiency mea-
sures, offer a basis for no-regrets policies. 
There is some reason to believe that a new generation of re-
newable energy technologies now under development could 
well become commercially viable in the near future. For ex-
ample, a variety of promising photovoltaic technologies de-
signed to shave commercial building demand during peak 
load periods is under active consideration in the U.S. and else-
where and might become commercially feasible in the fore-
seeable future (Byrne et al, 1994; Wenger etal. 1992). 
As the preceding discussion implies, the future role of re-
newables is hard to predict precisely. Although some scenar-
ios are more optimistic than others, the share of renewables in 
the 2020 energy mix will probably not exceed 25%.-' How-
ever, most studies agree that the new renewable mix will tend 
to be a hybrid that will exploit a variety of renewable energy 
sources backed up by fossil fuels, which will remain dominant 
for decades to come. 
7.4.4 Nuclear 
energy22 
Nuclear energy now accounts for about 5% of all primary en-
ergy production or 17% of the world's electricity generation. 
Its production, like that of renewables, emits relatively little 
CO.,.-' Moreover, its technology has passed the demonstration 
stage, except for the large but still unresolved issue of nuclear 
waste storage. On the other hand, further dissemination could 
be strongly prohibited by lack of public acceptance due to ma-
jor concerns about reactor safety, the risk of theft of nuclear 
technologies or materials, the proliferation of nuclear weapon 
capabilities, and the final treatment and disposal of fission 
products. 
Barring these limitations, nuclear energy, if evaluated on 
the basis of the engineering efficiency approach, can be com-
petitively applied, and in various countries it is. albeit to a 
largely different degree. (For comparison with gross costs, see 
Figure 7.2: for an estimate of the UK cost-effective potential, 
see Jackson. 1991. who used data from the mid-1980s.) Be-
cause of the long design/construction time (up to 10-15 yearsi 
and the enormous per plant investment costs, the nuclear op-
tion is rather inflexible now. According to Table 7.7 (note thai 
the figures in the table are based on averages from existing 
plants rather than new plants), costs to produce electricity 
with nuclear energy (S/kWh) appear to fall within the rangeot 
renewable options, though nuclear costs seem to have been 
rising and not fallin« (MacKcrron. 1992). 
.1 Generic Assessment of Response 
Options 
Table 7.5. Current use and practicable potentials of renewable energy technologies 
(TWh/yr) 
:-/.> 
Solar 
Wind 
Hydro 
Geothermal 
Ocean 
Traditional biomass 
Modern biomass' 
Current 
use 
54 
3.2 
2281.2" 
37-57 
0.6 
4170 
543 
Johansson 
et al. 2020 
6000-9000 
>53 
Practicable 
Swisher 
et al. 2030 
1395 
4931 
7077 
1499 
247 
8003 
potent ial estimate 
WEC 
2020 
489-1592 
20148 
8295'' 
178-405 
48-240 
7031-7269 
Read average 
to 2050 
about 35,000'' 
"Includes 81.7 TWh/yr for small hydro. 
'Includes 211-308 TWh/yr for small hydro. 
Modern biomass refers to the use of biomass (e.g., timber or sugar cane) for the production of electricity, liquid fuels, and heat using modern 
technology. 
'Assumes 740 million hectares become available for biofuel production by 2050 (proportionately less according to technical progress with 
biofuel productivity per hectare) with a slow start and more rapid build up after 2010. The 35,000 TWh would yield about 18,000 TWh of 
electricity given advanced generating technology expected to be in use next century. 
Source: Johansson et al. (1993), WEC (1993), Swisher et al. (1993), Read (1994b). 
Table 7.6. Estimates of current1 and future costs of renewable energy technologies 
(U.S4 per kWh) 
Source 
Biomass 
Solar 
Wind 
Hydro 
Geothermal 
Ocean 
Electric 
Fuel ($/GJ) 
lEA^ 
0-14* 
7.6-41.9 
(15-174)* 
5.2-26(22.61)' 
5(50)« 
3.5-4.2'' 
(4.48-7.62) 
(20)' 
(3.6-9.2) 
5-20"'3 
(11.5-50) 
6.7-8" 
7.58-12.80 
(1.85-16.68)" 
12.70-20.85' 
15.64-23.70" 
Johansson et al.2 
4.5-11.7 
(7.5-32.8)' 
4.9-9 
(8.5-28)* 
3.13-4.46 
(4.29-8.4) 
3-12* 
0.15-2.5' 
(5-30)" 
12-25" 
22-30" 
1.86-2.73 
(2.73-3.86) 
Swisher et al. 
5-lC(12) 
4-8f(25) 
4-8«(30) 
3-6(7) 
5-10(5X 
-10"' 
6r(8) 
7'(13) 
10'(15) 
lv 
WEC 
no storage"' 
0.4-2.5(0.5-10)' 
1-11 (1.2-28)/ 
4-14(28-45)" 
3-9(5-10) 
n/a 
(5-12)" 
(5-7)" 
(12)" 
(io-i4y 
n/a 
n/a 
Sole: n/a = not assessed, 
'current costs in parentheses. 
-1984 cents. 
•UK pence per kWh. 
passive solar: ''active solar; 'solar thermal (line focus); ''solar thermal (line focus); 'solar thermal (point focus); /solar thermal-electric; «pho-
t-noltaic: ''small/medium wind energy conversion systems: 'large wind energy conversion systems: 'small hydro: ^electric: 'direct heat: "'tidal: 
wave: salt gradient:''ocean thermal: ''ethanol from corn: 'ethanol from sugar: 'ethanol from wood: 'methanol Iron) wood: "methanol from 
herbage: methanol from biomass: "costs exclude storage systems. 
Smirres: IEA/OECD ( 1987): Johansson et al. (1993): Swisher et al. ( 1993): and W W ( 1993). 
244 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cluing 
Table 7.7. Examples of avoided emissions and their costs: 
Electricity 
Electricity" 
(Cost of avoided resource 
(coal):$0.44/kWhe) 
Measure Resource 
Cost ($/kWh) 
Avoided Emissions 
(g Carbon-eq/kWh) 
% 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
3 
51 
100 
100 
100 
100 
18 
59 
64 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
100 
Cost of Avoided 
Carbon-equivalent 
(CaCeq) ($/tonne) 
-171 
-159 
- 96 
- 79 
- 67 
- 30 
-102 
- 19 
- 54 
-137 
- 9 
-313 
-103 
- 33 
-221 
-588 
- 41 
-176 
-106 
- 73 
- 1 
- 24 
- 40 
89 
22 
- 24 
- 33 
- 51 
- 11 
End-use efficiency1' 
Available technologies 
Lighting (incandescent to compact fluorescent) 
-0.011 
Lighting (efficient fluorescent tube) 
-0.007 
Lighting (lamps, ballasts, reflectors) 
0.013 
Refrigerator/freezer, no CFCs 
0.018 
Freezer, automatic defrost, no CFCs 
0.022 
Heat pump water heaters 
0.034 
Variable-speed motor drive 
0.011 
U.S. field data, multifamily, leaking retrofits 
0.038 
Retrofits in 450 U.S. commercial buildings 
0.026 
No-cost or behavioural measures 
0 
Electricity production (busbar costs) 
Available technologies 
Biomass steam-electric (woodfuel) 
0.041 
STIG' (gasified coal) 
0.041 
STIG' (natural gas) 
0.027 
Wind (1988) 
0.054 
Solar thermal electric (1988) 
0.114 
Solar photovaltaics (1988) 
0.231 
Nuclear 
0.057 
Emerging technologies 
ISTIG'' (gasified coal) 
0.034 
ISTIC (natural gas) 
0.024 
Chemically recuperated gas turbine 
0.029 
Solar thermal electric 
(2000) 
0.043 
(2010) 
0.036 
(2020) 
0.031 
Solar photovoltaics 
(2000) 
0.072 
(2010) 
0.050 
(2020) 
0.036 
Wind 
(2000) 
0.033 
(2010) 
0.027 
Nuclear - industry target for U.S. 
0.040 
Fuel choice (STIG' technology in all cases) 
Avoided resource cost (gasified coal:$0.071/kWh) 
Gasified coal to natural gas (1990) 
0.027 
Gasified coal to biomass (sugar)(~ 2000) 
0.033 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
9 
163 
318 
318 
318 
318 
57 
187 
204 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
318 
155 
309 
50 
100 
- 91 
- 25 
"Unless noted, the annualized costs of efficiency and supply measures are calculated with a 6% real discount rate and no taxes. For details on 
the other assumptions, see source. 
^Lighting and refrigeration measures calculated using a 7% real discount rate. 
cSteam-injccted gas turbine. 
flntercooled steam-injected gas turbine. 
Source: Mills et al., 1991. 
\ Generic Assessment of Response Options 
J./i 
Social opportunity costs will remain high until a lull and 
credible investigation of the safety aspects of nuclear power 
plants is completed. However, if the nuclear option is assessed 
from the welfare economic point of view, the final assessment 
becomes much more uncertain because the lack of public ac-
ceptance and the various risks, advantages, and uncertainties 
now also have to be taken into account explicitly. This holds 
not only in the industrialized countries, but also in the devel-
oping countries and the countries in transition. In addition, 
any future use of nuclear energy, like any switch from fossil to 
nonfossil fuels, will depend on the underlying cross-price 
elasticities and energy price assumptions, inflation, public-
policy, and technological progress. Taking these complicating 
factors into account - namely, that there is no established 
technology for decommissioning nuclear plants, that there are 
hidden external costs regarding nuclear power-related dam-
age, and that efforts are being made to develop intrinsically 
safe nuclear reactors - the IEA projects the share of nuclear 
energy in total energy use at 6.1% by 2010; the WEC C-
scenario (see also note 6) projects the share of nuclear at 6.2% 
in 2020. 
7.4.5 Capture and disposal 
CO, capture and disposal is understood as any sequence of 
processes in which carbon is recovered in one form or another 
from an energy conversion process and disposed of at sites 
other than the atmosphere. It should be noted though, that dis-
posal capacity is ultimately limited, both for technical reasons 
and because not all forms of disposal ensure a permanent 
prevention of carbon reentering the atmosphere. However, 
assuming sufficient and feasible disposal, the further de-
velopment of these technologies in combination with coal 
gasification is thought to have significant intermediate poten-
tial, especially for coal-rich countries such as China, India. 
the U.S., or the Russian Federation (see also Nakicenovic and 
Victor, 1993, and the outcomes of the OECD Model Compari-
son Project as discussed in Chapter 8). 
Since places of recovery do not generally coincide with 
places of disposal, transport of the recovered carbon is re-
quired as an additional process. In principle, carbon can be re-
covered from each fossil fuel conversion process. However, 
recovery is most attractive at energy-intensive stationary point 
sources, such as steel manufacturing, fertilizer, and power 
plants.24 To date, most research effort has been spent on power 
plants. For these, two types of recovering technologies exist:-'" 
those that combine separation of the CO, from the flue gases 
(scrubbing) with modifications to the energy conversion 
process and those that rely on CO, scrubbing only. Modifica-
tions to the energy conversion process, which are now in ex-
perimental use, include an Integrated Coal Gasifier Combined 
Cycle (ICGCC) system, modification of boilers, and modifi-
cation of gas turbines.2'' The main separation options are 
chemical or physical absorption, the use of membranes, and 
cryogenic fractionation. Of these, chemical and physical ab-
sorption are most developed and membrane separation and 
cold distillation least.-7 
Depending on the place of disposal, transport will take 
place onshore or offshore. Onshore, pipelines are most eco-
nomical. Estimated transport costs vary between $1 and 
$4/tCO, over 100 km, depending on the flow rale (Hendriks. 
1994). Offshore, tankers compete with pipelines. For larger 
distances, tanker transport is likely to be cheaper. Pipeline 
transport costs are more or less proportional with distance and 
decrease with increasing flow rate of the gas and decreasing 
ambient temperatures. Estimates of costs offshore therefore 
vary between somewhat more than one-half to three times the 
costs onshore (Hendriks. 1994; TNO, 1992). 
After the carbon is recovered, it has to be handled so that 
reentry into the atmosphere is prevented or at least delayed as 
much as possible, that is. so that the mean retention time is 
large compared to the residence time of CO, in the atmos-
phere (since not all applications ensure entire or long-term 
storage of the carbon).2X 
Disposal can occur in two ways: The gas can be utilized for 
the production of long-lived materials,2'' or it can be stored 
underground, either in aquifers (which, technically, have al-
most unlimited storage potential), or in the ocean.30 Environ-
mental risks seem to be involved, however, especially in the 
latter cases. 
7.4.6 Enhancing sinks: Forestry options11 
Unlike removal options, options that enhance sinks remove 
carbon after it has been dispersed into the atmosphere. All 
sources seem to agree that much more carbon is stored in soils 
than in forests. This would suggest that significant attention 
be given to measures that promote soil conservation, reduce 
carbon mobilization from soils to air, and increase soil storage 
of atmospheric carbon through the action of soil microorgan-
isms. Nevertheless, the main option for enhancing carbon 
sinks - except for iron fertilization and weathering rocks, 
which are both still in their experimental stage - relates to 
forestry measures. Their importance is due to their expected 
large storage potential and relatively modest costs. The en-
hancement of forest sinks is also one of the lowest-risk 
options and offers substantial positive side effects in the envi-
ronmental and sometimes also in the socioeconomic sphere. 
Just as the potential for forestry measures in enhancing 
sinks is probably sizable, so is the contribution of deforesta-
tion to greenhouse gas emissions. After fossil energy-related 
activities, deforestation and other land use changes are the 
second-largest source of carbon emissions. The net annual 
flux of carbon to the atmosphere as a result of land use 
changes and deforestation ranged between 0.6 and 2.8 GtC 
during the early and probably the rest of the 1980s, compared 
with global emissions of slightly less than 6 GtC from burning 
of fossil fuels, manufacture of cement, and flaring of natural 
gas (Grublcr et cil.. 1993a; see also Houghton. 1990). The 
large amount of uncertainty about the net quantity of carbon 
released by deforestation and land use changes relates to the 
extent of the area undergoing land use change, the carbon 
content of biota and soils in the deforested land, and the dy-
namic release profile of biotic and soil carbon after distur-
bance. 
2-M 
Climate Change / W.i - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate CIIUKI 
The following subclasses of forestry measures are com-
monly distinguished: 
(1) 
Halting or slowing deforestation 
(2) 
Reforestation and afforestation32 
(3) 
Adoption of agroforestry practices 
(4) 
Establishment of short-rotation woody biomass planta-
tions 
(5) 
Lengthening forest rotation cycles 
(6) 
Adoption of low-impact harvesting methods and other 
management methods that maintain and increase carbon 
stored in forest lands 
(7) 
Sustainable forest exploitation cum sequestration of 
carbon in long-lived forest products" 
The first six measures sequester carbon by increasing the 
standing inventory of biomass or by preventing a decrease 
thereof. This amounts to a once-for-all uptake of carbon. In 
contrast, the seventh measure aims at continuing to break the 
carbon cycle, thereby, in principle, enabling its permanent ap-
plication. This option becomes even more efficient and attrac-
tive if the timber is used to substitute on a large scale for 
products such as bricks, concrete, steel, and plastics whose 
manufacture releases much greater quantities of CO.,. 
However, in practice all forestry measures are ultimately 
limited: The first six by the area available in competition with 
Other potential land uses and the seventh by saturation of de-
mand for timber and other long-lived wood products and the 
eventual decay of the wood. Therefore, forestry measures, 
like removal options, are to he seen as an intermediate re-
sponse policy. In this respect it is worth mentioning that trees 
grown on fairly short rotations (harvested at maximum Mean 
Annual Increment) are more effective carbon sinks than trees 
that are allowed to mature in old-growth forests. This fact has 
large implications, especially for developing countries, where 
by far the largest demand for wood is for fuelwood and small 
construction poles that can be grown on short rotations. 
In assessing the global potential for halting or slowing 
down deforestation and for reforestation, there are three main 
sources of uncertainty: 
(1) 
The potential for slowing deforestation depends on re-
solving complex problems that are linked to societal 
and economic pressures, such as large-scale settlement 
on forest lands and the sale of timber for export earnings 
in tropical countries or policy distortions (e.g.. below-
cost sales of timber on government lands) in industrial-
ized countries. 
(2) 
The potential of the option depends on the amount of 
area globally available for some kind of forestry mea-
sure (see also Volume 2. Chapter 24). 
(3) 
The incremental (i.e.. annual) and net cumulative car-
bon uptake per hectare" for the main forest species" 
have yet to be reliably determined. 
In addition, it should be noted that large-scale monoculture 
forestry may not be acceptable to many environmentalists: 
moreover, local ccosvstems mav be destabilized. 
With respect to the first of these uncertainties, there is a 
near consensus in the literature that most deforestation in 
tropical countries occurs because standing forests are con-
verted to crop and pasture land. This happens because those 
encroaching on the forests consider them to have lower eco-
nomic value than crop and pasture land. The potential for 
slowing deforestation is therefore hard to estimate. Further-
more, slowing deforestation requires the application of ef-
fective solutions to highly politicized problems such as 
inequitable land distribution and lack of secure land tenure, li 
also requires effective means of increasing the per hectare 
productivity of crops and livestock. The solutions to these 
problems are partly technical but mostly economic in nature 
and include improved price structures for farmers (e.g., higher 
crop and livestock prices versus lower prices for inputs such 
as fertilizer) and better access to markets. 
As for tropical deforestation rates, estimates of these vary 
widely among the various sources, partly due to different def-
initions of both tropical forests and deforestation (for a dis-
cussion, see Jepma, 1994). According to FAO (1991). annual 
tropical deforestation for the late 1980s amounted to some 17 
million ha; other estimates vary between 3 and 20 million ha. 
Estimates of global annual biotic carbon fluxes from closed 
forests during the late 1980s show an equally large variety. 
ranging between 600 MtC (IPCC, 1992) and 2800 MtC (WRI. 
1990). For an overview, see Griibler et al. (1993b). 
A similar discussion has arisen on the issue of the global 
land area that would be suitable and available for carbon se-
questering plantations. One study of the maximum worldwide 
potential of this approach, Sedjo and Solomon (1989). sug-
gests that 2.9 Gt of atmospheric carbon could be sequestered 
annually by approximately 465 million ha of fast-growing 
plantation forests at a cost of about $186-372 billion. Without 
employing fast-growing species the area needed would he 
several times larger, but many factors will determine whether 
such high rates of uptake can be achieved. 
Clearly, a large potential for the enhancement of forest 
sinks exists in the tropics. A recent survey, carried out under 
the auspices of the Asian Development Bank in eight Asian 
countries (Pakistan. India. Sri Lanka, Bangladesh. Indonesia, 
Malaysia. Vietnam, and the Philippines) indicates not only 
that climate change is likely to have large and generally ad-
verse impacts on forests and forest ecosystems in the Asia-
Pacific region, but also that "forest conservation and af-
forestation can often be judged to be cost-effective and 
excellent opportunities for limiting net greenhouse emis-
sions" (Qureshi and Sherer. 1994). However, it should be em-
phasized once again that much of the land availability will de-
pend on the willingness of the local population to cooperate. 
given their perceptions of the most appropriate land use. 
Keeping these limitations in mind, one can compare the 
preceding findings with the estimate of Griibler et al. (I993hi 
that at present 265 million ha globally would be available and 
suitable for forest plantations and 85 million ha for agro-
forestry. Other sources (Winjum et al.. 1992) suggest signifi-
cantly larger areas (some 400-1200 million ha). These figure* 
are in sharp contrast with the potential in the OECD countries 
amounting to 15-50 million ha in future in the EU. mainly due 
to redundancy of farmlands, and 30-60 million ha in the L.S. 
I Generic Assessment of Response 
Options 
24 
Carbon sequestered in global annual wood production is cur-
rently estimated at some 1 GtC (TNO, 1992). Such a high rate 
may not represent the actual "net" addition to the wood prod-
ucts pool and may not be sustainable in the future, but it gives 
some indication of the potential of carbon sequestration 
through wood products, depending on the price, product life-
time, and the trend in timber demand (which is commonly 
projected to rise). Some authors argue that a considerably 
higher demand for wood could be achieved if it were used to 
produce electricity (and liquid fuels such as methanol). This 
ivould replace fossil fuel CO, emissions with a system in 
which net emissions are zero, provided the wood is grown on 
a sustainable basis. (For a feasibility study, see BTG, 1994; 
tor a discussion of the institution building needed to monitor 
and account for the global realization of this concept, see 
Read. 1994a.) 
With respect to the problem of estimating carbon uptake, 
only rough estimates exist for the carbon content of biomass 
and soils in disturbed areas. Estimates of average annual car-
bon uptake vary considerably, depending on, among other 
factors, plantation age (for a correlation, see Cannell. 1982), 
timber species, soil/climate conditions, and management prac-
tices (see also Houghton. 1991). However, most estimates are 
in the likely range of 1-8 tC/ha/yr. Cumulative carbon uptake 
would as a maximum be somewhere between 100 and 150 
tC/ha for the main forest types. (Note that the vegetation and 
soils of undisturbed forests can hold 20-100 times more car-
ton than agricultural systems.) 
14.6.1 Costs 
Mitigation policies using forests are generally considered rel-
atively cost-effective, especially if applied in developing 
countries. An early U.S. high cost estimate of $ 100/tC (Nord-
haus. 1990) now seems to have ignored changes in soil carbon 
through tree planting and to have underestimated the carry-
ing capacity and length of productivity of forest plantations. 
Richards et al. (1993a. 1993b) estimate that the overall costs 
of stabilizing U.S. carbon emissions could be reduced by as 
much as 80% by forestry options. 
Most of the studies, which deal with the costs of afforesta-
tion or halting or slowing down deforestation, take the engi-
neering efficiency approach rather than the welfare economic 
approach. With respect to afforestation, the assumption is 
commonly made that the forests would not be harvested but 
ivould be left alone to mature (the so-called carbon cemetery 
forests). The emphasis, therefore, is on the assessment of the 
costs of afforestation (plantations), including maintenance 
and protection, and of land requirement. Sometimes, however, 
land required for establishing carbon plantations may be con-
sidered free, therefore implying thai opportunity costs would 
be zero (e.g.. Winjuin et al.. 1992). 
One generally recognizes that the second option, halting or 
slowing down deforestation, is probably one of the most ur-
gent and most cost-effective options (Griibler et at., 1993b). 
However, experience with the closest alternative, reforesta-
tion, has so far produced mixed results. On the one hand. 
Mime success stories can be told about reforestation projects 
in Sweden. Finland, and parts of Canada. On the other hand. 
large losses have occurred in Angola. Nigeria, Morocco, and 
several other countries, and in China the rate of survival of 
reforestation efforts is estimated to be not higher than 20% 
(Nakicenovic and John. 1991). 
There are two crucial factors that appear to determine the 
feasibility of the afforestation option in actual practice. First, 
it matters a great deal whether the forest can be harvested sus-
tainably and forest products sold at commercial rates, or 
whether it instead should be left alone. Second, much depends 
on the acceptance of the newly planted forests by the local 
population, as might be expected if they were to derive an 
economic benefit from it. 
If. for instance, the forest can he harvested through the ex-
ploitation of timber and nontimber products, and if, in addi-
tion, carbon sequestration credit can be given to trees that are 
harvested, then the net costs of afforestation could easily be-
come negative. In that case, afforestation would become a no-
regrets option, and initiatives could allow the payback period 
to be left to the market. However, not all externalities can be 
incorporated in the prices of the timber and nontimber prod-
ucts (e.g., trees may provide environmental benefits but may 
also contribute to productive losses by shading adjacent field 
crops or competing with them for water). 
Even if afforestation with sustainable exploitation offers a 
net positive return, many other factors may still form an obsta-
cle to its implementation. Actual experience has made abun-
dantly clear that, even if environmental quality and economic 
productivity in a certain area are both low, those who use the 
land may still be unwilling to convert it to forest. Some even 
argue that for at least a decade social, political, and infrastruc-
tural barriers will keep reforestation rates very modest 
(Trexler, 1991). Indeed, 
|T|ropical forestry programmes undertaken with global 
climate change mitigation in mind will need to be inte-
grated into the social, environmental, and economic con-
texts and needs of the countries |and local communities] in 
which they are undertaken. Failure to understand this has 
brought about the failure of many tropical forestry efforts 
intended to solve fuel wood and other problems. The same 
could easily occur with forestry efforts intended to mitigate 
global climate change. (Brown el al., 1993) 
Estimates of the cost-effectiveness of forestry measures in 
the engineering efficiency approach are also subject to uncer-
tainties about the availability of land area, carbon uptake 
per hectare, and costs of establishment and maintenance 
per hectare. In addition, figures diverge depending on the 
methodology adopted. In this respect, two problems should be 
discussed: (I) the derivation of point estimates or of cost 
functions, 
and (2) forestry cost function methodology. 
With respect to (I). most effort so far has been spent on de-
riving point estimates from average costs. Some selected 
cases are given in Tables 7.8 and 7.9. Note that the estimates 
generally assume a "tree cemetery" approach. Tables 7.8 and 
7.9 show relatively low carbon sequestering costs through tree 
planting, in many cases under Sl()/tC and rarely over $30/tC. 
Other studies with similar results, stressing various aspects of 
the problem, include Trexler el al. (1989). Swisher (1991). 
Winjum and Lewis (1993). and Faeth el al. ( 1993). lor a de-
24S 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Cliange 
Table 7.8. Costs of sequestering 
carbon through forest projects: Some selected cases ($/tC) 
Source 
Andrasko(1993) 
Dixon etal. (1993) 
Krankina and Dixon (1993) 
Houghton etal. (1991) 
Tropical 
Agroforestry 
3-5 
4-16 
3-12 
Plantation 
3-6 
6-60 
4-37 
Temperate 
Plantation 
0-2 
2-50 
1-7 
Boreal 
Plantation 
Protection 
3-27 
1-4 
1-8 
1-3 
Source: Adapted from Dixon et al. (1993). 
Table 7.9. Establishment 
costs of cost-efficient 
practices 
Forest Type/Practices 
Boreal 
Natural regeneration 
Reforestation 
Temperate 
Natural regeneration 
Afforestation 
Reforestation 
Tropical 
Natural regeneration 
Agroforestry 
Reforestation 
Median $/tCt 
5 
(4-11) 
8 
(3-27) 
1 
« 1 - D 
2 
« l - 5 ) 
6 
(3-29) 
1 
« l - 2 ) 
5 
(2-11) 
7 
(3-26) 
Median $/hat 
93 
(83-126) 
324 
(127-455) 
9 
(9-100) 
259 
(41-444) 
357 
(257-911) 
178 
(106-238) 
454 
(254-699) 
450 
(303-1183) 
(3) 
(4) 
Rising opportunity costs as fallow land is used up and 
plantations move on to land suitable for alternative 
fThe numbers in parentheses are interquartile ranges (middle 50% of 
observations). 
Source: Turner et al., 1993. 
tailed assessment see Turner et al. (1993) and Volume 2, 
Chapter 24, of this report. 
Though these point estimates may give a satisfactorily ac-
curate description of cost effectiveness for small areas and 
single plantation programmes, they are bound to lack validity 
in the case of large areas. From a global perspective, the costs 
in terms of economic welfare are likely to rise with the scale 
of the effort. Four forces underlie this cost pattern: 
(1) 
Diminishing uptakes as less suitable or less well-
managed land is forested, resulting in a lower carbon 
uptake per hectare 
(2) 
Increasing public resistance and social and legal objec-
tions b> the local population against interference with 
present land use 
uses36 
No or negligible economies of scale in operating and 
maintenance costs 
Together these factors generally mean that marginal costs will 
rise as the area being forested increases. Exceptions to this 
rule might only occur if the amount of land needed for ag-
riculture shows a declining trend. Clearly, this is almost no-
where the case in developing countries, but it might hold for 
parts of the Western world. Only recently have a number of 
somewhat more sophisticated studies begun to appear that do 
take increasing marginal costs explicitly into account. Such 
studies also do more justice to the welfare economic point of 
view by explicitly recognizing that an expansion of the area 
forested will most likely increasingly interfere with the ex-
panding domestic demand for agricultural land. Table 7.10 
sketches this feature. 
When comparing Tables 7.8 and 7.9 with Table 7.10, it is 
apparent that the figures correspond roughly only for low lev-
els of sequestering effort. For higher levels, the divergence 
grows rapidly. Therefore, the conclusion seems justified that 
point estimates, though valid for small areas, seriously fail to 
describe actual costs for larger areas. 
With respect to the second issue, a number of more sophis-
ticated studies have recently begun to appear. These include 
Moulton and Richards (1990). Adams et al. (1993). Parks 
and Hardie (1992), Richards et al. (1993a), and Read (1994b). 
These studies refine the approach to estimating the cost of es-
tablishing carbon sequestering tree plantations in three ways. 
First, they estimate a cost function, not a point. Second, they 
refine the cost estimates for establishing tree plantations by 
recognizing differences associated with location and site con-
siderations. Third, they build discounting procedures into the 
methodology - a common practice in the assessment of other 
options, but until recently one that was virtually ignored with 
respect to this option (see also Richards. 1993). Keeping all 
this in mind, it is clear that both the methodology and the em-
pirical estimates of the various studies are still amenable to 
further revision. It is probably a justified generalization to 
state that the newer research is tending to find a somewhat 
steeper increase in costs than did the earlier studies, with the 
A Generic Assessment 
of Response 
Options 
2VV 
Table 7.10. Estimates of cost of carbon sequestered by tree 
planting: some comparative 
results for the U.S. 
Study 
Total Carbon Sequestered (Mt) 
140 
280 
420 
700 
Costs ($/tC) 
Moulton/Richards 
16.57 
20.69 
23.24 
34.73 
(1990) 
Adams etal. 
18.50 
25.11 
37.21 
95.06 
(1993) 
Parks/Hardie 
175.00 
n/a 
n/a 
n/a 
(1992) 
Note: n/a = not assessed. 
Sources: As shown. 
marginal costs per tonne of carbon roughly doubling, from 
about $30 to $60, for large annual uptakes. 
Finally, it is increasingly recognized that there are proba-
bly limits to the extent to which the global system can main-
tain forest stocks. Nevertheless, sustainable forest manage-
ment can make an important long-term contribution to 
providing a continuous flow of substitutes for net-emitting en-
ergy sources such as coal. 
7.4.7 
Methane 
Methane currently accounts for about 20% of expected warm-
ing from climate change. This contribution is a result of 
methane's potency as a greenhouse gas and dramatically in-
creased anthropogenic emissions. Currently, about 70% of 
global methane emissions are associated with human-related 
activities such as energy production and use (coal mining, oil 
and natural gas systems, and fossil fuel combustion); waste 
management (landfills and wastewater treatment): livestock 
management (ruminants and wastes): biomass burning: and 
rice cultivation. 
Technologies and practices for reducing methane emis-
sions from their major anthropogenic sources have been iden-
tified and reviewed through a number of expert meetings and 
studies, many under the IPCC. Many of the technological op-
tions currently available are cost-effective in many regions of 
the world and have been implemented to a limited extent. The 
available options represent different levels of technical com-
plexity and capital needs and therefore should be adaptable to 
a wide variety of country situations. In total, it appears to be 
technically feasible to reduce methane emissions by about 
120 Tg (75 to 170 Tg) per year through reductions in emis-
sions from the following methane sources. 
Coal mining. 
Techniques for removing methane from 
gassy underground mine workings have been developed pri-
marily for safety reasons, because methane is highly explo-
sive in air in concentrations between 5% and 15% and is the 
cause of mining accidents. Some of these same techniques can 
be adapted to recover methane in concentrations of 30% or more, 
so the energy value of this fuel can be put to use. Methane 
emissions into the atmosphere can be reduced by up to 50-
70% at gassy mines using available techniques such as gob 
gas recovery (IPCC, 1990a. 1990b. 1990c; U.S. EPA, 1993; 
IPCC, 1993). 
Oil and natural gas systems. Methane is the primary con-
stituent of natural gas, and significant quantities of methane 
can be emitted to the atmosphere from components and opera-
tions throughout a country's natural gas system. The technical 
nature of emissions from natural gas systems is well under-
stood, and emissions are largely amenable to technological 
solutions through enhanced inspection and preventative main-
tenance, replacement of equipment with newer designs, im-
proved rehabilitation and repair, and other changes in routine 
operations. Reductions in emissions in the order of 10 to 80% 
are possible at particular sites, depending on site-specific con-
ditions (IPCC, 1990b; U.S. EPA, 1993; IPCC, 1993). 
Landfills. The methane generated in landfills as a direct 
result of the anaerobic decomposition of solid waste can be 
reduced by recovering this medium-BTU gas for use in 
electricity generation equipment or for direct use in heating or 
cooking equipment. At many sites reductions of up to 90% are 
possible. Additional benefits that result from landfill methane 
recovery include improved air and water quality and reduced 
risk of fire and explosion (IPCC. 1990b: U.S. EPA, 1993; 
IPCC, 1993). 
Ruminant livestock. Many opportunities exist for reducing 
methane emissions from ruminant animals by improving ani-
mal productivity and reducing methane emissions per unit of 
product (e.g., methane emissions per kilogram of milk pro-
duced). In general, a greater portion of the energy in the ani-
mals' feed can be directed to useful products instead of wasted 
in the form of methane. As a result, herd size can be reduced 
while productivity remains the same. Current technologies 
and management practices can reduce methane emissions per 
unit product by 25% or more in many animal management 
systems (IPCC, 1990a, 1990c; U.S. EPA. 1993; IPCC, 1993). 
Livestock 
manure. 
Methane emissions from 
anaerobic 
digestion of animal manures constitute a wasted energy re-
source which can be recovered by adapting manure manage-
ment and treatment practices to facilitate methane (biogas) 
collection. This biogas can he used directly for on-farm en-
ergy or to generate electricity for on-farm use or for sale. The 
other products of anaerobic digestion, contained in the slurry 
effluent, can he used as animal feed and aquaculture supple-
ments and as a crop fertilizer. Additionally, managed anaero-
bic decomposition is an effective method of reducing the 
environmental and human health problems associated with 
manure management. Current reduction options can reduce 
methane emissions by as much as 25-80% at particular sites 
(IPCC. 1990c; U.S. EPA. 1993; IPCC. 1993). 
7.5. Adaptation Options 
There are no comprehensive surveys of the various adaptation 
options and their costs, probably because adaptation covers 
such a broad range of potential action and also because of the 
large uncertainties surrounding these options. The literature 
on the subject is limited but growing." In any case, it is clear 
150 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Cluing 
Table 7.11. Agricultural 
yield changes under a 2 X CO, climate (percentage of gross agricultural 
product)" 
Region/Scenario' 
OECD America 
OECD Europe 
OECD Pacific 
Central and Eastern 
Europe and former 
Soviet Union 
Middle East 
Latin America 
South and 
Southeast Asia 
Centrally 
Planned Asia 
Africa 
1 
-20.0 
5.0 
7.5 
-7.5 
-22.5 
-22.5 
-20.0 
-7.5 
-20.0 
UKMO Model'' 
2 
-5.0 
5.0 
7.5 
-7.5 
-22.5 
-22.5 
-20.0 
7.5 
-20.0 
3 
-5.0 
5.0 
7.5 
-7.5 
-7.5 
-8.5 
-10.0 
7.5 
-20.0 
1 
10.0 
10.0 
7.5 
22.5 
-7.5 
-15.0 
-10.0 
7.5 
-7.5 
GISS Model* 
2 
10.0 
10.0 
7.5 
22.5 
-7.5 
-15.0 
-10.0 
22.5 
-7.5 
3 
10.0 
10.0 
7.5 
22.5 
7.5 
-1.0 
0.0 
22.5 
7.5 
1 
-5.0 
-5.0 
7.5 
7.5 
-7.5 
-10.0 
-10.0 
7.5 
-15.0 
GFDL Model'' 
2 
10.0 
-5.0 
7.5 
7.5 
-7.5 
-10.0 
-10.0 
22.5 
-15.0 
3 
10.0 
-5.0 
7.5 
7.5 
7.5 
4.0 
0.0 
22.5 
0.0 
"After Rosenzweig el al. (1993); cf. also Fischer et al. (1993), Rosenzweig and Parry (1994), and Reilly et al. (1994). 
''The climate change scenarios are based on equilibrium 2 X CO, experiments using the General Circulation Models of the UK Meteoro-
logical Office (UKMO), the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL). 
•The scenarios are (1) no adaptation, (2) minor shifts, and (3) major shifts in behaviour. 
Source: Tol (1994). 
that society now already incurs large costs in adapting to cli-
mate extremes; climate change will just increase these costs. 
When talking about adaptation, the central questions relate 
to (1) what impacts to adapt to, (2) how to adapt, and (3) when 
to adapt. In this section only the first two questions will 
be considered; no attention will be given to the aspect of 
insurance, which could be viewed as an adaptation option in its 
own right (see also Chapter 6). The question of when to adapt 
is one of implementing no-regrets adaptation options now 
(possibly developing drought-resistant cultivars and tech-
niques) and of weighing the implementation of mitigation op-
tions now against adaptation options in the future. In the 
literature hardly any attention has been paid to any possible 
trade-off between both types of options. The section concludes 
with some remarks on the modelling of adaptation. 
7.5.1 Adaptation 
to what? 
Adaptation in various degrees and in some form or other may 
be necessary to cope with ecosystem changes that have inter-
faces with human (economic, social, political, legal, and cul-
tural) activities (for a more detailed assessment of adaptation 
options, see Volume 2). The extent of these changes and their 
subsequent impact on human affairs will depend on the se-
quence, severity, and characteristics of the climatic changes 
that initiated them. Changes in temperature and associated 
rainfall regimes may lead to more droughts in some localities 
and heavier rainfall in others, thus affecting worldwide sur-
face and groundwater availability, which in turn will affect 
agronomic practices and yields in agriculture. Fisheries and 
forestry will be affected by changes in temperature and the 
availability and quality of water (e.g.. salinity). Temperature 
rise may also affect livestock populations and output through 
heat stress and climate-related influences on infestations of 
parasites, insects, and disease. 
Climate change may cause accelerated sea level rise, possi-
bly attended by increased flooding, changes in regional tem-
perature, increases in the frequency of storms and hurricanes, 
and changes in surface runoff and river discharges resulting 
from changes in the mean value and variability of precipita-
tion. Impact scenarios differ considerably, however, as a result 
of differences in their starting assumptions: IPCC (1994), for 
example, assumes a l-m sea level rise over 100 years, whereas 
other scenarios are based on a 50-cm rise. In addition, the re-
sponse options that are considered adequate or appropriate 
differ significantly from study to study. 
Global research on sea level rise is increasingly being 
carried out (Tol. 1994; Nordhaus, 1993; Cline, 1992a; Fank-
hauser. 1992, 1993. 1994a. and 1994b). The World Coast Con-
ference 1993 (IPCC. 1994) has pointed to the need to in-
tegrate responses to long-term threats such as climate change 
and associated sea level rise with existing planning and man-
agement efforts to arrive at Integrated Coastal Zone Manage-
ment. On the impacts of changes in river discharges, only 
some scattered information is available. As an example, the 
discharge of the Rhine in the Netherlands is predicted to fall 
by 10-15% due to an assumed temperature increase of 4°C in 
the Alpine part of the basin (Kwadijk. 1991, as cited in 
Penning-Rowsell and Fordham. 1994). However, little re-
search has yet been carried out to combine the effects of 
changes in precipitation with the effects of temperature rise. A 
major conclusion in IPCC (1994) is that it is very difficult to 
differentiate between sea level rise and nonclimate-related 
factors, such as subsidence and excessive groundwater with-
drawal, which may be equally important determinants in rela-
tive sea level rise. 
A Generic Assessment 
oj Response 
Options 
Table 7.12. Annual costs of sea level risef 
Region 
Wetland (mln. $) 
Drylands (mln. 
OECD America 
5,000 
2,000 
OECD Europe 
4,000 
500 
OECD Pacific 
4,500 
4,000 
Central and Eastern 
1,250 
1,250 
Europe and former 
Soviet Union 
Middle East 
0 
0 
Latin America 
1,500 
500 
South and 
1,500 
1,000 
Southeast Asia 
Centrally Planned Asia 
500 
0 
Africa 
500 
500 
•All estimates ± 50%. 
Source: Tol, 1993. 
Quite obviously, countries where sea level rise may be-
come prominent may face challenges beyond what only a cli-
mate change would have entailed. Effects on agriculture may 
be caused by regional changes in temperature and by sea level 
rise. A sea level rise of 1 m would affect the supply of rice of 
more than 200 million people in Asia (IPCC, 1994). Changes 
in temperature would have mixed regional effects (Tol, 1994, 
based on Rosenzweig et ah, 1993). Effects on agriculture 
would depend on the full range of possible impacts of climate 
change (as well as CO, fertilization) and not just temperature 
(see Table 7.11). 
Similarly, a sea level change would pose problems or pre-
sent opportunities for numerous other activities, including 
fishing and mangrove forestry. Human habitation would also 
be affected (through changes in water quality) as would indus-
try and trade (through relocation of industries and loss of in-
frastructure). Both these factors may also affect human health 
and nutrition. 
Human adjustment, however, will be affected by a complex 
array of factors over time. Thus, a study by the Asian Devel-
opment Bank (1994) shows that, whereas the agronomic yield 
of rice may increase, the "realized" increase may be lower 
than the agronomic potential due to the interplay of demand 
and supply factors. 
7.5.2 How to adapt 
Options for adapting to sea level rise can generally be catego-
rized as retreat, accommodation, or protection. 
Retreat will cause loss of dry land and loss of wetlands. 
IPCC (1994) computes that a 1-m sea level rise could threaten 
170,000 km- (or 56%) of the world's coastal wetlands. Loss of 
dry land means losses in agriculture, in forestry, in species, 
and in physical assets and implies migration of people. At-
tempts to estimate these losses can be found in Ay res and 
Walter (1991). Rijsbergen (1991). Fankhauser (1994a). Cline 
(1992a and 1992b). Suliman (1990). Nordhaus (1991b. 1993). 
and Tol (1994). In some of these sources estimates have been 
made of the land protection costs insofar as land loss is pre-
251 
Protection (mln. $) 
Total (mln. $) 
Total (% of GDP) 
1,500 
8,500 
0.15 
1,700 
6,200 
0.14 
1,800 
10,300 
0.45 
500 
3,000 
0.07 
0 
0 
0 
1,000 
3,000 
0.35 
2,000 
4,500 
0.65 
500 
1,000 
0.29 
500 
1,500 
0.43 
vented on economic grounds by such factors as coastal infra-
structure. An overview of costs (on an annual basis) for both 
wetland and dryland losses is given in Table 7.12. 
Not all estimates include the side effects of resettling peo-
ple that used to live on the lost land. These costs involve the 
costs of taking up refugees on the one hand and of people 
leaving (and of the hardships they may endure) on the other. 
By combining various sources of information, Tol estimated 
the global annual costs of relocating due to sea level rise at 
some $14 billion. These costs vary between 0.01 and 0.03% of 
GDP for the OECD and the countries in transition, and be-
tween some 0.3 and O.H'A lor the developing regions (Tol, 
1993). 
Accommodation to sea level rise involves not only the 
adaptation of existing structures to a higher sea level but also 
a variety of other responses, such as the elimination of subsi-
dized insurance in industrialized countries for building new 
structures along sea shores. In a state of transition it may also 
involve the need to respond to inundations causing loss of 
life and damage to assets, agriculture, and the environment 
(Penning-Rowscll and Fordham, 1994). 
Protection against sea level rise would involve major costs, 
but estimates of these differ. Tol (1994), assuming a 0.5-m 
rise, estimates annual global coastal defence costs at $9.5 bil-
lion in constant 1988 dollars. IPCC (1994). assuming a 1-m 
rise, computes costs of $10.0 billion per year in constant 1994 
dollars, whereas Ay res and Walter (1991. as cited in Win-
penny, 1994) derive a figure of $50-100 billion in constant 
1981 dollars. Protection costs for an increased intensity of 
storms are not available on a global scale. 
Adaptation to changes in river water discharge involves the 
same choice of options as adaptation to sea level rise: retreat, 
accommodation, or protection. Unfortunately, no global costs 
are available for any of these. For a European example, how-
ever, see Penning-Rowscll and Fordham (1994). 
Adaptation to changing temperatures involves adjustments 
in health care, heating and cooling facilities, and household 
activities, and the adaptation of agriculture and fisheries. Im-
provements to infrastructure, including urban buildings and 
construction as well as water control and storage systems 
2J2 
CIi'male Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
(such as dams, drainage and sewer systems, dikes, and locks), 
would also be needed. 
In agriculture various types of technical responses are 
available. These include changes in farming strategies and 
crop management as well as changes in crop variety, irriga-
tion, fertilizer, and drainage. Some salt-tolerant crops, to give 
an example, can be very successfully grown along the shore-
line of coastal deserts when irrigated with ocean water. Global 
and regional estimates for different levels of adaptation in 
agriculture are presented in Table 7.11. 
Given our still limited understanding of climate change, 
extending the range of policy options rather than refining 
technical responses seems to he the most logical approach at 
the moment. The following options deserve special attention: 
• Capacity building, in both industrialized and develop-
ing countries, to educate people in the former about the 
effects of their activities on carbon-trapping biota and 
people in the latter about responses to the effects of nat-
ural climatic variability and of potential future climate 
changes. 
• 
Changes in land use allocation, including developing 
the potential of tropical plant species. Since most of the 
world's plant food comes from only 20 species, the po-
tential of the vast majority of plant species is still to be 
developed. 
• 
Improvements in food security policies and reduction of 
postharvest losses. Given that postharvest losses - due 
to deficient systems of storage and transport - amount 
in many developing countries to 50% of production, or 
more, major scope for improvement does seem to exist. 
• Conversion to "controlled environment agriculture." 
Massive introduction of integrated "controlled environ-
ment agriculture" in developing countries might easily 
require an investment of several tens of billion of dol-
lars, or billions of dollars per annum if introduced over 
some decades. 
• 
Aquaculture. Climate change affects ocean circulation 
in the upper layers, upwelling. and ice extent, all of 
which affect marine biological production and, hence, 
marine fisheries. One way to adapt is to intensify efforts 
to develop aquaculture. Integrating aquaculture with 
"controlled environment agriculture" has a great poten-
tial, given recent dramatic advances in marine biotech-
nology. The almost sterile, nutrient-rich bottom water 
from Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) sys-
tems holds considerable promise as a culture medium 
for kelp, abalone. oysters, and a range of fish species. 
It should also be mentioned that for marginal groups the 
risks of damages due to climate change will become larger the 
more unequal the land distribution system is. Changes in land 
tenure may. therefore, as a side effect, reduce these risks and 
can be viewed as an indirect adaptation option in themselves. 
As a final remark, it may be pointed out that patterns of 
scatvitv and surplus will ehange across legions and over time, 
presenting new opportunities for trade between nations as 
lhe\ respond to stabilize supply. 
7.5. J Adaptation 
measures in developing 
countries 
In developing countries, as elsewhere, adaptation depends on 
the type and intensity of the impacts of climate change that 
may occur. Depending on these impacts, adaptation may be 
applied immediately or may be delayed. In the case of the 
African countries, however, no real adaptation studies have 
yet been carried out. Current bilateral and multilateral activi-
ties are expected to lead to a more systematic assessment of 
adaptation options and their costs. 
The quest for adaptation options, however, already existed 
long before the global debate on climate change began. Coun-
tries in arid and semi-arid zones have tried to find long- and 
short-term responses to recurrent droughts for some time now, 
while countries in heavy rainfall regions and those affected by 
storms and cyclones in their coastal areas have tried to find 
both structural (engineering) and nonstructural (institutional) 
means for dealing with recurrent floods. 
Short-term responses to recurrent droughts include im-
provements in drought preparedness and focus primarily on 
drought relief and drought recovery activities. Drought relief 
typically includes supplementary food programmes and pro-
grammes to protect and replenish livestock. Drought recovery 
entails such activities as the provision of seed and land pre-
paration supplements to farmers after a period of drought. 
However, even for these short-term responses no systematic 
studies have been carried out. 
Long-term measures include regional and national re-
search efforts to develop drought-resistant crops and breed 
hardy livestock. The incorporation of drought and salt resis-
tance in crop varieties is thus already a major item on the 
research agenda in some developing 
countries. Further 
activities, particularly those strengthening research capacity 
and financial support for research, are necessary and will 
almost certainly prove to be cost-effective. In areas where 
water resource management will become crucial because of 
large changes in rainfall regimes, an improved and more envi-
ronmentally sound infrastructure will be necessary, while poli-
cies encouraging water conservation (e.g., pricing mechanisms in 
which prices reflect social scarcity) will need to be intro-
duced. 
The electricity generation sector, which will also be heav-
ily affected by changes in climatic patterns, has already had to 
develop adaptation responses to problems outside the context 
of climate change. Facing massive river and dam silting and 
below-average precipitation to replenish hydroelectric instal-
lations, some nations have sought to develop alternative base 
load systems, such as coal thermal. A more systematic assess-
ment of these responses will prove to be crucial, particularly 
in the light of the indicated importance of decarbonizing the 
fuel base to reduce emissions. 
7.5.4 Modelling 
adaptation 
Climate change adaptation models have been developed for 
sea level rise, storminess, and changes in river discharges. A 
methodology for assessing damages can be found in Howe el 
al. (1991) and in Green el al. (1994). Penning-Rowsell and 
Fordham (1994) present a general methodology for adapta-
A Generic Assessment of Response Options 
tion, whereas models for flood hazard assessment and man-
agement can be found in Klaus et al. (1994). Coneia el al. 
(1994) present a framework for the analysis of river zone 
management, including the institution setting. 
Two important problems can be mentioned with respect to 
the modelling of adaptation. The first of these includes the 
general set of greenhouse assessment problems, such as the 
handling of time, uncertainty, and discount rate. The second is 
specific to adaptation and involves the valuation of intangi-
bles, such as wetlands and species. A valuation in dollars per 
person for protecting threatened species, for example, cannot 
be compared with a valuation in dollars per kilometre for pro-
tecting threatened coasts. 
7.6 An Integrating Approach 
A major part of the literature on response options focusses on 
the various technologies and their cost-effectiveness within a 
specific option. The options themselves, however, are not 
assessed on the basis of broader comparisons. The main ex-
planation for this "partial" approach is probably the limited 
availability of reliable and accepted data about the options' 
costs and benefits. Moreover, one increasingly recognizes that 
the costs of the various options critically depend on the as-
sumptions employed about the efficiency of the baseline sce-
nario used in the analysis (see also Chapters 8 and 9). 
A truly generic assessment, however, requires an integrat-
ing framework that allows a simultaneous evaluation of the 
various technologies. If emission reduction targets are to be 
achieved in an optimal way, not only economically but also in 
terms of flexibility and spreading of risks, a full picture of all 
the alternatives should be available, so an integrated portfolio 
of options can be determined that minimizes the costs of a 
given level of carbon reduction. (The integrating approach in 
this chapter should not be confused with the integration of 
costs of a given option, or with the integrated modelling ap-
proach treated elsewhere in this report.) One option, drawing 
on economics, is to apply a cost-benefit or cost-effectiveness 
criterion for decision making. That approach is highlighted 
here. Other approaches to decision making are also possible. 
One could rely, for example, on the concept of safe minimum 
standards (which may be particularly important in evaluating 
investments in nuclear power plants). 
The need for an integrating approach is reinforced by the 
fact that many of the options' cost functions appear to show-
internal diseconomies of scale (for some evidence with re-
spect to forestry options see. e.g.. Moulton and Richards. 
1990: Adams et al., 1993; Parks and Hardie, 1992: and 
Qureshi and Sherer. 1994; with respect to energy technolo-
gies, see. for example, Kram, 1994b, and Southern Centre/ 
Riso, 1993; for a broader analysis, see, e.g.. TNO. 1992). 
The implication is. therefore, that, after reaching a certain 
scale of application, the most efficient option will become 
more costly than another option, and this, in turn, may eventu-
ally become more costly than yet another option. The discus-
sion of the marginal costs of CO, abatement in Chapters 8 and 
9 is relevant in this respect. 
The need for an integrating approach is further reinforced 
by evidence that cost functions per option also differ from 
place to place because of regional variations in supply condi-
tions, levels of technology, infrastructure, and other factors. 
Evidence suggests that even within a relatively homogeneous 
area, such as the European Union, marginal emission reduc-
tion cost curves differ significantly (COHERENCE, 1991); 
a fortiori, one can hypothesize that some options can also be 
significantly more cost-effective in one place than in another 
(McKinsey & Company. 1989). 
A number of integrating studies have been carried out. 
Those using a "top-down" methodology attempt to provide a 
comprehensive analysis based on generalized estimates of the 
cost functions of the various options (McKinsey & Company, 
1989: Nordhaus, 1991 a: Jepma and Lee, 1995). Others using a 
"bottom-up" approach commonly pursue a greater level of de-
tail (Jackson. 1991; Rubin et al., 1992; Mills et al., 1991; 
Kram. 1994b).« 
In the "top-down" studies, the regional differences be-
tween the cost functions of the various options provide a 
strong case for their joint implementation, if the ultimate C02 
reduction target is to be achieved with the least cost (see 
also Article 4.2.B of the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change). This result is valid, irrespective of which parties 
take the main responsibility for financing the options. 
However, a number of other considerations may affect 
these conclusions. Often the various sources are not com-
pletely clear as to the degree to which opportunity costs, so-
cial and institutional barriers, and other environmental side 
effects have been included in the cost functions employed. 
Furthermore, as was explained in Section 7.3. cost functions 
may differ depending on whether they have been designed ac-
cording to the engineering efficiency approach or the welfare 
economic approach. These differences will obviously have a 
strong impact on the outcome of integrated assessments. To 
the extent that welfare considerations will cause cost func-
tions to shift upward (especially for countries in transition and 
developing countries) in comparison with those calculated on 
the basis of engineering efficiency, the anticipated scope for 
joint action may be reduced. 
In addition, the global costs of achieving ambitious long-
term emission reduction targets (such as reducing annual 
emissions to half the present level) - commonly estimated at 
several hundreds of billions of dollars per annum -turn out to 
be rather sensitive to the degree to which one assumes scope 
for no-regrets policies, especially in energy conservation, effi-
ciency improvement, and fossil fuel switching. 
The top-down studies also indicate that in the optimal case 
all options must be applied at the same time and in all regions, 
albeit to different degrees. The largest potential in overall 
emission reduction at current cost estimates seems to be in 
forestry (especially in developing countries) and energy 
conservation and efficiency improvement (especially in the 
OECD and Eastern Europe). Renewable energy (particularly 
in developing countries) and fuel switching (especially in 
Eastern Europe if methane leakages can be limited) are also 
important, though to a lesser extent. Needless to say, the opti-
mal mix may easily change as a result of future technological 
progress. 
To illustrate, the results of a linear programming optimiza-
tion procedure have been presented in Table 7.13 (Jepma and 
254 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 7.13. Base case simulation: 
Optimal mix of options for a global emission reduction oflAGtC 
(marginal costs: 
$50/tC) 
Option 
1. Energy conservation and efficiency improvement 
2. Fuel switching 
3. Removal and disposal 
4. Nuclear energy 
5. Renewable energy 
6. Forestry 
Total 
OECD 
250 (250; 250) 
50 
(50; 50) 
100(100; 150) 
50 
(50; 50) 
50 (100; 50) 
250 (250; 250) 
750 (800; 800) 
Level of emission reduction (MtC) 
Eastern Europe 
250 (250; 250) 
50 
(50; 50) 
50 (50; 100) 
50 
(50; 50) 
50(100; 100) 
250 (250; 250) 
700 (750; 800) 
Rest of the World 
100(100; 100) 
50 
(50; 50) 
0 
(0; 50) 
0 
(0; 50) 
100(150; 150) 
700 (550; 400) 
950 (850; 800) 
Total 
600 
150 
150 
100 
200 
1200 
(600; 600) 
(150; 150) 
(150; 300) 
(100; 150) 
(350; 300) 
(1050; 900) 
2400 (2400; 2400) 
Note: Figures in parentheses give the results for a 50% reduction in the marginal costs of renewables and for a doubling of the marginal costs 
of forestry respectively over all intervals. 
Source: Jepma and Lee (1995). 
Lee, 1995). The procedure starts from a predetermined emis-
sion reduction target and is applied to the cost functions of the 
various options per region, featuring stepwise increasing mar-
ginal costs and based on data from a combination of sources 
(McKinsey & Company, 1989; Jackson, 1991; Mills et ai, 
1991; and Rubin et at., 1992). The table shows the optimal 
mix of options both in terms of types of options and of regions 
of application if a medium-term emission reduction target of 
-2.4 GtC is to he achieved. (The figures in parentheses show 
the outcomes if the marginal costs of the renewable option are 
assumed to be 509r of those in the base case and if the mar-
ginal costs of the forestry option arc doubled compared to the 
base case. This sensitivity test suggests that the outcomes are 
fairly robust. Obviously, various other sensitivity tests, e.g., 
on the impact of changing lifestyles, could be carried out.) 
Kiam (1994b) is a detailed integrating response study 
in the bottom-up tradition. Here an overall assessment was 
made on the basis of long-term bottom-up country models 
(MARKAL) for nine Western countries, which integrate more 
than 70 technologies (including more than 30 supply tech-
nologies and more than 40 end-use technologies). A range of 
targets for CO,-emission reductions by 2020 was tested to de-
termine the mix of energy technologies that would produce 
the reductions at the least total energy system cost. The results 
revealed considerable diversity in the optimal paths of the 
different countries in terms of the mix of energy technolo-
gies and the cost and amounts of reductions that could be 
achieved. This diversity resulted from the future energy needs 
of the various countries, as well as their existing energy sys-
tems, natural resources, technology options, and energy poli-
cies (especially with regard to hydroelectric and nuclear 
power). 
Second, the study calculated the marginal costs of CO, re-
duction for the 1990-2020 period for several countries (Figure 
7.3). The results clearly show that the marginal costs vary 
greatly among the countries according to their circumstances. 
If one accepts that the most efficient allocation of emission re-
ductions would he at the point of equal marginal costs, these 
results provide further justification for implementing options 
on a joint or cooperative basis. 
There appeal to he no similar detailed integrating response 
studies dealing with the developing countries, (liven that the 
c o 
o 
3 
•a y 
C4 - s 
o o 
u u 
<+H *-; 
0 ^ 4 
t/5 GO 
5s 
Kj 
c 
oo 
$OUUi-
$500 -
$400-
$300 -
$200-
$100 -
Norway 
Belgium 
S 
o 
-30 -20 -10 
0 
10 20 
30 40 
50 
CO.Reduction in 2020 
(% from 1990 level) 
Source: Kram (1994a). 
Figure 7.3: Marginal costs of CO, emission reduction. 
level of economic development and other circumstances vary 
greatly among developing countries, the marginal costs of 
emission reduction for them are likely to be very context-
specific. 
7.7. Regional Differences and 
International Cooperation 
Though the industrialized countries constitute only 25% of 
the world's population, they account for 72% of the current 
global energy-related carbon emissions and some 80-85% of 
cumulative historical carbon emissions (Fujii, 1990). Clearly, 
such numbers require the industrialized countries to assume 
their historic responsibility, which has been translated into the 
concept of "common but differentiated responsibilities" men-
tioned in Article 3.1 of the FCCC. This has also been elabo-
rated in Principle 7 of the Rio Declaration, which states: "The 
developed countries acknowledge the responsibility that they 
hear in the international pursuit of sustainable development in 
view of the pressures their societies place on the global envi-
A Generic Assessment of Response Options 
Table 7.14. Comparison of the 1990 development and energy situations in the main (sub-)regions 
2JJ 
Region 
West 
North America 
Western Europe 
JANZ 
East 
Eastern Europe 
ex-USSR 
North 
Africa 
North and 
South Africa 
sub-Sahara 
Asia 
China 
India 
Other 
Latin America 
Brazil 
Mexico 
Other 
Middle East 
1 
South 
17 
31 
World 
6 
25 
Tr 
(%) 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
37 
5 
61 
15 
6 
25 
23 
15 
30 
5 
9 
1 
33 
36 
1 
Co 
22 
22 
22 
21 
25 
46 
20 
23 
21 
na 
na 
49 
72 
41 
19 
4 
5 
5 
4 
Fossil Fuels (%) 
Oi 
41 
38 
43 
51 
29 
25 
31 
38 
27 
na 
na 
25 
15 
23 
39 
45 
34 
49 
51 
64 
10 
20 
NG 
19 
24 
16 
12 
36 
19 
40 
24 
9 
na 
na 
4 
2 
4 
8 
14 
2 
22 
20 
32 
74 
81 
I F 
82 
83 
80 
84 
91 
90 
91 
85 
57 
92 
30 
78 
89 
68 
66 
63 
41 
75 
74 
Al 
(%) 
16 
15 
19 
16 
8 
9 
8 
14 
6 
3 
9 
7 
5 
7 
11 
22 
29 
20 
17 
98 
10 
13 
l E n e r 
(Mtoe) 
4296 
2289 
1456 
551 
1745 
352 
1393 
6040 
360 
154 
206 
1475 
718 
253 
504 
556 
185 
142 
228 
1 
2624 
8664 
Popul 
GNP 
(billion 
(million) 
US$) 
849 
276 
430 
144 
414 
125 
289 
1263 
642 
150 
492 
2810 
1139 
853 
817 
448 
150 
89 
209 
233 
4029 
5292 
14840 
5738 
5901 
3202 
3047 
388 
2660 
17888 
385 
227 
158 
1237 
393 
287 
557 
842 
375 
170 
297 
129 
370 
2835 
704 
20723 
3916 
GNP ($ per 
capita) 
17473 
20809 
13726 
22279 
7367 
3101 
9215 
14163 
600 
1507 
322 
440 
345 
337 
681 
1880 
2495 
1920 
1421 
2860 
0.65 
1.64 
Toe per 
capita 
5.06 
8.30 
3.39 
3.83 
4.22 
2.81 
4.83 
4.78 
0.56 
1.02 
0.42 
0.53 
0.63 
0.30 
0.62 
1.24 
1.23 
1.60 
1.09 
Toe per 
thousand 
US$ 
0.29 
0.40 
0.25 
0.17 
0.57 
0.91 
0.52 
0.34 
0.93 
0.68 
1.30 
1.19 
1.83 
0.88 
0.90 
0.66 
0.49 
0.83 
0.77 
1.81 
0.63 
0.93 
0.42 
Note: Tr = traditional (woodfuel, crop residues, and animal dung); Co = coal; Oi = Oil; NG = natural gas; IF = total fossils; Al = alternatives 
(nuclear, hydro, wind, geothermal, etc) (all % of total energy); lEner = total energy; (M)toe = (million) tons of oil equivalent; popul = popu-
lation; GNP = gross national product in 1989; na = not available. Western Europe = OECD Europe (includes Turkey); Eastern Europe = non-
OECD Europe (includes Cyprus, Gibraltar, and Malta); JANZ = Japan, Australia, and New Zealand. 
Source: Ettinger (1994), based on BP Statistical Review 1992 and World Resources 1992-93. 
ronment and of the technologies and financial resources they 
command." 
Table 7.14 compares economic development and energy 
use in the main regions of the world as of 1990. This compari-
son highlights the following striking differences between and 
within regions and may serve to clarify why the involvement 
of the developing countries in greenhouse policy formulation 
and implementation is imperative: 
• GNP per capita varies from an average of $440 for Asia 
to $17,473 for the West, a ratio of 1:40. The differences 
can also be large within regions: sub-Saharan Africa has 
a per capita GDP of $322 as against $1,507 for North 
and South Africa together (a ratio of 1:5). 
• The relative use of traditional energy (woodfuel, crop 
residues, and animal dung) varies from 1% for the East 
to 37% for Africa. Within Africa traditional fuels ac-
count for 5% of energy use for all Africa and 61% for 
sub-Saharan Africa (1:12). 
• The relative use of fossil fuels varies from 57% of total 
energy use for Africa to 98% for the Middle East: within 
Africa it amounts to 30% for sub-Saharan Africa and 
92% for all Africa (1:3). 
The relative use of nuclear plus renewables varies from 
1% for the Middle East to 22% for Latin America. 
Within Africa it amounts to 3% for all Africa and 9% for 
sub-Saharan Africa. 
The share of the main energy source as a percentage of 
total energy use varies from 36% for the East (natural 
gas) to 64% for the Middle East (oil). For Africa the 
main source is traditional fuels, for Asia coal, and for 
the West and Latin America oil. 
In terms of energy use per capita, the regions vary from 
0.53 tonnes of oil equivalent (toe) for Asia to 5.06 toe 
for the West, or by a ratio of 1:10. Between Western 
subregions it still varies from 3.39 for Western Europe 
to 8.30 toe for Northern America. 
Energy intensity (in toc/$1000 GNP) varies from 0.29 
for the West to 1.19 for Asia (1:4). Between Western 
subregions, it varies from 0.17 for Japan/Australia/New 
Zealand to 0.4 for Northern America. However, energy 
intensity in toe/$ 1000 GNP is an unreliable yardstick 
for comparisons between regions, especially between 
developed and developing countries, because of differ-
ences between nominal GNP and real GDP in purchas-
2J<5 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
ing power parities (PPP). If the energy intensity data in 
the (able were expressed in toe/$l()00 PPP (correction 
based on UNDP Human Development Report, 1993 
data), the energy intensity of the developing countries 
would become 0.35 but that of the developed countries 
would remain 0.34. However, this would still ignore the 
relatively higher energy content of the developing coun-
tries' imports and the lower energy contents of its ex-
ports. If these two factors are taken into account, energy 
intensity in the developing countries would be higher 
than thai in toe/$IOOO PPP but probably lower than 
that in nominal terms (Eltinger. 1994). 
Most scenarios suggest that during the next decades the 
growth in carbon emissions will increasingly take place in the 
developing countries. According to the data summarized in 
Alcamo el al. (1995), the mean world annual growth rate of 
CO, emissions for over twenty scenarios is 1.56%. the corre-
sponding mean rate for China is 2.837r, for Eastern Europe 
and ex-USSR 0.76%, and for Africa 3.85%. Consequently, ac-
cording to one of the scenarios in that study. ECS 92 (dynam-
ics as usual), the share of developing countries in global CO, 
emissions is projected to reach 46% by 2020 (as compared to 
34% for the OECD and 2()7< for countries in transition). How-
ever, according to the various World Energy Council (WEC) 
scenarios, the developing countries' share in 2020 would be 
over 60%. In any case, it seems most likely that the develop-
ing countries as a group will start to become the major CO, 
emitters within a few decades. This picture is reinforced if the 
emissions of CH, from wetland rice cultivation and from en-
teric fermentation are also taken into account. 
At the same time it is clear that, although the scope for ef-
fectively applying policy options in the developing countries 
seems to be significant (for a recent evaluation of various 
technical options at the country level, see UNEP, 1994), so are 
the obstacles to be encountered. Indeed, the availability of 
technical options for higher energy efficiency, to give just one 
example, does not guarantee their adoption on a large scale. 
There may need to be a significant stimulus to achieve wide-
spread efficiency improvements, particularly in markets char-
acterized by high implicit discount rates. But a combination 
of education, financial incentives, and minimum efficiency 
standards coupled with freedom from distortionary policies 
can effectively transform energy use markets so that large en-
ergy savings and emission reductions are achieved along with 
net economic savings (Geller and Nadel. 1994). 
The literature on the adoption and diffusion of technology 
clearly indicates that while profitability is probably the most 
straightforward determinant of the adoption of a new idea, a 
new technology, or new equipment, various other factors may 
also he important. A review o\' recent research into the diffu-
sion of energy technologies in developing countries shows 
that there are many financial, institutional, and other factors 
that influence the successful adoption of these technologies 
(Barnett. 1990; Ghai, 1994). In Africa, for example, social re-
sistance has impeded the diffusion of drought-tolerant crop 
varieties, and such resistance could also inhibit the adoption 
of new energy technologies. Often the initial awareness of 
benefits and new opportunities may be contingent on such 
factors as winning the support of women for more energy-
efficient cooking stoves. 
Moreover, one necessary ingredient for the adoption of 
new technology, namely a pool of local skills to draw on, may 
be lacking or inadequate in many cases, so that even proven 
technologies may spread rather slowly in these countries. For 
all these reasons an adequate and timely process of energy ef-
ficiency institution building seems imperative, especially in 
developing countries. There is evidence that the existence of 
such separate institutions has helped Indonesia, South Korea, 
and Thailand, for instance, make greater headway in the scope 
and coverage of their energy efficiency policies and pro-
grammes (Byrne et al., 1991). 
Endnotes 
1. The "engineering efficiency" approach determines the financial 
costs and benefits of various options to an individual agency or other 
entity in terms of CO, emission reduction/absorption; in the "welfare 
economics" approach the broadly defined costs and benefits of op-
tions to society are determined. These two approaches will be further 
discussed in Section 7.3. 
2. For an example of energy conservation, see, for example, Rubin 
et al. (1992). Here 25% of employer-provided parking places are 
eliminated and the remainder taxed to reduce solo commuting by 15-
20% in the U.S. Net costs are estimated to be -$22/tC (a negative 
cost is the same as a saving). 
3. It may seem that, although the above categories are conceptually 
distinct, in real life they are not strictly mutually exclusive: that is. 
measures arc conceivable that can be classified in more than one cat-
egory. An example would be the plantation of forests or biomass 
used for energy purposes. These measures seem to fall into both cat-
egory 3 (renewable energy) and category 6 (enhancing carbon sinks). 
However, this is not the case. The measures are an example of how 
easily markedly different processes that underlie the measures can be 
confused. 
In the case of forests, broadly three types of measures are con-
ceivable to fix carbon: (1) to afforest new lands to let the forest sim-
ply mature; (2) to plant forest and sequester the timber derived from 
it: and (3) to use the wood for energy purposes on a sustainable basis, 
thereby avoiding the alternative use of fossil fuels. In the following. 
(1) and (2) are discussed in Section 7.4.6 (forestry options), whereas 
(3) belongs to the renewable/biomass category. With respect to (3). it 
should be borne in mind that sometimes a significant amount of addi-
tional energy may be required to turn the biomass into energy. This 
is. for instance, the case for the production of ethanol from coin. 
where additional energy requirements are of the order of the energy 
content of the produced ethanol itself (Swisher et al., 1993). 
Another example would be to classify an Integrated Gasification 
Combined Cycle (IGCC) or the hydrocarb process in both category 1 
(energy saving and efficiency) and category 3 (clean fossil technolo-
gies). In the present chapter, both are considered primarily clean 
technologies and both change the energy conversion process to the 
extent of violating the definition for the energy saving and efficiency 
category. However, ultimately no clear distinction can he made a\ 
modifications in the energy conversion process become minor (due 
to further technological progress). 
4. For instance, studies for Poland, Hungary, and the former USSR 
indicate that a combination of energy efficiency improvements, fuel 
substitution, and structural change (Chandler. 1990). could reduce 
carbon emissions by 40-60% from base case projected levels by 
2030. In the case of Poland. Sitnicki et al. (1990) suggest that base-
A Generic 
Assessment 
of Response 
Options 
2J7 
line emissions of 260 Mt could be reduced to 117 Mt by 2030; for the 
former USSR, Makarov and Bashmakov (1990) suggest that a reduc-
tion of 40% would be feasible. 
5. For a more detailed discussion of top-down versus bottom-up 
modelling, see Chapters 8 and 9. 
6. The WEC distinguishes four scenarios for the energy mix in 
2020: Scenario A assumes high annual world economic growth (es-
pecially in developing countries), high annual energy intensity re-
duction, and very high total energy demand; scenario B 1 assumes 
moderate annual world economic growth rates, moderate annual en-
ergy intensity reduction, and high possible total energy demand; sce-
nario B, the reference scenario, assumes high annual energy intensity 
reduction; scenario C assumes moderate annual economic growth, 
very high energy intensity reductions, and relatively low total energy 
demand in 2020. 
7. Here a set of definitions taken from Rogner et at. (1993) is used 
to distinguish between different levels of geological certainty and 
economical and technical feasibility. The resource base is defined 
to consist of (proven) reserves and resources. Reserves are those oc-
currences that are identified, measured, and known to be economi-
cally and technically recoverable at current prices and using current 
technologies. Resources are the remainder of occurrences with less 
certain geological and economic characteristics. Additional quanti-
ties with unknown certainty of occurrence or with unknown or no 
economic significance at present are referred to simply as occurrences. 
8. Total global energy consumption amounted to 10 TWyr in 1990, 
whereas identified fossil energy reserves are estimated at 1.280 
TWyr (Rogner et at. 1993). Obviously, the use of an aggregate figure 
for fossil fuels (mostly coal reserves) should not obscure the fact that 
the corresponding time span for the individual fossil fuels differs 
widely. The ratio of proven reserves to annual production (R/P) is es-
timated at about 55 years for natural gas. 45 years for oil, and 235 
years for coal. 
9. IPCC carbon emission rates are 15.3. 20.0, and 25.8 kg of carbon 
per GJ for natural gas, crude oil, and (bituminous) coal respectively 
(IPCC, 1995). 
10. This is because transport and combustion technologies are 
roughly the same for natural gas and hydrogen (Ft,). 
11. Assuming a 100-year lime horizon. For the various ways the 
GWP measure for methane could be calculated, see, for example. 
Reilly and Richards (1993). 
12. This would imply that 3-41% (for distribution) and 1-63% (Re-
production) of the carbon reduction from a 100% coal-to-natural-gas 
fuel switch would be offset by the detrimental effects of leakage. 
13. BEP = A//(MER 
X GWP) + A/, with BEP = break-even point. A 
= (25.8-15.3) X 3.67. MER = mass:energy ratio for methane = 22 
Tg CH4/EJ, GWP = global warming potential index of methane = 
24.5. The term A is the additional mass of carbon dioxide released by 
coal compared to methane per GJ of energy and is composed of the 
difference between the carbon emission rates of coal and methane 
(25.8 and 15.3 kgC/GJ respectively; sec note 9) times the mass ratio 
of COyC (3.67). The calculation assumes a zero leakage rate of 
methane in coal production. 
14. See. for example. Jackson (1991) for an analysis of cost-
effectiveness in the UK, explicitly incorporating CH4 leakage. 
15. In this respect, electricity and hydrogen appear as ideal intermit-
tent energy carriers from a technological point of view. 
16. See, for example. IPCC (1991). Johansson et al. (1993). WEC 
Commission (1993). or WEC (1994). With respect to the classifica-
tion of renewables. it should he noted that the classification of geo-
thermal as a renewable resource is technically not correct, as the 
Earth's core will slowly but surely cool down. 
17. Solar can broadly be subdivided into solar thermal, solar archi-
tecture, solar thermal-electric, photovoltaic systems, and thermo-
chemical and photochemical systems. Wind and hydro are relatively 
homogeneous energy technologies, the largest differences stemming 
from scale of operation. Here, a distinction is made between 
small/medium-scale and large-scale conversion systems. In contrast, 
biomass appears to be the most complex of all technologies. A wide 
range of conversion technologies exists, depending on the type of 
feedstock used and the form of energy output required. Geothermal 
consists of hydrothermal. hot dry rock, geopressured, and magma re-
sources technologies. Current ocean technologies encompass tidal, 
wave, biomass, and salt and thermal gradient technologies. 
18. Different approaches describe the concept of "practicable," i.e., 
realizable, potential. The most common categorizations are physical, 
technical, and economic, in that order, with each ensuing category 
being a subset of the earlier mentioned one. The physical potential 
would denote the maximum potential that is constrained by geologi-
cal, geophysical, and meteorological factors only. Technical poten-
tial would refer to that part of physical potential thai can be exploited 
given the state of technology at hand. Finally, the remainder of tech-
nical potential after excluding what is not deemed feasible due to 
prevailing economic constraints (such as a prohibitive level of costs, 
institutional constraints in the energy markets, etc.) would pass for 
economic potential. Notice that, for the present purpose, the former 
of the three can be considered constant in time, whereas the others 
prevail only at a certain moment. 
Practicable potential would now be defined as somewhere be-
tween technical and economic potential. This is because the two do 
not hold independently but are interlinked in time; e.g.. technical po-
tential is enlarged by investments that stimulate 
technological 
progress. Conversely, the impact of improvements of, say, silicon 
films in photovoltaic systems on the price of solar energy is obvious. 
19. For example, wind energy costs depend heavily on wind speed 
and solar energy costs on solar irradiance, features that are not 
equally favourable for all locations, seasons, or times of day. 
20. It is not possible to derive cost developments for individual sub-
classes of technologies from the listed figures, as they are aggregated 
into ranges of similar technologies. The same holds for disparities 
stemming from differences among sites. It should be realized that 
these limitations significantly hamper direct comparison. However, 
greater detail was avoided for the purpose of clarity. 
21. Estimates are 21.3-29.6% in 2020 (WEC, 1993), 15% (6% of 
which comes from hydro) in 2020 (Grubler et «/., 1993a), and close 
to 43% in 2025 (Johansson et at.. 1993). According to Grubler et al. 
(1993a) the latter estimate is most likely too high. It would imply an 
unprecedented rate of change of technology and infrastructure. For 
comparison, it took about 80 years for the market share of oil to grow 
to 40% of global primary energy supply (Grubler et ul. 1993a). In the 
past the mean interval for replacing most technological systems has 
been about 30 to 40 years. 
22. For an extensive discussion of the nuclear option, see Volume 2 
of this report. 
23. Relatively minor fossil fuel inputs are used to support the overall 
functioning of breeder reactors. 
24. Recovery of carbon at power plants has the advantage of remov-
ing carbon from energy before it is distributed to highly dispersed 
end users. 
25. As the use of coal and natural gas is predominant in power plants, 
virtually no technologies are based on oil. 
26. In an ICGCC coal is converted prior to combustion. After some 
intermediate steps. CO\ and H, are obtained. The former can be ex-
tracted by absorption at a 98% rale and the latter can be used either 
directly in the power plant to generate electricity or as a carbon-lean 
fuel to be distributed to end-user sectors, like households, industry, 
or transport. Modifying a conventional gas- or coal-fired boiler in-
volves changing the oxidant from air to pure oxygen. The gas turbine 
2j& 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
of an ICGCC or a STICi (steam-injected gas turbine) can be modified 
by changing the combustion medium into an 0,/CO, medium. 
27. Cost information suggests that absorption and oxyfuel combus-
tion arc the most attractive. It appears that absorption is cheaper for 
conventional coal-derived flue gases than for natural gas flue gases. 
An ICGCC is promising, though it is not clear yet whether it will re-
place proven conventional pulverized coal-fired installations. 
28. In enhanced oil recovery, part of the injected CO, reenters the at-
mosphere, and in food packaging CO, is released within days or 
weeks. Obviously, insofar as CO, is released into the atmosphere, 
these applications, though perhaps commercially interesting, are of 
no significant long-term interest from an abatement point of view. 
29. Applications of carbon (dioxide) storage exist in the food, chem-
ical manufacturing, metal processing, and oil industries. Enhanced 
oil recovery, in which carbon dioxide is pumped into the production 
well to increase recovery rates, has the highest potential. 
30. The combined potential t)( the other applications is limited to 
several hundreds of MtC per year. Storage capacity of the ocean is 
very uncertain, as it already contains nearly 40,000 GtC as (dis-
solved) CO, (compared with some 750 GtC in the atmosphere). 
Moreover, most of the injected carbon will come out after fifty to 
several hundreds of years, depending on the depth and method of in-
jection. There may also he objections to ocean storage because of po-
tential environmental impacts from the methods used. 
31. Here, forestry measures are distinguished from the use of bio-
mass as a renewable energy resource. Forests, like biomass, could be 
classified as a renewable energy resource if harnessed for energy 
purposes and harvested in such a way that supply is practically un-
limited and no additional energy is required. This means that the 
plantation is rotated after harvest and net energy inputs for the en-
ergy extraction and conversion process are negative, or gross energy 
inputs are easily paid out of the extracted energy. 
Inherently, net carbon emissions (removal) will be zero for such 
applications o\' forests or biomass, since the carbon emitted by com-
bustion is exactly offset by the carbon removed in the next genera-
tion of plantations. Net carbon emissions are reduced only if the 
forest or biomass energy substitutes for fossil energy. 
32. Afforestation is defined to apply to lands that have not been cov-
ered by forests for the last 50 years. In contrast, reforestation applies 
to lands that were cleared no longer than 50 years ago. 
33. Sec Volume 2, Chapter 24, Management o\' Forests for Green-
house Gas Emissions, for a detailed assessment of the subclasses of 
forestry measures, the potential quantity of carbon that could be con-
served and sequestered by forestry measures, the effects of climatic 
and demographic changes on the potential amount of carbon conserva-
tion and sequestration, and the new research directions needed to im-
prove the assessment and development of practical forestry strategies. 
34. Besides carbon stored in the forest wood itself, soil carbon and 
carbon in other biomass growing in the forest are included. 
35. Cumulative uptake refers to the total amount of carbon stored af-
ter a certain period, usually after the forest has reached maturity and 
no (net) carbon is absorbed any more: in other words, the incremen-
tal uptake is nil. Annual uptake is usually described by one figure 
only, this being an average annual uptake rate. However, for planta-
tions logged before maturity, it should be noted that the absorption 
rate is dependent on the age of the forest. In contrast to widespread 
belief, annual uptake of a newly planted forest is in general not great-
est in the first years, but only alter the forest has reached an interme-
diate age. More precisely, accumulated uptake is an S-shaped growth 
function of time (NiKson. ll'S2; Cooper. IC)S3). 
36. OpportunilN costs for land would in theory largely be reflected in 
land market rents. 
37. For an o\er\iew of the costs of greenhouse damages, see also 
Chapter 0 of this report. 
38. Note that the distinction between bottom-up and top-down mod-
elling employed here does not coincide with a similar distinction 
elsewhere in the literature, where top-down approaches are associ-
ated with macroeconomic modelling techniques assuming fixed be-
haviourial patterns, and bottom-up approaches with identifying the 
(technical) opportunities presented by a changeable world. 
References 
Abdel-Khalek, G., 1988: Income and price elasticities of energy 
consumption in Egypt: A time series analysis, Energy 
Economics, 
10(1), 47-57. 
Adams, R.M., D.M. Adams, C.C. Chang, B.A. McCarl, and J.M. 
Callaway, 1993: Sequestering carbon on agricultural land: A pre-
liminary analysis of social cost and impacts on timber markets. 
Contemporary 
Policy Issues, 11(1), 76-87. 
Alcanio, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Grubler, T. Morita, and A. 
Sugandhy, 1995: An evaluation of the IPCC IS92 emission sce-
narios. In Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate 
Change 1994, J.T. Houghton, E.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoe-
sung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites. N. Harris, and K. Maskell, 
eds„ pp. 247-304, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Asaduzzaman, M., 1995: Energy savings potentials, issues and con-
straints, paper presented at the international conference on Joint 
Implementation, Groningen, 1-3 June 1994, The Feasibility 
of 
Joint Implementation, 
C.J. Jepma, ed., Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Asian Development Bank, 1994: Climate change in Asia: 
Bangla-
desh, country report, Manila. 
Ayres, R.U., and J. Walter, 1991: The greenhouse effect: Damages, 
costs and abatement, Environmental 
and Resource Economics, 
1, 
237-270. 
Baldwin, S.F., 1986: Biomass stoves: Engineering 
design, 
develop-
ment, and dissemination, 
VITA, Arlington, VA. 
Barnett, A., 1990: The diffusion of energy technology in the rural 
areas of developing countries: A synthesis of recent experience. 
World Development, 
18(4), 539-553. 
Benedick, RE., 1991: Ozone diplomacy, 
Harvard University Press. 
Cambridge. MA. 
Blok, K., C. Hendriks, and W.C. Turkenburg, 1989: The role of car-
bon dioxide removal in the reduction of the greenhouse effect. 
Energy technologies for reducing emissions of greenhouse gases -
Proceedings 
of an experts' seminar, Volume 2, 135-156. IEA/ 
OECD. Paris. 
Blok, K., J. Farla, C. Hendriks. and W. Turkenburg, 1991: Carbon 
dioxide removal: A review, paper presented at the International 
Symposium on Environmentally Sound Energy Technologies and 
their Transfer to Developing Countries and European Economies 
in Transition (ESETT91), October 1991, ENI - San Donata Mil-
anese. Italy. 
Blok, K... E. Worrell. R. Culenaere. and W. Turkenburg, 1993: The 
cost-effectiveness of CO, emission reduction achieved by energy 
conservation. Energy Policy, 21, 656-667. 
Brown, S.. C A S . Hall, W. Knabe. J. Raich, M.C. Trexler. and 
P. Woomer, 1993: Tropical forests: Their past, present, and poten-
tial future role in the terrestrial carbon budget. Water, Air. and Sail 
Pollution. 70, 71-94. 
BTG (Biomass Technology Group). 1994: Potential woodfuel pro-
duction in developing countries for power generation in The 
Netherlands. University of Twente. Enschede. The Netherlands. 
Byrne, J.. S. Letendre. C. Govindarajalu. and Y D . Wang. 1996: 
Evaluating the economics of photovoltaics in a demand-side 
management role. Energy Policy, forthcoming. 
A Generic 
Assessment 
of Response 
Options 
259 
Byrne, J., Y D . Wang, K. Hum, I. Han. J. Kim. and R. WykolT, 1991: 
Energy and environmental sustainability in East and Southeast 
Asia, 
IEEE 
Technology 
and 
Society 
Magazine, 
Winter 
1991/1992,21-29. 
Byrne, J., S. Letendre, R. Nigra, and YD. Wang, 1994: PV-DSM as a 
green investment strategy, Proceedings of the Fifth National Con-
ference on Integrated 
Resource Planning, pp. 272-285, National 
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners. Washington, DC. 
Canned, M., 1982: World forest hiomass and primary 
production 
data, Academic Press, London. 
Chandler, W.U., 1990: Carbon emissions control strategies, 
World 
Wildlife Fund, Washington, DC. 
Cline, W.R., 1992a: The economics 
of global warming, Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC. 
Cline, W.R., 1992b: Global warming 
- The benefits 
of 
emission 
abatement, 
OECD, Paris. 
COHERENCE, 1991: Cost-effectiveness 
analysis of CO, 
reduction 
options, Synthesis 
Report, Report for the CEC CO, Crash Pro-
gramme, Commission of the European Community, Brussels. 
Cooper, C.F., 1983: Carbon storage in managed forests, 
Canadian 
Journal of Forestry Research, 13, 155-166. 
Correia, F.N., M. da Graca Saraiva, J. Rocha. M. Fordham, F. 
Bernardo, I. Ramos, Z. Marques, and L. Soczka, 1994: The plan-
ning of flood alleviation measures: Interface with the public. In 
Floods across Europe: Flood hazard assessment, 
modelling 
and 
management, 
B.C. Penning-Rowsell and M.H. Fordham, eds., 
Middlesex University Press, London. 
COSEPUP (Committee on Science, Engineering and Public Policy). 
1991: Policy implications 
of greenhouse 
warming. Report of the 
Mitigation Panel. U.S. National Academy of Sciences, U.S. Na-
tional Academy of Engineering and Institute of Medicine, U.S. 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
DeCicco, J., and M. Ross, 1993: An updated assessment of the near-
term potential for improving automotive fuel ecomony, American 
Council for an Energy-Efficiency Economy, Washington, DC. 
Dessus, B., B. Devin, and F. Pharabod. 1992: World potential of re-
newable energies. In Houille blanche, 1, 21-70. 
Dixon, R.K., K.J. Andrasko, F.A. Sussman, M.A. Livinson, M.C. 
Trexler, and T.S. Vinson. 1993: Forest sector carbon offset pro-
jects: Near-term opportunities to mitigate greenhouse gas emis-
sions, Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 
70,561-577. 
Dronkers, J., R. Boeye, and R. Misdorp. 1990. Socio-economic, le-
gal, institutional, cultural and environmental aspects of measures 
for the adaptation of coastal zones at risk to sea level rise. In 
Changing climate and the coast, vol. 1: Adaptive responses 
and 
their economic, 
environmental, 
amd institutional 
implications, 
J.G. Titus, ed., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Economic and Social Commmission for Asia and the Pacific 
(ESCAP), 1991: Energy policy implications 
of the climatic 
effects 
of fossil fuel use in the Asia-Pacific 
region, Bangkok. 
Ettinger, J. van, T.H. Jansen, and C.J. Jepma, 1991: Climate, envi-
ronment and development. The European 
Journal of 
Develop-
ment Research, 3(1), 108-133. 
Ettinger, J. van, 1994: Sustainable use of energy, a normative energy 
scenario: 1990-2050. Energy Policy. 22, 111-118. 
Ewing, A.J., 1985: Energy efficiency in the pulp and paper 
industry 
with emphasis 
on developing 
countries, 
World Bank Technical 
Paper No. 34, Washington, DC. 
Faeth, P.. C. Cort, and R. Livernash, 1993: Evaluating 
the carbon 
sequestration 
benefits of sustainable forest projects in developing 
countries. World Resources Institute Report, Washington, DC. 
Fankhauser, S., 1992: Global warming damage costs: Some mone-
tary estimates, CSERGE Working Paper GEC 92-29, Centre for 
Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment, Lon-
don and Norwich. 
Fankhauser, S.. 1993: The economic costs of global warming: Some 
monetary estimates. In Costs, impacts and benefits of CO, mitiga-
tion, Y Kaya, N. Nakicenovic, WD. Nordhatis, and F.L. Toth, 
eds.. Proceedings of the IIASA Workshop on the Costs, Impacts, 
and Benefits of CO, Mitigation, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Fankhauser, S., 1994a: Global warming damage costs: Some mone-
tary estimates (revised version), Centre for Social and Economic 
Research on the Global Environment, London and Norwich. 
Fankhauser, S., 1994b: 77;<j economic costs of global warming 
dam-
age: A survey. Centre for Social and Economic Research on the 
Global Environment, London and Norwich. 
Fankhauser, S., 1995: Valuing climate change: 
The economics 
of 
the greenhouse effect. Earthscan. London. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization), 1991: FAO's 1990 re-
assessment of tropical forest cover, Nature and Resources, 27(2), 
21-26. 
Fischer, G.. K. Frohberg, M.L. Parry, and C. Rosenzweig, 1993: Cli-
mate change, world food supply, demand and trade. Global 
Envi-
ronmental Change, 4( 1), 7-23. 
Fujii, Y, 1990: Assessment 
of CO-, emission reduction 
technologies 
and building of a global energy balance model, Kaya Laboratory, 
Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Tokyo, 
Japan. 
Geller, H.S., 1994: Review of long term energy efficiency 
potential 
throughout the world. American Council for an Energy Efficient 
Economy. Washington, DC. 
Geller, H.S., and S. Nadel, 1994: Market transformation strategies to 
promote end-use efficiency. Annual Review of Energy and Envi-
ronment 19: 301-346, Annual Reviews Inc.. Palo Alto, CA. 
Geller, H.S., and D. Zylbersztajn, 1991: Energy intensity trends in 
Brazil, Annual Review of Energy and Environment, 
16:179-203, 
Annual Reviews Inc.. Palo Alto, CA. 
Ghai, D., 1994: Environment, livelihood and empowerment, Devel-
opment and Change, 25(1) (January), 1-11. 
Goldemberg, J.. T.B. Johansson, A.K.N. Reddy, and R.H. Williams, 
1988: Energy for a sustainable 
world, Wiley Eastern Limited, 
New Delhi, India. 
Green, C.H.. A. van der Veen, E. Wierstra, and E.G. Penning-
Rowsell, 
1994: Vulnerability 
refined: Analysing full 
flood 
impacts. In Floods across Europe: 
Flood hazard 
assessment, 
modelling 
and management, 
E C . Penning-Rowsell and M.H. 
Fordham, eds., Middlesex University Press, London. 
Griibler, A., and N. Nakicenovic. 1992: International burden shar-
ing in greenhouse gas reduction. Environment Working Paper No. 
55, World Bank Environment Department. Washington, DC. 
Griibler, A., S. Messner, L. Schrattenholzer. and A. Schafer, 1993a: 
Emission reduction at the global level. In Long term strategies 
for 
mitigating global warming. N. Nakicenovic, ed.. Special Issue of 
Energy - The International 
Journal. 18(5), 539-581. 
Griibler, A.. S. Nilsson, and N. Nakicenovic. 1993b: Enhancing car-
bon sinks. In Long term strategies for mitigating global 
warming, 
N. Nakicenovic, ed.. Special Issue of Energy - The 
International 
Journal. 18(5). 499-522. 
Gupta, S.. and N. Khunna, 1991: India country paper. In 
Collabora-
tive study on strategies to limit CO, emissions in Asia and Brazil, 
P. Ghosh, A. Achanta, P. Bhandari, M. Damodaran, and N. 
Khanna. eds.. Asian Energy Institute, New Delhi, India. 
Guzman, O., A. Yunez-Naude. and M.S. Wionczck, 1987: Energy ef-
ficiency and conservation 
in Mexico, 
Westview Press, Boulder 
and London. 
Hendriks, C.A., 1994: Carbon 
dioxide 
removal from 
coal-fired 
power plants, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
260 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Houghton, R.A., 1990: The future role of tropical forests in affect-
ing the carbon dioxide concentration of the atmosphere, Amhio, 
18, 204-209. 
Houghton, R.A., 1991: Tropical deforestation and atmospheric car-
bon dioxide. Climatic Change, 19, 99-1 IX. 
Houghton, R.A., J. Unruh, and P.A. LeFebvre, 1991: Current land 
use in the tropics and its potential for sequestering 
carbon, Pro-
ceedings of the Technical Workshop to Explore Options for 
Global Forestry Management, 24-29 April 1991, Bangkok, Thai-
land, pp. 279-310, International Institute for Environment and 
Development (IIED), London. 
Howe, C.H., H.C. Cochrane, J.E. Bunin, and R.W. King, 1991: Nat-
ural hazard damage handbook. 
University of Colorado, Boulder. 
Huang, J-R, 1993: Industry energy use and structural change: A case 
study of the People's Republic o\' China, Energy Economics, 
15(2), 131-136. 
Hurst, C , 1990: Establishing new markets for mature energy equip-
ment in developing countries: Experience with windmills, hy-
dropowered mills and solar water heaters. World 
Development, 
18(4), (i()5-6l5. 
IEA/OIX'I), 19X7: Renewable sources of energy, IEA/OECD, Paris. 
IEA/OKCI), 1991: Energy efficiency 
and the environment, 
IE A/ 
OECD, Paris. 
Imran, M.. and P. Barnes. 1990: Energy demand in the developing 
countries: Prospects for the future. World Bank Staff Working 
Paper No. 23, World Bank. Washington. DC. 
IPCC 
(Intergovernmental 
Panel 
on Climate 
Change), 
1990a: 
Methane emissions and opportunities 
for control. Subgroup for 
Methane Emissions and Opportunities for Control, Workshop re-
sults of the Response Strategies Working Group, U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency, Washington. DC. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990b: Energy 
and industry 
subgroup 
report. Energy and Industry Subgroup. 
Workshop results of the Response Strategies Working Group. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Washington. DC. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1990c: Green-
house 
gas emissions 
from 
agricultural 
systems. 
Agriculture. 
Forestry, and Other Human Activities Subgroup. Workshop re-
sults o\' the Response Strategies Working Group. U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency. Washington. DC. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1991: Climate 
change, the IPCC response strategies. 
Island Press. Washington. 
DC. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1992: Climate 
change 
IW2. IT. Houghton. B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney. 
eds.. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1993: Methods 
in national 
emissions 
inventories 
and options for control. Pro-
ceedings of International 
IPCC Workshop on Methane and 
Nitrous Oxide. A.R. van Amstel. ed.. Rijksinstitut voor Volksge-
/ondheid en Milieuhygienc (RIVM). Bilthovcn. The Netherlands. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1994: Prepar-
ing to meet the coastal challenges of the 21st century, conference 
report. World Coast Conference 
1993. National Institute for 
Coastal and Marine Management. The Hague. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1995: Green-
house ew.v inventors: 
IPCC guidelines for national 
greenhouse 
gas inventories, 
vol. 3. Reference Manual. United Kingdom Me-
teorological Office. Bracknell. England. 
Jackson, T . I'M I: I.eaM-co\i greenhouse planning: Supply curves 
for global warming abatement. Energy Policy. 19(1) (Jan/Feh). 
35 46. 
J c p n u i . C.I.. 
ll>95; I'ropical 
dil\<nshaion: 
A s<hio-i\<nit>inic 
ap-
pmiich. E.irlh'.can. London. 
Jepma, C.J., and C.W. Lee, 1995: Carbon dioxide emissions: A cost-
effective approach. In The feasibility 
of joint implementation, 
C.J. 
Jepma, cd., pp. 57-68, Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. 
Johansson, T.B., H. Kelly. A. Reddy, R.H. Williams, and L. Burnham 
(executive editor), 1993: Renewable 
energy: Sources for fuels 
and electricity, Island Press, Washington, DC, Covelo, CA. 
Kassler, P., 1994: Energy for development, 
Shell Selected Paper. 
Shell International Petroleum Company Ltd., London. 
Kaya, Y., 19X9: Impact of carbon dioxide emission control on GNP 
growth: Interpretation of proposed scenarios. Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, Response Strategies Working Group. 
Kaya, Y., Y. Fujii, R. Matsuhashi, K. Yamaji, Y. Shindo, H. Saiki, I. 
Furugaki, and O. Kobayashi, 1991: Assessment of the technolog-
ical options for mitigating global warming, paper presented at the 
IPCC EIS Group Meeting, 6-7 August 1991, Geneva, Switzer-
land. 
Klaus, J.. W. Pfliigner, R. Schmidtke. H. Wind, and C.H. Green. 
1994: Models for flood hazard assessment and management. In 
Floods across Europe: Flood hazard assessment, 
modelling 
and 
management, 
E.G. Penning-Rowsell, and M.H. Fordham. eds. 
Middlesex University Press, London. 
Kram, T., 1994a: Boundaries of future carbon dioxide emission re-
duction in nine industrial countries (executive summary). Energy 
Technology Systems Analysis Programme. Annex IV: Green-
house Gases and National Energy Options, Netherlands Energy 
Research Foundation ECN/International Energy Agency. 
Kram, T., 1994b: National energy options for reducing CO, emis-
sions, vol. 1, The international 
connection, 
a report of the Energy 
Technology Systems Analysis Programme/Annex 4 (1990-1993): 
Greenhouse Gases and National Energy Options, Netherlands En-
ergy Research Foundation ECN/International Energy Agency. 
Krankina, O.N., and R.K. Dixon, 1993: Forest management options 
to conserve and sequester terrestrial carbon in the Russian Feder-
ation. World Resources Review, 6(1), XX-101. 
Kwadijk, J.C.J., 1991: Sensitivity of the river Rhine discharge to en-
vironmental change: A first tentative assessment, Earth 
Surface 
Process and Landreforms. 
16, 627-637. 
Ledbetter, M.. and M. Ross, 1989: Supply curves of conserved en-
ergy for automobiles, 
American Council for an Energy Efficient 
Economy, Washington. DC. 
Levine, M.D., A. Gadgil, S. Meyers. J. Sathaye, and T. Wilbanks. 
1991: Energy efficiency, developing nations, and Eastern 
Europe. 
report to the U.S. Working Group on Global Efficiency. Washing-
ton, DC. 
Li, J., R.M. Shreshtha. and W.K. Foci I. 1990: Structural change and 
energy use: The case of the manufacturing sector in Taiwan. En-
ergy Economics. 
12(2), 109-115. 
MacKerron, G.. 1992: Nuclear costs, why do they keep rising? En-
ergy Policy. 20,641-652. 
Makarov, A.A., and I. Bashmakov, 1990: The Soviet Union. In Car-
bon emissions 
control 
strategies. 
W.U. Chandler, ed.. World 
Wildlife Fund. Washington. DC. 
Mathur, A.. 1991: Energy and CO, scenarios developed within 
Asian Energy Institute's collaborative study, paper presented at 
the Workshop on CO, reduction and removal: Measures for the 
next century. 19-21 March 1991. International Institute for Ap-
plied Systems Analysis. Laxenburg. Austria. 
Matsuo, N.. 1991: Japan country paper. Collaborative 
study on 
strategies 
to limit CO, emissions 
in Asia and Brazil. Asian En-
ergy Institute (AEI). AEI. New Delhi. India. 
McKinsey & Company, 19X9: Protecting the global environment, 
findings and conclusions, appendices. Ministerial conference 
on atmospheric pollution and climate change. Noordwijk. The 
Netherlands. 
A Generic 
Assessment 
oj Response 
Options 
261 
Meier, A., 1991: Supply curves of conserved energy. Proceedings 
of 
the IEA International 
Conference 
on Technology 
Responses 
to 
Global Environmental 
Challenges: 
Energy Collaboration 
for the 
21st Century, 6-8 November 1991, vol. 1. Inter Group Corpora-
tion, Kyoto. Japan. 
Mills, E., D. Wilson, and T.B. Johansson, 1991: Getting started -
No-regrets strategies for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. En-
ergy Policy, 19, 527-542. 
Mongia, N., R. Bhatia, J. Sathaye, and P. Mongia, 1991: Costs of 
reducing CO, emissions from India. Energy 
Policy, 
19(10). 
978-986. 
Moulton, R.J., and K.R. Richards, 1990: Costs of sequestering 
car-
bon through tree planting 
and forest management 
in the United 
States, USDA Forest Service General Technical Report WO-58. 
Washington, DC. 
Nakicenovic, N., and A. John, 1991: CO, reduction and removal 
measures for the next century. Energy - The International 
Jour-
nal, 16(11/12), 1347-1377. 
Nakicenovic, N., and A. Griibler. 1993: Energy conversion, conser-
vation and efficiency. In Long term strategies 
for 
mitigating 
global warming, N. Nakicenovic, ed.. Special Issue of Energy -
The International 
Journal, 18(5). 421-435. 
Nakicenovic, N.. and D. Victor. 1993: Technology transfer to devel-
oping countries. In Long term strategies for mitigating 
global 
warming, N. Nakicenovic. ed.. Special Issue of Energy - The In-
ternational Journal, 18(5), 523-538. 
Nakicenovic, N.. D. Victor. A. Griibler, and L. Schrattenholzer, 
1993: Introduction. In Long term strategies for mitigating 
global 
warming, N. Nakicenovic. ed., Special Issue of Energy - The In-
ternational Journal, 18(5), 401-419. 
Nilsson, N.-E.. 1982: An alley model for forest resources planning. 
In Statistics 
in theory and practice: 
Essays in honour of Berlil 
Maim, 
B. Ranneby. Ed.. Section t.i( Forest Biometry, Swedish 
University of Agricultural Sciences, Umea. Sweden. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1990: An intertemporal general-equilibrium model 
of economic growth and climate change. Proceedings 
of the 
workshop 
on economic/energy/environmental 
modeling for cli-
mate analysis, 
D.O. Wood, Y. Kaya. eds., 22-23 October, 1990, 
pp. 415-433, MIT Center for Energy Policy Research. Cam-
bridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991a: The cost of slowing climate change: A sur-
vey, The Energy Journal, 
12, 37-65. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1991b: To slow or not to slow: The economics of the 
greenhouse effect. The Economics Journal, 
101 (July) 920- 937. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1993: Managing 
the global commons: 
The eco-
nomics of climate change, MIT Press. Cambridge. MA. 
Ogawa, Y., 1992: Analysis of factors affecting carbon dioxide emis-
sions due to past energy consumption around the world. Green 
house research initiatives 
in the ESCAP region: Energy, ESCAP. 
Bangkok. 
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 1991: Changing 
by de-
grees: Steps to reduce greenhouse 
gases, OTA-0-842. Congress 
of the United States, U.S. Government Printing Office. Washing-
ton, DC. 
Parikh, J., and S. Gokarn. 1993: Climate change and India's energy 
policy options: New perspectives on sectoral CO, emissions and 
incremental costs. Global Environmental 
Change 
(September) 
276-291. 
Park, S-H., 1992: Decomposition of the industrial energy consump-
tion: An alternative method. Energy Economics, 
14(4). 265-270. 
Parks, P.J., and I.W. Hardie, 1992: Least-cost 
forest 
carbon 
re-
serves: Cost-effective 
subsidies 
to convert marginal 
agricultural 
land to forest, American Forests. Washington. DC. 
Penning-Rowsell, E C , B. Peerbolte. F.N. Correia. M. Fordham. 
C.H. Green. W. Pflugncr. J. Rocha. M. Saraiva. R. Schmidtke, 
J. Tortcrotot. and A. van der Veen. 1992: Flood vulnerability 
analysis and climate change: toward a European methodology. In 
Eloods and flood management, 
A.J. Saul. ed.. Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
The Netherlands. 
Penning-Rowsell, E.C., and M.H. Fordham. 1994: Floods 
across 
Europe: Flood hazard assessment, 
modelling 
and 
management, 
Middlesex University Press, London. 
Qureshi, A., and S. Sherer. 1994: Climate change in Asia: 
Forestry 
and land use, Asian Development Bank's Regional Study on 
Global Environment Issues. Climate Institute, Washington, DC. 
Read, P., 1994a: Responding 
to global warming: 
The 
technology, 
economics and politics of sustainable 
energy, ZED Books, Lon-
don and Atlantic Highlands. NJ. 
Read, P.. 1994b: Biofuel as the core technology in an effective re-
sponse strategy, economics discussion paper, Massey University, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand. 
Reijntjes, C . B. Haverkort. and A. Waters-Bayer. 1992: Farming for 
the future: An introduction 
to low-external-input 
and 
sustainable 
development, 
Macmillan. London. 
Reilly, J., and K.R. Richards. 1993: Climate change damage and the 
trace gas index issue. Environmental 
and Resources 
Economics, 
3,41-61. 
Reilly, J.. N. Hohmann, and S. Kane. 1994: Climate change and agri-
cultural trade: Who benefits, who loses? Global 
Environmental 
Change, 4( I). 24-36. 
Richards, K.R.. 1993: Valuation of temporary and future greenhouse 
gas reductions, paper presented at Western Economic Association 
Annual Meeting. Lake Tahoe, NV. 
Richards, K.R., R. Moulton. and R.A. Birdsey. 1993a: Costs of cre-
ating carbon sinks in the U.S.. Energy Conservation 
and Manage-
ment, 34(9-11). 905-912. 
Richards, K.R.. D.H. Rosenthal. J.A. Edmonds, and M. Wise, 
1993b: The carbon dioxide emissions game: Playing the net, pa-
per presented at Western Economic Association Annual Meeting, 
Lake Tahoe. NV. 
Rijsbergen, F. 1991: Potential costs of adapting to sea level rise in 
OECD countries. In Responding 
to climate change: Selected 
eco-
nomic issues, OECD. Paris. 
Robinson, J., M. Frascr. K. Haites. D. Harvey, M. Jaccard, A. Rein-
sch. and R. Torrie, 1993: Canadian options for greenhouse 
gas 
emission 
reduction 
(COGGER), 
final report of the COGGER 
Panel to the Canadian Global Change Program and the Canadian 
Climate Program Board. Royal Society of Canada, Ottawa. 
Rogner, H.. N. Nakicenovic. and A. Griibler. 199.3: Second- and 
third-generation energy technologies. Energy - The 
International 
Journal, Special Issue, Long term strategies for mitigating global 
warming. 18(51.461-484. 
Rosenzweig, C . M.L. Parry. G. Fischer, and K. Freiberg, 1993: Cli-
mate change and world food supply. Environmental Change Re-
search Unit. Number 3. University of Oxford. Oxford. 
Rosenzweig, C . and M L . Parry. 1994: Potential impact of climate 
change on world food supply. Nature, 367, 133-138. 
Rosenzweig, C . M.L. Parry, and G. Fischer. 1996: Climate change 
and world food supply. In K.M. Strzepek and J.B. Smith, eds., As 
climate changes: International 
impacts and implications, 
Cam-
bridge University Press. Cambridge. 
Rubin, E.S.. R.N. Cooper. R.A. Frosch. T.H. Lee. G. Marland, A H . 
Rosenfeld. and D.D. Stine. 1992: Realistic mitigation options for 
global warming. Science. 257 (July) 148-149. 261-266. 
Schipper, L., R.B. Howarth. and H. Geller. 1990: United States en-
ergy use from 1973 to 1987: The impacts of improved efficiency, 
Annual Review of Energy, 15, 455-504. 
Sedjo, R.A.. and A.M. Solomon. 1989: Climate and forests. In 
262 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Greenhouse warming: Abatement and adaptation, N.J. Rosen-
berg, W.E. Easterling III, PR. Crosson, and J. Darmstadter, eds.. 
Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Simpson, V.J.. and C. Anastasi, 1993: Communication, future emis-
sions ol'CH, from the natural gas and coal industries, Energy Pol-
icy, 21,827-830. 
Sitnicki, S., K. Budzinski, J. Juda, J. Miehna, and A. Szpilewica, 
1990: Poland. In Carbon 
emissions 
control 
strategies, 
W.U. 
Chandler, ed„ pp. 55-80, World Wildlife Fund, Washington, DC. 
Southern Centrc/Risii, 1993: UNEP Greenhouse gas abatement 
costing studies, Zimbabwe 
country study, phase two, Southern 
Centre for Energy and the Environment, Harare, Zimbabwe, and 
Riso National Laboratory Systems, Analysis Department, Copen-
hagen, Denmark. 
Springmann, F., 1991: Analysis of the ecological 
impact of demon-
stration projects in the field of rational use of energy: 
Develop-
ment of evaluation criteria, study on behalf of the Commission of 
the European Communities, Directorate General for Energy (DG 
XVII), Regio-Tec GmbH, Starnbcrg. Germany. 
Suliman, M„ 1990: Introduction: Africa in the IPCC report. In 
Greenhouse 
effect and its impact on Africa, M. Suliman, ed.. In-
stitute for African Alternatives, London. 
Swisher, J.N., 1991: Cost and performance of CO, storage in 
forestry projects, ISiomass and Energy, 1(6), 317-328. 
Swisher, J„ D. Wilson, and L. Schrattenholzer, 1993: Renewable en-
ergy potentials. In Long term strategies for mitigating 
global 
warming, N. Nakicenovic. ed.. Special Issue of Energy - The In-
ternational Journal, 18(5), 437-459. 
Task Force on Energy, 1991: Report for the Bangladesh govern-
ment, vol. 3, University Press Limited, Dhaka. 
TNO (Netherlands' Organization for Applied Scientific Research), 
1992: Confining 
and abating CO, from fossil fuel burning - A 
feasible option? rapport voor de EG, TNO, Apeldoorn. 
Tol, R.S.J., 1993: The climate fund: Survey of literature on costs and 
benefits. Institute for Environmental Studies (IVM), Free Univer-
sity Amsterdam. 
Tol, R.S.J.. 1994: The climate fund: Optimal greenhouse 
gas emis-
sion abatement. 
Institute for environmental studies, W-94-08. 
Free University Amsterdam. 
Train, K., 1985: Discount rates in consumers' energy-related deci-
sions: A review of the literature. Energy, 16( 12): 1243-1253. 
Trexler, M.C.. 1991: Estimating tropical biomass futures: A tentative 
scenario. Proceedings 
of the Technical 
Workshop 
to 
Explore 
Options for Global Forestry 
Management, 
24-29 April 1991, 
Bangkok. Thailand. International Institute for Environment and 
Development. UK. 
Trexler, M.C.. RE. Faeth, and J.M. Kramer. 1989: Forestry as a re-
sponse to global warming: An analysis of the Guatemala 
agro-
forestry 
and carbon 
sequestration 
project. 
World Resources 
Institute. Washington. DC. 
Turner, D P . J.J. Lee, G.J. Koperper. and J R . Barker (eds.). 1993: 
77;c forest 
sector carbon budget of the United States: 
Carbon 
pools andJlux 
under alternative policy options, U.S. EPA. ERL. 
Corvallis. OR. 
UNEP, 1993: UNEP Greenhouse 
gas abatement 
costing 
studies, 
aiudysis of abatement costing issues and preparation of a method-
ology to undertake 
national greenhouse 
gas abatement 
costing 
studies, Phase Two Report. UNEP Collaborating Centre on En-
ergy and Environment. Riso National Laboratory, Denmark. 
UNEP, 1994: f 'A7-.7' Greenhouse gas abatement costing studies. Part 
1: Main report, and Part 2: Country summaries, 
UNEP Collabo-
rating Centre on Energy and Environment, May, Riso National 
Laboratory, Denmark. 
U.S. Congress, 1992: Office of Technology Assessment (OTA), Fueling 
development: 
Energy lechologies 
in developing 
countries, 
OTA-
E-516, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D C , April. 
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 1990: Policy op-
tions for stabilizing global climate, report to Congress: technical 
appendices, EPA Washington, DC. 
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 1993: Options 
for reducing methane emissions internationally, vol. I, Techno-
logical options for reducing methane emissions, report to Con-
gress, K B . Hogan, ed., Office of Air and Radiation, Washington, 
DC. 
Viner, D., and M. Hulme, 1994: The Climate Impacts LINK 
Project 
providing 
climate change scenarios for impacts assessments 
in 
the UK, report for the UK Department of the Environment. Cli-
mate Research Unit, University of East Anglia, Norwich. 
Watson, R.T., E.G. Meira Filho, E. Samhueza, and A. Janetos, 1992: 
Sources and sinks. In Climate change 1992: The 
supplementary 
report to the IPCC scientific 
assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, B.A. 
Callander, and S.K. Varney, eds., pp. 25-46, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge. 
WEC (World Energy Council) Commission, 1993: Energy for to-
morrow's world - The realities, the real options and the agenda 
for achievement, 
World Energy Council, Kogan Page Ltd., Lon-
don, St. Martin's Press, New York. 
WEC (World Energy Council), 1993: Renewable 
energy 
resources: 
Opportunities 
and constraints 
1990-2020, 
Kogan Page, London. 
WEC (World Energy Council), 1994: New renewable 
energy re-
sources: A guide to the future, Kogan Page, London. 
Wenger, H., T. Hoff, and R. Perez, 1992: Photovoltaics as a demand-
side management option: Benefits of a utility-customer partner-
ship. In Proceedings 
of the Fifteenth 
World Energy 
Engineering 
Conference, October 1992. Atlanta, GA. 
Winjum, J.K., R.K. Dixon, and P.E. Schroeder, 1992: Estimation of 
the global potential of forest and agroforest management prac-
tices to sequester carbon, Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 
62, 
213-227. 
Winjum, J.K., and O.K. Lewis, 1993: Forest management and the 
economics of carbon storage: The nonfinancial component. Re-
search paper, U.S. EPA, Environmental Research Laboratory. 
Corvallis, OR. 
Winpenny, J.T., 1994: The relevance of global climatic effects to 
project appraisal, In The economics 
of project appraisal and the 
environment, J. Weiss, ed., Edward Elgar, Aldershot, UK. 
World Bank, 1993: Energy efficiency and conservation 
in the devel-
oping world, A World Bank Policy Paper, Washington, DC. 
WRI (World Resources Institute), 1990: World resources 
1990-91: 
A guide to the global 
environment, 
WRI. Oxford University 
Press, New York. 
WRI (World Resources Institute). 1994: World resources 
1994-95: 
A guide to the global environment. 
Oxford University Press. Ox-
ford. 
Yamaji, K.. R. Matsuhashi. Y. Nagata, and Y. Kaya, 1991: An inte-
grated system for CO,/energy/GNP analysis: Case studies on eco-
nomic measures for CO, reduction in Japan, paper presented at 
the Workshop on CO, Reduction and Removal: Measures for the 
Next Century. 19-21 March 1991, International Institute for Ap-
plied Systems Analysis. Laxenburg. Austria. 
8 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating 
Greenhouse Gases 
Convening Author: 
J.C. HOURCADE 
Principal Lead Authors: 
R. RICHELS, J. ROBINSON 
Lead Authors: 
W. Chandler, O. Davidson, J. Edmonds, D. Finon, M. Grubb, K. Halsnaes, 
K. Hogan, M. Jaccard, F Krause, E. La Rovere, W.D. Montgomery, P. Nastari, 
A. Pegov, K. Richards, L. Schrattenholzer, D. Siniscalco, PR. Shukla, Y. Sokona, 
P. Sturm, A. Tudini 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
267 
8.1 Introduction 
268 
8.2 Costs: Definitions and Determinants 
269 
8.2.1 How is cost measured? 
269 
8.2.2 Taxonomy of mitigation cost concepts 
269 
8.2.2.1 Gross costs, net costs, and the 
overall cost-benefit balance 
of mitigation strategies 
270 
8.2.3 Key factors affecting the magnitude of 
costs: Costs as a function of baselines 
and policy strategies 
271 
8.2.3.1 Baselines and magnitude of the 
"no-regret" potentials 
271 
8.2.3.2 Target setting: Level and timing 
273 
8.2.3.3 Policy instruments - the tax 
recycling issue 
273 
8.2.3.4 International dimensions of climate 
policies 
274 
8.3 Patterns of Development and Technological 
Change 
274 
8.3.1 Links between development patterns, 
technical change, and mitigation costs 
274 
8.3.1.1 The importance of the socio-
economic assumptions underlying 
scenarios 
274 
8.3.1.2 Current and future socioeconomic 
development patterns 
277 
8.3.1.2.1 Material and energy content 
of development in 
industrialized countries 
277 
8.3.1.2.2 Links among energy, 
transport, and urban planning 277 
8.3.1.2.3 Land use and human 
settlements 
278 
8.3.1.2.4 Development patterns 
in developing countries 
278 
8.3.2 Modelling development paths and 
mitigation costs 
279 
8.3.2.1 Prediction and simulation: The need 
for multiple baselines 
279 
8.3.2.2 Economic modelling and development 
trends: Some limits 
280 
8.3.3 Multiple baselines, uncertainly, and 
long-term mitigation costs 
281 
8.3.3.1 Multiple baselines and the 
noncomparability of cost assessments 
281 
8.3.3.2 The meaning of the baseline 
282 
8.4 Differences among Models and their Results 
282 
8.4.1 General methodological considerations 
282 
8.4.2 Critical dimensions of a typology of 
existing models 
283 
8.4.2.1 Diversity of models, diversity of 
purposes 
283 
8.4.2.2 The structure of existing models 
284 
8.4.2.3 The role of key input assumptions 
285 
8.4.3 The top-down versus bottom-up 
modelling controversy: Some lessons 
from the energy field 
286 
8.4.4 Beyond energy: Carbon sinks and 
nonenergy greenhouse gas emissions 
289 
8.4.4.1 Carbon sequestration studies 
289 
Endnotes 
292 
References 
293 
SUMMARY 
• It is important to be clear what types of costs (e.g., di-
rect, sectoral, macroeconomic, or welfare) are included 
in the analysis. What matters from the point of view of 
policy are, not the total costs of emission reduction, but 
the net costs (i.e., the total costs minus any positive side 
effects of mitigation). 
• The insights generated by modelling analyses (e.g., the 
areas of greatest potential for cost-effective emission re-
duction or the directional effect of tax recycling on 
emission reduction costs), not the specific numerical 
results of any one analysis, are what matter. Although 
researchers attempt to incorporate their best understand-
ing of development processes into the studies, neither 
the baseline nor the intervention scenarios should be in-
terpreted as representing likely future conditions, espe-
cially more than a decade into the future. 
• The size of the costs of mitigation depends critically on 
assumptions about the efficiency of the baseline sce-
nario used in the analysis. The higher the underlying 
economic growth assumed in the baseline scenario, the 
greater the estimated costs of mitigation. The more 
emission reduction built into the baseline, the higher the 
estimated costs of further reduction. 
• Whether a no-regrets potential for emission reduction ex-
ists depends on whether the economy under considera-
tion is on or below its theoretical production frontier. The 
existence of a no-regrets potential (where the society is 
below the frontier) implies, first, that significant market 
failures exist that give rise to increased greenhouse gas 
emissions and, second, that policies can be designed and 
implemented that correct those market failures. 
• Mitigation costs will be affected by a wide range of fac-
tors, including population growth, consumption patterns, 
resource and technology availability, geographical dis-
tribution of activity, land use and transportation patterns, 
and trade. As a result, there exists a range of quite differ-
ent socioeconomic and technological development paths 
that would give rise to quite different emission scenarios 
and costs of mitigation. Existing energy and emissions 
models do not address these underlying factors in a very 
effective way. Future analysis should make use of mul-
tiple baseline scenarios to help capture the differences in 
these factors. 
• Infrastructure decisions are critical because they can al-
low or restrict future options, and different infrastruc-
ture decisions can lead to very different cost outcomes. 
This issue is of particular importance to developing 
countries, where major infrastructure decisions will be 
made over the next 25 years. 
• Mitigation costing analyses reveal the costs of mitiga-
tion relative to a given baseline. The results of different 
studies cannot easily be compared to each other unless 
differences in baselines are taken into account. Neither 
the baseline nor the intervention scenarios should be in-
terpreted as representing likely future conditions. 
• There is growing integration of bottom-up and top-down 
analyses of the costs of energy-related greenhouse gas 
mitigation. This convergence means that differences in 
results are increasingly driven by differences in input as-
sumptions rather than by differences in model structure. 
Nevertheless, differences in structure remain important, 
since each type of model is best suited to answer particu-
lar kinds of questions. Models with more detailed rep-
resentation of technology are better suited to identify 
technical potentials and financial costs and savings; 
models with more detailed representation of broader 
economic activity arc better suited to identify costs in 
terms of higher or lower economic growth. 
• Substantial disagreement still exists over the existence 
and size of a significant no-regrets potential for green-
house gas emission reduction. Bottom-up approaches, 
which assume that there exist substantial correctable 
market imperfections, show significant no-regrets po-
tential; top-down studies, which assume that existing 
markets are relatively efficient, show little no-regrets 
potential. 
2<5K 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
8.1 Introduction 
Although most of the available literature on the costs of 
greenhouse gas mitigation has been written in the period since 
1988, interest in this issue began more than a decade earlier 
with Nordhaus (1977, 1979), whose contribution was fol-
lowed by about a dozen other pioneering studies. The picture 
has evolved since then, but it retains two features from this 
earlier period: 
• First, the focus is on CO, emissions, and the other 
greenhouse gases are either ignored or treated sepa-
rately in an ad hoc manner. This emphasis has arisen not 
only because of the importance of CO-, emissions rela-
tive to those of other gases, but also because the long-
term demand and supply models' that energy analysts 
had begun to develop by the mid-1970s in response to 
the instability of energy markets at that time could also 
he used to analyze CO, emissions associated with the 
energy system. Such a modelling capability was not 
available with respect to other greenhouse gases. 
• Second, the structure of the debate was determined very 
early by the wide range of numerical results about the 
potential for, and costs of, mitigation. Some studies ar-
gued that mitigation policies were likely to entail very 
substantial costs (Nordhaus. 1977, 1979), others that the 
costs would be relatively small (Edmonds and Reilly, 
1983), and still others that these costs might in fact be 
negative and bring an overall benefit (Lovins et ai, 
1981).; 
This debate became more heated and the demand for this 
type of study accelerated after the drafting of the UN Frame-
work Convention on Climate Change in 1992. At that time, 
the climate issue appeared on the international negotiation 
agenda and countries and international organizations became 
interested in obtaining information on the economic impacts 
of climate policies. 
The resultant controversies about the overall costs of 
greenhouse gas mitigation strategies made it clear that states-
men, policymakers, business people, journalists, and the pub-
lic stand in an ambiguous posture in the face of figures 
coming from economic modelling exercises. On the one hand, 
they expect a clear-cut answer, for example, about the effec-
tiveness of a carbon tax to curb greenhouse gas emissions and 
about the economic consequences of this tax. preferably in the 
form of an aggregated figure such as a loss of GDP. On the 
other hand, they are very sceptical about the results of such 
analyses and. above all, about the capacity of economic mod-
els to provide reliable predictions and cost estimates.•' 
Much of this scepticism stems from the well-documented 
failure of energy forecasters in the past to provide reliable 
predictions of future energy demand after the oil shock distur-
bances beginning in the early 1970s.1 as well as the more gen-
eral problems of errors in economic forecasting even over 
short time horizons (Ascher. 1978, 1990). Part, however, 
stems from misunderstandings about what the economic and 
energy models are able to capture and about how to use their 
results. There is a gap between the answers expected by 
policymakers and the type of information economic models 
can supply. As discussed below, the lessons of modelling 
analysis are rather complex and cannot easily be translated 
into clear-cut policies. 
Another difficulty stems from the fact that, in the first 
phase, many agencies have employed models not initially de-
signed to shed light on the cost of emission reductions. Exam-
ples would be models with energy sectors so aggregated that it 
was impossible to describe a substitution between fossil and 
nonfossil energies, or the use of short-term models to simulate 
medium-term impacts. Some of these models are no longer in 
use; others have evolved through several versions, further 
complicating the picture. Thus, some of the apparent diversity 
of results is simply due to the development of research itself. 
These circumstances have created an opportunity for mis-
using models and their results in public debates. To help avoid 
either uncritical acceptance or total distrust of current analy-
ses of mitigation costs, this chapter will present a discussion 
of the critical determinants likely to influence the overall cost 
of climate policies and of the main methodologies employed 
to account for them. The purpose is not to have a detailed com-
parative analysis of the models, but to concentrate on the possi-
ble sources of misunderstanding and misinterpretations of the 
results presented in Chapter 9 so as to facilitate the discussion 
of their policy implications. We will examine successively 
• the various concepts of costs used in the literature (Sec-
tion 8.2) 
• the relationships between economic cost assessments 
and assumptions about development patterns and tech-
nical change which (explicitly or implicitly) underlie 
any economic scenario used to assess mitigation costs 
(Section 8.3) 
• the main methodological approaches for costing assess-
ments, the key assumptions likely to determine the nu-
merical results, and the lessons derived from modelling 
debates in the energy field and in the forestry sector 
(Section 8.4) 
We will not in this chapter discuss methodological issues 
having to do with integrating cost analyses with analyses of 
the benefits of mitigation, or issues having to do with the 
costs of adaptation to climate change. Discussions of esti-
mates of benefits (i.e.. of the costs of climate change) arc 
contained in Chapter 6. whereas Chapter 10 on integrated as-
sessment discusses issues related to the integration of costs 
and benefits. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a basis 
for a better understanding of the mitigation cost estimates 
summarized in Chapter 9. These cost estimates need to be 
compared with the estimates of the benefits of mitigation (i.e.. 
the damages or costs of not reducing net emissions) summa-
rized in Chapter 6 in order to provide the basis for an inte-
grated assessment of the merits of climate control policies 
(Chapter 10). But the research agenda for the new generation 
of integrated models must address the methodological issues 
discussed in this chapter. 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
269 
8.2 Costs: Definitions and Determinants 
O 
. 
8.2.1 How is cost measured? 
~ S 
p 
3 
<L> - O 
*£ 
U 
Hi 
<+* 
_) 
C 
O 
C/3 
5 
XI 
1+-I 
o 
GHG Emission Reduction (t) 
It is important to begin with a clear definition of costs that can 
be found in the literature because many misunderstandings 
stem from using very different cost concepts when presenting 
and comparing the results of existing studies. There are two 
crucial elements in the definition: how costs are measured and 
whether costs are reported on a gross basis or net of some of 
the ancillary benefits of policies to reduce emissions. 
igure 8.1: Energy technology cost curve. 
net present value or levelized costs). Technical costs 
can show negative net costs because a given technology 
may yield enough energy cost savings to more than off-
set the costs of adopting and using the technology. 
These costs depend on both technico-economic data and 
a given interest rate and can he used to construct tech-
nology cost curves of the kind shown in Figure 8.1. 
They can be calculated in the absence of any global sce-
nario but they do not then provide a macroeconomic 
cost assessment unless they are fed into coherent techni-
cal and economic frameworks. They are the only source 
of information available for mitigation measures in sec-
tors for which no comprehensive sectoral model has so 
far been developed. 
) 
Economic costs for a given sector. Here sectoral models 
are used to integrate sets of measures to provide con-
sistent pictures of a given sector, and to compare the 
relative costs of different scenarios. These sectoral 
scenarios take some macroeconomic indicators, such as 
the overall rate of growth, as input parameters. They 
provide what is referred to as "partial equilibrium" 
analysis, in the sense that these sectoral models do not 
capture the feedback effects between the behaviour of a 
sector and that of the overall economy. To date, most 
sectoral analyses of mitigation costs have used energy 
sector models and forestry models. Other sectoral mod-
els, such as transportation or agriculture models, exist 
but have not yet been used so extensively for analysis of 
greenhouse gas mitigation. 
Macroeconomic costs. These measure the impact of a 
given strategy on the level of the gross domestic product 
(GDP) and its components (household consumption, in-
vestment, etc.). This aggregate index measures the mon-
etary value added of goods and services produced in a 
single year and provides an index of the scale of human 
activities that pass through markets plus, by convention, 
the imputed value of some nonmarket activities (such as 
the value of services provided by public administra-
tion). At this level of cost analysis one tries to account 
for the interrelationships between a specific sector and 
the overall economy. This requires the use of either pure 
macroeconomic models or modelling frameworks cou-
8.2.2 Taxonomy of mitigation cost concepts 
In any economic analysis, the cost of mitigation is calculated 
as a difference in costs (defined in monetary units) between a 
reference situation and a new one characterized by lower 
emissions. Beyond this common feature, however, the con-
cept of cost is not unique, meaning that the measurement cri-
teria chosen to represent costs will depend on the level and the 
purpose of the measurement. 
First, we have to recall here a classic distinction in eco-
nomics between marginal costs (e.g., the incremental cost of 
removing an additional tonne of carbon or its equivalent), to-
tal costs (the sum of all marginal costs), and average costs (to-
tal cost divided by the quantity removed). Confusion can 
easily result from neglecting these distinctions. For example, 
the marginal cost of reducing emissions by an additional 
tonne may be very high in a given scenario, whereas the total 
and average cost of the relevant emissions reduction policy 
may be very low or even negative. 
Before comparing any results, attention must be given to 
the way reduction targets are set, because this affects their 
meaning. Some models calculate reduction from a benchmark 
date in the recent past; this is the case for most of the U.S. 
studies in the energy field and for the studies carried out in the 
other OECD countries on how to stabilize greenhouse gas 
emissions over the next decade. Others (usually in studies of 
developing countries and very often in long-term studies in 
Europe) set the target in terms of a percentage reduction from 
an emission level at a specified future date. Given expected 
growth in baseline emissions in the future, a particular per-
centage reduction from a base year typically implies a much 
greater total reduction than the same percentage reduction 
from the future baseline scenario. 
Second, to understand many critical debates about the 
costs of climate policies, it is necessary to distinguish four 
types of cost concepts used in costing analysis: 
(1) 
The direct engineering and financial costs of specific 
technical measures. Examples include the cost of 
switching from coal to gas in electric production, of im-
proving the thermal efficiency of existing homes, or of 
planting trees in reforestation programmes. Costs are 
normally reported in present-value terms and can repre-
sent the life-cycle cost of the technique used or of the 
project (the up-front cost of the measures considered 
plus annual energy and operating costs, all reduced to a 
27(; 
CIiunite Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
pling sectoral models and macroeconomic models in or-
der to capture the changes throughout an economy 
caused by policies in a given sector (what is commonly 
labelled the "general equilibrium" effects, which are 
to be distinguished from the partial equilibrium-
sectoral -effects). 
(4) 
Welfare costs. GDP variations do not provide direct 
measures of human welfare. There are many reasons for 
this. First a climate policy may change the composition 
of GDP in the direction of higher investments and lower 
consumption. These changes are invisible to an analysis 
looking only at the level of GDP. Second, human wel-
fare may not increase linearly with consumption, so 
consumption changes do not necessarily indicate com-
mensurate changes in welfare. Third, changes in the 
level of GDP do not account for the relationship be-
tween distribution of income and overall welfare. Finally, 
environmental degradation reduces welfare but does not 
result in a corresponding reduction in GDP. Even GDP, 
therefore, does not include all costs of interest, and even 
general equilibrium models that attempt to measure wel-
fare costs do not include all costs that matter. 
The four types of costs outlined here represent increasing lev-
els of generality as one moves from direct financial costs to 
welfare costs. However, the different levels of cost cannot be 
aggregated or correlated in any systematic way. For example, 
ranking efficient technologies in terms of their individual 
prices in the marketplace (direct engineering and financial 
costs) usually does not reveal the way these technologies will 
actually he adopted and combined in an economically consis-
tent productive system. For instance, a given energy efficiency 
improvement may not be rationally selected if this improve-
ment occurs in a period of time when the electric supply is in 
excess. Similarly, a sectoral optimization of a very capital-
intensive sector may not give results consistent with some 
form of overall macroeconomic optimum. For example, the 
amount of money spent in optimized energy supply or trans-
portation systems may prevent investment in other sectors 
such as education and health. On the other hand, aggregate 
macroeconomic analysis of costs may not capture important 
changes to the extent that these changes remain below the 
level of "noise" of analysis and are not captured by historical 
variation in the aggregate variables. This typically occurs 
with respect to the agricultural sector, which represents a 
small part of overall GDP but often plays a decisive role in the 
social and spatial equilibrium of a society. 
Existing studies use a variety of methodological ap-
proaches and definitions of cost to assess the costs of mitigat-
ing greenhouse gas emissions. No existing study provides a 
complete evaluation of lull social costs. Instead, studies pro-
vide a range of cost estimates: Some provide estimates of the 
direct financial costs of specific technological options; others 
provide estimates of the effect of broad policies on aggregate 
economic activity: still others attempt to estimate welfare 
costs. It is important to be clear about which type of cost is be-
ing estimated in any specific study. 
Despite these differences, progress has been made in incor-
porating successively broader concepts of costs in greenhouse 
gas mitigation studies and in accounting for the possibility of 
significant technological and behavioural change. Two more 
general problems remain, however. 
The first lies in the fact that, in a number of developing 
countries and Central and Eastern European countries, the 
level of government intervention or market distortion (which 
exists also in OECD countries but not to the same degree) 
may interfere with the absolute and relative prices of goods 
and services. This results in distortions between observed 
market prices of technologies and their "shadow prices," as-
sessed "at factor costs," which would reflect the actual balance 
between human capabilities, technical potentials, natural re-
source scarcity, and final needs within a given economy. The 
use of market prices is relevant for assessing the likeliness of 
the adoption of some technical alternatives for a given institu-
tional context,5 but if these costs are interpreted as capturing 
the overall social costs of a given measure, they conceal some 
intrinsic costs of goods and services and can be very mislead-
ing. 
The second problem is that it is more difficult, empirically 
and theoretically, to pass from GDP costs to welfare costs. In 
most empirical models, welfare cost measures are calculated 
as the income required to leave a typical household no worse 
off after a tax than before. In models devoted to analyzing the 
short-term impact of taxation policies, welfare costs are cal-
culated on the basis of the so-called "Harberger triangle," 
which demonstrates that welfare losses grow at a higher rate 
than increases in taxes. These results, however, are not com-
plete measures of welfare costs. In the first place, they gener-
ally do not account for the dynamic effects of important 
policy measures on technology and consumer preferences. In 
the second place, they depend on market product calculations 
and do not account for the goods and services produced by 
nonmarket and informal economies. 
In fact, much work remains to be done in attempting to in-
corporate broader conceptions of human welfare (such as 
those that are suggested in the United Nations Development 
Programme's Human Development Index), and most of the 
models reported hereafter ignore such factors. The cost fig-
ures provided by current economic modelling studies must 
therefore be strictly interpreted as estimates of losses (or 
gains) in the value of new final goods and services forgone as 
a consequence of the policy, not as estimates of impacts on 
overall welfare. 
The different kinds of cost estimates discussed here are of 
great value: the point is simply that, before drawing policy-
relevant conclusions from even the most general analyses of 
macroeconomic costs, it is important also to examine other in-
dicators (e.g., unemployment, distribution of income, secu-
rity, and political stability). 
8.2.2.1 Gross costs, net costs, and the overall 
cost-benefit 
balance of mitigation 
strategies 
In assessing the costs of mitigation, it is first important to 
make a distinction between what economists call the gross 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
171 
costs and the net costs of mitigation strategies. The two are 
different to the extent that there are possible positive side ef-
fects of mitigation strategies that would offset some of the 
gross costs. These positive side effects can be divided into 
three categories: 
(1) 
The negative cost potential, namely mitigation caused 
by technologies whose costs are lower than the tech-
nologies currently in use. As discussed further in Sec-
tion 8.4 below, this issue is controversial, since it 
implies that there are cost-effective mitigation strategies 
not now in use and that will not be adopted in the ab-
sence of new policies. Such measures would have a neg-
ative net cost and obviously lower the gross cost of 
greenhouse gas mitigation for a given target. 
(2) 
An economic double dividend, such as the possible pos-
itive effects on growth or employment of the recycling 
of carbon tax revenues or of the technological externali-
ties (i.e., side effects) associated with fostering research 
and development programmes. 
(3) 
An environmental double dividend, namely the synergy 
between greenhouse gas mitigation strategies and the 
mitigation of other environmental nuisances such as lo-
cal air pollution, urban congestion, or land and natural 
resource degradation, such that greenhouse gas mitiga-
tion also contributes to reducing these other problems. 
The existence of such positive side effects within an array of 
mitigation measures would result in lowering the gross cost of 
these measures. To the extent that such positive side effects 
may totally offset the gross costs of a specific emission strat-
egy, they represent what has been called a "no-regrets poten-
tial": measures that are worth undertaking whether or not 
there are climate-related reasons for doing so.6 However, as 
discussed below, there is much controversy about the exis-
tence and magnitude of these positive side effects. The point 
here is simply that, from the point of view of greenhouse 
gas mitigation policy, what matters is the net costs of mitiga-
tion strategies, that is. gross costs minus any positive side ef-
fects. 
To avoid any possible misunderstanding, it must be empha-
sized that the double dividend positive side effects described 
here are not the same as, and should not be mistaken for, the 
benefits of mitigation policies (or costs of climate change). 
which are discussed in Chapter 6. Instead, these positive side 
effects represent items that lower the total cost of mitigation 
policies, and it is the resulting net cost figure (gross cost mi-
nus positive side effects) which is to be compared with the 
benefits of mitigation policies (whether these benefits are ac-
counted for in terms of explicit monetary values or purely 
normative mitigation targets).7 
Many current economic models account for the first and/or 
the second category of positive side effects: very few account 
for positive environmental externalities.s This is mainly due 
to practical reasons, and one can expect quick improvement in 
this direction in the near future. In the meantime, it is useful to 
remember that the studies discussed in this chapter do not in-
clude this category of secondary benefit. 
< 
o 
Emission Reduction 
Figure 8.2: Relationship between economic activity and emission 
reduction. 
8.2.3 Key factors affecting the magnitude of costs: 
Costs as a function of baselines and policy strategies 
The above taxonomy suggests that assessing the costs of 
greenhouse gas mitigation strategies is not equivalent to 
adding up the direct costs of individual measures or policies. 
The cost of mitigation is always a net incremental cost (or a 
marginal cost) relative to a given scenario - usually called a 
baseline scenario. This means that the calculation of these net 
costs is determined in large part by both the assumptions un-
derlying such baseline scenarios and the assumptions about 
mitigation policies. 
8.2.3.1 Baselines and magnitude of the 
"no-regret" potentials 
The most sensitive issue in the debates about how to interpret 
the results of the models is the way assumptions about the ex-
istence and the size of potentials for so-called "no-regret 
strategies" are conveyed in specific modelling frameworks 
and baseline scenarios. 
The discussion of "no-regrets" potential has triggered a 
sensitive policy debate which can he summarized rather sim-
ply, though rather abstractly, in graphical form (see Figure 
8.2). To begin, wc represent the whole economy as producing 
two sets of goods and services: (I) a composite good Q, 
namely an aggregate of all existing goods and services, and 
(2) a given level of environmental quality E. represented in 
this case by a certain amount of emission reductions. Given 
such an assumption, it is possible to construct a curve F(Q,E), 
called a theoretical production frontier by economists, which 
represents the trade-off between economic activity (Q) and 
emission reduction (E). For a given economy at a given time, 
each point on this curve shows the maximum size of the econ-
omy for each level of emission reduction: put another way, it 
shows the maximum emission reduction for each level of eco-
nomic activity. II the economy is at a size and level of emis-
sion reduction below and to the left of this curve (e.g., point O 
in Figure 8.2), it is possible for that economy to move up-
wards (e.g.. from O to B). producing more goods without in-
creased emissions, or to move to the right (e.g., from O to A), 
reducing emissions without reducing the size of the economy. 
272 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
or to move somewhere in between A and B, increasing both 
economic activity and emissions reduction. 
From the point of view of cost analysis, a key considera-
tion is what is assumed about the location of the reference or 
baseline scenario with respect to this curve. If the baseline 
scenario assumes the economy to be located somewhere on 
the theoretical production frontier (curve F), it is clear that 
there is a direct and unavoidable trade-off between economic 
activity and the level of emissions. In effect, all increases in 
emission reduction (moving down the surface of the curve to 
the right) will decrease economic activity (i.e., increase 
costs). That is, there is no no-regrets potential: Moving up to 
the left on the curve will increase economic activity but also 
increase emissions. In such a context, an appropriate policy 
mix can minimize the net cost of lower emissions but can 
never offset it totally.'' Conversely, in a baseline scenario that 
describes an economy below the production frontier repre-
sented by curve F, no-regret strategies are possible, by mov-
ing from O to any point between A and B on curve F. Under 
these conditions, emissions can be reduced without reducing 
the size of the economy (i.e., without increasing overall costs) 
and possibly with some enhancement of economic activity.10 
The critical question is, then, whether the reference or 
baseline scenario to which mitigation scenarios are compared 
is on this frontier or not. Assuming that a no-regrets potential 
exists suggests implicitly that any baseline scenario is below 
the frontier and that appropriate policies would move the 
economy up towards thai frontier. The counterargument is 
that, if such a potential had existed, it would already have 
been adopted by the marketplace at least as long as there were 
no institutional failures preventing market forces from operat-
ing." This line of reasoning leads many analysts to assume 
that any cost-effective emission reduction is already embod-
ied in any baseline scenario and to locate their baseline sce-
nario on the frontier.l: In (his sense the economic debate is as 
much about the location and characteristics of the baseline 
scenarios as it is about the nature and costs of specific mitiga-
tion measures.1 •' 
In fact, the existence of a no-regrets potential implies (1) 
that markets and institutions do not behave perfectly because 
of market failures (lack of information, distorted price sig-
nals, lack of competition, etc.) and/or institutional failures 
(inadequate regulation, inadequate delineation of property 
rights, distortion-inducing fiscal systems, etc.): (2) that it is 
possible to identify policies that have the ability to correct 
these market and institutional failures without incurring im-
plementation costs larger than the benefits gained: and (3) that 
a policy decision is made to eliminate selectively those fail-
ures that give rise to increased greenhouse gas emissions 
(since there may exist other market failures whose removal 
might increase these emissions). 
In other words, the existence of market and institutional 
failures that give rise to a no-regrets potential is a necessary 
but not a sufficient condition for the development of strategies 
to realize that potential. The latter depends on the existence of 
significant political desire to realize the potential. In practice, 
in main fields o( public policymaking, countries will consider 
climate policies in a nuiltiobjective decision-making frame-
64-
u 
/ 
E 
y 
§ 
^ y 
,B 
£ 
I 
1 
Emission Reduction (t) 
Km. 
A - no market imperfections, no economic double dividend 
B - negative cost potential plus economic double dividend 
Note: A and B do not include environmental double dividend. 
Figure 8.3: Alternative views on cost of emission reduction. 
work, whereby greenhouse gas mitigation policies are likely 
to be a by-product or joint product of policies developed in 
part for other reasons. Few costing studies address these com-
plexities; however, some bottom-up studies examine the addi-
tional environmental benefits of greenhouse gas mitigation 
policies, whereas some top-down studies examine the benefits 
of using carbon taxes to reduce other tax distortions in the 
economy. 
The existence of these issues means that the results of any 
analysis of the relationship between cost and emission reduc-
tion are largely determined by a set of underlying assumptions 
about negative cost potentials and the economic double divi-
dend. Figure 8.3 illustrates two different views of this rela-
tionship that underlie the top-down and bottom-up debate. 
Both curves in Figure 8.3 show how total costs would in-
crease for higher levels of emission reduction, given different 
underlying assumptions about the efficiency of existing en-
ergy markets. Both curves assume that there exist no environ-
mental double dividends. 
Curve A (traditionally associated with a top-down perspec-
tive) assumes that there exist no reducible market imperfec-
tions (i.e., no negative cost potential), or that reducible market 
imperfections are already incorporated in the base case, or 
that the costs of reducing market imperfections outweigh the 
benefits. It also assumes there is no economic double divi-
dend. As a result, the greater the level of emission reduction, 
the higher the costs. In this perspective, the net costs may be 
even higher than the gross costs because of inefficient recy-
cling of carbon tax revenues. 
Curve B (traditionally associated with a bottom-up per-
spective) starts below the v-axis because it assumes that there 
exists some combination of (I) market failures in the energy-
transportation, or agricultural systems that can be corrected 
by (or are corrected in parallel with) emission reduction poli-
cies at negative cost, and (2) economic double dividends that 
offset the costs of emission reduction policies. Thus Curve B 
shows the existence of some no-regrets or "worth doing any-
way" potential below the .v-axis. 
The differences between Curves A and B represent differ-
ent underlying views of the efficiency of the economy. Since 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Cuccnhoiise Cases 
27 J 
many current models can adopt either view of the economy, 
such underlying assumptions are often the main reason for the 
differences in quantitative results among different analyses. 
8.2.3.2 Target setting: Level and timing 
The growth rate of CO., emissions is determined by the 
growth rate of GDP, the ratio between GDP and the required 
level of end-use services (energy, transport, food), and the 
level of greenhouse gas emission per unit of each of these ser-
vices.14 
When targets are set for levels of emissions calculated 
from a given benchmark year in the recent past, the level 
of baseline emissions is critical because higher rates of 
economic growth increase the gap between baseline and tar-
get emissions, thus making any given target more costly to 
achieve. The higher the rate of growth, the bigger the emis-
sion reductions required to meet the target. This tendency is 
obviously less strong if the baseline incorporates some decou-
pling between economic growth and emissions and assumes 
many flexibilities in the system (e.g., high responsiveness of 
consumption to price and nonprice signals, or availability of 
low carbon-intensive techniques). 
With emissions growing over time, a target of constant 
emissions implies that larger emission reductions are required 
in every future time period, requiring recourse to more and 
more expensive measures. Conversely, if a model embeds op-
timistic assumptions about technological progress in the long 
run, this tendency may be counterbalanced and the costs in the 
short term may be higher than over the long run. 
For given assumptions about technical progress the time 
profile of the abatement may be a key determinant of differ-
ences in cost estimates. In discussing these timing issues, 
there is a key distinction between the transition period and the 
backstop period. 
The transition period comes first and is characterized by an 
existing capital stock and limited technological options for 
replacing existing techniques with less carbon-intensive or 
carbon-free techniques. In effect, much of the infrastructure 
and technology is fixed. The backstop period is entered after 
sufficient time elapses to allow the entire capital stock to be 
replaced and for carbon-free backstop technologies to become 
available, in other words, technologies available for wide-
spread adoption at the end of the economic life of existing 
equipment. 
One of the most important determinants of costs during the 
transition period is the turnover of the capital stock. Over the 
backstop period the cost of carbon-free technologies places an 
upper limit on how great the costs of reducing carbon emis-
sions can be. Successful research and development that accel-
erate the availability of less carbon-intensive and carbon-free 
technologies can reduce costs in the backstop period. 
8.2.3.3 Policy instruments - the tax recycling issue 
What policy instruments are used to trigger modifications in 
consumption and technical adoption behaviours and how they 
are accounted for in the models can also affect the models' re-
sults. The types of policy instruments that have been studied 
in detail are energy taxes and quotas on the one hand and 
BOX 8.1: BASIC PRINCIPLES FOR THE ASSESS-
MENT OF THE WELFARE COST OF A TAX 
Make D the demand curve for a given good (part (a) of the 
diagram). Then Q(| is the quantity of this good purchased 
for a market price P(). The increase in welfare for the con-
sumer who purchases Q(| of the good is the area of the tri-
angle PMP()D(), namely the sum of the differences between 
the maximum price the consumer would he willing to pay 
for each quantity of the good below Q„ and the price actu-
ally paid (the consumer would have been willing to pay Pm 
for the first unit of the good but got all Q(| units for P()). 
When a tax is levied, the new price of the good is P,. 
The consumer surplus is now the area of the triangle 
PmP|D|, and the tax revenue is the area of the rectangle R. 
The net loss in welfare is then equal to the triangle A (i.e., 
A is the part of the triangle Pn]P„D() that does not accrue to 
the consumer, who gets P^P,D,, or to the government, 
which gets R). If a tax is levied on top of an existing tax 
(part (b) of the diagram), then the loss of welfare is A plus 
A' plus B. The higher the preexisting tax, the greater the 
loss of welfare. 
Added burden from tax 
(u) With no preexislin/j lax 
(>>) Willi a preexislinn 
lux 
I', 
i" 
R 
" l 
A \ | .n„ 
\ i 
£ " ' 
\ 
R 
R 
A \ 
B 
11, 
A \ 
o, o„ 
Quantity 
o: o, o„ 
Quantity 
a collection of regulatory programmes, efficiency standards, 
incentives, information programmes, and voluntary pro-
grammes that are intended to bring about adoption of specific 
technical measures to reduce energy use on the other. Signifi-
cant differences exist among different models as to which in-
struments are considered and how they are treated. 
To date the focus of macroeconomic models has been on 
carbon or energy taxes (the focus of new generations of sec-
toral technico-economic analysis has been on the impact of 
other types of incentive instruments), and significant differ-
ences result from the way the revenues of a carbon tax are 
recycled in an economy. In the earlier models, many sim-
ulations were made that assumed no tax recycling. Such an 
assumption amounts to treating a carbon tax as an external 
shock such as an oil shock and places an upper bound on the 
macroeconomic costs. In later analyses, most of the models 
represented recycling in the form of a lump-sum process, 
namely, without modifying the rest of the fiscal structure. 
This method makes comparison easier but does not describe 
the recycling techniques that have the highest probabilities of 
being implemented. In a third stage, models tried to exemplify 
other ways of recycling a tax by changing the level of payroll 
taxes, income taxes, and corporate taxes, or simply by reduc-
27V 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
U4 
1/5 o 
U 
E 
o 
c o 
E2 
Carbon Tax ($) 
A - gross abatement costs, no preexisting distortions, 
no recycling 
A | • net cost with preexisting tax distortions 
A-,- net cost with "efficient" tax recycling 
Figure 8.4: Possible costs of a carbon tax. 
ing public deficits. This methodological development compli-
cates comparisons, because the outcome depends on the ways 
the existing distortions of fiscal structures (or subsidies) are 
accounted for in the baseline, but it is more meaningful from a 
policymaking viewpoint. 
Theoretically, the recycling of a carbon tax may result in 
either an economic double dividend or an added tax burden 
(Bovenberg and Van der Mooij, 1994; Goulder, 1994). Rec-
tangle B in the right-hand diagram in Box 8.1 represents the 
additional cost of a tax when it is levied on top of existing dis-
torting taxes. In these circumstances, emission taxes would 
yield an economic double dividend if the added tax burden 
they cause is lower than the decreased tax burden they make 
possible by reduced taxes on other factors of production 
(labour, capital, rent). Otherwise, emission taxes would in-
crease the costs to the economy. 
These alternative possibilities are shown graphically in 
Figure 8.4. Curve A shows the gross abatement costs. Curve 
A, represents the net costs of emission taxes when there is no 
tax recycling and when there are preexisting tax distortions. 
The difference between A and A, is the added tax burden of 
the emission tax. (A, would he lower, but still above A if the 
emission tax revenues were used to reduce taxes that had less 
distorting effects than the emission taxes.) Curve A, shows 
the result if the emission tax revenues are recycled to reduce 
taxes that are more distorting than the emission taxes. Under 
these circumstances there exists an economic double divi-
dend. 
8.2.3.4 
International 
dimensions of climate 
policies 
The last factor affecting the cost figures provided by the mod-
els is the nature of the assumptions made about the interna-
tional context of climate policy. 
On the one hand, unilateral reduction of greenhouse gases 
may negatively affect the competitiveness of national indus-
tries and create a "leakage" of emissions from one country to 
another. This leakage occurs if mitigation policies in a given 
counin cause firms to relocate their polluting plants and pro-
duction processes to countries in which no such policies exist. 
or if firms in countries with no mitigation policies gain a com-
parative advantage due to lower costs, thus increasing their 
output and thereby their emissions relative to countries with 
mitigation policies. 
On the other hand, international coordination of mitigation 
policies may not only prevent these outcomes but may result 
in lowering the total global cost of reducing emissions. To the 
extent that mitigation costs vary among countries, the costs of 
a given level of global mitigation would be lower if interna-
tional coordination resulted in the most cost-effective mitiga-
tion policies being adopted first than if each country were 
simply to reduce emissions by an equal amount.15 Although a 
growing theoretical literature is currently devoted to this is-
sue, it has been addressed only in a few empirical modelling 
works to date. Most analyses have assumed either that na-
tional polices are adopted unilaterally or that the effects of 
national mitigation policies are neutral with respect to in-
ternational competition (i.e., that all countries take the same 
action or that the effects of mitigation policies on international 
competitiveness are small). So far no model has been able to 
account for the gains to be expected from international cooper-
ation in research and development and technology diffusion. 
8.3 Patterns of Development and 
Technological Change 
For any country, both the level of greenhouse gas emissions 
and the costs of mitigation of those emissions depend on a se-
ries of factors, including the range of technologies used and 
the underlying technological and socioeconomic conditions 
that give rise to final demands for land, energy services, or 
transportation. Most models explore options and alternatives 
as well as possible future economic conditions, based on par-
ticular assumptions about the nature of technological change 
and long-term development paths. This section of the chapter 
will explore this latter question in more detail, because these 
assumptions are very often only implicit and because current 
modelling methodologies and current data do not enable mod-
ellers to treat explicitly some of these critical parameters. 
8.3.1 Links between development 
patterns, 
technical 
change, and mitigation 
costs 
8.3.1.1 The importance of the socioeconomic 
assumptions 
underlying 
scenarios 
Much of the discussion about the costs of greenhouse gas 
emission reduction - and indeed about energy issues in gen-
eral - naturally focusses on economic concepts and variables 
such as income, prices, and growth in GDP. We therefore 
begin with a rather trite observation: Damages to the envi-
ronment are not caused by a given amount of dollars, yen. 
pounds. Deutschmarks. or francs, but by the material content 
of the consumption or production activities that are the coun-
terparts of these monetary values. To put it in another way. 
greenhouse gas emissions over the long run depend not only 
on the rate of economic growth but also on the structure and 
physical content of this growth. 
It is well known that countries with rather similar develop 
ment levels may have very different energy consumption per 
E.stimatiiii: the Costs o/Mili^atiii,i; Crcenhousc Cases 
.'/.•> 
capita or very different transportation requirements. Some of 
these disparities are obviously due to natural and geographical 
characteristics (temperature, population density, etc.), but 
many stem from differences between the development pat-
terns of these countries. Comparative studies aiming at ex-
plaining these differences (Martin, 1992; Darmstadter el al., 
1977) suggest the importance of five considerations that will 
influence the amount of greenhouse gas emissions, given a 
certain overall rate of economic growth: 
(1) 
Technological patterns in sectors such as energy, trans-
port, heavy industry, construction, agriculture, and for-
estry. As discussed below, these patterns encompass 
individual technological choices and options but also 
include overall technological systems, with their partic-
ular internal consistencies and dynamics. 
(2) 
Consumption patterns. For a given per capita income, 
parameters such as housing patterns, leisure styles, or 
the durability and the rate of obsolescence of consump-
tion goods will have a critical influence on long-run 
emission profiles. Beyond their purely technical as-
pects, these patterns are also related to the level of edu-
cation, distribution of income, and degree of dualism in 
an economy. 
(3) 
The geographical distribution of activities, which en-
compasses the distribution of human settlements in a 
given territory, climate impacts on energy demand, and 
the nature of urban form within a given settlement. The 
impact of this parameter is threefold: first on the evolu-
tion of land uses, second on mobility needs and trans-
portation requirements, and third on the energy used for 
heating and cooling. 
(4) 
Structural changes in the production system and, in par-
ticular, the role of high or low energy-intensive indus-
tries and services. The energy content of industries such 
as steel, nonferrous metals, chemicals, or pulp and pa-
per is between four and six times that of other indus-
tries. At the other end of the spectrum, a simple phone 
call on a given commodity futures market can generate 
substantial economic gains (and e-mail connections can 
increase the efficiency of researchers) for a negligible 
energy content. A shift in the relative size of primary 
production and service industries in an economy may or 
may not affect the overall level of economic activity but 
will have significant implications for energy use. 
(5) 
Trade patterns. It is generally argued in the economic 
literature that removing tariff and nontariff trade barri-
ers enhances overall economic efficiencies. But, be-
cause historical experience demonstrates that some form 
of protectionism was considered necessary to many 
countries at the early stages of industrialization, and be-
cause of the transition problems for removing these bar-
riers (risks of social and economic disruptions), free 
trade will be implemented only gradually after the 
Uruguay Round. In the meantime, the world is appar-
ently moving towards the creation of regional trading 
blocs (European Union. NAFTA, Mercosul). The future 
of these arrangements is very hard to predict and will al-
ter significantly the access to the best available tech-
nologies, the capacity of developing countries to gen-
erate high enough internal capital accumulation to fi-
nance infrastructures and education, the location of 
industrial activities, and future land uses (because of the 
impact on agricultural markets). 
These factors are not ignored by current economic models. 
They are in some way captured by changes in economic pa-
rameters such as the structure of household expenses devoted 
to heating, transportation, or food, the share of each activity in 
the total value added, the share of energy costs and transporta-
tion costs in the production function of industrial sectors, or 
import-export elasticities. This type of treatment is conve-
nient for addressing the requirements traditionally posed by 
policymakers since the beginning of economic modelling just 
before the Second World War: to provide information on the 
consequences of economic policies (e.g., a monetary devalua-
tion, a fiscal policy, an incentive to final demand through pub-
lic investment programmes, etc.) over the short term (one to 
three years), or to develop consistent economic scenarios to 
frame sectoral planning and policy (mainly in energy and 
transportation) over the medium term (four to ten years). For 
these time horizons and objectives it is logical to assume a 
continuation of historical trends in the main characteristics of 
development patterns and in the speed and direction of the 
transformation of these characteristics. 
For the longer-term periods under consideration in green-
house debates, these assumptions cannot easily be main-
tained, and economic parameters cannot easily be viewed as 
the sole command variables needed to predict the future of 
our production and consumption systems. For example, a 
given amount of added value produced by the steel or chemi-
cal industries may correspond to very different levels of mate-
rial production (and thus energy demand), depending on the 
level of sophistication of the final product: in the same way, 
the differences in household budgets devoted to transportation 
may not fully express the differences in mobility and trans-
portation patterns prevailing between towns with or without 
public rail transport systems, or between car uses in towns 
with very different levels of congestion. 
More fundamentally, the dynamics of long-term techno-
logical development cannot he fully captured by changes in 
the capital output ratio (the aggregate amount of economic 
capital used per unit of output) or by the impact of the rate of 
investment on overall productivity. These parameters are im-
portant, but the outcome in terms of greenhouse gas emissions 
will also depend on dynamic linkages between technol-
ogy, consumption patterns (mainly with respect to energy 
requirements), transportation, urban infrastructure, and the 
rural-urban distribution of population. We will return to the 
attempts of existing models to take these parameters into 
account, but the lack of knowledge available about their 
dynamic linkages and about their interactions with economic 
policies and economic signals over the long run must be un-
derlined at this stage, together with the intrinsic difficulty of 
predicting innovations and transformations of lifestyles over 
the long run. Many fields of social science address these is-
sues, but such information is not typically available in a form 
easy to process in a numerical model. 
27f, 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
In principle, alternative configurations of the factors deter-
mining development patterns could be formally combined to 
give internally consistent scenarios characterized by various 
physical and technical characteristics and economic equilibria 
for a given rate of economic growth. But this does not mean 
that all these possible scenarios are viable and that it is possi-
ble to achieve a transition towards these long-term pictures 
without entailing high social and economic costs. What mat-
ters here is that these underlying technological and consump-
tion factors are critical not only for the definition of the 
baseline scenarios but also for the assessment of actual miti-
gation costs for a given mitigation policy or objective. 
As explained earlier, the mitigation costs attached to each 
possible baseline scenario depend not only on the absolute 
level of the required mitigation and on the array of available 
technologies (energy efficiency, 
fuel switching, biomass 
planting, other renewable energy development, modal choices 
in transport) but also on the timing of this mitigation (Grubb 
et cil,, 1994; Hourcade and Chapuis, 1993; Manne and 
Richels, 1992). In this connection, three groups of partly re-
lated issues become very important: 
• 
The flexibility (or inertia) of consumption 
patterns un-
derlying the activity of greenhouse-gas-emitting sectors 
such as energy, transportation, or cement. This flexibil-
ity parameter determines the speed of adaptation to a 
given economic or noneconomic signal and encom-
passes two aspects. The first is the rate of renewal of ex-
isting end-use equipment, which is likely to be an 
important factor in the case of buildings, which have 
longer lifetimes than most capital stock. A more critical 
inflexibility of this kind stems from the systemic link-
ages between consumption patterns, technology, and the 
spatial distribution of activities. To take an extreme il-
lustration, it would he far more costly to move away 
from oil-based automobile fuels in big conurbations 
where urban structure makes the use of cars almost 
essential than in. say. a European town of about 40.000 
inhabitants, where it would be easier to satisfy a signifi-
cant proportion of intraurban personal transportation 
with electric buses and bicycles. The second aspect is 
the length of time required for turnover of the energy 
supply system. In this connection, the flexibility of pol-
icy response is associated with the size and lead times 
associated with new energy supply technologies. 
• 
Behavioural 
characteristics 
that determine technical 
change and the evolution of lifestyles; this point will 
be elaborated further with regard to technical adoption 
mechanisms. With regard to consumption patterns, the 
roots o( inertia are not only technical. Anthropology and 
social psychology demonstrate how far they are embed-
ded in cultures and habits and. more generally, how in-
dividual consumption behaviours are shaped by social 
determinants that are hard to change overnight (Robin-
son. 1901a; l.ut/enhiser. 1993; Schipper. 1995). 
• 
limitative 
effects due to feedbacks between the use of 
certain options and the rest o\' the economy. Some sec-
tors ha\e a pervasive effect on the rest of the economy. 
and drastic adaptations would trigger strong structural 
shocks on the entire productive system. 
As a whole, the critical role of these factors comes from the 
fact that the bigger the inertia of the production and consump-
tion systems the more the mitigation costs will be determined 
by the timing of the required mitigation. This is easy to under-
stand as far as the adoption of new technologies is concerned: 
To accelerate the replacement of old equipment could be a 
major source of the costs of mitigation. But this inertia also 
determines the magnitude of the loss of consumer welfare as-
sociated with mitigation. If the range of available alternatives 
is restricted by the material and spatial features of one's living 
conditions, the consumer will tend to suffer from welfare losses 
during the transition period towards consumption and produc-
tion systems that emit lesser quantities of greenhouse gases. 
A special case for inertia in development patterns occurs 
when such inertia creates irreversible processes of technologi-
cal change. To a large extent such irreversibilities emerge out 
of the factors traditionally discussed in the literature on tech-
nical innovation: learning curves, economies of scale, in-
creasing informational returns, positive network externalities, 
barriers to entry, and others. Irreversibility occurs when these 
factors combine in such a way that a particular trajectory of 
technological change and development is created that effec-
tively makes impossible the alternative choices that were 
available earlier. This gives rise to a time dependence of tech-
nical choices and the occurrence of "lock-in" effects (Arthur, 
1988). Beyond such a bifurcation point, market forces will re-
inforce the first choice in a self-fulfilling process. To give a 
single example, given the high research and development 
costs involved in a new automobile engine, it is unlikely that re-
search and development risks will be incurred simultaneously 
on electric cars, 2L/100 km gasoline engines, and biofuel en-
gines. As with gasoline engines in the early days of the automo-
bile, the choice of a particular technology, beyond a'certain 
point, will essentially prevent the development of alternatives. 
More generally, beyond technical considerations them-
selves, the self-reinforcing loops among technical choices, 
consumer demand, and the geographical distribution of activi-
ties and human settlements explain the fact that particular sets 
of technological and behavioural options can be clustered into 
consistent packages which, at least for a rather long period of 
time, foreclose other options in technology and innovation. 
These clusters are rather systematic in industries relying on 
network structures, such as energy, transportation, or telecom-
munications because of the characteristics of their production 
function (e.g.. discontinuities and economies of scale), the 
need for technical harmonization across the network, and 
their dynamic interactions with markets. This is particularly 
clear for transportation systems because of their linkages with 
urban and spatial dynamics. For example, trends observed in 
Western Europe over the past several decades could be ex-
pected to lead to a doubling of road freight on highways in the 
next fifteen years under the influence of the Single European 
Market. However, if Austria and Switzerland maintain their 
policies of limiting international truck freight transport across 
their countries for reasons of security, avoidance of conges-
tion, and local environmental protection. Europe will over 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Crcenhousc Cases 
the next several decades create two very different transport 
systems (combined rail-road versus road-dominant) and will 
certainly have gone beyond a bifurcation point (Hourcade. 
1992). A similar choice will be faced in the near future in 
many large developing countries with far more dramatic con-
sequences, as decisions are made about how to expand road, 
rail, and air networks to respond to large increases in the de-
mand for personal mobility and freight transport. 
8.3.1.2 Current and future socioeconomic 
development patterns 
Combining the issues and considerations discussed above 
suggests that four factors are likely to give rise to differences 
in the development paths underlying different baseline emis-
sion levels and differences in the cost curves for emission re-
duction or adaptation. We will describe briefly the nature of 
these factors and point out to what extent they are amenable or 
not to conscious control or choice. A critical issue is that 
many of the decisions that are apt to control the long-term 
paths will be taken for reasons that have nothing to do with 
energy policy or climate change and are indeed very often 
taken "in passing" rather than as an explicit component of 
public policy. 
8.3.1.2.1 Material and energy content of development in 
industrialized countries 
An important determinant of greenhouse gas emissions in any 
economy is the raw material intensity of that economy: the 
amount of matter and energy used per unit of economic activ-
ity. Broadly speaking, for any given level of economic activity, 
the lower the raw material intensity, the lower the greenhouse 
gas emissions. Over the past several decades, the raw material 
intensity of industrialized countries has dropped significantly 
(Bernardini and Galli, 1993; Williams, 1987). An important 
question is whether such reductions in industrialized 
economies simply reflect the shifting of energy- and matter-
intensive activities to other countries, in which case the net ef-
fect may be to hold constant or even increase global raw 
material intensities, or whether there is a net reduction in the 
energy- and matter-intensive activities themselves (IAEE. 
1993). 
Some of the major socioeconomic factors that will affect 
the future raw material intensity of industrialized economies 
are 
• structural shifts in the economy towards services 
• increases in the "information intensity" of industrial 
processes, goods, and services (Chen, 1994) 
• the effects of telecommunications on travel and trans-
portation energy use (Selvanathan and Selvanathan, 
1994) 
• saturation in the consumption of some goods and ser-
vices and the emergence of less energy- and material-
intensive goods and services 
Clearly, quite different configurations of these factors are 
possible, resulting in potentially large differences in raw ma-
terial intensities, independent of the size of the economy. It is 
also clear that mitigation costs per unit of economic activity 
277 
(e.g., dollars per unit GDP) will depend on both the mix and 
level of such intensities and will necessarily vary among 
economies with different structures. 
H.3.1.2.2 Links among energy, transport, and urban planning 
Transportation energy use accounts for a significant propor-
tion of greenhouse gas emissions,"' and its growth rate is typi-
cally higher than for other categories of energy demand. More 
critically it is the only form of energy use not drastically de-
coupled from economic growth after the oil shocks. This does 
not demonstrate that price effects are nonexistent in this sec-
tor but that they interact with other structural determinants. In 
the U.S., for example, energy efficiency gains in private auto-
mobiles over the 1970s and early 1980s were almost exactly 
offset by increases in distances driven per vehicle, so that total 
energy use remained flat (Schipper and Howarlh, 1990). In 
the transport sector, the types and quantities of emissions are a 
function of the demand for transportation services (i.e., the 
amount of travel), the mode chosen (auto, air, bus, rail), the 
efficiency of the vehicles, and the types of fuel used. The first 
two of these, in turn, are greatly influenced by. and influence, 
the size and configuration of cities and towns (Newman and 
Kenworthy, 1989). Important factors are: 
• the location of housing relative to jobs, schools, and re-
tail outlets 
• the distribution of retail trade and industrial activities 
within the region 
• the road and rail network within and among different 
cities and towns 
• the investment in, and choice of, public transit systems 
Beyond these specific urban planning issues are a whole set of 
questions related to the development of new transportation 
systems and technologies (Ross, 1989). The growth in per-
sonal mobility in industrialized countries over the past several 
centuries has been closely correlated with technological ad-
vances in the types of vehicles used, the availability of fuels, 
and the transportation infrastructure created. In turn, such fac-
tors interact in complex ways with urban form and develop-
ment and directly affect both the prospects for, and the costs 
of, greenhouse gas mitigation. lor example, the level of fu-
ture automobile emissions will depend in part on the degree of 
saturation of automobile densities in urban areas, due to the 
availability of effective air and high-speed ground transporta-
tion alternatives (Grubler et al., 1993). In the metropolitan 
area of Sao Paulo, for instance, most of the increase in atmo-
spheric pollution has been attributed to increased congestion, 
as indicated by a reduction in the average vehicle speed from 
28 km/h during the 1980s to 20-24 km/h in 1993 (CETESB, 
1994). 
Clearly, quite different configurations of these factors can 
be envisaged, and transportation is a field in which bifurca-
tions towards contrasted paths may occur in any region of the 
world. These alternatives would have major impacts on miti-
gation options and costs. As suggested earlier, the costs of 
transportation sector mitigation for a population that depends 
on automobile transport in highly dispersed suburban develop-
ments would be very different than for a population located at 
27,S' 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
the core of dense urban agglomerations with a well-developed 
urban transit infrastructure. Since towns and cities take shape, 
and change, over periods measured in decades and centuries, 
the full effect of alternative transportation developments will 
be manifest only in the relatively long term, and there is high 
uncertainty about the long-run impact of short-term decisions 
(or nondecisions). 
8.3.1.2.3 
Land use and human 
settlements 
This issue concerns all regions of the world, but its quantita-
tive impact is more impressive in developing countries. Land 
use and human settlement pattern changes derived from agri-
cultural and forestry activities as well as rural-rural and 
rural-urban migrations are among the main sources of green-
house gas emissions in these countries. Deforestation in most 
developing countries is a complex phenomenon, mainly caused 
by the expansion of the road network, logging and cattle raising 
activities, agricultural production, and population growth fos-
tered by rural-rural migrations due in some cases to the ab-
sence of guaranteed access to land (agrarian reform) in other 
regions. 
These examples show that mitigation cost estimates that 
don't take account of such institutional factors can be very 
misleading. Hidden costs can he very important when one 
considers the institutional capacity building needed, on the 
one hand, to prevent the harvesting of a very low-cost natural 
resource such as a native forest, and. on the other, to enforce 
environmental protection, reforestation, and forest manage-
ment practices. Moreover, even macroeconomic cost assess-
ments don't tell the whole story: For instance, the whole GDP 
loss resulting from completely halting the development of the 
Amazon region would he very low compared with overall 
Brazilian economic output, but this scenario is clearly incon-
ceivable for social, political, and cultural reasons. Deep struc-
tural changes in these underlying factors will often be re-
quired in order to make mitigation strategies feasible. 
In this field it is even more important than elsewhere to 
look at the "greenhouse gas mitigation component" of more 
general development strategies instead of considering green-
house gas mitigation measures on their own. Mitigation costs 
are only one part of a larger set of factors in such cases. For 
example, a first step towards increasing the relevance of a car-
bon sequestration objective might he to link it with the preser-
vation of biodiversity. This could increase its political and 
social relevance, though it would make the task of quantifying 
economic costs and benefits much more difficult. 
S.J. 1.2.4 Development patterns in developing 
countries 
The importance of development pattern assumptions for the 
assessment of mitigation costs is of particular importance 
in the case of developing countries. Since a major part of the 
infrastructure needed for development is still to be built, the 
spectrum o[' future options is considerably wider than in 
industrialized countries. The traditional approach of using 
"business-as-usual" assumptions as the baseline is then par-
ticular!) problematical. 
Nor can one assume thai developing countries will auto-
matical!) follow the past development paths of industrialized 
countries. The significant transformations recently evident in 
the international economy and energy markets highlight the 
dangers of such an assumption. In this respect, we need to 
consider the structure of GDP in developing countries and 
how that structure might evolve given such global transforma-
tions. A crucial question concerns the developing countries' 
share of the world production of highly energy- and pollution-
intensive goods, such as steel and aluminum. For example, as 
the recent shift of heavy industries from the industrialized 
countries towards the developing countries begins to slow, 
economic output may increasingly come from services and 
other less energy-intensive activities. 
Moreover, technological choices in both the production 
and consumption sectors can substantially change critical pa-
rameters such as the elasticity of energy demand/GDP. Ex-
perience demonstrates that countries entering the path to 
development have had generally lower energy profiles than 
countries that developed sooner. This does not mean that the 
energy/GDP ratio will not increase in many of these countries 
and that increases in consumer purchasing power in many de-
veloping countries will not drive up energy demand growth 
rates. It does mean, however, that these countries are not 
bound to reach the same levels of energy intensity that coun-
tries such as the UK and the U.S. have; they are not bound, for 
example, to adopt the same models of energy-wasteful refrig-
erators still in operation in developed countries or to reject up-
to-date technological improvements for factories, many of 
which will improve energy efficiency. More generally a grow-
ing interest in the preservation of cultural diversity might also 
favour less energy-intensive housing, transportation, leisure, 
and consumption patterns, and less resource consumption per 
capita than is currently the case in the developed countries. 
One among other possible examples is related to avoiding low 
urban population densities that are coupled with long daily 
trips to work and to large shopping centres by car. 
Finally, the spatial distribution of the population and o\' 
economic activities is still not settled in most developing 
countries, a situation that offers the possibility of adopting ur-
ban/regional planning and industrial policies directed towards 
rural development and a stronger role for small and medium-
sized cities, thus reducing the rural exodus and the concentra-
tion of populations in large cities.17 But. given current heavy 
trends towards huge conurbations, it will be difficult to shift 
them over the next century. We are faced here with a strong 
socioeconomic inertia that can be overcome only gradually 
through steady long-term policies. Nevertheless, more decen-
tralized development patterns than those typical of industrial-
ized countries could allow developing countries to use 
modern technology (biotechnology, solar energy, wind, and 
small-scale hydro power) to tap their large reserves of natural 
resources. In the same ways, it could change their needs for 
transportation. 
These examples show that developing countries might be 
in a position to adopt anticipative strategies that could prevent 
in the long term some of the problems faced today by indus-
trial societies. For example, in industrialized countries, en-
ergy demand/GDP elasticities first increased with successive 
stages of industrialization (with an acceleration during the 
ll)5()s and l°60s). but have sharply decreased since then, due 
to a number of different factors, such as the relative sirovvth of 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
services in the share of GDP and technical progress and 
energy conservation induced by higher oil prices (Martin. 
1988; Darmstadter, et al., 1977). Developing countries could 
skip these intermediate stages and follow a path leading 
directly to less energy-intensive development patterns, thus 
avoiding a large increase in energy/GDP intensities in the short 
and medium terms - the so-called "tunnel effect" (Berrah, 
1983). 
Such possibilities for alternative development patterns 
highlight the technical feasibility of low carbon futures in de-
veloping countries that are compatible with national objec-
tives. But, in the opposite direction, past and present experi-
ence suggest that these countries might not be in a position to 
switch to low greenhouse gas emitting profiles. The recent ex-
perience of economic stagnation or recession in a substantial 
set of developing countries demonstrates, for example, that 
access to superior technologies may be limited by the increase 
of the share of second-hand equipment or the import of obso-
lete technology and products. In the same way. the prevailing 
indebtedness of many countries could prohibit the adoption 
of interurban transportation infrastructures or of the urban 
infrastructure policies necessary to reach balanced human 
settlement patterns. As a whole, barriers to more sustainable 
development in the developing countries can hardly be 
underestimated. These include insufficient capital stock (thus 
preventing the use of the same technologies as in developed 
countries), tariff and nontariff trade barriers, the organization 
of international trade and the international financial environ-
ment, the distribution of national income, and very often the 
lack of appropriate institutions for using the indigenous tech-
nical and economic capabilities of these countries. 
This means that switching to very different development 
patterns from those that have customarily been expected will 
depend on the removal of these barriers, the setting up of an 
appropriate context by national public policies, and the evolu-
tion of international economic relationships. Development 
theory has not yet provided the analytical tools needed to en-
able modellers to discriminate among such different develop-
ment patterns. 
8.3.2 Modelling development paths and mitigation costs 
It is clear from the preceding discussion that the underlying 
socioeconomic conditions will have an important effect on fu-
ture greenhouse gas emissions and the costs of mitigation and 
that great uncertainty exists about how those conditions may 
evolve over the next century. The extent of these uncertainties 
is such as to cast some doubt on the ability of models to pre-
dict long-term development patterns. On the other hand, it has 
become more and more important to have a scientific under-
standing of the implication of possible long trends. It is in the 
context of this tension between uncertainty and the need to act 
that we have to assess the meaning and lessons of modelling 
analyses. 
8.3.2.1 Prediction and simulation: The need for 
multiple baselines 
In coming to grips with the uncertainty of long-term projec-
tions, it is important to recognize that it goes beyond the un-
J7V 
certainty associated with any given emissions forecast or sce-
nario. The point is not that individual base case forecasts or 
scenarios are uncertain with regard to exogenous parameters 
such as economic or population growth rates. It is that there 
exists a range of quite different underlying socioeconomic de-
velopment paths that would give rise to different emission 
scenarios and costs of mitigation. Each of these development 
paths can be thought of as a base case, and each one will vary, 
given different assumptions about economic or population 
growth rates (i.e., each is uncertain in the familiar sense). 
Moreover, to the extent that these different development paths 
contain the kinds of bifurcations and irreversibilities dis-
cussed above, it would be very difficult, and indeed mislead-
ing, to estimate a probability distribution for the set of 
long-term development paths. Such bifurcations can be trig-
gered by short-term decisions and actions that are not pre-
dictable. 
The logical implication of this is the necessity to use multi-
ple scenarios in order to account for uncertainties with regard 
to development patterns and the possibility of what econo-
mists call "multiple equilibria" in the long term. At time "/" 
there are several possible market equilibria that could arise at 
a future time "t+n" (i.e., several possible stales of the world 
characterized by different technical circumstances), and these 
are not easily predictable from current trends. From a purely 
analytical perspective, it is possible to resort to some subjec-
tive or logical probability distribution in order to narrow these 
uncertainties among different scenarios and provide some 
kind of average scenario. But to do so could be misleading in 
a decision-making context. The point is that these alternative 
base cases represent quite different, and internally consistent, 
patterns of development. Many of the uncertainties about such 
scenarios are due to the long-term consequences of short-term 
decisions or behaviours, and to the collective expectations 
prevailing at time "/" regarding the future lime "t+n." In turn, 
these decisions, behaviours, and expectations are part of a 
particular sequence of events and cannot simply he combined 
with the components of other such sequences to produce an 
"average" or "most likely" sequence. 
These concerns about the predictive value of models and 
the existence of possible multiple economic equilibria and 
their logical implications for policymaking are not new in var-
ious fields of socioeconomic modelling. The origin of these 
concerns lies in the recognition of the limits of empirical fore-
casting methods that appeared by the end of the 1960s. This 
led to the development of approaches that tend to emphasize 
the unpredictability of alternative futures, the degree to which 
they are subject to partial choice, and the need for analysis of 
multiple alternatives."4 In the energy field, approaches based 
on the concept of multiple scenarios were pioneered by Shell 
International Petroleum Company in the early 1970s (Jeffer-
son, 1982. 1983: Wack. 1985a. 1985b) and have been adopted 
in various forms in the electric utility industry in North Amer-
ica (Southern California Edison Company. 1988; Northwest 
Power Planning Council, 1991). More recently, building in 
part on some of the methodological insights of the Shell sce-
nario analysis approach, there has emerged a set of more gen-
eral analyses of long-term futures focussing on questions of 
surprise and alternative development paths defined in very 
2,S'U 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
broad terms (FRN, 1987; Stockholm Environment Institute/ 
Greenpeace, 1993; Gal and Prick. 1987). 
In parallel to methodological concerns about the inade-
quacy ol' traditional forecasting techniques, there emerged 
over the same period a series ol critiques of conventional 
"business-as-usual" views of the future, usually based on an 
explicitly "environmental" perspective. One of the most 
prominent of these early critiques was the Club of Rome's 
1972 book The Limits to Growth (Meadows and Meadows, 
1972), the publication of which stimulated an extensive de-
bate about alternative development paths. This debate was fu-
elled by the publication of a number of subsequent studies 
(Mesarovic and Pestel, 1974), including the Leontieff report 
launched to illustrate the International Development Strategy 
adopted by the United Nations in 1974 (Tinbergen, 1976). 
An attempt to articulate a developing country perspective on 
these issues led to the publication of the Bariloche report. 
which presented a rather different development path for these 
countries (Herrera et al., 1976). 
These studies provided fertile ground for the development 
of alternative energy modelling analyses, which were also 
triggered in part by the oil shock of 1973-74. These studies 
expressed concerns about possible long-range limits in fossil 
fuel resources and about the risks likely to be involved in nu-
clear power. Following a major study by the Ford Foundation 
in 1974 (Ford Foundation. 1974). Amory Lovins' provocative 
"soft energy path" analysis (Lovins. 1977) helped to launch 
many exploratory works in North America (Craig et al., 1978; 
Sunt, 1979; Brooks and Gin/ton, 1980; Stobaugh and Yergin. 
1979; Ross and Williams, 1981) and in many European coun-
tries (Johansson and Stcen. 1977; Leach. 1979; Norgaard, 
1979; Krause. 1981; Messenger. 1981; Olivier et al., 1982) 
about the possibility of avoiding possible physical limits and 
nuclear risks. These studies were based on what came to be 
called "bottom-up" methods of analysis and produced energy 
system projections that were significantly at odds with the 
"top-down" analyses prepared by governments, the energy in-
dustry, and energy economists relying on extrapolatory ap-
proaches.1" In the early 1980s, the publication of the results 
of the energy study by the International Institute of Applied 
Systems Analysis (Hafele. 1981) sparked a vigorous debate 
both about modelling methods and about alternative energy 
futures (Keepin and Wynne. 1987; Thompson. 1984). Subse-
quent analyses continued to reflect the split between top-
down and bottom-tip analyses, but revealed a growing interest 
in global environmental issues such as global climate change, 
influenced in part by the publication of the final report of the 
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) 
and the subsequent UN Conference on Environment and De-
velopment in 1992.'" Throughout this period, a major hone of 
contention has been how best to analyze alternative patterns 
of development and technological change that represent sig-
nificant departures from past trends. 
These debates are not restricted to applied analyses. They 
have taken place in many fields of social science theory con-
cerning such issues as the plurality of economic equilibria 
generated by different sets of expectations-such as the works 
about the so-called "simspot theory" (A/aiiadis and dues 
nene (ll)8(i): self-fulfilling or self-defeating prophecies (Hen-
shell, 1982, 1993); "common knowledge" and "conventions" 
(Lewis, 1969; Dupuy. 1989); the coordination game (Schelling, 
I960; Aumann, 1987), and, more generally, the outcome of re-
peated games in game theory (Fudenberg and Tirole, 1991) 
and chaotic behaviour and surprises. There is thus a rich his-
tory of approaches to modelling that emphasize the impor-
tance of incorporating alternative development paths and 
multiple base cases. As yet such approaches have made only a 
modest impact on greenhouse gas costing studies. 
8.3.2.2 Economic modelling and development 
trends: 
Some limits 
There is perhaps an unavoidable gap between advanced think-
ing in social science theory and the empirical tools available, 
given computational constraints, data availability, and the pri-
orities adopted by research-funding institutions. Nevertheless, 
over the past two decades the state of the art of long-term, 
policy-oriented energy system modelling has evolved very 
rapidly, due in large part to significant progress in energy-
economy modelling. This progress has been driven by ques-
tions raised by the oil shocks of the 1970s, perceived risks of 
resource exhaustion, the nuclear debate, and climate change 
issues. 
Progress has also been made in modelling other sectors 
such as transportation or agriculture. However, less attention 
has been paid in this work to the linkage between sectoral 
analysis and a more comprehensive economic framework 
than in energy sector analyses, where policymakers have been 
very interested in the macroeconomic imbalances (e.g., exter-
nal debt, inflation, and unemployment) caused by oil imports 
and price increases. Moreover, the initial focus on energy-re-
lated greenhouse gas emissions has meant that less attention 
has been paid to the emissions of other sectors. As a result, the 
state of the art of modelling in the energy field serves as a use-
ful indicator of the difficulties of representing alternative de-
velopment paths in current models. 
Many econometrically driven "top-down" models of the 
whole economy, initially built for the purpose of economic 
policy analysis, have contained aggregate or quasi-aggregate 
sectoral demand functions (e.g., one or two energy services or 
one composite food product). They consequently capture fu-
ture development and technological trends in the econometric 
relationships among standard econometric indicators. Using 
them in long-term analyses amounts to extrapolating current 
trends in the relationships among key variables, on the as-
sumption that historical changes in these relationships capture 
the essence of likely future responses to changes in input vari-
ables such as the future price of energy, food, or wages. Such 
analysis provides very useful "counterfactual" information 
on. say. the aggregate impact of a carbon tax relative to some 
assumed base case, but it does not have a very high predictive 
value for the very long term or with regard to, say. bifurca-
tions in the transportation sector. 
"Bottom-up" models have historically been designed for 
the specific needs of a given sector (e.g.. energy, transporta-
tion, forestry) and in the energy field are sometimes linked to 
standard macroeconomic models. They give a disaggregated 
picture of demand and supply and point out potential gains in 
efficiency from specific technologies or the potential for sub-
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
stitution of carbon-free technologies. Such models rely on 
rather precise descriptions of end-use and production tech-
nologies (e.g., appliance penetration and usage rates, building 
heat-loss coefficients, tonne-kilometres of freight transporta-
tion), but typically do not contain much treatment of feed-
backs between these parameters and underlying economic 
variables (e.g., feedbacks between energy efficiency savings 
and employment, or consumption behaviour for other goods 
and services). The lack of macroeconomic behavioural feed-
back means that such models are better suited to "what if" 
simulation analyses rather than to prediction. 
Virtually all the modelling analyses of greenhouse gas mit-
igation undertaken to date have used some form of these two 
approaches to energy/economy modelling or coupled models 
that combine them. We will discuss the difference between 
these approaches in more detail in Section 8.4. The point here 
is simply that, to date, neither set of models has been used to 
address the issues of alternative development patterns and 
technological change that have just been identified. Instead, 
the models have been used to analyze the effect of certain 
policies (typically tax policies in the case of top-down models 
and the implementation of specific energy-using technologies 
in the case of bottom-up models), given implicit assumptions 
about development paths. 
This suggests that existing mitigation cost studies are 
meaningful primarily at the margin of a given development 
path, which, in turn, means that they are valid under the fol-
lowing conditions: 
(1) 
As long as historical development patterns and relation-
ships among key underlying variables hold constant for 
the projection period (top-down analyses) 
(2) 
If there are no important feedbacks between the struc-
tural evolution of a particular sector in a mitigation 
strategy and the overall development pattern (bottom-
up analyses) 
8.3.3 Multiple baselines, uncertainty, and long-term 
mitigation costs 
The preceding discussion explains why there is a growing 
consensus among experts on the necessity to work with multi-
ple baseline scenarios when long-term horizons are under 
consideration. Such scenarios would represent different, in-
ternally consistent sets of assumptions concerning the factors 
discussed above rather than simple variants of a base case 
generated by altering the input parameters of a given model. 
The point is not to predict what long-term outcomes are most 
likely, an exercise at which few have been successful (Ascher. 
1978, 1990), but to explore the economic and technical feasi-
bility and the costs associated with quite different develop-
ment paths. This would make it possible, for example, to 
respond to the frequent request for the generation and analysis 
of "sustainable development" or other scenarios that represent 
very different assumptions about economic and technological 
development paths and about "lifestyle change" from those 
contained in traditional analyses. 
The limitations of current methodologies heighten the need 
for making clear the types of structural determinants that are 
_\S7 
explicitly accounted for in each baseline scenario and those 
that are considered fixed. There is a need for more sensitiv-
ity testing of modelling analyses, together with viability test-
ing to ensure the overall consistency of long-term projected 
trends, given financial, political, and institutional constraints. 
However, it is also important to avoid the common mistake of 
using arguments about the inadequacies of existing models to 
project wishful thinking about future development options 
and mitigation strategies. 
Beyond these technical difficulties we should like to em-
phasize two major issues stemming from the existence of sev-
eral baseline scenarios. These are covered in the following 
two sections. 
8.3.3.1 Multiple baselines and the noncomparahility of 
cost assessments 
Given that different underlying assumptions about development 
patterns can give rise to a number of quite different types and 
levels of greenhouse gas emissions as well as a number of 
mitigation costs and potentials, a comparison between cost as-
sessments theoretically requires an evaluation of baseline and 
mitigation scenario assumptions, including technology data.21 
Such an evaluation should identify key determinants and as-
sumptions behind the cost estimates in order to explain differ-
ences. Without a comprehensive and transparent documenta-
tion of the full set of scenario assumptions, any comparison of 
cost estimates coming from studies with very different base-
line scenarios will be misleading. For example, a mitigation 
scenario derived from baseline assumptions that incorporate 
substantial air quality improvements for reasons unrelated to 
climate change is likely to give rise to greenhouse gas mitiga-
tion cost estimates that are higher per unit of reduction than a 
mitigation scenario derived from baseline assumptions with-
out such improvements.-- Similarly, mitigation cost estimates 
would vary depending on the transportation infrastructure as-
sumed in the baseline scenario. 
Moreover, given the difficulties of incorporating the feed-
backs between development patterns and economic variables 
discussed above, a baseline scenario that gives rise to lower 
estimates of mitigation costs cannot be interpreted as being 
economically superior to other baselines. Such lower cost es-
timates simply mean that the incremental costs of mitigation 
relative to that baseline arc lower than the incremental costs 
relative to some other baseline. However, this leaves unan-
swered the question of the relative costs (e.g.. transaction or 
political costs) of achieving these different baseline scenarios. 
Since different baselines represent different development 
paths, each of which is potentially an "efficient" scenario, 
they cannot be directly compared and no overall relative cost 
assessment is possible. Two historical examples help to illus-
trate that this problem is far from being a simple intellectual 
fancy. 
If the climate debate had emerged in 1973, just before the 
decision to launch the nuclear programme in France, any as-
sessment of mitigation costs should have considered two pos-
sible baseline scenarios. The first would have excluded the 
nuclear programme and, consequently, would have had a 
higher C02 emission level. In this case, the cost of the nuclear 
programme could have been included in the mitigation costs. 
2K2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
The second would have included the nuclear programme, and, 
as a result, emissions and mitigation requirements would have 
been lower. Paradoxically, however, the costs of an incremental 
emission reduction of, say, 20% would have been far higher. 
Beyond the fact that assessing the relative costs of two to-
tally different energy systems is technically difficult (for 
example, in the nonnuclearcase France would not have devel-
oped electrical heating to the degree it did), the critical point 
is that the nuclear choice would not have been made, in prac-
tice, purely for climate-related reasons, but in any negotiation 
the French administration would have tended to argue the 
contrary so that this programme could have been considered a 
specific contribution to a collective climate policy. 
Turning to the second example, baseline and mitigation 
scenarios for Brazil differ considerably, depending on as-
sumptions about the future of the country's biomass ethanol 
programme. Even though no environmental factors were 
taken into account to justify it when it was first implemented 
in 1975, the existence of this programme can be shown to lead 
to both a lower emission baseline and lower mitigation costs. 
So far. many questions are still pending with regard to the 
overall costs and benefits of this programme in terms of 
macroeconomic impacts, distributional effects, refining struc-
ture of oil. and innovation, and until these are answered it is 
difficult to predict the likely future of the programme. Fur-
thermore, the choice of a baseline with or without the ethanol 
programme would entail many types of transaction and politi-
cal costs and would have many external effects, all of which 
are very hard to assess. 
In both cases, the best analytical strategy is to recognize 
that different baselines are possible and that any mitigation 
cost estimates are only relevant at the margin of each baseline 
and not in absolute terms. 
8.3.3.2 
The meaning of the baseline 
The function of baseline scenarios in cost studies is to provide 
a basis of comparison for calculating mitigation costs. It is 
important to hear in mind that such baselines pose a somewhat 
artificial distinction between a notional "business-as-usual" 
case (i.e., what would happen if no mitigation policies were 
instituted) and a "policy intervention" case (what would hap-
pen if they were). Although such a procedure is required to 
obtain a basis of comparison and thus an estimate of the costs 
of intervention, in principle it does not imply anything about 
the likelihood or relative economic efficiency of the baseline 
compared to the intervention case. 
A similar problem emerges with respect to the conven-
tional distinction between adaptation to. and mitigation of. 
climate change. In the short term, the meaning of that distinc-
tion is clear: Mitigation means reducing sources of emissions 
and/or increasing sinks (i.e.. reducing the causes of climate 
change), whereas adaptation means improving our capability 
to withstand changes in the global climate system (i.e.. re-
sponding to the effects of climate change). In the longer term, 
however, the distinction between mitigation and adapta-
tion begins to blur. Not onl\ will measures adopted to serve 
one goal ha\e significant consequences for the other (e.g.. 
some eneig\ efficiency measures adopted to reduce emissions 
ma\ make encrev s\ stems more resilient to climate variabil-
ity) but many policies adopted for other reasons will have 
both adaptive and mitigative effects (e.g., urban planning de-
cisions). 
Indeed, in the long term, both "mitigation" and "adapta-
tion" measures are part of the adaptive responses of societies 
to a whole host of conditions and perceived problems, only a 
small number of which have to do with climate change. From 
this point of view, the distinction between baseline and inter-
vention scenarios is particularly artificial. Their importance 
lies in the difference between them, not in the plausibility or 
likelihood of either as a forecast. 
8.4 Differences among Models and their Results 
8.4.1 General methodological 
considerations 
We have suggested that existing models do not generally ad-
dress questions of alternative paths of technological develop-
ment in an effective way. Yet even without the variation that 
consideration of such factors might be expected to induce, the 
range of results in greenhouse gas mitigation costing studies 
is very large. It is difficult to disentangle the various reasons 
for these disparities in modelling results, given the diversity 
of tools used to calculate cost estimates, the many and varied 
assumptions employed, and the disparities in the geographical 
coverage of different studies. 
Historically the debate in the energy field has been framed 
by the distinction between "top-down" and "bottom-up" stud-
ies, a distinction that can be applied in other fields as well. 
Basically, top-down models analyze aggregated behaviours 
based on economic indices of prices and elasticities. These 
models began mainly as macroeconomic models that tried to 
capture the overall economic impact of a climate policy, which, 
because of the difficulty of assessing other types of policy in-
struments, was usually in the form of a carbon tax or, more 
rarely, tradable permits. Bottom-up models, on the other hand, 
rely on the detailed analysis of technical potential, focussing on 
the integration of technology costs and performance data. 
Not all models fall neatly into one of these two categories, 
and several "hybrid models" are now available in which ana-
lysts have attempted to merge top-down and bottom-up model 
characteristics. As a result, differences in findings are increas-
ingly the effect of differences in input assumptions rather than 
differences in model structure. However, the discussion in this 
text will maintain the dichotomy between these models to the 
extent that this distinction remains meaningful for under-
standing some critical policy issues. 
The top-down/bottom-up categorization has been por-
trayed as opposing the optimism of the "engineering para-
digm" to the pessimism of the "economic paradigm" (Grubb 
et al., 1993). From an engineering standpoint the evidence is 
that the best available technologies have not been adopted so 
far: this "efficiency gap" is the gap between the energy effi-
ciency of equipment actually chosen by consumers and the 
energy efficiency of the technology that could theoretically 
minimize the costs entailed in providing a given amount of 
energy service. Bottom-up models are able to demonstrate the 
existence of such an "efficiency gap." and thus they suggest 
that, thanks to "negative cost measures." substantial emission 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Cases 
2SJ 
reductions could be achieved with low taxes and low costs or 
even net savings. 
In response, the professional reflex of many economists 
has been to call attention to the reasons why consumers do not 
adopt technologies that appear to be optimal, and to suggest 
that accounting for these reasons, together with the economic 
feedbacks of a given policy, would reduce the magnitude of. 
or eliminate, the efficiency gap that is actually achievable. 
Top-down macroeconomic models concluded, at least in early 
analyses, that relatively large carbon taxes resulting in signifi-
cant economic costs would be required to counter current 
emission trends. 
The methodological difficulties lying behind these differ-
ences revolve around how to describe the processes of tech-
nology adoption, the decision-making behaviour of economic 
agents, and the feedbacks between any public policy measures 
and the overall economy, and how markets and economic in-
stitutions actually operate over a given period of time. From 
this viewpoint the opposition between top-down and bottom-
up methodologies does not fully represent the whole spectrum 
of critical issues. That is why, before discussing the lessons 
of the top-down and bottom-up debate, we will sketch the 
dimensions of a typology of existing models. Given the prom-
inence of energy/economy models in the field, we will con-
centrate on them. However, many of the methodological issues 
are quite general and similar arguments could be applied to 
models of other sectors, such as forestry. 
8.4.2 Critical dimensions of a typology of 
existing models 
Various attempts have been made to categorize the large vari-
ety of models that have been used to analyze the costs of re-
ducing greenhouse gas emissions.23 Instead of providing a 
new and necessarily arbitrary typology, we will try here to 
provide a description of the main characteristics that differen-
tiate these models, in order to make clear what each type of 
model describes and what kind of policy question it can best 
address. To accomplish this, we will focus on those character-
istics that have to do with the purposes of the models (i.e., the 
questions they are meant to address), their structure (i.e.. 
those assumptions that are embedded in the equation system), 
and their external assumptions (i.e., assumptions expressed in 
terms of inputs to the models). Because few, if any, individual 
models represent pure types within these categories, we have 
not referenced specific models. Instead the goal here is to pro-
vide a general framework to aid in interpretation of the spe-
cific modelling results presented in Chapter 9. 
8.4.2.1 Diversity of models, diversity of purposes 
Significant misinterpretations of the results of modelling 
studies can arise from overlooking the purpose of the analysis 
they were used for. The meaning of the numerical results of a 
model will differ depending on whether a given scenario is 
used to predict (forecast) the future or to explore it as a tool 
for "backcasting" exercises. 
Many models are used to try to "predict" the future and 
to provide an estimate of the most likely set of future 
events. This purpose imposes very strict methodological 
constraints on the modeller. He or she must produce a base 
case forecast, which amounts to a best-guess projection of 
the most likely future; to do this requires an endogenous 
representation of economic behaviour and general growth 
patterns. This type of predictive exercise attempts to extrap-
olate the interactions of historical trends into the future, 
with a minimum of exogenous parameters. This approach 
has been typical of government and sectoral forecasting ac-
tivities (e.g.. in energy, transport, and heavy industries such 
as steel) and early climate change scenario analyses. It re-
mains both necessary and convenient for analyzing the 
short-term impacts of climate policies, since a number of 
critical underlying development variables can reasonably be 
assumed to remain constant for these time periods. Most 
short-term, econometrically driven macroeconomic models 
adopt this approach. For the long-term (middle of the next 
century), the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen. McKibbin-Wilcoxen, and 
Goulder models are the only models in this category. It is 
noteworthy that none of these models tries to work on the 
basis of forecasts of explicit technological trends in the en-
gineering sense. 
Because of the difficulty of extrapolating past trends over 
the long run, the purpose of some modellers is to "explore" 
the future rather than to predict it and, in so doing, to provide 
potentially counterintuitive assessments. This leads to a sce-
nario analysis approach, which involves building up different 
coherent visions of the future (each of which can undergo sen-
sitivity testing) based on different values for key assumptions 
about economic behaviour, physical resource endowments, or 
technical progress, together with assumptions about economic 
or population growth. The first step in such analyses is the 
generation of a "reference" or "nonintervention" scenario. 
This is then contrasted with alternative cases involving an ar-
ray of policy measures, such as carbon taxes or energy effi-
ciency regulations, giving rise to one or several "policy" or 
"intervention" scenarios, but the policy analysis is relevant 
only in the context of each baseline scenario. This approach is 
increasingly used for climate change analysis and was the ba-
sis for the 1992 IFCC scenarios (Legget et ai, 1992). It is 
shared by both bottom-up and top-down models24 and indeed 
tends to favour the development of hybrid models (which are 
discussed at greater length below). In terms of representing 
and simulating the behaviour of economic agents, two method-
ologies predominate. One involves an assumption of least-
cost optimization, in which society maximizes the utility of 
consumption over the long run. The other involves the effort 
to simulate real-world behaviour predictively in terms of tech-
nology adoption. 
Finally, another possible purpose of models is to assess the 
feasibility of alternative futures, often defined in terms of de-
sirability rather than likelihood. This contrasts with the two 
previous approaches, insofar as it involves the development 
of a vision of a future state of the system being studied and 
then an analysis of how that future system might be realized. 
This "backcasting" methodology25 allows for identification of 
major changes as well as discontinuities in present trends that 
might be required if a desirable future is to be attained 
(Robinson, 1988, 1990). Two types of research can be carried 
2X4 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 8.1. Key structural characteristics 
in energy/economy 
models 
Structural Characteristics 
Policy Issues 
1. Degree ol'cndogeni/.ation (ihe extent to which 
behavioural relationships are endogeni/ed in the 
model equations or left to be supplied as 
exogenous assumptions) 
2. Extent of description of the nonenergy sector components 
of the economy (investment, trade, consumption of 
nonenergy goods and services, income distribution, etc.) 
3. Extent of description of energy end uses 
4. Extent of description of energy supply technologies 
Models that endogenize behaviour are suited to predict actual outcomes: 
those that exogenize it are more suited to simulate the effects of changes in 
historical patterns 
Models that describe these sectors in more detail are more suitable for 
analyzing the wider economic effects of energy policy measures 
Models that describe these end uses in more detail are more suitable for 
analyzing the technological potential for energy efficiency 
Models that describe these end uses in more detail are more suitable for 
analyzing the technological potential for fuel substitution and new supplies 
Table 8.2. Key structural distinctions between bottom-up and top-down 
models 
Early Models 
More Recent Models 
Structural Dimension 
Top-Down 
Bottom-Up 
Top-Down 
High 
High 
Increasing 
Increasing 
Decreasing 
Bottom-Up 
Increasing 
Increasing 
High 
High 
Increasing 
1. Endogeni/.ation of behaviour 
High 
2. Detail on nonenergy sectors 
High 
3. Detail on energy end-uses 
Low 
4. Detail on energy supply technologies 
Low 
5. Predictive orientation 
High 
Low 
Low 
High 
High 
Low 
out in this approach. Most studies involve generating and ana-
lyzing normative scenarios about desired futures. Many alter-
native energy studies, for example, belong to this category. 
But it is also possible to use a backcasting methodology as a 
purely analytical tool by simply linking bottom-up analyses 
about the long-term evolution of technology and development 
patterns to a macroeconomic framework (Hourcade, 1993) so 
as to be able to assess the economic consistency of different 
and competing views about the long run.-" 
These three different purposes have implications for the 
types of models required, the analytical questions being 
asked, and the meaning ol the results. As discussed in Section 
8.3.2.1 above, there has been a historical correlation between 
attempts to move away from predictive modelling approaches 
and the early development of bottom-up models: these models 
were in many cases built precisely to undertake simulation 
and backcasting analyses not possible with the current genera-
tion of top-down models (Baumgartner and Middtun. 1987: 
Robinson, 1982). The greatest emphasis in current climate 
modelling efforts is on "exploratory" analyses, using a combi-
nation of top-down and bottom-up methods, but there is contin-
uing interest in "backcasting"' analyses aimed at exploring quite 
different future scenarios than would otherwise be examined 
(FRN. 1987; Goldemberg <•/<;/.. 1988: .lager et al.. 1991: Roth-
man and Coppock. 199b: Robinson ct al.. 199b). 
8.4.2.2 
The structure of existing 
models 
A second basis for distinguishing among different models is 
the nature of the model itself (i.e.. those assumptions embed-
ded in the mathematical structure of the model). At a very 
general level, it is possible to characterize some of the main 
structural differences among existing energy and emissions 
models in terms of four main dimensions. This description ab-
stracts from a number of more detailed distinctions among 
models but captures the points that differentiate the models 
in a way that helps to show the connection between model 
structure and policy questions (see Section 8.4.3 for a more 
detailed discussion of the top-down/bottom-up modelling de-
bate). These four dimensions, and some of the related policy 
questions, are sketched in Table 8.1 for energy/economy mod-
els. An equivalent typology could be applied to models fo-
cussing on other sectors (e.g., forestry). 
Each of the four structural characteristics shown in Table 
8.1 represents a spectrum from more to less, and individual 
models can be located on that spectrum for each dimension. 
This means that individual models are more or less suited to 
answering particular policy questions, depending on where 
they are located on the spectrum for each dimension. Tradi-
tionally, top-down models have represented one end of the 
spectrum on each of these dimensions, and bottom-up models 
the other, as illustrated in Table 8.2. 
It is clear from Table 8.2 that the early top-down and bot-
tom-up models represented virtual mirror images of each 
other, with respect to the four characteristics shown in Table 
8.1. Bottom-up models tended to describe the energy system 
in great detail, with little endogenization of behaviour or de-
scription of other parts of the economy. Top-down models 
tended to have very little detail on the energy sector but 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating (irecnhoitse (iascs 
_\S'5 
explicit treatment of behaviour and larger economic relation-
ships. As suggested in the previous section, these characteris-
tics caused the two types of model to be useful for answering 
somewhat different questions. Bottom-up models were better 
at simulating detailed technological substitution potentials 
("exploration") and top-down models were better at predict-
ing wider economic effects ("prediction"). 
Table 8.2 also shows that this simple characterization of 
the differences between top-down and bottom-up approaches 
is increasingly misleading, since more recent versions of each 
approach have tended to move in the direction of greater de-
tail in those dimensions that were relatively less developed in 
the past. This is possible because the four dimensions shown 
in Table 8.1 are independent of each other. Thus any particular 
model can be located at virtually any point on the spectrum 
represented by each dimension. It is this independence of key 
structural characteristics that makes it so hard to classify the 
large population of existing models on any single spectrum, 
whether bottom-up to top-down, or any other. Instead we in-
creasingly have a wide range of models, which, in terms of 
their structure, occupy different places on each of the four di-
mensions shown here. Thus, although the differences repre-
sented by these four dimensions remain important, no simple 
classification scheme is adequate. 
Tables 8.1 and 8.2 describe the differences among different 
types of models in very general terms. Coming closer to the 
structure of actual models, we can distinguish several kinds of 
modelling procedures. 
Among bottom-up models two approaches are usually dis-
tinguished: (1) spreadsheet models that solve a simultaneous 
set of equations to describe the way a given set of technol-
ogies is (or could be) adopted throughout the economy; and (2) 
simulation or optimization models, which simulate invest-
ment decisions endogenously. Each of these two approaches 
can be used in two different ways: prescriptively or descrip-
tively. 
A prescriptive model examines the effect of acquiring only 
the most efficient technologies available or of minimizing ex-
plicit costs for a given service at a system level (e.g.. electric 
supply, urban transportation, or land use). A descriptive 
model, in contrast, would try to estimate the technology mix 
that would result from actual decisions, based on factors such 
as more complex preferences (people preferring private cars 
even if the cost per kilometre is higher than railway trans-
portation), intangible costs (differences in cost of acquisition 
of technologies), capital constraints, attitudes to risk (via 
higher discount rates for some agents) and uncertainty (actual 
performance of new technologies), or any kind of market bar-
riers. Such analyses will typically tend to be less optimistic 
than prescriptive studies about mitigation, unless appropriate 
policies are assumed to remove existing barriers to the adop-
tion of the best available technologies. Considerable disagree-
ment about the potential for such policies now exists in the 
literature. 
Top-down models resort to two main methodologies: (i) 
neo-Keynesian macroeconomic models and (ii) computable 
general equilibrium models and models simulating very long-
term growth paths. Each of these approaches can be coupled 
to process energy models. 
Neo-Keynesian macroeconomic models incorporate econ-
ometrically estimated sets of equations that trace the short-
and middle-run dynamics of the national economic aggregates 
and related components of economic activity (labour, savings, 
consumption). They usually simulate aggregate potential out-
put as a function of aggregate inputs of capital and labour, and 
some of them include energy and materials as production fac-
tors. They use input-output tables to describe the transactions 
among economic sectors and lag equations to model inertia in 
the adjustment processes and to allow for unemployment in 
the short run in response to shocks. Some of them also allow 
for structural unemployment due to inadequate demand for 
labour in the long run. The fact that they assume a nonperfect 
equilibrium economy explains, as seen in Chapter 9, why 
there is a gap between their findings in the case of nonrecy-
cling or lump-sum recycling of tax revenues (which show 
high costs) and their findings in the case of efficient recycling 
(some of which show an overall economic benefit from a car-
bon tax). For longer time periods, they fail to account for the 
effects of intertemporal preferences and expectations and cap-
ture technical change in a rather static fashion. 
Computable general equilibrium (CGE) models or optimal 
growth models (for the very long term) focus mainly on a 
long-term analysis of the effect of climate policies in the pe-
riod after adjustment of the economy to short-term effects. 
They rely on a resource allocation principle (maximization of 
utility and cost minimization) and a market clearing mecha-
nism for all goods (which functions by equating prices with 
marginal costs). The dynamics of these models are produced 
by capital accumulation and/or by the exogenous growth of 
the factors of production and productivity. In contrast to the 
neo-Keynesian models, they do not rely systematically on 
econometric relationships. They are, instead, 
frequently 
benchmarked on a given year in order to guarantee the con-
sistency of the parameters. This allows for a greater flexibil-
ity in using information coming from other models (or 
expert judgments) about possible shifts in current trends 
(technological breakthroughs, for example) that would not 
be picked up in econometric relationships but that would be 
dangerous to neglect when very long time periods are being 
examined. 
Given an exogenous perturbation such as a change in the 
tax system, CGE models produce a price-dependent general 
equilibrium response due to the behaviour of economic agents. 
This has two impacts on cost assessments. First, because of 
their formal structure, these models calculate a new equilib-
rium but do not provide an accurate picture of the time path 
towards this equilibrium; they tend as a result to understate 
transition costs. Second, because they rely on a perfect market 
equilibrium assumption, they do not allow for structural un-
employment over the long run and in this and other ways re-
duce the room for economic double dividends. 
8.4.2.3 
The role of key input 
assumptions 
A third important factor to consider in evaluating the meaning 
of the specific modelling studies is the nature and value of the 
assumptions that make up the external inputs to those models. 
Changes in the values of these assumptions will have a signif-
icant impact on the results of the study. 
2X6 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 8.3. Key input assumptions 
in greenhouse gas mitigation costing 
studies 
Assumption 
Meaning and Relevance 
1. Population 
2. Economic growth 
3. Energy demand 
a) Structural change 
b) Technological change/choice 
4. Energy supply 
a) Short-term availability of alternative supplies 
b) Backstop technology 
5. Price and income elasticities of energy demand 
6. Existing tax system and tax recycling 
Other things being equal, population growth increases greenhouse gas emissions 
Increased economic growth increases energy-using activities and also increases 
the turnover of energy-using equipment (e.g., allowing penetration of more effi-
cient equipment) 
Degree to which the structure of the economy changes. Since different sectors of 
the economy have different energy intensities, this will have a significant impact 
on overall energy use 
Energy intensity of energy-using equipment and processes. This "energy effi-
ciency" variable influences overall energy demand 
This determines the potential for fuel substitution 
The cost at which an infinite alternative supply of energy becomes available. This 
sets an upper bound on the cost of mitigation 
These elasticities measure the relative change in energy demand, given relative 
changes in energy prices and in incomes. Higher elasticities cause larger changes 
in energy use 
Whether carbon tax revenues are used to reduce the distortionary effects of exist-
ing taxes. This has a large impact on the overall cost of carbon taxes 
The distinction between input assumptions and assump-
tions embedded in the structure of the models changes as 
models evolve and incorporate more assumptions in the model 
structure. Moreover, input assumptions can be based on im-
plicit mental models ol the way the world works that have not 
yet been formalized in explicit terms and that may or may not 
be consistent with the formal model. For example, assump-
tions about the cost and availability of biomass energy sup-
plies in the future imply certain assumptions about future land 
use that may or may not be consistent with the rest of the 
analysis. 
The assumptions listed in Table 8.3 represent assumptions 
that are important for any findings regarding costs of GHG 
mitigation. 
S.4.3 The top-down versus bottom-up 
modelling 
controversy: 
Some lessons from the energy field 
As discussed earlier, many recent analyses incorporate fea-
tures of both bottom-up and top-down models, and conse-
quently the distinction between these two approaches is be-
coming blurred. Despite this convergence, we have reported 
the results of costing studies separately in Chapter 9 for 
bottom-up and for top-down analyses. We turn here to a dis-
cussion of the bottom-up/top-down controversy. There are 
several reasons for doing so. First, the prevalence of this 
modelling dichotomy in the energy field (most studies in 
other fields are bottom-up) means that the bulk of studies re-
viewed in Chapterl) fall naturally into these two camps. Sec-
ond, the differences between the results that emerged from 
these two approaches - the bottom-up models tended to sug-
gest that the costs of greenhouse gas mitigation might be low 
to negative and top-down models tended to suggest the oppo-
site - has led to a significant level of controversv organized 
around this distinction. Finally, the fundamental questions 
raised by these differences in approach need to be understood 
if the results of these studies are not to be misinterpreted. 
Such questions also raise important policy issues that are rele-
vant beyond the energy field. 
The terms "top" and "bottom," in the usual jargon of the 
economic modeller, are commonly linked to the distinction 
between aggregate models and disaggregated models. The 
top-down label is derived from the way in which the first de-
velopers of these models applied econometric techniques (i.e.. 
statistical analyses of past trends) to historical data on con-
sumption, prices, and incomes to estimate price and income 
elasticities for final demand goods and services such as en-
ergy, transportation, food, and industrial products. These ag-
gregate models were criticized for not providing a complex 
enough description of the determinants underlying sectoral 
demand dynamics. Simulation-oriented 
technico-economic 
models were then developed to explore the potential for a pos-
sible decoupling of energy demand from economic growth. 
This required "bottom-up" or disaggregated analysis of tech-
nical alternatives and demand for specific services. 
Many macroeconomic models are also very detailed, but 
not in the same way as bottom-up models: They account tor 
economic activities at a two-digit SIC level27 and can break 
down consumer demands into many household types. In main 
models the so-called aggregate demand functions of con-
sumer expenditure are constructed by summing "individual 
demand functions." which allows for testing the income dis-
tribution effects of various types of climate change policies. 
A second methodological distinction, partly correlated 
with but not identical to the aggregation level, is the degree to 
which behaviours are endogenized in the model equations 
(i.e.. predicted by the model) and extrapolated over the long 
run. Because econometric relationships among aggregated 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
2S7 
variables are generally more reliable than among disaggre-
gated variables, and the behaviour of the model is more stable 
with such variables, it is common to adopt higher levels of ag-
gregation (two to ten goods and services) in top-down econo-
metric models to make them more robust over longer periods. 
This means that, with a few notable exceptions, as longer pe-
riods are under consideration, the aggregation gap between 
top-down and bottom-up models tends to increase. 
Top-down models attempt to examine a broad equilibrium 
framework, which means that they are interested in feedbacks 
between the energy system and other sectors of the economy, 
between all sectors of the economy and the macroeconomic 
performance of the economy, between national energy mar-
kets and global energy markets, and, in some cases, between 
the national economy and the global economy. Given all of 
these feedbacks, early top-down models generally included 
little detail of the energy-consuming side of the economy, es-
pecially at a technology-specific level. In contrast, bottom-up 
models attempt to examine in detail the technological options, 
especially on the energy-consuming side of the economy. This 
detailed representation of different energy end uses and the 
technologies serving those end uses generally meant that greater 
feedbacks were ignored. In a sense, bottom-up models hold a 
magnifying glass up to the energy demand side of the econ-
omy, and other connections and feedbacks tend to be obscured 
or lost from the picture. 
Another way to look at the difference between these ap-
proaches is by returning to the first three types of mitigation 
costs introduced in Section 8.2.2. We can say that top-down 
models focus on financial flows across the whole economy 
and provide rather sophisticated analytical tools at this level, 
whereas sectoral models, which have tended also to be top-
down but sometimes with fairly detailed representation of 
technology, focus on the market dynamics stemming from a 
given industrial structure but with little consideration devoted 
to overall feedbacks with the rest of the economy. Finally, 
bottom-up models focus on the technical margins of freedom 
likely to be evident at a microeconomic level and provide a 
detailed analysis of the technical and economic dimensions of 
specific policy options. Historically, this difference in focus 
has led to significant differences in results, as the larger eco-
nomic feedback loops originally examined in top-down mod-
els (higher production costs, lower investments in nonenergy 
sectors) tended to increase the macroeconomic costs of emis-
sion reductions relative to bottom-up results. More recently, 
other feedbacks that tend to reduce overall costs (efficient tax 
recycling) have been examined in top-down analyses, while 
bottom-up methods have increasingly incorporated detailed 
examination of the behavioural dimensions of the policy op-
tions examined. The effect of these developments has been to 
narrow the range of difference in mitigation costs between 
these two approaches. 
But behind this difference in the level of aggregation lie 
two different ways of representing technology. One side tries 
to capture technology in the engineering sense: a given tech-
nique (coke oven steel versus electric-arc steel, an incandes-
cent light bulb versus a fluorescent light bulb) with a given 
technical performance at a given direct cost. On the other 
side, the technology term in macroeconomic models, what-
ever their level of disaggregation, is represented by the share 
of the purchase of a given input in intermediate consumption 
(e.g.. steel products to make cars ) and by the allocation of the 
sales revenue among the cost of intermediary inputs, returns 
to labour, and returns to capital. These shares constitute the 
basic ingredients of the economic description of a technology 
in which, depending on the choice of production function, the 
share elasticities represent the degree of substitutability among 
inputs. 
This characterization of technology makes it difficult to es-
tablish explicit links between production functions in eco-
nomic models, on the one hand, and technology projections, 
on the other. For example, there is a gap between the findings 
of Jorgensen (1984) and Hogan and Jorgensen (1990) with 
respect to the negative correlation between technological 
change and energy prices in the U.S. economy and the obser-
vation of accelerated innovations at a technical level. The 
reason is that that technological innovation can have two dif-
ferent meanings. For an engineer, it implies increased tech-
nical efficiency and therefore greater productivity. For an 
economist, however, productivity growth is correlated with 
many other factors than mere technology characteristics; a de-
pressed demand or growing uncertainties can result in lower 
economic productivity, even if the technical efficiency of 
equipment is very high. Consequently, both descriptions can 
be internally consistent, but each may represent a different de-
finition of technological change. Put another way, both de-
scriptions of technological change make sense, but each 
captures a different aspect of that change. 
Bearing in mind these fundamental differences in ap-
proach, it is clear that there is no a priori reason that the two 
modelling approaches must give different results. Top-down 
models account for the technological changes so valued by 
bottom-up analysis via two parameters: (1) the autonomous 
energy efficiency index (AEEI). and (2) the elasticity of sub-
stitution between the aggregate inputs to households and 
firms. AEEI is a function of time (a proxy for all the long-run 
reasons for equipment turnover) and suggests the rate at 
which the penetration of new technologies may change the 
energy intensity of the economy. The elasticity of substitution 
is a function of relative prices of inputs and allows measure-
ment of the degree to which capital or labour can be substi-
tuted for energy (i.e.. energy intensity can be reduced) as 
energy prices rise relative to these other inputs. The values of 
AEEI and elasticity of substitution can be adjusted to provide 
results that match those frequently suggested by bottom-up 
analysts. 
Recently, top-down modellers have proven to be more will-
ing to abandon historically derived parameter values in favor 
of other values - derived, for example, from detailed bottom-
up analysis - both for AEEI and the elasticity of substitution 
(benchmarking). They have also worked to develop model 
forms that achieve greater disaggregation of energy end-use 
activities, if not a detailed representation of technologies. 
Thus a relatively high value for AEEI, say a 2% decline per 
year, and a relatively high value for the elasticity of substitu-
tion between fossil fuels and other factors of production 
2&\ 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
(labour, capital) could lead to top-down simulation results 
in which the costs of carbon emission stabilization, and even of 
a 15-30% reduction, were below or close to zero. This way of 
incorporating bottom-up information is relatively easy to 
achieve in the generation of top-down models that use "bench-
marking" approaches to calibration; in the case of economet-
rically calibrated models, it requires the adoption of some ad 
hoc hypotheses and a departure from strict econometric con-
sistency. 
Conversely, some of the recent refinements to bottom-up 
modelling have tended to use more sophisticated economic 
indicators than the technical costs per toe or kWh. They seek 
to be more descriptive of the actual energy-using behaviours 
of firms, households, and institutions and to account for actual 
experience as regards responses to price signals and energy 
efficiency programmes as well as the administrative costs of 
policy programmes. In particular, bottom-up studies have be-
come increasingly sophisticated with regard to 
• Technical analysis: This is especially so with respect to 
demand-side efficiency improvements. On the one hand. 
more detailed studies will tend to arrive at larger cost-
effective efficiency potentials; on the other, analysts 
may disagree about the actual performance of various 
types of end-use equipment. 
• Administrative costs: Most earlier bottom-up analysis 
assumed that energy efficiency standards - with minimal 
administrative costs - would be the main policy tool. 
More recent analysis has increasingly taken stock of the 
administrative costs involved in actual utility demand-
side management programmes. These costs are esti-
mated to range from negligible (Krause. 1994; Eto et id., 
1994) to substantial (Joskow and Marion. 1993). de-
pending primarily on the type of incentive programme 
involved. 
• Policy effectiveness: The results of bottom-up studies 
vary as a function of the way they account for transac-
tion costs and transition costs. At one end of the spec-
trum, it is assumed that a complete shift to efficient 
equipment will he achieved within one cycle of capital 
stock turnover (ten to twenty years); at the other end, 
political and institutional constraints inhibit the use of the 
most energy-efficient technology over periods of forty 
years or more. 
In addition to differences in their approach to technology. 
bottom-up and top-down models typically contain important 
differences in their assumptions about consumer surpluses. 
so-called intangible costs, and the role of market barriers 
(Sutherland, 1991). 
An example of a consumer surplus would be the extra sat-
isfaction or value that a consumer derives from a particular 
automobile that may not be reflected in its capital or operating 
costs. Common examples of intangible costs are (1) the cost 
of becoming sufficiently informed about a new technology in 
order to consider it seriously as an option. (2) the perceived 
risks associated with the capital or operating costs of a tech-
nology. (3) the various transaction costs associated with find-
ing, ordering, shipping, installing, operating, and maintaining 
a technology, and (4) externally or internally imposed restric-
tive investment criteria that differ from the social time prefer-
ence of consumers and the opportunity cost of capital of 
firms. A difference in one or more of these intangible cost fac-
tors or consumer surpluses between two goods could be suffi-
cient to offset differences in their tangible costs. 
Top-down modellers, who tend to be economists, are gen-
erally reluctant to doubt the economic efficiency of business 
and household consumption choices, although they recognize 
the classical imperfections in markets (oligopoly, natural mo-
nopoly, subsidies, etc.). They therefore tend to assume that if 
a technology does not penetrate the market to the extent that a 
bottom-up engineering/economic analysis (which focuses 
only on tangible costs) suggests that it could, it is probably at 
least in part because the intangible cost and/or consumer sur-
plus differences are at least large enough to make the invest-
ment unattractive. As a consequence of this general assump-
tion, many economists are more likely to put their faith in 
values for AEEI and elasticity of substitution that have 
emerged from studies of the economy using statistical regres-
sion of historical aggregate data sets. Since the historical data 
are based on actual behaviour, behavioural parameters esti-
mated from them may represent a synthesis of all tangible and 
intangible costs, including differences in consumer surplus. 
Sweeping generalizations about bottom-up modelling are 
as hazardous as those about the top-down aproach. However, 
bottom-up analysts in the past were more likely to be engi-
neers and physicists. Their detailed knowledge of thermody-
namic potentials and the energy-using characteristics of new 
and emerging technologies has led them to be aware of the ap-
parent economic potential for society to adopt new technolo-
gies more quickly than in the past, at rates that, in aggregate, 
would imply values for AEEI and elasticity of substitution far 
higher than the values emerging from the historical data relied 
on originally by top-down modellers. This issue is particu-
larly important when faced by the very long time frame re-
quired by the climate change issue. 
In addition, bottom-up modellers point out that economet-
rically derived relationships may incorporate market imper-
fections. Although many top-down modellers assume that 
these imperfections are either negligible or very costly to cor-
rect, bottom-up modellers have noted the significant successes 
in fostering technological innovation and greater energy effi-
ciency resulting from government initiatives during the en-
ergy crises of the 1970s and utility and government initiatives 
in the 1980s, and have pointed to these experiences as evi-
dence that well-designed research and development and pol-
icy programmes could significantly affect the evolution of the 
AEEI term and even the elasticity of substitution. Thus, inso-
far as institutional reforms could lower transaction costs and 
remove barriers to the adoption of technologies whose life 
cycle costs are advantageous, there would be room for no-
regrets improvements. 
The empirical foundations of this position come from eval-
uation studies of the impacts of demand-side management 
programmes on end-use markets, product choices, consumers, 
manufacturers, and trade allies (DeCanio, 1993; Howarth and 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse (loses 
j,sy 
Anderson, 1993; Howarth and Winslow, 1994; Koomey and 
Sanstad, 1994; Krause et «/., 1989; Levine and Sonnenblick, 
1994; Nadel, 1992). Though the argument has been challenged 
by various critics (Sutherland, 1991; Joskow and Marion, 
1993), the authors of these studies suggest that there exists 
significant potential to capture the "negative cost potential" 
that can be realized by well-designed demand-side manage-
ment programmes. 
Given these results, bottom-up modellers tend to argue that 
appropriate policy will cause energy-efficient products to 
have lower transaction costs and risks than are generally as-
sumed by firms and households, and perhaps even higher 
consumer surpluses. From this perspective the market as 
currently configured simply isn't delivering levels of energy 
efficiency that would be economically advantageous, neither 
at the microlevel of direct financial costs nor at more aggre-
gate and inclusive levels of cost. They suggest that significant 
potentials for emission reductions can be realized at net eco-
nomic savings through a combination of mandatory energy 
efficiency standards, labelling and auditing programmes, 
least-cost planning-oriented utility regulatory reforms, profit 
incentives for utility demand-side management programmes, 
market-pull incentives provided through innovative utility 
or government procurement programmes, and increased re-
search and development and commercialization efforts for 
small-scale modular technologies with short gestation peri-
ods, notably energy efficiency improvements and renewables. 
The differences in results between top-down and bottom-
up modelling analyses are thus rooted in a complex interplay 
among differences in purpose, model structure, and input as-
sumptions. The growing tendency for the development of hy-
brid modelling approaches means that differences of model 
structure are becoming a less important factor in many cli-
mate modelling studies, but the overall difference in perspec-
tive and thinking about energy markets represented by these 
two modelling approaches remains. Hybrid modelling ap-
proaches allow the exploration of the relative importance and 
implications of different input assumptions and are likely to 
narrow the difference in results between bottom-up and top-
down studies. They will not by themselves, however, resolve 
the underlying question of whether energy markets are effi-
cient with respect to the delivery of energy efficiency gains or 
not. Moreover, it remains to be seen whether these new ap-
proaches will be equally fruitful in fulfilling the range of pur-
poses discussed in Section 8.4.2.1. In particular, it seems clear 
that we need to improve our ability to explore long-term de-
velopment paths or configurations of technology that are very 
different from those typical of experience in past decades 
(i.e., the alternative future scenarios that are often the subject 
of backcasting analyses). Much work remains to be done to 
address these larger issues in a satisfactory way. 
8.4.4 Beyond energy: Carbon sinks and nonenergy 
greenhouse gas emissions 
The focus of the literature on the potential for controlling C02 
from energy sources has developed in part because of the 
ready availability and adaptability of models designed to ana-
lyze energy markets. However, because of the lack of similar 
ready-made models that could he adapted to analyses of car-
bon sequestration and reductions in emissions of methane, ni-
trous oxide, halogenated substances, and other greenhouse 
gases, debates in these areas have not been structured around 
the bottom-up and top-down modelling approaches. Never-
theless, controversies in these fields are related to fundamen-
tal issues similar to the ones underlying the bottom-up versus 
top-down division in the energy field, namely, the reasons for 
a wedge between the direct cost of technical alternatives from 
an engineering viewpoint and the overall costs of their adop-
tion and implementation if transaction costs and economic 
general equilibrium effects are included in the accounting. 
8.4.4.1 Carbon sequestration studies 
Carbon sequestration cost studies fall into four general cate-
gories: 
(1) 
studies of the cost of removal and storage of carbon 
dioxide from emission sources such as power plants 
(2) 
studies of biomass energy technologies that allow dis-
placed fossil carbon to remain undisturbed 
(3) 
studies of practices to maintain and expand the biologi-
cal carbon sink, particularly in forests 
(4) 
studies of technologies to expand the storage of carbon 
in wood products 
Technologies for the removal and storage of carbon dioxide are 
prohibitively expensive at this time (see e.g., Riemer, 1993). 
Biomass energy is treated elsewhere in this report as a renew-
able energy technology that lowers net emissions of carbon 
dioxide. The analysis of the costs of increasing the use of long-
lived wood products is not well developed. Consequently, this 
review of carbon sequestration cost studies will concentrate on 
the expansion of forest and agricultural carbon sinks. 
Most carbon sink cost analyses have examined the direct 
costs of specific technical measures.-* Under this approach, 
forestry or agricultural practices are matched with appropriate 
geographic regions. The pairs are defined as unique technolo-
gies with specific production functions. Then, in a very simple 
analysis, three key variables arc identified for each region/ 
practice combination: 
(1) 
the suitable land area for that practice (e.g., hectares) 
(2) 
the treatment cost and land cost for the practice (e.g., 
annualized costs per hectare per year) 
(3) 
the annual carbon yield (e.g.. tonnes of carbon per 
hectare per year) 
Two critical results can he derived from these three pieces 
of data. The potential yield of carbon in tonnes per year, from 
a given region and practice can be derived by multiplying the 
first and third factors. The unit cost of carbon sequestration, in 
dollars per tonne, can be derived by dividing the second factor 
by the third. These results can then be combined across prac-
tices within a region to develop a supply curve for carbon se-
questration. 
The simple analysis described above has been employed 
by some studies (see, e.g., Moulton and Richards, 1990). 
However, estimation of the three variables listed above - land 
290 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
BOX 8.2: COST CONCEPTS IN CARBON SINK ANALYSIS 
Most carbon sink cost analyses have employed the first cost concept described in this chapter, namely, the direct costs of 
specific technical measures. However, there is no consensus on the definition of the summary statistic "dollars per tonne of 
carbon sequestration." A review of the literature reveals at least three distinct definitions of this measure of cost-effective-
ness. The difference among the definitions revolves around how each deals with the relative value of carbon flows that oc-
cur at different points in time. Because carbon-sink-enhancing activities result in very uneven flows of carbon - flows that 
in some cases occur over several decades - the treatment of the time value of carbon is important. 
Flow summation method. The simplest approach to summarizing the cost-effectiveness of carbon sequestration projects 
is simply to sum the total tonnes of carbon captured, regardless of when the capture takes place. This approach treats early 
capture (or release) of carbon equally with later capture (or release). 
Average storage method. This approach involves dividing the present value of the sum of all implementation costs over a 
specified period (e.g., Dixon et id., 1991. use 50 years) by the mean standing carbon storage averaged over several rotation 
periods (see the discussion of carbon flow treatment in Chapter 9, Section 2). 
Levelization/discounting method. This method differentiates costs and accomplishments according to when the carbon is 
captured. There are actually two approaches that yield identical results but are conceptually distinct. The first, which is sim-
ilar to the approach used in many bottom-up energy studies, annualizes (levelizes) the present value of costs over the period 
of carbon flows and divides the annualized costs by the annual carbon capture rate. The second approach, developed to ad-
dress uneven flows of carbon, applies the social discount rate to discount the tonnes of carbon captured back to a summary 
statistic - the present tonnes equivalent (PTE) - and divides that figure into the present value of costs. 
The choice of an appropriate method from among these three candidates depends on the underlying policy for which the 
cost analysis is being conducted. If the underlying policy is one that is concerned only with capping the total accumulation 
of carbon and is not concerned with when the reductions occur, then the flow summation method may be appropriate.1 Al-
ternatively, if the damages from greenhouse gas accumulation are continuous so that interim damages matter, the leveliza-
tion discounting method, which recognizes the relatively higher value of reductions that are achieved sooner, is the 
appropriate choice. 
Choice of method: An illustration 
The importance of the choice of summary statistic can be illustrated by calculating the dollars per tonne associated with the 
three stylized tree planting examples described below. For purposes of this illustration, a social discount rate of 5% is as-
sumed. For a discussion of the appropriate discount rate, see Chapter 4. 
Example I: A new one-hectare forest plantation is established to sequester carbon. The net present value of all costs 
(land, establishment, maintenance, and administration) is $1000. The forest captures 2 tonnes of carbon per year for 50 
years. Thereafter, the plantation captures no additional carbon and stands permanently without being harvested. 
Example 2: The forest plantation is established as above, but the species is slower growing initially. During the first 25 years 
it captures only I tonne of carbon per year and then increases to 3 tonnes per year for 25 years. Thereafter, the plantation cap-
tures no additional carbon and stands permanently without being harvested. The net present value of costs is still $1000. 
Example .v The forest plantation is established and grown as in Example 1, but in the fiftieth year it is harvested. All ac-
cumulated carbon is released to the atmosphere upon harvest. The area is replanted and the process repeats itself. The net 
present value of all costs, including perpetual replanting is $1100. 
Flow summation method. Using this approach, the first and second examples each have a cost of $10 per tonne. The third 
example is more difficult to analyze. Although the costs are clearly identified, the accomplishments are unclear. The cumu-
lative tonnage sequestered is cyclical, rising to 100 tonnes just prior to harvest but falling to zero immediately following 
harvest. This suggests that under this analytical approach there is no value to capturing carbon that is eventually released, no 
matter how long the storage period. 
Average storage method. Examples 1 and 2 are difficult to analyze using this approach, since the rotation length is not 
clear. As the rotation length approaches infinity, the mean carbon storage asymptotically approaches 100 tonnes. This would 
suggest a cost of $10 per tonne. If. instead, a 50-year rotation length is artificially imposed on the analysis, the mean carbon 
storage is 51 tonnes in Example I and 38.5 in Example 2. In this case the carbon costs in the two examples would be $19.61 
per tonne and $25.97 per tonne respectively. In Example 3. where the rotation length is clearly 50 years, the mean carbon 
storage is 51 tonnes, giving a carbon cost of $21.57 per tonne. 
Levelization/discounting method. In Example 1 the present value of costs, $1000, can be levelized over a 50-year period 
at 5'7c to $54.78 per year. Dividing by the annual carbon yield of 2 tonnes per year leads to a cost of $27.39 per tonne. Alter-
natively, discounting the number of tonnes of carbon at a 5% social discount rate yields 36.5 PTEs. and dividing by the pres-
ent cost also gives $27.39 per tonne. The irregular carbon flow in Example 2 makes it more difficult to apply 
the levelization approach in that case, but the carbon discounting approach can easily be applied to derive a yield of 26.58 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Greenhouse Gases 
]V 
Box 8.2 {cont.) 
PTEs and a carbon cost of $37.62 per tonne. In Example 3, the stream of flows is also irregular, so the discounting approach 
is easier to apply than the levelization method. The continuous rotations yield approximately 30.49 PTEs for a cost of 
$36.08 per tonne. 
The accompanying table summarizes the cost figures that the three approaches yield for each of the examples. Note that 
the flow summation method and the average storage method yield the same result in the first two examples, where the rota-
tion period approaches infinity. It is only by imposing an artifical rotation period that the average storage method can be 
forced to differentiate between these examples. In contrast, the levelization/discounting approach differentiates between 
Examples 1 and 2 purely on the basis of when the flows occur. The flow summation method provides no results with respect 
to Example 3, where continuous rotations occur. The result in that example is that the cost oscillates between 10 and infinity 
dollars per tonne of carbon sequestered. For both the average storage and levelization/discounting methods the costs rise 
slightly in Example 3 relative to Example 1. 
Carbon sequestration 
costs for examples, by method 
Method 
Costs ($/tonne) 
Example 1 
Example 2 
Example 3 
Summation 
10 
10 
Indeterminate 
Average storage 
10[I9.61]+ 
10[25.97p 
21.57 
Levelization/ 
Discounting 
27.39 
37.62 
32.80 
^Implicit in this policy is the assumption that greenhouse gases cause no damages until they reach some critical level, after which their 
impacts are catastrophic. A corollary is that, prior to reaching the critical level, temporary removal of carbon from the atmosphere has no 
value. 
'Term in brackets is derived by imposing a 50-year rotation period. 
area, land and treatment costs, and carbon yield - is not sim-
ple in practice. As discussed in Box 8.2, there is no consensus 
on the definition of the summary statistic "dollars per tonne of 
carbon sequestration." 
As with energy studies, differences among the studies that 
give rise to a wedge between direct and social costs occur at 
each stage of a carbon sequestration cost analysis. These stem 
from different assumptions about the suitability of forestry 
and agricultural practices, different treatments of land and 
forestry practice implementation costs, and different esti-
mates of the expected accomplishments of the forestry prac-
tices and valuation of those accomplishments in terms of 
greenhouse gas emission benefits as well as double dividend 
GDP and natural resource conservation benefits. 
As Table 8.4 indicates, a variety of forestry practices may 
contribute to increasing the size of forest and agricultural car-
bon sinks. Just as in the case of the best available technologies 
in the energy field, the appropriate forestry and agricultural 
practice for carbon sequestration is, in theory, the one that 
promises to be a cost-effective way to capture and store car-
bon (see, e.g., Parks and Hardie, 1995). The analysis of "in-
tangible" factor costs or of "double dividends" has been 
hampered by the fact that many studies have imposed con-
straints on the forestry or agricultural practices or types of 
land that they consider. These have included requirements that 
the adopted practices decrease soil erosion (Moulton and 
Table 8.4. Examples of forestry and agricultural practices to 
increase carbon 
sequestration 
Afforestation of agricultural land 
Reforestation of harvested or burned timberland 
Preservation of forestland from conversion 
Protection of forests from destructive wildfire, pests, and diseases 
Adoption of agroforestry practices 
Establishment of short-rotation woody biomass plantations 
Lengthening forest rotation cycles 
Modification of forestry management practices to emphasize carbon 
storage 
Adoption of low-impact harvesting methods to decrease carbon re-
lease 
Adoption of carbon-enhancing agricultural practices (crop rotation, 
no-till, etc.) 
Richards, 1990), meet local needs (Andrasko et al, 1991), or 
provide other environmental benefits such as habitat preser-
vation. Ideally, these factors should be accounted for as bene-
ficial secondary effects, which in many cases appear to be 
greater than those associated with energy efficiency. 
Significant differences in the cost assessments of sink stud-
ies can be traced back to disagreements about the assumptions 
and data related to the many factors that determine total costs: 
292 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
land costs, first treatment and maintenance costs, transaction 
costs, the valuation of wood and agricultural products, and the 
discount rate applied to expenditures. 
With respect to land costs, studies of carbon sequestration 
costs in the United States have, for example, employed sev-
eral methods to identify (he social costs associated with con-
version of land to forest. These have included the use of land 
rental rates derived from surveys (Moulton and Richards, 
1990), the use of market prices adjusted for the elasticity of 
demand for agricultural land (Richards et ai, 1993), the use 
of the estimated lost profits from removing the land from agri-
cultural production (Parks and Hardie, 1995), and the use of 
consumer surplus loss from increases in food prices due to the 
constriction of agricultural land availability (Adams et ai, 
1993). In the absence of extensive experience, estimating land 
costs has proven difficult because of the low reliability of data 
on the elasticities of demand for agricultural land. Also, un-
certainties about the future of government subsidies for agri-
culture raise questions about land costs. These subsidies tend 
to drive a wedge between the market prices and the social cost 
of land. 
These accounting difficulties are obviously far more diffi-
cult in countries that do not have well-established land mar-
kets, that have land tenure laws that do not allow permanent 
transfer of land at all, or where the government owns a signif-
icant portion of the land. Further, even where land markets do 
function, the lack of data about market activities often renders 
land cost estimates speculative at best. 
The transaction costs associated with establishing forestry 
and agricultural programmes can he significant. Even in well-
developed market economies, the costs of programme ad-
ministration can rise to as much as l.Wr of the total costs of 
land rental, establishment, and maintenance (Richards et ai, 
1993). It is reasonable to expect that where land and labour 
markets are not so well developed or when a public adminis-
tration is not well established, the costs of administration and 
information gathering might rise to a much higher level, even 
surpassing the direct costs of land acquisition and tree plant-
ing. In the context of developing countries where the pressure 
on land comes from agricultural purposes or from wood ex-
ports, these transaction costs should, theoretically, encompass 
policies required to slacken this pressure. This requirement 
could narrow the range of feasible low-cost carbon sequestra-
tion opportunities. 
Some carbon sink cost studies have assumed that carbon 
sequestration project lands would be taken out of agricultural 
or timber production permanently (Nordhaus. 1991; Richards 
et ai. 1993). but most have allowed for some kind of deriva-
tive benefit in the form of forestry products such as pulpwood. 
timber, firewood, and biomass energy. Such derivative bene-
fits raise several additional issues. First, harvesting of forestry 
products suggests the need to modify the flows of carbon as-
sociated with the project to reflect the removal of carbon from 
the site. This in turn raises the question of the rate of release 
of the carbon back to the atmosphere after harvest. Second, in 
a cost-effectiveness study, the costs o( the project should be 
reduced to reflect the noncarbon benefits of the wood and 
agricultural products. Furthermore, to the extent that seques-
tration timber drives down the price of timber products, addi-
tional markets will develop for wood substitutes for energy-
intensive materials such as concrete, aluminum, and steel. 
thus yielding further reductions in emissions. 
As the discussion in Box 8.2 illustrates, harvesting can 
have a significant impact on the carbon benefits of a project. 
Further, the measure of that impact depends very much on the 
choice of summary statistics. At the same time, the economic 
benefits of timber harvesting can be significant. Studies that 
do not quantify either of these two effects will overstate both 
the costs of carbon sink projects and the carbon benefits. Al-
though the effect on carbon costs of ignoring timber harvest-
ing is indeterminate, it is likely that inclusion of forestry 
products in the analysis would generally lower unit costs. 
Studies that include the effects of harvesting on carbon flows 
but do not incorporate its economic benefits will almost cer-
tainly overstate the unit costs of carbon sequestration. At the 
extreme, some forestry practices may pay for themselves in 
the form of forestry products and provide the carbon benefits 
as a costless (i.e., no-regrets) bonus.29 For example, Xu (1994) 
suggests that there may be negative costs associated with 
some carbon sequestration practices in China. Conversely, 
those studies that only consider the benefits of forestry prod-
ucts but do not adjust the carbon flows to reflect increased re-
leases of carbon back to the atmosphere will understate the 
costs of carbon sequestration. 
It is apparent that, as with energy efficiency, there are op-
portunities in the carbon sink area to achieve double divi-
dends. These become evident under an analysis that provides 
full accounting for the wood and agricultural product benefits 
of projects as well as for the less tangible benefits such 
as habitat and watershed preservation, improved local self-
reliance, and soil erosion control. However, full accounting 
must also include those factors that tend to increase social 
costs relative to financial costs, such as the effect of removing 
nonmarginal quantities of land from agricultural production, 
transaction costs associated with establishing new land use 
patterns, administrative costs of implementing a large-scale 
carbon sequestration programme, and decreases in carbon 
benefits associated with timber harvesting. Perhaps the most 
important factor, one commonly ignored by carbon sink cost 
studies, is the potential for "leakage" of the carbon sequestra-
tion gains. If the selective subsidization of tree planting and 
other forestry practices creates a new supply of timber, own-
ers of existing forests may try to avoid competition in the tim-
ber market by accelerating harvest of their stocks, decreasing 
the amount of postharvest replanting, and avoiding expansion 
of the holdings. 
Endnotes 
1. However, in most of the earlier modelling work, "long-term" 
generally meant a time horizon of 10-20 years, not the 100-plus hori-
zons used in many of the current climate change scenarios. 
2. For a discussion of the wide range of views on future energy de-
mand in the early 1980s, see Caputo (1984) and Thompson (1984). 
3. For a discussion of the sometimes vexed relationship between 
energy modellers and energy policymakers, see Robinson (1992). 
Estimating the Costs of Miti^atin^ 
Creenliouse 
Cases 
4. See, for example, the various national case studies in Baumgart-
nerandMiddtun(1987). 
5. Early work in this area is summarized in Little and Mirrless 
(1974) and in Squire and Van der Tak (1976). A good illustration of 
the interest in making a distinction between market prices and factor 
costs is given in the debates around the biomass ethanol program in 
Brazil, where the cost of ethanol is far lower if one utilizes some 
form of social costs (Nastari, 1991). 
6. Most discussions of the issue of "no-regrets" potential have cen-
tred on the first category of positive side effects described here: 
Whether there exist "negative cost" measures such as some types of 
energy efficiency programmes. But whatever positive side effects are 
included, the "no-regrets" concept should not be taken to imply that 
undertaking all such measures will guarantee no regrets with regard 
to the effects of climate change, if these effects ultimately are proven 
to be very significant. A better term might be "worth doing anyway" 
measures. 
7. See also the discussion in Chapter 7. 
8. See section 6.7 for a discussion of some estimates of the magni-
tude of the environmental double dividend. 
9. For a more general presentation of the different meanings of con-
cepts such as "no regrets" and "double dividend," see Goulder 
(1994). 
10. It would also be possible to move from O to a point B' above and 
to the left of point B (increasing economic growth and also increas-
ing emissions). This means that the economic surplus gained, thanks 
to the removal of inefficiencies (i.e., moving from O to curve F). will 
be devoted to improving environmental quality only if there is a col-
lective preference and political will to do so. It could also be possible 
to move to a point A' below and to the right of A (reducing both 
emissions and economic activity) if the surplus is devoted to very 
high investments with a low return and a very low efficiency in terms 
of environmental quality improvement. This could occur in the case 
of misallocation of efforts for a given level of concern for environ-
mental quality. 
11. Another counterargument acknowledges that a suboptimal base-
line may be the most realistic assumption, even over the long run. but 
suggests that the cost of greenhouse gas abatement measures should 
be calculated net of the effect of any measures taken to move the 
economy towards the production frontier (e.g.. the effect of fiscal 
distortions are assumed to be removed before calculating the cost of 
a carbon tax). By suggesting that no economic double dividends 
should be included in the cost of abatement, such arguments reduce 
the estimate of cost-effective abatement potential, but they also im-
ply that the adoption of a more economically efficient baseline sce-
nario may result in lower emissions for reasons unrelated to climate 
policies. 
12. All this assumes a static production frontier. In reality, as a result 
of technological change and other factors, the frontier moves, usu-
ally to the right, over time. Bottom-up analyses often compare a 
point below the current production frontier with a future production 
frontier. Bottom-up analysts typically also argue that due to market 
imperfections, actual future production is likely to lie below the fu-
ture production frontier. Since bottom-up analyses tend to calculate 
the cost savings due to the adoption of future technologies relative to 
existing ones, it is not surprising that they usually show net savings. 
Top-down analyses tend to focus on the costs of moving from the 
current to a future production frontier. Since that entails investment, 
it is not surprising that the costs are always positive. 
13. The same debate surrounds the analysis of fiscal reforms linked 
to a carbon (or energy) tax. Some analysts consider that it is more le-
gitimate to separate the gains from reducing existing fiscal distor-
tions from the incremental impact of a carbon tax. Others consider 
2Vj 
that both such effects should be accredited to the carbon tax. since 
reducing fiscal distortions is associated with, and may be made more 
politically palatable by. the imposition of the carbon tax. This latter 
position, which can reduce or more than offset the costs of the carbon 
tax. is the position taken in most of the empirical modelling work to 
date; the former assumption is more typical of more theoretical 
analyses. 
14. This is a logical identity and does not imply the independence of 
these three terms. 
15. To give a simple example, if there were two countries in the 
world and the cost of emission reduction were always twice as ex-
pensive in country A as in B. then it would be cheaper to use up all 
the reduction potential in country B before reducing emissions in A. 
16. In 1989. the range for Europe and North America was 20-35% 
(World Resources Institute. 1993). 
17. Alternatively, countries might adopt strategies encouraging the 
development of very energy-efficient urban design. 
18. For a discussion and examples of such approaches see Jantsch 
(1967); Harman (1976); Gault el al. (1987); Gal and Fric (1987); 
Glimel and Laestadius (1987); Godet (1986); and Robinson (1988). 
19. See the country case studies in Baumgartner and Middtun (1987). 
See also Caputo (1984). For a discussion of the bases of disagree-
ment, see Robinson (1982). 
20. For examples of more recent bottom-up work, see Goldemberg el 
al. (1988) and Johansson el al. (1993). 
21. In Chapter 9 we provide the findings of some attempts to provide 
such comparisons. 
22. Since the former baseline already incorporates such improve-
ments, the cost per unit of further reduction is likely to be higher than 
it would be relative to a baseline without such improvements. 
23. For a recent example, which characterizes individual bottom-up 
and top-down models, see Grubb el al. (1993). 
24. For example, Environmental Protection Agency (1990); Ed-
monds el al. (1986); Manne and Schrattenholzer (1993); and Johans-
son elal. (1993). 
25. The term "backcasting" is also used in the economic modelling 
literature to refer to the process of simulating a model over historical 
time in order to compare such a historical "projection" with actual 
historical data. 
26. For a discussion of the implications of backcasting approaches 
for modelling, see Gault el al. (1987) and Robinson (1991b). 
27. The SIC (Standard Industrial Classification) is an internationally 
recognized classification system for industrial activity. The two-digit 
SIC level is a very highly aggregated level that breaks industrial ac-
tivity into less than ten sectors. 
28. Apparently, the only carbon sequestration cost study to employ 
an econometric approach (in contrast to the least-cost analysis of 
most other studies) is currently being prepared by Robert Stavins of 
the Kennedy School of Government. Harvard University, U.S. The 
econometric analysis not only incorporates data from direct financial 
cost, but accounts for behavioural considerations regarding how 
landowners respond to economic incentives. 
29. As in the case of energy-related emissions, the assertion that op-
portunities exist to enhance sinks at a negative cost raises the obvi-
ous question of why these activities are not already being undertaken 
if their costs truly are negative. 
References 
Adams, R., D. Adams. J. Callaway, C. Chang, and B. McCarl, 1993: 
Sequestering carbon on agricultural land: Social costs and im-
pacts on timber markets, Contemporary Policy Issues, 11(1), 
76-87. 
2W 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Andrasko, K.. K. Heaton, and S. Winnett, 1991: Evaluating the 
costs and efficiency of options to manage global forests: A cost-
curve approach. Proceedings of the Technical Workshop to Ex-
plore Options for Global Forestry Management, Bangkok. 24-30 
April, pp. 216-233, International Institute for Environment and 
Development. London. 
Arthur, W.B., I9XX: Self-reinforcing mechanisms in economics. In 
The economy as an evolving complex system, P.W. Anderson, K.J. 
Arrow, and D. Pines, eds.. pp. 9-31, Addison-Wesley, Redwood 
City. 
Ascher, W., 1978: Forecasting - An appraisal for policy-makers 
and 
planners, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 
Ascher, W., 1990: Beyond accuracy. International 
Journal of Fore-
casting. 5, 469-4X4. 
Aumann, R.J., 19X7: Correlated equilibrium as an expression of 
Bayesian rationality, Fconometrica, 
55( I), 1-18. 
Azariadis, C , and R. Guesnerie, 19X6: Sunspots and cycles, Review 
of Economic Studies, 53, 725-737. 
Baumgartncr. 'I'., and A. Middtun (eds.), 19X7: The politics of en-
ergy forecasting, 
Oxford University Press, New York. 
Kernardini, ()., and R. Galli, 1993: Dematerialization: Long-term 
trends in the intensity of use of material and energy, Futures, 
25(4). 431-44X. 
Hurrah, N.E., 19X3: Energy and development: The tunnel effect. Re-
vue de I'Fnergie, no. 356 (August/September), Paris. 
Bovenberg, L. and R. Van der Mooij, 1994: Environmental levies 
and distortionary taxation. American 
Economic Review, 84(X4). 
pp. 10X5-10X9. 
Brooks, D., and J. Robinson, I9X3/X4: 2025: Soft energy futures 
for 
Canada, study prepared by Friends of the Earth Canada. 12 vol-
umes. Department o( Energy. Mines, and Resources, Ottawa. 
Brooks, H., and E. Gin/Ion (eds.). 19X0: Energy in 
Transition 
I9H5-20I0. 
Final report of the Committee on Nuclear Alternative 
Energy Systems of the National Research Council. W.H. Freeman 
& Sons, San Francisco. CA. 
Caputo, R.. 19X4: Worlds in collision. Futures. 16, 233-259. 
CETKSB (Companhia de Saneamento Basico do Estado de Sao 
Paulo), 1994: Relatorio de qualidade do a rem Sao Paulo, Secre-
taria de Saneamento e do Meio Amhiente do Estado de Sao Paulo. 
Sao Paulo. 
Chen, X., 1994: Substitutions of information for energy. Energy pol-
icy, 22(1). 15-27. 
Craig, P.. M. Christensen, M. Levine. D. Muhamed. and M. Sim-
mons (eds.), I97X: Distributed energy systems in California's fu-
ture, report prepared for the U.S. Department o( Energy. U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington. DC. 
Darmstadter, J.. J. Dunkerely. and J. Alterman. 1977: How indus-
trial societies use energy. Johns Hopkins University Press. Balti-
more. 
DeCanio, S., 1993: Barriers within firms to energy efficiency invest-
ments. Energy I'olicy. 21(9). 901-914. 
Dixon, R.. P. Schroedei. and J. Winjum (eds.). 1991: Assessment 
of 
promising forest management 
practices and technologies for en-
hancing the conservation 
and sequestration 
of atmospheric 
car-
bon and their costs at the site level. Report of the U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency. #EPA/600/3-91/067. Environmental 
Research Laboratory. Corvallis. OR. 
Dupuy, J.-P.. 19X9: Convention et common knowledge. 
Revue 
economique. 
40(2). 361 -400. 
Edmonds, J.A., and J. Reilly. 19X3: A global energy-economic 
model of carbon dioxide release. Energy Ecimomics. 5(2). 74-SX. 
Kdmonds, J. A., et.;/. 1°S6: Future iirmospheric carbon dioxide sce-
narios and limitation strategics. Noves Publications. Park Ridge. 
NJ. 
Environmental Protection Agency, 1990: Policy options for stabi-
lizing global climate, report to Congress, 0. Lashof and D. Tir-
pak. eds., EPA. Washington, DC. 
Eto, J., E. Vine, L. Shown, R. Sonnenblick, and C. Payne, 1994: The 
cost and performance 
of utility commercial 
lighting 
programs. 
LBL-34967. 
Energy 
and 
Environment 
Division, 
Lawrence 
Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. 
Ford Foundation, 1974: A time to choose: America's 
energy future, 
Energy Policy Project. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA. 
FRN (Forskningsradsnamden), 1987: Surprising futures, notes from 
an International Workshop on Long-Term World Development, 
Forskningsradsnamden (Swedish Council for Planning and Coor-
dination of Research), Report 87:1, Stockholm. 
Fudenberg, D., and J. Tirole, 1991: Theory game, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 
Gal, F., and P. Fric, 1987: Problem-oriented participative forecast-
ing. Futures, 19(6), 678-6X5. 
Gault, F., K. Hamilton, R. Hoffman, and B. Mclnnis, 1987: The de-
sign approach to socio-economic forecasting. Futures, 
19( 1). 
3-25. 
Glimel, H., and S. Laestadius, 1987: Swedish futures studies in tran-
sition. Futures. 19, 635-650. 
Godet, M.. 1986: Introduction to La Prospective, Futures. 
18(2). 
134-157. 
Goldemberg, J., A. Reddy, T. Johansson and R. Williams, 198X: En-
ergy for a sustainable world, Wiley-Eastern Ltd., New Delhi. 
Gouider, L.H., 1994: Environmental taxation and the double divi-
dend: A reader's guide, paper presented at the 50th Congress of 
the International Institute of Public Finance, (August), Session 1. 
Green taxes and the rest of the tax system, Harvard University. 
Cambridge, MA. 
Grubb, M., J. Edmonds, P. ten Brink, and M. Morrison, 1993: The 
costs of limiting fossil-fuel CO, emissions: A survey and analy-
sis, Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 
18, 397-478. 
Grubb, M.. M. Ha Duong, and T. Chapuis. 1994: Optimising climate 
change abatement responses: On inertia and induced technology 
development. In Integrative assessment of mitigation impacts and 
adapation to climate change, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus. R. 
Richels, eds., pp. 513-534, Proceedings of an IIASA workshop 
held on 13-15 October 1993 at Laxenburg, Austria, International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg. 
Griibler, A„ N. Nakicenovic. A. Schafer. 1993: Dynamics of trans-
port and energy systems, Report RR-93-19, International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Hafele, W.. 1981: Energy in a finite world: A global systems analy-
sis. Ballinger. Cambridge. MA. 
Harman, W., 1976: An incomplete guide to the future, San Francisco 
Books, San Francisco. 
Henshell, R. 19X2: The boundary of self-fulfilling prophecy and the 
dilemma of prediction, British Journal of Sociology, 33, 511-528. 
Henshell, R.. 1993: Do self-fulfilling prophecies improve or degrade 
predictive accuracy? How sociology and economics can disagree 
and both be right. Journal ofSocio-Economics, 
22(2). 85-104. 
Herrera, O.. H. Scolnik, G. Chichilnisky, G. Gallopin. J. Hardoy. 
D. Moscovich, E. Oteiza. G. de Romero Brest. C. Suarez. and L. 
Talavera. 1976: Catastrophe 
or new society? -A Latin American 
world model. International Development Research Centre. Ot-
tawa. 
Hogan, W.. and D. Jorgensen. 1990: Productivity trends and the cost 
of reducing CO, emissions. Global Environmental Policy Project. 
Discussion Paper E-90-07. Harvard University. Cambridge. MA. 
Hourcade, J.-C. 1992: Modelling long run scenarios: Methodology 
lessons from a prospective study on a low CO, intensive country. 
Energy Policy. 21(3). 309-3 1 1. 
Estimating the Costs of Mitigating Crecnlioiise 
Cases 
2 V? 
Hourcade, J.-C, and T. Chapuis, 1993: No regret potentials and 
technical innovation: A viability approach to integrative assess-
ment of climate policies. In Integrative assessment of mitigation 
impacts and adaptation to climate change. Proceedings of an 
IIASA workshop held on 13-15 October 1993 at Laxenburg, Aus-
tria, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus, R. Richels. eds., pp. 
535-558, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, 
Laxenburg. 
Howarth, R., and B. Anderson. 1993: Market barriers to energy effi-
ciency, Energy Economics, 15(4). 262-272. 
Howarth, R., and M. Winslow, 1994: Energy use and climate stabil-
isation: Integrating pricing and regulatory policies. Energy- The 
International Journal, 19, 855-867. 
IAEE (International Association for Energy Economics), 1993: En-
ergy, environment, and sustainable development: Challenges for 
the 21st century. 16th Annual International Conference of the In-
ternational Association for Energy Economics, Nusa Dua, Bali, 
Indonesia, July. 
Jager, J„ N. Sonntag, D. Bernard, and W. Kurz, 1991: The challenge 
of sustainable development in a greenhouse world: Some vi-
sions of the future, report of a Policy Exercise held in Bad Blei-
bert, Austria, Sept. 2-7, 1990, Stockholm Environment Institute, 
Stockholm. 
Jantsch, E., 1967: Techological forecasting, OECD, Paris. 
Jefferson, M., 1982: Historical perspectives of societal change and 
the use of scenarios in shell. In Social forecasting for company 
planning, B. Twiss. ed., Macmillan, London. 
Jefferson, M., 1983: Economic uncertainty and business decision-
making. In Beyond positive economics, J. Wiseman, ed.. Macmil-
lan, London. 
Johansson, T., and P. Steen, 1977: Solar Sweden, Secretariat for Fu-
tures Studies, Stockholm. 
Johansson, T., H. Kelly, A. Reddy, and R. Williams, 1993: Renew-
able energy: Sources for fuels and electricity. Island Press, Wash-
ington, DC. 
Jorgensen, D., 1984: Economic effects of the rise in energy prices: 
What have we learned in ten years? The role of energy in produc-
tivity growth, The American Economic Review. 74(2). 26-29. 
Joskow, P., and D. Marron, 1993: What does a negawatt really cost? 
Evidence from utility conservation programs. The Energy Jour-
nal, 13(4), 41-74. 
Keepin, B., and B.Wynne, 1987: The roles of models-What can we 
expect from science? A study of the IIASA World Energy Model. 
In. The politics of energy forecasting, T. Baumgartner, A. Midd-
tun, eds., pp. 33-57. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 
Koomey, J., and A. Sanstad. 1994: Technical evidence for assessing 
the performance of markets affecting energy efficiency. Energy 
Policy, 22(10), 826-832. 
Krause, F., 1981: The industrial economy - An energy barrel with-
out a bottom, paper presented at the Second International Confer-
ence on Soft Energy Paths, ENI, Rome. 
Krause, F.. R. Howarth. J. Koomey. and A. Stanstad, 1994: Top-
down and bottom-up methods for calculating the cost of cutting 
carbon emissions: An economic assessment, invited contribution 
to the 1995 IPCC Scientific Assessment. Working Group III. In-
tergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva. 
Krause, F., E. Vine, and S. Gandhi. 1989: Program experience and 
its regulatory implications: A case study of utility lighting effi-
ciency programs, LBL-28268. Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. 
Berkeley, CA. 
Leach, G.. 1979: A low energy strategy for the United Kingdom, The 
International Institute for the Environment and Development, 
Science Reviews Ltd., London. 
Legget, J.. W.J. Pepper, and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emissions scenarios 
for the IPCC: An update. In Intergovernmental panel on climate 
change. Climate change 1992: The supplementary report to the 
IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton. B.A. Callander, S.K. 
Varney, eds., pp. 69-95, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Levine, M.. and R. Sonnenblick. 1994: On the assessment of utility 
demand-side management programs. Energy Policy, 22(10), 
848-856. 
Lewis, D. K., 1969: Convention: A philosophical study, Harvard 
University Press, Cambridge. MA. 
Little, I., and J. Mirrless. 1974: Project approach and planning for 
developing countries, Basic Books, New York. 
Lovins, A.B., 1977: Soft energy paths: Towards a durable peace, 
Penguin Books, Harmondsworth. 
Lovins, A.B., L. Lovins. F. Krause, and W. Bach, 1981: Least-cost 
energy - solving the C()1 problem, Brick House Publishing, An-
dover, MA. 
Lutzenhiser, L., 1993: Social and behavioural aspects of energy use, 
Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 18, 247-289. 
Manne, A., and R. Richels. 1992: Buying greenhouse insurance. The 
economic costs of carbon dioxide emission limits, The MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Manne, A., and L. Schraltenholzer. 1993: Global scenarios for car-
bon dioxide emissions. Energy. 18(12), 1207-1222. 
Martin, J.M., 1988: L'intensiie energetique de I'activite economique 
dans les pays industrialises: les evolutions de longuc periode 
livrent-elles des enseignements utiles? Serie Economic de 1'en-
ergie, 4, 9-27. 
Martin, J.M., 1992: Economic el politique de I'energie, Armand 
Collin, coll. Cursus Economic. Paris. 
Meadows, D.H., and D.L. Meadows. 1972: The limits to growth, 
Universe Books, New York. 
Mesarovic, M.. and E. Pestel. 1974: Mankind at the turning point, 
E.P. Dutton, New York. 
Messenger, M., 1981: A high technology-low energy demand for 
Western Europe. Energy-the International Journal, 6, 1481- 1503. 
Moulton, R., and K. Richards, 1990: Costs of sequestering carbon 
through tree planting and forest management in the United States, 
General Technical Report WO-58, U.S. Department of Agricul-
ture. Washington. DC. 
Nadel, S.. 1992: Utility demand-side management experience and 
potential-A critical review, Annual Review of Energy and the En-
vironment, 17,507-535. 
Nastari, P.M., 1991: Economic viability of sugar cane ethanol in 
Brazil considering its social cost of production, Proceedings of 
the IX international symposium on alcohol fuels, Florence, Italy, 
pp. 981-983. 
Newman, P., and J. Kenworthy, 1989: Cities and automobile 
dependence: An international sourcebook, Gower Techni-
cal. Aldershot. UK. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1977: Strategies of the control of carbon dioxide, 
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 443, Yale University, 
New Haven. CT. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1979: The efficient use of energy resources, Yale 
University Press, New Haven. CT. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1991: The cost of slowing climate change: A sur-
vey. The Energy Journal. 12(1). 37-65. 
Norgaard, J.. 1979: Household and energy, report No. 4 from 
DEMO-Project, Physics Laboratory III, Danish Institute of Tech-
nology, Lyngby. Denmark. 
Northwest Power Planning Council, 1991: 1991 Northwest conser-
vation and electric power plan, Volume II, Portland, Oregon. 
Olivier, D., H. Miall, F. Nectoux, and M. Opperman, 1982: Energy-
efficient futures: Opening the solar option, Earth Resources Re-
search, London. 
296 
Climate Change /W/> - i'.eonomie and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Parks, P., and I. Hardin, 1995: Least cost forest carbon reserves: 
Cost-effective subsidies to convert marginal agricultural land to 
forests, Land Economics, 71(1), I 22- I 36. 
Richards, K., R. Moulton, and R. Birdsey. 1993: Costs of creating 
carbon sinks in the U.S. In Proceedings of the International En-
ergy Agency Carbon Dioxide Symposium. P. Rienier, ed., pp. 
905-912, Pergamon Press, Oxford. 
Riemer, P. (ed.), 1993: Proceedings ol the International Energy 
Agency Carbon Dioxide Symposium. Energy Conversion and 
Management, 34,711-1227. 
Robinson, J., 1982: Bottom-up methods and low-down results: 
Changes in the estimation of future energy demands, Energy -
The International Journal, 7, 627-635. 
Robinson, J.. 1988: Unlearning and backcasling: Rethinking some 
of the questions we ask about the future. Technological Forecast-
ing and Social Change. 33(4). 325-338. 
Robinson, J., 1990: Futures under glass: A recipe for people who 
hate to predict, Entities, 22(9), 820-843. 
Robinson, J., 1991a: The proof of the pudding: Making energy effi-
ciency work. Energy Policy, 19(7), 631-645. 
Robinson, J.. 1991b: Modelling the interactions between human and 
natural systems. International Social Sciences Journal, 130, 
629-647. 
Robinson, J.. 1992: Of maps and territories: The use and abuse of 
socio-economic modelling in support of decision-making. Tech-
nological Forecasting and Social Change, 42(3), 147-164. 
Robinson, J., D. Biggs, G. Francis. R. Legge. S. Lerner, S. Slo-
combe, and C. Van Hers, 1996: Life in 2030: Exploring a sustain-
able future for Canada, UBC Press, Vancouver, forthcoming. 
Ross, M., 1989: Fnergy and transportation in the United States, An-
nual Review of Energy. 14, 131-171. 
Ross, M., and R. Williams. 1981: Our energy - Regaining control, 
McCraw Hill. New York. 
Rothman, D.. and R. Coppoek, 1996: Scenarios of sustainability : 
The challenges of describing desirable futures. In Climate change 
and world food security, Thomas E. Downing, ed.. Springer-
Verlag, London. 
Sachs, I.. 1993: Ecodeveloppement: strategies de transition vers le 
XXle siecle. Collection Alternatives economiques, Syros, Paris. 
Sant, R., 1979: The least-cost energy strategy, The Energy Produc-
tivity Center, Carnegie Mellon Institute, Arlington, VA. 
Rebelling, T.C., 1960: The strategy of conflict. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Sehipper, L.. 1995: Determinants of automobile use and energy con-
sumption in OECD countries, Annual Review of Energy and the 
Environment, 20, 325-386. 
Schippcr, L.. and R. Howarth, 1990: United States energy use from 
1973 to 1987: The impacts of improved efficiency. Annual Re-
view of Energy, 15, 455-504. 
Selvanathan, E., and S. Selvanathan. 1994: The demand for trans-
port and communications in the United Kingdom and Australia, 
Transportation Research B. 288(1), 1-9. 
Southern California Edison Company, 1988: Strategies for an un-
certain future, Southern California Edison Company, Rosemead, 
CA. 
Squire, L., and H. Van der Tak, 1976: Economic analysis of projects. 
Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore. 
Stavins, R., 1995: The costs of carbon sequestration. A revealed 
preference approach. J.F. Kennedy School of Government (Har-
vard University) and Resources for the Future, Cambridge, MA. 
and Washington, DC. 
Stobaugh, R.. and D. Yergin. 1979: Energy future - Report of the en-
ergy project at the Harvard Business School, Random House, 
New York. 
Stockholm Environment Institute/Greenpeace, 1993: Towards a 
fossil free energy future, the next energy transition, a technical 
analysis for Greenpeace International, SEI. Boston. 
Sutherland, R., 1991: Market barriers to energy-efficient invest-
ments, The Energy Journal. 12(3), 15-34. 
Thompson, M., 1984: Among the energy tribes: A cultural frame-
work for the analysis and design of energy policy, Policy Sci-
ences, 17(4), 321-339. 
Tinbergen, J., 1976: Reshaping the international order, report to the 
Club de Rome, E.P. Dutton and Co., New York. 
Wack, P., 1985a: Scenarios: Uncharted waters ahead, Harvard Busi-
ness Review, 63(5), 72-89. 
Wack, P., 1985b: Scenarios: Shooting the rapids, Harvard Business 
Review, 63(6), 139-150. 
Williams, R., 1987: Materials, affluence and energy use. Annual Re-
view of Energy, 12, 99-144. 
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987: 
Our common future, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
World Resources Institute, 1993: World resources, 1992-3, Oxford 
University Press, New York. 
Xu, P., 1994: The potential for reducing atmospheric carbon by 
large-scale afforestation in China and related cost/benefit analy-
sis, Biomass and Bioenergy, forthcoming. 
9 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Convening Author: 
J.C. HOURCADE 
Principal Lead Authors: 
K. HALSNAES, M. JACCARD, W D. MONTGOMERY, R. RICHELS, 
J. ROBINSON, P.R. SHUKLA, P. STURM 
Lead Authors: 
W. CHANDLER, O. DAVIDSON, J. EDMONDS, D. FINON, K. HOGAN, 
F. KRAUSE, A. KOLESOV, E. LA ROVERE, P. NASTARI, A. PEGOV, 
K. RICHARDS, L. SCHRATTENHOLZER, R. SHACKLETON, Y. SOKONA, 
A. TUDINI, J. WEYANT 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
9.1 Introduction 
9.2 Review of Existing Studies of the Costs of 
Reducing C0 2 Emissions 
9.2.1 Studies of the costs of reducing C02 
emissions in the U.S. 
9.2.1.1 A review of top-down studies 
9.2.1.1.1 Key assumptions 
9.2.1.1.2 Emission scenarios 
9.2.1.1.3 Carbon taxes 
9.2.1.1.4 GDP losses 
9.2.1.1.5 The nature of the GDP losses 
9.2.1.1.6 The relationship between timing, 
emission reduction costs, and 
research and development 
9.2.1.1.7 The issue of revenue recycling 
9.2.1.2 A review of bottom-up studies 
9.2.1.2.1 Variations in bottom-up 
technology and policy 
assumptions 
9.2.1.2.2 Key study assumptions 
and results 
9.2.2 Studies of the costs of reducing CO, 
emissions in other OECD countries 
9.2.2.1 A review of top-down studies 
9.2.2.1.1 Regional studies 
9.2.2.1.2 National studies 
9.2.2.1.3. The effects of revenue recycling 
on GDP and employment 
9.2.2.1.4 The effectiveness of energy and 
carbon taxes 
9.2.2.2 A review of bottom-up studies 
9.2.2.2.1 Methodology of the studies 
9.2.2.2.2 Main objectives and definitions 
9.2.2.2.3 The results 
9.2.2.2.4 The dependence of the results on 
input assumptions and modelling 
approach 
9.2.3 Studies of the costs of reducing CO, 
emissions in transitional economies 
9.2.3.1 A review of top-down studies 
9.2.3.2 A review of bottom-up studies 
9.2.3.2.1 Summary of studies 
9.2.3.2.2 Evaluation of cost estimates 
301 
9.2.4 Studies of the costs of reducing 
C02 emissions in developing 
303 
countries 
325 
9.2.4.1 A review of top-down studies 
325 
9.2.4.1.1 The costs of emission reduction 
303 
in China 
326 
9.2.4.1.2 The impacts of energy subsidy 
304 
removal 
326 
304 
9.2.4.1.3 The impacts of carbon taxes 
305 
on noncommercial energy 
306 
consumption 
327 
306 
9.2.4.2 A review of bottom-up studies 
327 
307 
9.2.4.2.1 Main assumptions and findings: 
308 
Trends and margins of freedom 
for curbing greenhouse gas 
emissions 
328 
308 
9.2.4.2.2 Emission reduction costs 
331 
308 
9.2.4.2.3 The special case of China 
332 
309 
9.2.4.2.4 Comparing numerical results: 
Critical assumptions about 
technical options 
332 
309 
9.2.4.2.5 Comparability of the national 
studies 
333 
310 
9.2.4.2.6 Conclusion 
335 
9.2.5 Global studies of the costs of reducing 
312 
CO; emissions 
335 
312 
9.2.5.1 A review of top-down studies: 
312 
The importance of international 
313 
cooperation 
335 
9.2.5.1.1 The costs of stabilizing global 
314 
emissions 
335 
9.2.5.1.2 The costs of meeting alternative 
316 
emission targets 
337 
317 
9.2.5.1.3 The potential gains from 
317 
international cooperation 
338 
318 
9.2.5.1.4 Allocation of emission rights 
339 
318 
9.2.5.1.5 Carbon "leakage" 
341 
9.2.5.1.6 The costs of stabilizing 
atmospheric CO, concentrations 
343 
9.2.5.2 A review of bottom-up studies: 
The critical role of innovation 
343 
9.3 Studies of the Costs of Carbon Sequestration 
345 
9.3.1 Costs of carbon sequestration 
352 
9.3.2 Potential quantities of carbon 
355 
9.3.3 Cost curves 
355 
322 
322 
322 
323 
323 
325 
300 
Climate CIHI»'"' 
9.4 Studies of the Costs of Reducing Nonenergy 
enhouse Gas Emissions 
1 Costs of reducing methane emissions 
9.4.1.1 Natural gas and oil systems 
9.4.1.2 Coal mining 
9.4.1.3 Waste disposal 
9.4.1.4 Ruminant animals 
9.4.1.5 Animal manures 
356 
357 
357 
357 
358 
358 
358 
9.4.2 Costs of reducing emissions of other 
greenhouse gases 
358 
9.4.2.1 Nitrous oxide 
358 
995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
9.4.2.1.1 Adipic and nitric acid production 
358 
9.4.2.1.2 Fertilizer use 
358 
9.4.2.1.3 Other sources 
359 
9.4.2.2 Halogenated substances 
359 
9.4.2.2.1 Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
359 
9.4.2.2.2 Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
359 
9.4.2.2.3 Other halogenated substances 
359 
Endnotes 
359 
References 
360 
SUMMARY 
• Estimates of the cost of greenhouse gas emission reduc-
tion are sensitive to assumptions about appropriate 
model structure, demographic and economic growth, 
the cost and availability of both demand-side and 
supply-side energy options, the desired level and tim-
ing of abatement, and the choice of policy instruments. 
Different assumptions have led to a wide range of emis-
sion reduction cost estimates. 
• Despite significant differences in views, there is agree-
ment that some energy efficiency improvements (per-
haps 10-30% of current consumption, depending on base-
line assumptions and the implementation time frame) 
can be realized at negative to slightly positive costs. The 
existence of such a no-regrets potential depends on the 
existence of substantial market or institutional imper-
fections that prevent cost-effective emission reduction 
measures from being taken. The key question is whether 
such imperfections can be removed cost effectively by 
policy measures. 
• Energy-related emissions can be reduced through both 
demand-side (energy efficiency) and supply-side (alter-
native sources of supply) options. In the short term, de-
mand-side options are cheapest in most countries. 
• Estimates of the costs of stabilizing CO, emissions vary 
widely as a result of differences in both the baseline sce-
narios used (e.g.. how much energy efficiency or what 
rate of economic growth is contained in the baseline 
scenario) and the calculated costs of various policy 
measures. 
• There has been much more analysis to date of emission 
reduction potentials and costs for industrialized coun-
tries than for other parts of the world. Moreover, many 
existing models are not well suited to the study of econ-
omies in transition or developing country economies. 
Much more work is needed to develop and apply models 
outside of developed countries. 
• The overall cost of abatement programmes will ulti-
mately be determined by the rate of capital replacement, 
the discount rate, and the effect of research and devel-
opment. Appropriate long-run signals to encourage re-
search and development will reduce long-run costs. The 
implementation of any no-regrets potential will increase 
the time available to learn about climate risks and to 
bring new technologies to the marketplace. 
• Infrastructure decisions are critical because they can en-
hance or restrict the number and types of future options, 
and different infrastructure decisions can lead to very 
different cost outcomes. This issue is of particular im-
portance to developing countries, where major infra-
structure decisions will be made in the near term. 
• If the climate issue is formulated in terms of stabilizing 
atmospheric concentrations, the choice of emission time 
path is critical in determining the overall price tag. It is 
important to identify those paths that minimize the costs 
of achieving a particular concentration target. 
• The overall impact of a carbon tax will depend not only 
on the size of the tax, but also on the uses to which the 
revenues are put. If carbon tax revenues are used to re-
duce more distortionary taxes, overall emission reduc-
tion costs will be reduced. Inefficient tax recycling 
could, however, increase costs. 
• There is need for both detailed (bottom-up) analysis of 
technological options and also more aggregate (top-
down) analysis of economic effects. Whereas, histori-
cally, these two approaches have been associated with 
very different cost estimates, this need not always be the 
case. Indeed, widely differing methods can produce 
quite similar results when calibrated to the same set of 
input assumptions. 
• Given differences in marginal emission reduction costs 
among countries, international cooperation can signifi-
cantly reduce the global price tag for emission reduction. 
Economic efficiency would be enhanced by carrying 
out emission reduction where it is cheapest to do so. 
• Estimates of the costs of stabilizing C02 emissions 
at 1990 levels in OECD countries vary widely. Many 
bottom-up studies suggest that the costs of achieving 
this target over the next few decades may be negli-
gible. Given rising baseline emissions over the longer 
term, however, many top-down studies suggest that the 
annual costs of stabilizing emissions may ultimately 
exceed 1-2% of GDP. 
• The costs of stabilizing emissions for economies in 
transition may be small relative to OECD countries. 
The potential for cost-effective reductions in energy use 
is apt to be considerable, but the realizable potential will 
depend on what economic and technological develop-
JW2 
C 'liiuaie Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
ment path is chosen. A critical issue is the future of 
structural changes in these countries that may drasti-
cally change the level of baseline emissions and the 
emission reduction costs. 
• Analyses suggest that there may be substantial low-cost 
emission reduction opportunities for developing coun-
tries. However, these are likely to be insufficient to off-
set rapidly increasing emission baselines associated 
with, for example, increased economic growth. In the 
absence of a highly favourable allocation of carbon 
emission rights, the likely magnitude of emission reduc-
tion will be particularly costly for developing countries. 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
JOJ 
o 
! 
I 
I 
1/3 
5 
7o 
-
4% -
# 
BG(2095) 
BG(2050) 
BG(2050) 
MG(2020) BG(2095) 
2% 
CB 1(2000) 
# 
CBG(2100), 
G(205O) 
CB2(2000) 
G(2050) 
t 
" , V J ^ " ' 
" ^ ' 
' 
MR(2100) 
• 
B G r 2 0 2 0 , 
MG(2050)MRG(2100: 
™MRG(2050)CBO(:'(X)), MR&2100)' 
1 
CBO(2,00) 
. ^ o T ? ^ 
JW(2020) 
?(™°> #RG(2020) 
MRG(2100) 
1 
, ' 
A.onnm ! 
0 0(2015) 
' 
OMG(2050) 
, G(2050) 
SLINK(20,0) T ^ T 
JW(2100) 
EB(2020) ! OMG(2020) 
'• 
•j\V(2060P 
£ 
CBG(2100) 
°NAS 
MR(2100) 
RG(2100) 
1 # 
JW(2060) MAS* • 
• OMG(2020) 
• SG(2010)' 
OMG(2050) 
JW(2100) 
SRDK2010) 
0 -
0 0(2015) 
*SJW(2010) 
|0M(2010) 
OMG(2050) 
0 
0(2015) 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
Reduction of C02 Emissions (from baseline) 
• 
Top-down; economic model estimate 
0 
Bottom-up; technology based estimate 
Note: to avoid crowding, labels are not attached to all points. For key to studies used, see Table 9.1. 
Source: Grubb et al. (1993). 
Figure 9.1: U.S. Studies: Cost of CO, abatement relative to baseline projection. 
9.1 Introduction 
A variety of options can be adopted in response to the 
prospect of increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases in 
the earth's atmosphere. These include (1) options that elimi-
nate or reduce greenhouse gas emissions: (2) options that off-
set emissions, for example, through the enhancement of sinks; 
and (3) options that help human and ecological systems adjust 
or adapt to new climate conditions and events. The first and 
second types of interventions take effect prior to climate change 
and are intended to slow its pace. As such, they are referred to 
as "mitigation" measures. The third category of intervention 
takes place after warming occurs and falls under the classifi-
cation of "adaptation." This chapter reviews existing studies 
of the economic costs of mitigating greenhouse gas emis-
sions. 
A caveat is in order. Sensible greenhouse policy should in-
volve careful consideration of the costs of mitigation and 
adaptation options together with what these options may buy 
in terms of reduced environmental impacts. This chapter fo-
cusses exclusively on mitigation costs. The benefits from 
adopting such options are discussed in Chapter 6. 
9.2 Review of Existing Studies of the Costs of 
Reducing C0 2 Emissions 
In recent years, there have been numerous studies of the costs 
of reducing CO., emissions. Unfortunately, estimates have 
spanned such a wide range that they have been of limited 
value to policy making. Figure 9.1 and Table 9.1, which sum-
marize recent projections of the costs of reducing U.S. CO, 
emissions, are illustrative of the current lack of consensus 
about the costs of emission reduction. Whereas some studies 
place losses at several percent of GDP, others question 
whether there will be any losses at all. An essential first step 
in narrowing the range of disagreement is to determine why 
estimates differ so widely. 
M)4 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.1. U.S. CO, abatement cost modelling 
studies 
Author (year) 
Barns et al. (1992). 
Barns et al. (1992) 
Barns el al. (1992) 
DRK1992) 
CBO-PCAEO, DRKI990) 
CBO-DGEMO990) 
CBO-IEA-ORAU(1990) 
Edmonds & Barns (1991) 
Ooulder (1991) 
Jackson(1991) 
Jorgenson & Wilcoxcn (1990a) 
Jorgenson & Wilcoxcn (1990a) 
Jorgcnson & Wilcoxcn (1990b) 
Mannc & Riehels (1990a) 
Mannc& Riehels (1990a) 
Mannc (1992) 
Mannc (1992) 
Manned 992) 
Mills <•/<//. (1991) 
NASI 1991) 
Olivciia-MartinscW. (1992b) 
Oliveira-MaitinstVu/. (1992b) 
OTA (1991) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Shackleton et al. (1992) 
Shackleton et al. (1992) 
U.S. Energy Choices (1991) 
Key" 
BG(2020) 
BG (2050) 
BG(2095) 
B(2020) 
CB1(2000),CB2(2000) 
CB3(2000) 
CBG(2100) 
EB(2020),EB(2100) 
G(2050) 
J(2005) 
JW(2060) 
JW(2100) 
JW(2020) 
MR(2020) 
MR(2100) 
MRG(2020) 
MRG(2050) 
MRG(2100) 
M(2010) 
N 
OMG(2020) 
OMG(2050) 
0(2015) 
RG(2020) 
RG(2050) 
RG(2I00) 
SJW(2010), SLINK(2010) 
SDRI(2010), SG(2010) 
USEC(2030) 
C 0 2 Reduction 
from Baseline (%) 
26, 45, 60 
45, 70, 84 
67, 88, 96 
37 
8, 16 
36 
11,36,50,75 
35,59 
13,18,27 
43,40,46 
20,36 
10, 20, 30 
8, 14, 32 
45 
50, 77, 88 
26,45, 60 
45, 70, 84 
67, 88, 96 
21 
24,40 
26,45, 60 
45,75, 84 
23,53,53 
26,45, 60 
45, 70, 84 
67, 88, 96 
22,2 
5,28 
67.5 
Cost/GNP Reduction 
from Baseline (%) 
0.6,2.0,3.2 
1.9,4.9,7.5 
4.3, 8.0, 10.9 
1.8 
1.9,2.0 
0.6 
1.1,2.2,0.9,3.0* 
1.3,2.3 
1.0,2.2,4.5 
-0.2,-0.1,0.1 
0.5, 1.1 
0.2,0.5, 1.1 
0.3,0.5, 1.6 
2.2 
0.8, 2.5, 4.0' 
0.8,2.2,4.2 
1.4,2.7,3.3 
2.3,3.1,3.4 
-1.2'' 
0,0.8 
0.2, 1.1,2.4 
0.4, 1.3,2.4 
-0.2/ -0.2/ 1.8 
0.5,1.3,2.5 
1.2,2.4,2.5 
1.8,2.6,2.8 
-0.6,0.1 
-0.4, 0.2 
-0.6 
"If the model used is a global model, the key includes the letter "G" before the date. 
''The first two results use multilateral taxes, the others use unilateral taxes; taxes are flat only in the first and third estimates, rising in the other 
estimates. 
'Values represent different assumptions for technological developments: an optimistic, an intermediate, and a pessimistic view. 
•'Arising from 11 specified regulatory changes; estimated from claimed savings of $85 billion per year. 
'The benefit shown in the OTA cost estimates is only an indicative value; no explicit modelling value was calculated. 
Source: Grubb et al. (1993). 
There are many possible explanations for the disagree-
ment - choice of methodologies, underlying assumptions, emis-
sion scenarios, policy instruments, reporting year, and others. 
In Chapter 8, we explored some of these reasons, paying par-
ticular attention to the modelling of technological change. In 
this chapter, we provide a more systematic examination of the 
published literature on the costs of reducing C0 2 emissions. 
In doing so. we will show that, despite widely varying and of-
ten contradictory findings, the impressive accumulation of 
modelling results provides a number of useful insights for cli-
mate policy making. 
The review is organized by region, with results presented 
successively for 
(1) 
The U.S. 
(2) 
Other OFCD countries 
i.^i 
The transitional economies of Eastern Europe and the 
former So\ iel I'nion 
(4) 
Developing countries 
(5) 
The globe as a whole 
For each region, we first present results from top-down stud-
ies, then from bottom-up studies. In the last section, we at-
tempt to draw some general conclusions based on our inter-
pretation of these studies. 
9.2.1 Studies of the costs of reducing C02 emissions in 
the U.S. 
9.2.1.1 A review of top-down 
studies 
There have been several attempts in the U.S. to systematically 
compare the results of modelling analyses of greenhouse gas 
emission reduction costs. One of the best known is a study 
conducted by the Energy Modeling Forum of Stanford Uni-
versity (EMF. 1993). A diverse group of economic models, 
employing common assumptions for selected numerical in-
A Review of Mitigation 
Cast Studies 
Table 9.2. Models used in Energy Modeling Forum (EMF) study 
.«)5 
Model/Modellers 
Model Type 
Time Horizon 
2100 
2100 
2050 
2095 
2030 
2030 
2100 
2100 
2030 
2050 
2005 
2025 
2095 
2010 
Regions 
1 global 
5 global 
U.S 
9 global) 
U.S. 
U.S. 
5 global 
9 global 
U.S. 
8 global 
10 global 
U.S. 
9 global 
14 global 
CETA 
(Peck and Teisburg) 
CRTM 
(Rutherford) 
DGEM 
(Jorgenson and Wilcoxen) 
ERM 
(Edmonds and Reilly 
Fossil 2 
(Belanger and Naill) 
Gemini 
(Cohan and Scheraga) 
Global 2100 
(Manne and Richels) 
Global Macro-economy 
(Pepper) 
Goulder 
GREEN 
(Martins and Burniaux) 
IEA 
(Vouyoukas and Kouvaritakis) 
MARKAL 
(Morris) 
MWC 
(Mintzer) 
T-GAS 
(Kaufmann) 
Aggregate economic equilibrium 
Disaggregated economic equilibrium 
Disaggregated economic equilibrium 
Energy-sector equilibrium 
Energy-sector equilibrium 
Energy-sector equilibrium 
Aggregate economic equilibrium 
Energy-sector equilibrium 
Disaggregated economic equilibrium 
Disaggregated economic equilibrium 
Energy-sector equilibrium 
Energy-sector optimization 
Energy-sector equilibrium 
Energy demand simulation 
Source: EMF (1993). 
puts, was used to analyze a standardized set of emission re-
duction scenarios. In all, 14 top-down models participated in 
the study (Table 9.2). 
The EMF exercise provides the most comprehensive appli-
cation of top-down methodologies to date. The harmonization 
of key exogenous inputs makes it possible to verify to what ex-
tent the disagreements were due to differences in methodolo-
gies and to understand better the economic meaning of these 
differences. Although the focus was primarily on the U.S., 
many of the insights are applicable to developed countries in 
general. It is instructive to examine its results in some detail. 
9.2.1.1.1 Key 
assumptions 
In selecting parameters for standardization, the EMF study fo-
cussed on what were felt to be the most influential deter-
minants of emission reduction costs. These included GDP, 
population, the fossil-fuel resource base, and the cost and 
availability of long-term supply options. 
Given its importance as a determinant of future carbon 
emissions,1 the GDP growth rate was a key parameter for 
harmonization across models. For its reference case. EMF 
adopted the average of the IPCC high and low economic 
growth cases (Report of the Response Strategies Working 
Group, 1990). Also, for consistency with the IPCC. the study 
adopted the population growth projections of Zachariah and 
Vu(198B). 
Although the EMF models differed considerably in their 
technology representation, the study attempted to impose uni-
formity with regard to world oil prices, the oil and gas re-
source base, and the cost of backstop technologies. For the 
reference case, world oil prices were specified exogenously 
and assumed to be $24/barrel in 1990 and to increase at a real 
rate of $6.50/barrel each decade until 2030. (This trajectory 
was selected for its consistency with those from general equi-
librium models which incorporate international trade in oil.) 
Oil and gas resources were based on the optimistic 95th per-
centile estimates of Masters et al. (1987). 
To facilitate model comparisons, the study assumed that 
three types of backstop technologies would ultimately be-
come available: 
(1) 
a liquid synthetic fuel derived from coal or shale at 
$50/barrel of oil equivalent 
(2) 
a noncarbon-based liquid fuel at $100/barrel of crude 
oil equivalent 
(3) 
a noncarbon based electric option at 75 mills/kWh. 
Although these technologies were assumed to be initially 
available in 2010. the models imposed constraints on the rate 
at which they could enter the marketplace. The models also 
included a variety of carbon- and noncarbon-based supply op-
tions that are available at rising marginal costs. 
.M6 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
Table 9.3. Description of 
EMFscenarios 
Scenario 
Description 
Source: EMF (.1993). 
Table 9.4. Comparison of carbon taxes and GDP losses in 
2010 
Reference 
No controls 
5 
Stabilization 
Stabilize CO, emissions at their 1990 levels 
g 
by 2000 " 
| 
20% reduction 
Stabilize CO, emissions at their 1990 levels 
| 
by 2000, reduce by 20% below 1990 levels 
1 
by 2010 
g 
50% reduction 
Stabilize CO, emissions at their 1990 levels 
J 
by 2000, reduce by 20% below 1990 levels 
J 
by 2010, reduce by 50% below 1990 levels 
by 2050 
2050 
Source: EMF (1993). 
Figure 9.2: EMF reference and emission reduction scenarios. 
Carbon Tax 
($ per tonne of C) 
GDP Loss 
(%ofGDP) 
200 
Model 
20% 
20% 
Stabilization 
Reduction 
Stabilization 
Reduction 
CRTM 
DGEM 
ERM 
Fossil 2 
Gemini 
Global 
2100 
Global 
Macro 
Goulder 
GREEN 
MWC 
150 
20 
70 
80 
120 
110 
20 
20 
80 
70 
260 
50 
160 
250 
330 
240 
130 
50 
170 
180 
1.0 
1.7 
1.1 
1.4 
1.5 
1.2 
.9 
1.1 
Source: EMF (1993). 
9.2.1.1.2 
Emission 
scenarios 
Tabic 9.3 describes the principal EMF emission scenarios, 
and the reference case in Figure 9.2 represents the average of 
the model results. The reference case projects future emis-
sions in the absence of control measures. Hence, it indicates 
the amount of carbon that must be removed from the energy 
system in order to meet a given target. Figure 9.3 compares 
emission projections for the U.S. In all models, emissions in-
crease well beyond 1990 levels. There are, however, substan-
tial differences in the rate of increase. 
The following identity (Kaya. 1989) helps explain why 
projections differ: 
The growth rate in CO, = the growth rate in GDP 
- the rate of decline of energy 
use per unit of output 
the rate of decline of CO, 
emissions per unit of energy use 
! 
1 
CRTM 
2 
DGEM 
3 
ERM 
4 
Fossil 2 
5 
Gemini 
6 
Global-Macro 
7 
Global 2100 
8 
Goulder 
9 
GREEN 
10 ll:A 
11 MARKAI. 
12 MWC 
1.1 TGAS 
Source: EMF (1993). 
Figure 9.3: U.S. carbon emissions. 
The models employed common assumptions about GDP 
growth, but they differed with regard to the last two terms in 
the identity. The more optimistic the models were about the 
prospects for reducing energy intensity or the availability of 
low-cost substitutes, the lower their CO, growth rates. 
9.2.1.1.3 
Carbon taxes 
The modellers generally used taxes based on the carbon con-
tent of fossil fuels in order to achieve a prescribed emission 
reduction. The magnitude of the tax provides a rough estimate 
of the degree of market intervention that would be required to 
achieve a niven emission tarcet. 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
$450 | 
1 
2 50% reduction 
>*" 
$350 - 
3 stabilize at 1990 levels 
J* 
$300 - 
^ - " - " ' " ' " ^ 
U $250 - 
X ^ \ " 
is $i5o - 
/y 
0 
1990 
2000 
2010 
2020 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Year 
Source: EMF (1993). 
Figure 9.4: U.S. carbon taxes - average of all models. 
Table 9.4 compares model results for the stabilization and 
20% reduction scenarios. Estimates range from $20 to $150 
per tonne for the carbon taxes required to hold emissions at 
1990 levels in 2010. Estimates of the carbon taxes required to 
reduce emissions by 20% below 1990 levels in 2010 range 
from $50 to $330 per tonne. 
Two parameters are particularly important in explaining 
the differences in tax projections: the price elasticity of en-
ergy demand and the speed with which the capital stock ad-
justs to higher energy prices. Neither was controlled in the 
EMF experiments but rather they were left to the choice of the 
modellers. Not surprisingly, those models using lower price 
elasticities required higher taxes to achieve the same emission 
goal. Those models which assumed greater malleability of 
capital required lower taxes. 
The wide spread in the numerical results should not, how-
ever, obscure the fact that the models were in agreement on a 
number of important points. First, despite the inclusion of im-
proved technologies and improved energy efficiencies in the 
reference case, all the models projected that intervention 
would be required to achieve the emission targets. 
Second, the size of the required tax increases with the 
stringency of the carbon limit. The tax paths shown in Figure 
9.4 represent averages of the model results. Note that the size 
of the required tax doubles as the limit is tightened to 20% be-
low 1990 levels and nearly doubles again for a 50% reduction. 
This suggests that the economic efforts to be devoted are non-
linear with respect to the level of controls in any given year. 
That is, incremental reductions are apt to cost more as the ab-
solute level of allowable emissions is reduced. 
Figure 9.4 also suggests that the size of the carbon tax is 
apt to vary over time, even for the same target. Recall that the 
purpose of the tax is to raise the price of carbon-intensive fu-
els to the point where consumers will turn to price-induced 
conservation and less carbon-intensive supply alternatives. 
Hence, the size of the tax is determined by the cost differential 
M)7 
1990 
20(X) 
2010 
2020 
2030 
2040 
2050 
Year 
Source: EMF (1993). 
Figure 9.5: U.S. GDP loss projections - average of all models. 
between the marginal sources of supply with and without a car-
bon constraint. This cost differential is apt to change over time. 
9.2.1.1.4 GDP losses 
Table 9.4 shows a marked variation in GDP losses across 
models. Stabilizing emissions at their 1990 levels is estimated 
to reduce GDP by 0.2-0.7% in the year 2010 - roughly a $20 
billion to $70 billion loss for that year. Estimates of the costs 
of reducing emissions by 20% below 1990 levels in the year 
2010 range from 0.9 to 1.7% of GDP. 
In making these calculations, the modellers assumed a 
lump sum redistribution of tax revenues. That is, tax revenues 
are used to replace other tax payments by individuals and cor-
porations without affecting marginal tax rates or total tax rev-
enues. The GDP losses calculated in this manner measure the 
cost of the distortions to the economy caused by the imposi-
tion of the carbon tax. There are no credits or penalties for 
lump sum recycling of tax revenues. The assumption of lump 
sum recycling avoids confusing the economic impacts of car-
bon taxes with costs or benefits attributable to potential uses 
of the revenues. 
Figure 9.5 shows the average GDP losses across models. 
Holding emissions at 1990 levels results in a 0.3% loss in 
2000. This rises to 1.5% by the middle of the century. That 
GDP losses increase over time should come as no surprise. In-
creasing amounts of carbon must be removed from the energy 
system in order to hold emissions to a particular target. GDP 
losses also increase with the stringency of the target. With a 
20% reduction, losses exceed 2%. of GDP in 2050. With a 
50% reduction, losses exceed 3% of GDP. 
It is interesting that GDP losses for a given year are influ-
enced by expectations about limits in future years. All three 
emission reduction scenarios require that emissions be stabi-
lized at 1990 levels by the year 2000. Yet losses are higher in 
2000 for the scenarios that eventually require further reduc-
tions. The reason is that energy investments are typically long 
.WW 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Chant-e 
Stabilization 
I—J (It-dine in energy use per unil of oulput 
LJ 
decline in COsper unit ol energy use 
H 
earhun emissions 
Note: Components add up to rate of growth in GDP. 
Source: EMF (1993). 
Figure 9.6: Decoupling between carbon emissions and GDP annual 
growth rates (1990-2010). 
lived. Consumers and producers will be influenced by their 
expectations about the future. 
9.2.1.1.5 
The nature of the GDP losses-
Figure 9.6 is helpful in understanding the nature of the GDP 
losses. Losses occur when the carbon taxes lead to invest-
ments that arc more expensive than those that would take 
place in the absence of the taxes. Economists refer to these as 
deadweight losses. The higher the carbon taxes, the greater 
the investment in price-induced conservation and the more 
fuel switching towards the less carbon-intensive substitutes. 
Hence, the higher the deadweight losses. 
In the reference case, carbon emissions and GDP grow at 
average annual rates of I .()'/< and 2.2'7< respectively. In the ab-
sence of carbon taxes, there is some minor fuel switching to-
wards more carbon-intensive fuels, but this is more than offset 
by the decline in energy use per unit of economic activity. 
(Note that the top-down models, on average, project sizable 
reductions in energy intensity - even in the absence of explicit 
measures to reduce emissions.) 
In the stabilization case (the right-hand bar in Figure 9.6). 
the carbon taxes induce sufficient investment in supply-side 
substitutes and conservation to eliminate growth in carbon 
emissions. That is. carbon emissions and GDP are virtually 
decoupled. Note that this is done without significantly reduc-
ing the growth oi the economy. Whereas the losses may be 
considered large in absolute terms, they are relatively small 
when measured in terms of a reduction in the GDP growth rate. 
9.2.1.1.6 
The relationship between timing, 
emission 
reduction costs, and research and 
development 
The EMF study also addressed the issue of the timing of the 
carbon constraint. An important question is whether the costs 
of CO, emission reduction will increase or decrease if emis-
sion reductions are deferred to the future. This is a complex 
issue. If marginal costs increase with the level of emission re-
duction in each period, deferring a tonne of emission control 
from the near term to a more distant time could raise costs, all 
else being equal. But all else is not equal. 
There are three reasons why deferring emission reductions 
may reduce costs (Leary and Scheraga, 1994). First, large 
emission reductions in the near term will require accelerated 
replacement of the existing capital stock. This is apt to be 
costly. There will be more opportunities for reducing emis-
sions cheaply once the current capital equipment turns over. 
Second, the availability and cost of technologies for fuel 
switching will improve over time. As a result, the costs of re-
ducing a tonne of carbon emissions will decline. Finally, even 
if the costs of removing a tonne of carbon were the same in all 
periods, a positive discount rate will favour deferred reduc-
tions. Model simulations by Cohan et al. (1994) suggest that 
deferring emission reductions can reduce costs substantially. 
For example, they find that delaying the target date from 2010 
to 2015 for stabilizing U.S. emissions at 20% below 1990 lev-
els can reduce control costs by as much as 20%. 
To bound the potential benefits from successful research 
and development, the EMF modellers were asked to examine 
an "accelerated R&D" scenario in which the cost of the non-
electric backstop is reduced from $100 to $50 per barrel and 
the cost of the electric backstop is reduced from 75 to 50 
mills/kWh. In such a scenario, the carbon-free backstops are 
economical in their own right. That is, they will enter the mar-
ketplace even in the absence of a carbon constraint. 
Four models (ERM, Fossil 2, Global 2100, and CRTM) 
were used to examine the accelerated R&D scenario. The 
models were remarkably consistent in their estimates of the 
potential savings. With the more optimistic technology as-
sumptions, GDP losses for the 20% emission reduction sce-
nario were reduced by approximately 65%. This implies that 
approximately 35% of the discounted losses are incurred dur-
ing the transition. The remaining costs accrue once we enter 
into the backstop phase, that is, once the backstops are avail-
able in unlimited quantities. 
9.2.1.1.7 
The issue of revenue 
recycling 
The overall impact of a carbon tax will depend not only on the 
size of the tax but also on the uses to which the revenues are 
put. In the standard EMF scenarios, it was assumed that tax 
revenues would be redistributed in a neutral manner (i.e.. 
without affecting the marginal tax rates). There are, of course. 
numerous ways in which tax revenues can be used. These 
include reducing budget deficits: reducing marginal rates 
of income, payroll, corporate, or other taxes; granting tax 
incentives to preferred activities: and increasing the level of 
government expenditures. The costs of the tax will van 
widely, depending on how the revenues are recycled. 
Table 9.5 shows the range of GDP losses associated with a 
carbon tax rising from $15 per tonne in 1990 to $40 per tonne 
in 2010. with alternative methods of recycling the revenues 
The analysis is performed using four different economic mod-
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Table 9.5. GNP loss, 1990-2010 (percent of discounted con-
stant price GNP) 
Lump sum tax cuts 
Revenue raising 
Personal income 
tax cuts 
Corporate income 
tax cuts 
Payroll tax cuts 
(Employee only) 
(Employer only) 
Investment tax credit 
DRI 
(%) 
-0.58 
-0.40 
-0.56 
0.40 
-058 
0.19 
1.55 
LINK 
(%) 
-0.46 
-1.02 
-0.53 
-0.11 
-0.53 
-0.25 
1.67 
DGEM 
(%) 
-0.62 
-0.16 
0.60 
Goul 
(%) 
-0.24 
-0.24 
-0.16 
-0.17 
-0.18 
0.00 
Source: Shackleton et at. (1992). 
els of the U.S. economy (two macroeconomic models and two 
general equilibrium models). The first alternative recycling 
method, lump sum tax cuts, is in the neutral manner described 
above. 
Note that the GDP costs of the carbon tax vary consider-
ably depending on how the revenues are recycled. In some 
models, the costs are more than offset by tax policies that en-
courage investment. On the other hand, one model suggests 
that the GDP costs of the tax would be increased over the neu-
tral case if the revenues were used simply to reduce the gov-
ernment budget deficit. Although the alternative of increasing 
government expenditures was not examined, it is possible that 
such a policy would increase the GDP costs of the tax over the 
neutral case (see Nordhaus, 1994). 
9.2.1.2 A review of bottom-up studies 
Bottom-up research in the U.S. and Canada has tended to sug-
gest, as elsewhere in the world, that significant decreases in 
C02 emissions are possible without great cost to the economy. 
In this sense, their results differ from those of most top-down 
research, the latter suggesting substantial economic costs to 
CO, emission abatement. The methodology discussions in Chap-
ter 8 reviewed some of the key reasons for these differences. 
9.2.1.2.1 Variations in bottom-up technology and policy 
assumptions 
Like top-down studies, bottom-up studies result in a wide 
range of reduction cost estimates. Compared with top-down 
studies, the structure of formal models in bottom-up analysis 
is generally less important for the results. Instead, input as-
sumptions are dominant. Inspection of available studies 
shows that for a given time horizon and geographic region, di-
vergent results arise mainly from differences in two factors: 
• The quality of the technical analysis from which supply 
curves for energy efficiency and supplies from cogener-
ation and renewables are derived 
• The assumed effectiveness of policy instruments in mobi-
lizing the economically cost-effective resource potential 
M)9 
Differences in technical analysis. Of the technical factors, 
the most important ones appear to he the level of detail in ana-
lyzing and representing supply curves for technology options, 
notably those for demand-side efficiency improvements. Bot-
tom-up studies that rely on more detailed and comprehensive 
assessments of these options will tend to arrive at larger effi-
ciency potentials and lower costs of saved energy than less 
detailed studies. Even then, uncertain baseline data for equip-
ment use and efficiency in individual end uses leave some 
room for disagreement among technologists. 
The treatment of administrative policy costs can also be 
important. Most bottom-up analyses assume that energy effi-
ciency standards would be the main policy tool. These have 
negligible administrative costs, but such costs can be more 
substantial in some types of incentive programmes. State-of-
the-art studies give a differentiated treatment. 
Depending on the scope of the study, additional no-regrets 
opportunities may be quantified. These are lower generating 
costs from utility regulatory reforms, savings in acid rain and 
other pollution control expenditures from reduced fossil fuel 
use, the cost-reducing effects of monetizing environmental 
externalities (other than climate change), and increased cost-
effectiveness of nonfossil options when removing fossil fuel 
price subsidies. 
Most bottom-up studies do not quantify the feedback effect 
from lower energy demand on fuel prices or the further effect 
of lower fuel prices and energy service costs on cost-effective 
energy efficiency levels and energy demand. As a result, 
bottom-up studies may at once underestimate feasible eco-
nomic savings from carbon reductions and overestimate the 
amount of emission reductions that market transformation 
policies can bring. 
Differences in assumed policy effectiveness. All bottom-
up scenarios of future energy demand assume that policy 
intervention can at least partially shift the investment be-
haviours of consumers and firms from historically subopti-
mal patterns to economically optimal choices. At one end of 
the spectrum, it is assumed that policies will shift every re-
placement purchase or expansion of end-use equipment that 
will occur over the time period studied. For short time hori-
zons (10-20 years), this assumption implies that a complete 
shift to efficient equipment will he achieved within one cycle 
of capital turnover. This assumption is almost certainly too 
optimistic. 
At the other end of the spectrum, some bottom-up studies 
take a very pessimistic view in which current political diffi-
culties are assumed to limit the more widespread application 
of market transformation policies. As a result, the savings po-
tential is estimated to be low. 
A compromise position is found in studies using longer 
time horizons (30-40 years or more). Over these long periods, 
most capital goods will be replaced more than once, and many 
several times. Here, least-cost efficiency levels can be achieved 
within the time horizon, even if policies do not shift all or 
most investments the first time around. The assumptions 
about the effectiveness of policies are thus more realistic in 
these studies. 
J10 
('lii)i(ilc Change 199^ - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.6. Bottom-up studies of U.S. emission mitigation costs - major assumptions 
(percent annual growth 
rates) 
Study 
Base 
Year 
Forecast 
Year 
GDP 
Discount 
Rate 
Energy Prices 
Oil 
Coal 
Gas 
Elect. 
Alliance to Save Energy 
(1991) 
National Academy of 
Sciences (1991) 
Office of Technology 
Assessment (1991) 
U.S. EPA (1990) 
SEI/Greenpeace(1993) 
Carlsmilh <-/«/. (1990) 
Chandler & Kolar (1990) 
Chandler & Nicholls 
(1990) 
Chandler (1990) 
Lovins&Lovins(199l) 
Mills etui (1991) 
Rubin etui (1992) 
1988 
1990 
2000 
2010 
2030 
n/s 
2.4 
2.4 
1987 
1988 
1988 
1988 
1985 
1989 
1989 
1988 
1988 
1989 
2015 
2005 
2010 
2030 
2010 
2030 
2000 
2000 
2010 
n/s 
2000 
n/s 
2.3 
2.5 
2.5 
2.1 
2.5 
2.5 
— 
— 
2.5 
— 
2.5 
— 
7 
7 
8 
7 
7 
7 
5 
6 
6 
6.5 
6.0 
4.3 
5 
2.5 
2.4 
6.9 
4.8 
0.9 
1.4 
1.8 
0.8 
7.8 
10.0 
7.1 
5 
2.5 
2.5 
0.2 
1 
0.2 
Note: n/s = not specified. 
9.2. E2.2 Key study assumptions and results 
In this section we survey some of the key assumptions and re-
sults in the studies for the U.S. and Canada. 
Unfortunately, 
there has not yet been an effort to undertake a harmonized 
comparative analysis of U.S. bottom-up models, as has been 
the case with U.S. top-down models. However, a survey of the 
approaches at least allows for some tentative observations. 
An overview of the main assumptions and results of the 
major U.S. bottom-up studies is provided in Tables 9.6, 9.7, 
and 9.8. Most studies test the sensitivity of their results to 
changes in GDP growth rates. Energy prices are generally as-
sumed exogenouslv. although some studies have attempted to 
incorporate the feedback effects of efficiency measures on en-
ergy prices. R1GHS. for example, assumes low-cost fossil en-
ergy in 2030 as a consequence of successful implementation 
of energy efficiency. In contrast, Carlsmiih el al. (1990) as-
sume high rates of near-term energy price increases. 
Table 9.8 reconfigures the reported results from Tables 9.6 
and 9.7 in a manner thai facilitates interpretation for policy-
making. Results are now reported in terms of the percentage 
reduction below the level of base year emissions that was 
found to have zero net cost. The base year variously ranged 
from 1985 to 1990. The reduction cost is reported as average 
cost. For studies where negative net average costs were re-
ported, feasible zero-net cost reductions are shown with a 
"greater than" sign to indicate that the results reported do not 
include reduction options up to the intersection point with the 
x-axis. 
The following reductions were found to result in zero net 
costs: 
• 
M\ the turn of the centurv: 0-2 I',' t median of I lr< ) 
• 
M\ about :00> :0I0: M)-20', (median of l.v; ) 
. 
By about 2015-2020: >23-58% (median of 41%) 
• By about 2025-2030: >61-82% (median of 72%) 
The studies were not normalized in terms of such factors as 
economic growth, structural change, fuel prices, technology 
costs, or policy effectiveness. As a result, the above reduction 
ranges are wider than a coordinated analysis based on uniform 
assumptions would have found. 
Despite these wide variations, the figures show a consis-
tent pattern: Within the 1990-2030 time frame, progressively 
larger reductions become feasible at zero net cost as time 
horizons grow longer. And for any given reduction target, 
mitigation costs decline as longer adjustment periods are al-
lowed. 
This pattern reflects two major factors: First, bottom-up 
studies identify large energy efficiency potentials that are net 
exploited in the reference case, due to the high transaction 
costs. The studies assume that these high transaction costs 
will he reduced through suitable policy interventions, such as 
efficiency standards, least-cost utility planning, and other in-
formation and financial incentive programmes. 
Second, most energy efficiency improvements are intro-
duced at the "economic optimal" rate of capital stock turn-
over, with the more long-lived capital goods lasting twenty to 
thirty years or more. Due to this synchronicity. cost-effective 
efficiency improvements continue to occur. As a result, bottom-
up studies estimate "transition benefits" rather than "transac-
tion costs" for such technology shifts. 
Third, cheap cogeneration opportunities are assumed in a 
number of studies to make an important further negative-cost 
contribution. Compared to separate generation of electricity 
and heat, this supply-side technology is found to have signifi-
cant cost-effective resource potentials. They are typically no: 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
Table 9.7. Results of U.S. emission mitigation 
studies 
Ml 
Study 
Forecast Year 
CO,R eduction 
(% from Base Year) 
26 
53 
82 
24 
40 
23 
53 
3 
0 
74? 
0 
20 
0 
20 
7 
20 
0 
20 
58+ 
21 
6 
35 
61 
75 
Cost of Reduction 
(%ofGNP) 
-0.4 
-0.5 
-0.6 
0 
0.8 
-0.2 
-0.2/1.8 
0 
0 
0 
0.5 
0 
0.5 
0 
-1.2 
0 
<0 
<0 
Average Cost 
($/tC) 
0 
9 
0 
0 
0 
0 
82 
0 
92 
0 
-231 
13 
0 - < 0 
<0 
<0 
Alliance to Save 
2000 
Energy etal. (1991) 
2010 
2030 
National Academy 
n/s 
of Sciences (1991) 
Office of Technology 
2015 
Assessment (1991) 
U.S. EPA (1990) 
2005 
2010 
SEI/Greenpeace (1993) 
2030 
Carlsmith etal. (1990) 
2010 
Chandler & Kolar (1990) 
2005 
Chandler & Nicholls (1990) 
2000 
Chandler (1990) 
2010 
Lovins&Lovins(1991) 
n/s 
Mills etal. (1991) 
2000 
Nordhaus(1990) 
n/s 
Rubin etal. (1992) 
n/s 
RIGES (Johansson et al, 1993) 
2025 
FFES (SEI/Greenpeace 1993) 
2030 
'Scenario ultimately yields 100% reduction. 
Table 9.8. Zero average net cost reduction potential in U.S. bottom-up studies (estimated reduction potential below base year 
achieved with zero net average 
cost) 
Study 
Alliance to Save Energy etal. (1991) 
Carlsmith et al. (1990) 
Chandler and Nicholls (1990) 
Chandler and Kolar (1990) 
DPA0989) 
Lovins and Lovins (1991) 
Mills etal. (1991) 
NAS(1991) 
OTA (1991) 
Rubin et al. (1992) 
RIGES (Johansson et al., 1993) 
FFES (SEI/Greenpeace, 1993) 
Range 
Midpoint 
Country 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
Canada 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
2000 
(%) 
0 
21 
0-21 
11 
2005/10 
(%) 
>26 
0 
>0 
>13 
0-26 
> 13 
2015/20 
(%) 
>53 
58 
>24 
>23 
35 
>23-58 
>4I 
2025/30 
(%) 
>82 
>61 
>75 
>61-82 
>72 
Note: A "greater than" sign indicates that the study did not include options up to the intersection point of the x-axis. This means that larger re-
ductions could be achieved for negative or zero average cost. 
included in the reference case, since business-as-usual regula- 
available and thus add to the near- to medium-term no-regrets 
tory regimes do not sufficiently control monopsonistic utility 
potential. 
buy-back practices. Like most energy efficiency improve- 
When cost estimates arc compared for a given reduction 
ments. cogeneration technologies are already commercially 
target, the results of the hnttom-up studies listed in Tables 9.6, 
M2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
9.7, and 9.8 lie within a reasonably close range, despite con-
siderable differences in assumptions. Most cost estimates for 
a 20% reduction in U.S. CO, emissions by the year 2010, for 
example, range between -0.6 and +0.5% of GDP (see Table 
9.7). As noted in Section 9.2.1.2.1, this difference is explained 
at least in part by the nature and level of detail of the input 
assumptions used in the specific bottom-up analysis. The 
RIGES study, for instance, assumes 100% penetration of mar-
kets by all technologies shown to he cost-effective in an en-
gineering/economic analysis. In contrast. Carlsmith et al. con-
strained their model to link all market penetration of efficient 
technologies to consumer behaviour parameters (expressed as 
price elasticities) and policy constraints (expressed as effi-
ciency standards). This latter approach did not lead to 100% 
market penetration by efficient technologies. 
Bottom-up studies for Canada were compiled and re-
viewed by Robinson and colleagues in the study 
Canadian 
Options for Greenhouse 
Gas Emission Reduction 
(Robinson 
et al., 1993). Estimates of cost-effective CO, emission reduc-
tion potential by 2010, relative to a reference (or baseline) 
scenario, ranged from 20% to 40%, with a median of about 
23%). Relative to 1988 or 1990, many studies showed savings 
in energy use or emissions of between 10 and 30%, with a me-
dian of about lo%. 
9.2.2 Studies of the costs of reducing COy emissions in 
other OECD 
countries 
Much of the early work on the costs of CO, emission reduc-
tion was U.S.-based and. as a result, tended to be U.S.-
focussed. More recently, there has been a flurry of analytical 
activity elsewhere in the OECD, mainly in Western Europe. In 
general, these country-specific studies have had relatively 
shorter time horizons than in the U.S., focussing on the costs 
of stabilizing emissions in 2000 or a 20% reduction by 2005 
(the "Toronto target"). 
9.2.2.1 A review of top-down 
studies 
Top-down studies of non-U.S. OECD countries have been of 
two types: those focussing on an entire region or a subset of 
countries and those focussing on individual nations. In this 
section, we review the results of both. As with the U.S. stud-
ies, the types of policies tested have been limited for the most 
part to taxes on CO, and energy under alternative domestic 
fiscal recycling schemes. 
9.2.2.1.1 
Regional 
studies 
One notable attempt at a systematic comparison of non-U.S. 
OECD models was conducted by the OECD in the early 
1990s (Dean and Hoeller. 1992). The exercise was patterned 
after the parallel study being undertaken by the Energy Mod-
eling Forum. The two studies used many of the same models 
and shared a common set of input assumptions. For purposes 
of the model comparison, the OECD was divided into two re-
gions: the U.S. and "other OECD countries." 
The OECD analysis encompassed both the transition and 
backstop phases. This long-term perspective is useful when 
examining issues related to the limine of the transition from 
2.0 
CL, 
Q 
a 
j 
1.0 
0.5 -
0.0 
-0.5 
-
-
ERM 
^ ^ G R E E N ^ ^ 
^ 
MR 
-**CRTM 
• 
i 
O
Q
O
O
O
O
O 
o
o
o
o
o 
(
^
O
O
O
O
O
O 
o
o
o
o 
— 
— 
(N 
(N 
(N 
(N 
(N 
(N 
CN 
CN 
(N 
CM 
(N 
Year 
Source: OECD (1993). 
Figure 9.7: GDP losses in the stabilization scenario (other OECD 
countries). 
$250 
y 
$200 
64 
oo 
£ 
$150 
X 
ea e $100 
o -e 
rj 
$50 
A 
\JK 
/ 
CRTM 
/ 
/ 
^ M R 
J^ 
XtlREEN 
i 
i 
i 
1990 
2020 
2050 
Year 
2080 
Source: OECD (1993). 
Figure 9.8: Carbon taxes in the stabilization scenario (other OECD 
countries). 
fossil fuels and the potential role of technical innovation in 
lowering overall costs of reducing emissions. 
The OECD study examined a range of emission reduction 
scenarios. Among the more interesting is one in which emis-
sions are permanently held to 1990 levels. Figure 9.7 com-
pares annual GDP losses for four models: ERM, GREEN. 
Global 2100 (MR), and CRTM. The models are fairly consis-
tent in their projections of losses in 2010 - between 0.3% and 
0.5% of GDP. The convergence is due in part to the standard-
ization of key input parameters, but it is also important to note 
the aggregation effect. Combining all non-U.S. OECD coun-
tries into a single region masks important intercountry differ-
ences. As we will see in the next section, the variance around 
the mean is likely to be large. 
The models are less in agreement as we move beyond 
2010. The differences can be traced to several uncontrolled 
parameters. Global 2100. for example, employs a lower rate 
of autonomous energy efficiency improvements than ERM 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
<D 
C 
<U 
1/1 
JO 
w 
o 
I n 
to 
(X 
£ 0 
o 
00 
C/l 
O 
J 
OH 
5 
<4-H 
o 
^ 
c/3 
03 
O o 
u 
O 
0 
# 
rccoiii) 
£ 
JYCQ005) 
$ 
SWB(2IXXI) 
^ 
# 
JN(2(K)5) 
FC(2UI0) 
* 
NEN(2010) 
m 
SWB(2000) 
NOI20I0) 
• 
$ 
SWB.200., 
m 
A
m
m
) 
UK„M,2.X,5,IHNJ,2«.5, 
„
, 
# 
^ „ „ „ 
GHM(2(X)5L 
# 
* 
SWB(2000) 
$ 
AMC2005) 
* 
NB(2(Kinr 
AICGI2005) 
. 
»UKB,2f 5. 
* 
™2'm 
... 
0 
JG(2030) 
SWB(2(XX)) <KuKB(2(X)5) 
UKBL(2005) 
# 
UKS(2(X)5) 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Reduction of C02 Emissions (as % from baseline) 
Note: See Table 9.9 for key. 
Figure 9.9: Non-U.S. OECD studies: Cost of CO, abatement relative to baseline projection. 
and GREEN. As a result, its baseline emissions path is some-
what higher. More carbon must be removed from the energy 
system to maintain emissions at 1990 levels. Hence annual 
abatement costs are apt to be higher. 
Assumptions about the rate at which backstop technologies 
can enter the energy system also tend to be important. 
GREEN, for example, assumes a more rapid introduction rate 
than the other models. Hence its marginal cost of emission 
abatement is lower for each tonne of carbon removed. This, 
coupled with the lower baseline, easily explains the ranking 
of cost estimates among the three models. 
Figure 9.8 shows the taxes that would be required to stabi-
lize emissions at 1990 levels. The results from ERM, Global 
2100 (MR), and GREEN are consistent with the above discus-
sion. In addition, the OECD report included results from the 
IEA model. This econometric model is relatively pessimistic 
about the prospects for energy conservation and fuel switch-
ing. Hence, high energy prices are needed to bring down 
emissions. 
9.2.2.1.2 National studies 
Figure 9.9 and Table 9.9 report the results of a number of non-
U.S. OECD national studies. Annual GDP losses are plotted 
as a function of emission abatement, where reductions are 
measured relative to the model's baseline or business-as-usual 
emission path. Note that the story is quite similar to that for 
the U.S. The costs of emission abatement tend to be positive, 
but there is considerable variation in the magnitude of the 
losses. 
Some of the differences are to be expected, particularly 
when they are intercountry in nature. Nations differ widely in 
indigenous resources, supply infrastructure, and energy use 
patterns. Those with plentiful natural gas supplies, large exist-
ing investments in carbon-free alternatives, and/or low energy 
use per unit of economic activity should see less growth in 
carbon emissions. Hence, less carbon will have to be removed 
from the energy system to meet a specific target. 
Intercountry differences do not explain, however, the wide 
variety of results for an individual country. Here, as in the 
case of the U.S., we must turn to the models and their underly-
ing assumptions. Unfortunately, sorting out the reasons for 
the disagreement is more difficult. Unlike the EMF exercise, 
these studies were conducted independently. There was no op-
portunity to standardize key inputs. Nevertheless, based on 
the discussions of the previous sections, it is possible to iden-
tify several probable causes for the lack of consensus. 
The national studies encompass the period in which we are 
apt to be most constrained on the supply side, namely, the next 
ten to fifteen years. During this time, the fuel switching capa-
bility will be mostly restricted to switching among fossil 
fuels. Consequently, much of the burden for the emission re-
ductions will fall on the demand side of the energy sector. 
The potential for end-use improvements remains one of the 
more controversial issues in the greenhouse debate. The wide 
range of opinion is reflected in the models. Those which are 
optimistic about the prospects for price- and nonprice-in-
duced conservation show relatively low abatement costs. 
Conversely, the more pessimistic models tend to report con-
siderably higher losses. 
Assumptions relating to what is going on in other countries 
are also important. In the absence of an explicit model of 
global world trade,- the common practice is to adopt one of 
two hypotheses: (I) unilateral initiatives - which place an up-
per bound on trade losses, or (2) initiatives coordinated at an 
J14 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.9. Non-U.S. OECD CO, abatement cost modelling 
studies 
Country 
Australia 
Australia 
Australia 
Belgium 
EC 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Italy 
Japan 
Japan 
Japan 
Japan 
Netherlands 
Norway 
Norway 
Sweden 
UK 
UK 
UK 
UK 
Author (year) 
Dixon el al. (1989) 
Industry Commission (1991) 
Marks et al. (1990) 
Proost & van Regcmorter (1990) 
DRKI992) 
Christcnsen(1991) 
Hermes-Midas (1992: Karadeloglou) 
Hermes-Midas (1992: Karadeloglou) 
Hermes-Midas (1992: Karadeloglou) 
Ban(1991) 
Goto (1991) 
Nagata cf «/. (1991) 
Yamaji(1990) 
NEPP0989) 
Bye, Bye, & Lorentson (1989) 
Glomsrod era/. (1990) 
Bergman (1990) 
Barker (1993) 
Barker & Lewney (1991) 
Sondheimer(l990) 
Hermes-Midas (1992: Karadeloglou) 
Key" 
AD (2005) 
AICG (2005) 
AM (2005) 
BP(2010) 
ECDRI (2005) 
PC (2010) 
FHM (2005) 
GHM (2005) 
IHM (2005) 
JB (2000) 
JG (2000, 2010, 2030) 
JN (2005) 
JYC (2005) 
NEN(2010) 
NB (2000) 
NG(2010) 
SWB (2000) 
UKB (2005) 
UKBL (2005) 
UKS (2000) 
UKHM (2005) 
C 0 2 Reduction 
from Baseline (%) 
47 
40 
44 
28 
12 
23,21 
11 
13 
13 
18,18 
23,41, 
26 
36 
25,25 
16 
26 
10, 20, 
12 
32 
4 
7 
66 
30,40,51 
Cost/GDP Reduction 
from Baseline (%) 
2.4 
0.8 
1.5* 
1.8 
0.8 
6.9,4.8' 
0.7 
1.3 
1.9 
0.4, l.Ti 
0.2, 0.8, 1 
4.9 
6< 
4.2, 0.6/ 
1.5* 
2.7 
0, 1.4, 2.6. 3.9, 5.6 
-0.2, +0.4'' 
0 
-0.5 
1.9 
"The letters in the key refer to the country and author. 
''Study combines technology with macroeconomic assessment of GDP impact. 
'Unilateral action and global action. 
''Tax case and regulation case. 
•Values of both 5 and (i'7r have been given. 
'National policy scenario and global policy scenario. 
"GDP costs IbrOECD range from 1 to 2<7r. 
'GDP gain when OECD tax levied with VAT reduced to maintain revenue neutrality; GDP loss when tax used to reduce the public sector 
borrowing requirement. 
OECD or European Community level - which place a lower 
bound on trade losses. The impact of a tax at the national level 
will also vary depending on industrial composition (particu-
larly, the existence of large energy-intensive industries) and a 
country's dependence on international trade. 
How a model handles preexisting energy taxes is also im-
portant. Many countries rely on energy taxes as a major 
source of revenue. If a country already has high energy taxes, 
it will require a larger carbon tax to achieve a given percent-
age increase in retail energy price levels. This means that the 
deadweight losses are apt to be higher. Unfortunately, models 
differ widely in their treatment of preexisting taxes, adding 
yet another reason why results are apt to differ. (This was not 
an issue in out review of U.S. analyses since U.S. energy 
taxes are much lower than those elsewhere in the OECD. 
They are more like user fees, barely covering the costs of 
highway construction and maintenance.) 
Still another reason why estimates of GDP losses differ so 
widely relates to the revenue recycling issue. The national 
models embrace an even wider variation of recycling options 
than those reported for the U.S. Indeed, some modellers as-
sume that the tax revenues are removed entirelv from the 
economy, likening an imposition of a carbon tax to the oil im-
port price shocks of the 1970s. As one would expect, this 
leads to much higher GDP losses than would be the case if the 
revenues were used to stimulate investments or consumption 
elsewhere in the economy. In the next section, we look at the 
issue of revenue recycling in some detail. 
9.2.2.1.3. 
The effects of revenue recycling on GDP and 
employment 
It has recently been advocated that, independently of their in-
trinsic environmental merits, carbon or energy taxes could be 
used to reduce nonwage labour costs and thus increase em-
ployment in Europe. Many European countries finance not 
only their public administration but also their health system. 
social security, and teaching system by raising funds from 
taxes levied directly or indirectly on wages. This way of meet-
ing these financial requirements raises total labour costs and 
causes structural unemployment. 
In some countries, taxes on labour represent nearly half of 
total hourly labour costs. These taxes create a wedge between 
what an employer must pay for an hour of labour and what a 
worker receives, and thus tend to reduce both labour supply 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
;/5 
Table 9.10. Effects of different types of tax revenue recycling at the community level: GDP losses in the last year 
(energy tax of 10$/bbl) 
HERMES" 
4 countries 
(%) 
-1.6 
-0.9 
-0.2 
+0.3 
-0.3 
0 
QUEST'' 
EUR 12 
(1995) 
(%) 
-1.2 
-0.4 
-0.7 
-0.3 
-1.1 
0 
DRI< 
EUR 11 
(2005) 
(%) 
HERMES-
LINK'' 
6 countries 
(2001) 
(%) 
+0.15 
+0.64 
Without recycling (revenue raising) 
GDP losses in the last year 
Employment 
Payroll tax cuts (employer only) 
GDP losses in the last year 
Employment 
Personal income tax cut 
GDP losses in the last year 
Employment 
VAT cut with mixed policy 
-0.36s 
"Rate of change after seven years with reference to the baseline (Donni etai, 1993). 
''Rate of change after seven years (DG Il-CEC, 1992). 
Tax revenue is shared between reduction in personal income tax (30%), employers' social security taxes (30%), reduction in corporate taxes 
(10%), and incentives for energy conservation (30%) (DRI, 1994). 
^Bureau du Plan-Erasme (1993). 
•Calculation from results of the average reduction of the rate of growth. 
and the demand for workers. There is considerable evidence 
to suggest that this tax wedge, in combination with existing 
legal or contractual minimum wage arrangements, entails par-
ticularly detrimental employment effects for low-skilled or 
unskilled labour. It is not surprising, therefore, that the rev-
enue recycling debate in Europe has tended to focus on shift-
ing the tax burden from labour to energy. 
Table 9.10 compares the results from several studies which 
suggest that the GDP losses of an energy tax could be at least 
partially offset through effective revenue recycling that re-
duces particularly burdensome taxes. Where the agreement 
among these studies breaks down is in whether recycling 
through appropriate cuts in other taxes can actually increase 
employment. This type of recycling can be compared either 
with a lump-sum recycling measure or with the baseline sce-
nario. The first comparison aims at isolating the gains due to 
corrections of fiscal distortions from the specific dividend 
yielded by the carbon/energy tax; the second comparison as-
sesses the overall result of the reform and assumes implicitly 
that concern about climate change facilitates its acceptance. 
Some studies suggest that the negative impact on employment 
and growth is only slightly reduced, whereas others suggest 
that an energy tax recycled through a payroll tax cut will in-
crease employment. 
The differences among modelling results can be explained 
in part by choice of methodology. Because of the focus on 
short- to medium-term time horizons, most studies for Europe 
have been carried out using neo-Keynesian models. Some 
studies employed general equilibrium models to examine the 
period 2000-2005: namely. Glomsrod et al. (1990) for Nor-
way, Proost and van Regemorter (1991) for Belgium, Bergman 
(1990) for Sweden, and Conrad and Schroder (1991) for Ger-
many. In these studies, carbon taxes were generally used to 
maintain a given level of CO, emissions, assuming lump-sum 
recycling. The results are not surprising. The loss in GDP is 
relatively low for reductions of up to 10-20% from the baseline 
(below 0.2% of GDP) but rises dramatically as the target is in-
creased. The reason for this is that these studies are pessimistic 
about the tax level required to achieve a 25-30% reduction 
from baseline emissions in 2000-2005 (e.g., 380 $/t in Bel-
gium, 100 $/t in Norway. 195 $/t in Sweden). GDP reductions 
approximating 2.5% arc found in some studies. It is important 
to note, however, that such studies typically ignore the effects 
of correcting distortions in the existing tax system. 
Neo-Keynesian models embed more rigidities and allow 
for unemployment in the short run in response to shocks to the 
economy and for structural unemployment due to inadequate 
demand for labour. Recycling through payroll tax reductions 
can increase demand for labour and reduce both cyclical and 
structural unemployment. In both types of models, other fac-
tors may also be responsible for increased employment. For 
example, energy taxes may cause labour to be substituted for 
energy and technical progress to be biassed to save energy and 
use labour. 
Many studies have been carried out at a national level, and 
it is impossible to analyze them in detail. Beyond the specifics 
of the national context, comparison is made difficult by the 
variety of ways in which the models handle preexisting en-
ergy and nonenergy taxes and in which a carbon or energy tax 
is levied. Nevertheless, some useful insights can be derived. 
Mb 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.11. Differences in the macroeffects of the energy tax between EC countries in 2001 or 2005 (difference in % 
from the baseline) 
GDP 
Private 
consumption 
Employment 
Inflation 
Hermes" 
DRI'' 
Hermes" 
DRI'' 
Hermes" 
DRI'' 
Hermes" 
DRI'' 
FRG 
022 
-0.26 
0.27 
-0.78 
0.79 
-0.39 
0.45 
1.96 
F 
0.06 
-0.13 
0.03 
-0.39 
0.44 
-0.13 
0.80 
1.30 
UK 
-0.72 
-0.52 
-0.57 
-0.78 
0.56 
-0.39 
2.12 
2.22 
IT 
0.72 
-0.39 
0.75 
-1.04 
0.79 
-0.39 
0.86 
2.10 
NL 
-0.16 
-0.39 
0.34 
-1.18 
0.30 
-0.26 
0.80 
2.10 
B 
0.57 
-0.65 
0.23 
-0.78 
0.88 
-0.39 
0.20 
2.00 
EUR6 
0.15 
0.15 
0.64 
0.95 
"Recycling by reduction of social charges in HERMES Model (1993). The reference year is 2001. 
''Mixed policy test in DRI Model (1994). The tax revenue is recycled as follows: 30% for reduction of employers' social charges, 30% for re-
duction of personal direct taxes, 10% for reduction of corporate taxes, 30% for incentives to energy conservation. The reference year is 2005. 
Note: FRG = Germany; F = France; UK = United Kingdom; IT = Italy; NL = Netherlands; B = Belgium; EUR6 = the six European countries 
listed. 
For example, a study by Erasme originally placed the costs of 
a carbon and energy tax in France at \.5c/c of GDP in 2000, 
assuming lump-sum recycling of tax revenues (Beaumais, 
1992). In a subsequent study, applying a complex mix of recy-
cling measures (decreased payroll taxes, incentives to energy 
efficiency), the same team calculated GDP gains (of 0.5 to 
0.93%) from an identical tax (Godard and Beaumais. 1993). 
In the same way, connecting a bottom-up approach with a 
macroeconometric long-term model, Walz et al. (1994) link a 
40% CO, reduction up to 2020 in Germany with an increase 
in GDP of between 0.2 and 0.7%. 
In the English context. Barker (1994) and Barker, Baylis, 
and Bryden (1994) point out that results differ according to 
the product on which the excise tax is levied. Indeed, they 
show that a road duty increase in the UK is likely to reduce in-
flation (when the revenues are recycled via reductions in em-
ployment taxes) and raise employment. 
Difficulties in comparative analysis are less important 
when the same measure is analyzed, which was the ease with 
studies of a proposal for limiting CO, emissions put forth 
by the European Commission (1992). This proposal, which 
called for levying new taxes on most major sources of energy, 
was perhaps the most widely discussed emission-control ini-
tiative in Europe. The taxes would be based partly on carbon 
and partly on energy content. Using oil as a point of reference. 
the tax would level off at $10 per barrel in the year 2000. Nu-
clear energy and large-scale hydroelectric projects would be 
taxed at a lower rate - approximately 50% of that of carbon-
intensive fuels. 
Several studies have attempted to quantify the macroeco-
nomic impacts o( the EC proposal. Table 9.10 reports results 
from the HERMES. QUEST. DRI. and HERMES-LINK mod-
els. It compares a case without tax recycling with different re-
cycling schemes. In all cases lump-sum recycling entails net 
costs. The payroll tax cut is demonstrated to be more efficient 
than a personal income tax cut in the European context. It is 
interesting that recent HERMES-KINK (Bureau du Plan-
Erasmc. I9°3> and QUEST (European Commission. 1994) 
simulation results arrive at a net positive impact. The employ-
ment effects tend to be particularly favourable when the en-
ergy taxes are simultaneously introduced by several countries 
and when the compensatory reduction in social security con-
tributions is targeted to the low-skilled. 
A more detailed picture of effects on GDP, private con-
sumption, employment, and inflation is given in Table 9.11, 
which reports results based on the HERMES and DRI models 
for six countries. Note that in the case of HERMES, the car-
bon/energy tax would result in a net positive effect on em-
ployment for all the countries and a slight increase in GDP for 
four of them. In the case of the DRI model the results are less 
optimistic and do not yield a double dividend that would to-
tally offset the costs of a carbon tax; this is due in part to dif-
ferences in model structure. Nevertheless, the comparison 
captures the likely range of impacts. 
9.2.2.1.4 
The effectiveness 
of energy and carbon taxes 
If the taxes were restricted to carbon-based fuels, the impacts 
would be unambiguous. Carbon taxes reduce CO, emis-
sions through both their effects on energy consumption and 
fuel choice. However, the EC proposal represents a depar-
ture from this pure case by not only aiming to limit CO, emis-
sions but also to achieve other objectives such as energy 
efficiency in general. Coupling an energy tax to a carbon 
tax will lead to additional conservation, but it will also have 
an impact on fuel choice. By raising the price of carbon-free 
substitutes, the proposal will reduce incentives for fuel 
switching. 
Several analysts have looked at this issue and found that ex-
tending a carbon tax to other forms of energy reduces the effec-
tiveness of measures to reduce CO, emissions because taxing 
noncarbon-based fuels provides a disincentive for fuel switch-
ing. Table 9.12 compares the results from four such studies. 
These analyses could be criticized from a bottom-up per-
spective because they rely on econometric assumptions and 
neglect the role of accompanying measures apt to accelerate 
the adoption of energy-efficient equipment. Moreover, such 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
Table 9.12. Comparison of emission reductions from an energy tax and a carbon tax 
317 
Study 
Geographical Scope 
Horizon 
Carbon Tax (%) 
Energy Tax (%) 
Global 2100 
(Tax: 10$/bbl) 
Hermes-Midas 
(Tax: 10$/bbl) 
Melodic 
(Tax: 200 $/t) 
Midas 
(Tax: 10 $/bbl) 
Europe 
France 
Germany 
UK 
Italy 
France 
Germany 
UK 
2030 
2005 
2005 
2005 
2005 
2010 
2005 
2005 
-50 
-10.83 
-12.95 
-6.55 
-12.74 
-15.7 
-11.63 
-3.98 
-46.5 
-9.27 
-7.12 
-4.40 
-3.10 
-12.6 
-7.52 
-3.29 
stylized model simulations neglect important institutional 
characteristics of the European energy market (for example, 
natural gas prices are effectively linked to mineral oil prices, 
as there is no gas-to-gas competition, and the decision to build 
nuclear power stations is significantly influenced by political 
choices). They therefore tend to overstate the likely actual dif-
ference between carbon and energy taxes. 
These analyses, however, provide important insights into 
the impact of other environmental concerns on CO., abate-
ment and illuminate the importance of the trade-off between 
reductions of CO, emissions and broader energy efficiency 
goals. This loss in terms of CO, reduction seems more im-
portant in Germany (between 35 and 49%) and in the UK 
(32.5% for the HERMES-MIDAS model) than in France (20%), 
where the shift of electric supply towards nuclear energy has 
been completed during the past two decades. 
9.2.2.2 A review of bottom-up 
studies 
This section principally summarizes and compares the results 
of major coordinated bottom-up studies for Europe. It also ac-
counts for studies in other regions such as the Pacific area, 
Australia, and New Zealand. Studies for other countries are 
less available. The main differences in results are discussed in 
relation to different input and baseline scenario assumptions 
and to modelling methodology. The studies considered are: 
. 
The CEC DG XII JOULE (1991a, b) "Cost-effective-
ness analysis of C 0 2 reduction options" studies (some-
times also called the Crash Programme), covering nine 
European Union countries and carried out by the CO-
HERENCE research team and a group of other Euro-
pean teams 
• The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
International Project for Sustainable Energy Paths: 
country studies for Denmark, France, and the Nether-
lands (UNEP, 1994b) 
• The five-country International Project on Sustainable 
Energy Paths (IPSEP. 1993) 
• The nine-country Energy Technology Systems Analysis 
Project (ETSAP) (Kram, 1993) 
• Johansson et at. (1989) on Sweden 
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural Resource Eco-
nomics (ABARE) MENSA study (Naughten et at., 
1994) on Australia 
The German Parliamentary Enquete Commission (En-
quete Kommission des deutschen Bundestages, 1991; 
BMU, 1993) 
9.2.2.2.1 
Methodology 
of the studies 
The CEC study adopted a uniform modelling methodology, 
the EFOM linear optimization model developed by the re-
search programme of the European Community. In the UNEP 
studies, a common methodological framework was applied 
across countries, comprising uniform assumptions on tech-
nology input data, time horizons, and cost definitions. The 
Netherlands study used the MARKAL linear optimization 
model, whereas the French study relied on a bottom-up simu-
lation framework combined with a static general equilibrium 
model. The Danish study used an integrated energy system 
simulation model. 
The IPSEP studies defined a common methodological 
framework and uniform assumptions like those of the UNEP 
studies. The customized scenario modelling in the IPSEP pro-
ject involved a combination of detailed assessment of poten-
tial, cost, and behaviour related to energy end-use demand 
and supply options. The participating countries were the UK, 
the Netherlands. Italy. Germany, and France. 
The ETSAP project was a comparable assessment for nine 
countries using the MARKAL model with consistent cost and 
technology assumptions. The participating countries were Bel-
gium. Italy, the Netherlands. Norway, Sweden, and Switzer-
land, together with non-European countries (the U.S., Japan, 
and the provinces of Ontario and Quebec in Canada). Exten-
sion of this MARKAL-based comparison to Australia was un-
dertaken independently (Dickson et al., 1994; Naughten et al., 
1994). using the MENSA model of the Australian Bureau of 
Agricultural and Resource Economics. An innovation in this 
study was the incorporation of greenhouse gases other than 
CO, that are emitted by the energy system. 
The study by Johansson and Bodlund did not use any for-
malized modelling framework but focussed on the assessment 
of technologies and their emission reduction potential. 
.?/.S' 
Climate Change J 995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
Table 9.13. Zero average net cost emission reduction potential in non-U.S. OECD bottom-up studies (estimated 
reduction 
potential achieved with zero net average cost) 
Study 
Country 
2005/10 (%) 
2015/20 (%) 
2025/30 (%) 
IPSEP(1993) 
FRGEnquetc(l992) 
Mills etal. (1991) 
Crash Programme (1991) 
UNEP(1994a,b) 
Range 
Median 
EC-5 
FRG 
Sweden 
UK 
Denmark 
30 
>35 
10 
>21 
10-35 
>17 
>26 58 
>26-58 
>42 
>60 
>45 
>45-60 
>53 
Note: A "greater than" sign indicates that the study did not include options up to the intersection point of the x-axis. This means that larger 
reductions could he achieved for negative or zero average cost. The Mills et al. study uses the same input assumptions as the Johansson et al. 
study of 1989. 
9.2.2.2.2 
Main objectives and 
definitions 
The primary aims of the European bottom-up studies have 
been to demonstrate the existence of an energy savings poten-
tial with negative or low economic cost and to analyze the 
cost-effectiveness of energy supply and demand options for 
achieving a certain emission-reduction goal. An important 
outcome of such a cost-effectiveness analysis is to enable in-
tercountry comparison of reduction costs. 
The study results are highly dependent on the assumptions 
about energy efficiency measures included in the baseline 
scenario. The CEC report and the ETSAP project assumed 
that all profitable efficiency measures were included in the 
baseline, which meant that all emission reduction options, by 
definition, would have positive costs in these analyses. How-
ever, in the MARKAL-based study, the baseline was designed 
to exclude energy efficiency devices and policy responses, 
both in road passenger transport (Naughten et al.. 1993) and 
in the residential sector (Naughten et al.. 1994; Naughten and 
Dickson. 1995). 
In the UNEP studies, Denmark, the Netherlands, and 
France followed different principles for baseline definition. 
Denmark defined its baseline to include the persistence of 
some major inefficiencies, implying that a large potential for 
no-regrets emission reduction options was found. The French 
study accounted for transaction costs for adopting more effi-
cient technologies, and the Dutch study assumed the baseline 
to be efficient. 
The IPSE!' and Johansson et al. studies included major in-
efficiencies in their baselines and found, consequently, a sig-
nificant potential for no-regrets options. 
9.2.2.2J 
The results 
Despite differences in baseline definition, all the studies 
demonstrated the existence of an economic potential for the 
reduction o( CO, emissions at negative or low costs. Table 
9.13. for example, shows the zero-cost emission reduction po-
tential as estimated by five of these studies for three different 
time horizons. At the same time, the results demonstrated that 
the basic assumptions have an important bearing on the exis-
tence and possible implementation of no-regret options. This 
can have a significant effect on the total, average, and mar-
ginal costs of reductions. 
8 
o 
U 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
1 Spain 
1 / 
~ 
1 
/ 
Greece 
"NelherlanclsJw 
/ 
/ 
I'/idC1"" 
^ ^ ^ M France 
/ Belgium 
- * 
' 
P - -
Germany 
DUK 
_ _ - O Denmark 
5% 
10% 
15% 
20% 
30% 
Emission Reduction (% reduction from 1990) 
Figure 9.10: Marginal costs of emission reductions in 2010 relative 
to 1990 emissions in the Crash Programme study. 
Table 9.14. Marginal costs for C02 emission reductions from 
1988 levels in 2010 as estimated by the Crash 
Programme 
study (ECU/t of CO,) 
Belgium 
Denmark 
France 
Germany 
Greece 
Italy 
Netherlands 
Spain 
United 
Kingdom 
Stabilization 
15 
0 
0 
0 
23 
22 
27 
18 
0 
5% 
15 
0 
0 
0 
56 
112 
136 
143 
0 
10% 
39 
6 
1 
15 
224 
413 
— 
1,556 
12 
15% 
290 
— 
— 
18 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
20% 
— 
11 
43 
43 
— 
— 
— 
— 
35 
30% 
— 
32 
— 
138 
— 
— 
— 
63 
The main results of the European C 0 2 Crash Programme 
(CEC 1991a. b) study are shown in Figure 9.10 and Table 
9.14. The study found that it is less costly for the UK. Ger-
many, and Denmark to reduce emissions from current levels 
than for Greece and Spain. The study estimated neglible costs 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
.?/y 
Table 9.15. Main categories ofC02 reduction options and related marginal abatement costs for Denmark (reductions in 
relation to baseline in 2030) 
CO, Reduction Option 
Reduction (%) 
0.5 
2.0 
4.8 
1.5 
2.8 
1.6 
0.4 
3.8 
11.6 
3.0 
2.6 
9.4 
0.3 
0.7 
2.9 
1.0 
Marginal Abatement 
Cost (U.S. $/t C0 2) 
-222.7 
-100.0 
-70.0 
-62.9 
-55.7 
-40.0 
-38.6 
-8.6 
-4.3 
0.0 
1.0 
12.9 
30.0 
81.4 
185.7 
614.3 
Connection to natural gas network 
Connection to district heating network 
Electricity conservation in households 
Increased use of combined heat and power 
Electricity conservation in services 
Conservation in industry 
Conservation in agriculture 
Combined cycle - natural gas (1,000 MW) 
Biogasification (1,500 MW) 
Wind turbines (1,800 MW) 
Central natural gas comb. (4,000 MW) 
Decentralized biomass combustion 
Solar collectors for hot water 
Insulation in office buildings 
Photovoltaics (800 MW) 
Fuel cells (1,000 MW) 
Total C02 reductions 
48.9 
associated with 10% reductions in emissions from present 
levels for the former three EC members. For the latter two, 
even to keep emissions constant at today's levels would re-
quire substantial investment in energy conservation schemes 
or investment in nonfossil fuel technologies. 
Baseline CO, emissions range from a drop of 3% by 2010 
in Luxembourg, to stabilization for Germany, to increases of 
72 and 86% for Greece and Portugal respectively (all from 
current levels). Some of this variation can certainly be ex-
plained by intercountry variations in industrial structure, capi-
tal stock constraints, and different national energy systems. 
However, the national baseline projections and cost assess-
ments still show larger differences than would be expected 
from "real" differences in energy systems and economic de-
velopment patterns. 
One of the main explanations behind the widely varying 
national cost assessments is the heterogeneity of the national 
technology data used in the analyses. Differences in economic 
growth, for instance, for Spain and Greece, could partly ex-
plain the high marginal emission reduction cost in these coun-
tries but cannot fully explain all intercountry differences. It 
seems surprising, for example, that France, with an energy 
system characterized by a large installed nuclear capacity, 
arrives at an abatement cost very similar to that of Britain and 
Germany, whereas Italy arrives at a lower cost. This is in 
contrast to the fact that the scope for manoeuvre in the power 
sector is much higher in the latter three countries, owing to 
the dominance of conventional power production, than in 
France. 
The CEC study also assessed the potential for negative cost 
energy efficiency improvements for the countries. This was 
done by the construction of a MURE scenario in which the 
end-use savings measures were embedded. It was estimated 
that the implementation of these negative cost options would 
lead to a 6% decrease in CO, emissions in 2010 from the 1988 
level for Germany, stabilization in Denmark, and increases of 
52 and 82% for Greece and Portugal respectively. 
The CEC study was a pioneering study in the development 
of the methodology of comparative cost assessment between 
countries and produced important methodological lessons on 
the requirements for uniformity in national scenario and tech-
nology assumptions. This experience has induced CEC to or-
ganize a homogeneous new data collection on efficient energy 
technologies. 
Differences in assessed reduction potential and costs are 
also seen in the UNEP studies for Denmark, the Netherlands, 
and France. These differences are consistent with "real" varia-
tions between the countries in the carbon content of their en-
ergy systems and in baseline definitions. Denmark and, to a 
lesser degree, the Netherlands have high emission-reduction 
potentials as a consequence of carbon-intensive power pro-
duction systems. In the French country study, certain more 
costly transportation sector measures are included because re-
ductions in electricity supply arc limited and end-use demand 
options are assumed to have positive costs. 
The Danish study assumed that the emission reduction case 
included further profitable efficiency improvements and en-
ergy end-use savings compared with baseline development. 
These measures required introduction of legislation in the 
form of norms, efficiency standards, and obligatory connec-
tion to already established natural gas and district heating 
grids, which at present have a low utilization rate. Other op-
tions with positive, but low costs were wind turbines and bio-
mass fuels. The Danish options are listed in Table 9.15. 
The study for the Netherlands assumed that all possible ef-
ficiency improvements in the energy system would be imple-
mented in the reference case. A consequence of the "efficient" 
definition of the baseline case for the far-reaching reduction 
targets includes energy end-use savings amounting to 3-4% 
followed by the use of costly advanced technologies such as 
MO 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
Table 9.16. Main categories of emission reduction options in 
the UNEP study for the 
Netherlands 
Sector 
CO, Reduction Option 
Industry 
Fuel cell combined heal and power 
More efficient industrial processes 
Gas-fired and electric heat pumps 
Solar heated and biomass- and hydrogen-
fired equipment 
Transport 
More efficient engines, brake energy 
recuperation 
Biofuel, hydrogen, electric, liquefied 
petroleum gas, compressed natural gas, 
and methanol engines 
Households and 
Condensing gas boiler 
services 
Gas-fired and electric heat pumps 
Improved building insulation 
More efficient electric and lighting 
appliances 
Solar boilers, biomass- and hydrogen-fired 
equipment 
District heating 
Greenhouse insulation 
Electricity and heat 
Gas combined cycle and advanced coal 
production 
combined cycle plants 
Fuel cell industrial cogeneration and district 
heat 
Electricity storage, hydrogen fuel cells 
CO, removal at gas-fired and coal-fired 
plants 
Wind turbines, biomass power plants, solar 
photovoltaic 
Other processes 
Methanol production from natural gas 
and coal 
Hydrogen production from natural gas and 
imports from Sahara 
Liquid and solid biofuel production (from 
sugar beet, wheat, straw, wood) 
Combined methanol and electricity production 
Transport of CO, to depleted natural gas 
fields and to aquifers 
Note: The nature of the energy system optimization model used in 
the Netherlands study does not allow percentage reductions and 
costs to be assigned to individual options. The options here are part 
of an integrated package of technologies that leads to a reduction in 
CO, emissions of 50';; from baseline in 2030 at a total cost of U.S. 
$3.8 billion. 
CO,-removal technologies and the importation of hydrogen 
from the Sahara. The emission reduction options for the 
Netherlands are shown in Table 9.16. 
The French study estimated a tax rate for emission reduc-
tions in a maeroeeonomie model. In one scenario variant, it 
was assumed that carbon taxes would be combined with com-
plementary measures in the energy sector, such as informa-
tion, efficiency standards, research and development, and 
grants, as well a\ with measures in other sectors. The tax was 
estimated to be SIS". 5 per tonne of CO. for a 12.5'i reduction 
in 2005. $"5 per tonne o( CO, for a 25', reduction in 2030. 
and $1,425 per tonne of CO, for a 50% reduction in 2030. The 
lower tax rates in 2030 compared with 2005 are due to as-
sumptions relating to technical progress. 
Despite the fact that the UNEP country studies followed a 
common methodological framework (UNEP 1994a, b, c,) the 
results still show differences as a consequence of different 
baseline approaches and emission-reduction technology as-
sumptions. This means that the comparison of national results 
requires a detailed and transparent documentation of assump-
tions and national modelling frameworks and that the mar-
ginal emission reduction costs cannot be compared directly 
between the countries. 
Yet another approach to country differences is taken in the 
IPSEP study (IPSEP, 1994/1995). Though the analysis started 
from baseline data and demand growth projections unique to 
each of the five countries, emphasis was placed on the aggre-
gate carbon reduction potentials and costs in the five-country 
region. This approach reflects current plans for a common in-
ternal market within the European Union, including a homog-
enization of the policy frameworks for the energy sector. 
The costs and potentials for conventional fossil supplies, 
nuclear power, demand-side efficiency, cogeneration, and re-
newables were developed in several substudies. The costs of 
efficiency resources include estimates of administrative costs 
developed from a review of market transformation policies 
(standards, financial incentives to consumers, financial incen-
tives to manufacturers of efficiency equipment, and utility 
regulatory reforms) in Europe and the U.S. High/low sensitiv-
ity ranges were modelled not only for fuel prices but also for 
technology and administrative programme costs. In the be-
havioural module of the analysis, assumptions about imple-
mentation rates were validated on the basis of empirical 
investigations of consumer responses to market transforma-
tion policies (standards, financial incentives to consumers, fi-
nancial incentives to manufacturers of efficiency equipment, 
and utility regulatory reforms). The effectiveness of these 
policies was expressed in terms of the fraction of the resource 
potentials assumed to be mobilized by 2020. Scenario results 
were then given for 25%. 50%, 75%, and 100% effectiveness. 
Figure 9.11 shows results for the least cost (a) and. mini-
mum risk (/;) cases for the five countries combined, based on 
four permutations of cost assumptions. Because of feedback 
effects, a combination of low fuel prices and low technology 
costs is considered most plausible. For this combination, 
emissions drop by 40% relative to 1985 in the least-cost case. 
and energy service costs drop by 23% relative to the CEC ref-
erence case. In the minimum risk case, the same combination 
of cost assumptions results in emissions dropping by 60%. 
while costs decline 20%. 
The country-to-country variations of the IPSEP study arc 
smaller than in other studies. The large no-regrets efficiency 
potentials found in all five countries make the differences on 
the supply side relatively less important. 
Although the Swedish exercise of 1989 included a detailed 
assessment of end-use demand options similarly to the IPSEP 
study, a higher abatement cost was estimated. This is because 
Swedish CO, emissions are already very low as a result of the 
present use of hydro power and nuclear power. In the future 
these two supply sources will be. respectively, supplemented and 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
.Ul 
(a) Least cost 
700 
30% 20% 10% 0% -10%-20%-30%-40%-50%-60% 
Percent Change in Carbon 
Emissions from 1985 Level 
o 
O 
(b) Minimum risk 
700 
650 
1 
II 
600 
550 
OS 
o 
U 
1 
s 500 
450 
400 
Reference Low 
30% 20% 10% 0%-10%-20%-30%-40%-50%-60% 
Percent Change in Carbon 
Emissions from 1985 Level 
Low Capital Cost/High Fuel Price Case 
High Capital Cost/Low Fuel Price Case 
Low Cost Case 
High Cost Case 
1985 EC-5 Carbon emissions = 532 MtC 
Source: Krause and Koomey (1992). 
Figure 9.11: Sensitivity analysis of the cost of carbon reductions in the IPSEP EC-5 study, all sectors. 
substituted for by fossil fuels because of the implementation of 
regulations concerned with environmental problems other than 
C02 emissions. 
The results of the ETSAP study are illustrated in Figure 
9.12, showing the marginal costs in the year 2020 of successive 
carbon emission reductions from the 1990 level. There are wide 
variations among the countries. Norway, Sweden, and Switzer-
land - which now emit the least CO, per capita - would be 
among those measuring the highest cost to achieve a specific 
further reduction in CO, emissions. The Netherlands, with the 
assumed availability of C02 removal and storage options, ap-
pears able to make the greatest reductions at the least cost. 
In addition to the results of these comparative exercises, 
it is worth recalling that one of the largest studies of energy 
end-use sectors, the German Enquete Commission study (in-
volving 150 studies by 50 institutes), identified a zero cost 
potential of 16.5% in Germany compared with 1981 levels 
(Enquete (Commission. 1991; BMU, 1993). 
Time dependence of abatement costs. In all assessed Euro-
pean bottom-up exercises, the slope of marginal cost curves, 
notably after a certain level of reduction of CO, emissions, is 
highly dependent on the package of technologies considered. 
c o 
'5 
3 
1 
si 
33 
$600 r 
$500 -
$400 -
5 $300 -
U=L $200 -
a 
c 1 
$100 -
<0) 
W) 
30) 
* 
CO - WlnK*m i«i 3#0) 
Source: kramu W ) , 
Kijiurv 4.12; \l;v:iy;,-. 
iln-lTSM'.uvjiN 
'if. ''.-':ttj|.-Tli'i»;-
122 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
The slope may be very steep after a certain level: For instance, 
in the Danish UNEF study, abatement costs increase from 10 
$/t to 200 $/t if the 2030 reduction goal is switched from 25 to 
50% (baseline reference). The introduction of more technolo-
gies into the analysis, however, tends to extend the segment of 
the cost curve where marginal costs increase slowly. This ten-
dency has also been seen when short-term reduction targets 
are compared with long-term targets. The marginal emission 
reduction cost decreases with time for similar reduction tar-
gets (from baseline) in the Danish and Dutch UNEP studies, 
simply because more technologies are available. 
9.2.2.2.4 
The dependence of the results on input 
assumptions 
and modelling 
approach 
Though the choice of models in bottom-up analysis may have 
some effect on the calculated carbon reduction costs, these re-
sults cannot explain the large differences in findings between 
the CEC. UNEP, IPSEP, and ETSAP studies. Differences ap-
pear to be explained mainly by two factors: the assumptions 
in some studies that the reference case is already more or less 
economically efficient, and the use of a limited number of 
possible efficiency improvements. 
More systematic research on the importance of technology 
assumptions for the results of bottom-up studies would be 
useful. Optimization models may encourage the use of more 
historically estimated aggregate data on end-use demand, and 
in some cases this may imply a more pessimistic assessment 
of the savings potential. However, studies have also shown 
that when identical data on efficiency potentials are used, op-
timization and simulation results appear to converge. Also, 
optimization models are being continuously refined. A large 
contribution is currently being made to provide a range of 
standardized algorithms for modelling alternative policy pro-
grammes. 
Overall, the divergent results suggest the need for further 
empirical research on how end-use market efficiency could 
improve the implementation of end-use options. Also, com-
parative bottom-up modelling exercises should he done in 
which identical national data sets for efficiency potential and 
costs are combined with standardized assumptions about im-
plemented fractions in the reference case. Such an exercise 
has already been done for Denmark. It was shown that uni-
form input assumptions in the EFOM model for Denmark 
and the Danish UNEP study produced very similar results 
(Morthorst, 1993). 
The 
French 
study, conducted 
by CIRED using 
the 
NEXUS-IMACLIM model (Hourcade et al.. 1993). shows the 
sensitivity of the results to the assumptions about the indus-
trial and socioeconomic content of the reference scenario. 
New urban policies could determine a change of fuel con-
sumption growth between now and 2030 just as effectively as 
a huge carbon tax of 280 $/t. 
9.2.3 Studies of the costs of reducing CO, emissions in 
transitional 
economies 
The term econt>mics in trttnsirit>n is often applied to the coun-
tries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. The im-
plication is that market reforms are underway. The stage of 
the transition varies dramatically, however, by country, and 
there is no certainty about the types of economic institutions 
likely to emerge at the end of this process and the type of de-
velopment pattern which will ultimately win out. 
Modelling emission reduction costs for the 
formerly 
planned economies is particularly challenging. The region has 
a long history of highly subsidized energy prices and other in-
efficiencies in the structure of incentives. Models that assume 
the existence of market mechanisms will miss many of the 
important features of these economies. Applying equilib-
rium models to planned economies assumes that planned 
economies mimic the behaviour of market economies. This 
assumption is impossible to accept empirically, particularly 
with regard to energy use. 
The problem is further complicated by the fact that the 
transition process per se generates a state of crisis. The Rus-
sian GDP, for example, declined by 18.5% in 1992. Economic 
activity in 1993 was lower than in 1985 (Bashmakov, 1994). 
Consequently, standard econometric techniques derived from 
historical records cannot be applied without caution. Until 
these economies achieve a more stable footing, predictions of 
future growth will be tenuous at best. 
9.2.3.1 A review of top-down 
studies 
The problems of adapting top-down models for use in transi-
tional economies explains the dearth of applications for this 
region of the world, particularly when compared to the grow-
ing body of analysis being amassed on developed economies. 
The few studies that do exist were conducted by Western 
economists, using models that are best suited to application 
within the OECD. This is not to imply that the studies are 
without merit. Indeed, as we will see shortly, they have 
yielded some useful insights about the costs of emission re-
duction. Nevertheless, as we move beyond the OECD, we 
need to be increasingly circumspect in the interpretation of re-
sults. 
A key issue in extending top-down models to emerging 
economies is the treatment of energy subsidies. Many of the 
early studies showed relatively high emission reduction costs 
(see, for example, Dean and Hoeller, 1992). Critics claim that 
the high numbers reflect "the difficulties top-down studies 
have with economies undergoing restructuring" (Grubb el «/., 
1993). They argue that the high costs are in large part due to a 
failure to adequately capture the demand-side impacts of sub-
sidy removal. 
There is some validity to this criticism. The removal of 
subsidies will result in costless conservation in addition to 
that induced by the AEEI factor. The early studies may have 
indeed underestimated the potential for demand-side savings. 
(It is important to note, however that the criticism applies 
more to the choice of input assumptions than to the models 
themselves. The models are not inherently limited to scenar-
ios in which markets clear.) 
The importance of existing market distortions is under-
scored in a modelling experiment by Marine and Schratten-
holzer (1993) using the Global 2100 model. They examined 
the sensitivity of emission reduction costs for emerging 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
$250 
y 
$200 
3 
§ 
$150 
ON 
x 
c o i 
U 
$100 
$50 
0 
* 
FSU(GREEN) 
• 
EET(GREEN) 
• 
FSU(12RT) 
# 
EET(12RT) 
J_ 
1990 
2000 
2010 
2020 
2030 
2040 
Source: Marine and Oliveira-Martins (1994). 
2050 
Figure 9.13: Comparison of carbon taxes in the stabilization scenario for the former Soviet Union (FSU) and Eastern European countries in 
transition (EET). 
economies to the presumed size of the subsidy. They found 
that the removal of artificial barriers that insulate domestic 
consumers from international price movements may well lead 
to a drop in carbon emissions over the next several decades. 
The same result was confirmed in a subsequent study by 
Manne and Oliveira-Martins (1994). They used the GREEN 
and 12RT models to estimate the taxes required to stabilize 
emissions at 1990 levels. It is important to note that price re-
forms and the removal of energy subsidies were included in 
the "baseline" scenario. This enabled the modellers to separate 
the impacts of restructuring from those of a carbon constraint. 
For purposes of the analysis, the transition economies were 
divided into two regions: the countries of the former Soviet 
Union (FSU) and the Eastern European countries in transition 
(EET). Figure 9.13 displays the carbon taxes required to 
achieve stabilization in each region. The former Soviet Union 
and Eastern European countries have zero taxes before 2010. 
This is because the stabilization constraint is nonbinding. 
With price reforms and the removal of energy subsidies, there 
is a decline in emissions relative to 1990 levels. For the 
GREEN model, the emission constraint begins to bite shortly 
after 2010. For 12RT. emissions remain below the 1990 level 
until 2040. 
Despite the intrinsic difficulties of applying top-down 
models to the countries of this region, the implications of 
these analyses are important. The costs of stabilizing emis-
sions may be relatively small for economies in transition. 
Market failures have undoubtedly limited investment in en-
ergy efficiency. The potential for cost-effective reductions in 
energy use is apt to be considerable. The key is a successful 
transition towards a new institutional context in which, under 
whatever form, prices actually reflect the full cost of energy. 
9.2.3.2 A review of bottom-up studies 
This section summarizes selected studies of the potential and 
cost of carbon emission reduction strategies in the post-
planned economies. Bottom-up methods offer some advan-
tages for dealing with transitional economies in that they 
focus on the physical stock of equipment and apply scenarios 
for its evolution, with less concern for anticipating macroeco-
nomic equilibrium conditions. However, just as top-down 
models are constrained by lack of reliable data for these 
economies, the data on current equipment end-use energy ef-
ficiencies are severely limited. 
9.2.3.2.1 Summary of studies 
A comparison of emission reduction cost studies reveals strik-
ing differences with the results of some top-down models (see 
Table 9.17). On the bottom-up side, a number of studies have 
been completed by Eastern European and Russian experts 
since the transitions of 1989. Some of this work was con-
ducted using the U.S. EPA End-Use Energy Model, whereas 
others applied indigenous country-specific models. The EPA 
model projected future energy demand to the year 2030 in 
five-year increments, giving results for the major fuel types 
and future aggregate industrial energy intensity. The model 
estimates energy demand on the basis of economic growth, 
structural change, price response, and technical energy-
efficiency improvements not attributed to price response. Like 
that of Makarov and Bashmakov (1991), most of the bottom-
up studies incorporated economic restructuring as a driving 
force for determining the energy content of economic growth. 
A relationship can be seen between the magnitude of the 
emission reductions and costs in the above scenarios, but this 
factor cannot explain the significant variation in cost esti-
Tabic 9.17. Cost of carbon dioxide emission 
reductions 
Country 
Former Soviet Union 
Hungary 
Poland 
Czechoslovakia 
Study 
Burniaux el al. (1992) 
Burniaux m//. (1992) 
Burniaux el al. (1992) 
Kononov(1993) 
Makarov and Bashmakov (1991) 
Makarov and Bashmakov (1991) 
Manne(1992) 
Manne(1992) 
Manne(1992) 
Oliveira-Martins et al. (1992b) 
Oliveira-Martins et al. (1992b) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Jaszay(1990) 
Leach & Nowak (1991) 
Leach & Nowak (1991) 
Sitnickiefrt/. (1991) 
Sitnicki <•*«/. (1991) 
Radwanski et al. (1993) 
Radwanski et al. (1993) 
Kostalova et al. (1991) 
Kostalova et al. (1991) 
Typet 
TD 
TD 
TD 
BU 
BU 
BU 
TD 
TD 
TD 
TD 
TD 
TD 
TD 
TD 
BU 
BU 
BU 
BU 
BU 
TD 
TD 
BU 
BU 
Forecast 
Year 
Bur-2020 
Bur-2050 
Bur-2100 
Kon-2005 
Mak-2005 
Mak-2020 
Man-2020 
Man-2050 
Man-2100 
OM-2020 
OM-2020 
Rut-2020 
Rut-2050 
Rut-2100 
Jas-2005 
L&N-2005 
L&N-2005 
Sit-2005 
Sit-2030 
Rad-2010 
Rad-2030 
Kos-2005 
Kos-2030 
CO, 
Reduction 
from Baseline (%) 
45 
70 
88 
50 
23 
44 
45 
70 
88 
45 
70 
45 
70 
88 
17 
37 
53 
44 
62 
27 
39 
20 
29 
Cost of 
Reduction 
(%ofGNP) 
0.9 
2.3 
3.7 
0.3 
0.5 
1 
3.1 
6.4 
5.6 
1.7 
3.7 
1.5 
5.8 
4.1 
-0.1 
-0.1 
-0.1 
0 
0.3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
*TD indicates a top-down study and BU indicates a bottom-up study. 
120 
- 
6 
0 1
™
"
1
"
~
1
"
^
I
"
^
U
~
™
^
U
™
1
™
"
1 
0 
Hui 
Mm 
Bur 
Kon 
Mak 
Mak 
Man 
Man 
Man 
OM 
OM 
Rut 
Rut 
Rut 
202(1 
2050 
211)0 2005 
2005 
2020 
2020 2050 
2100 
2020 
2020 
2020 
2050 
2100 
OH 
Q 
o 
0* 
Q 
a 
o 
Carbon LmisMon Reduction 
GDP impact 
Note: Sec Tabic l>. I ~ tor kc\ to studies. 
Figure 9.14: Cost studies: 1 'mission reduction in the lormer So\ iel Union. 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
70 
c o 
c o 
W 
J as 
2005 
L&N 
2005 
L&N 
Sit 
2005 
2005 
Sit 
2030 
Rad 
Rad 
2010 
2030 
Kos 
2005 
Kos 
2030 
Carbon Emission Reduction 
Note: See Table 9.17 for key to studies. 
Figure 9.15: Cost studies: Emission reduction in central Europe. 
GDP Impact 
mates across the scenarios. And although the discount rate 
varied among the studies, there seems to be little correlation 
between this variation and variations in cost estimates. In-
deed, the one major difference in cost estimates in the studies 
reviewed appears to be that of methodology, specifically the 
choice of top-down versus bottom-up models (see Figures 
9.14 and 9.15, and Table 9.17). This result is not surprising, 
given the special nature of planned and postplanned eco-
nomies. 
9.2.3.2.2 Evaluation of cost 
estimates 
The most energy-intensive economies in the world are the 
planned or postplanned economies (Chandler et ai, 
1990). 
However, a short digression on the meaning and importance 
of energy intensity in the formerly planned economies may be 
in order. Energy intensity (energy consumed per unit of eco-
nomic output) is an important, if controversial, indicator of 
future emissions. This value is difficult to measure accurately 
because GNP is difficult to quantify in comparable units. 
Also, differences in economic structures may be significant. 
If energy intensity is interpreted simply as a surrogate for 
energy efficiency, then the measure can be misleading. How-
ever, a vast literature has verified that the planned economies 
use energy inefficiently (Baron, 1992), both because they use 
technology that is not optimized and because the structures of 
their economies - that is, the remarkable reliance on heavy in-
dustry - is not economically justified. Yet, most models of fu-
ture energy use in this region imply both continued high 
energy intensity and high economic growth. The results are 
sometimes startling when one realizes that they indicate that 
the formerly planned economies would be twice as energy in-
tensive in the year 2050 as Japan is today. This outcome may 
be unlikely, given the constraints of international competition. 
9.2.4 Studies of the costs of reducing C02 emissions 
in 
developing 
countries 
Climate analysts have long recognized that greenhouse gas 
emissions and consequent climate change are a global phe-
nomenon and need global responses. Yet in most global abate-
ment studies, the analysis for developing nations is usually 
piggybacked on the developed country studies. The fact that 
the developed nations at present account for nearly two-thirds 
of greenhouse gas emissions has continued to overshadow the 
results of the very same models that show that within two or 
three decades emissions from the developing nations will sur-
pass those from the present developed nations. Greenhouse 
gas abatement studies for developing countries are therefore 
not numerous. The relatively few that do exist are based on 
methodologies designed for use in developed nations. These 
models tend to treat the dynamics of developing nations as a 
caricature of industrialized economies. 
9.2.4.1 A review of top-down 
studies 
This tendency is particularly marked in the case of top-down 
models, where the dynamics of each geographical region 
326 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Table 9.18. Comparative results from Jive models for carbon emission and GDP losses for China and the world 
Modelt 
CRTM 
ERM 
GREEN 
IEA 
MR 
Average Annual 
Carbon Emission 
Growth (%) 
BAU Scenario 
World 
1.6 
1.2 
2.0 
2.0 
1.7 
China 
2.5 
2.5 
3.8 
3.2 
2.2 
GDP Loss in 
Year 2100 
over 
Scenario I 
World 
4.0 
7.0 
3.6 
— 
5.2 
China 
3.5 
6.0 
1.5 
— 
5.0 
BAU (%) 
Scenario II 
World 
3.5 
4.5 
3.0 
— 
4.5 
China 
5.0 
13.0 
5.5 
— 
5.0 
Major Policy Option 
Abatement 
— 
Fuel substitution 
Energy conservation 
Energy conservation 
Fuel substitution 
•Terminal years for ERM, GREEN, and IEA models are 2095, 2050, and 2005 respectively, and 2100 for the other two models. 
tends to mirror the market-based economies of the Western 
world. The models are market-driven and assume the exis-
tence of future markets, perfect information, competitive 
economic dynamics on the demand and supply side, and 
optimizing behaviour on the part of producers, consumers, 
and government. These assumptions are often found to be in-
valid in developing countries. 
In addition, top-down models tend to underestimate the 
contributions 
from 
the 
informal 
sectors 
of 
developing 
economies. In many countries, these sectors account for the 
overwhelming proportion of agriculture and land-use activi-
ties, employment, and household energy consumption. Activi-
ties in these sectors, such as traditional biomass use. defor-
estation, rice cultivation, and animal husbandry, account for 
significant greenhouse gas emissions. The models also have 
difficulty capturing the patterns of change whereby the devel-
opment process transforms the traditional activities into mod-
ern activities through a myriad of simultaneous processes 
such as moneti/.ation. market development, technology pene-
tration, institution building, and education. 
Despite these limitations, top-down models can still pro-
vide useful insights into a number of important issues. These 
include taxes and subsidies, revenue recycling, international 
trade, allocations lor research and development, and backstop 
technologies. But until more effort is devoted to broadening 
the frameworks to deal better with the unique characteristics 
of developing countries, one must he especially cautious in 
interpreting their results. With these caveats in mind, we now 
turn to a review of several recent applications. 
9.2.4.1.1 
The costs of emission reduction in China 
Of the developing countries. China has received the greatest 
attention from top-down modellers. This is not surprising, 
since it is currently the third-largest emitter of CO, and there 
is every expectation that its share will continue to increase. 
Because of its importance, global models usually include 
China as a single geographical region. For example, the 
OECD Model Comparison Project divided the globe into five 
geopolitical regions: the I'.S.. other OECD countries, the for-
mer Soviet I'nion. China, and ROW (a catch-all category for 
the rest of the world). This study provides some interesting 
perspectives on how China's emissions are likely to evolve in 
the future and the potential costs of emission reduction. 
Besides business as usual (BAU), the following two sce-
narios were examined. Scenario I postulated a reduction in the 
rate of growth of emissions in each region by 2% per annum, 
and Scenario II a stabilization of emissions at 1990 levels in 
each region. Table 9.18 summarizes the percent growth rate of 
carbon emissions for BAU. In addition, it shows GDP losses 
for China and the world under the two control scenarios. 
Note that all models report very large GDP losses for 
China under the stabilization scenario. This is because the 
emissions growth under business as usual is much higher for 
China compared to the world as a whole. Hence, China re-
quires especially large emission cuts. In Scenario I, absolute 
cuts in emissions will be required in the industrialized coun-
tries, whereas a low growth in emissions is allowed for China. 
Hence, the GDP losses for China (in percentage terms) are 
somewhat lower. Although figures are not reported for ROW 
due to the heterogeneous nature of this region, the study indi-
cates that the GDP losses are also very high for ROW under 
both scenarios. Among other things, the OECD study under-
scores the importance of the emission allocation scheme in 
determining costs to individual countries. This issue will be 
addressed in greater detail in the section on global models. 
9.2.4.1.2 
The impacts of energy subsidy 
removal 
One area in which macroeconomic models are particularly 
useful relates to the removal of market imperfections. In a re-
cent study, the OECD used the GREEN model to analyze the 
impact of subsidy removal in China and India (OECD, 1994). 
The "distortion removal" scenario assumes phasing out of 
subsidies on the sale price of oil by 2000 and on coal and gas 
by the year 2010. Under the "no distortion removal" scenario, 
the energy subsidies observed in the base year continue. 
The study finds that the removal of energy subsidies has a 
major impact in reducing energy consumption and carbon 
emissions. Under the no distortion removal scenario, energy 
consumption and carbon emissions increase by a factor of 14 
between 1985 and 2050 in both countries. Under the distor-
tion removal scenario, energy consumption and emissions in 
China and India are reduced to nearly 40 and 60% respec-
A Review of Mitigation 
COM Studies 
Table 9.19. Bottom-up studies of developing 
countries 
Energy and Environmental Division, LBL (1991) 
C02 Emissions from Developing Countries. India, Indonesia. China, Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela. High and low emission scenar-
ios, 1985-2025. Country-specific reductions between 13 and 54% in 2025. Energy system model, STAIRS. 
Asian Development Bank (1993) 
National Response Strategy for Global Climate Change: People's Republic of China. Business as usual with high and low economic growth 
and policy scenario, 1990-2050. CO: reduction of 23% from baseline in 2050. Energy system model combined with macroeconomic assess-
ment. 
UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environment (1994) 
UNEP Greenhouse Gas Abatement Costing Studies. Brazil, India, Egypt, Senegal, Thailand, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe. Reference and 
abatement scenario. Emission reduction targets for 2005/10 and 2020/30 covering 12.5 to 50% reductions from baseline. Construction of 
abatement cost curves using energy system models. 
Davidson (1993) 
Carbon Abatement Potential in Western Africa. Ghana, Sierre Leone, and Nigeria. High and low emission scenarios, 1985-2025. Reduc-
tions from baseline in 2025: Ghana 38%, Sierre Leone 25%, Nigeria 24%. Energy system model, STAIRS. 
LaRovere, Legey, and Miguez (1994) 
Alternative Energy Strategies for Abatement of Carbon Emissions in Brazil. Three alternative economic growth scenarios, abatement 
scenario using high economic growth scenario as baseline. Reductions in 2010:8 and 50% from baseline; reductions in 2025: 5 and 50% 
from baseline. Input-output model used to forecast energy requirements, scenarios taking Japan, Spain, and Colombia as focal points. 
Energy system analysis. 
Asian Energy Institute (1992) 
Collaborative Study on Strategies to Limit CO, Emissions in Asia and Brazil. Brazil, China, India. The Islamic Republic of Iran, South 
Korea, and Thailand. Emission reduction scenarios for 1988/90 to 2000/2015. Calculation of investment cost for individual abatement 
technologies. 
SEl/Greenpeace (1993) 
Towards a Fossil Free Energy Future. Global study including regional assessment for Africa, centrally planned Asia, Latin America, and 
South and East Asia. Reduction scenario 1988-2100. Global reductions from 1988 level: 50% in 2030, 100% in 2100. Energy system model 
and macroeconomic assessment of the impact of carbon taxes on final energy prices. 
tively in 2050 (relative to the no distortion removal case). The 
reductions are due to higher energy efficiency and the use of 
backstops promoted by higher market prices for carbon-based 
fuels. Moreover, a Chinese study using a World Bank model 
suggested that joint reforms of energy prices and the ex-
change rate can offset the effects of energy price increases on 
the exchange rate, thus reducing the cost of imports (Peng and 
Hanslow, 1993). 
9.2.4.1.3 The impacts of carbon taxes on 
noncommercial 
energy 
consumption 
Even if this conclusion relies on incontestable price mecha-
nisms, however, the informal economy could offset part of the 
expected gain. That was pointed out by, among others, re-
searchers from the OPEC Secretariat who used a macroeco-
nomic model to investigate the impacts of OECD-type carbon 
taxes on developing countries (Walker and Birol, 1992) and 
explicitly considered the impact of income and price levels on 
the consumption of non-commercial energies (NCE). 
The study finds that the income elasticity of NCE is nega-
tive, meaning that consumers shift from NCE to commercial 
energy as income rises. But more important, the study also re-
ports an inverse relationship between noncommercial and 
commercial energy demand in response to price changes. That 
is, consumers switch from commercial to NCE in the case of 
price hikes. Both these results point to behaviour that is obvi-
ous and well known in the developing nations and yet is most 
often forgotten or ignored in top-down analyses. Based on the 
above findings, the study concludes that in the absence of ef-
fective controls on deforestation, carbon taxes would create 
incentives to deplete forests for energy use. 
9.2.4.2 A review of bottom-up 
studies 
Most bottom-up studies of developing countries focus on the 
national level and typically cover scenario periods from 
1988/90 to 2020/30. This contrasts with top-down studies, 
which tend to treat developing countries in groups, with the 
exception of China. Some of the principal studies are listed in 
Table 9.19. 
Emission reduction targets in develop!ng-country bottom-
up studies typically formulate reduction targets, either as per-
centage changes from a baseline (or reference) case reflecting 
the reference case's economic development and energy re-
quirements (UNEP 1994a) or as percentage changes related 
to a high emission case for the energy sector (Sathaye and 
Goldman, 1991). This contrasts with most of the studies car-
ried out for developed countries, where emission reductions 
targets generally are calculated for each scenario in terms of 
stabilization or abatement from a given benchmark date. 
Two major multicountry studies have been conducted by 
the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) and by the UNEP 
Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environment (UCCEE). 
.(2K 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.20. Growth rates of population, 
GDP, primary energy consumption, and C02 emissions in reference and 
abatement 
scenarios for 1990 to 2020/30 (in 
percentages) 
Country 
Population 
GDP 
2.0 
4.7 
3.2 
6.0 
5.0 
4.0 
6.3 
5.0 
3.0 
5.0 
4.4 
4.0 
3.2 
3.0 
4.8 
8.0 
3.8 
4.0 
4.2 
3.3 
3.2 
4.6 
4.1 
Primary Energy 
Reference 
1.8 
3.5 
2.5 
3.1 
3.2 
3.6 
4.2 
4.6 
3.6 
2.7 
2.6 
3.2 
2.2 
4.8 
2.5 
3.4 
2.8 
2.7 
3.9 
Abatement 
1.1 
3.7 
1.0 
2.7 
1.4 
3.0 
3.8 
4.3 
3.2 
3.1 
2.1 
1.9 
2.4 
1.7 
4.2 
7.8 
1.9 
3.2 
1.9 
0.9 
1.5 
CO, 
Reference 
1.8 
5.3 
2.8 
2.6 
3.8 
5.4 
3.8 
4.6 
4.0 
2.8 
4.6 
3.5 
3.5 
5.5 
3.1 
2.5 
3.2 
3.2 
5.1 
Emissions 
Abatement 
1.1 
3.2 
0.8 
2.1 
1.4 
5.0 
2.9 
4.3 
3.5 
2.8 
1.9 
3.8 
2.6 
3.0 
4.6 
7.8 
2.1 
1.9 
1.5 
-0.6 
-0.2 
Argentina" 
Brazil 
Brazil" 
China" 
Egypt 
Ghana' 
India 
India" 
Indonesia" 
South Korea'' 
Mexico" 
Nigeria' 
Senegal 
Sierra Leone'' 
Thailand 
Thailand'' 
Venezuela 
Venezuela" 
Zimbabwe 
Latin America' 
Latin America/ 
Southeast Asia' 
Southeast Asia/ 
1.1 
1.4 
1.2 
0.8 
1.7 
2.9 
1.8 
2.0 
1.2 
0.4 
1.7 
3.0 
3.0 
2.3 
0.9 
2.0 
2.1 
1.7 
2.4 
1.5 
1.3 
1.4 
1.6 
"Energy and Environmental Division, LBL(1991). 
'Asian Development Bank (1993). 
'Davidson (1993). 
''Asian Energy Institute (1992). 
'IPCC (1992a). 
'SE1/Greenpcace(1993). 
Note: Unreferenced studies were part of the UNEP greenhouse gas abatement costing project, UNEP (1994). 
These two research centres facilitate comparative analysis in a 
way similar to that employed for the studies carried out by the 
Energy Modeling Forum in the U.S. The results and method-
ological framework of the UNEP and LBL multicountry stud-
ies arc reviewed in this section along with similar country 
studies for China. West Africa, and South East Asia. 
Only some of the studies have estimated the costs of 
achieving emission reduction. These are the UNEP studies 
(UNEP. 1994a). the LBL study for India (Mongia. 1991). and 
the ADB study for China (Asian Development Bank. 1993). 
The UNEP studies, for example, have estimated emission 
reduction costs lot a range of target reductions running 
from 12.5 to 25<< in 2005/10 and from 25 to 50'.; in 2020/30 
(UNEP 1994a. b). 
The coordinated country study programmes conducted by 
UNEP and LBL defined an analytical framework for mitiga-
tion analysis comprising uniform assumptions about analyti-
cal structure that allow the use of different national modelling 
tools. The recommended framework for each country consists 
of the follow ing analytical steps: 
• Construction of reference scenario 
• Assessment and ranking of greenhouse gas reduction 
options 
• Construction of greenhouse gas reduction scenarios 
• Macroeconomic impact assessment (to the extent possible) 
The studies have in this way tried to combine traditional el-
ements from bottom-up models with macroeconomic assess-
ment. In practice this has meant that the baseline has been 
constructed to reflect general macroeconomic and energy sys-
tem development trends. Similarly, after mitigation options 
have been assessed, the most important macroeconomic im-
pacts of implementing specific options have been considered 
either qualitatively or quantitatively. 
9.2.4.2.1 Main assumptions and findings: 
Trends and 
margins of freedom for curbing greenhouse gas emissions 
The country studies considered here exhibit a striking similar-
ity to the expected development trends in energy and carbon 
intensity for the economies of developing nations. This has 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Table 9.21. Key elasticities in reference and abatement scenarios for 1990 to 2020/30 
Country 
Argentina" 
Brazil 
Brazil-
China'' 
Egypt 
Ghanac 
India 
India" 
Indonesia" 
South Korea'' 
Mexico" 
Nigeria^ 
Senegal 
Sierra Leone' 
Thailand 
Thailand'' 
Venezuela 
Venezuela" 
Zimbabwe 
Latin America" 
Latin America/ 
Southeast Asia" 
Southeast Asia/ 
Energy/GDP 
0.9 
0.8 
0.8 
0.5 
0.6 
0.9 
0.7 
0.9 
1.2 
0.6 
0.7 
1.0 
0.7 
1.0 
0.7 
0.9 
0.7 
0.8 
0.8 
Reference 
CO,/Energy 
1.0 
1.5 
1.1 
0.8 
1.2 
1.5 
0.9 
1.0 
1.1 
1.0 
1.7 
1.1 
1.6 
1.2 
1.3 
0.7 
1.2 
1.2 
1.3 
C0 2/G 
0.9 
1.1 
0.9 
0.4 
0.8 
1.4 
0.6 
0.9 
1.3 
0.6 
1.1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.1 
0.8 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.1 
Energy/GDP 
0.6 
0.8 
0.3 
0.5 
0.3 
0.8 
0.6 
0.9 
1.1 
0.6 
0.5 
0.5 
0.8 
0.6 
0.9 
1.0 
0.5 
0.8 
0.4 
0.3 
0.4 
Abatement 
CO/Energy 
1.0 
0.9 
0.8 
0.8 
1.0 
1.7 
0.8 
1.0 
1.1 
0.9 
0.9 
2.0 
1.1 
1.8 
1.1 
1.0 
1.1 
0.6 
0.8 
-0.7 
-0.1 
C0 2/GD 
0.5 
0.7 
0.3 
0.4 
0.3 
1.3 
0.5 
0.9 
1.2 
0.6 
0.4 
1.0 
0.8 
1.0 
1.0 
1.0 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
-0.2 
0.0 
"Energy and Environmental Division, LBL (1991). 
'Asian Development Bank (1993). 
"Davidson (1993). 
''Asian Energy Institute (1992). 
'IPCC (1992a). 
/SEI/Greenpeace(1993). 
Note: Unreferenced studies were part of the UNEP greenhouse gas abatement costing project, UNEP (1994). 
important implications for CO., reduction potential and related 
costs in these countries. The studies indicate a tendency for 
the energy intensity of economic growth to decrease, primar-
ily as a consequence of structural economic change and tech-
nological development. In contrast, however, the studies 
generally expect the C02 intensity of primary energy con-
sumption to increase more or less as a direct outcome of the 
introduction of commercial fossil fuels as a major source of 
energy supply in future baseline development. The overall re-
sult is that the CO./GDP intensity is close to unity for most of 
the studies. The policy implication of these trends is that the 
studies indicate a potential for implementing low-carbon en-
ergy technologies, but a special effort seems to be necessary 
to reverse the strong tendency for fossil fuel energy technolo-
gies to become the major source of supply in the future. 
The actual assumptions for GDP growth rates, primary en-
ergy consumption, and CO, emissions are shown in Table 
9.20 for the reference and emission reduction scenarios of the 
country studies. The annual economic growth rates range 
from 3.0 to 8.07c with most projections below 5.0%. 
In some cases economic growth rate forecasts for the same 
country differ between studies. Generally the growth rates of 
the UNEP studies are higher than for the LBL studies. This is 
understandable, given the uncertainties surrounding such 
long-term forecasts. 
The elasticities of primary energy to GDP, C02 emissions 
to primary energy, and C02 emissions to GDP are shown in 
Table 9.21 for the reference or baseline scenarios. Many of the 
countries have a primary energy/GDP elasticity between 0.6 
and 0.8, implying that a 1% increase in GDP leads to a 0.6-
0.8% increase in energy consumption. This value, which is 
low if one considers current trends in developing countries, is 
explained in the individual countries in part by national eco-
nomic development plans that include structural changes and 
technical efficiency improvements. However, the C02/GDP 
elasticity is close to unity for most of the country studies as a 
consequence of high expected CO,/energy elasticities. This 
latter elasticity reflects development processes in which tradi-
tional local biomass and also hydropower resources are 
"squeezed out" while commercial fossil fuels are expected to 
play a larger role. A remarkably high CO./energy elasticity is 
projected in the UNEP Brazil study and in the studies by David-
son for Ghana, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone, where biomass is 
substantially replaced by fossil fuels in the reference scenario. 
JM) 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
800 
600 
1 
S3 
400 
W 
200 
Thailand 
Brazil 
Zimbabwe 
India 
Egypt 
Senegal 
Venezuela 
I 
1990 
2005/10 
Year 
2020/30 
Source: UNEP (1994a). 
Figure 9.16: UNEP baseline projections. 
The different assumptions for development in GDP. pri-
mary energy, and CO, emissions in the baseline case imply 
that the imposition of reduction targets related to future emis-
sions has quite different consequences for the absolute level 
of emissions in the reduction scenarios. 
The baseline emission projections range from a six- to 
eightfold increase for Thailand and Brazil to a two- to three-
fold increase for other developing countries in the UNEP 
study. In the LBL study, the projection is for a five- to sixfold 
increase for Indonesia and India and a two- to threefold in-
crease for China. Argentina. Brazil. Mexico, and Venezuela. 
The emission projections of the UNEP and LBL studies are il-
lustrated in Figures 9. Id and 9.17. 
We later discuss the implications of such a wide range of 
results. Despite these discrepancies, however, the studies con-
verge in suggesting a steep increase in CO, emissions from 
developing countries over the next decades. A second impor-
tant convergence relates to the estimate of a significant poten-
tial for reducing the CO, intensity of economic growth in 
these countries. 
In the UNEP study, the emission reduction scenario for 
most of the countries shows a 40-50''; emission reduction 
from the reference scenario by 2020/30. However, this still 
600 
400 
I 
a 
§ 
•a 
w 
200 
-
-
1 
• India 
• Indonesia 
/ 
• Korea 
/ 
/ 
m Brazil 
/ 
f 
j # ^ Mexico 
/ 
/
^ 
J 
Venezuela 
/ ^ \ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ \ j U Argentina 
1 
1985 
2025 
Year 
Source: Davidson (1993) and Sathaye and Goldman (1991). 
Figure 9.17: LBL baseline projections. 
implies up to a doubling of emissions, relative to the present. 
Exceptions are the studies for Thailand and Brazil, where 30 
and 50% reductions from the reference scenario still lead to a 
sixfold and threefold emission increase respectively from the 
present. 
The emissions develop more slowly in the low emission 
scenarios of the LBL study than in the UNEP study, even 
though reductions in the scenarios are less extensive than in 
the UNEP studies. The LBL studies are typically focussed 
around a 20-30% reduction from the reference scenario in 
2025. This reflects the lower economic growth rate projec-
tions of the LBL study. The lowest projections are seen for 
Brazil and Argentina, where the emissions are projected to in-
crease by only about 50% from present levels. Another group 
of countries, including China, Mexico, and Venezuela, is pro-
jected to have emission levels two to three times higher than 
present levels after reductions of 20-30% from the baseline 
scenario. India and Indonesia are projected to have persis-
tently high emission levels. 
The reduction scenarios of the UNEP and LBL studies are 
shown in Figures 9.18 and 9.19. 
Although these potentials for CO, emission reduction 
in developing countries are insufficient to offset the overall 
tendency towards increased CO, emissions, they are large 
enough to contradict the notion that, given current low levels 
of energy consumption in these countries, there is little utility 
in efforts to control their emissions. 
A similar conclusion can be drawn from a study by the 
Asian Energy Institute that included Bangladesh. Brazil. 
China. India, the Islamic Republic of Iran. Japan. South Ko-
rea, and Thailand. The study assessed the potential for emis-
A Review 
of Mitigation 
Cost 
Studies 
600 
I 
a 
o 
400 
a 
200 
Thailand 
Brazil 
India 
Senegal 
Venezuela 
Zimbabwe 
Egypt 
I 
1990 
2005/10 
Year 
2020/30 
Source: UNEP (1994a). 
Figure 9.18: UNEP reduction estimates. 
600 " 
X 
400 
I 
c 
o 
CO 
W 
200 
-
-
-
1 
• 
India 
• 
Indonesia 
/ 
^ # 
Korea 
/ 
^
/
^ 
Brazil 
/ 
. ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
Venezuela 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
r . B Mexico 
^^^^* a s""~""^ 
Argentina 
1 
1985 
2025 
Year 
Source: Davidson (1993) and Sathaye and Goldman (1991). 
Figure 9.19: LBL reduction estimates. 
$300 
$200 
00 * 
5 
C/3 
o 
u 
I 
3 
100 
13-$ 100 
1 
-$200 
-$300 
Zimbabwe-
Brazil 
Thailand 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Emission Reduction (%) 
60 
Figure 9.20: UNEP studies: Marginal abatement costs for 2005/2010. 
sion reduction in these countries through energy efficiency 
improvements and a shift towards supply technologies with 
lower carbon intensity. 
9.2.4.2.2 Emission reduction costs 
The UNEP country studies include an estimation of costs for 
emission reductions of between 12.5 and 25% from the base-
line scenario in the short term (2005/10) and between 25 and 
50% in the long term (2020/30). Cost is defined as financial 
cost at the energy sector level including investment, operation 
and maintenance, and fuel costs (UNEP, 1994c). Cost curves, 
containing a number of target reductions in one year, should 
be regarded as snapshot pictures of the levelized cost of 
achieving a given reduction in that year. Figures 9.20 and 9.21 
show the cost curves for a number of participating countries 
for both the short-term and long-term target years. 
The short-term cost curves for Brazil, Thailand, and Zim-
babwe (Figure 9.20) exhibit a number of similarities. A partic-
ular feature is the large potential for negative-cost or low-cost 
emission reduction options of up to 10-15% from baseline 
emissions. The curves are also similar in shape. The first part 
of the cost curves, up to about the 5% reduction level, indi-
cates very low emission reduction costs. It is followed by 
a long interval up to about the 25% level in which emission 
.U2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
1 
00 
6 I 
•i 
$300 
$200 
$100 
Zimbabwe 
Thailand 
Venezuela 
Brazil 
-$100 
jj] -$200 
Egypt 
• Senegal 
-$300 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Emission Reduction (%) 
Figure 9.21: UNEP studies: Marginal abatement costs for 2020/ 
2030. 
reduction costs fall within a relatively narrow range between 
-$10 and +$30 marginal cost per tonne of CO, reduced. 
Few higher cost options were included in the analysis. Those 
that were included tend to be expensive supply-side options, 
implying a steep increase in marginal costs. 
The long-term marginal cost curves shown in Figure 9.21 
show many similarities for the developing countries. Venezuela, 
with a completely positive cost curve, may be regarded as an 
exception. This is the result of the methodological decision to 
include most no-regret options in the baseline. 
Senegal and Thailand have a negative marginal cost poten-
tial up to about a 15'! reduction from baseline emissions in 
2020/30. This potential is expanded to about the 40% reduc-
tion level for Fgypt and to about the M)'"c reduction level for 
Zimbabwe. The marginal cost curve for Brazil cuts the hori-
zontal axis around the l()r< reduction level. As with the short-
term curves, the long-term marginal cost for most countries 
falls within an interval of -$10 to +$25 per tonne of CO, for 
emission reductions of about 5-25'<. 
Table 9.22 shows marginal, average, and total emission re-
duction costs for the short- and long-term reduction targets. In 
the long term, the average emission reduction costs for reduc-
tions from baseline of between 25 and 50' '< ramie between -$5 
and +$37 per tonne of CO,. Total emission reduction costs are 
negative for Egypt and Senegal. 
The study of India (Mongia et al., 1991) estimated emis-
sion reduction costs for two emission reduction scenarios, one 
reflecting a least-cost emission reduction case and the other a 
"capital-constraint" case with more emphasis on domestic re-
sources. The least-cost case requires foreign capital and re-
sources. The other emission reduction scenario assumes a 
more expensive supply system with greater reliance on do-
mestic renewable energy sources. The first emission reduction 
case estimates average emission reduction costs in 2025 to be 
-$9.5 per tonne of CO, for a 45% reduction from baseline. 
The second case, based on domestic resources, is significantly 
more costly for achieving the same level of emission reduc-
tion. 
9.2.4.2.3 
The special case of China 
Because of the expected magnitude of its future CO, emis-
sions, China warrants separate treatment. The Asian Develop-
ment Bank has, in collaboration with the Chinese govern-
ment, conducted a comprehensive technology assessment 
study for the period 1990 to 2050 (ADB 1993). The study as-
sumes very low energy/GDP and CO,/energy elasticities due 
to expectations of structural economic development away 
from heavy energy-intensive industries and fast technological 
change. The baseline furthermore assumes a decreasing share 
for coal in primary energy consumption and includes the im-
plementation of large efficiency improvements, especially in 
the power production sector. 
The GDP growth rate over the period is assumed to be 
6.0%, primary energy growth 3.1%, and the CO, emission 
growth rate 2.6%. The resulting elasticities are 0.5 for en-
ergy/GDP, 0.8 for CO,/energy, and 0.4 for CO,/GDP. The 
share of coal in the primary energy supply is projected to de-
crease from 75.5% in 1990 to 58.0% in 2050. Coal is replaced 
by an increasing amount of natural gas and nuclear power, as 
well as some hydro power. 
It is assumed that efficiency gains in power production of 
3.6% annually can be achieved until 2000, decreasing to 1.8','-
for the rest of the period to 2050. These high savings are re-
lated to the current low power-production efficiency of 30'/, 
combined with the expected high investment level in new effi-
cient electricity generation technologies. 
The reduction scenario results in a 23% emission reduction 
from baseline in 2050. The main reduction options in the sup-
ply system are expanded nuclear capacity, increasing from 
9.9% of primary energy supply in the baseline to 13.9% in the 
reduction case. The share of hydro power and natural gas is 
also increased slightly. Total primary energy consumption is 
decreased by 14% from the baseline level. 
9.2.4.2.4 
Comparing numerical results: Critical 
assumption* 
about technical 
options 
The country studies have estimated emission reduction po-
tential as a function of technical options, either related to 
individual technologies or to comprehensive packages of 
technologies. The costs and emission reduction potential of 
technical options have been assessed using energy system 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Table 9.22. Marginal (MAC), average (AAC), and total abatement costs (TAC)for maximum reductions and comparison 
with GDP 
Country 
Short term 
Brazil 
Thailand 
Zimbabwe 
Long term 
Brazil 
Egypt 
Senegal 
Thailand 
Venezuela 
Zimbabwe 
Year 
2010 
2010 
2010 
2025 
2020 
2020 
2030 
2025 
2030 
Baseline 
Emissions 
(Mt C0 2) 
767.8 
359.8 
32.7 
1611.2 
253.0 
15.4 
751.4 
189.4 
57.4 
Reduction 
(Mt CO,) 
101.3 
99.3 
6.9 
741.2 
141.7 
7.7 
221.7 
50.4 
22.2 
Reduction 
(%) 
13.2 
27.6 
21.1 
46.0 
56.0 
50.0 
29.5 
26.6 
38.7 
M A C 
(S/t CO;) 
25 
171 
289 
29 
2 
3 
171 
56 
289 
TAC 
($mil.) 
-1881 
1027 
221 
9339 
-732 
-16 
2089 
685 
205 
AAC 
($/t CO,) 
-18.6 
10.3 
32.0 
12.6 
-5.2 
-2.0 
9.4 
13.6 
9.3 
GDP 
($bn.) 
848 
250 
35 
1740 
118 
14 
538 
177 
72 
TAC/GDP 
(%) 
-0.22 
0.41 
0.64 
0.54 
-0.62 
-0.12 
0.39 
0.39 
0.28 
The marginal abatement cost (MAC) here corresponds to the level at the maximum reduction achieved for the country. 
models that evaluate end-use efficiency improvements, fuel 
substitution, and new supply technologies in an integrated 
way. This analysis has been conducted with different degrees 
of sophistication, depending on the individual country and the 
particular study. 
As an example, a summary of the main technical emission 
reduction options in the UNEP country studies is presented in 
Table 9.23. The national options are listed in aggregated form 
and thus represent classes of options rather than individual tech-
nologies. The cost curve may be considered in three segments, 
representing negative and low-cost options, intermediate-cost 
options, and high-cost options. One general similarity among 
the country studies is that the least expensive part of the cost 
curve contains energy end-use savings in households and/or in-
dustry. Another is that electricity supply options first appear in 
the intermediate-cost part of the reduction potential cost curves. 
On the supply side, most of the studies focussed on tradi-
tional energy-supply technologies and few included more ad-
vanced technologies and/or renewable energy technologies. 
Consequently, the cost curve either increases very sharply or 
simply does not include any further reduction after the ex-
haustion of these options. 
9.2.4.2.5 Comparability of the national studies 
The emission reduction costing studies for developing coun-
tries considered here exhibit similarities with regard to the as-
sessed potential for negative or low-cost emission reduction. 
In general, these options comprise end-use efficiency im-
provements, energy supply efficiency improvements, and the 
introduction of fuels with lower carbon intensity. These tech-
nologies cover the first and cheapest part of the emission 
reduction potential and can. especially in the longer term, 
be supplemented with renewable energy technologies, more 
far-reaching end-use savings, and advanced combustion 
technologies. The long-term emission reduction potential will 
consequently be extended and is also likely to be cheaper than 
currently estimated. 
The individual country studies are difficult to compare 
quantitatively because of differences in methodological ap-
proach and in scenario assumptions for economic growth, en-
ergy requirements, and emission reduction costs. There is an 
important difference in the baseline scenario assumptions 
used in the different studies. 
In the UNEP studies, the national research teams took offi-
cial macroeconomic forecasts as the starting point for energy 
demand projections. In contrast, the LBL studies used a 
broader-level international perspective to estimate an eco-
nomic structure and income distribution which could be 
achieved in a developing country within a given time hori-
zon. Thus, for example, it could be assumed that a coun-
try like Brazil would approach an economic structure and 
income distribution comparable to that of Spain in a given time 
frame. 
The advantage of using national macroeconomic projec-
tions is that they reflect national views on development. How-
ever, national forecasts may be only partially consistent and 
realistic, whereas international economic studies may be of 
help in establishing a consistent data set across countries. 
Studies using a common, well-documented background can 
also be easier to compare than studies that use different na-
tional forecasts. 
The degree of optimism of experts from different countries 
with regard to the penetration of energy efficiency or of car-
bon-free energy supply options may differ dramatically. This 
can lead to different critical assumptions in the baseline as 
well as in the emission reduction scenarios. One approach is 
to assume that all possible efficiency improvements will be 
implemented as part of the baseline scenario, implying that 
only positive-cost options remain. If the existing energy sys-
tem - as in many developing countries at present - is rela-
tively inefficient, the above-mentioned approach implicitly 
assumes large investment programmes to implement the "effi-
cient options" in parallel to any emission reduction effort. If, 
instead, it is assumed that major inefficiencies persist in the 
.U4 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.23. Technical emission reduction options in the UNEP study 
Country 
CO, Reduction Option 
Reduction (%) 
7 
1 
21 
19 
48 
6 
10 
2 
9 
5 
5 
8 
7 
52 
0.1 
5 
0.4 
11 
13 
15 
6 
50 
2 
1 
6 
2 
18 
1 
30 
7 
10 
1 
2 
4 
0.6 
2 
0.4 
27 
23 
4 
2 
5 
2 
1 
1 
38 
M A C (US$) 
-66 
22 
24 
29 
-21 
-12 
-12 
-8 
-3 
-3 
-1 
2 
-210 
-28 
-4 
0 
1 
2 
3 
-36 
-27 
-14 
-9 
20 
92 
3 
10 
13 
17 
21 
35 
39 
52 
-9 
-2 
-2 
5 
66 
153 
289 
Brazil 
Egypt 
Senegal 
Thailand 
Venezuela 
Zimbabwe 
Electricity savings (industry, services, and residential) 
Solar uses in agriculture 
Fuelwood and charcoal for afforestation programmes 
Ethanol, bagasse, and electricity generation from bagasse 
Total C0 2 reduction 
Fuel switching in households 
Efficient industrial equipment and maintenance 
Transportation 
Heat recovery and new industrial processes 
New raw materials 
Efficient household appliances 
Electricity generation 
Efficient stoves 
Total C0 2 reduction 
Early hydropower implementation 
Agriculture intensification 
Energy conservation in industry 
Dissemination of improved stoves 
Improved carbonization efficiency 
Liquefied petroleum gas substitution for charcoal 
Biomass from afforestation 
Total CO, reduction 
Efficient air conditioners 
Electronic ballast 
Compact fluorescent lamps (service sector) 
Compact fluorescent lamps (residential sector) 
Nuclear electricity 
Highly efficient gasoline cars 
Total CO, reduction 
Reduced flaring and leakage of methane 
Efficient boilers and kilns 
Freight transport 
Efficient electric motors in the industrial sector 
Passenger transport 
Electric sector 
Other energy savings in the industrial sector 
Efficient electric appliances 
Total CO, reduction 
Efficient boilers 
Energy savings in the industrial sector 
Efficient motors and power factor correction 
Increased hydropower 
Efficient furnaces 
Central photovoltaic power 
Coal for ammonia 
Total CO, reduction 
energy system in the baseline scenario, there will he an inter-
relationship between emission reduction measures and the 
general effort to overcome barriers for efficiency improve-
ments in the energy system. In the UNEP study, for example, 
where country research teams were free to make judgments, 
the team for Venezuela assumed that all profitable efficiency 
improvements would be implemented in the reference sce-
nario, whereas the teams for Brazil and Thailand assumed a 
relatively inefficient reference scenario. 
Another difference in reference scenarios between coun-
tries relates to difficult assumptions about structural change in 
the economy, about fuel supply, and about the overall level of 
development. The striking difference between the UNEP and 
LBL studies in the case of Brazil is an enlightening example 
of the consequence of these differing assumptions. Part of the 
difference between the two studies for Brazil can be explained 
by different assumptions for the GDP growth rate, but another 
key difference is a consequence of the low fuel price increase 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
projected in the UNEP study during a period long enough 
to make the existing alcohol fuels programme unprofitable. 
Consequently, the reference case assumes replacement of pre-
sent biomass use, including ethanol, with fossil fuels. The 
LBL studies, in contrast, defined reference energy scenarios 
as a continuation of historical trends, implying that the alco-
hol fuels programme would be sustained in Brazil. A new 
Brazilian study (La Rovere et ai, 1994) has been carried out 
as a compromise between the assumptions of the UNEP and 
LBL studies. 
9.2.4.2.6 Conclusion 
The bottom-up C02 emission reduction costing studies car-
ried out for the energy sector for developing countries exhibit, 
despite differences in methodological approach, some com-
mon empirical results, namely: 
• The 30-40-year reference scenario projections show a 
tendency to decreasing energy/GDP intensity but in-
creasing C02/energy intensity. 
• The potential for a 30-40% emission reduction from 
baseline over a 40-year time frame has been estimated. 
However, even after such a reduction, emissions will, 
on average, be two or three times more than present lev-
els, because of economic growth. 
• The emission reduction potential includes low- or negative-
cost options relating to end use and conventional supply 
technologies in the short to medium term. In the 30-40-
year time frame, the UNEP country studies have esti-
mated average emission reduction costs to be below 
$14/tonneofCO,. 
9.2.5 Global studies of the costs of reducing C02 
emissions 
The review of existing studies up to this point has focussed on 
country or regional analyses. In addition, there are a growing 
number of studies that attempt to provide a global perspective 
on the assessment of abatement costs. These studies are im-
portant for several reasons. The enhanced greenhouse effect is 
inherently a global issue. If significant reductions in emis-
sions are required, they can be accomplished only through in-
ternational accords and cooperation. It will be helpful to have 
some sense of the overall costs before confronting the diffi-
cult issue of burden sharing. 
A global perspective is also important in assessing the 
costs to individual countries. Actions taken in one region arc-
apt to have "spillover" effects into other regions. Partial equi-
librium analyses ignore potentially significant linkages (e.g.. 
trade in oil, gas. and carbon-intensive basic materials) that 
could substantially alter the economic impacts of a carbon 
constraint. 
Finally, and perhaps most important, a global perspective 
is necessary if we are to identify economically efficient strate-
gies for achieving emission targets. The Framework Conven-
tion on Climate Change states that "policies and measures to 
deal with climate change should be cost-effective so as to en-
sure global benefits at the lowest possible cost." This means 
AM 
that emission reductions should be carried out where it is 
cheapest to do so. Analysis on a global scale is needed in or-
der to construct a "least-cost" global abatement supply curve. 
All the caveats expressed above about the limitations of 
country-specific or region-specific models should be borne in 
mind when evaluating the results of global studies. In addi-
tion, the global analyses confront aggregation issues which 
further complicate the interpretation of results. Not surpris-
ingly, most of the global studies employ top-down methodolo-
gies. Nevertheless, there have been several bottom-up studies 
that illustrate the overall technical potential for curbing green-
house emissions at a world level. 
9.2.5.1 A review of top-down studies: The importance of 
international cooperation 
Several of the models used for regional analyses provide the 
capability for analyzing emission abatement costs at a global 
level. These models typically divide the globe into five or 
more geopolitical groupings. By necessity, they are highly ag-
gregate in their treatment of macroeconomic and technology 
issues. In order to represent regional differences and trade ef-
fects, local economic and technological detail must be sacri-
ficed. 
Figure 9.22 and Table 9.24 summarize the results of recent 
studies using these models. Not surprisingly, there is consid-
erable disagreement concerning the costs of emission abate-
ment. Consistent with the regional studies, the top-down 
global analyses indicate that emission abatement will involve 
positive costs, but the size of the model-based cost estimates 
varies from study to study. In this section, we will try to un-
derstand why these results differ so widely. In doing so, we 
hope to gain additional insights into the costs of emission 
abatement at the regional and global level. 
9.2.5.1.1 The costs of stabilizing global emissions 
A systematic comparison of global models was undertaken by 
the OECD in its 1992 Model Comparison Project (OECD, 
1993). The study included all available global models with the 
capability of simulating regional carbon tax rates required to 
achieve specific emission abatement targets and the resulting 
output losses. The models were calibrated to the same set of 
input assumptions employed by the parallel study being con-
ducted by the Energy Modeling Forum (see earlier discus-
sion). Results were reported for a business-as-usual scenario 
and for four scenarios involving various levels of emission re-
duction. We begin by examining the results from the emission 
stabilization scenario. 
For emission stabilization, it was assumed that global 
emissions would be permanently held at 1990 levels. The 
global costs of meeting such a target will depend, in part, 
upon how emission reductions are allocated among regions 
and whether there is scope for international cooperation. In 
the analysis that follows, each region is required to hold emis-
sions at 1990 levels without the opportunity of shifting emis-
sion abatement from high to low marginal abatement cost 
regions. That is. there is no trade in carbon emission rights. 
Later on. we will explore the potential benefits from relaxing 
this constraint. 
336 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
<u 
1) 
r/1 
cs 
J J 
H 
o 
WH 
< 4 - l 
OH 
z 
o 
1/3 
fe 
% o 
< 4 - l 
o 
& 
<2 
8 
O 
6 
4 
2 
PR (2010 
EB (2025) 
* 
* 
WW (2030) 
i 
WW (2030) 
M (2020%* 
B(2020) 
£ . 
# 
OM (2020), EB (2020) 
R(2020)# 
EB (2025) 
EB (2025) * 
* 
MR (2100) 
* 
M (205* EB (2050) 
AB (2050)* 
OM (2050) 
B (2050) 
J 
R (2050) 
# 
EB (2025) 
B(2050) 
* 
B(2050) 
* 
EB (2095)* 
M(2I00)# 
R(2100)* 
Ml (2100)* 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
Reduction of C02 Emissions (from baseline) 
Note: See Table 9.24 for key to studies. 
Figure 9.22: Global studies of C02 abatement costs relative to baseline projection. 
80% 
Table 9.24. Global CO, abatement cost modelling 
studies 
Author (year) 
Anderson and Bird (1992) 
Burniaux rial. (1990) 
Buriiiaiix ci til. (1992) 
Hdinoiuls and Barns (1990) 
F.dmomls and Barns (1992) 
Mamie and Richels (1990b) 
Manned 992) 
Mint/er(1987) 
Oliveira-Martins cud. (1992) 
l'erroni and Rutherford (1991) 
Rutherford (1992) 
Wluilley and Wigle (1990) 
Key 
AB (2050) 
B(2020) 
B(2050) 
EB (2025) 
EB (2020, 2050, 2095) 
MR (2100) 
M (2020, 2050, 2100) 
Mi (2075) 
OM (2020, 2050) 
PR (2010) 
R (2020, 2050, 2100) 
WW (2030) 
C 0 2 reduction 
from baseline (%) 
68 
37 
64, 64, 66 
14, 36, 47, 70 
45, 70, 88 
75 
45, 70, 88 
88 
45,70 
23 
45, 70, 88 
50 
C 0 2 reduction 
from reference 
year0 (%) 
-17 
17 
-18,-18,-11 
22,41,53 
-16 
13,25,21 
67 
-2,2 
15,28,43 
GNP impact/cost 
(reduction) from 
baseline (%) 
2.8 
1.8 
2.1, 1.0,0.3* 
0.1,0.5,0.7 2.2' 
1.9,3.7,5.7 
4.0 
2.9,2.7,4.7 
3.0 
1.9,2.6 
1.0 
1.5,2.4,3.6 
4.4, 4.4, 4.2'' 
'Negative values imply an increase in CO,. 
''Toronto-typo agreement in all three cases, with tradable permits in the second and third cases and removal of energy subidies in the third 
ease. 
'Costs as estimated from consumer + producer surplus. 
•The three numbers refer to three different tax forms: a national producer tax. a national consumer tax, and a global tax with per capita redis-
tribution of revenues. 
Souivc: Grubb cl al. (1993). 
Figure 9.23 compares output losses entailed by stabilizing 
though it is difficult to isolate all the reasons for the differ-
emissions in the year 2020. It also shows the reduction in the 
ences in abatement cost estimates, the discussion of the pre-
average annual growth rate of CO, emissions required to 
ceding sections points to several possible causes. 
achieve the desired target. Note that losses vary by a factor of 
The higher the baseline emission level, the more strin-
nearly three 
from OS to 2.2'< of gross world product. Al- 
gently carbon emissions have to be curtailed to achieve a 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
.U7 
I 
CUD. 
88 n 
-
• MR 
• GREEN 
• ERM 
• CRMT 
Notes: 
Reduction in annual growth rate 
of CO, emissions (percentage points) 
1 No emission trading between regions 
2 CRMT (Rutherford) model, ERM (Edwards-Reilly) model, 
GREEN model, and MR (Manne-Richels Global 2100) 
model as described and referenced in OECD (1993) 
Source: OECD (1993). 
Figure 9.23: Estimated CO, abatement cost in 2020. 
given target, and hence the higher the overall abatement costs. 
The global baseline, however, is not the sole determinant of 
global abatement costs: The GREEN baseline projects the 
highest emissions for the year 2020; hence it requires the 
largest annual reductions to stabilize emissions at their 1990 
level. Yet this does not lead to the highest cost estimates. This 
is because GREEN is the most optimistic of the four models 
concerning the speed at which backstop technologies can be 
introduced into the energy system. 
Conversely, ERM projects the lowest baseline emissions 
for 2020. As a result, less carbon must be removed from the 
energy system to achieve emission stabilization. Even so, esti-
mated costs (in terms of resulting output losses) are higher 
than those projected by CRTM since ERM does not include 
backstop technologies, thus producing higher marginal costs 
of emission abatement. 
In a separate experiment, it was determined that ERM and 
MR project essentially the same baseline emissions when em-
ploying identical rates of autonomous energy efficiency im-
provements. However, for the OECD study, MR adopted an 
average annual rate of 0.5%. whereas ERM assumed that non-
price-induced efficiency improvements occur at twice this 
rate. Standardization for this key parameter brings results of 
these two models much closer together with respect to their 
projections of GDP losses from emission abatement. 
The OECD Model Comparison Project suggests that the 
principal reason why model-based studies differ with respect 
to estimates of both baseline emissions and abatement costs is 
alternative views about the future characteristics of the energy 
system embodied in the models. In an attempt to place greater 
reliance on expert knowledge in this area, Manne and Richels 
(1994) polled a group of individuals on their beliefs about key 
parameters to which abatement costs are particularly sensi-
tive. 
I_l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
T— 
I 
I 
o 
0 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Loss of GDP (% of gross world product) 
Source: Manne and Richels (1993). 
Figure 9.24: Costs of stabilizing global carbon emissions. 
For each parameter, expert beliefs were encoded in the 
form of probability distributions, which were, in turn, com-
bined to form a group probability distribution. Using the poll 
responses to describe the uncertainty surrounding critical pa-
rameters, a probability distribution was then constructed for 
the costs of stabilizing global CO, emissions at 1990 levels, 
using the MR model. 
Figure 9.24 presents the results of this analysis. The spread 
of the distribution is quite broad, ranging from 0.2 to 6.8% of 
gross world product (GWP). The median (that is, the fiftieth 
percentile) is located at approximately 1.0% of GWP. The dis-
tribution is also quite skewed. Because of the long right-hand 
tail, the mean value lies to the right of the median, at approxi-
mately 1.5% of GWP. 
9.2.5.1.2 The eosts of meeting alternative emission targets 
In addition to the emission stabilization scenario, the OECD 
project examined three alternative scenarios in which the 
growth rate of emissions in each region is reduced below that 
of the corresponding baseline by one, two, and three percent-
age points respectively. Figure 9.25 plots global GDP losses 
as a function of worldwide emissions. Although there are sig-
nificant variations in cost estimates across models, the results 
yield some important insights. 
First, notice that the costs of stabilizing emissions at 1990 
levels (approximately 6 billion tonnes) are lower in 2000 than 
in later years. The increase in emissions over the present 
decade is relatively small and there are ample quantities of 
low-cost substitutes (e.g.. natural gas and demand-side man-
agement) to achieve the objective. 
This situation does not persist as we move out in time. Al-
though technical progress may eventually lower the marginal 
cost of emission abatement, more and more carbon must be 
removed from the energy system in order to maintain a partic-
ular target. As a result, annual losses are apt to increase. 
.w 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
% 
OH 
Q 
O 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
Emissions (GtC per year) 
5 
10 15 
20 
25 
30 
35 40 
Emissions (GtC per year) 
c 
2 
B 
§ 
i 1 
1 
§ 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
" 
2020 
\ 
\ l 
0 
5 
10 
15 20 
25 
30 35 40 
Emissions (GtC per year) 
0 
5 
10 
15 20 
25 
30 
35 40 
Emissions (GtC per year) 
Sources: Dean and Hoeller (1992) and OECD (1993). 
Figure 9.25: World CO, emissions and GDP losses. 
ERM 
GREEN 
CRTM 
MR 
As one would expect, output losses and macroeconomic 
impacts in general rise with the stringency of the abatement 
target, but it is important to note the nonlinear nature of the 
loss function. Successive emission reductions are increasingly 
expensive. As cheaper options to reduce emissions are used 
up. it becomes increasingly difficult to substitute for. or to 
economize on. fossil fuels. 
I-'or the models that incorporate backstop technologies, the 
marginal cost of emission abatement will eventually level off. 
This accounts for the linear nature of the total cost curves for 
CRTM and MR in the year 2100. ERM. on the other hand, ex-
cludes backstop technologies. Hence costs continue to rise 
nonlincarly as a function of emission reduction. 
9.2.5. I.J The potential gains from international 
cooperation 
Emission reduction actions affect global emissions and at-
mospheric concentrations equally, irrespective of the geo-
graphical and sectoral origin o{' the emissions. The least-cost 
global abatement strategy requires reducing emissions where 
it is cheapest to do so. If the costs of reducing emissions by a 
tonne were constant and the same in all regions, the location 
of emission reduction would have no effect on global costs. 
To the extent that marginal costs vary among regions, there 
are opportunities for efficiency gains through international 
cooperation. 
These opportunities may be exploited through a system of 
international trade in carbon emission rights or a global car-
bon tax. Emission rights trading would allow for a more effi-
cient allocation of emission reductions across regions by 
letting countries trade to the point where the marginal cost of 
emission reduction is the same in all places and activities. A 
global carbon tax would also result in the marginal cost of 
emission reduction being equal for all countries.1 
Figure 9.26 shows the carbon taxes that would be required, 
on a region-by-region basis, to achieve a given level of emis-
sion reduction (OECD. 1994). Although these "emission re-
duction cost curves" are from a single study, virtually all 
analvsts asiree that the marginal costs of emission reduction 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
$2000 
.,\,'V 
% 
$1500 
m 
oo 
ON 
£ 
$1000 
I 
$500 
-
1 U.S. 
2 Japan 
3 EEC 
4 Other OECD 
5 China 
6 Former Soviet Union 
7 India 
8 Eastern European countries in transition 
9 Other 
0 
0 
-10 
-20 
-30 
-40 
-50 
-60 
-70 
-80 
Emission Reduction from Baseline in 2050 (%) 
Source: Van der Mensbrugghe (1995). 
Figure 9.26: Regional carbon tax required for equiproportional C0 2 emission reductions from baseline. 
Table 9.25. Cost differences for emission trading (global aggregates based on a 2% reduction in emissions from the baseline) 
2020 
2050 
2100 
No trade 
Trade 
No trade 
Trade 
No trade 
Trade 
Tax 
($/tC) 
283 
238 
680 
498 
1304 
919 
ERM« 
GDP 
loss (%) 
1.9 
1.6 
3.7 
3.3 
5.7 
5.1 
GREEN 
Tax 
($/tC) 
149 
106 
230 
182 
— 
— 
GDP 
loss (%) 
1.9 
1.0 
2.6 
1.9 
— 
— 
Tax 
($/tC) 
325 
308 
448 
374 
242 
208 
MR 
Welfare 
loss* 
— 
— 
— 
— 
8.0 
7.5 
"End year is 2095 for ERM. 
'Consumption losses through 2100, discounted to 1990 at 5% per year, in trillions of 1990 dollars. 
Sow/re: OECD( 1993). 
are apt to vary widely among regions. Efficiency gains can be 
reaped from shifting abatement from high- to low-marginal-
cost regions. If the resulting cost savings are shared between 
participating regions, all can be made better off. 
The potential gains from international cooperation can be 
demonstrated by comparing the total costs of achieving a 
global emission target alternatively with and without trade in 
carbon emission rights. Table 9.25 reports the results of such 
an experiment. From the viewpoint of economic efficiency, 
trade in emission rights is clearly worthwhile. A reduction 
strategy in which each region reduces its emissions by the 
same percentage will not be globally cost-effective. 
9.2.5.1.4 Allocation of emission 
rights 
The establishment of international trade in carbon emission 
rights requires a decision on the allocation of emission rights 
among nations, which, in turn, has major implications for the 
international distribution of wealth. The decision on how 
emission rights are distributed among regions does not affect 
global abatement costs significantly,4 but it will have a major 
.w 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
a) Permit allocation (% of total) 
100% r. 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
b) Income received from sales of excess 
emission rights (billions of 1990 US$) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
$2000r 
$1500-
$1000-
$500-
$0-
-$500 -
-$1000-
-$1500 -
-$2000 -
—•I 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
c) Total cost of emission reductions plus net wealth 
transfers from sales of emission rights (as % of GDP) 
5%r 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
Figure 9.27: Grandfathered emission rights principle. 
impact on the distribution of net gains and losses and hence 
on the perceived equity of the agreement. This is a political 
rather than an economic issue, as there is no unique or objec-
tive definition of fairness (sec Chapter 3). 
Edmonds et al. (1993) studied a variety of schemes for al-
locating emission rights. At one end of the spectrum they con-
sidered a "grandfathered" emissions principle in which future 
emission rights are allocated on the basis of the share in 
global emissions at the time of joining a global abatement 
agreement. At the other end of the spectrum, they examined 
an "'equal per capita emissions" principle where emission 
rights are allocated on the basis of regions' shares in adult 
population. 
Figures 9.27 and l).2S are based on a scenario in which 
global emissions are permanently held at \W() levels. They 
show results obtained by grandfathering emission rights 
and by granting quotas on the basis of equal per capita emis-
1 • 
Rest of world 
2 • 
China 
3 • 
Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union 
4 • 
Japan, Australia, New Zealand 
5 • 
Western Europe and Canada 
6 • 
U.S. 
sions respectively. The allocation of emission rights differs 
markedly under these two extreme quota allocation schemes' 
OECD countries hold on to approximately 50% of the emis-
sion rights when the status quo is maintained under a grandfa-
thering scheme, whereas under the equal per capita emissions 
scheme, their share drops to about 20%. 
The implications for regional net costs incurred are as ex-
pected: The OECD is much better off with the status quo. In-
deed, the OECD region would be a seller of emission rights, 
and the resulting wealth transfers would be sufficient to re-
duce the region's GDP losses from abatement to a negligible 
level. Under such a scenario, the economic burden on devel-
oping countries would be substantial. 
An equal per capita quota allocation scheme would sub-
stantially shift the distribution of net benefits and losses: The 
OECD countries would incur significant net income losses 
and the re»ion labelled "rest of world" would be a winner. In-
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
.Ul 
a) Permit allocation 
(% of global 
total) 
100% r 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
b) Income received from .sales of excess 
emission 
rights (billions of 1990 
US$) 
$2000 r 
$1500 
$1000 
$500-
$0 
-$500 -
-$1000-
-$1500 
-$2000 
- H H S | 
3/4/5 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
c) Total cost of emission reductions plus net wealth 
transfers from sales of emission rights (as % of GDP) 
5%-
2 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
Figure 9.28: Equal per capita emission rights principle. 
1 • 
Rest of world 
2 m China 
3 • 
Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union 
4 • 
Japan, Australia, New Zealand 
5 • 
Western Europe and Canada 
6 • 
U.S. 
der either scheme, China incurs substantial net income losses, 
except for the very early years. Unless it can greatly increase 
its energy efficiency, China's rapidly rising demand for en-
ergy would far outstrip its allocation of emission rights, even 
under an equal per capita quota allocation rule. 
In a third scenario, also based on emission stabilization, 
Edmonds ex al. (1993) explore what they refer to as a "no harm 
to developing nations" principle. Here developing nations re-
ceive sufficient emission rights to cover their own emissions 
and to generate sufficient revenue from excess quota sales to 
cover the economic cost of participating in the agreement. 
This leaves developing countries no worse off (in terms of to-
tal production plus income transfers) than had they not partic-
ipated in the agreement. The results under such a quota 
allocation rule in terms of regional wealth transfers and net in-
come changes are shown in Figure 9.29/' 
9.2.^./.J Car&vz "Wbzgf " 
Some proposals for limiting CO, emissions call for high-
income countries to take the lead in reducing emissions. 
When abatement actions are limited to a subset of regions, it 
is important to consider so-called carbon "leakage" effects, 
which represent the impact of the emission policies of the 
abating regions on the emission levels of nonabating regions. 
Leakage can occur through a number of channels, including 
• The relocation of the production of energy-intensive 
products to nonabating regions 
• Energy market effects, including increased energy con-
sumption in nonabating regions and interfuel substitu-
tion between fuels of differing carbon contents, due to 
the differential decline in fossil fuel prices in response 
to reduced demand in abating regions 
.U2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
a) Permit allocation (% of global total)] 
100% 
b) Income received from sales of excess 
emission rights (billions of 1990 US$) 
$2000 
$1500-
$1000-
$500-
$0 
-$500 
-$1000 
-$1500 
-$2000 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
c) Total cost of emission reductions plus net wealth 
transfers from sales of emission rights (as % of GDP) 
6%r 
6 
5 
4 
2 
1 • 
2 • 
3 • 
4 • 
5 • 
6 • 
Rest of world 
China 
Eastern Europe and former Soviet Union 
Japan, Australia, New Zealand 
Western Europe and Canada 
U.S; 
2005 2020 2035 2050 2065 2080 2095 
Year 
Figure 9.29: No net cost to developing nations emission rights principle. 
• Changes in regional incomes (and thus energy demand) 
due to terms-of-trade changes 
Such leakage effects can he positive or negative (negative 
leakage reduces carbon emissions in nonparticipating re-
gions). Negative carbon leakage occurs, for example, in the 
case of a reduction in the incomes of energy-exporting regions 
when major oil consuming regions abate carbon emissions. 
There have been several attempts to estimate leakage (Bar-
rett. 1994). Unfortunately, estimates have varied so widely 
that they provide little guidance to policy makers. Pezzey 
11992). using the model of Whalley and Wigle. examined a 
scenario in which the European Union acted unilaterally to re-
duce emissions by 2()''< below baseline. He found that for 
every 10 tonnes of carbon abated, global emissions fell by 
only 2 tonnes. I .eakage rates for the OUCH as a whole were of 
the order ot ~0', . 
Horton, Rollo, and Ulph (1992) estimated even higher 
leakage rates. They found that for some industries (e.g.. fertil-
izer production), unilateral abatement action could lead to 
substantial relocation. They argue that if the shift is to coun-
tries where energy use is more carbon-intensive, leakage rates 
may exceed 100%. 
In contrast, Oliveira-Martins, Burniaux, and Martin (1992). 
using the OECD's GREEN model, estimate relatively small 
leakage rates. They examined a scenario in which emissions 
are held to 1990 levels and found leakage rates of 11.9% and 
3.5% respectively for the European Union and the OECD as a 
whole. 
Using still another model (12RT). Manne (1993) estimated 
leakage rates that fall between those of Pezzey (1992) and 
Oliveira-Martins. Burniaux. and Martin (1992). He examined 
a case in which the OECD acts unilaterally to reduce emis-
sions bv 20f( below 1990 levels and found that 25% of the 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
.UJ 
OECD region's reductions could be offset indirectly through 
changes in international trade patterns. 
The reasons why results differ so widely are not entirely 
clear. Manne and Oliveira-Martins (1994) have attempted a 
systematic model comparison of results from 12RT and 
GREEN. They find that much of the differences in leakage 
rates reported by the two models can be explained by different 
assumptions concerning the response of trade flows to 
changes in comparative advantage and competitiveness en-
tailed by a regional carbon tax. Other key determinants of the 
extent of carbon leakage are the size and composition of the 
region undertaking unilateral abatement action, the supply 
elasticities of different fossil fuels, and the elasticity of sub-
stitution between energy and primary inputs of labour and 
capital in the production process in participating and nonpar-
ticipating regions. The model comparison needs to be ex-
tended to include other models, particularly those that show 
extremely high rates of leakage, before firm conclusions con-
cerning the leakage effects of unilateral abatement actions can 
be drawn. 
9.2.5.1.6 The costs of stabilizing atmospheric CO-, 
concentrations 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change has as its ultimate objective the "stabilization of 
greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that 
would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the 
climate system." The question of what constitutes an appropri-
ate concentration level is likely to remain the subject of intense 
discussion for some time. But there is little disagreement over 
a subsequent clause in the Convention - that "policies and 
measures to deal with climate change should be cost-effective 
so as to ensure global benefits at the lowest possible cost." 
The issue of cost-effectiveness was addressed in a study by 
Richels and Edmonds (1995). Although a particular concen-
tration target can be achieved in a variety of ways, some will 
be more costly than others. Using a reduced-form carbon cy-
cle model to construct alternative emission paths, the authors 
attempted to identify those paths that would minimize the 
costs of achieving alternative concentration levels. Global 
abatement costs were calculated using the Global 2100 and 
Edmonds-Reilly models. 
The analysis suggests that the emission time path may be 
as important as the concentration level itself in determining 
the costs of emission abatement. Time is needed both for an 
economical turnover of the existing capital stock and to de-
velop and deploy low-cost carbon-free alternatives.7 The most 
cost-effective emission time paths are those which provide the 
greatest flexibility in managing the transition away from fos-
sil fuels. Shifting emission reductions into the outer years can 
reduce costs substantially while preserving both the concen-
tration target and the date at which the target is achieved. 
As an example, the authors calculated the economic costs 
associated with two alternative scenarios for limiting atmos-
pheric CO, concentrations to 500 ppmv in the year 2100 (see 
Figure 9.30). One involved stabilizing global emissions at 
1990 levels through the end of the next century. The second 
provided for some increase in emissions during the early 
years when the costs of emission abatement are highest, fol-
lowed by sharp reductions in the later years when it is cheap-
est to do so. For this example, shifting emission reductions 
into the outer years reduced costs by as much as 50%. 
The fact that deferring reductions may lead to lower costs 
should not be interpreted as supporting a "wait and see" or 
"do nothing" strategy. Part of the savings stems from not hav-
ing to turn over the existing carbon-intensive capital stock 
prematurely. If we are to depart from the business-as-usual 
path, however, it is important that the new capital stock be 
less carbon-intensive. This means that energy sector decision 
makers must commit to a less carbon-intensive infrastructure 
when making new investments. Second, new supply options 
typically take many years to enter the marketplace. To have 
sufficient quantities of low-cost substitutes in the future will 
require a sustained commitment to research and development 
today. 
9.2.5.2 A review of bottom-up studies: The critical role of 
innovation 
Several bottom-up studies have been carried out with the aim 
of providing a normative view of the very long-term future. 
Following the work of Lovins in the 70s and early 80s, Energy 
for a Sustainable World by Goldemberg et al. (1987) played a 
key role in emphasizing the differences between the devel-
oped and developing countries.* 
A typical global bottom-up analysis has been carried out 
for Greenpeace International by the Stockholm Environment 
Institute, Boston (SEI/Greenpeace, 1993) for the period 1985-
2100. The study includes a "fossil-free energy future" (FEES) 
scenario with the following objectives and constraints: 
• Meeting ambitious global CO, emission reduction tar-
gets 
• Phasing out nuclear power by the year 2100 
• Considering alternative scenarios for infrastructure, 
population, and GDP, with the aim of achieving a 
greater degree of economic equity between different re-
gions of the world 
For comparison, two reference scenarios were used as a 
high and low projection case for C02 emissions, namely the 
IPCC 1991 scenario as the high alternative and an average of 
the U.S. EPA's "Rapidly and Slowly Changing World" cases 
as the low alternative (IPCC 1992a; Lashof andTirpak, 1990). 
Emissions for these reference scenarios for the year 2100 
range between 22.6 PgC for IPCC 91 and 17.7 (PgC) for the 
EPA. These reference scenarios are shown in Table 9.26, to-
gether with the policy scenarios of the FEES study and the 
EPA "Rapid Reductions" policy scenario. CO, emissions de-
crease to zero in the year 2100 in both these intervention 
cases. 
The total primary energy consumption is relatively similar 
in the FEES and the EPA policy scenarios. The scenarios dif-
fer significantly, however, in their assumptions about the 
structure of the energy supply system. The EPA scenario as-
.U4 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
I 
8. I I 
1990 
2010 
2030 
2050 
2070 
2090 
business as usual 
stabilization of global emissions at 1990 levels (limits atmospheric concentrations 
to500ppmvin2100) 
alternative emission timepath for limiting atmospheric concentrations to 500 ppmv 
in 2100 
Source: Richels and Edmonds (1995). 
Figure 9.30: Global carbon emissions: Three emission scenarios. 
sumes that renevvables will account for 77% of total primary 
energy consumption in 2100, whereas the FFES assumes 
100%. Furthermore, the EPA scenario assumes a higher share 
of biomass. amounting to 58% of primary energy consump-
tion in 2100. compared with only 18% in the FFES. The FFES 
instead expects solar and wind resources to cover as much as 
79% of primary energy consumption in 2100. compared with 
only 9% in the EPA policy scenario. 
The high expectations for the contribution of solar and 
wind in the FFES scenario are linked to the assumption that a 
breakthrough in solar photovoltaic electricity production 
costs will occur during the period 2010-2030. In the same 
way. a breakthrough is expected for electricity production 
costs for wind power, providing an opportunity for utilizing 
the technology in areas with weaker wind resources. Finally. 
the development o\' advanced storage facilities would enable 
intermittent solar and wind resources to service a greater part 
of the electricity system's load. All these assumptions about 
technical progress explain why the FFES concludes that the 
costs of implementing the scenario are small compared with 
the baseline. 
The high contribution of renewables in the FFES scenario 
is in contrast to the conclusion of an extensive analysis of 
renewable energy potential by the World Energy Council 
(1994). This analysis estimates that renewable energy re-
sources would supply about 50% of total energy by 2100 in 
the so-called "ecologically driven scenario," which is the 
most far-reaching C02 reduction case in the study. It is argued 
that the total potential for renewable energy could be larger at 
that time, but if renewables make a major contribution and en-
ergy growth is low over a long period, as assumed in the eco-
logically driven scenario, supplies of petroleum and natural 
gas will still be available and it will be beneficial to mix dif-
ferent sources in the supply system. 
An integrated global top-down/bottom-up analysis has 
been carried out in relation to the IPCC Working Group II 
Second Assessment Report (Volume 2 of this report) and h:b 
resulted in the construction of scenarios for a Low Emissions 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
.•>V5 
Table 9.26. Results of the IPCC 91 and U.S. EPA reference 
scenarios and the FEES and U.S. EPA policy 
scenarios 
1988 
2000 
2010 
2030 
2100 
IPCC 91 
CO; (PgC) 
Primary energy (EJ) 
Renewables % 
Solar/Wind % 
Biomass % 
EPA Reference 
C02 (PgC) 
Primary energy (EJ) 
Renewables % 
Solar/Wind % 
Biomass % 
FFES 
CO, (PgC) 
Primary energy (EJ) 
Renewables % 
Solar/Wind % 
Biomass % 
EPA "Rapid" 
Reductions" 
C02 (PgC) 
Primary energy (EJ) 
Renewables % 
Solar/Wind % 
Biomass % 
5.9 
7.3 
9.4 
12.8 
22.6 
349 
460 
471 
797 
1641 
5.1 
302 
7 
0 
0 
5.3 
338 
13 
0 
7 
5.1 
302 
7 
0 
0 
6.6 
384 
8 
0 
0 
5.7 
396 
21 
5 
10 
5.5 
334 
10 
1 
0 
7.7 
451 
10 
1 
5.6 
400 
29 
9 
13 
4.5 
408 
38 
2 
26 
9.9 
585 
13 
2 
3 
2.6 
384 
62 
31 
24 
2.5 
545 
68 
4 
54 
17.7 
1067 
19 
7 
5 
0.0 
987 
100 
79 
18 
1.5 
799 
77 
9 
58 
Note: For the EPA and IPCC studies, the 1988, 2010, and 2030 val-
ues were interpolated from the 1985, 2000, and 2050 results. Results 
shown for IPCC for 1988 are actually 1990 values. 
Source: SEI/Greenpeace (1993). 
Supply System (LESS). The scenario results are shown in 
Figure 9.31. 
The LESS scenarios provide estimates of the potential for 
greenhouse gas emission abatement using data developed 
from the detailed technology assessments in the Working 
Group Ha assessment process (IPCC. 1994). The energy sup-
ply systems were constructed from work by both bottom-up 
(Lashof and Tirpak. 1990; Johansson et a!., 1993) and top-
down modellers (Edmonds, Wise, and MacCracken, 1994). In 
the bottom-up variant, the starting point is energy demand 
projections by world regions for 2025, 2050, 2075, and 2100 
developed by the Response Strategies Working Group (RSWG, 
1990) as part of the IPCC 1990 Assessment Report. A high 
economic growth version of this scenario demonstrated the 
importance of technology assumptions in the LESS analysis. 
Global GDP grows eight-fold by 2050 relative to 1985 and 
twenty-eight-fold by 2100, with primary energy consumption 
growing from 323 EJ in 1985 to 559 EJ in 2050 and 664 EJ in 
2100. Biomass, mostly for fuels used directly, plays a major 
role. It accounts for 31% of primary energy in 2025 and rises 
to 50% in 2100 in one version of the scenario. 
As a comparison with the LESS bottom-up analysis, a top-
down analysis was carried out (Edmonds, Wise, and Mac-
Cracken, 1994), incorporating performance and cost parame-
ters for some of the key energy technologies used in the 
construction of the base case. The following six technology 
cases were modelled: 
(1) 
A reference scenario very similar to IPCC IS92a (IPCC, 
1992b; the exogenous end-use energy intensity im-
provement rate is 0.5% by 2005, rising to 1.0% by 2035 
and reaching 1.5% by the year 2065) 
(2) 
Similar to Case 1, but with an emphasis on energy-effi-
cient power generation from fossil fuels 
(efficiency 
reaches 66% by 2095) 
(3) 
Similar to Case 1, but hydrogen, solar, and wind power 
become more competitive 
(4) 
Similar to Case 3, but compressed hydrogen is used in-
stead of liquefied hydrogen 
(5) 
Similar to Case 4, but biomass prices are more competi-
tive 
(6) 
Similar to Case 5, but the autonomous rate of energy ef-
ficiency improvements increases to 2.0% per year in 
2050. 
The results of the scenario analysis are given in Figure 9.32, 
showing global annual fossil fuel CO, emissions and energy 
production and use. 
Cases 5 and 6 show that if the assumed technological char-
acteristics are realized, significant reductions in CO., emis-
sions could be achieved without economic penalty, as the 
technologies embodied in the low emissions scenario become 
competitive under market conditions with traditional fossil 
fuel technologies. 
These LESS scenario results support the suggestion that 
the disagreement in the numerical outcomes of the models, in 
the very long run, is due less to the modelling structure than to 
the exogenous hypotheses. From a decision-making point of 
view, however, the most sensitive issue that remains to be ad-
dressed is the plausibility of this long-term transition, if one 
accounts for all the general equilibrium effects (for example, 
the implications of shifting agricultural activities to fuel pro-
duction) and for all the transaction costs involved in the tran-
sition. It is worth noting, however, that the World Energy 
Council's ecologically driven case, which includes less volun-
taristic assumptions than the LESS scenarios, points to a 60% 
reduction in global energy-related C02 emissions from 1990 
levels in 2100. This scenario is buttressed by a very compre-
hensive study of renewable energy prospects out to the year 
2100. 
9.3 Studies of the Costs of Carbon Sequestration 
There are many difficulties inherent in developing and com-
paring estimates of carbon sequestration costs (see Chapter 8, 
Section 8.3.4). Those difficulties notwithstanding, this section 
attempts to summarize, compare, and critique the results of 
national, regional, and global carbon sequestration studies. 
.146 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
20,000 
16,000 
& 
1-1 
& 
u 
•<-> 
S 
tfl 
12,000 
8,000 
w 
4,000 
1985 
2025 
2050 
2075 
2100 
Year 
Actual 
IS92a 
• LESS 
Figure 9.31: Global CO, emissions from fossil fuel burning for the LESS base case compared with actual emissions and the IPCC IS92a scenario. 
Global annual fossil fuel C02 
20.000 r 
15.000 
S 10.000 
c o 
I 5.000 
Case 6 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
I 
I 
mho I'iso 2000 
2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 
Year 
Global annual energy production and use 
1500 r 
Case 1 
I960 1980 2000 2020 2040 2060 2080 2100 
Year 
Source: F.divtoiuls. Wise, and MacCracken (19941 
Figure 9.32: Global annual GO, omission-, from fossil fuel burning and global annual primary energy production and use for six allernaliu' 
eases constructed In 1PGG \\G 11a. 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Table 9.27. Land area availability 
U7 
Study 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989)" 
Grainger (1988) 
Barson and Gifford (1990) 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991)'' 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten etal. (1992) 
Adams etal. (1993)c 
Houghton etal. (1993) 
Richards et al. (1993) 
Dixon etal. (1994) 
Tasman Institute (1994) 
Maseraetal. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994)'' 
Xu (1994)f 
Parks and Hardie (1995/ 
Region 
Global 
Tropics 
Australia 
United States 
Global 
Boreal 
Temperate 
Tropical 
Latin America 
Africa 
Asia 
North America 
New York State 
Canada 
United States 
Latin America 
Africa 
Asia 
United States 
South America 
Africa 
South Asia 
North America 
New Zealand 
Mexico 
India 
China 
United States 
Area Available for Practice (ha x 
Forest 
Plantation 
465 
621 
1.6 
112 
510 
Not specified 
Not specified 
Not specified 
214 
222 
115 
42 
0.4 
8.6 
114 
44 
178 
29 
102 
— 
— 
— 
— 
5 
18.2-19.6 
41.3 
110.5 
10.4 
Forest 
Management 
— 
137 
— 
31 
— 
Not specified 
Not specified 
Not specified 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0.2 
19.7 
— 
634 
26 
393 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
18.7 
36.9 
19.2 
— 
10") 
Agroforestry 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
Not specified 
Not specified 
Not specified 
372 
305 
159 
7 
— 
— 
— 
737 
888 
270 
— 
65-380 
300-440 
130-225 
90-140 
— 
96 
70.5 
— 
"The estimate by Sedjo and Solomon (1989) was based on a carbon budget goal of 2.9 x 109 tonnes per year. It is not based on an assessment 
of land actually available, but rather land needed to meet the goal. 
''Land area availability was not specified by practice. Therefore, costs and yields could not be matched with land areas available. The land 
area for dryland ecoregions was split between temperate and tropical categories. 
"The land area was constrained by the carbon budget goal, not by availability. 
Community woodlots, timber forestry, and softwood forestry are included in the forest plantation category; natural regeneration and en-
hanced natural regeneration are included in the forest management category. 
•The planting areas and sandy waste areas are included in the forest plantation category; open forest is included in the forest management cat-
egory; dry cropland is included in the agroforestry category. 
/The land area was constrained by budget, not by availability. 
Many factors affect estimates of carbon sequestration costs 
and potential, including assumptions, methods, and data used 
with respect to land area, land costs, treatment costs, discount 
rates, carbon capture rates and patterns, ecosystem compo-
nents included in the analysis, and the treatment of forest 
products. The data and assumptions employed by various 
studies are summarized in Tables 9.27 to 9.34. 
As an illustration of the variation in data employed by se-
questration studies, consider the estimates of land availability 
by region and practice listed in Table 9.27. For the tropics, 
Grainger (1988) has estimated that 621 x 106 ha of land may 
be suitable for establishing forest plantations. Dixon, Winjum, 
and Krankina (1991) appear to be in relatively close agree-
ment with this figure, estimating that there are 551 x 10'' ha 
suitable for forest plantations in Latin America, Africa, and 
Asia. In contrast, for the same three regions, Houghton et al. 
(1993) arrive at an estimate of less than half as much - 251 x 
106 ha. The more optimistic figures are lent support by the 
studies of Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994) and Xu 
(1994), which, taken together, suggest that there are more 
than 150 x 10'' ha suitable for forestry plantations in India and 
China. The estimates for tropical agroforestry show similar 
disagreement. Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) estimate 
that there are 835 x 10'' ha suitable for agroforestry, whereas 
Houghton et al. (1993) suggest that 1895 x 10'' ha are avail-
able. 
MX 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.28. Land costs 
Study 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989) 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten e/a/. (1992) 
Adams el al. (1993)° 
Richards et al. (1993) 
Dixon et al. (1994) 
Maseru et al. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994)' 
Xu(1994K 
Parks and Hardie (1995)'' 
Region 
Global 
United States 
Global 
Boreal 
Temperate 
Tropical 
Latin America 
Africa 
Asia 
North America 
New York State 
Canada 
United States 
United States 
South America 
Africa 
South Asia 
North America 
Mexico 
India 
China 
United States 
Forest 
Plantation 
400 U.S.$/ha 
360-8400 
U.S.$/ha 
20-200 U.S.$/ha 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0-1200 U.S.$/ha 
0 
Not reported 
separately 
275-5135 
U.S.$/ha 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
16U.S.$/ha 
0 
40-650 
U.S.$/ha/yr 
Land Costs 
Forest 
Management 
120-1440 
US$/ha 
— 
0 
0 
0 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0 
0 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0 
16 US$/ha 
0 
Agroforestry 
— 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
— 
— 
— 
0 
0 
0 
0 
— 
0 
0 
"The opportunity cost of land was derived within a mathematical programming model as the consumer welfare loss associated with the with-
drawal of agricultural land from production. 
''These figures arc referred to as land rent but are included in the total investment costs, which appear to be initial costs only. It is not clear 
whether these figures represent a one-time cost or an annual rent. 
• It is not clear whether land costs arc included in investment costs (see Table 9.29). 
•The land costs were expressed as annual rental payments to landowners within a subsidy programme. 
The range of estimates of land availability for the temper-
ate areas is only slightly narrower. Adams et al. (1993), Moul-
ton and Richards (1990), and Richards et al. (1993) suggest 
that there may be 100 x 10'' to 115 \ 10'' ha of marginal agri-
cultural land suitable for afforestation in the U.S. alone. How-
ever. Dixon. Winjum. and Krankina (1991) identify only 42 x 
10'' ha in all i>f North America as suitable for forest planta-
tions. Parks and Hardie (1995) consider only 10.4 x 10'' ha in 
the United States for their analysis, though the land area con-
straint in their study is determined by an assumed program-
matic budget and not by land availability. 
Studies have also shown a wide range ii{' estimates of land 
costs. As discussed in Chapter 8. this factor has proved partic-
ularly difficult because of the many nonmarket considerations 
associated with the social cost of converting between land 
uses. Because of the difficulty of determining the appropriate 
figures, some studies simply have not included land costs as 
an element o\' the cost analysis (e.g.. Dixon. Schroeder. and 
Winjum. l u o l ) . Others have apparently assumed that the use 
of land is costless because it is either public land (New York 
State, 1991) or because the wood products will eventually pay 
for the land (Van Kooten et al., 1992; Xu, 1994). As might be 
expected, those that have included land costs have arrived at a 
wide range of estimates for that variable. Table 9.28 provides 
a summary of the land cost data employed in the various stud-
ies. Note that several of the studies that provide estimates cf 
land availability do.not include cost figures. 
Initial treatment costs (see Table 9.29) are generally ex-
pressed as a capital outlay, whereas the maintenance costs, if 
included, are expressed as annual costs. Land costs may be 
expressed as either annual costs (rent) or capital costs. The 
cost analysis is facilitated by summarizing these costs as ei-
ther a net present value equivalent or an equivalent annual 
cost. The key factor for this operation is the discount rate ap-
plied to these costs. Table 9.30 summarizes the discount ratc< 
used by various sequestration cost studies. 
The importance of the choice of discount rate depends crit-
ically on the specific structure of the analysis. For example. 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Table 9.29. Treatment cost 
.WV 
Study 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989) 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten etal. (1992) 
Adams et al. (1993) 
Richards etal. (1993) 
Dixon et al. (1994) 
Masera etal. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994) 
Xu(1994) 
Parks and Hardie (1995)" 
Region 
Global 
United States 
Global 
Boreal 
Temperate 
Tropical 
Latin America 
Africa 
Asia 
North America 
New York State 
Canada 
United States 
United States 
South America 
Africa 
South Asia 
North America 
Mexico 
India 
China 
United States 
Forest 
Plantation 
400 
140-520 
400^50 
125-450 
25-800 
250-320 
150-800 
30-1400 
150-375 
50-1200 
660 
300-500 
140-520 
190-690 
— 
— 
— 
— 
387-700 
367-550 
46-828 
350 
Treatment Costs (U.S.$/ha) 
Forest 
Management 
— 
— 
— 
50-250 
0-1600 
50-500 
10-85 
3-60 
15-30 
10-400 
288 
650-1000 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
NA" 
77-205 
11-31 
— 
Agroforestry 
— 
— 
— 
1000 
250-750 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
500-3500 
500-3500 
500-3500 
500-3500 
— 
39 
14-240 
— 
"Although there are costs associated with forest management in Masera et al. (1994), it is not clear how to interpret the figures. 
'Parks and Hardie categorize treatment according to hardwood and softwood treatments. The figure listed here is for hardwood treatment. 
The costs for softwood are cited but not listed. 
Table 9.30. Discount rate applied to financial outlays 
Study 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989) 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten etal. (1992) 
Adams etal. (1993) 
Richards et al. (1993) 
Dixon etal. (1994) 
Masera etal. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994) 
Xu(1994) 
Parks and Hardie (1995) 
Annual Discount 
Rate (%) 
Not specified 
10 
8 
5 
Not specified 
10 
10 
10 
5 
Not specified 
10 
12-17.25 
Not specified 
4 
Moulton and Richards (1990) defined the cost per tonne of 
carbon as a ratio of land rent plus annualized establishment 
costs to average annual carbon capture. Since establishment 
costs are such a small part of the total costs in that analysis, 
the difference between applying a 4% and a 10% discount rate 
was minor. However, in Richards et al. (1993), which used 
land purchase costs and time-dependent carbon yield curves, 
an increase in the discount rate from 3 to 7% nearly doubled 
the unit cost of carbon sequestration. 
One of the most significant differences among studies is 
how they have addressed the irregular flows of carbon inher-
ent in carbon sequestration and the differences in patterns 
among activities. For example, as Figure 9.33 illustrates, 
planting Loblolly pine on agricultural land in the Southeast 
region of the U.S. leads to carbon uptake rates that peak dur-
ing the second decade after planting and taper off during the 
next four decades. In contrast, the carbon uptake rates associ-
ated with planting Ponderosa pine in the mountain states do 
not peak until the sixth decade after planting. Other carbon se-
questration activities have similar variations in their flows 
over time. 
Carbon sequestration studies have dealt with carbon flows 
in one of several ways. Some, such as Adams et al. (1993) and 
Moulton and Richards (1990). have used average carbon 
yields, expressed in tonnes per acre per year over the first 
forty years after tree stand establishment. Others have used 
yield curves such as those illustrated in Figure 9.33 to 
describe expected carbon flows on a year-by-year basis 
(Nordhaus, 1991b; Richards et al., 1993). A third approach, 
.ISO 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Table 9.31. Treatment of carbon flows 
Study 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989) 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b)" 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum 
(1991) 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina 
(1991)'' 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kootene/rt/. (1992) 
Adams et cil. (1993) 
Richards et at. (1993)' 
Dixon etal. (1994) 
Maserae/a/. (1994)'' 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar 
(1994)-' 
Xu(1994)/ 
Parks and Hardic (1995) 
Region 
Global 
United States 
Global 
Boreal 
Temperate 
Tropical 
Not specified 
New York State 
Canada 
United States 
United States 
South America 
Africa 
South Asia 
North America 
Mexico 
India 
China 
United States 
Yield Method 
Average Mow 
Average flow 
Yield curve 
MCS 
MCS 
MCS 
Average flow 
Average flow 
Average flow 
Yield curve 
MCS 
MCS 
MCS 
MCS 
MCS 
Standing 
carbon 
MCS 
Average flow 
Estimate of Carbon Yield 
Forest Plantation 
6.24 tonnes/ha/yr 
2.0-10.9 
tonnes/ha/yr 
0.8-1.6 tonnes/ha/yr 
15^0 tonnes/ha 
30-175 tonnes/ha 
25-125 tonnes/ha 
2.1 tonnes/ha/yr 
0.6-0.8 tonnes/ha/yr 
2.0-10.9 
tonnes/ha/yr 
0.0-9.4 tonnes/ha/yr 
— 
— 
— 
— 
25-150 tonnes/ha 
76-121 tonnes/ha 
22-146 tonnes/ha/yr 
0.4-0.8 tonnes/ha/yr 
Forest Management 
0.0-7.6 tonnes/ha/yr 
— 
4-20 tonnes/ha 
10-125 tonnes/ha 
20-200 tonnes/ha 
1.1 tonnes/ha/yr 
0.6-2.1 tonnes/ha/yr 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
121-134 tonnes/ha 
62-87 tonnes/ha 
9-15 tonnes/ha 
— 
Agroforestry 
— 
— 
15-160 tonnes/ha 
50-150 tonnes/ha 
— 
— 
— 
39-195 tonnes/ha 
29-53 tonnes/ha 
12-228 tonnes/ha 
90-198 tonnes/ha 
— 
25 tonnes/ha 
6-33 tonnes/ha 
— 
"Nordhaus (1991b) develops logistic yield curves based on estimated carrying capacity, average flows, and time to maturity. 
''Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) concentrated on forestry activities and their costs rather than on carbon yields. 
' The range represents the lowest yield year for the slowest growing species to the highest yield year for the highest yield species. 
''Carbon yield for forest management is estimated as avoided emissions from deforestation. 
'These figures appear to count total carbon standing at 50 years, but may use MCS since rotations are considered for some practices. 
'In addition to the components included in MCS, carbon stored in wood products is included in the carbon flow figures. 
Table 9.32. Treatment of forest products in carbon sequestration 
studies 
Study 
Forest Product Treatment 
Barson and Gilford (1990) 
Moullon and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon. Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
Dixon. Winjum. and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten et al. (1992) 
Adams ci til. (1993) 
Richards <•/«/. (1993) 
Dixon ctal. (1994) 
Tasman Institute (1994) 
Masera <•/((/. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994) 
Nut 1994) 
Parks and Hardic i ll>l>si 
Outlines three scenarios for decay rates of wood products described, but effect on carbon ac-
counting unclear. 
Does not consider forest products. 
Discusses land purchased and turned into permanent forest cover; does not consider harvest. 
Assumes products are harvested; 100% release of stored carbon at time of harvest; no accounting 
for value of forest products. 
Does not address carbon flows or stocks; benefits of harvest are implicitly considered in forestry 
practice costs analysis via derivation of internal rate of return on investment. 
Subtracts value of timber products from costs of carbon sequestration. 
Does not consider forest products. 
Explicitly includes timber harvest but does not include value of products in the benefits account-
ing; effect of release of carbon on carbon accounting not clear. 
Discusses land purchased and turned into permanent forest cover; does not consider harvest. 
Discusses effects of harvest qualitatively; does not quantify. 
Accounts for carbon loss at harvest; assumes 100% loss at harvest. 
Discusses harvest of timber; carbon and cost accounting methods unclear. 
Includes value of forest products in cost accounting. 
forest products arc explicit!) included as a component of carbon storage and net costs. 
Docs not consider forest products. 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
Table 9.33. Ecosystem components 
included in carbon sequestration 
studies 
i5l 
Study 
Ecosystem Carbon Components Included 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989) 
Barson and Gifford (1990) 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten et al. (1992) 
Adams etal. (1993) 
Houghton et al. (1993) 
Richards etal. (1993) 
Dixon etal. (1994) 
Tasman Institute (1994) 
Masera etal. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994) 
Xu(1994) 
Parks and Hardie (1995) 
Above- and below 
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Not specified 
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below 
Tree bole only1 
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
Above- and below-
ground tree 
•ground tree, soil, understory 
•ground tree, soil, understory, litter 
ground tree 
•ground tree 
ground tree 
ground tree, soil, understory, litter 
ground biomass 
ground tree, soil, understory, litter 
ground tree1 
ground tree, understory, litter 
ground tree, soils 
ground tree, understory, soils 
ground tree, litter, and wood products 
ground tree 
^Implied in text, but not explicitly stated. 
Table 9.34. Summary statistic applied to studies 
Study 
Summary Statistic Used 
Moulton and Richards (1990) 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten et al. (1992)" 
Adams etal. (1993)'' 
Richards et al. (1993) 
Dixon et al. (1994) 
Maseraefa/. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994)' 
Xu(1994) 
Parks and Hardie (1995) 
Levelized costs 
Levelized costs 
Average storage method 
Average storage method 
Levelized costs 
Flow summation 
Levelized costs 
Levelized costs/discount method 
Average storage method 
Average storage method 
Flow summation 
Average storage method 
Levelized costs 
"Van Kooten used a flow summation method in the text and expresses a clear preference for this approach. Levelized costs are provided in an 
appendix. 
'Levelized costs are not explicitly derived but are implicit in the form of the model. 
'Because the carbon accounting method is unclear (see Table 9.31) it is uncertain whether the costs are derived using the flow summation 
method (if carbon accounting is based on standing carbon) or the average storage method (if carbon accounting is based on MCS). 
introduced by Schroeder (1992), expresses programme effects 
on carbon in terms of storage rather than flows. The method, 
called mean carbon storage (MCS), assumes that once a prac-
tice is implemented, the forest system is sustained in the same 
use over time. Thus the carbon changes are expressed in terms 
of the change in the amount of carbon storage on site, aver-
aged over one full rotation. This is expressed as 
XC. 
MCS =• 
where C is the standing carbon (tonnes) in year /, and n is the 
rotation length. Finally, the standing carbon method, a varia-
tion on the MCS method, expresses accomplishments in terms 
of the carbon standing at the end of the analysis period, say 
fifty years. This is the method used by Ravindranath and So-
mashekhar (1994). Table 9.31 provides a summary of the 
methods employed by sequestration cost studies. 
Carbon flows into forests can also be reversed by harvest-
ing. Those studies that have concentrated on plantation estab-
lishment have dealt with this issue in one of three ways (Table 
9.32). The group of studies that employ the MCS method as-
.152 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
il 
C u 
o ca 
M 
H 
•s 
4 -
3 -
2 -
1 -
0 
-
-
' 
1 
A Mountains: Ponderosa Pine 
^~""**^ Southern Plains: Loblolly Pine 
^_Northern Plains: 
^ » ^ ^ ^ 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ m a c k Walnut 
^ " ^ ^ . 
i 
T~~—i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
I 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 85 95 105 115 125 135 145 155 
Stand Age (years) 
Source: Richards, Moulton, and Birdsey (1993). 
Figure 9.33: Rate of annual carbon fixation as a function of forest-stand age for three region/species combinations. 
sume that all carbon is released on harvest, but that the 
forestry practices are repeated in continuous rotations (Dixon, 
Schroeder, and Winjum, 1991; Dixon, Winjum, and Krankina, 
1991; Dixon ct al., 1994). Hence, the concept of carbon re-
lease is built into the analysis. Another group of studies as-
sumes that the land planted with trees is permanently 
withdrawn from other uses, including harvest of wood prod-
ucts, so that there is no release of carbon (e.g., Nordhaus, 
1991b; Richards ct al., 1993). This assumption must be re-
flected in the calculation of land costs. Finally, some studies 
simply do not address the release of carbon on harvest, im-
plicitly assuming that either the forest area will not be har-
vested, or that the harvest will occur so far in the future as not 
to he a concern (e.g.. Moulton and Richards. 1990). 
Several components of a forest ecosystem store carbon, in-
cluding tree trunks, branches, leaves, and coarse and fine roots, 
as well as soils, litter, and understory. Studies have varied signifi-
cantly with respect to how they address these various compo-
nents. Some have included all components in their carbon 
accounting (e.g.. Moulton and Richards. 1990). Others have lim-
ited their analysis to tree carbon only (e.g.. Dixon. Schroeder. and 
Winjum. 1991). Table 9.33 provides a summary of which carbon 
components are included in each of the studies reviewed. 
Box 8.2 in Chapter S provided a discussion and sample cal-
culations of the various summary statistics used in carbon se-
questration cost studies to capture the concept of "dollars per 
tonne of carbon sequestration." Van Kooten ct al. (1992) 
demonstrate the importance of the choice of summary statis-
tics in their analysis o\' the cost-effectiveness of carbon se-
questration in Canada. Their analysis o( costs employs the 
flow summation method, whereas an appendix provides cal-
culations using the leveli/ation approach. The costs in the hit-
ter case rise by a factor of five to ten relative to the former 
case. Table 9.34 provides a summary of the approaches em-
ployed by the carbon sequestration cost studies. 
9.3.1 Costs of carbon 
sequestration 
Table 9.35 summarizes the estimates of unit costs of carbon 
sequestration provided by the studies reviewed here. The 
studies fall into four general categories. One group concen-
trates on the potential of North America to sequester carbon 
(Adams et al., 1993; Moulton and Richards, 1990; Ottingerf 
al., 1990; Van Kooten et al., 1992; Parks and Hardie, 1995: 
Richards et al., 1993). This group predominantly uses a cost 
levelization/discounting approach. The one exception is Van 
Kooten ct al. (1992), and they complement their flow summa-
tion approach by providing cost levelization results in their 
appendix. The second group considers the carbon sequestra-
tion potential of major ecological regions of the world using 
the average storage method (Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum. 
1991: Dixon. Winjum and Krankina. 1991; and Dixon ct al.. 
1994). The third group comprises studies of the global potential 
and cost of carbon sequestration (Sedjo and Solomon. 1989: 
Nordhaus. 1991b). Sedjo and Solomon (1989) do not provide 
unit cost calculations of carbon sequestration, whereas Norc-
haus applies a discounting method. The fourth group, a set of 
recent studies, examines the potential for carbon sequestration 
in individual developing countries (Maseru et al.. 1994: 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar, 1994; Xu. 1994). These stud-
ies use either the average storage method or the How summa-
tion method. 
Among the group of studies that concentrate on North 
America, the estimates of carbon costs fall into a relatively 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
Table 9.35. Unit costs of carbon sequestration 
Study 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989)° 
Moulton and Richards (1990)' 
Nordhaus (1991b) 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) 
New York State (1991) 
Van Kooten et al. (1992) 
Adams et al. (1993) 
Richards et al. (1993)' 
Dixon etal. (1994) 
Maseraefa/. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994)' 
Xu(1994X 
Parks and Hardie (1995) 
Region 
Global 
United States 
Global 
Boreal 
Temperate 
Tropical 
New York State 
Canada 
United States 
United States 
South America 
Africa 
South Asia 
North America 
Mexico 
India 
China 
United States 
Method 
Levelized 
Flow summation 
Levelized 
Flow summation 
Levelized 
Average storage 
Average storage 
Average storage 
Levelized 
Flow summation 
Levelized 
Levelized 
Levelized 
Flow summation 
Average storage 
Average storage 
Average storage 
Average storage 
Average storage 
Flow summation 
Average storage 
Levelized 
Cost of Carbon Sequestration 
Forest 
Plantation 
7 
3 
9-41 
2-9 
42-114 
5-8 
2-6 
7 
14-54 
6-18 
66-187 
20-61 
9-66 
2-9 
— 
— 
— 
— 
5-11 
0.13-1.06 
(12)-2 
5-90 
Forest 
Management 
— 
— 
6 ^ 7 
2-9 
— 
7 
1-13 
1-9 
12 
8-23 
39-108 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
0.3-3 
0.09-1.22 
(2)-l 
— 
($/tonne) 
Agroforestry 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
— 
23 
5 
— 
— 
— 
— 
4-41 
4-69 
2-66 
1-6 
— 
0.95-2.78 
(13)-(1) 
— 
"Sedjo and Solomon do not provide a unit cost figure for carbon sequestration. The figures presented here are based on their cost and yield es-
timates treated over 40 years with a 5% discount rate on financial outlays. 
'The flow summation method is not used in these reports. The figures are supplied here for purposes of comparison with other studies. 
'The interpretation of these figures is unclear. See discussion in text. 
''Figures in parentheses indicate negative costs. 
narrow range. After accounting for the differences attributable 
to cost analysis methods, Moulton and Richards (1990) pro-
vide the lowest cost range ($9 per tonne to $41 per tonne of 
carbon captured). These estimates were subsequently revised 
to reflect refined (lower) carbon yield estimates, the elasticity 
of demand for agricultural land, administrative costs, and fail-
ure rates (Richards et al. 1993). The analysis by Adams et al. 
(1993), which is based on a method of imputing land values 
through consumer welfare loss derived within a mathematical 
programming model of the agricultural sector, tends to con-
firm the revised results. Both studies suggest that the marginal 
cost of carbon sequestration would range from $9 to about 
$65 per tonne of carbon captured (levelized cost basis). The 
New York State (1991) study is in close agreement with the 
previous two studies. 
Parks and Hardie (1995) present a very different picture. 
They suggest a similar lower range on costs but a very rapid 
increase that approaches $90 per tonne of carbon. Several fac-
tors contribute to the difference in costs. First, Parks and 
Hardie recognize much less land availability than either 
Adams et al. (1993) or Richards et al. (1993). This means that 
they move into more expensive land very quickly. Also, as in-
dicated by Tables 9.28 and 9.30, their annual land costs are es-
timated at $40-$650/ha/yr and their discount rate is 4%. This 
suggests a capitalized land cost over the ten-year rental con-
tracts of $320/ha to $5300/ha, a rental cost that is higher than 
that used by Richards et al. (1993) for the outright purchase 
of land. Also, Parks and Hardie (1995) use lower carbon 
yield estimates and include only tree carbon in their calcula-
tions. Finally, and perhaps most important, their costs are an-
nualized over only a 10-year contract period. Although this 
may be appropriate for their analysis of a specific hypotheti-
cal government programme, it almost certainly overstates the 
costs of carbon sequestration in a broader context, since car-
bon capture continues for several decades into the future, 
even after the end of government land rental payments. 
In their presentation of levelized costs, Van Kootcn et al. 
(1992) also provide higher estimates of carbon costs than ei-
ther Adams et al. (1993) or Richards et al. (1993). This might 
be surprising in light of the fact that they do not include land 
costs in their estimates. The difference can be attributed in 
part to higher initial establishment costs and the low growth 
rates expected in the Canadian forests. Their carbon capture 
rates are also low because they consider only the carbon in the 
tree trunks and not whole ecosystem carbon. 
The two studies of broad geographic/climate regions sug-
gest that the costs of carbon sequestration may be relatively 
low for all three types of practices - forest plantations, forest 
management, and agroforestry (Dixon, Schroeder, and Win-
jum. 1991; Dixon et al.. 1994). Although these costs are 
.154 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 9.36. Potential carbon 
sequestration 
Carbon Sequestration Potential 
Study 
Region 
Forest Plantation 
Forest 
Management 
Agroforestry 
Sedjo and Solomon (1989) 
Barson and Gifford (1990)" 
Moulton and Richards (1990)' 
Nordhaus (1991b)' 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991)'' 
New York State (1991)'' 
Van Kooten et al. (1992)' 
Houghton et al. (1993 y 
Adams et al. (1993)' 
Richards et al. (1993)'' 
Dixon etal. (1994)' 
Tasman Institute (1994X 
Masera et al. (1994) 
Ravindranath and Somashekhar (1994)* 
Xu(l994) 
Parks and Hardie (1995)' 
Global 
Australia 
United States 
Global 
Boreal 
Temperate 
Tropical 
New York State 
Canada 
Latin America 
Africa 
Asia 
United States 
United States 
Global 
New Zealand 
Mexico 
India 
China 
United States 
2900 x 106 tonnes/year 
7 x 106 tonnes/yr 
630 x 106 tonnes/yr 
280 x 106 tonnes/yr 
2x 109 tonnes 
20 x 10' tonnes 
53 x 109 tonnes 
0.8 x 106 tonnes/yr 
6xl0& tonnes/yr 
2.3 x 109 tonnes 
13.6 x 109 tonnes 
1.9 x 109 tonnes 
640 x 106 tonnes/yr 
49 x 109 tonnes 
5 x 106 tonnes/yr 
1.4-2.0 x 109 tonnes 
3.7 x 109 tonnes 
8.5 x 109 tonnes 
150 x 106 tonnes/yr 
HOx 106 
tonnes/yr 
0.2 x 10« 
tonnes/yr 
13 x 106 
tonnes/yr 
13.2 x 109 tonnes 
0.4 x 109 tonnes 
15.0 x 109 tonnes 
1.5-2.3 x 109 
tonnes 
2.6 x 109 tonnes 
0.2 x 109 tonnes 
49.1 x 109 tonnes 
52.6 x 109 tonnes 
18.7 x 109 tonnes 
1100-2200 x lO6 
tonnes/yr 
2.4 x 109 tonnes 
1.1 x 109 tonnes 
"This carbon capture rate is maintained over 25 years. 
'This carbon capture rate is maintained over 40 years. 
'This is the average carbon capture rate over an assumed 40-year growing period with planting spread over 35 yers, so that actual carbon cap-
ture is spread over 75 years. 
•'Dixon. Schroeder. and Winjum (1991) do not differentiate total potential yield on the basis of forestry practice. This is MCS for all practices 
averaged over a 50-year period. 
Rates are maintained over 60 years for plantation forests and 80 years for forest management. 
'This is MCS. Period of time over which MCS is calculated is not specified. 
'•'Adams ft til. (1990) do not specify the period over which this carbon capture rate could be maintained. 
''Richards el al. (1993) report potential cumulative carbon yield of 49 x 109 tonnes over a 160-year period. Of that 40 x 109 tonnes occur in the 
first 100 years. Hence, there is a potential average carbon capture rate of 400 x I06 tonnes per year for 100 years. 
'This is MCS over 50 years. 
'This carbon capture rate is maintained over 30 years. 
'This is apparently total standing carbon at 50 years. 
'Calculations are based on 10-year period only. However, sequestration is likely to continue over a longer period. 
calculated using the average storage method, the costs pre-
sented here suggest lower estimates than those derived in the 
North American studies. It is interesting to note that Dixon. 
Schroeder, and Winjum (1001) find relatively little difference 
among the boreal, temperate, and tropical regions with respect 
to the carbon sequestration costs associated with forest plan-
tations and forest management, which range from $2 per 
tonne to $8 per tonne and $1 per tonne to $13 per tonne 
respectively. In contrast, the carbon sequestration costs as-
sociated with agro fores try are considerably higher in the tem-
perate region ($23 per tonne) than in the tropics ($5 per 
tonne). In the second study, however, that relation seems to he 
reversed: the cost in the tropical areas is $2 to $69 per tonne 
and the cost in North America is $1 to $6 per tonne (Dixon et 
al.. 1994). The reversal appears to have occurred because the 
relative costs of initial treatment in the temperate zone were 
lowered in the second study and the MCS capacity of land 
was raised. 
The two studies of global cost estimates differ signifi-
cantly. The Nordhaus (1991b) estimate of $42-$ 114 per tonne 
for the unit costs of global carbon sequestration through 
afforestation is much higher than those from the other two 
groups. This is a bit surprising, given the fact that Nordhaus's 
land and treatment cost figures are similar to those used by 
other studies. The difference in results is almost entirely at-
tributable to how the Nordhaus study treats carbon yields. 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
.w 
First, Nordhaus uses average carbon yield factors derived 
from the review of greenhouse gas policy options conducted 
by the U.S. EPA (1989). These figures are for carbon yields on 
average commercial timber land and probably substantially 
underestimate yields expected from conversions of marginal 
agricultural land to forestry plantations (see Table 9.31 for a 
comparison with other studies). Second, the analysis limits 
the total cumulative carbon to a range of 30-50 tonnes/ha and 
assumes that this amount occurs over a forty-year period fol-
lowing plantation establishment. These figures are certainly at 
the low end of the expected carrying capacity of forest plan-
tations (see, e.g., Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum, 1991). 
Finally, to portray the timing of carbon capture, Nordhaus ap-
plies a logistic growth curve that has the effect of delaying 
carbon uptake relative to the rate given by the average-flow 
approach or the MCS approach. Combined with a levelization 
approach to costs, this delay in carbon uptake contributes to 
an increased unit cost of carbon capture. (Richards et al., 
1993, also captures this effect.) 
At the other extreme, Sedjo and Solomon (1989) provide 
land and treatment cost figures that would suggest a cost of 
carbon sequestration of $7 per tonne on a cost levelization ba-
sis and $3 per tonne on a flow summation basis. This rela-
tively low cost estimate is due to their optimistic assumption 
regarding carbon yield, which is based on growth rates in the 
Pacific Northwest and Southeast regions of the U.S. Applying 
these rates to a global analysis is probably unrealistic, but it 
does suggest that, at least in some regions, carbon sequestra-
tion should be relatively inexpensive. 
The three studies of individual developing countries pro-
vide an interesting contrast. Whereas Masera et al. (1994) 
estimate that carbon sequestration on forest plantations in 
Mexico would cost $5-$ 11 per tonne, Xu (1994) calculates 
that carbon could be stored on plantations in China at a nega-
tive cost. The latter result stems from the fact that Xu includes 
revenues from the sale of forestry products in the cost calcula-
tions, and that China has a largely unmet demand for timber. 
The interpretation of cost figures for Ravindranath and So-
mashekhar (1994) is unclear. Although they apparently use a 
flow summation approach in their cost calculations, they do 
discuss the application of discounting, at zero and 1%, to the 
carbon flow, which would suggest a levelized cost method. 
Their costs range from $0.09 to $2.78 per tonne. 
9.3.2 Potential quantities of carbon 
The studies show a wide range of estimates of potential for 
carbon sequestration (Table 9.36). At one extreme, Sedjo and 
Solomon (1989) have estimated that if 465 million hectares of 
land can be secured, 2.9 Gt of carbon per year can be removed 
from the atmosphere in forest plantations. This is nearly one-
half of current annual global levels of carbon emissions. At 
the other extreme, Nordhaus (1991b) suggests that an average 
of only 0.28 GtC per year can be captured over a period of 75 
years, even in the presence of a global effort. The difference 
between these two estimates is almost entirely due to the esti-
mates of carbon yields, since their assumptions on land avail-
ability are very similar. At the same time, Dixon et al. (1994) 
estimate that globally 1.1-2.2 GtC can be captured annually 
using expanded agroforestry practices alone. 
Opportunities in the most northern latitudes appear some-
what limited. Dixon. Schroeder. and Winjum (1991), summing 
across all practices, suggest that only 2 GtC can be accumu-
lated in the boreal regions. Averaged over their 50-year pe-
riod, this yields 0.04 GtC per year. However, Van Kooten et al. 
(1992) suggest that forestry opportunities in Western Canada 
alone may provide as much as 0.13 Gt of carbon capture per 
year. 
In the temperate regions there appear to be significant op-
portunities. Richards et al. (1993) suggest that in the U.S. 
alone, an aggressive tree planting programme could yield an 
average of 0.4 GtC per year for 100 years and a cumulative to-
tal of 49 GtC if the plantations are undisturbed for 160 years. 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) are not so optimistic. 
That study suggests that across all forestry practices a total of 
20 GtC could be accumulated in the entire temperate zone. 
Over their 50-year analysis period this averages to 0.4 GtC 
per year. Because the estimate of land area availability in 
Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) is much higher than in 
Richards et al. (1993), the difference in the estimates must be 
due to the fact that the latter study uses much higher estimates 
of potential carbon accumulation per hectare. 
The outlook in the tropics is even better than that in the 
temperate region. Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum (1991) sug-
gest that a cumulative total of 53 GtC could be captured 
across all forestry practices. Houghton et al. (1993) provide 
an even more optimistic estimate of the potential in the trop-
ics, 167 GtC, though they provide no cost figures. 
Two other studies that provide estimates of carbon seques-
tration potential without analyzing costs suggest that Aus-
tralia and New Zealand could capture carbon at a rate of 0.007 
Gt per year and 0.005 Gt per year respectively for 25 to 30 
years (Barson and Gilford, 1990; Tasman Institute, 1994). For 
Mexico, India, and China it is estimated that approximately 
3.5 GtC, 8.7 GtC, and 9.8 GtC respectively could be accumu-
lated (Masera et al.. 1994; Ravindranath and Somashekhar, 
1994; Xu, 1994). 
9.3.3 Cost curves 
This discussion has suggested that there is significant varia-
tion among the studies with respect to their estimates of the 
unit costs and potential amounts of carbon sequestration. The 
studies also differ in how they present the results. Several of 
the reports (Sedjo and Solomon. 1989; Nordhaus, 1991b; 
New York State, 1991; Van Kooten et al., 1992) have pre-
sented their results as point estimates, that is, as estimates of 
the costs of achieving a specified amount of carbon sequestra-
tion.9 Other studies have developed cost curves that illustrate 
the increasing marginal cost of carbon sequestration as a func-
tion of the level of sequestration (Adams et al., 1993; Moulton 
and Richards, 1990; Dixon, Schroeder, and Winjum, 1991; 
Parks and Hardie, 1995; Richards et al., 1993). The cost 
curves provide information that is not conveyed in either 
point estimates or in the ranges of unit costs listed in Table 
9.35. 
.156 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
u 
120 B" 
100 
on 
D 
t/5 
o 
U 
a 
c 
C 
bi) 
Sg 
80 
60 
40 
10 
20 
30 
40 
70 
80 
Carbon Stored (Gt) 
Source: Dixon, Winjum, and Schroeder (1991). 
Figure 9.34: Marginal initial costs of sequestering carbon in forest systems employing forestation and forest management practices. 
3(X) 
in 3 
o 
U 
£ 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Carbon Sequestered (billions of short tons of carbon) 
Source: Richards. Moulton. and Birdsey (1993). 
Figure 9.35: Total cost curve for carbon sequestration under a 
year programme. 
60-
Other studies report the marginal cost of carbon sequestra-
tion differently. Marginal costs are sometimes expressed in 
nominal dollars, that is, the dollars of the year in which the se-
questration occurs. To arrive at this figure, current costs are 
levelized (inflated) at the discount rate. Carbon sequestration 
can also be measured as tonnes of carbon accumulated and 
permanently stored. Marginal cost curves that use either or 
both of these procedures tend to have a shape that is very sim-
ilar to the curve in Figure 9.34 despite the significant underly-
ing differences in the meaning of the values. 
Figure 9.35 illustrates the total cost for carbon sequestra-
tion under a 160-year programme. The total cost rises almost 
linearly over the range of 12 to 55 billion short tons of carbon. 
This implies that the average cost per ton of carbon stored is 
roughly constant over this range. A constant average cost 
means that the marginal cost per ton of carbon stored is also 
constant and is equal to the average cost. Thus, Figure 9.35 
confirms the relatively constant marginal cost over this range 
shown in Figure 9.34. 
An example of a cost curve for global carbon sequestration 
is shown in Figure 9.34. The dependent variable is the marginal 
cost of carbon capture expressed in dollars per tonne of carbon. 
Costs rise only slightly from 0 to 70 GtC. but climb sharply for 
higher levels of carbon sequestration. The MCS method, which 
expresses a stock of carbon o\cr several rotations rather than 
total accumulation of carbon, is used for the finure. 
9.4 Studies of the Costs of Reducing Nonenergy 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Although much of the work on greenhouse gas emission re-
duction has focussed on energy-related emissions, a growing 
literature is emerging on nonenergy emissions. Table 9.37 
summarizes some of the major options and their reduction po-
tential. 
A Review of Mitigation Cost Studies 
J .57 
Table 9.37. Summary of economically viable options for reducing methane, nitrous oxide, PFC, and HFC emissions 
Source 
Methane 
Natural gas systems 
Coal mining 
Waste disposal 
Ruminant livestock 
Animal manures 
Wastewater treatment 
Rice cultivation 
Biomass burning 
Nitrous Oxide 
Adipic acid production 
Nitric acid production 
Fertilizer use 
PFCs 
Aluminum production 
HFCs 
Intentional manufacture 
Manufacturing by-product 
Applications 
Global 
Emissions 
(Tg/yrX 
30-65 
24-40 
20-40 
65-100 
10-18 
30-40 
60-100 
29-68 
0.3-0.6 
0.1-0.3 
0.3-3.0 
0.03 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Available Options 
for Reducing 
Emissions 
Profitably 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
NA' 
under development 
under development 
under development 
not examined 
under development 
Yes 
not examined 
Yes 
not examined 
Reductions 
Possible at 
Site-Specific 
Projects'' (%) 
20-80 
30-90 
up to 90 
5-60 
uptoO 
— 
— 
— 
up to 90 
— 
up to 30 
up to 90 
— 
up to 50 
— 
Near-term Profitable 
Reductions Possible 
Worldwide 
(Tg/yr)" 
4-16 
4-7 
9-14 
4-10 
over 1 
— 
— 
— 
not examined 
not examined 
not examined 
not examined 
not examined 
not examined 
not examined 
"U.S. EPA (1994) for methane emissions; see text for other greenhouse gases. 
'U.S. EPA (1993a). 
CU.S. EPA (1993b). 
''Methane emissions from wastewater treatment are largely from lesser developed countries, and large capital investments may be necessary 
to construct effective wastewater management facilities. In these cases the captured methane is not expected to substantially offset the invest-
ments. 
9.4.1 Costs of reducing methane emissions 
Methane is emitted from a diverse set of human-related ac-
tivities which currently represent about 70% of global emis-
sions annually (U.S. EPA, 1994). It is important to note that 
methane emissions from these systems represent the waste of 
a valuable fuel, and the methane can often be recovered where 
the saved fuel justifies the investment. Recent reports suggest 
that substantial reductions in methane emissions can be 
achieved profitably or at low cost while providing a number 
of other benefits (RIVM, 1993: U.S. EPA. 1993a; U.S. EPA. 
1993b).10 These studies indicate that it may be possible to em-
ploy existing technologies and practices profitably and reduce 
methane emissions from landfills, oil and natural gas systems, 
coal mining, and ruminant livestock by about 18 to 37 Tg per 
year over the next 5 to 10 years. These reductions represent 
about 5-10% of current anthropogenic emissions. Emission 
reductions of about 36 to 97 Tg per year (10-30% of current 
anthropogenic emissions) may be possible in the longer term. 
This section summarizes the results of these reports for each 
major methane source. 
9.4.1.1 Natural gas and oil systems-
Cost studies of available technologies and practices for reduc-
ing methane emissions from natural gas systems indicate that 
reductions in emissions in the order of 20-80% are possible at 
particular sites for particular types of emissions, depending on 
site-specific conditions (U.S. EPA, 1993a). The major oppor-
tunities for profitably achieving such reductions are in coun-
tries or regions where (1) gas prices are at world levels and 
reasonably small incremental investments can modify current 
operations and practices and save sufficient gas; (2) there are 
old or stressed systems handling large quantities of gas; and 
(3) work is underway to reduce emissions of volatile organic 
compounds or air toxics. For example, recent analyses in the 
U.S. show that, through incremental investments in a small set 
of best management practices, emissions can be profitably re-
duced over the next decade by about 30% or 1 Tg (U.S. EPA, 
1993c). Globally it may be possible to reduce emissions by 4-
16 Tg per year over the next decade through profitable ven-
tures (U.S. EPA, 1993b). 
9.4.1.2 Coalmining 
With available techniques, methane emissions into the atmos-
phere can be profitably reduced by up to 50-70% at gassy 
mines, depending on site-specific conditions (U.S. EPA, 
1993a). The best opportunities for profitably achieving such 
reductions are for mines that are classified as "gassy," that 
produce substantial quantities of coal, and that are close to de-
.w 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
mand points for a medium quality fuel. However, with appro-
priate technical expertise, high quality gas can be produced 
and sold to pipeline systems. Recent analyses in the U.S. 
show that emissions from coal mining can be profitably re-
duced over the next decade by about 35% or 1.5 Tg with 
intensified efforts at about twenty-five mines (U.S. EPA. 1993c). 
Globally it may he possible to reduce emissions by 4-7 Tg per 
year over the next decade by profitable expansion of methane 
recovery techniques (U.S. EPA, 1993b). Reductions of 1.5-
2.5 Tg per year could he achieved just by using the medium 
quality gas that is currently recovered in major coal regions 
around the world but then vented to the atmosphere (U.S. 
EPA, 1993b). 
9.4.1.3 Waste disposal 
Methane emissions from landfill sites can be profitably re-
duced by up to 90% and provide additional benefits in the 
form of improved air and water quality and reduced risk of 
fire and explosion (U.S. EPA, 1993a). Landfills that provide 
the best opportunities for profitably using captured gas fall 
into two categories: (1) those that are currently receiving 
wastes, that are expected to have more than 0.5 to 1 million 
tonnes of waste in place, and that have a clearly identifiable 
energy user or buyer nearby, and (2) those likely to be subject 
to air pollutant emission rules. Recent analyses in the U.S. 
show that methane emissions from landfills may be reduced 
by as much as 7 Tg per year as a by-product of new air emis-
sion regulations. Some of these landfills will be able to com-
ply through revenue-generating recovery projects. Globally it 
may be possible to reduce emissions by 9-14 Tg per year over 
the next decade through methane recovery projects (U.S. 
EPA. 1993b). 
9.4.1.4 Ruminant 
animals 
Analyses show that available technologies and management 
practices can reduce methane emissions per unit of product by 
5-60%' in many animal management systems (U.S. EPA. 
1993a). The greatest near-term potential for the profitable use 
of better management practices is in countries or regions 
where animals have not experienced large changes in pro-
ductivity in the preceding decades, the animals are currently 
eating poor quality forage, product markets and physical in-
frastructure exist, and traditions and customs will support the 
changing practices. In particular, dairy herds in many devel-
oping countries offer great potential because the current diets 
are nutrient-deficient, there is daily access to animals so that 
feed supplementation and other management practices are 
possible, and the increased production of milk is quickly seen 
and marketable. Globally, emission reductions of 4-10 Tg per 
year may be achieved over the next decade by promoting 
available practices in these regions (U.S. EPA. 1993b). 
9.4.1.5 Animal 
manures 
Available technologies can profitably reduce methane emis-
sions by as much as 80% at particular sites (U.S. EPA. 1993a). 
The best opportunities for profitably using recovered biogas 
from animal manures are in fairly warm regions with farms 
with large numbers of animals. 1 or example, in the U.S. only 
farms in the Southern states that have over 500 head of dairy 
cattle and over 1500 head of swine and that lagoon their ani-
mal manures and purchase fairly expensive electricity are ex-
pected to recover methane profitably. However, these farms 
represent about 30% of total U.S. emissions and could prof-
itably reduce these by about 1 Tg per year. 
9.4.2 Costs of reducing emissions of other greenhouse 
gases 
Nitrous oxide and halogenated substances are the other green-
house gases that make sizable contributions to the increasing 
radiative forcing in the earth's atmosphere. Although there re-
mains much uncertainty about the magnitude of emissions of 
these gases from different sources, a number of activities are 
underway around the world to further assess and implement 
technologies and practices for reducing the emissions. This 
section briefly describes these activities. In general, the tech-
nologies and practices already in use are economically viable 
or were pursued for reasons other than the reduction of green-
house gas emissions. 
9.4.2.1 Nitrous oxide 
Nitrous oxide is emitted from a variety of industrial and agri-
cultural activities. These human-related activities represent 
about 20% of global emissions annually (IPCC, 1992b). Tech-
nologies and practices for reducing nitrous oxide emissions 
from some of the key sources have been identified and are at 
different stages of use and development as discussed below 
(RIVM, 1993). 
9.4.2.1.1 Adipic and nitric acid production 
Nitrous oxide is produced as a waste gas during the produc-
tion of adipic acid, which is used primarily in the manufacture 
of nylon. The production of nitric acid - mostly for fertilizer 
production, with a small percentage used as an input into 
adipic acid production - also produces nitrous oxide. These 
sources are estimated to emit about 0.4 to 0.6 TgN and 0.1 to 
0.3 TgN as N,0 per year, respectively (IPCC, 1992b). Over 
80% of these emissions are from the industrialized countries. 
Emissions of nitrous oxide from adipic acid production al-
ready reflect a 30% emission abatement from the use of re-
ductive furnaces to reduce emissions of NOv (RIVM. 1993). 
Reductive furnaces reduce emissions by about 98%. A num-
ber of additional options for reducing these emissions with 
similar reduction efficiencies are under study by the adipic 
acid producers, some of whom expect to have these technolo-
gies in place by 1996. Emissions of nitrous oxide from nitric 
acid production are not currently abated, and technologies for 
reducing these emissions do not appear to be under discus-
sion. 
9.4.2.1.2 Fertilizer use 
Cultivated soils are the principal anthropogenic source of ni-
trous oxide emissions. Nitrogen-based fertilizers contribute a 
large proportion of these emissions, primarily through denitri-
fication processes (RIVM. 1993). Emissions from cultivated 
soils are estimated to he 0.3 to 3.0 TgN per year (IPCC, 19921. 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
15V 
with about 80% of these emissions from the developing coun-
tries and countries with economies in transition. Approaches 
for reducing nitrous oxide emissions from cultivated soils 
concentrate on the more efficient use of fertilizers, since these 
approaches can result in sizable cost savings. More efficient 
fertilizer use can be achieved by testing soils for nutrient defi-
ciencies, applying fertilizers to meet specific plant needs, and 
using application methods that reduce the loss of nitrogen. Al-
though these alternatives need substantial development and 
demonstration before becoming widely available, the poten-
tial for reductions in fertilizer use and greenhouse gas emis-
sions is substantial. For example, the U.S. expects to reduce 
fertilizer use by 10-30% by 2000 by demonstrating such alter-
natives and educating farmers through agricultural extension 
networks about the cost savings associated with more strate-
gic and efficient fertilizer use (Clinton and Gore, 1993). 
9.4.2.1.3 Other sources 
Nitrous oxide is also produced from a variety of other sources, 
including biomass burning and mobile and stationary com-
bustion. Technologies and practices for controlling emissions 
from these sources are in the research phase. 
9.4.2.2 Halogenated substances 
Halogenated substances are emitted by a variety of manufac-
turing processes and numerous types of equipment and appli-
ances. The halogenated substances of greatest interest to the 
IPCC are perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs), which are highly potent and long-lived greenhouse 
gases. They are not ozone depleters and therefore are not cov-
ered by the Montreal Protocol. Activities are underway to de-
termine low-cost, if not profitable, ways to reduce emissions 
of these gases. 
9.4.2.2.1 Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
The production of aluminum is thought to be the largest 
source of emissions of two PFCs, CF4 and C,Ffi. These emis-
sions are produced primarily by anode events, which occur 
during the reduction of alumina in the primary smelting 
process. World emissions are highly uncertain and are esti-
mated to be in the order of 30,000 tonnes per year and 3000 
tonnes per year for CF4 and C2F6, respectively (Cook, 1995). 
Approaches for reducing emissions focus on technological 
upgrades for highly inefficient smelters and practices for re-
ducing the frequency and duration of anode events at more 
modern smelters. These practices include improved algo-
rithms for controlling automated processes, better manage-
ment of alumina additions, and improved training for per-
sonnel. Because aluminum smelters are large consumers of 
energy, the costs of these modifications can be largely offset 
by the costs of saved energy. The U.S. estimates that it can re-
duce PFC emissions from aluminum smelting by 30-60% by 
2000 by promoting profitable changes in current practices 
(Clinton and Gore, 1993). 
9.4.2.2.2 Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
HFCs occur as by-products of manufacturing, are intention-
ally produced as CFC and HCFC substitutes, and are used in a 
variety of applications. Emissions are difficult to estimate on 
an annual basis because, even though almost 100% of manu-
factured HFCs will be emitted to the atmosphere eventually, 
emission rates can vary from low but long-term (as in the case 
of insulating materials) to instantaneous (as in the case of 
aerosol propellants). Currently, emissions of these gases are 
relatively small, but emissions can be expected to grow sub-
stantially over the next decades as HFCs are increasingly used 
as substitutes for CFCs and HCFCs. The U.S., for example, 
expects more than a doubling in these emissions between 
1990 and 2000. A number of options for reducing emissions 
of these gases are being investigated. Options include process 
changes, substitution of other substances, recycling, and de-
struction. The U.S. expects to reduce emissions of HFCs by 
about 25% by 2000 by encouraging product stewardship, by 
implementing regulations under the Clean Air Act, and by re-
ducing HFC emissions as a by-product of HCFC-22 produc-
tion. 
9.4.2.2.3 Other halogenated substances 
Other halogenated substances include sulphur hexafluoride 
and fluoroiodocarbons. Sulphur hexafluoride is produced for 
use as insulation for electrical equipment, to degas molten re-
active metals, and as a tracer gas. Fluoroiodocarbons may be 
produced for intentional use as halon alternatives or refriger-
ants. These substances are emitted in relatively small quanti-
ties worldwide. Technologies or practices for reducing or 
limiting emissions of these gases do not appear to be under 
discussion. 
Endnotes 
1. See, for example, Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), Edmonds and 
Reilly (1985), and Manne and Richels (1994). 
2. In fact, with the exception of the Quest model in the European 
Community, no model was able to assess satisfactorily the effects on 
trade balances or on delocation of big consuming industries because 
of the lack of a model of international trade. 
3. The Pareto efficiency of abatement strategies based on a uniform 
carbon tax or tradable emission quotas (regardless of the quota allo-
cation) has recently been contested at a theoretical level by 
Chichilnisky and Heal (1994). Their paper has triggered various re-
sponses; however, the ongoing debate on this issue is not pursued 
further here. 
4. There may be second order general equilibrium effects on global 
abatement costs from changes in regional demand patterns, terms of 
trade, and investment paths, due to region-specific income and price 
elasticities of demand and to investment propensities. 
5. These extreme quota allocation rules, neither of which is likely to 
he an acceptable basis for a global abatement coalition, were chosen 
for purely illustrative purposes. 
6. Towards the end of the I 10-year simulation period, even allocat-
ing all emission rights to developing countries is insufficient to com-
pensate them for income losses from a global emission stabilization 
agreement. As a result, it is necessary to allocate "negative emission 
rights" to some developed regions under this allocation rule. 
7. Recall from Section 9.2.1.1.6 that a positive discount rate also 
favours deferring reductions. 
.w; 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
8. See, for example, the "Jeremie" and "Noe" scenarios by B. 
Dcssus(l99l). 
9. Nordhuus (1991) presented a range for the cost estimates associ-
ated with a target level. 
10. R1VM 1993 is a report of the proceedings of an international 
IPCC workshop on methane and nitrons oxide held in Amersfoort. 
the Netherlands, 3-5 February. 1993; U.S. EPA 1993a is a Report to 
Congress developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(U.S. EPA) building on efforts of the U.S./Japan Working Group on 
Methane for the Response Strategies Working Group of the IPCC, 
which solicited methane-related information from all IPCC country 
representatives. U.S. EPA 1993b is a follow-on to the first U.S. EPA 
report, which examines the applicability of available technologies 
and practices in specific countries. These reports are based on nu-
merous supporting studies, some of which are listed at the end of this 
section. 
References 
Adams, R., D. Adams, J. Callaway, C. Chang, and B. McCarl. 1993: 
Sequestering carbon on agricultural land: Social cost and im-
pacts on timber markets. Contemporary 
Policy Issues, 11(1), 76-
87. 
Alliance to Save Energy, American Council for an Energy-Efficient 
Economy, Natural Resources Defense Council, Union of Con-
cerned Scientists, 1991: America's energy choices: Investing in a 
strong economy and a clean environment. 
Union of Concerned 
Scientists, Cambridge MA. 
Anderson, D. and C D . Bird, 1992: Carbon accumulations and tech-
nical progress - a simulation study of costs, previously released 
as mimeo (1990), Oxford Bulletin of Economics 
and 
Statistics 
42(1). 
Asian Development Bank, 1993: National 
response strategy 
for 
global climate change: Peoples Republic of China. Asian Devel-
opment Bank. Beijing. 
Asian Energy Institute, 1992: Collaborative 
study on strategies to 
limit CO, emissions 
in Asia and Brazil, Asian Energy Institute. 
New Delhi. 
Ban, K.. 1991: Energy conservation and economic performance in 
Japan - An economic approach to CO, emissions. Faculty of 
Economics. Discussion Paper Series, No. I 12. Osaka University. 
Japan. 
Barker, I.. 1993: A UK carbon/energy tax: The macroeconomic ef-
fects, Energy Policy. 21(3). 296-308. 
Barker, I.. 1994: Taxing pollution instead of employment: Green-
house gas abatement through fiscal policy in the UK. Energy-
Environment-Economy Modelling Paper No. 9. ESRC (Eco-
nomic and Social Research Council). Department of Applied 
Economics. University of Cambridge. Cambridge. UK. 
Barker, T.. and R. l.ewney. 1991: A green scenario for the UK econ-
omy. In Creen futures for economic growth: Britain in 2010, T. 
Barker, ed.. Cambridge Econometrics. Cambridge. UK. 
Barker, T.. S. Bay lis, and C. Bryden. 1994: Achieving the Rio tar-
get: CO, abatement through fiscal policy in the UK. Energy-
En\ ironmcnt-Economy Discussion Paper No. 9. ESRC (Eco-
nomic and Social Research Council). Department oi' Applied 
Economics. University of Cambridge. UK. 
Barns, D.W., J. A Edmonds, and .1. M. Reilly. 1992: The use of the 
Edmonds-Rcillv models to model energy related greenhouse gas 
emissions. OECD. Economics Dept. Working Paper No. 113. Paris. 
Baron. R . Il">2: Pvnainic 
ci>\t estimates 
of carbon dioxide 
emis-
sions rciluclit'n ui luisicrn Europe and the former Soviet 
Cnion: 
An evaluation, 
Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Advanced Inter-
national Studies Unit, Global Studies Program, Richland, WA. 
Barrett, S., 1994: Climate change policy and international trade. 
Climate change: Policy instruments 
and their implications. 
Pro-
ceedings of the Tsukuba Workshop of IPCC Working Group III. 
Tsukuba, Japan, 17-20 January 1994. 
Barson, M., and R. Gilford, 1990: Carbon dioxide sinks: The poten-
tial role of tree planting in Australia. In Greenhouse 
and energy. 
D. Swainc, ed., pp. 433-443, Commonwealth Scientific and In-
dustrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Canberra. 
Bashmakov, I., 1992: World energy development and CO, emission. 
Perspectives 
in Energy, 2, 1-12. 
Bashmakov, I., 1993: Russia: Energy related greenhouse 
gas emis-
sions, present and future, 
International Workshop on Integrated 
Assessment of Mitigation, Impacts and Adaptation to Climate 
Change, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. 
Laxenburg, Austria, October 1993. 
Bashmakov, I., 1994: Russia - Energy-related greenhouse gas emis-
sions: Present and future. In Integrative 
assessment 
of mitigation, 
impacts, and adaptation to climate change, N. Nakicenovic, W.D. 
Nordhaus, R. Richels, and F.L. Toth, eds.. pp. 379-401, Interna-
tional Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Bashmakov, I., and V. Chupiatov, 1991: Energy conservation: 
The 
main factor for reducing greenhouse 
gas emission in the former 
Soviet Union, Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Advanced Interna-
tional Studies Unit, Global Studies Program, Richland, WA. 
Beaumais, D., 1992: Variations sur l'ecotaxe: evaluation des effets 
macroeconomiques et energetiques de court-moyen terme indtiits 
par l'instauration d'une taxe carbone energie sur les energies fos-
siles, Ecole centrale de Paris et Universite de Paris I. 
Bergman, L., 1990: General equilibrium effects of environmental 
policy: A CGE-modelling approach. Research Paper No. 6415. 
Handelshegskolan. Stockholm. Sweden. 
Berry, L., 1989: The administrative 
costs of energy 
conservation 
programs, 
ORNL/CON-294, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 
Oak Ridge. TN. 
Bhide, A.D.. S.A. Gaikwad. and B.Z. Alone, 1990: Methane from 
land disposal sites in India. In International 
workshop 
on 
methane emissions from natural gas systems, 
coal mining, and 
waste management 
systems, 
funded by Environment Agency of 
Japan. U.S. Agency for International Development, and U.S. En-
vironmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC (April). 
Bibler, C.J., J.S. Marshall, and R.C. Pilcher, 1992: Assessment 
of the 
potential 
for economic 
development 
and utilization 
of coalbed 
methane 
in Czechoslovakia, 
prepared for U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington. DC. 
BMU (Federal Environment Ministry of Germany), 1993: Synopsis 
of CO, reduction measures and potentials 
in Germany, 
Federal 
Environment Ministry of Germany, Bonn. 
Bodlund, B.. E. Miller, T Karlsson. and T.B. Johansson, 1989: The 
challenge of choice: Technology options for the Swedish electric-
ity sector. In Electricity: 
Efficient end use and new 
generations 
of technologies, 
their planning 
implications, 
T.B. Johansson. 
B. Bodlund. and R.H. Williams, eds., Lund University Press. 
Lund. Sweden. 
Boero, G.. R. Clarke, and L.A. Winters. 1991: The 
macroeconoinic 
consecpiences of controlling greenhouse 
gases: A survey. Depart-
ment of the Environment. Environmental Economics Research 
Series. HMSO. London. 
Bowman, R.L.. 1992: Reducing 
methane emissions 
from 
ruminant 
livestock: India prefeasibility 
study, prepared for U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Asiencv. Washington. DC. 
A Review of Mitigation 
COM Studies 
3(U 
Bowman, R.L., T.D. Robertson, and S.A. Ribeiro. 1993: Reducing 
methane emissions from ruminant livestock: Tanzania prefeasi-
bility study, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Washington, DC. 
Brandsma, A., 1992: Les effets macroeconomiques d'une introduc-
tion d'une taxe CO,/encrgie: simulation sur la base du module 
Quest. In Economie europeenne (Le Defi climatique: aspects 
economiques de la strategic communautaire), 51 (May). 
Bureau du Plan-Erasme, 1993: Un redeploiement fiscal au service 
de l'emploi: reduction du cout salarial financee par la taxe 
CO,/energie, rapport a la DG XI de la Commission Economique 
Europeenne, Brussels. 
Burniaux, J-M., J.P. Martin. G. Nicoletti, and J.O. Martins. 1990: 
The costs of policies to reduce global emissions of CO,: Initial 
simulation results with GREEN, OECD Dept. of Economic Sta-
tistics, Resource Allocation Division. Working Paper No. 103. 
OECD/GD(91), Paris. 
Burniaux, J-M., G. Nicoletti. and J.O. Martins, 1992: GREEN: A 
global model for quantifying the costs of policies to curb CO, 
emissions, OECD Economic Studies, 19 (Winter), 49-92. 
Bye, B., T. Bye, and L. Lorcntson, 1989: S1MEN: Studies in indus-
try, environment and energy towards 2000. Central Bureau of Sta-
tistics Discussion Paper No. 44. Oslo, Norway. 
Carlsmith, R., W.U. Chandler, J.E. McMahon, and D.J. Santini, 
1990: Energy efficiency: How far can we go?. Oak Ridge Na-
tional Laboratory, ORNL/TM - 11441, Oak Ridge. TN. 
CBO (Congressional Budget Office), 1990: Carbon charges as a re-
sponse to global warming: The effects of taxing fossil fuel, U.S. 
Congress, Washington, DC. 
CEC DG XII JOULE, 1991a: Cost-effectiveness analysis of C02-
reduction options: Synthesis report, Report for the CEC CO, 
Crash Programme, COHERENCE. Commission of the European 
Communities, Brussels. 
CEC DG XII JOULE, 1991b: Increase of taxes on energy as a way 
to reduce CO., emissions: Problems and accompanying measures. 
Report for the CEC CO, Crash Programme prepared by V. De-
temmerman. E. Donni, and P. Zagame, Commission of the Euro-
pean Communities. Brussels. 
Chandler, W., 1988: Carbon Emissions Control Strategies: The Case 
of China, Climatic Change, 13(3), 241-265. 
Chandler, W. (ed.), 1990: Carbon emissions control strategies: 
Case studies in international cooperation. Conservation Founda-
tion, Washington DC; Carbon Dioxide Information Center, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory. Oak Ridge. TN. 
Chandler, W.. 1994: Confidential report to the international finance 
corporation on energy-efficiency investment opportunities and 
constraints in Poland, draft, February. 
Chandler, W. (rapporteur). W.B. Ashton. I.A. Bashmakov. S. Butt-
ner, L.L. Jenney. E.K. Jochem, A.B. Lovins, R.G. Richels, L. 
Schipper, and K. Yamaji. 1992: Group Report: What are the op-
tions available for reducing energy use per unit of GDP? In Limit-
ing greenhouse effects: Controlling carbon dioxide emissions, 
G.I. Pearman, ed., Wiley, West Sussex, UK. 
Chandler, W., and S. Kolar, 1990: Carbon emissions futures for 
eight industrialized countries. The Fridtjof Nansen Institute. Oslo. 
Chandler, W., and S. Kolar. 1991: Energy and energy conservation 
in Eastern Europe: Two scenarios for the future, Battelle. Pacific-
Northwest Laboratories, prepared for the U.S. Agency for Inter-
national Development Global Energy Efficiency Initiative. Wash-
ington. DC. 
Chandler, W. and A.K. Nicholls, 1990: Assessing carbon emission 
control strategies: A carbon tax or a gasoline tax?, Policy Paper 
No. 3, American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy 
(ACEEE). Washington. DC. 
Chandler, W.U., A. Makarov and Z. Dadi, 1990: Energy for the So-
viet Union. Eastern Europe, and China, Scientific American, 
263(3), 120-127. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal. 1994: Who should abate carbon 
emissions: An international perspective, Economies Letters 44, 
443-449. 
Christensen, A., 1991: Stabilisation of CO, emissions - Economic 
effects for Finland, Ministry of Finance, Paper No. 29, Helsinki, 
Finland. 
Cline, W.R., 1992: The economics of global warming, Institute for 
International Economics, Washington, DC. 
Clinton, W.J.. and A. Gore, Jr., 1993: The climate change action 
plan. The White House, Washington, DC. 
Cohan, 0., R.K. Stafford, J.O. Scheraga, and S. Hcrrod, 1994: The 
global climate policy evaluation framework. In Proceedings of 
the 1994 Air and Waste Management Association Global Climate 
Change Conference. Phoenix. 15-18 April, Air and Waste Man-
agement Association, Pittsburgh, PA. 
Conrad, K., and M. Schroder. 1991: The control of CO, emissions 
and its economic impact. Environmental and Resource Econom-
ics. 1,289-312. 
Cook, E., 1995; Lifetime commitments: Why policymakers can't af-
ford to overlook fluorinaled compounds. World Resources Insti-
tute. Washington. DC. 
Davidson, O., 1993: Carbon abatement potential in Western Africa. 
In The global greenhouse regime: Who pays? P. Hayes and K. 
Smith, eds.. United Nations University, Tokyo. 
Dean, A., and P. Hoeller. 1992: Costs of reducing CO, emissions: 
Evidence from six global models. OECD Economic Studies, 19 
(Winter). 15-47. 
Dessus, B.. 1991: Jeremie et Noc: deux scenarios energetiques mon-
diaux a long terme, Revue de Tenergie, 421, 291-307. 
DG II-CEC, 1992. : The economics of limiting C02 emissions. Spe-
cial edition of European Economy. Commission of the European 
Communities, Office for Official Publications, Luxembourg. 
Dickson, A.. K. Noble. Z. Peng. J. Dlugosz, and R. Stuart, 1994: 
Meeting greenhouse targets in Australia: Implications for coal 
use, ABARE paper presented at Greenhouse 94; An Australia-
New Zealand Conference on Climate Change, Wellington, New 
Zealand (October). 
Dixon, P.B.. RE. Marks. P. McLennan, R. Schodde, and PL. Swan, 
1989: The feasibility and implications for Australia of the adop-
tion of the Toronto Proposal for CO, emissions, Report to Charles 
River & Assoc, Sydney, Australia. 
Dixon, R.. J. Winjum. K. Andrasko. J. Lee, and P. Schroeder, 1994: 
Integrated land-use systems: Assessment of promising agroforest 
and alternative land-use practices to enhance carbon conservation 
and sequestration. Climatic Change, 30, 1-23. 
Dixon, R.. J. Winjum. and O. Krankina, 1991: Afforestation and 
forest management options and their costs at the site level. In 
Technical workshop to explore options for global forestry man-
agement, International Institute for Environment and Devel-
opment, eds.. pp. 319-328. Proceedings of a conference held 
24-30 April. 1991. Bangkok. Thailand. 
Dixon, R., P. Schroeder. J. Winjum (eds.), 1991: Assessment of 
promising forest management practices and technologies for 
enhancing the conservation and sequestration of atmospheric 
carbon and their costs at the site level, Report of the U.S. Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency. #EPA/600/3-91/067. Environmen-
tal Research Laboratory, Corvallis, OR. 
.(62 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Donni, E., P. Valette, and P. Zagame, 1993: HERMES, 
Harmonised 
econometric 
research for the modelling 
of economic 
systems. 
North Holland, Amsterdam. 
The DPA Group Inc., 19X9: Study on the reduction of energy-
related greenhouse gas emissions. Ministry of Energy. Toronto. 
Ontario. 
DRI (Data Resources Inc.), 1992: The economic effects of using car-
bon taxes to reduce carbon dioxide emissions 
in major 
OECD 
countries, 
prepared for the U.S. Department of Commerce by 
DRI/McGraw-Hill, Lexington, MA. 
DRI (Data Resources Inc.). 1994: Potential benefits of 
integrating 
environmental 
and economic 
policies. 
Report prepared for the 
European Commission, Office for the Official Publications of the 
European Union. Luxembourg. 
ECN 1994: Boundaries 
of future carbon dioxide emission 
reduction 
in nine industrial countries, 
Netherlands Energy Research Foun-
dation, ECN-C-94-025. Amsterdam. 
Edmonds, J.A., and J.M. Reilly. 19X5: Global energy: Assessing 
the 
future, Oxford University Press. New York. 
Edmonds, J.A., and J.M. Reilly. 19X6: Uncertainty in future 
global 
energy use ami fossil fuel CO, emissions 
1975 to 2075, prepared 
for the U.S. Department of Energy. DOE/NBB-00XI. Department 
of Energy, Washington, DC. 
Edmonds, J.A., and D.W. Barns, 1990: Estimating the marginal cost 
of reducing global fossil fuel CO, emissions. 
Pacific Northwest 
Laboratories, I'NI.-SA- 1X361. Washington. DC. 
Edmonds, J.A., and D.W. Barns. 1991: Use of the 
Edmonds-Reilly 
model to model energy-sector 
impacts of greenhouse 
emissions 
control strategies, 
prepared for the U.S. Dept. of Energy, by Pa-
cific Northwest Laboratories, Washington, DC. 
Edmonds, J.A., and D.W. Barns. 1992: Factors affecting the long-
term cost of global fossil fuel CO, emissions reductions. Interna-
tional Jounud of Global Energy Issues. 4(3). 140-166. 
Edmonds, J.A.. D.W. Barns, and M. Ton. 1993: Carbon coalitions -
The cost and effectiveness of energy agreements to alter trajec-
tories of atmospheric carbon dioxide emissions, draft. Pacific 
Northwest Laboratories, Washington. DC. 
Edmonds, J.A.. M. Wise, and C. MacCracken. 1994: Advanced 
en-
ergy technologies 
anil climate 
change: An analysis 
using the 
global change assessment model (GCAM), report prepared for the 
IRCC Second Assessment Report. Working Group I hi. Energy 
Supply Mitigation Options. 
Edmonds, J.A.. M. Wise. H. Pitcher. R. Richels. T. Wigley. and 
C. MacCracken. 1994: The accelerated 
introduction of advanced 
energy technologies 
and climate change: An analysis using the 
global 
change 
assessment 
model 
(GCAM). 
Battelle 
Pacific 
Northwest Laboratories, draft. Washington. DC. 
EMI 
(Energy Modeling Forum). 1993: Reducing 
global 
carbon 
emissions - Costs and policy options. EMF-12. Stanford Univer-
sity. Stanford. CA. 
Energy and Environmental Division. LBL (Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratories). 1991: CO, emissions 
from developing 
countries: 
Heller understanding 
the role of energy 
in the long 
term. 
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Berkeley. CA. 
Enquele Kommission des deutschen Bundestag's (German Par-
liamentary Enquete Commission). 1991: Schutz der Erde: cine 
Ih'standsaufnalune 
mil Yorsehliige :u einer neuen 
Energiepolilik. 
Bundestag. Bonn. 
European Commission. 1992: A community strategy to limit carbon 
dioxide emissions and to improve energy efficiency, communica-
tion from the Commission to the Council. European Commission. 
Brussels. 
European Commission. ll>9.i: Taxation, employment and environ-
ment: Fiscal reform for reducing unemployment, European 
Econ-
omy, 53, 137-177. 
Faruqui, A., M. Maulden, S. Schick, K. Seidcn, G. Wiklcr, and C. 
Ceilings, 1990: Efficient electricity 
use: Estimates 
of 
maximum 
energy savings, EPRI CU-6746, Electric Power Research Insti-
tute, Palo Alto, CA. 
Fickett, A.P., C.W. Ceilings, and A.B. Lovins, 1990: Efficient use of 
electricity, Scientific American, 263(3), 64-75. 
Glomsrod, S., H. Vennemo. and T. Johnson, 1990: Stabilization of 
emissions of CO,: A computable general equilibrium assessment. 
Central Bureau of Statistics. Discussion Paper No. 48, Oslo, Nor-
way. 
Godard, O., and O. Bcaumais, 1993: L'Economic face a l'ecologie. 
La Decouverte/La Documentation franchise, Paris. 
Goldemberg, J., T.B. Johansson, A. Reddy, and R. Williams. 19X7: 
Energy for a sustainable world, report, Wiley Eastern, New Delhi. 
India; World Resources Institute, Washington, DC. 
Goto, U., 1991: A study of the impacts of carbon taxes using the 
Edmonds-Reilly model and related sub-models. In Global warm-
ing and economic growth, A. Amano, ed., Centre for Global Envi-
ronmental Research, Tsukuba. Japan. 
Goulder, L.H., 1991: Effects of carbon taxes in an economy with 
prior tax distortion: An intertemporal general equilibrium analy-
sis for the U.S., working paper, Stanford University, Palo Alto. 
CA. 
Grainger, A., 1988: Estimating areas of degraded tropical lands 
requiring replenishment of forest cover, The International 
Tree 
Crops Journal, 5,31-61. 
Grubb, M., J. Edmonds, P. ten Brink, and M. Morrison, 1993: The 
costs of limiting fossil-fuel CO, emissions: A survey and analy-
sis, Annual Review of Energy and Environment, 
18, 397-478. 
Hanslow, K., M. Hinchy, J. Small, B. Fisher, and D. Gunasekera. 
1994a: Trade and welfare effects of policies to address climate 
change, paper presented at IPCC Workshop on Equity and So-
cial Considerations Related to Climate Change, Nairobi. July. 
ABARE Conference paper 94.24, Australian Bureau of Agricul-
tural and Resource Economics, Canberra. 
Hanslow, K., M. Hinchy, J. Small, B. Fisher, and D. Gunasekera. 
1994b: Climate change: Trade and welfare effects, 
Australian 
Commodities, 
1(3), 344-354. 
Hanslow, K., M. Hinchy, J. Small, B. Fisher. 1994c: International 
greenhouse economic modelling, paper presented to Greenhouse 
94 Conference, Wellington (October), ABARE Conference paper 
94.34, Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Econom-
ics, Canberra. 
Hirst, E. and M. Brown, 1990: Closing the efficiency gap: Barriers 
to the efficient use of energy. Resources, 
Conservation 
and Recy-
cling, 3(4). 
267-2X\. 
Hoeller, P., A. Dean, and J. Nicolaisen, 1991: Macroeconomic impli-
cations of reducing greenhouse gas emissions: A survey of empir-
ical studies. OECD Economic Studies, 16 (Spring), 45-78. 
Horton, G.R.. J.M.C. Rollo, and A. Ulph, 1992: The Implications for 
trade of greenhouse tax emission control policies, working paper 
prepared for UK Department of Trade and Industry. London. 
Houghton, R.. J. Unruh. and P. Lcfebvre. 1993: Current land cover 
in the tropics and its potential for sequestering carbon. Global 
Biogeochemical 
Cycles. 7(2). 305-320. 
Hourcade, J-C. R. Baron, and N.B. Chaabane. 1991: Politique 
energetic/lie el I'effet de serre: Une esquisse des marges tie man-
oeuvre a 2030. rapport pour 1'Atelier Prospective du Commissariat 
General du Plan. Centre International de Recherche sur I'Environ-
nement et le Developpement (CIRED). Montrouge. France. 
Hourcade. J.-C. N.B. Chaabane. K. Helioui. V. Journe. and P. 
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
.•.Y).-? 
Mabirc, 1993: UNEP GHC abatement easting studies: France 
country study, Centre International de Recherche sur I'Environ-
nement et le Developpement (CIRED), Montrouge, France. 
Industry Commission, 1991: Costs and benefits of reducing green-
house gas emissions, report 15, vol. 1, Industry Commission. 
Canberra. 
IPCC, 1992a: Emission scenarios for the IPCC, an update: Assump-
tions, methodology, and results, W. Pepper, J. Leggetl, R. Swart, 
and J. Wasson, prepared for The Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change, Working Group 1, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, DC. 
IPCC, 1992b: Climate change 1992. The supplementary report to 
the IPCC scientific assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callendar. 
and S.K. Varney, eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
IPCC, 1994: Energy supply mitigation options, IPCC Working 
Group Ha (draft 18), July. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change, Geneva. 
IPSEP (International Project for Sustainable Energy Paths), 1993: 
Energy policy in the greenhouse: The economics of energy tax 
and non-price policies, International Project for Sustainable 
Energy Paths, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Berkeley, CA. 
IPSEP, 1994/1995: The cost of cutting carbon emissions in Western 
Europe: Energy policy in the greenhouse, Volume II, Parts 2-6. 
Report to the Dutch Ministry of Environment, International Proj-
ect for Sustainable Energy Paths (IPSEP), El Cerrito, CA. 
Jackson, T., 1991: Least-cost greenhouse planning: supply curves 
for global warming abatement. Energy Policy, 19(1), 35-46. 
Jaszay, T., 1990: Hungary, In: Carbon emission control strategies: 
case studies in international cooperation, W. Chandler, ed.. 
Conservation Foundation, Washington, DC; Carbon Dioxide In-
formation Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 
TN. 
Johansson, T.B., B. Bodlund, and R.H. Williams (eds.), 1989: Elec-
tricity: Efficient end-use and new generation technologies and 
their planning implications, Lund University Press. Lund, Swe-
den. 
Johansson, T.B., H. Kelly. A.K.N. Reddy. and R.H. Williams, 1993: 
A renewables-intensive global energy scenario (RIGES). In: Re-
newable energy: Sources for fuels and electricity, T. Johansson, et 
al, eds.. Island Press, Washington, DC. 
Jones, B., Z. Peng, and B. Naughten. 1994: Reducing Australian 
energy sector greenhouse gas emissions. Energy Policy, 22(4). 
270-286. 
Jorgenson, D.W., and P.J. Wilcoxen, 1990a: The cost of controlling 
carbon dioxide emissions, presented at Workshop on Economy-
Energy-Environment Modelling and Climate Policy Analysis. 
Washington, DC; Harvard University. Cambridge, MA. 
Jorgenson, D.W., and P.J. Wilcoxen, 1990b: Reducing U.S. carbon 
dioxide emissions: The cost of different goals, Harvard Institute 
for Economics and Resources. Harvard University. 
Karadeloglou, P., 1992: Energy tax versus carbon tax: A quantita-
tive macro-economic analysis with the Hermes/Midas models. 
European Economy, Special Edition no. 1., CEC DG-II, Brussels. 
Belgium. 
Kaya, Y., 1989: Impact of carbon dioxide emissions on GNP growth: 
Interpretation of proposed scenarios, Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change/Response Strategies Working Group, IPCC. 
Geneva. 
Kononov, Y.. 1991: The cost of reducing Soviet CO^ emissions, 
Siberian Energy Institute, Irkutsk, Russia. 
Kononov, Y. 1993: Impact of the economic reforms in Russia on 
greenhouse gases emissions, mitigation and adaptation, Interna-
tional Workshop on Integrated Assessment of Mitigation, Impacts 
and Adaptation to Climate Change. October. International Insti-
tute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Koomey, J., C. Atkinson. A. Meier, .1. McMahon. S. Boghosian. B. 
Atkinson. I. Turiel, M. Levine. B. Nordman. and P. Chan. 1991: 
The potential for electricity efficiency improvements in the US 
residential sector. Report LBL-30477. Lawrence Berkeley Labo-
ratory, Berkeley, CA. 
Kostalova, M., J. Suk, and S. Kolar. 1991: Reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions in Czechoslovakia. Pacific Northwest Laboratories. 
Advanced International Studies Unit, Global Studies Program, 
Richland, WA. 
Kram, T., 1993: National energy options for reducing CO, emis-
sions, vol. 1. Netherlands Energy Research Foundation (ECN), 
Amsterdam. 
Krause, F.. and J. Koomey, 1992: The greenhouse abatement divi-
dend. Electricity Journal. 5(7). 
La Rovere, E.. L.F.L. Legey, and J.DO. Miguez, 1994: Alternative 
energy strategies for abatement of carbon emissions in Brazil, 
Energy Policy, 22( 1 1), 914-924. 
Lashof, D.A.. and DA. Tirpak, 1990: Policy options for stabilizing 
global climate. Appendices. Report to Congress from the Office 
of Policy. Planning and Evaluation. U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency. Washington, DC. 
Leach, G., and Z. Nowak, 1991: Cutting carbon dioxide emissions 
from Poland and the UK, Energy Policy, 19(10), 918-925. 
Leary, N.A., and J.D. Scheraga. 1994: Policies for the efficient re-
duction of carbon dioxide emissions, International Journal of 
Global Energy Issues, 6( 1/2), 102- III. 
Leng, R.A., 1991: Improving ruminant production and reducing 
methane emissions from ruminants by strategic supplementation, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC. 
Levine, M., A. Gadgil. S. Meyers, J. Sathaye, J. Stafurik, and T. 
Wilbanks. 1991: Energy efficiency, developing nations, and East-
ern Europe, report to the U.S. Working Group on Global En-
ergy Efficiency, International Institute for Energy Conservation, 
Washington, DC. 
Lovins, A. B. and L.H. Lovins. 1991: Least cost climate stabilization, 
Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 16, 433- 531. 
Mahin, D.B., 1988: Prospects in developing countries for energy 
from urban solid wastes. In Bioenergy Systems Report, U.S. 
Agency for International Development, Washington, DC. 
Makarov, A., and I. Bashmakov. 1991: An energy development 
strategy for the USSR: Minimizing greenhouse gas emissions. 
Energy Policy, 19(10), 987-994. 
Manne, A.S.. 1992: Global 2100: Alternative scenarios for reducing 
emissions, OECD Working Paper 111, OECD, Paris. 
Manne, A.S., 1993: International trade: The impacts of unilateral 
carbon emission limits, paper presented at the International Con-
ference on the Economics of Climate Change, OECD, Paris. 
Manne, A.S.. and R.G. Richels. 1990a: CO, emission limits: An eco-
nomic cost analysis for the USA. The Energy Journal, 22(2), 
51-74. 
Manne, AS., and R.G. Richels. 1990b: Global CO, emissions re-
ductions - the impacts of rising energy costs. The Energy Jour-
nal, 12(1). 87-102. 
Manne, AS., and C. Wene, 1990: MARKAL-MACRO: A Linked 
model for energy-economy Analysis, Brookhaven National Labo-
ratory. Upton. NY. 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels. 1991: Buying greenhouse insurance. 
Energy Policy, 19(6), 543-552. 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels. 1992: Buying greenhouse insurance -
the economic costs of CO, emission limits, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 
.m 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1993: The EC proposal for combin-
ing carbon and energy taxes: The implications for future CO, 
emissions. Energy Policy, 21(1), 5-13. 
Manne, A.S., and L. Schrattenholzer, 1993: Global scenarios for car-
bon dioxide emissions. Energy. 18( 12), pp. 1207-1222. 
Manne, A.S., and J. Oliveira-Martins. 1994: Comparisons of model 
structure and policy scenarios: GREEN and 12RT, draft. Annex to 
the WP1 Paper on Policy Response to the Threat of Global Warm-
ing, OECD Model Comparison Project (II). OECD, Paris. 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1994: The costs of stabilizing global 
CO, emissions: A probabilistic analysis based on expert judg-
ments, The Energy Journal, 15(1), 31-56. 
Marks, RE.. RE. Swan, P. McLennan. P.B. Dixon, and R. Schodde. 
et al., 1990: The cost of Australian carbon dioxide abatement. The 
Energy Journal, 12(2), 135-152. 
Marshall, J.S., R.C. Pilcher. C.J. Bible,, and O.K. Kruger, 1993: 
Reducing 
methane 
emissions 
from coed mines in Russia 
and 
Ukraine: 
The potential for coalhed methane development, 
pre-
pared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Masera, O., M. Bellon, and G. Segura. 1994: Forest management 
options for sequestering carbon in Mexico, liiomass 
and Bio-
energy (forthcoming). 
Masters, CD., E D . Attanasi. WD. Diet/man, R.F. Meyer, R.W. 
Mitchell, and D.H. Root. 1987: World resources of crude oil, nat-
ural gas, natural bitumen, and shale oil. Proceedings 
of the 12th 
World Petroleum Congress, vol. 5. John Wiley. London. 
McDougall, R.A., 1993: Energy taxes and greenhouse gas emissions 
in Australia, Monush Centre for Policy Studies. General Paper 
No. G-104. December, Clayton. Australia. 
McDougall, R.A., and G.A. Meagher. 1994: Distributional effects of 
a carbon tax in Australia, paper presented to the 50th Congress of 
the International Institute Public Finance (IIPF), August, Cam-
bridge. MA. 
Meredydd, E.. 1994: The status of joint implementation programs in 
the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet 
Union, draft. Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories. Washing-
ton, DC. 
MR-halik, J., S. Pasierb. J. Piszezek. M. Pyka. and J. Surowka. 1992: 
Evaluation 
of the feasibility 
and profitability 
of 
implementing 
new energy conservation 
technologies 
in Poland, Polish Founda-
tion for Energy Efficiency (October), Warsaw. 
Mills, E.. D. Wilson, and LB Johansson. 1991: Getting started: No-
regrets strategies for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Energy 
Policy 19(d). 526-542. 
Mint/cr, I. I9S7: ,-\ matter of degrees: The potential for 
controlling 
the greenhouse 
effect, Research Report #5. World Resources In-
stitute. Washington. DC. 
Mongia, N., R. Bhatia. J. Sathaye. and P Mongia. 1991: Cost of re-
ducing CO, emissions from India: Imperatives for international 
transfer of resources and technologies. Energy Policy. 19(10). 
97S-9S6. 
Morlhorst, P.E.. 1993: The cost of CO, reduction in Denmark -
methodology and results. Riso National Laboratory. Systems 
Analysis Department. Denmark (December). 
Morlhorst, P.E.. and P.E. Grohnheit. 1992: UNEP greenhouse 
gas 
abatement 
costing studies - Danish Country Report. Phase 
I. 
Riso National Laboratory. Denmark. 
Moulton, R.. and k. Richards. 1990: Costs of sequestering carbon 
through tree planting and forest management in the United States. 
In General Techniccd Report UVM.S. U.S. Depl. of Agriculture. 
Washington. DC. 
Nadel, S.. U'''2: Utilitx demand-side management experience and 
potential - A critical Review, Annual Review of Energy and the 
Environment, 
17, 507-535. 
Nagata, Y., K. Yamaji, and N. Sakarai, 1991: C02 reduction by car-
bon taxation and its economic impact. Central Research Institute 
of the Electric Power Industry, Economic Research Institute Re-
port No. 491002, Tokyo. 
NAS (National Academy of Sciences), 1991: Policy implications 
of 
greenhouse 
warming. National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Naughten, B.. and A. Dickson, 1995: Greenhouse, energy efficiency 
and cost effectiveness. In Outlook 95, vol. 3, Minerals 
and en-
ergy, pp. 289-301, Proceedings of the National Agricultural and 
Resources Outlook Conference, Australian Bureau of Agricul-
tural and Resource Economics, Canberra (February). 
Naughten, B„ B. Bowen, and A. Beck, 1993: Energy market failure 
in road transport: Is there scope for "no regrets" greenhouse gas 
reduction? Climatic Change, 25, 271-288. 
Naughten, B.. P. Pakravan, J. Dlugosz, and A. Dixon, 1994: Reduc-
tions in greenhouse gas emissions from the Australian 
energy sys-
tem: A report on modelling 
experiments 
using ABARE's 
MENSA 
model, report prepared for the Australian Department of the Envi-
ronment, Sport, and Territories, Canberra. 
NEPP (National Environmental Policy Plan), 1989: To choose or 
to lose, Second Chamber of the States General, The Hague. 
Netherlands. 
New York State, 1991: Analysis of carbon reduction in New York 
State, Report of the New York State Energy Office in consulta-
tion with NYS Department of Environmental Conservation and 
NYS Department of Public Service, NYS Energy Office, Albany. 
NY. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991a: To slow or not to slow: The economics of 
the greenhouse effect, Economic Journal, 101, 920-937. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991b: The cost of slowing climate change: A sur-
vey. The Energy Journal, 12( 1), 37-65. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1994: Managing 
the global commons: 
The eco-
nomics of the greenhouse effect, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. and G. Yohe, 1983: Future carbon dioxide emis-
sions from fossil fuels. In Changing climate, National Research 
Council, Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee, National Acad-
emy Press, Washington, DC. 
Northwest Power Planning Council (NWPPC), 1991: Northwest 
conservation and electric power plan, NWPPC, Portland, OR. 
OECD, 1993: The costs of cutting carbon emissions: Results from 
global models. OECD, Paris. 
OECD, 1994: GREEN: The reference manual, OECD Department of 
Economics. Working Paper No. 143, OECD. Paris. 
OECD, 1995: Global warming: Economic dimensions 
and policy re-
sponses, OECD, Paris. 
Oliviera-Martins, J., 1995: Unilateral emissions control, energy-
intensive industries, and carbon leakages. In OECD. Glohn1 
warming: 
Economic 
dimensions 
and 
policy 
responses, 
pp. 
105-124. OECD Monograph OECD, Paris. 
Oliveira-Martins, J., J-M. Burniaux, and J.P. Martin, 1992a: Trade 
and the effectiveness of unilateral CO, -abatement policies: Evi-
dence from GREEN. OECD Economic Studies. 19, 123-140. 
Oliveira-Martins, J.. J.-M. Burniaux. J.P. Martin, and G. Nicoletti. 
1992b: The cost of reducing CO, emissions: A comparison of car-
bon tax curves with GREEN. OECD Economics Working Paper 
No. 118. OECD. Paris. 
Orlic, M.A.. and R.A. Leng. 1992: Preliminary 
proposal 
to assist 
Bangladesh 
to improve ruminant 
livestock productivity 
and re-
duce methane emissions. 
Prepared for U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency. Washington. DC. 
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment). 1991: Changing 
by </<-
A Review of Mitigation 
Cost Studies 
.%s 
grees: Steps to reduce greenhouse gases: Summary, OTA-0-482. 
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. 
Ottinger, R.L., DR. Wooley, N.A. Robinson, DR. Hodas, and S.E. 
Babb, 1990: Environmental costs of electricity. Prepared by Pace 
University Center for Environmental Legal Studies for the New 
York State Energy and Developmental Authority and the U.S. De-
partment of Energy, Oceana Publications, New York, NY. 
Parks, P., and I. Hardie, 1995: Least cost forest carbon reserves: 
Cost-effective subsidies to convert marginal agricultural land to 
forests, Land Economics Jl( 1), 122-136. 
Peng, Z., and K. Hanslow, 1993: China's greenhouse policy options: 
A general equilibrium analysis, ABARE paper presented to the 
International Congress on Modelling and Simulation, Modelling 
change in Environmental and Socioeconomic Systems, Univer-
sity of Western Australia, Perth (December). 
Perroni, C, and T. Rutherford, 1991: International trade in carbon 
emissions rights and basic materials: General equilibrium calcu-
lations for 2020, Dept. of Economics, Wilfred Laurier University, 
Waterloo, Canada, and Dept. of Economics, University of West-
ern Ontario, London, Canada. 
Petersen, E., S. Belanger, 0. Cohan, A. Diener, J. M. Drozd, and A. 
Gjerde, 1993: The transition to reduced levels of carbon emis-
sions, WP 12.6, Energy Modeling Forum, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA. 
Pezzey, J., 1992: Analysis of unilateral CO, control in the European 
Community and OECD. The Energy Journal, 13, 159-171. 
Pilcher, R.C., C.J. Bibler, R. Glickert, ct al„ 1991: Assessment of the 
potential for economic development and utilization of coalbed 
methane in Poland, prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, DC. 
Proost, S., and D. van Regemorter, 1990: Economic effects of a car-
bon tax - With a general equilibrium illustration for Belgium, 
Public Economics Research Paper No. 11, Katholieke Univer-
siteit, Leuven, Belgium. 
Radwanski, E., A. Gromadzinski. E. Hille. P. Skowronski, and 
S. Szukalski, 1993: Case study of greenhouse gas emission in 
Poland: Final report (Polish Foundation for Energy Efficiency), 
prepared for the Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Washington, 
DC. 
Ravindranath, N., and B. Somashekhar, 1994: Potential and eco-
nomics of forestry options for carbon sequestration in India, Bio-
mass and Bioenergy (forthcoming). 
Richards, K.M., 1989: Landfill gas: Working with Gaia. In Biodete-
rioration extracts, no. 4, Energy Technology Support Unit, Har-
well Laboratory, Oxfordshire, UK. 
Richards, K.M., R. Moulton. and R. Birdsey, 1993: Costs of creat-
ing carbon sinks in the U.S. In Proceedings of the International 
Energy Agency Carbon Dioxide Disposed Symposium, P. Riemer. 
ed., pp. 905-912. Pergamon Press. Oxford. 
Richels, R„ and J. Edmonds. 1995: The economics of stabilizing 
atmospheric CO, concentrations. Energy Policy, 23(3/4), 373-
379. 
RIVM (Rijksinstitut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieuhygiene), 
1993: Proceedings of International IPCC Workshop on Methane 
and Nitrous Oxide: Methods in national emissions inventories 
and options for control, A.R. van Amstel, ed., RIVM, Amersfoort, 
the Netherlands. 
Robinson, J.. M. Fraser, E. Haites. D. Harvey, M. Jaccard, A. Reisch, 
and R. Torrie, 1993: Canadian options for greenhouse gas emis-
sion reduction: Final report of the COGGER panel to the Cana-
dian Global Change Program and the Canadian Climate 
Program Board, Canadian Global Change Program Technical Re-
port Series No. 93-1. The Royal Society of Canada, Ottawa. 
Roos, K.. 1991: Profitable alternatives for regulatory impacts on 
livestock waste management. In Proceedings of American Society 
of Agricultural Engineers 1991 National Livestock, Poultry, and 
Aquaculture Waste Management Meeting. 
RSWG (Report of the Response Strategies Working Group), 1990: 
Formulation of response strategies, Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, Island Press, Washington. DC. 
Rubin, E., R. Cooper, R. Frosch. T. Lee, G. Marland, A. Rosenfeld, 
and D. Stine, 1992: Realistic mitigation options for global warm-
ing, Science, 257, 148IT. 
Rutherford, T.. 1992: The welfare effects of fossil carbon reduc-
tions: Results from a recursively dynamic trade model, Working 
Papers, No. 112, OECD/GD(92)89, OECD, Paris. 
Saadullah, M., 1991: Importance of urea molasses block lick and 
bypass protein on animal production (Bangladesh), paper pre-
sented at International Atomic Energy Agency, International 
Symposium on Nuclear and Related Techniques in Animal Pro-
duction and Health, Vienna, Austria (April). 
Sathaye, J., and N. Goldman (eds.), 1991: CO, emissions from de-
veloping countries: Better understanding the role of energy in the 
long term, vol. 2, Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela, and 
vol. 3: China, India, Indonesia and South Korea, Energy & Envi-
ronment Division, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA. 
Schipper, L., and S. Meyers, 1992: The potential for energy conser-
vation. In World energy: Building a Sustainable Future, Stock-
holm Environmental Institute. Stockholm. 
Schroeder, P., 1992: Carbon storage potential of short rotation tropi-
cal tree plantations, Forest Ecology and Management, 50, 31-41. 
Sedjo, R.. and A. Solomon. 1989: Climate and forests. In Green-
house warming: Abatement and adaptation, N. Rosenberg, W. 
Easterling, P. Crosson. and J. Darmstadter, eds., pp. 110-119, Re-
sources for the Future. Washington. DC. 
SEI (Stockholm Environment Institute)/Greenpeace, 1993: Towards 
a fossil free energy future, The next energy transition, a technical 
analysis for Greenpeace International, Tellus Institute, Boston. 
Shackleton, R., M. Shelby. A. Cristofar, R. Brinner, and J. Yanehcr, 
1992: The efficiency value of carbon lax revenues, U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency. Washington, DC. 
Shackleton, R., and M. Shelby. 1992: The efficiency value of carbon 
tax revenues. Programme de recherche interdisciplinaire sur so-
cicte, technique, et energie. Centre national de recherche scien-
tifique (PRISTE-CNRS), Oct. 1992: Paris. 
Sinyak, Y. and K. Nagano. 1992: Global energy strategies to con-
trol future carbon dioxide emissions. Status Report, International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Sitnicki, S., K. Budzinski, J. Juda, J. Michna, and A. Spilewicz, 
1991: Poland: Opportunities for carbon emissions control, Energy 
Policy. 19,995-1002. 
Sollid, A.E.. and M.J. Walters. 1992: Reducing ruminant methane 
emissions in China: Findings of a prefeasibility site visit, pre-
pared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washing-
ton. DC. 
Sondheimer, J., 1990: Energy policy and the environment: Energy 
policy and the Green 1990s - macroeconomic effect of a carbon 
tax. paper presented at The Economy and the Green 1990s, 
Robinson College, Cambridge, UK (July), seminar sponsored by 
Cambridge Econometrics and UKCEED. 
Tasman Institute, 1994: A framework for trading carbon credits 
from New Zealand's forests, Report C6, Tasman Institute, Mel-
bourne. Australia. 
Tonkal, V„ N. Gnedoy. M. Kulik. M. Mints, and M. Raptsoun, 1992: 
Case study and the potential of energy conservation in Ukraine, 
Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories, Richland. WA. 
.M6 
('limine ( 'luni^e IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions oj Climate Change 
UNEP, 1994a: UN El' greenhouse gas abatement costing studies. 
Phase Two Report, Part I: Main Report, UNEP Collaborating 
Centre on Energy and Environment, Riso National Laboratory. 
Denmark. 
UNEP, 1994b: UNEP greenhouse gas abatement costing studies. 
Part Two: Country summaries, UNEP Collaborating Centre on 
Energy and Environment, Riso National Laboratory, Denmark. 
UNEP, 1994c: UNEP greenhouse gas abatement costing studies, 
Annex: Guidelines, UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and 
Environment, Ris0 National Laboratory, Denmark. 
U.S. Department of Energy, 1991: Limiting net greenhouse gas 
emissions in the United States. Washington, DC. 
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), 1989: Policy options 
for stabilizing global climate - Report to Congress, vol. 1: Chap-
ters 1-6, United States Environmental Protection Agency, Wash-
ington, DC. 
U.S. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency). 1990: Preliminary 
technology cost estimates of measures available to reduce U.S. 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2010. Washington, DC. 
U.S. EPA, 199.1a: Options for reducing methane emissions interna-
tionally, vol. I: Technological options for reducing methane 
emissions, report to Congress, K.B. Hogan. ed.. EPA 430-R-93-
006 A, Office of Air and Radiation. Washington, DC. 
U.S. EPA, 1993b: Options for reducing methane emissions interna-
tionally, vol. 2: International opportunities for reducing methane 
emissions, report to Congress, K.B. Hogan, ed., EPA 430-R-93-
006 B, Office of Air and Radiation, Washington, DC. 
U.S. EPA, 1993c: Opportunities to reduce anthropogenic methane 
emissions in the United States, report to Congress, K.B. Hogan, 
eel., EPA430-R-93-012, Office of Air and Radiation, Washington, 
DC. 
U.S. EPA, 1994: International anthropogenic methane emissions: 
Estimates for 1990, report to Congress, M.J. Adler, ed., Office of 
Policy Planning and Evaluation, Washington, DC. 
Van der Mensbrugghe, D„ 1995: Regional carbon tax required for 
equiproportional CO, emission reduction from baseline, Interval 
Note, OECD, Paris. " 
Van Kooten, G., L. Arthur, and W. Wilson. 1992: Potential to se-
quester carbon in Canadian forests: Some economic considera-
tions. Canadian Public Policy, 18(2), 127-138. 
Walker, I.O., and F. Birol, 1992: Analysing the cost of an OPEC en-
vironmental tax to the developing countries, Energy Policy, 20, 
559-567. 
Walz, R., M. Schon, etai, 1994: Gesamtwirtschaftliche Auswirkung-
en von Emissionsminderungsstrategien, Study for the Enquete 
Commission of the German Bundestag, Karlsruhe/Berlin. 
Whalley, J., and R. Wigle, 1990: Cutting CO, emissions: The effects 
of alternative policy approaches, The Energy Journal, 12(1). 
109-124. 
Williams, R.H., 1990: Low-cost strategies for coping with CO, 
emission limits. The Energy Journal, 11(3), 35-59. 
Wilson, D., and J. Swisher, 1992: Exploring the gap: Top-down vs. 
bottom-up analyses of the cost of mitigating global warming, 
Summer School on Science and World Affairs, Shanghai, China. 
World Energy Council, 1994: New renewable energy resources: A 
guide to the future, World Energy Council, London. 
Xu, 0.. 1994: The potential for reducing atmospheric carbon by 
large-scale afforestation in China and related cost/benefit analy-
sis, Biomass and Bioenergy (forthcoming). 
Yamaji, K., 1990: Japan. In Carbon emissions control strategies: 
Case studies in international cooperation, W.U. Chandler, ed.. 
pp. 155-172, Conservation Foundation, Washington, DC; Carbon 
Dioxide Information Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 
Oak Ridge, TN. 
Ybeme, JR., P.A. Okken, T. Kram, and P. Lako, 1993: C02 abate-
ment in the Netherlands: A study following the UNEP guidelines. 
ECN Policy Studies, Amsterdam. 
Zachariah, K.C., and M.T. Vu, 1988: World population projections. 
1987-1988 edition, World Bank, Johns Hopkins University Press, 
Baltimore, MD. 
10 
Integrated Assessment of 
Climate Change: An Overview 
and Comparison of Approaches 
and Results 
Convening Lead Author: 
J. WEYANT 
Principal Lead Authors: 
0. DAVIDSON, H. DOWLATABADI, J. EDMONDS, M. GRUBB, E.A. PARSON, 
R. RICHELS, J. ROTMANS, PR. SHUKLA, R.SJ. TOL 
Lead Authors: 
W. CLINE, S. FANKHAUSER 
i
CONTENTS 
Summary 
10.1 Introduction 
10.1.1 Purposes of integrated assessment 
10.2 Approaches to Integrated Assessment 
10.2.1 Integrated modelling and other methods 
of integration 
10.2.2 The current state of integrated 
assessment activity 
10.3 Elements of an Integrated Assessment 
Model 
10.4 Overview of Existing Integrated Assessment 
Models 
10.4.1 State of the art in integrated assessment 
modelling 
10.5 First Results from Integrated Assessment 
Models 
10.5.1 Results from policy evaluation 
models - contributions to the scientific 
debate 
10.5.1.1 Balancing the carbon budget 
10.5.1.2 Integrated land-use analysis 
10.5.1.3 Global warming potentials 
10.5.1.4 The sulphate aerosols debate 
10.5.1.5 IPCC scenarios 
10.5.1.6 Delayed response analysis 
10.5.1.7 Risk assessment 
371 
10.5.2 Results from cost-benefit policy 
optimization models 
374 
10.5.3 Cost-effective strategies for stabilizing 
374 
atmospheric C02 concentrations 
10.5.3.1 International cooperation 
375 
10.5.4 Results from uncertainty-oriented 
policy optimization models 
375 
10.5.4.1 Sensitivity analyses 
10.5.4.2 Baseline projections and 
377 
uncertainty 
10.5.4.3 Results from stochastic simulation 
models 
377 
10.5.4.4 Uncertainty, decision analysis, 
and the value of information 
380 
10.6 Strengths and Limitations of Current 
Integrated Assessments 
380 
10.6.1 Representation and valuation of impacts 
of climate change 
10.6.2 Consideration of low probability/high 
382 
consequence events 
10.6.3 Critical issues in developing countries 
10.6.4 Model integration and management 
10.6.5 Relevance and presentation 
10.6.6 The state of the art in integrated 
assessment modelling 
383 
383 
384 
384 
384 
385 
385 
385 
10.6.f 
10.6.( 
Endnotes 
References 
385 
386 
388 
388 
389 
389 
389 
389 
391 
391 
391 
391 
392 
392 
393 
393 
393 
SUMMARY 
Integrated assessments are convenient frameworks for com-
bining knowledge from a wide range of disciplines. These ef-
forts address three goals: 
(1) 
Coordinated exploration of possible future trajectories 
of human and natural systems 
(2) 
Development of insights into key questions of policy 
formation 
(3) 
Prioritization of research needs in order to enhance our 
ability to identify robust policy options 
The integration process helps the analyst coordinate assump-
tions from different disciplines and introduce feedbacks absent 
in conclusions available from individual disciplinary fields. 
Historically, the most common approach to integrated as-
sessment has been the attempt by individual researchers or 
research teams to integrate the information available from 
the relevant disciplines and provide policy advice in books 
and reports. Although this has typically been accomplished 
via informed qualitative linkages. Integrated Assessment Mod-
els (IAMs) use a computer program to link an array of com-
ponent models based on mathematical representations of in-
formation from the various contributing disciplines. This 
approach makes it easier to ensure consistency among the as-
sumptions input to the various components of the models, but 
may tend to constrain the type of information that can be 
used to what is explicitly represented in the model. 
IAMs can be divided into two broad classes: policy opti-
mization models and policy evaluation models. Policy opti-
mization models optimize key policy control variables such as 
carbon emission control rates or carbon taxes, given formu-
lated policy goals (e.g., maximizing welfare or minimizing 
the cost of meeting a carbon emission or concentration target). 
Policy evaluation models, on the other hand, project the phys-
ical, ecological, economic, and social consequences of spe-
cific policies. 
Policy optimization models can be divided into three prin-
cipal types: 
(1) 
Cost-benefit models, which attempt to balance the costs 
and benefits of climate policies 
(2) 
Target-based models, which optimize responses, given 
targets for emissions or climate change impacts 
(3) 
Uncerainty-based models, which deal with decision 
making under conditions of uncertainty 
Policy evaluation models are of two types: 
(1) 
Deterministic projection models, in which each input 
and output takes on a single value 
(2) 
Stochastic projection models, in which at least some in-
puts and outputs are treated stochastically 
Each approach has strengths and weaknesses and produces 
particular insights regarding climate change and potential pol-
icy responses to it. Some of the more advanced models can be 
used for several purposes. 
Cost-benefit models 
Cost-benefit IAMs balance the marginal costs of controlling 
greenhouse gas emissions against those of adapting to any 
climate change. In this approach any constraint on human ac-
tivities is explicitly represented and costed out. At present, 
models of this type include highly aggregated representations 
of climate damages, generally representing economic losses 
as a function of mean global surface temperature but some-
times disaggregating total damages into market and nonmar-
ket damage components. 
Keeping in mind the uncertainties and limitations inherent 
in these models, they can nevertheless be used to compute op-
timal control strategies. Specifically, results relating to opti-
mal CO, emission control rates (percentage reductions in 
emissions relative to baseline emissions) and carbon taxes 
(equivalent to the marginal cost of efficient carbon emission 
reductions) over the next century vary widely, in part because 
of debates about the nature and valuation of climate impacts 
and in part because of debates about how to represent the dy-
namics of energy systems and technology development 
processes. However, the models do agree that higher control 
costs, lower damage estimates, and higher discount rates lead 
to lower initial optimal control rates, whereas lower control 
costs, higher damage estimates, and lower discount rates lead 
to higher initial control rates. For example, if new technology 
development is highly responsive to the level of control, 
lower control costs will result over time and a higher initial 
optimal control rate will be implied. Conversely, break-
throughs in biotechnology that would be expected to reduce 
the damages resulting from climate change on agriculture 
would (other things being equal) reduce the optimal initial 
control rate. 
Target-based models 
In target-based IAMs, targets for greenhouse gas emissions, 
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, climate 
change, or climate impacts can be set to avoid certain types of 
risks, perhaps according to the "precautionary principle." As a 
Ml 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
result, the guiding principle of the cost-benefit models, eco-
nomic optimization (i.e., the marginal cost of implementing 
the mitigation and adoption measures resulting from the indi-
vidual targets should equal the marginal economic benefits of 
the impacts avoided), is replaced by an emphasis on precau-
tionary targets, risk aversion, and physical criteria. 
Several integrated assessment efforts have attempted to 
identify the cost-effective emission timepath for reaching a 
particular CO, concentration target, that is. to identify the 
emission profile that minimizes abatement costs. The initial 
path depends on assumptions about the current availability of 
low-cost measures and the inertia of the system, but after tak-
ing account of these factors the least-cost path tends to remain 
close to the reference path initially and to diverge at a rate that 
depends on the concentration target (among other things). 
Factors that tend to favour deferral of reductions include 
(1) 
A positive marginal product of capital 
(2) 
The prospect of autonomous reductions in the cost of 
carbon-free substitutes 
(3) 
More time to achieve an optimal configuration of the 
capital stock in anticipation of emission constrictions 
(4) 
The carbon cycle (the earlier the release, the more time 
for removal from the atmosphere) 
Conversely, factors that make greater early action optimal 
include 
(1) 
Lower marginal product of capital 
(2) 
The prospect 
of inducing 
further 
cost 
reductions 
through abatement action 
(3) 
The prospect of avoiding being locked in to more car-
bonintensive patterns of development 
(4) 
The extent to which inertia may amplify the costs of 
having to make more rapid emission reductions later 
It is important to note that these analyses were conducted 
with top-down models of the global energy-economic system. 
Although the models incorporate opportunities for "no-regrets" 
measures, they assume that such options are in insufficient sup-
ply to displace fossil fuels altogether. Hence, they show emis-
sions continuing to grow under a wide range of assumptions 
about population and economic growth. IAMs that include the 
full range of factors that bear on the optimal timing of emission 
reductions have not yet been developed. 
Uncertainty-based models 
As a result of the high level of uncertainty about the future evo-
lution of socioeconomic and natural systems, some researchers 
have put the analysis of climate change into explicit frame-
works of the kind discussed in Chapter 2 for analyzing decision 
making under uncertainty. Generally, this has been done either 
by including an uncertainty representation of all key parameters 
within simplified models of the types discussed above or by 
adding a limited number of alternative states to full cost-benefit 
models. In addition, many of these models allow policies to he 
changed as uncertainties are resolved through time, although 
the process by which uncertainty is resolved is usually re pre-
sentcd quite simplistically, perhaps even unrealistically. The 
uncertainty-based cost-benefit assessments completed thus far 
find higher optimal rates of abatement than do the deterministic 
cost-benefit models. Uncertainty analyses with target-oriented 
IAMs have also been used to calculate the likelihood of certain 
key physical thresholds being exceeded in the future. 
Policy evaluation models 
Policy evaluation IAMs are comprehensive, process-based 
models that attempt to provide a thorough description of the 
complex, long-term dynamics of the biosphere-climate sys-
tem. The dynamic description often includes a description 
of atmospheric chemistry, climate, and ecological impact 
processes as well as a number of geophysical and biogeo-
chemical feedbacks within the system. Some of the models 
even deal with biosphere-climate dynamics at a geograpically 
explicit level. On the other hand, the socioeconomic system in 
these models is usually poorly represented. The larger models 
usually do not serve the purpose of performing cost-benefit or 
cost-effectiveness analyses, but they can provide insights into 
the intricate interrelationships between the various compo-
nents of the human system and the biosphere-climate system. 
Ideally, such insights can lead to new priority setting in the 
analysis of the climate change process. Policy evaluation 
IAMs provide a useful framework for identifying, illuminat-
ing, and clarifying current uncertainties. The most important 
uncertainties can be compared and ranked, and then the model 
can show how they propagate through the whole human/cli-
mate/biosphere system. 
Policy Evaluation IAMs have helped identify critical 
knowledge gaps in several areas. Some of the most important 
findings from these models relate to the balancing of the car-
bon cycle, integrated land-use analysis, and sulphur aerosols. 
The carbon cycle. IAM assessments of the impact of feed-
back mechanisms within the global carbon cycle have demon-
strated that there are a large number of representations of the 
cycle that balance the past and present carbon budget, each of 
which can lead to very different atmospheric concentration 
levels for a specific projection of future carbon emissions. 
Land-use analysis. The integration of geographically ex-
plicit representations of agriculture and land cover with cli-
mate change calculations has already provided new insights 
into climate-related shifts in agricultural areas and the in-
fluence of changing land cover on climate. Preliminary re-
sults suggest that regional demands for land can serve as a 
surrogate for the regional and local forces that are driving 
local land cover changes. These results also show the vul-
nerability of protected areas under shifting 
vegetation 
zones, and the consequences for biodiversity and nature 
conservation. 
Sulphur aerosols. The first integrated assessments incorpo-
rating both SO, and CO, emissions show that it is conceivable 
that reductions in radiative forcing resulting from rapid reduc-
tions in coal use in some regions could be more than offset for 
a decade or two by increased radiative forcing from the asso-
ciated reductions in SO, emissions. However, spatial and tern-
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Results 
.w 
poral differences in sulphur emissions and the local nature of 
the changes in radiative forcing due to sulphur aerosols mean 
that the effects cannot be considered to cancel each other out 
in terms of impacts on regional climate patterns. 
Although integrated assessment of climate change is a 
rapidly evolving field, the following additional preliminary 
conclusions can be made from the work completed thus far: 
(1) 
Integrated assessments are no stronger than the underly-
ing natural and economic science that supports them. 
Nevertheless, by bringing many components of the cli-
mate change problem into a common framework, they 
offer potentially useful insights that would be unavail-
able from a purely disciplinary research programme. In 
applying these assessments to climate policy design, 
two critical factors should be noted. First, researchers 
should provide a measure of the confidence with which 
such policy assessments can be made; and, second, the 
models should indicate the distribution across countries 
and income levels of impacts associated with particular 
policy goals and implementations. 
(2) 
Recent refinements to Integrated Assessment Models 
show increased diversity in the distribution of regional 
costs and benefits. This implies potentially greater diffi-
culty in reaching agreements but also opens up the pos-
sibility of greater gains in global welfare from achiev-
ing them. 
(3) 
From the integrated assessment perspective, there are 
important gaps in disciplinary research and inconsisten-
cies between the information produced by the various 
disciplines whose reconciliation would lead to im-
proved integrated assessments. Much of the underlying 
fundamental science needed to develop coordinated in-
tegrated assessments is not in a form suitable for imme-
diate use. Different disciplinary experts, for example, 
have held different factors constant. This contributes to 
the difficulty of developing, calibrating, and validating 
the models. In addition, some of the underlying funda-
mental research has not been performed. For example, 
models of adaptive decision making do not yet explic-
itly consider how social goals and progress towards 
them are measured over time or how global change 
processes are detected. Finally, there are some highly 
uncertain components in the current set of integrated as-
sessments, including the sensitivity of the climate sys-
tem to changes in greenhouse gas concentrations, the 
physical and economic impacts of any climate change 
that may occur, and the applicability and choice of dis-
count rates. One of the main values of the integrated as-
sessment approach to the study of climate change lies in 
the identification of gaps and inconsistencies in our 
knowledge of the underlying phenonema and their im-
plications for future research. 
(4) 
Although it is difficult confidently to choose one policy 
in preference to others based on current knowledge 
about the climate system and human interactions with it, 
it has been demonstrated that the policy objective, dis-
count rate, and timing of compliance can be critical to 
short-term policy formulation and the overall cost of ac-
tion. 
(5) 
Given the considerable uncertainties associated with 
how the climate system will evolve and interact with 
human activities, policies that enhance the flexibility of 
nations and individuals to respond to any impacts that 
do emerge tend to have high value. Because they can 
be focussed directly on the impacts of climate change, 
research and development activities related to technolo-
gies and institutions that facilitate the process of adapta-
tion to climate change generally have a high payoff. 
Research and development activities directed towards 
technologies that lower material use in economic activ-
ity are also a good bet. 
(6) 
Most current models do not match the social and eco-
nomic organization of the developing economies well. 
For example, none of the existing models can incorpo-
rate hierarchical decision structures or represent the op-
eration of the informal economies that are important in 
many developing countries. This can lead to biases in 
global assessments when impacts in developing coun-
tries are valued as if these countries were no different 
from developed countries. 
(7) 
Finally, climate change is but one dimension of global 
change. For example, integrated assessments suggest 
that ecosystem impacts from projected climate change, 
agriculture management, and urbanization could well be 
of similar magnitudes. 
J74 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
10.1 Introduction 
The historic Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(FCCC), signed by 154 countries at the UN Conference on En-
vironment and Development (UNCED) in Brazil in June 1992, 
had as its central objective the stabilization of atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations at a level that would prevent 
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. 
It also stated that this goal should he realized soon enough that 
ecosystems could adapt naturally to climate change, that food 
production would not be threatened, and that sustainable eco-
nomic development could proceed (FCCC, Article 2). The text 
does not specify, though, what the operational meaning of 
"dangerous anthropogenic interference" is, how its occurrence 
or the risk of its occurrence could he detected, or what mea-
sures, applied at what level of stringency, would be justified in 
avoiding it. The other central concepts in the objective - nat-
ural adaptation of ecosystems, threats to food production, and 
sustainable economic development - are also not articulated 
precisely. Nor could they he. 
Rendering the Convention's objective into operational 
specifics will require further deliberations, informed by the 
best available synthesis of current scientific, technical, eco-
nomic, and sociopolitical knowledge. Such a synthesis can 
help define and assess the risks associated with climate 
change, ecosystem responses, and human adaptive responses 
as well as the feasibility, effectiveness, cost, and side effects 
of potential response measures. Synthesizing and communi-
cating such knowledge in support of policy deliberations is 
the function of assessment. 
Integrated assessment is distinguished from disciplinary 
research by its purpose, which is to inform policy and deci-
sion making rather than to advance knowledge for its intrinsic 
value. Integrated assessment is identified by the breadth of 
knowledge sources and the variety of disciplines from which 
it draws. It is to be distinguished from those (infrequent) in-
stances in which a significant policy issue can be well in-
formed by clear presentation of a body of knowledge held 
within a single discipline. 
The broader the set of knowledge domains that must be syn-
thesized to inform a policy or decision, the greater the intellec-
tual and managerial problems that must be overcome to do the 
assessment well and make it useful to its audience. How inte-
grated any particular assessment must be depends on the issue 
or decision (o he informed. Perhaps more than any other policy 
issue, global climate change requires integrated assessment. 
Making rational, informed social decisions on climate change 
potentially requires knowledge of a large number of interre-
lated processes, beginning with the human activities that affect 
greenhouse gas emissions and extending to the atmospheric, 
oceanic, and biological processes that link emissions to atmo-
spheric concentrations, the climatic and radiative processes 
that link atmospheric concentrations to global and regional cli-
mate, the ecological, economic, and sociopolitical processes 
that link changed climate to valued impacts, and the processes 
by which such evaluations are made. Any progress in under-
standing and responding to an issue o\ such complexity will re-
quire the capacitv to interpret, integrate, reconcile, organize. 
and communicate knowledge across domains - that is, to do 
integrated assessment. This need has been widely recognized 
in calls to advance methods of integrated assessment and in the 
large number of projects now underway. Although there have 
been past examples of integrated assessments of major envi-
ronmental issues - for example, the American CIAP Project 
(Grobecker et«/., 1974) and the European acid rain studies in-
tegrated in the RAINS model (Alcamo et al., 1990) - the cur-
rent level of integrated assessment activity on global climate 
change is unprecedented. 
10.1.1 Purposes of integrated 
assessment 
Integrated assessment can in principle serve three purposes. 
First, integrated assessment can help assess potential re-
sponses to climate change, by (1) representing physical, eco-
logical, economic, and social processes to project the conse-
quences of climate change and of particular policy responses 
to it, (2) using a cost-benefit formulation to compare costs 
of responses to the severity of the impacts they are intended 
to prevent, or (3) using a cost-effectiveness formulation to 
compare the relative effectiveness and cost of different re-
sponses to meet a specified target. Whichever of these for-
mulations is employed, integrated assessment performs this 
function by making consistent, contingent, appropriately qual-
ified projections of the likely cost and effect of specified 
responses. 
Second, by providing a coherent, systematic framework to 
structure present knowledge, integrated assessment can bring 
two important benefits: It can promote a broad view of the cli-
mate issue that may facilitate more systematic searching for 
possible responses and avoid prematurely settling on one or a 
few proposed responses; and it can provide a consistent repre-
sentation of current uncertainties, permitting identification 
and prioritization of those that are most important in practia.l 
terms - that is, those uncertainties that are most important to 
reduce in order to understand what should be done. Since the 
most important uncertainties from the perspective of policy 
relevance will not necessarily be the most important for ad-
vancing basic understanding, this function of integrated as-
sessment can be of the highest importance. 
Third, integrated assessment can help to address the most 
fundamental policy question about global climate change: 
How important is it relative to other matters of human con-
cern? Gaining insight into this question will require compar-
ing the aggregate social effect of climate change and potential 
responses to it with the aggregate social effect likely to arise 
from other changes and risks over the same period of time. 
In fulfilling these purposes, integrated assessment supple-
ments disciplinary research but does not replace it. A discipli-
nary research programme in the natural or social sciences. 
even one including components representing every relevant 
discipline that could contribute to informing policy choice, 
will not normally emphasize a synthesis of knowledge across 
domains and so cannot typically do the jobs of assessing the 
consequences of potential responses or prioritizing decision-
relevant uncertainties and research needs. Current experience 
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Residts 
575 
suggests that cross-disciplinary integration to fill these needs 
does not happen spontaneously and can be both difficult and 
costly. But this does not mean that integrated assessment 
can replace disciplinary research, even for providing policy-
relevant knowledge. Although integrated assessment is need-
ed to identify and prioritize policy-relevant and scientific gaps 
in knowledge, the gaps so identified can normally only be 
filled by disciplinary research, whether in the natural or social 
sciences. 
10.2 Approaches to Integrated Assessment 
Integrated assessments can be integrated over different di-
mensions and to different degrees. In contributing to general 
policy-relevant understanding, studies using many different 
dimensions and degrees of integration, from the broadest to 
the narrowest, may make important contributions. In inform-
ing the deliberations or decisions of a particular policy audi-
ence, though, the appropriate form and extent of integration are 
determined by the needs of the audience. When there is a spe-
cific audience or decision to inform, a useful assessment will 
seek to represent the kinds of policies and decisions they are 
concerned with, at a resolution that corresponds to their re-
sponsibilities and concerns, while taking appropriate opportu-
nities to help broaden their understanding of the issue. 
An area of active current exploration is the development of 
global-scale climate assessments with "end-to-end'" integra-
tion that combines assessment of emissions and abatement 
measures with impacts and adaptation measures. Such proj-
ects often (implicitly or explicitly) pursue a cost-benefit fram-
ing of the climate issue to shed light on decisions about 
optimal global emission abatements and efficient means of 
achieving them. The implied audience for such assessments 
consists of those decision makers with the authority to bal-
ance the extent and form of abatement measures, adaptive and 
compensatory measures, and possibly geoengineering mea-
sures. Assessments of this kind are likely to help improve the 
general understanding of appropriate responses to the climate 
issue. Broad balancing of abatement and adaptation measures 
will be done, implicitly or explicitly, and it is clearly desirable 
that whatever knowledge is available to illuminate such broad 
trade-offs be presented to those involved in such choices. 
Such assessments, though, are not the only kind that can be 
useful, or necessarily the most appropriate for informing 
many specific policy decisions. Certain international deliber-
ations and negotiations, for example, may need assessments 
that are integrated even more broadly. At this level, it may not 
be possible to address the climate issue without making judg-
ments of its significance relative to other environmental and 
policy issues. To engage choices of this breadth, assessments 
may be required that facilitate comparing the potential im-
pacts of climate change and other issues. End-to-end assess-
ment of climate change may be a necessary component of 
such assessments, but it may not by itself be sufficient. For 
questions of such breadth, the most useful assessments may 
be those that focus not on a single environmental issue but on 
basic policy choices and long-term technological trends in 
areas of human activity that affect a variety of environmental 
and other issues, such as agriculture or energy. 
On the other hand, most policy audiences are likely to need 
less broadly integrated assessments. This may be so even Re-
assessments to inform international negotiations, if, as often 
happens, a preexisting political commitment either to a simple 
heuristic principle like the precautionary principle or to a spe-
cific numerical policy target truncates the consideration of re-
sponses (Parson and Zeckhauser, 1995; Levy, 1993). In such 
cases the most useful assessment may be to adopt a cost-effec-
tiveness approach, comparing emission types, sources, gases, 
and regions, to determine feasible, low-cost ways to meet 
specified abatement goals (see, e.g.. Read, 1994b). However, 
integrated assessment models can also be used to test the cost-
effectiveness or welfare implications of those principles. 
Integrated assessment may also be of interest to small coun-
tries or regions that may suffer climate impacts but have little 
or no influence over global emissions. For authorities in such 
jurisdictions, the crucial dimension of integration will be 
across dimensions of impact - sector, location, group, and time 
- under an illustrative set of climate change scenarios. This 
type of assessment could inform their decisions about long-
term climate-dependent investment, emergency response mea-
sures, zoning, and insurance and compensation schemes that 
form the bulk of adaptation response. Recent empirical study 
suggests that assessments conducted at relatively fine levels of 
spatial or sectoral aggregation and initiated by decision makers 
with direct responsibility for making such decisions or re-
sponding to such impacts tend to be more immediately useful 
and more directly used than assessments with national or inter-
national scope (Clark and van Eijndhoven, 1996). 
10.2.1 Integrated modelling and other methods 
of integration 
A variety of methods to conduct integrated assessment are pos-
sible. Current projects on global climate have largely, but not 
exclusively, pursued integration through a formal integrating 
model, though the centrality and manner of use of the model 
vary among projects (Rotmans et ai. 1995). Other integration 
methods that have been tried include special senior commis-
sions or panels whose members span the required range of ex-
pertise and integrate knowledge judgmentally through their 
deliberations; formal models of problem subcomponents, 
linked through an external, judgmental combination of results 
rather than through a formal integrating model; collaborative 
interdisciplinary research teams whose continuing interactions 
develop collective skills at exchanging and sharing knowledge 
across their fields; and individual essays by authors with suffi-
cient multidisciplinary competence to encompass the policy 
problems (see Box 10.1). Other integrating devices are not yet 
thoroughly developed but may hold substantial promise. These 
include simulations or policy exercises - devices for joint de-
liberation by researchers and policymakers in a hypothetical 
policy setting employing knowledge available from a variety 
of sources, including existing literatures, formal models, and 
expert judgment (Brewer. 1986: Parson. 1995b). 
J 76 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Integrated assessment is neither a new concept nor an activity restricted to climate change. This box provides an illustrative 
review of landmarks in the history of integrated assessment of global environmental issues. 
The first integrated assessment of a global environmental issue was the Climatic Impacts Assessment Program (CIAP), 
conducted by the U.S. Department of Transportation to assess the environmental impacts of stratospheric flight by super-
sonic aircraft (Grobecker et ai, 
1974). Six separate interdisciplinary expert teams examined one link in a causal chain 
stretching from human activities (scenarios of supersonic flight and jet engine design) through atmospheric chemistry and 
radiation to biological, economic, and social impacts. The teams exchanged numerical estimates of key quantities, ulti-
mately yielding quantitative estimates of the environmental and economic impacts of specific scenarios of stratospheric 
Hight. 
Through the 1970s and early 19S()s. several other major integrated assessments were conducted using a similar structure 
of interdisciplinary expert panels. Early assessments of global climate change that helped lay the groundwork for the present 
IPCC approach included Clark (1982) and the U.S. National Research Council (1983). This comprehensive, interdiscipli-
nary approach, which does not centrally depend on formal modelling, continues to the present in such bodies as the Assess-
ment Panels of the Montreal Protocol and the IPCC itself. Since CIAP, however, no assessment has attempted such a 
precise, comprehensive integration of processes, from human activities to valued consequences, without using a formal in-
tegrating model. 
Formally modelled integrated assessment studies trace their inspiration, if not their precise methods, to the global models 
of the 1970s, such as Meadows et al. (1972) and Mesarovic and Pestel (1974). (This field was reviewed in Meadows et ai, 
1982.) These highly aggregated dynamic models of world development included generalized representations of pollution 
and resource depletion but did not address any particular environmental issue. 
Formal integrated assessment models of climate change emerged in the late 1970s from earlier economic and technical 
models of energy policy. Nordhaus (1979) presented the first model that combined energy conversion, emissions, and atmo-
spheric CO, concentration. Subsequent efforts in integrated assessment of climate change that stressed formal modelling in-
eluded the 11 AS A energy project (llafele et ai, 1981), Nordhaus and Yohe (1983), which added uncertainty to modelled pro-
jections of future CO, concentrations, and Edmonds and Reilly (1985). 
Through the 1980s, climate assessment studies using formal integrated modelling were narrower in scope than those us-
ing interdisciplinary expert panels. The modelled assessments normally extended no further than atmospheric CO, concen-
tration, excluding both non-CO, greenhouse gases and resultant changes in climate and impacts. A separate line of work, 
beginning with the MINK project (Rosenberg and Crosson, 1991; Rosenberg, 1993) focussed specifically on climate im-
pacts, combining detailed sectoral models of agriculture, forests, energy, and water resources. 
The first integrated assessment model to extend fully from emissions to impacts did not address climate change but the 
more analytically tractable issue of acid rain. The RAINS model of acidification in Europe was developed at IIASA begin-
ning in the early 1980s (Alcamo. Shaw, and Hordijk. 1990). RAINS integrates models of acid emissions, atmospheric trans-
port and deposition, and effects. The RAINS project also pioneered a close relationship between the modelling team and 
policymakers, arguably leading to a more policy-relevant model and a more useful contribution to negotiations and policy 
making than has yet been attained on other issues. 
The first steps to extend formal integrated modelling of climate change were taken by Mintzer (1987), who added non-CO, 
gases and global temperature change, and subsequently by Lashof and Tirpak (1989) in their Atmospheric Stabilization 
Frame work. The first model to attempt a fully integrated representation of climate from sources to impacts was IMAGE 1.0 
(Rotmans. 1990). which subsequently became the basis for the integrated European model ESCAPE (Hulme et al., 1995). 
Since 1990. the number of projects in integrated assessment modelling of global climate change has expanded rapidly. 
The idea that useful models could be developed to span the full range of the climate issue has gained increasing acceptance, 
as advances in computing power and in the disciplinary understanding and sectoral modelling efforts on which such inte-
grated modelling projects depend have made projects of this kind increasingly feasible. A landmark of the maturation of in-
tegrated assessment modelling of climate change was the first conference to assess activity in the field (Nakicenovic etui.. 
1994). Since then, as discussed in the text of this chapter, the field has continued to expand and develop rapidly. 
BOX 10.1: HISTORY OF INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT 
Doing integrated assessment by building an integrating 
model has several evident advantages. Constructing a model 
imposes common standards of coherent, precise communi-
cation on project participants. It also imposes common data 
definitions and standards oi' consistency and scale on prob-
lem components and can facilitate the incorporation of new 
know ledge in an awcwincm. Attendant disadvantages are that 
the modelling may force more precise representation than I lie 
underlying knowledge in particular domains allows, may im-
pose inappropriate restrictions, and may direct excessive pro-
ject effort toward technical problems of model convergence, 
hence giving aggregate results that say as much about algo-
rithmic artifacts as they do about component understanding. 
Integration through integrated modelling may be particularly 
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Results 
>V7 
Atmospheric 
Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
Composition 
! 
' 
Ocean Carbon 
Cycle 
' 
Climate & Sea Level 
Climate 
IZ 
X 
: 
• ' 
> 
Ocean 
! 
• temperature 
; 
• sea level 
! 
L 
Human Activities 
Energy 
System 
Other Human 
Systems 
Agriculture, 
Livestock, & 
Forestry 
% 
f 
< 
* 
Coastal 
System 
Ecosystems 
Terrestrial 
Carbon Cycle 
Unmanaged 
Ecosystem 
Crops & 
Forestry 
Hydrology 
Figure 10.1: Key components of full scale IAMs. 
weak in representing policies and decisions realistically and 
in reflecting knowledge of relevant social, political, institu-
tional, and negotiation processes. 
those both more and less strongly dependent on integrated 
modelling. 
10.2.2 The current state of integrated 
assessment activity 
Most current integrated assessment projects focus principally 
on building integrated models, although this is only one of 
various possible approaches to integrated assessment. In addi-
tion, most current projects are characterized by a national to 
global scale, a rather coarse spatial and sectoral resolution, 
and weak representation of policies and political processes. 
The balance of this chapter focusses on recent and current 
work in integrated assessment modelling (IAM), discussing 
the structure, modelling approaches, and major weaknesses of 
present projects and reviewing preliminary results. 
Despite its importance, the field of integrated assessment is 
relatively immature and lacks a shared body of professional 
knowledge and standards of "best practice." Such knowledge 
will require more experience to develop: in its absence, it 
would be ill-advised to pursue a single, authoritative vision of 
integrated assessment. On many intellectual and managerial 
dimensions, there are many plausible ways of meeting the 
challenges of integrated assessment, but there is no evident 
single right way. Consequently, there is much to be gained 
from the parallel pursuit of diverse approaches, including 
10.3 Elements of an Integrated Assessment Model 
A large number of integrated assessment models, with a wide 
variety of differing goals and objectives motivating their con-
struction, are now being used to examine the issue of climate 
change. They vary greatly in their level of detail, but all share 
the defining trait that they incorporate knowledge from more 
than one field of study. However, they also vary greatly with re-
gard to their scope. It is therefore important to distinguish be-
tween models in terms of this dimension as well as their level of 
detail. Models that attempt to represent the full range of issues 
raised by climate change are referred to as "full-scale" IAMs. 
Full-scale IAMs must grapple with all the complexity of an 
IPCC assessment. This is an intimidating array of concerns. 
But although an I AM for climate change must consider a wide 
variety of issues, the number of issues is bounded. For the 
purpose of exposition, we group the principal considerations 
into four general categories, depicted in Figure 10.1: 
• human activities 
• atmospheric composition 
• climate and sea level 
• ecosystems 
.UH 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Chanel 
Emissions 
Energy 
System 
Other 
Emissions 
Agriculture 
Atmospheric Composition 
Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
Ocean 
Carbon 
Cycle 
Climate & Sea Level 
Climate 
Ocean 
temperature 
• sea level 
Impacts 
Energy 
System 
Health & 
Other 
Impacts 
Agriculture, 
Livestock, & 
Forestry 
?<=* 
4 — » 
Coastal 
System 
Figure 10.2: lanl-to-eiul characterisation of IAMs. 
Figure 10.1 is not the only possible depiction of the climate 
change system. An infinite number of aggregations are possi-
ble and a great many ""wiring diagrams" already exist. This 
particular diagram has the virtue of including both human 
and natural sWeni components. One alternative organization 
is the "end-to-end" characterization depicted in Figure 10.2. 
In this organizational formulation there are also four cate-
gories, this time beginning with emissions and ending with 
impacts. The principal organizational difference is that hu-
man activities and ecosystems are partitioned, with some fea-
tures of each contained in the emissions and impacts compo-
nents. This characterization deemphasizes the interactive 
character of the IAMs, in particular the fact that the same hu-
man and natural systems that produce emissions also suffer 
impacts. 
Human systems interact with natural systems in two ways. 
Human activities are responsible for the emissions of green-
house-related gases that are the centre of concern in the cli-
mate change issue. Human activities are also affected by 
climate change, either directly, for example, through changes 
in temperature, which affect demands for space heating and 
cooling, or indirectly, for example, through changes in sea 
level, crop productivity, or biodiversity. 
Full-scale IAMs must consider the issue of emissions of 
greenhouse-related gases. The array of gases that matter from 
the perspective of emissions differs slightly from the array of 
gases that matter from the perspective of climate. From the 
perspective of climate change only, the set of gases and parti-
cles that have the capacity to change the radiative balance of 
the planet needs to be considered. At present the set consists 
principally of the following: water vapour (H20), ozone (O,). 
carbon dioxide (CO,), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N,0). 
sulphur aerosols, and the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and 
their substitutes. 
The set of gases that must be considered from the perspec-
tive of emissions is strongly overlapping, but includes some 
important differences. Water vapour and O, are not emitted in 
sufficient quantities by human activities to matter. Ozone con-
centrations are, however, affected by the emissions of other 
greenhouse-related gases such as carbon monoxide (CO). 
odd-nitrogen (NOx), and nonmethane hydrocarbons (NMHC). 
whereas water vapour concentrations are influenced by the 
effect of temperature change on the water cycle. Likewise. 
sulphur aerosols are not emitted but are formed in the atmo-
sphere at a rate that depends on emissions of sulphur oxides 
and particulate matter as well as other aspects of atmospheric 
chemistry. 
With regard to the emissions of greenhouse-related gases 
the following human activities figure prominently: 
• energy systems 
• agriculture, livestock, and forest systems 
• industrial systems 
The role of energy systems is the single most critical compo-
nent determining emissions in IAMs. Not only are energy sys-
tems associated with the greatest anthropogenic release of 
carbon to the atmosphere, but they are also associated with the 
largest anthropogenic release of sulphur compounds as well. 
Systems that determine rates of land use change figure im-
portantly, though the relationship between specific human 
actions and land use change is less well defined than the rela-
tionship between energy production and use and the release of 
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Results 
.ivy 
greenhouse-related gases. Agriculture, livestock, and forestry 
represent the most extensive anthropogenic uses of land. In 
addition, agriculture and livestock are important determinants 
of CH, and N,0 releases. 
Finally, full-scale IAMs must consider the array of other 
greenhouse-related emissions to the atmosphere. Most promi-
nent among these are the chlorofluorocarbons and their sub-
stitutes, although there are others. 
From the perspective of the consequences of climate 
change, an overlapping but somewhat different list of issues 
must also be dealt with by IAMs. The problem of climate 
change impacts is more difficult to deal with in IAMs because 
impacts are anticipated to affect a wide array of human activi-
ties, with no single activity thought to be substantially more 
vulnerable than others. IAMs thus frequently confront the im-
pacts issue abstractly, using "damage functions," rather than 
explicitly. Nevertheless, underlying any treatment of impacts 
within an IAM are, at a minimum, the following human activ-
ities: 
• agriculture, livestock, and forest systems 
• energy systems 
• coastal zones 
• water systems 
• human health 
• the value of local air quality 
• the values of unmanaged ecosystems1 
The second information set that a full-scale IAM must gener-
ate is the concentrations of greenhouse gases, which the 
model must translate from both natural emissions and the 
emission flows generated by human activities. Greenhouse 
gas concentrations also depend on natural sources and sinks. 
In general, greenhouse gases can be segregated into CO., and 
other gases. The non-CO, greenhouse-related gases are con-
trolled by atmospheric processes. Their sinks are predomi-
nantly in the atmosphere. C02, on the other hand, is governed 
by the processes of the carbon cycle. The concentration of 
CO, in the atmosphere is determined predominantly by inter-
actions between atmospheric concentrations and the oceans 
and terrestrial systems. 
Models deal with CO, in a variety of ways, ranging from 
simple airborne fraction models, which use a proportional 
approximation method to determine atmospheric concentra-
tions, to interactive process models of the atmosphere and 
biosphere. The present understanding of both the carbon cycle 
and atmospheric chemistry have been surveyed in Volume 1 
of the present report and in previous IPCC scientific reports 
(seelPCC, 1990, 1992. 1995). 
Full-scale IAMs should ultimately also consider the prob-
lem of local air quality, as the removal rates for local air pollu-
tants depend on weather conditions, and greenhouse gas 
abatement influences local air quality. These factors, in turn, 
interact with the economic value of changes in health condi-
tions. The inclusion of local air quality is not yet possible, 
however, because of the totally different spatial and temporal 
scales and aggregation levels of the climate change and local 
air pollution problems. At the moment, such analyses can only 
be done through case studies, such as those being done by 
RIVM (the Dutch National Institute of Public Health and En-
vironmental Protection) for 25 megacities around the world. 
Chapter 6 assesses these so-called "secondary benefits" of 
greenhouse gas abatement. 
The third information set that a full-scale IAM must gener-
ate is the state of climate and sea level. Climate cannot be de-
rived without dealing in one way or another with oceans. 
Oceans are an important determinant of the timing of climate 
change, as they represent an enormous heat sink. Thus, ocean-
atmosphere feedbacks also influence the rate of sea level rise. 
In addition, interactions between the atmosphere and cryo-
sphere affect climate change and sea level. Sea level calcula-
tions, for example, must include changes in the volume of 
meltwater from the major land-based ice sheets. Furthermore, 
the ocean that interacts with atmospheric processes in de-
termining climate and sea level change also absorbs carbon 
that has been accounted for in the atmospheric composition 
model. 
In Figure 10.1, the fourth category of IAM information is 
ecosystems. This category includes information associated 
with natural emissions of greenhouse-related gases, the terres-
trial carbon cycle, and the effect of climate change, sea level 
rise, and CO, on crops, pastures, grazing lands, forests, hy-
drology, and unmanaged ecosystems. 
These systems are strongly interactive. Some models han-
dle them in a holistic manner, explicitly considering the inter-
actions of natural system emissions, the status of unmanaged 
ecosystems, hydrology, ground cover, crop, and forest pro-
ductivity. Other models treat them as if they were indepen-
dent. The managed biosphere interacts strongly with human 
systems, which determine the selection of crop and managed 
forest species and the allocation of water resources among 
competing ends. Interactions between ecosystems and the cli-
mate and sea level functions are presently thought to be of 
second-order importance and arc not dealt with in a majority 
of IAMs. 
In addition to the degree of complexity (including disag-
gregation) considered within and between modules, another 
major design consideration in an integrated assessment model 
is the treatment of the considerable uncertainties about virtu-
ally every major relationship in the climate change assess-
ment system. Future population and economic growth are 
uncertain; future greenhouse gas emissions, given population 
and economic activity, are uncertain; future greenhouse gas 
concentrations, given emissions, are uncertain; future climate, 
given atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, is un-
certain; future physical impacts of climate change are un-
certain: and the future valuation of the physical impacts 
attributable to climate change is uncertain. 
Uncertainty can be handled in a number of ways in inte-
grated assessment modelling. Extensive sensitivity analyses 
can be performed on key model inputs and parameters, or ex-
plicit subjective probabilities can be assessed for these inputs 
and parameters and fed into a formal risk or decision analysis 
framework. If a formal risk or decision analysis approach is 
pursued, it is generally possible to calculate the value of in for-
.ISO 
Climate Change IW5 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
mation with respect to wholly or partially resolving the uncer-
tainty associated with each key input or parameter. Such cal-
culations can provide a useful screening of uncertainties to 
determine where research expenditures may or may not have 
large net expected benefits. Combined with estimates of re-
search costs and success probabilities, they can help in setting 
research priorities in a rational way. Of course, these priorities 
can be expected to change over time as research itself changes 
perceptions of research costs and benefits. 
10.4 Overview of Existing Integrated 
Assessment Models 
Prior to 1992, only two integrated assessment models of cli-
mate change had appeared in the literature (Nordhaus, 1989, 
1991; Rotmans, 1990). Since 1992 a host of new models has 
emerged. Table 10.1 lists twenty-two integrated assessment 
models that are in active use or under active development; in 
addition, a number of other modelling efforts are underway, so 
the number of existing integrated assessment models might be 
expected to at least double in the next few years. Even within 
the group of models listed in Table 10.1, though, there is a 
wide variation in level of model maturity. Some models are 
fully operational and documented. Others are up and running 
but not yet fully operational or documented. Still others are in 
module development and testing phases, with some modules 
not yet fully specified. It is anticipated that all the models 
shown here will he fully operational, albeit in preliminary ver-
sions in some cases, by the end of 1995. The modelling in this 
area is so active that even models that are fully operational are 
continually being refined and updated substantially every three 
to six months. Table 10.2 summarizes the current development 
status and most recent documentation available for the twenty-
two models listed in Table 10.1. 
The models included in Table 10.1 can be compared struc-
turally according to the amount of emphasis they place on 
each of the blocks shown in Figure 10.1. The results of this 
process are shown in Table 10.3 (adapted from Rotmans et at., 
1995). Note that some of the models do not explicitly consider 
the relationships included in each of the blocks. In particular, 
several of the key models omit direct modelling of economic 
activity and rely on exogenous greenhouse gas emission tra-
jectories. In addition, more than half the existing models con-
sider both the physical impacts and their valuation only 
through aggregate damage functions that relate global mean 
temperature change directly to economic damage. 
10.4.1 State of the art in integrated 
assessment modelling 
It is difficult to characterize simply the state of the art in inte-
grated assessment modelling of climate change - a great deal 
of model development is underway at present, involving a 
large number of research teams, with members drawn from a 
myriad of relevant disciplines, focussing on different dimen-
sions of the problem, and using different types of methodol-
ogies. Nonetheless, a locus on the trade-offs between the 
complexity of natural systems models, the complexity of eco-
nomic models, and the effort devoted to the explicit incor-
poration of uncertainty can help us understand the model 
development completed so far, as well as that occurring today 
or planned or anticipated for the future. 
There are two broad classes of integrated assessment mod-
els: policy evaluation models that project the physical, eco-
logical, economic, and social consequences of policies and 
policy optimization models that optimize key policy control 
variables (e.g., carbon emission control rates or carbon taxes) 
given formulated policy goals such as maximizing welfare or 
minimizing the cost of meeting a carbon emission or concen-
tration target. There are two general types of policy evaluation 
models: deterministic projection models, in which each input 
and output takes on a single value, and stochastic projection 
models, in which at least some inputs and outputs are treated 
stochastically. Policy optimization models can be divided into 
three general types: models that optimize responses, given 
targets for emissions or climate change impacts; models that 
seek to balance the costs and benefits of climate policies; and 
models of sequential climate decision making under uncer-
tainty. Each approach has strengths and weaknesses, and each 
produces particular insights regarding climate change and po-
tential policy responses to it. Some of the more advanced 
models can be used for several of the above purposes. 
Policy optimization IAMs focus on balancing the marginal 
costs of controlling greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to 
any climate change impacts that may occur with the damages 
that result after implementation of the mitigation and adapta-
tion policies. These models reflect the strict cost-benefit para-
digm discussed in Chapter 5. In this approach any constraint 
on human activities is explicitly represented and costed out. 
At present, models of this type include highly aggregated rep-
resentations of climate damages, generally representing eco-
nomic losses as a function of mean global surface tempera-
tures but sometimes disaggregating these losses into market 
and nonmarket damage components.- However, as additional 
research on climate change impacts proceeds, it may be deter-
mined that these measurements are inaccurate. Moreover, it 
may be difficult to get policymakers to implement policies 
based on aggregate damages, as they are more likely to be 
able to relate to impacts on particular countries, regions, or 
sectors (e.g., agriculture or biodiversity in tropical rain 
forests) which are not explicitly represented in the current 
cost-benefit type of integrated assessment models. Early mod-
els of this type were also so complicated that it was difficult to 
incorporate explicit representation of uncertainty (and risk 
aversion) within the model structures. As discussed below, 
this situation has improved somewhat over the last couple of 
years. 
The policy evaluation IAMs add detail on the physical im-
pacts of climate change on various market and nonmarket 
sectors in different countries or regions, based in part on the 
impacts and mitigation areas addressed in Volume 2 of this 
report. Economic values have generally not yet been put on 
these impacts, an omission that reflects both the paucity of 
valuation studies in some sectors and the modellers' percep-
Integrated Assessment 
of Climate Change: An Overview ami Comparison of Approaches and Results 
J<S7 
Table 10.1. Integrated assessment 
models 
Model 
Modellers 
AS/ExM 
(Adaptive Strategies/Exploratory Model) 
AIM 
(Asian-Pacific Integrated Model) 
CETA 
(Carbon Emissions Trajectory Assessment) 
Connecticut 
(also known as the Yohe model) 
CRAPS 
(Climate Research And Policy Synthesis model) 
CSERGE 
(Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment) 
DICE 
(Dynamic Integrated Climate and Economy model) 
FUND 
(The Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation, and Distribution) 
DIAM 
(Dynamics of Inertia and Adaptability Model) 
ICAM-2 
(Integrated Climate Assessment Model) 
IIASA 
(International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis) 
IMAGE 2.0 
(Integrated Model to Assess the Greenhouse Effect) 
MARIA 
(Multiregional Approach for Resource and Industry Allocation) 
MERGE 2.0 
(Model for Evaluating Regional and Global Effects of GHG Reductions Policies) 
MiniCAM 
(Mini Global Change Assessment Model) 
MIT 
(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) 
PAGE 
(Policy Analysis of the Greenhouse Effect) 
PEP 
(Policy Evaluation Framework) 
ProCAM 
(Process Oriented Global Change Assessment Model) 
RICE 
(Regional DICE) 
SLICE 
(Stochastic Learning Integrated Climate Economy Model) 
TARGETS 
(Tool to Assess Regional and Global Environmental and 
Health Targets for Sustainability) 
R. Lempert, S. Popper (Rand); 
M. Schlesinger (U. of Illinois) 
T. Morita, M.Kainuma (National Inst, for Environmental 
Studies, Japan); Y. Matsuoka (Kyoto U.) 
S. Peck (Electric Power Research Institute) 
T. Teisberg (Teisberg Assoc.) 
G. Yohe (Wesleyan University) 
J. Hammitt (Harvard U.); 
A. Jain, 0. Wuebbles (U. of Illinois) 
D. Maddison (University College of London) 
W. Nordhaus (Yale U.) 
R.S.J. Tol (Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam) 
M. Grubb (Royal Institute of International Affairs), 
M.H. Dong, T. Chapuis (Centre Internationale de 
recherche sur l'environnement et developpement) 
H. Dowlatabadi, G. Morgan (Carnegie-Mellon U.) 
L. Schrattenholzer, Arnulf Grubler (NASA) 
J. Alcamo, M. Krol (Rijksinstitut voor Volksgezondheid 
Milieuhygiene, Netherlands) 
S. Mori (Sci. U. of Tokyo) 
Alan Manne (Stanford U.), Robert Mendelsohn 
(Yale U.), R. Richels (Electric Power Research Institute) 
J. Edmonds (Pacific Northwest Lab), R. Richels 
(Electric Power Research Institute), T. Wigley (Univer-
sity Consortium for Atmospheric Research (UCAR)) 
H. Jacoby, R. Prinn, Z. Yang (Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology) 
C. Hope (Cambridge U.); J. Anderson, P. Wenman 
(Environmental Resources Management) 
J. Scheraga, S. Herrod (EPA); 
R. Stafford, N. Chan (Decision Focus Inc.) 
J. Edmonds, H. Pitcher, N. Rosenberg (Pacific 
Northwest Lab); T Wigley (UCAR) 
W. Nordhaus (Yale U.); Z. Yang (MIT) 
C. Kolstad (U. of California, Santa Barbara) 
J. Rotmans, MB.A. van Asselt, A. Beusen, M.G.J, den 
Elzen, M. Janssen, H.B.M. Hilderink, A.Y Hoekstra, 
H.W. Kostcr. W.J.M. Martens, L.W. Niessen, 
B. Strengers, H.J.M. de Vries (Rijksinstitut voor 
Volksgezondheid en Milieuhygiene, Netherlands) 
,?,S'2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Table 10.2. Development Status of Integrated Assessment Models (June 1995) 
Model 
Status 
Reference 
AS/ExM 
Preliminary version operational 
AIM 
Operational 
CETA 
Operational, with regional and uncertainty variants 
Connecticut 
Operational 
CRAPS 
Preliminary version operational 
CSERGE 
Preliminary version operational 
DICE 
Operational, with regional and uncertainty variants under 
development 
FUND 
Operational 
DIAM 
Analytic version operational 
Numeric version operational 
ICAM-2 
ICAM-1 operational; ICAM-2 operational 
IIASA 
Energy, economy, and agriculture modules operational 
IMAGE 2.0 
Operational 
MARIA 
Operational 
MERGE 2.0 
Operational, with uncertainty variant under development 
MiniCAM 
Operational 
MIT 
Various stages of module testing 
PAGE 
Operational 
PEF 
Prototype operational, enhanced version under development 
ProCAM 
Most modules in testing phase 
RICE 
Operational 
SLICE 
Operational 
TARGETS 
Targets 1.0 operational 
hempen etal. (1994, 1995) 
Moritae/«/. (1994); Matsuoka et al. (1995) 
Peck and Teisberg (1992, 1993, 1994, 1995) 
Yohe (I995a,b); Yohe and Wallace (1995) 
Hammitt (1995a,b); Jain etal. (1994) 
Maddison(1995) 
Nordhaus(1994) 
lo\etal. 
(1995) 
Grubber a/. (1993, 1995) 
Chapuisefa/. (1995) 
Dowlatabadi and Morgan (1993); Dowlatabadi (1995) 
WEC/IIASA ( 1995) 
Alcamo(1994) 
Mori(1995a,b) 
Manne etal. (1993) 
Edmonds etal. (1994a,b); Wigley etal. (1993) 
MIT (1994) 
Commission of the European Communities (1992) 
Cohan ef al. (1994) 
Edmonds et al. (1994a,b) 
Nordhaus and Yang (1995) 
Kolstad(1993, 1994a,b,c) 
Rotmansefa/. (1995) 
tion that policymakers feel more comfortable trading off nat-
ural and physical impacts than dollars. In addition, the targets 
can be set to avoid certain types of risks, perhaps according 
to the precautionary principle. On the other hand, there is no 
guarantee that the marginal cost of implementing the mitiga-
tion and adaptation measures resulting from the individual 
targets will equal the marginal benefit (if that can be as-
sessed) of the impacts avoided. Furthermore, because of the 
large size of these models, only limited amounts of sensitiv-
ity analysis can be performed, and more explicit representa-
tions of uncertainty (and risk aversion) have generally not 
been possible, except for the ICAM-2 model (Dowlatabadi. 
1995) and the TARGKTS model (Van Asselt and Rotmans. 
1995). 
Reflecting the high level of uncertainty about the future 
evolution of socioeconomic and natural systems, some ana-
lysts have put the analysis of climate change into explicit 
frameworks, of the kind discussed in Chapter 2. for decision 
making under conditions of uncertainty. These models have 
generally been either the result of a relatively complete uncer-
tainty representation of all key parameters within simplified 
models or the result of adding a limited number of alternative 
states to more complex policy evaluation and policy optimiza-
tion models. In addition, many of these models allow policies 
to be changed as uncertainties are resolved through time, al-
though the process by which uncertainties will be resolved is 
usually represented quite siniplistically. Stochastic models 
can generate multiple scenarios that in some cases have prob-
abilities associated with them. Then, the (usuallv more com-
plex) deterministic models can be run to investigate specific 
scenarios further. Table 10.4 places the models listed in Table 
10.3 into the two primary categories and relevant subcate-
gories discussed above. 
10.5 First Results from Integrated 
Assessment Models 
Most integrated assessment models of climate change have 
been constructed since 1992. By the end of 1994, however, re-
sults from a number of these models had already been pub-
lished. This section gives an overview of these results, 
highlighting the insights that seem most relevant to the cur-
rent debate on appropriate global change policies. The variety 
of different approaches employed to study the climate change 
issue makes comparison and reconciliation difficult. 
In what follows, we group the available model results into 
two main categories: (1) results from policy evaluation models 
that include many linkages and interactions between the several 
key elements of the climate/biosphere system and (2) results 
from policy optimization models that directly consider the costs 
and benefits of potential climate change policy responses or 
minimize costs subject to constraints on emissions, concentra-
tions, climate change, or climate impacts. 
There are also large differences in the outputs that indivic-
ual modellers report from their integrated analyses and the 
time periods for which those outputs are reported. Some of the 
more common outputs from the policy optimization models 
are projections of the cost of controlling greenhouse gas emis-
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview ami Comparison of Approaches and Results 
Table 10.3. Summary characterization of integrated assessment models 
.«.; 
Model 
AS/ExM 
AIM 
CETA 
Connecticut 
CRAPS 
CSERGE 
DICE 
FUND 
DIAM 
ICAM-2 
IIASA 
IMAGE 2.0 
MARIA 
MERGE 2.0 
MiniCAM 
MIT 
PAGE 
PEF 
ProCAM 
RICE 
SLICE 
TARGETS 
Forcings 
o.co2 
1. other GHG 
2. aerosols 
3. land use 
4. other 
0 
0,1,2,3 
0,1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0,1 
0 
0,1,2,3 
0 
0,1,2,3 
0 
0,1 
0,1,2,3 
0,1,2,3 
0,1 
0,1 
0,1,2,3 
0 
0 
0,1,2,3,4 
Geographic 
Specificity 
0. global 
1. continental 
2. countries 
3. grids/basins 
0 
2,3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1,2 
0 
3 
0,1 
1 
2,3 
2,3 
1,2 
1,2 
2,3 
1 
1 
0 
s ocioeconomic 
Dynamics 
0 
1 
2 
3. 
4. 
exogenous 
economics 
technology 
choice 
land use 
demographic 
0 
1,2,3,4 
1,2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1,4 
1,2 
1,3,4 
1 
0,2,3 
1 
1,2 
1,2,3 
1 
1 
1 
1,2,3,4 
1 
1 
1,2,3,4 
Geophysical 
Simulation" 
0. Global AT 
1. 1-DAT,AP 
2. 2-D AT, AP 
3. 2-D Climate 
0 
1,2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1,2 
1 
2 
0 
0 
2 
2,3 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
2 
Impact 
A ssessmenf' 
O.AT 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5. 
A sea level 
agriculture 
ecosystems 
health 
water 
0 
0,1,2,3,5 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0,1,2,3,4 
0 
0,1,3 
2 
1,2,3 
0 
0 
0 
0,2,3 
0,1,2,3,4 
0 
0,2,3,5 
0 
0 
1,2,3,4 
Treatment of 
Uncertainty 
0. None 
1. Uncertainty 
2. Variability 
3. Stochasticity 
4. Cultural 
Perspectives 
1 
0 
Oorl 
1 
1 
1 
Oorl 
Oorl 
Oorl 
1,2,3 
0 
1 
0 
Oorl 
0 
1 
2 
2 
1 
0 
1 
4 
Treatment of 
Decision 
Making 
0. optimization 
1. simulation 
2. simulation 
with 
adaptive 
decisions 
2 
1 
0 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1,2 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0,1 
1 
1 
1 
0 
2 
1,2 
"TARGETS includes ozone depletion, soil erosion, acid rain, and toxic and hazardous pollutant releases. 
''In AIM, FUND, IMAGE, PAGE, and ProCAM, the impacts are calculated separately for each sector. 
Source: Adapted from Rotmans ct al. (1995). 
sions, the damages resulting from climate change, the "con-
trol rate," stated in terms of the percentage reduction in green-
house gas emissions in each year relative to level of emissions 
projected to occur in the absence of new policy initiatives, and 
the carbon tax required in each year to limit greenhouse emis-
sions to the levels specified in the scenario under considera-
tion. Policy evaluation models, on the other hand, tend to 
report physical changes in emissions, concentrations, temper-
ature, and sea level, as well as changes in land use by activity 
(e.g., agriculture, forestry, etc.). and/or physical impacts like 
ecosystems at risk, coastal land area lost, fresh water require-
ments, and mortality rates. 
10.5.1 Results from policy evaluation 
models - contributions to the scientific debate 
Policy evaluation models are rich in physical detail and have 
produced useful insights, for example, into the potential for 
deforestation as a consequence of interactions between demo-
graphics, agricultural productivity, and economic growth and 
into the relationship between climate change and the extent of 
potentially malarial regions (see Volume 2, Chapter 25). 
10.5.1.1 Balancing the carbon budget 
To assess the impact of a number of feedback mechanisms 
within the global carbon cycle, an integrated assessment 
model has been used to balance the past and present carbon 
budget. They show that both a historical and a present carbon 
balance can be obtained in many different ways, resulting in 
different biospheric fluxes and. thus, in considerably different 
atmospheric projections. The CO,-fertilization feedback ap-
pears to determine the balance and to dominate the tempera-
ture-related feedbacks, whereas the feedback from net biolog-
ical primary production seems to counterbalance the soil and 
respiration feedback effect. Future projections based on the 
IPCC's 1990 "business-as-usual*' scenario show that the CO, 
concentrations calculated with the integrated assessment 
models are lower than the IPCC values, reaching a difference 
.i.S'-/ 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
Table 10.4. Integrated assessment models by type 
Policy Evaluation Models 
Deterministic Projection Models 
AIM 
IIASA 
IMAGE 2.0 
MIT 
ProCAM 
TARGETS 
Stochastic Projection Models 
PAGE 
ICAM-2 
TARGETS 
Policy Optimization Models 
Cost-Benefit and Target-Based Models 
CETA 
Connecticut 
CSERGE 
DICE 
FUND 
DIAM 
MARIA 
MERGE 2.0 
MiniCAM 
RICE 
Uncertainty-Based Models 
AS/ExM 
CETA 
CRAPS 
CSERGE 
DICE 
EUND 
ICAM-2 
MERGE 2.0 
PEE 
SLICE 
of about 157c (Rotmans and Den Elzen, 1993; Wigley, 1993). 
This difference can be explained by the fact that most global 
carbon cycle models used by the IPCC were unbalanced: the 
balanced models do not produce terrestrial fluxes that corre-
spond to observations. 
10.5.1.2 
Integrated land-use 
analysis 
A first attempt to integrate the various aspects of the global 
land use problem on a geographically explicit base has been 
made using the IMAGE 2.0 model. The model represents the 
transformation oi' land cover as it is affected by climatic, de-
mographic, and economic factors and links these explicitly 
with the flux of CO, and other greenhouse gases between the 
biosphere and atmosphere. Conversely, it also takes into ac-
count the effect o\' productivity changes in the terrestrial and 
oceanic biospheres. The integration oi' agricultural and land 
cover calculations can provide new insights about shifts in 
agricultural areas related to climate and the influence that 
changing land cover has on climate. The first, preliminary, re-
sults show that there may be some validity to the hypothesis 
that regional demands for land can serve as a surrogate for 
measuring local land cover changes, and that land use rules 
can be used to represent the forces driving land conversions. 
Other results relate to the vulnerability of protected areas un-
der shifting vegetation zones, the consequences for biodiver-
sity and nature conservation, and the determination of risks 
associated with current productivity levels of specific crops 
with shifting agricultural patterns. These analyses could in 
due time assist regional policymakers in assessing the serious-
ness of climate change impacts (Alcamo, 1994). 
10.5.1.3 
Global warming 
potentials 
A slightly improved version of the IMAGE 1.0 model has been 
used to investigate the input and parameter uncertainties as 
well as methodological uncertainties associated with Global 
Warming Potentials (GWPs) for greenhouse gases (Den Elzen. 
1993; Rotmans and Den Elzen, 1992). In particular, the role of 
the emission scenario used and the difference between tran-
sient and equilibrium GWPs have been discussed. Although 
integrated assessment models have structural limitations, they 
can produce estimates for at least the direct impact of green-
house gases as well as some of the indirect effects. 
The advantages of using integrated assessment models of 
climate change in estimating GWPs are twofold: (a) they can 
calculate GWPs for each conceivable scenario, so the influ-
ence of the emission scenario selected can be stated explicitly; 
and (b) they also deal with the rates of change of all kinds of 
targeting processes, so the cumulative effect can be combined 
with the rate at any time. The results show that the GWPs cal-
culated with integrated assessment models differ from the 
ones previously published by the IPCC. Considering a time 
horizon of 100 years, the difference might be as much as 5-
10%. This difference demonstrates the crucial role of the cho-
sen scenario in calculating GWPs and cannot be addressed by 
analytical methods. 
10.5.1.4 
The sulphate aerosols 
debate 
As discussed at length in Volume 1 of this report, the presence 
of sulphate aerosols in the atmosphere is now thought to have a 
strong local cooling effect. This effect is manifested through 
three pathways: scattering and absorption of shortwave (solar) 
radiation, cloud reflectivity, and cloud persistence. By incor-
porating a simplified mathematical expression of the rela-
tionship between sulphate aerosols and radiative forcing into 
integrated assessment models, some of the sulphate aerosol ef-
fect can be taken into account. In this way, the sensitivity of 
the climate system to simultaneous changes in SO, and CO, 
emissions can be examined. The first calculations show that 
over the next decade, it is conceivable that the increased radia-
tive forcing due to SO, concentration changes could more than 
offset reductions in radiative forcing due to reduced CO, emis-
sions (Edmonds et «/., 1994b). depending on the rate of reduc-
tion and a number of other assumptions. Therefore, policies 
that reduce fossil fuel use may not be so effective in reducing 
near-term average radiative forcing as a simple calculation 
based on greenhouse gas emissions alone might imply. The 
proper treatment of SO, is. therefore, an important considera-
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Results 
.AS'S 
tion in the integrated analysis of the consequences of technol-
ogy development and deployment for climate change. 
10.5.1.5 IPCC scenarios 
In 1989, a U.S.-Netherlands expert group of the IPCC was 
asked to develop four different pathways for future global 
emissions of C02, CH4, N20, halocarbons, and the ozone pre-
cursors NOx and CO. The expert group used two alternative 
integrated assessment models to construct these scenarios: the 
ASF model from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
and the IMAGE 1.0 model from the RIVM, the Dutch Na-
tional Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection 
(Rotmans, 1990). Three scenarios were designed in such a 
way that they would lead to a doubling of the CO,-equivalent 
concentration in the atmosphere in the years 2030, 2060, and 
2090. These were referred to as the "Business-as-Usual," 
"2060 Low Emissions." and "Control Policies" scenarios, re-
spectively. The fourth scenario, the "Accelerated Policies" 
scenario, leads to stabilization of the CO,-equivalent concen-
tration in the atmosphere at well below doubling of prein-
dustrial concentrations. Each scenario is based on a set of 
assumptions for key factors, including population growth, 
economic growth, the costs of technology used to convert en-
ergy from one form to another, energy end-use efficiency lev-
els, deforestation rates, CFC emissions, and agricultural emis-
sions. 
10.5.1.6 Delayed response analysis 
The IMAGE 1.0 model (Rotmans, 1990) was used by the 
IPCC to analyze delayed policy response options in which the 
start of the international policy response was delayed to 2000, 
2010, 2020, and 2030 respectively. It was calculated that de-
laying implementation of the "Control Policies" scenarios by 
10 years would result in only a minor increase in global mean 
temperatures, but that it would require a reduction of global 
CO, emissions of 20% with respect to year 2000 levels, 
whereas starting immediately would require only a 5% reduc-
tion with respect to 1990 levels over the same period. This 
integrated analysis shows that the timing of the climate re-
sponse policies is crucial for the control of climate change, 
and that the feasibility of the required transition decreases 
over time. 
10.5.1.7 Risk assessment 
The Advisory Group on Greenhouse Gases (AGGG) recom-
mended a maximum rate of global mean temperature increase 
of 0. 1°C per decade, together with a maximum temperature 
increase of 2°C above the preindustrial global mean tempera-
ture level. These temperature targets might be considered as 
limits beyond which damages to sensitive ecosystems and 
coral areas might be expected to increase rapidly. One diffi-
culty with these targets is that they are global, whereas large 
regional variations in temperature change and impacts are 
likely. Moreover, the targets need to be reviewed periodically 
in light of potential feedbacks and nonlinearities that may pro-
duce surprises and unexpected changes. The "Risk Assess-
ment" calculations showed that (1) all IPCC 1990 and 1992 
scenarios except the 1990 "Control Policies" scenario lead to 
Table 10.5. Key results from deterministic cost-benefit analyses 
Model 
CETA 
Linear damages 
Cubic damages 
DICE 
Control Rate (percentage 
reduction relative to 
baseline emissions) 
1990-2000 
0-1 
0-2 
9 
Carbon Tax 
(1990 U.S. 
dollars/tonne) 
1990-2000 
7-8 
8-12 
5 
temperature increases and rates of temperature change greater 
than the target values, and (2) even the IPCC 1990 "Control 
Policies" scenario leads to mean global temperature changes 
that are close to the targets (Den Elzen, 1993). 
10.5.2 Results from cost-benefit policy 
optimization models 
In this section we consider results from cost-benefit inte-
grated assessment models run with all inputs and parameters 
set at their median or best-guess values. Notwithstanding the 
immense uncertainties inherent in the climate change issue, a 
number of analysts have suggested that the results from these 
deterministic analyses provide a useful benchmark for near-
term decision making, if not an adequate approximation of the 
results obtained from more complex approaches that explic-
itly include consideration of the key uncertainties. 
Table 10.5 shows some key results from two models that 
balance the costs and benefits of greenhouse gas emission re-
ductions. For example, the "optimal run" results from the 
DICE model (Nordhaus. 1994) show a 1995 control rate (i.e., 
percentage reduction in emissions relative to baseline green-
house gas emissions) of about 8.8% with an associated carbon 
tax3 of $5.29 per tonne of carbon. This programme leads to an 
increase in the discounted present value of consumption of 271 
billion 1989 dollars or about .04% of discounted baseline con-
sumption. Similar results are obtained from the CETA, MERGE, 
and SLICE models when run under similar assumptions. 
In The economies of global warming, Cline (1992) ana-
lyzes the time profile of abatement and damage costs under a 
policy of limiting global carbon emissions to 4 Gt annually 
and similarly reducing other greenhouse gas emissions. The 
abatement cost curve is low at first, then peaks at about 3.5% 
of gross world product, and thereafter declines to a plateau of 
about 2.5% as a consequence of widening technological alter-
natives. 
The cost-benefit decision for greenhouse policy involves a 
trade-off between substantial abatement costs early in the 
horizon and avoidance of potentially large damages later in 
the horizon. The discounting of future costs and benefits rela-
tive to current ones is critical in such a trade-off. On the 
grounds that policymakers would be risk averse, Cline also 
weights a high-damage case three times as heavily as a low-
damage case. Discounting at a zero rate of time preference, he 
.f,SY, 
Climate Change J 995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
Table 10.6. Key sensitivities from deterministic cost-benefit 
analyses 
Sensitivity 
Model and 
Cases 
Control Rate 
(percentage) 
Carbon Tax 
(1990 U.S. 
dollars/tonne) 
1990-2000 
1990-2000 
CETA 
Warming per 2XC02 
Low 
r 
Baseline 
3° 
High 
5° 
Damage Function Power 
Low 
1 
Baseline 
2 
High 
3 
Utility Discount Rate 
Low 
2% 
Baseline 
3% 
High 
4% 
0 
0-2 
0-7 
0-1 
0-2 
0-2 
8 
5 
1 
2 
9-12 
22-29 
8-9 
9-12 
10-13 
19-24 
9-12 
5-7 
DICE 
Warming per 2XC02 
Baseline 
3° 
High 
4.5° 
Damage Function Power 
Baseline 
2 
High 
4 
Utility Discount Rate 
Low 
1 % 
Baseline 
3% 
9 
11 
9 
9 
19 
9 
5 
5 
24 
5 
finds that the overall benefit-to-cost ratio for aggressive ac-
tion limiting carbon emissions to 4 Gt is a favourable 1.3. 
Thus, dine endorses a much more aggressive control policy 
than calculated in most of the other pure cost-benefit studies. 
Much of the difference in results stems from Cline's assump-
tion of risk aversion on the part of national and international 
policymakers and his use of a zero rate of pure time prefer-
ence, whereas the other studies generally employ a pure rate 
of time preference of about 3'< and no risk aversion by 
policymakers. In fact. Cline has shown that the optimal con-
trol rate in 2100 in the DICE model would be 50'7r if a zero rate 
of pure time preference is employed as opposed to the 15% re-
ported for the }'"<• rate of time preference in the DICE baseline. 
Moreover, as discussed below. Nordhaus (1994) reports that the 
pure rate of time preference is the input to which DICE results 
are most sensitive. The subject of the appropriate rate of pure 
time preference is a major focus of Chapter 4 of this report. 
Although optimal control rates and carbon taxes vary 
widely for the year 2100. results from the two models, as 
shown in Table 10.6. are not all that disparate in the 1990s. 
though the sensitivity analysis shows a variation in the tax. 
This reflects the time dynamics o\' climate change. The costs 
of control are related to decreases in the rate of emissions as 
soon as the controls are applied. The benefits of control, on 
the other hand, are related to temperature change, which re-
sponds to changes in atmospheric concentrations of green-
house gases with a long lag, whereas atmospheric concen-
trations respond only slowly to changes in emission rates 
because of the large stock and long lifetimes of greenhouse 
gases already in the atmosphere. Thus, the marginal costs of 
controlling greenhouse gases tend to be highly nonlinear with 
respect to the control rate, whereas most of the marginal bene-
fits tend to be delayed by several decades. 
10.5.3 Cost-effective strategies for stabilizing 
atmospheric C02 concentrations 
There have been several interesting applications of integrated 
assessment modelling to the issue of concentration targets. The 
ultimate goal of the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change is the "stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations 
in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous an-
thropogenic interference with the climate system." Under the 
terms of the Convention, mitigation costs are to play a limited 
role in establishing the concentration target. The permissible 
concentration level will depend on our understanding of the 
greenhouse effect and its potential consequences. 
Mitigation costs are a more important consideration in de-
termining how the target is to be achieved. The Convention 
states that "policies and measures to deal with climate change 
should be cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the 
lowest possible cost." A particular concentration target can be 
met in a variety of ways. For example, Figure 10.3(a), drawn 
from the IPCC Synthesis Report, shows trajectories for stabi-
lizing CO, concentrations at 450, 550, 650, 750, and 1,000 
ppmv. Figure 10.3(b) shows two alternative emission paths for 
reaching each of the four lowest CO, concentrations. Some 
ways of meeting concentration targets will be more costl) 
than others. Integrated assessment modelling can help iden-
tify emission paths that minimize the costs of meeting a pre-
specified concentration level (see Chapter 9). 
Richels and Edmonds (1995) have examined the question 
of cost-effectiveness in achieving a particular concentration 
target. They found that the emission timepath can be as impor-
tant as the concentration level itself in determining the ulti-
mate price tag. Specifically, they examined alternative emis-
sion profiles for limiting CO, concentrations to 500 ppmv in 
the year 2100. Employing two widely used energy-economy 
models (the Edmonds-Reilly model and Global 2100). they 
found that emission timepaths involving modest reductions in 
the early years followed by sharper reductions later were less 
expensive than those involving substantial reductions in the 
short term. A similar conclusion can be found in Kosobud et 
al. (1994). 
There are several reasons why shifting emission reductions 
into the outer years can reduce mitigation costs. As noted in 
Wigley etal. (1996) 
to a first approximation, a concentration limit defines a 
"carbon budget" (e.g.. an allowable amount of carbon 
that can be released into the atmosphere between now 
Integrated Assessment 
of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Results 
20 p — ' — r -
.W7 
> 
a a. 
& 
c 
o 
CO 
h c 
1) 
o 
c 
n 
o 
o 
u 
1000 
950 
900 
850 
800 
750 
700 
650 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400 
350 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ //^ 
///t ->-^ 
/ / / s 
S 1000 
S750. 
S 650 . 
S550. 
S 450 . 
US92a 
2000 
2050 
2100 
2150 2200 
2250 
2300 
2350 
Year 
SIOOO 
2000 
2050 
2100 2150 
2200 
2250 
2300 
2350 
Year 
(a) CO2 concentration profiles leading to stabilization at 450, 
550, 650 and 750 ppmv following the pathways defined in 
IPCC (1995) (solid curves) and for pathways that allow 
emissions to follow the IS92a scenario (IPCC, 1992) until 
at least the year 2000 (dashed curves). A single profile that 
stabilizes CO? concentration at 1,000 ppmv and follows 
IS92a emissions at least until 2000 is also shown. 
(b) CO? emissions leading to stabilization at concentrations 
of 450, 550, 650, 750 and 1,000 ppmv following the profiles 
shown in (a) from a mid-range carbon cycle model. Results 
from other models could differ from those shown by up 
to approximately ±15%. For comparison, the COo emissions 
for IS92a and current emissions (dotted line) are also shown. 
Figure 10.3: Emission profiles consistent with stabilization of CO, concentrations at levels from 450 to 1,000 ppmv. 
and the date at which the target is to be achieved). The is-
sue is how the carbon budget is to be allocated over time. 
Several factors argue for drawing more heavily on the 
budget in the early years. With the economy yielding a 
positive return on investment, emission reductions in the 
future will be cheaper than emission reductions today. 
That is, a smaller amount of today's resources needs to 
be set aside to finance them. As a result, the same level 
of cumulative emission reductions can be achieved at a 
lower total cost to society. In addition, slowing the tran-
sition away from fossil fuels provides valuable time to 
develop low-cost, carbon-free alternatives, to allow the 
capital stock to adapt, and to remove carbon from the at-
mosphere via the carbon cycle. Cumulative emissions 
for a 550 ppmv ceiling can differ by more than 60 PgC, 
with higher cumulative emissions associated with higher 
near term emissions. (See Volume 1) 
Building on the earlier work of Nordhaus (1979), Manne 
and Richels (1992, 1993) have explored least-cost mitigation 
paths for achieving concentration targets of 450-750 ppmv. 
Figure 10.4 shows results from their MERGE model. In each 
instance, the least-cost path allows for some growth in global 
emissions in the early years, but this is followed by sharp re-
ductions later on. 
These studies should not. however, be seen as supporting a 
"do nothing" or "wait and see" strategy. First, each concentra-
tion path still requires that future capital equipment be less 
carbon-intensive than under a scenario with no carbon limits. 
Given the long-lived nature of energy-producing and -using 
equipment, this has implications for current investment deci-
sions. Second, new supply options typically take many years 
to enter the marketplace. To have sufficient quantities of low-
cost, low-carbon substitutes in the future would require a 
sustained commitment to research, development, and demon-
stration today. Third, any available no-regrets measures for 
reducing emissions are assumed to be adopted immediately. 
Finally, it is clear that emissions must ultimately be reduced. 
One cannot go on deferring emission reductions indefinitely. 
The lower the concentration target, the more substantial the 
required emission reductions. 
Other authors cite reasons for more mitigation sooner. 
These include the prospect of inducing further cost reductions 
through abatement action, the prospect of avoiding being 
locked in to more carbon-intensive patterns of development, 
and the extent to which inertia may amplify the costs of hav-
ing to make more rapid emission reductions later. 
Models that emphasize inertia and induced innovation 
(e.g., Hourcade and Chapuis. 1995) place greatest emphasis 
on the need to avoid investments that tend to "lock in" a 
higher carbon future and on the fact that evasive action now 
reduces both the climate risks and the possibility of having to 
take more rapid action later. His results show that for an atmo-
spheric limit of 500 ppmv, delaying the response by 20 years 
could double the subsequent required rate of abatement. A 
parallel study of'CFCs showed that if the phase-out had begun 
.m 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
i 
I 
§ 
§ 
u 
2200 
1 business as usual 
2 stabilize concentrations at 750 ppmv 
3 stabilize concentrations at 650 ppmv 
4 stabilize concentrations at 550 ppmv 
5 stabilize concentrations at 500 ppmv 
6 stabilize concentrations at 450 ppmv 
Fi|>ur<! 10.4: Least-cost emission paths for achieving alternative atmospheric concentration targets. 
ten years earlier, it would have allowed much slower reduc-
tions of CFC use. The level of protection of the ozone layer 
resulting from the London Amendments to the Montreal Pro-
tocol could have been achieved while CFC use continued dur-
ing the I 990s and with far less need to scrap capital stock. 
Another line of analysis is developed by Grubb et al. 
(1994, 1995). drawing on studies of energy systems and the 
observation that much innovation comes from "learning by 
doing." Such innovation represents an external benefit that is 
not captured in market signals. Their model focusscs on iner-
tia and induced innovation and they conclude that induced in-
novation amplifies the benefits of acting sooner rather than 
later. If induced innovation is sufficient for systems to adapt 
to emission constraints over a period of a few decades, then 
the optimal near-term control rate is likely to be considerably 
larger than projected with models that do not include induced 
innovation. However, this is a result derived from a cost-bene-
fit analysis in which many of the benefits from stronger early 
action arise from reduced impacts. The model has not been run 
to a fixed limit on the concentration of CO, in the atmosphere. 
Note also that the locus of these analyses is on mitigation 
costs. Consequently, they provide only partial guidance lot-
policy making. Different emission profiles yield different 
concentration levels and rates of change in the years leading 
up to a particular concentration target. The implications lot-
damages need to be considered. I nfortunaleh. the knowledge 
base is not yet available for preparing an optimal strategy con-
sidering the full array of costs and benefits. Integrated assess-
ment models that include the full range of factors that bear on 
the optimal timing of emission reductions have not yet been de-
veloped, and the relative importance of the various economic 
issues that bear on the question is still a matter of debate. 
10.5.3.1 International 
cooperation 
Integrated assessment models show there is a strong need 
for international cooperation because developed nations 
cannot independently reduce atmospheric C 0 2 concentra-
tions on their own (OTA. 1994: Bradley et al'.. 1994: Ed-
monds et al., 1995: Manne and Richels, 1992; Marine et al.. 
1993: Nordhaus and Yang, 1995; and Tol et al., 1995; see 
also Chapter 9). 
Regarding the resolution of political conflicts over climate 
change policy between developed and developing countries. 
Read (1994b) points to the potential for biofuel production in 
developing countries. Financed by the developed economies, 
a biofuel initiative could generate beneficial multiplier effects 
in underemployed and cash-constrained developing rural 
economies. 
10.5.4 Results from uncertainty-oriented 
policy 
optimization 
models 
Policy optimization modellers have pursued a number of al-
ternative approaches to incorporating the large uncertainties 
Integrated Assessment 
of Climate Cluiii!>c: An Overview and Comparison of Approaehes ami Results 
.w; 
inherent in the various elements of the climate system into 
their analyses. The discussion here deals with results obtained 
from these approaches in the following order: 
(1) 
Sensitivity analyses of key model inputs and parameters 
(2) 
Analyses in which all model inputs and parameters are 
treated stochastically 
(3) 
Uncertainty analyses that focus on the implications of a 
small number of uncertainties that seem particularly rel-
evant to the policy issues being addressed 
These results also suggest a number of modelling challenges 
that have been identified as high priority areas for future im-
provements in integrated assessment modelling. 
10.5.4.1 
Sensitivity 
analyses 
Given the sizable uncertainties inherent in virtually every ma-
jor input and model parameter employed in any analysis of 
global climate change, it is important to assess the implica-
tions of the key uncertainties on model results. A common 
first step in this effort is sensitivity analysis, which involves 
looking at how key model outputs respond to changes in input 
or parameter values over plausible ranges. 
Table 10.6 shows control rate and carbon tax sensitivities 
for two models. For example, for the CETA model the initial 
control rate for the years 1990-2000 moves from 0% below 
baseline emissions in the base case to 7% when the sensitivity 
of global mean surface temperature to a CO., doubling is in-
creased from 1°C to 5°C. In addition, the initial carbon tax 
rate for 1990-2000 changes from $2 per tonne to $29/tonne 
over the same range of global mean surface temperature sen-
sitivities. Similarly, in the DICE model the initial control rate 
for 1995 changes from 9% below baseline emissions in the 
base case to 19% when the pure rate of time preference is 
changed from its base value of 3% to 1 %. 
Another type of sensitivity analysis involves focussing on a 
small number of more carefully designed scenarios that are ex-
pected to lead to fundamental changes in key model outputs. A 
recent analysis of carbon-free advanced energy technologies 
was performed by Edmonds et al. (1994b). In this study the im-
plications of advanced energy technologies (including very low-
cost biomass 
fuels) 
for 
greenhouse 
gas emissions 
and 
temperature change were investigated. Obviously, the introduc-
tion of very low cost noncarbon fuels leads to lower carbon 
emissions and less temperature rise in the long run (post-2050). 
A somewhat surprising result of this analysis, though, is an in-
crease in temperature prior to 2050 as the replacement of car-
bon-based fuels with carbon-free fuels leads to a reduction in 
sulphur emissions and. therefore, fewer climate-cooling sulphur 
aerosols in the atmosphere. Lower sulphur emissions, however. 
would produce benefits in the form of reduced acidic deposition. 
10.5.4.2 Baseline projections 
and 
uncertainty 
Manne and Richels (1993) have argued that any deterministic 
projection of baseline carbon emissions may be upwardly bi-
ased because individual energy consumers should already be 
reducing their consumption of carbon-based fuels because of 
the possibility of constraints on carbon emissions in the fu-
ture. They compute the implicit carbon tax in the year 2000 as 
a function of the probability that U.S. carbon emissions will 
be limited to 1990 levels. For example, if consumers feel 
there is a 50-50 chance that carbon emissions will be con-
strained in 2010, they will reduce carbon emissions in 2000 as 
if a carbon tax of $ 17.50 per tonne of carbon were already in 
place. 
10.5.4.3 
Results from stochastic simulation 
models 
Stochastic simulation models generalize the sensitivity analy-
sis idea by including probability distributions for all major 
inputs and model parameters. Each input distribution is 
sampled, the value chosen is used in the subsequent calcula-
tions of the model, and the process is continued until proba-
bility distributions are derived for each output variable of the 
model. The PAGE (Hope et al., 1993) and ICAM-2 models 
(Dowlatabadi, 1995) are prominent examples of integrated as-
sessment models that take this approach. 
An analysis with PAGE of no control and stringent control 
options results in a recommendation for adaptation rather than 
mitigation as a first-best policy initiative. Conditions under 
which both adaptation and aggressive mitigation options 
ought to be pursued are also identified. 
It is also possible to do a more comprehensive type of sen-
sitivity analysis with the stochastic simulation approach by 
computing the partial rank correlation coefficient of output 
measures of interest with respect to variations in each input. 
For example, Hope et al. (1993) report that "cheaper preven-
tative costs of CO," and "no action CO, emissions (i.e., base-
line emissions) of CO," have the greatest effect on total cost 
uncertainty, and "global temperature sensitivity to doubling of 
CO," and "half life of global warming response to change in 
forcing" have the greatest effect on total impact uncertainty. 
The methods described above are unable to make the un-
certainties associated with disagreement and subjectivity ex-
plicit. Relating the concept of uncertainty to differences in 
individual perspectives. Van Asselt and Rotmans (1995) ar-
rived at the concept of perspective-based alternative model 
routes as a methodology to make uncertainties within I A M S 
visible and tangible. Alternative model routes can be consid-
ered as model interpretations in which not only parameters 
but also relationships are varied according to the bias and 
preferences of a particular perspective, resulting in alternative 
model structures. 
10.5.4.4 
Uncertainly, decision analysis, and the value 
of information 
Climate change may have severe impacts on individuals and 
societies. On the other hand, the impacts may not be very se-
vere at all. Individuals and societies often attempt to reduce the 
impact of low probability/high consequence events through 
various means. As shown in Table 10.7, Nordhaus (1994) 
groups activities designed to mitigate the effects of uncertainty 
on economic welfare into three categories: (I) traditional in-
surance, (2) consumption smoothing, and (3) precautionary in-
vestments. 
.fW 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions 
of Climate Change 
Table 10.7. Alternative policies to mitigate 
uncertainty 
Category 
Source of Uncertainty 
Policy 
1. Traditional Insurance 
2. Consumption smoothing 
over time 
3. Precautionary investments 
Diversifiable (individual) risk 
2. Risk of large or catastrophic loss 
3. Uncertain scope of damage or 
abatement costs 
1. (a) Private insurance 
(b) Social insurance 
(against terms-of-trade or income losses) 
2. Investment (for a rainy day) 
3. (a) Precautionary abatement 
(e.g., higher carbon tax) 
(b) Precautionary adaptation 
(e.g., retreat from coastline) 
(c) Investment in knowledge (e.g., geophysical 
and social science research) 
Source: Nordhaus (1994). 
Traditional 
insurance 
involves pooling together large 
groups of people, each of whom is subject to a small probabil-
ity of a large loss (such as having a house burn down). Thus, 
each individual pays the a priori expected value of a loss plus 
a small transaction fee to get compensated for the catastrophe 
should it occur. The pooling necessary to implement this ap-
proach requires that the occurrence of the catastrophe among 
the members of the population be more or less independent. 
This is not the case with climate change, however, for which 
the impacts are likely to he pervasive throughout the globe. 
On the other hand, since some individuals (e.g., people who 
live on coastlines) will he affected more severely than others. 
traditional insurance may help allocate the costs of the total 
damages resulting from climate change in a way that im-
proves welfare, liven this capability to reallocate the costs of 
climate change through traditional insurance may also be 
somewhat limited, though, because those who are most vul-
nerable may be known in advance or can he easily identified 
when the impacts of climate change start to be felt. 
Consumption 
smoothing 
over lime amounts to the social 
equivalent of "saving up for a rainy day." If there are signifi-
cant thresholds in the impacts of climate change, it is possible 
that societies will incur large adjustment or mitigation costs. 
Thus, welfare may he improved by saving capital now to con-
sume when the threshold impacts occur. 
Precautionary 
investments in mitigation, adaptation, or in-
formation represent the third type of policy that can be used to 
mitigate the uncertainty associated with climate change. Such 
actions enable societies to hedge against the possibility of bad 
climate outcomes before the major uncertainties determining 
the severity of the climate change problem have been re-
solved. 
It appears that all three types of policies for coping with 
climate change uncertainty are valuable. In terms of overall 
payoff, however, the traditional insurance approach is the 
most tactical, in that it simply redistributes the costs of any 
climate change impacts that might occur, and the precaution-
ary societal investment is the most strategic, in that it involves 
national or international investments now that can signifi-
cantly reduce the total worldwide costs of climate chance im-
pacts in the future. Thus, a number of precautionary invest-
ment analyses have started to appear in the literature. One 
innovative example is the analysis, based on a stochastic 
optimization model, that is included in Chapter 4 of Buying 
greenhouse 
insurance: 
The economic costs of CO, emission 
limits (Manne and Richels, 1992). This analysis deals explic-
itly only with the cost of CO, emission reductions, but it is as-
sumed that U.S. decision makers must act initially without 
knowing what ultimate limit on carbon emissions will emerge 
from further scientific research and international negotiation. 
However, it is assumed that by 2010 it will be revealed 
whether (I) no limits will be necessary, (2) a 20% emission 
reduction will be required, or (3) a 50% reduction will be re-
quired. Each of these future policy outcomes is assigned a 
probability of occurrence. This formulation makes the idea of 
hedging against a range of future outcomes explicit, with the 
initial control rate and carbon tax for the optimal hedging 
strategy (the one that maximizes the expected future utility of 
consumption) lying between the maximum control and no-
control strategies, and with the exact level depending on the 
probabilities assigned to the different control outcomes. Put 
differently, there is a risk premium associated with emitting 
carbon, owing to the fact that carbon emissions may be con-
strained (and possibly severely constrained) in the future. 
A study by Hammitt, Lempert, and Schlesinger (1992) 
traces alternative control strategies for attaining certain tem-
perature constraints. Although not determining an optimal 
path, this study shows that a "moderate control strategy" is 
less costly than an "aggressive" approach if either the temper-
ature sensitivity to a doubling of CO, is low or the allowable 
temperature change is above 3° C. 
In Managing the global commons: 
The economics 
of cli-
mate change, Nordhaus (1994) performs a decision analysis 
with his dynamic global cost-benefit model (DICE) using a 
representation (derived from an extensive stochastic simula-
tion analysis with the model) of the relevant uncertainties as-
sociated with climate change. He concludes that '"roughb 
speaking, the optimal carbon tax doubles when uncertainty is 
taken into account, and the optimal control rate increases by 
slightly less than half. The increased stringency of controls re-
Integrated Assessment of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaches and Kcsitlts 
j V / 
suits from the interaction of different uncertain variables, 
whereby extreme events may cause significant economic-
costs." 
10.6 Strengths and Limitations of Current 
Integrated Assessments 
The five biggest challenges facing integrated assessment 
modellers are 
(1) 
Developing a credible way to represent and value the 
impacts of climate change 
(2) 
Developing a credible way to handle low probability but 
potentially catastrophic events 
(3) 
Developing realistic representations of the dominant 
processes and policies in the developing countries 
(4) 
Integrating and managing a large and diverse array of 
data and models from many researchers and many disci-
plines 
(5) 
Improving the relevance of the models to policy needs 
and the presentation of their results to policymakers and 
the public 
10.6.1 Representation and valuation of impacts of 
climate change 
A major problem in attempting to analyze and value climate 
change impacts is that the projections from most general cir-
culation models, until recently at least, have been based on a 
hypothetical steady-state situation (a doubled-CO, climate). 
In reality, however, greenhouse gas concentrations are not 
steady and will not necessarily stabilize at a level equivalent 
to a doubling of preindustrial CO, concentrations. Moreover, 
there are uncertainties about many elements of these projec-
tions, especially at a regional level. The process of projecting 
transient regionalized changes in the key climate variables -
such as temperature and precipitation - that lead to impacts on 
economies and ecosystems is in its infancy and is thus a 
source of additional uncertainties. Furthermore, the climate 
information required to most effectively project the impacts 
has in many cases not yet been determined, nor have the most 
appropriate measures of climate impacts, and ecosystems may 
not currently be in equilibrium. Finally, it may be necessary 
for this information to be analyzed using valuation methods 
that are still under development and not tightly linked to the 
impacts on natural systems in order to provide policymakers 
with the information they need to decide what to do. 
10.6.2 Consideration of low probability/high 
consequence events 
The first results from integrated assessment models, which 
considered only the expected costs and benefits of controlling 
greenhouse gases, have generally concluded that only a mod-
est current level of control is warranted. However, it may not 
be expected conditions that should be our main concern but. 
rather, relatively low probability catastrophic events that are 
irreversible or from which it would be very difficult to re-
cover. Unfortunately, lack of data, lack of understanding of 
the relevant processes, and analytical intractability have pre-
vented such events from receiving adequate attention in the 
integrated assessments that have been performed to date (see 
Chapter 6). The implications of these low probability/high 
consequence events for current decisions have just started to 
be investigated through the use of integrated assessment mod-
els (see Nordhaus, 1994; Peck and Teisberg, 1994; Lempert et 
al., 1994, 1995). 
10.6.3 Critical issues in developing countries 
In general, the processes and policy options relevant to cli-
mate change are easier to assess in the twenty-four countries 
of the OECD. This stems from the facts that these countries 
have been studied more intensively and that their populations 
and economies are growing relatively slowly. The data and 
understanding of critical processes and issues in the 140-odd 
non-OECD countries are more limited. Many of these coun-
tries are in a state of rapid development or dynamic change, 
making projections of key economic drivers and social orga-
nizations over even short periods of time extremely difficult. 
Moreover, the contribution of these countries to climate 
change and their responses to it are likely to be influenced by 
other more immediately pressing concerns. Three of the most 
critical such issues in the developing countries are land use, 
land tenure, and population. 
The way land is used is a key determinant of the net emis-
sions and accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmos-
phere and of the impacts of climate change. However, land 
use and land tenure decisions in the developing countries will 
be driven by development goals and local pollution concerns 
rather than climate change concerns over at least the next sev-
eral decades. Therefore, it is important to track trends in land 
use and land tenure in order to project the contribution of the 
developing countries to global climate change and how they 
will be affected by any changes that might occur. Only a few 
of the operational integrated assessment models (e.g., Alcamo, 
1994: Morita et al., 1993) track land use at all, and even those 
models are limited by lack of good data regarding current land 
use patterns in the developing countries, as well as a lack of 
understanding about who controls land use decisions at pres-
ent, who is likely to control them in the future, and what crite-
ria will be used in allocating land to alternative uses. 
Another fundamental uncertainly that complicates assess-
ments of the magnitude of the global climate change problem 
and the effectiveness of policy responses to it is future popu-
lation growth, especially in the developing countries. In gen-
eral, more population means more economic activity and 
more greenhouse gas emissions. Again, though, trends and 
policies regarding future population growth will depend more 
on other phenomena (the spread of diseases, the level of in-
come, the cultural norms) and policies (e.g., regarding educa-
tion, health care, and birth control) than on explicit considera-
tion of the implications of population for climate change in 
the future. Virtually all the existing integrated assessment 
models take future population growth as given, although the 
.W2 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
TARGETS model of" Rotmans el al. (1994) has recently be-
come the first exception (Van Vienen el al., 1994). Moreover, 
the projections used generally all come from one or two inter-
national agencies. 
The extent to which a better understanding and modelling 
of land use, land tenure, and population growth in the devel-
oping countries will alter the insights regarding the climate 
change problem and potential policy responses to it produced 
by the current set of aggregate integrated assessment models 
is an open question. There is no doubt though that there is an 
urgent need to add detail in these areas that would better re-
flect the reality of developing countries and thus improve the 
credibility of the models. 
10.6.4 Model integration and management 
The complexity and multidisciplinary nature of the climate 
change issues create another challenge for integrated assess-
ment modellers - that of linking a vast amount of data, analy-
sis, and computer code developed by different researchers 
from different disciplines into a unified whole. It is particu-
larly important to maintain consistency between the assump-
tions made in different parts of the analysis and to preserve 
the integrity of the information passed from one module to an-
other. For example, some of the early integrated assessments 
made very optimistic assumptions about technical change in 
some parts of the analysis but not in others. 
Another important issue in integrated modelling is the 
compatibility of the many modules included in the model, 
each reflecting the modelling approaches and abilities of a 
distinct set of disciplines. A comparative static model, de-
scribing the difference between two equilibrium states (char-
acteristic of many climate and climate impact models run to 
date), cannot readily he tied to a dynamic model like those 
used to project economic activity and carbon emissions. But 
even two dynamic models can work on two entirely different 
timescales; for instance, larger economic models are at best 
seasonal whereas general circulation models operate in time 
steps of tens of minutes. Spatial scales can also differ, not 
only in resolution, but also conceptually. Economists, for in-
stance, tend to think in terms of nations and geopolitical re-
gions, whereas ecologists think in terms of habitats and life 
zones. A third difference is the degree to which models ap-
proximate the real world. Normative models, which describe 
how systems should operate (a paradigm reflected in some 
economic models) cannot he easily integrated with descrip-
tive models of how the world actually operates (common in 
climate and ecological modelling). The compatibility issue is 
at present being dealt with through trial and error. Continued 
feedback with the mother disciplines is required to ensure (hat 
modules are not used or changed in an inappropriate manner. 
In addition to the specific problems of integrating informa-
tion across disciplines, modellers have to deal with a number 
of challenges that need to be addressed in any large-scale 
modelling enterprise (Karplus. 1992). One issue is separabil-
ity, or which links to include'.' This issue was already touched 
on in the discussion of figures 10.1 and 10.2. A number o( 
models, for example, neglect the cooling effect of sulphate 
aerosols (see Section 10.5.1.4), which can have important im-
plications for the temperature profile. In addition, the influ-
ence of another link between climate and fossil fuel combus-
tion, hot spells and ozone formation, has only been included 
parametrically (see Chapter 6), if at all, without having been 
studied with a full-fledged model. These are just two exam-
ples of known links, one with a known effect, one with an un-
known effect, that could profitably receive more attention. 
Related to the issue of separability is the question of selec-
tivity. Is it appropriate to study the enhanced greenhouse ef-
fect in isolation, or should it be studied simultaneously with 
other major environment and development problems? The 
TARGETS model (Rotmans et al, 1994) is the first to make 
such an attempt at integrating these issues. This model tries to 
address the concept of sustainable development from a world 
perspective, covering the global issues of human health and 
demographic dynamics, energy resources, global element cy-
cles, and land- and water-related problems. In addition, the 
discussion of the secondary benefits of emission control in 
Chapter 6 and the first results of the FUND model (Tol et al., 
1995) indicate that it is worthwhile to tie the analysis of 
global warming to conventional air pollution issues. 
Counteracting the call for more causal links and further in-
tegration is the curse of" dimensionality. The larger a model, 
the less transparent it is, and the harder it is for analysts and 
policymakers to interpret its results. The sheer size of the 
model renders full sensitivity analyses impossible, and it be-
comes more difficult for the modellers themselves to oversee 
what is happening. 
A further general problem of modelling, but one that is par-
ticularly relevant in the analysis of global change issues, in-
volves the need to consider the consequences of discontinu-
ous climatic or ecological responses. Inputs to IAMs reflect 
the world as we know it or as we might expect it to evolve, but 
climate change may bring surprises. Large uncertainties in our 
knowledge add to the need to consider discontinuous system 
responses. Atmospheric physics and chemistry seem to react 
relatively smoothly to external changes. However, ecological 
and. to some extent, economic responses could potentially be 
quite discontinuous. In a full uncertainty analysis, low proba-
bility events, such as the drying up of the U.S. corn belt. 
should be considered. The difficulty with such events, how-
ever, is that they are unprecedented and therefore hard to 
model. 
The final problem is how to deal with chaotic behaviour of 
the model itself". A model is chaotic if small changes in its in-
puts cause large, nonsystematic changes in its output. Because 
chaos is associated with nonlinear dynamics, integrated as-
sessment models run the risk of being chaotic, yielding advice 
that arbitrarily depends on how they are calibrated. 
10.6.5 Relevance and presentation 
The fifth big challenge of integrated assessment modelling is 
how to improve the capability of modellers to answer the 
questions that arc of greatest concern to politicians and the 
general public and to present the results in such a manner that 
thev understand the outcome and its limitations. Although this 
Integrated Assessment 
of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparison of Approaehes and Results 
w 
is the eventual aim of integrated assessment, it is not a trivial 
matter. The majority of the problems obviously arise from the 
immature state of the current generation of models. Most cur-
rent models, for example, do not give insight into income dis-
tribution or employment issues. Nonmarket impacts can be 
included only after having been econometrically valued, thus 
implying substitutability. Economic models of the costs of 
emission controls often consider only market-based instru-
ments and assess only efficiency. As others have argued in this 
report, policymakers tend to have a broader outlook that em-
braces more than economics. On the other hand, integrated as-
sessment models that are more biased towards the natural 
sciences provide a weaker representation of the societal forces 
driving emissions and impacts. Evaluation and optimization 
are often not represented. In addition, some models calculate 
changes on the basis of potential rather than actual outcomes 
without considering transitional problems. 
With respect to improving the presentation of results, poli-
cymakers generally do not welcome voluminous compilations 
of model results, nor can they usually interpret a set of de-
tailed maps or technical diagrams, nor do they like to have 
measures prescribed for them, and yet these are broadly the 
three approaches taken so far. What is needed is an interface 
where model outcomes can be concisely and understandably 
represented and perhaps further evaluated and optimized. This 
implies a further step in integration and the use of information 
from another discipline: decision support systems. 
10.6.6 The state of the art in 
integrated 
assessment 
modelling 
A number of approaches to integrated assessment of climate 
change are being pursued. Each of these has strengths and 
weaknesses relative to the others. Moreover, individual mod-
elling teams have chosen to focus on different aspects of the 
climate change issue. At this time, the significant complexi-
ties and uncertainties associated with the operation of the cli-
mate system, and how it impacts - and is impacted by -
human activities, make it impossible to know exactly what to 
focus on and what methodology to employ. Thus, there is an 
advantage to the use of multiple research teams pursuing a 
plethora of alternative approaches. The approaches may pro-
vide complementary insights into the causes and effects of cli-
mate change or provide identical reenforcing results that 
increase our confidence in the results from any one approach. 
There is also a natural complementarity between the differ-
ent types of analyses, in that the more aggregate models (par-
ticularly if embedded in a probabilistic framework) can be 
used to focus the development of the more complex models. 
The more complex models can. in turn, be used as one source 
of parameter values for the more aggregated models and as a 
means of testing the effects of the aggregation employed on 
specific results. Moreover, the simple models can be used to 
cross-check results from the more complex models for consis-
tency (i.e., they can be used as benchmarks) and to help com-
municate results from them to the policy development com-
munity and to the public. Finally, as each research team 
continually modifies its work plan and builds on the work of 
1 
the others, all the approaches may tend to converge. Even if 
3 
this were to be the case at some point in the future, it is not 
clear which of the approaches being pursued today would lead 
most efficiently to that ultimate model. This once again sug-
i 
gests the efficacy of pursuing a multitude of alternative ana-
3 
lytic approaches to the study of climate change and the poten-
f 
tial responses to it. 
Endnotes 
1. The following types of values of unmanaged ecosystems are iden-
tified in Chapter 6 of this report: (I) direct and indirect use values 
(e.g., plant inputs into medicine and the role of mangrove forests in 
coastal protection), (2) option value (preserving a species to retain 
the possibility that it may be of economic use in the future), and (3) 
existence value (e.g., the value of knowing that there are still blue 
whales). 
2. An exception is the FUND model (Tol et ai, 1995), which has 
separate damage functions for each of the damage categories dis-
cussed in Chapter 6. 
3. These "carbon taxes" are actually the marginal costs of efficiently 
reducing carbon emissions by the optimal amounts. Efficiency in this 
context means simply that lower cost emission reduction measures 
are always implemented before higher cost ones. 
References 
Alcamo, J. (ed.), 1994: Image 2.0: Integrated modeling of global cli-
mate change, Kluwer, Dordrecht. The Netherlands. 
Alcamo, J., R. Shaw, and L. Hordijk (eds.), 1990: The RAINS model 
of acidification: Science and strategies in Europe, Kluwer, Dor-
drecht, The Netherlands. 
Bradley, R.A., J.A. Edmonds. M. Wise, and H. Pitcher, 1994: Con-
trolling carbon: Equity, efficiency, and participation in possible 
future agreements to control fossil fuel carbon emissions. In 
Equity and social considerations related to climate change, 
ICIPE Science Press, Nairobi. Kenya. 
Brewer, CD., 1986: Methods for synthesis: Policy exercises. In Sus-
tainable development of the biosphere, W.C. Clark and RE. Munn, 
eds.. pp. 455-473, Cambridge University Press, New York. 
Chapuis, T. M. Duong, and M. Grubb. 1995: The greenhouse cost 
model: An exploration of the implications for climate change pol-
icy of inertia and adaptability in energy systems, International 
Energy Workshop. International Institute for Applied Systems 
Analysis. Laxenburg, Austria. 20-22 June. 
Clark, W.C. (ed.), 1982: Carbon dioxide review: 1982, Oxford Uni-
versity Press. New York. 
Clark, W.C, and R.E. Munn (eds.). 1986: Sustainable development of 
the biosphere, Cambridge University Press, New York. 
Clark, W.C. and J. van Eijndhoven (eds.), 1996: Response assess-
ment. In The Social Learning Group. Learning to manage global 
environmental risks, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, forthcoming. 
Cline, W. R.. 1992: The economics of global warming, The Institute 
for International Economics. Washington, DC. 
Cohan, D„ R.K. Stafford, J.D. Scheraga. and S. Herrod, 1994: The 
global climate policy evaluation framework, proceedings of the 
1994 A&WMA Global Climate Change Conference: Phoenix, 5-
8 April, Air & Waste Management Association, Pittsburgh. 
Commission of the European Communities, 1992: PAGE user 
manual, Brussels. 
.W4 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Den Klzen, M.G.J., 1993: Cilobal environmental change: An inte-
grated modelling approach, I'll I) thesis. University of Maastricht. 
The Netherlands. 
Dowlutubadi, II., 1995: Integrated assessment climate assessment 
model 2.0, technical documentation. Department of Engineering 
and Public Policy, Carnegie-Mellon University, Pittsburgh. 
Dowlatiibadi, II., and M.Ci. Morgan. 1993: A model framework for 
integrated assessment of the climate problem, Energy Policy, 21, 
209-221. 
Kdmonds, J., J.M. Reilly. J.R. Trabalka. and D.E. Reichle. 1984: An 
aiuilyxix of possible future atmospheric 
retention of fossil 
fuel 
C()2, TR0I3. DOE/OR/2I400-I, National Technical Information 
Service, U.S. Department of Commerce. Springfield. VA. 
Kdmonds, J., and J.M. Reilly, 1985: Global energy: Assessing 
the 
future, Oxford University Press. New York. 
Kdmonds, J., II. Pitcher, N. Rosenberg, and T. Wigley. 1994a: Design 
for the global change assessment model, proceedings of the Inter-
national Workshop on Integrative Assessment o\' Mitigation, Im-
pacts, and Adaptation to Climate Change. International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, Austria, 13-15 October. 
Kdmonds, J.. M. Wise, C. MacCracken. 1994b: Advanced energy 
technologies and climate change: An analysis using the global 
change assessment model (CiCAM), presentation to the Air and 
Waste Management Meeting, 6 April. Tempe AZ. Air and Waste 
Management Association, Pittsburgh. 
Kdmonds, J., D. Warns. M. Wise, and M. Ton, 1995: Carbon coali-
tions: The cost and effectiveness of energy agreements to alter 
trajectories of atmospheric carbon dioxide emissions. Energy 
Policy, 23(4/5), 309-336. 
Fujii, Y, Y. Kaya. and K. Yamaji (1993): The New Earth 21 model, 
working paper. Department of Systems Engineering, University 
of Tokyo. 
Grobecker, A.J.. S.C. Coronili. and R.H. Cannon. Jr.. 1974: The re-
port of findings: The effects of stratospheric pollution by aircraft, 
DOT-TST-75-50. U.S. Department of Transportation. Climatic 
Impact Assessment Program. National Technical 
Information 
Service. Springfield, VA. 
Grubb, M. (1991): Energy policies and the greenhouse effect. Royal 
Institute of International Affairs. Dartmouth Publishing, Alder-
shot, Hants.. U.K. 
Grubb, M.. M. Koch. A. Munson. I. Sullivan, and K. Thomson 
(1993): The Earth Summit Agreements: 
A guide and 
assessment, 
Harthscan. London. 
Grubb, M.. M i l . Duong, and T. Chapuis. 1994: Optimizing climate 
change abatement responses: On inertia and induced technical 
change. In Integrative 
assessment 
of mitigation, 
impacts 
and 
adaptation 
to climate change, N. Nackicenovic. WD. Nordhaus. 
R. Richels. and RE. Toll), oils., pp. 205-218. IIASA. Laxenburg. 
Austria. 
Grubb, M.. MIL Duong, and T. Chapuis. 1995: The economics of 
changing course. Energy Policy, 23(4/5). 417-432. 
Hafde, W.. J. Anderer. A. McDonald, and N. Nakicenovic. 1981: 
Energy in a finite world, Ballinger. Cambridge. MA. 
Hammitt, J.K.. 1995a: Outcome and value uncertainties in global-
change polic\. Climatic Change, 30(2). 125 145. 
Hammitt. J.K.. 1995b: Expected values of information and coopera-
tion for abating global climate change. In Wise choices: 
Games, 
decisions and negotiations. 
R. Kecnev. .1. Sebenius. and R. Zeck-
hauser. eds.. Harvard Business School Press. Boston. 
Hammitt. J. K and .I.E. Adams. 1995: the value of international co-
operation in abating climate change. American Economics Asso-
ciation/Association of En\ ironmental and Resource Economists 
Annual Meetim;. Washington. DC. d-S .lanuarv. 
Hammitt, J.K., R.J. Lempert, and M.E. Schlesinger, 
1992: A 
sequential-decision strategy for abating climate change. Nature, 
357,315-318. 
Hope, C , J. Anderson, and P. Wenman, 1993: Policy analysis of th; 
greenhouse effect: An application of the PAGE model. Energy 
Policy. 21,327-338. 
Hordijk, L„ 1991: Use of the RAINS model in acid rain negotiation in 
Europe, Environmental Science and Technology, 25(4). 596- 602. 
Hourcade, J.C.. and T. Chapuis, 1995: No-regret potentials and 
technical innovation. Energy Policy, 23(4/5). 433-446. 
Hulme, M., S.C.B. Raper. and T.M.L. Wigley, 1995: An integrated 
framework to address climate change (ESCAPE) and further de-
velopments of the global and regional climate modules (MAG-
ICC). Energy Policy, 23(4/5). 347-355. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: Cli-
mate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton. G.J. 
Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraums, eds., Cambridge University Press. 
Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 1992: Climate 
change 1992: The supplementary 
report to the IPCC scientific as-
sessment. J.T. Houghton. B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney. eds.. 
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1995: Climate 
change 1994: Radiative forcing of climate change and an evalua-
tion of the IPCC 1S92 emission scenarios, 
J.T. Houghton. EG 
Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites. N 
Harris, and K. Maskell. eds., Cambridge University Press. Cam-
bridge. 
Jain, A., H. Kheshgi. and D. Wuebbles, 1994: Integrated 
scienct 
model for assessment 
of climate change. 
Lawrence Livermore 
Laboratory, Livermore, CA, May. 
Karplus, W.J.. 1992: The heavens are falling - The scientific predic-
tion of catastrophes in our lime. Plenum Press, New York. 
Kolstad, CD., 1993: Looking vs. leaping: The timing of CO, con-
trol in the face of uncertainty and learning. In C«.v/.v, impacts, 
and benefits of CO, mitigation, 
Y Kaya, N. Nakicenovic. W.D. 
Nordhaus. and RE. Toth, eds., pp. 63-82, 11ASA. Laxenburg. 
Austria. 
Kolstad, CD., 1994a: George Bush vs. Al Gore: Irreversibilities in 
greenhouse gas accumulation and emissions control investment. 
Energy Policy. 22,771-778. 
Kolstad, CD., 1994b: The timing of CO, control in the face of un-
certainty and learning. In International 
Environmental 
Econom-
ics, E.C. Van Icrland. ed.. pp. 75-96, Elsevier. Amsterdam. 
Kolstad, CD.. 1994c: Mitigating climate change impacts: The con-
flicting effects of irreversibilities in CO, accumulation and emis-
sion control investment. In Integrative 
assessment 
of mitigation, 
impacts and adaptation 
to climate 
change. 
N. Nackicenovic. 
W.D. Nordhaus. R. Richels. and R.L. Toth. eds.. pp. 205-2IS. 
IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
Kosobud, R.. T. Daly. D. South, and K. Quinn. 1994: Tradable cu-
mulative CO, permits and global warming control. The Energy 
Journal. 15(2), 213-232. 
Lashof, D.A.. and 0.A. Tirpak. 1989. Policy options for stabilizing 
global climate, draft report to Congress. U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency. Office of Policy. Planning and Evaluation. Wash-
ington. DC. 
Lempert. R.J.. M.E. Schlesinger. and J.K. Hammitt. 1994: The im-
pact of potential abrupt climate changes on near-term policy 
choices. Climatic Change. 26, 351-376. 
Lempert, R.J.. M.E. Schlesinger. and S. Bankes. 1995: When ue 
don't know the costs or the benefits: Adaptive strategies for abat-
ing climate change. Climate Change, forthcoming. 
Integrated Assessment 
of Climate Change: An Overview and Comparisan of Approaches and Results 
JVS 
Levy, M.A., 1993: European acid rain: The power of tote-board 
diplomacy. In Institutions for the earth: Sources of effective inter-
national environmental protection, P.M. Haas. R.O. Keohane. 
and M.A. Levy, eds.. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 
MacCracken, J.C., and F.M. Luther. 1985a: Detecting the climatic 
effects of increasing carbon dioxide, DOE/ER-0235, National 
Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce. 
Springfield, VA. 
MacCracken, J.C., and F.M. Luther, 1985b: Projecting the climate 
effects of increasing carbon dioxide, DOE/ER-0237, National 
Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Springfield, VA. 
Maddison, D., 1995: A cost-benefit analysis of slowing climate 
change, Energy Policy, 23(4/5), 337-346. 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1992: Buying greenhouse insurance: 
The economic costs oj'C02 emission limits, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
MA. 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1993: CO, hedging strategies -The 
Impact of uncertainty upon emissions, paper presented at the 
OECD/IEA Conference on the Economics of Climate Change, 
Paris, 14-16 June. 
Manne, A.S., R. Mendelsohn, and R.G. Richels, 1993: MERGE: A 
model for evaluating regional and global effects of GHG reduc-
tion policies, Energy Policy, 23( 1), 17-34. 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 1994: Center for 
Global Change Science and Center for Energy and Environmental 
Policy Research. Joint program on the science and technology of 
global climate change, Cambridge, MA. 
Matsuoka, Y.. M. Kainuma, and T. Morita, 1995: Scenario analysis 
of global warming using the Asian-Pacific integrated model. En-
ergy /W/cv. 23(4/5), 357-372. 
Meadows, D.H., D.L. Meadows, J. Randers, and W.W. Behrens, 
1972: 77?<? limits to growth, Universe Books. New York. 
Meadows, D.H., J. Richardson, and G. Bruckmann, 1982: Groping in 
the dark: The first decade of global modelling, Wiley, Chichester, 
UK. 
Mesarovic, M.D., and E. Pestel, 1974: Mankind at the turning point: 
The second report to the Club of Rome, Dutton. New York. 
Mintzer, I., 1987: A matter of degrees: The potential for controlling 
the greenhouse effect. Research Report 5, World Resources Insti-
tute, Washington, DC. 
Mori, S., 1995a: A long-term evaluation of nuclear power technol-
ogy by extended DICE + e model simulations - Multircgional ap-
proach for resource and industry allocation. Progress in Nuclear 
Energy, 29. 135-142. 
Mori, S., 1995b: Long-term interactions among economy, environ-
ment, energy, and land-use changes - An extension of MARIA 
Model. Technical Report IA-TR-95-04. Science University of 
Tokyo, Japan. 
Morita,T, Y. Matsuoka. M. Kainuma. H. Harasawa, and K. Kai. 1993: 
AIM - Asian-Pacific integrated model for evaluating policy options 
to reduce GHG emissions and global warming impacts, National 
Institute for Environmental Studies. Tsukuba. Japan, September. 
Morita, T.. M. Kaihuma. H. Harasawa, K. Kai, L. Dong-Kumand. 
and Y Matsuoka. 1994: Asian-Pacific integrated model for evalu-
ating policy options to reduce GHG emissions and globed warming 
impacts, interim report. National Institute for Environmental 
Studies, Tsukuba. Japan. 
Nakicenovic, N.. WD. Nordhaus, R. Richels. and F.L. Toth (eds.). 
1994: Integrative assessment of mitigation, impacts, and adapta-
tion to climate change, CP-94-9, Proceedings of a workshop held 
13-15 October 1993 at IIASA, Laxenburg, International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg. Austria. 
Nordhaus, W.D.. 1979: The efficient use of energy resources, Yale Uni-
versity Press. New Haven, CT. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1989: The economics of the greenhouse effect, pa-
per presented to the June 1989 meeting of the International En-
ergy Workshop. Laxenburg. Austria, 20-22 June. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1991: To slow or not to slow: The economies 
of the greenhouse effect. The Economic Journal. 101, 920-937. 
Nordhaus, W.D., 1994: Managing the global commons: The eco-
nomics of climate change. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 
Nordhaus, W.D., and G.W. Yohe, 1983: Future carbon dioxide emis-
sions from fossil fuels. In Changing climate: Report of the car-
bon dioxide assessment committee. National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC. 
Nordhaus, W.D., and Z. Yang. 1995: RICE: A regional dynamic 
general equilibrium model of optimal climate change policy, Yale 
University Press. New Haven. CT. 
OTA (Office of Technology Assessment), 1994: Climate treaties and 
models: Issues in the international management of climate change, 
OTA-BP-ENV-128, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Parson, E.A., 1994: Searching for integrated assessment: A prelimi-
nary investigation of methods and projects in the integrated as-
sessment of global climatic change, paper presented to the third 
meeting of the Harvard-CIESIN Commission on Global Environ-
mental Change Information Policy. NASA Headquarters, Wash-
ington DC, 17-18 February. 
Parson, E.A.. 1995a: Integrated assessment and environmental 
policy-making: In pursuit of usefulness, Energy Policy, 23(4/5), 
463-475. 
Parson, E.A.. 1995b: Why study hard policy problems with simula-
tion gaming? International Institute for Applied Systems Analy-
sis, Laxenburg, Austria.. 
Parson, E.A.. and Richard Zeckhauser. 1995: Cooperation in the un-
balanced commons. In Barriers to the negotiated resolution of 
conflict, K. Arrow, R. Mnookin, L. Ross, A. Tversky, and R. Wilson, 
eds.. Norton. New York. 
Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg. 1992: CETA: A model for carbon emis-
sions trajectory assessment. The Energy Journal, 13(1), 55-77. 
Peck, S.C.. and T.J. Teisberg. 1993: Global warming uncertainties 
and the value of information: An analysis using CETA, Resource 
and Energy Economics, 15( I), 71-97. 
Peck, S.C., and T.J. Teisberg, 1994: Optimal carbon emissions tra-
jectories when damages depend on the rate or level of warming, 
Climatic Change, 30, 289-314. 
Peck, S.C.. and T.J. Teisberg, 1995: Optimal CO, control policy with 
stochastic losses from temperature rise, Climatic Change, 31, 
19-34. 
Read, P.. 1994a: Responding to global warming: The technology, 
economics and politics of sustainable energy, ZED Books, London 
and Atlantic Highlands, NJ. 
Read, P.. 1994b: Optimal control analysis of policy regret under ad-
verse climate surprise. International Energy Workshop, East-West 
Center. Honolulu. 21 -22 June. 
Richels, R.. and J. Edmonds, 1995: The costs of stabilizing atmo-
spheric CO, concentrations. Energy Policy, 23(4/5). 373-378. 
Rosenberg, N.J. (ed.). 1993: Towards an integrated impact assess-
ment of climate change: The MINK study, Kluwer. Boston. 
Rosenberg, N.J.. and PR. Crosson. 1991: The MINK project: A new 
methodology for identifying regional influences of and responses 
to increasing atmospheric CO, and climate change, Environmen-
tal Conservation, 18(4). 313-322. 
Rotmans, J.. 1990: Image: An integrated model to assess the green-
house effect, Kluwer, Dordrecht. The Netherlands. 
<V6 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Rotmans, J., 1995: TARGETS in transition, RIVM report, Rijksinsti-
lut Voor Volksge/.ondheid En Milicuhygiene (National Institute 
of Public Health and the Environment), Bilthoven. The Nether-
lands. 
Rotmans, J., and M.G.J, den El/en. 1992: A model-based approach 
to the calculation of global warming potentials (GWPs), Interna-
tional Journal t>j Climatology, 
12, 865-874. 
Rotmans, J., and M.G.J, den El/.en, 1993: Modeling feedback mech-
anisms in the carbon cycle: Balancing the carbon budget, Tellits, 
45B(4), 301-320. 
Rotmans, J., M.B.A. van Asselt, A.J. de Bruin. M.G.J, den Elzen, J. 
de Greet', H. Hilderink, AY. Hoekstra, M.A. Janssen, H.W. 
Koster, W.J.M. Martens, L.W. Niessen. and H.J.M. de Vries, 
1994: Global change and sustainable 
development: 
A modelling 
perspective for the next decade, Rijksinstitut Voor Volksgezond-
hcid En Milicuhygiene (National Institute of Public Health and 
Environmental Protection). Bilthoven. The Netherlands. 
Rotmans, J., II. Dowlatabadi. J.A. Filar, and E.A. Parson, 1995: Inte-
grated assessment of climate change: Evaluation of methods and 
strategies. In Human choices and climate change: A state of the 
art report, Batelle Pacific Northwest Laboratory, Washington. DC. 
Strain, B.R., and J.I). Cure, 1985: Direct effects of increasing 
car-
bon dioxide on vegetation, DOE/ER-023X, National Technical In-
formation Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA. 
Tol, R.S.J., 1993: The climate fund: Modelling 
costs and 
benefits, 
W-93/17, Institute for Environmental Studies, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam. 
Tol, R.S.J., 1995: The climate fund sensitivity, 
uncertainty, 
and ro-
bustness analyses. W-95/02, Institute for Environmental Studies, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. 
Tol, R.S.J.. T. van der Burg, H.M.A. Jansen, and H. Verbruggen, 
1995: The climate fund - Some notions on the socio-economic 
im-
pacts of greenhouse 
gas emissions and emission reduction in an 
international 
context. Institute for Environmental Studies, Report 
R95/03, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. 
Trabalka, J. (ed.), 1985: Atmospheric 
carbon dioxide and the global 
carbon 
cycle. 
DOE/ER-0239, National Technical Information 
Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA. 
U.S. National Research Council, 1983: Changing 
Climate, 
Na-
tional Academy Press, Washington, D C . 
Van Asselt, MB.A., and J. Rotmans, 1995: Uncertainty in integrated 
assessment 
modelling: A cultural perspective-based 
perspective, 
RIVM Report No. 461502009, Rijksinstitut Voor Volksgezond-
heid En Milicuhygiene (National Institute of Public Health and 
Environmental Protection), Bilthoven, The Netherlands. 
Van Vienen, H.A.W., F.J. Willekens, J. Huttcr. M.B.A. van Asselt. 
H.B.M. Hilderink. L.W. Niessen, and J. Rotmans, 1994: Fertil-
ity change: A global integrated 
perspective, 
RIVM Report No. 
461502008, Rijksinstitut Voor Volksgezondheid En Milicuhy-
giene (National Institute of Public Health and the Environment). 
Bilthoven, The Netherlands. 
WEC (World Energy Council) and IIASA (International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis), 1995: Global energy perspectives 
to 
2050 and beyond. World Energy Council, London. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1993: Balancing the carbon budget: Implications for 
projections of future carbon dioxide concentration changes, Tel-
lus, 45B(5), 409-425. 
Wigley, T„ 1995: Global mean temperature and sea level consequences 
of greenhouse gas stabilization, Geophysical 
Research 
Letters. 
22(1), 45-48. 
Wigley, T„ M. Hulme, and S. Raper. 1993: MAGICC: Model for the 
assessment 
of greenhouse 
induced 
climate 
change. 
University 
Consortium for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO. 
Wigley, T„ R. Richels, and J. Edmonds, 1996: Economic and envi-
ronmental choices in the stabilization of atmospheric CG\ con-
centrations, Nature, 379, 240-243. 
Yohe, G., 1995a: Exercises in hedging against extreme consequences 
of global change and the expected value of information, Depart-
ment of Economics, Wesleyan University, Wesleyan, CT. 
Yohe, G., 1995b: Strategies for using integrated assessment models 
to inform near-term abatement policies for greenhouse gas emis-
sions. In Proceedings 
of NATO Advanced 
Research 
Workshop on 
Integrated Assessment 
of Global Environmental 
Change: 
Science 
and Policy, Durham, North Carolina, Department of Economics, 
Wesleyan University, Wesleyan, CT. 
Yohe, G., and R. Wallace, 1995: Near-term mitigation policy for 
global change under uncertainty: Minimizing the expected cost of 
meeting unknown concentrations, Department of Economics, 
Wesleyan University, Wesleyan, CT. 
11 
An Economic Assessment of 
Policy Instruments for Combatting 
Climate Change 
Lead Authors: 
B.S. FISHER, S. BARRETT, P. BOHM, M. KURODA, J.K.E. MUBAZI, 
A. SHAH, R.N. STAVINS 
Contributors: 
E. Haites, M. Hinchy, S. Thorpe 
The lead authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of L. Coulder. A. Jaffe. R. Newell, and R. Repctln during the 
preparation of this chapter. 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
401 
11.1 Introduction 
402 
11.1.1 Guidelines from the FCCC 
402 
11.1.2 The greenhouse policy problem 
402 
11.2 Greenhouse Policy Instruments and 
Criteria for Policy Assessment 
402 
11.2.1 Domestic policy instruments 
403 
11.2.1.1 Conventional regulatory 
instruments 
403 
11.2.1.2 Market-based instruments 
403 
11.2.1.2.1 Taxes and subsidies 
403 
11.2.1.2.2 Tradable permits 
403 
11.2.1.3 Other complementary policies 
403 
11.2.2 International policy instruments 
404 
11.2.2.1 Regulatory instruments 
404 
11.2.2.2 International taxes and harmonized 
domestic taxes 
404 
11.2.2.3 Tradable quotas 
404 
11.2.2.4 Other complementary policies 
405 
11.2.3 Criteria for policy assessment 
405 
11.2.3.1 The choice of policy instruments 
under uncertainty 
405 
11.2.3.2 Other considerations 
406 
11.2.4 Coverage of greenhouse gases 
407 
11.2.4.1 The need for comprehensive 
targets 
407 
11.2.4.2 Initial coverage of C02 sources 
and sinks 
407 
11.3 The Domestic Policy Context 
408 
11.3.1 Preexisting market distortions 
409 
11.3.1.1 Energy subsidies 
409 
11.3.1.2 The "local" environmental benefits 
of climate change policy 
409 
11.3.1.3 Information and energy 
conservation 
409 
11.3.1.4 Transport 
410 
11.3.1.5 Agriculture and forestry 
410 
11.3.1.6 Policies affecting adaptation 
410 
11.3.2 Revenue recycling 
410 
11.3.3 The broader context for climate 
change policies 
411 
11.3.3.1 "No-regrets" policies 
411 
11.3.3.2 Adaptation policies 
411 
11.4 Regulations, Voluntary Agreements and 
Other Nonmarket-Based Instruments 
412 
11.4.1 Uniform technology and 
performance standards 
412 
11.4.2 Government investment 
414 
11.4.3 Voluntary agreements 
414 
11.4.4 Demand-side management 
414 
11.4.5 Distributional impacts 
415 
11.5 Market-Based Policy Instruments 
415 
11.5.1 Domestic carbon taxes 
415 
11.5.1.1 Related instruments: Deposit 
refund systems for carbon removal 
416 
11.5.2 Tradable permits 
417 
11.5.3 International carbon taxes 
417 
11.5.4 Tradable quotas 
418 
11.5.5 Joint implementation 
419 
11.5.6 Distributional impacts of market-
based measures 
419 
11.6 Policy Implementation Issues 
421 
11.6.1 The "currency" of regulation 
422 
11.6.2 Market power 
422 
11.6.3 Transaction costs 
423 
11.6.4 Free riding and emission leakage 
problems 
423 
11.6.4.1 Policies to reduce free riding 
424 
11.6.4.2 The severity of emission leakage 
424 
11.6.4.3 Policies to reduce leakage 
425 
11.6.5 Compliance 
426 
11.6.6 Information issues, the role of 
brokers, and risk management 
426 
11.6.7 Implementation issues for 
economies in transition 
428 
11.7 Comparative Assessment of Greenhouse 
Policy Instruments 
428 
11.7.1 Comparing regulatory systems and 
market-based instruments 
429 
11.7.2 Comparing domestic tradable 
permits and domestic tax systems 
430 
11.7.3 Comparing international tradable 
quotas and tax systems 
430 
Endnotes 
431 
References 
433 
SUMMARY 
A clear distinction needs to be drawn between the costs and 
benefits of actions taken to reduce the impacts of climate 
change and the costs and benefits of actions taken to reduce 
emissions. The first involves a consideration of adaptation 
policies such as developing new drought-resistant plant culti-
vars, whereas the second involves a consideration of policies 
designed to mitigate climate change. The final policy mix 
adopted by countries is likely to contain both adaptation and 
mitigation policies. 
The world economy and individual national economies 
suffer from other distortions than those possibly leading to 
global climate change. Any of these may prevent economies 
from attaining efficient outcomes. In many cases, correcting 
for those other distortions would lead to actions that would 
also serve to reduce the expected damage from climate change. 
Plainly, such distortions should be corrected, and many gov-
ernments are already taking steps to do so. 
To effect a substantial reduction in net greenhouse gas 
emissions, such as would be required to stabilize atmospheric 
concentrations, requires policies expressly designed to mit-
igate global climate change. The associated policy instru-
ments must be identified at two different levels: those that 
might be used by a coalition of countries and those that might 
be used by individual nations unilaterally or to achieve com-
pliance with a multilateral agreement on greenhouse gas 
emission targets. 
Governments may have different sets of criteria for as-
sessing international as well as domestic greenhouse policy 
instruments. Among these criteria are efficiency or cost-
effectiveness, effectiveness in achieving stated environmen-
tal targets, distributional (including intergenerational) equity, 
flexibility in the face of new knowledge, understandability to 
the general public, and consistency with national institutions 
and traditions. The choice of instruments may also partly re-
flect a desire on the part of governments to achieve other ob-
jectives such as meeting fiscal targets or influencing pollution 
levels indirectly related to greenhouse gas emissions. Govern-
ments may also be concerned about the effects of policy on 
competitiveness. 
A coalition of nations may choose one or a mix of policy 
instruments, including tradable quotas, feasible forms of joint 
implementation, harmonized domestic carbon taxes, interna-
tional carbon taxes, nontradable quotas, and various interna-
tional standards. At both the international and national levels, 
market-based approaches are likely to be more cost-effective 
than other instruments. 
At the international level, all the potentially efficient tax or 
quota solutions should be available to facilitate future negotia-
tions. Under a harmonized carbon tax, incentives exist for coun-
tries to alter related policies to reduce the domestic implications 
of the tax (for example, by introducing offsetting production 
subsidies). This possibility could make harmonized carbon 
taxes less effective than tradable quotas in reducing emissions. 
For a global treaty, a tradable quota system is the only po-
tentially cost-effective arrangement where an agreed level of 
emissions is attained with certainty (subject to enforcement). 
The initial quota allocation could provide a means of compen-
sation to countries - particularly developing countries - that 
would bear substantial costs in implementing international re-
sponse measures. This attribute would provide the opportu-
nity to encourage developing countries to participate actively 
in global action. 
In principle, individual countries can choose from among a 
large set of available instruments, including carbon taxes, 
tradable permits, deposit refund systems, and subsidies, as 
well as technology standards, performance standards, product 
bans, direct government investment, and voluntary agree-
ments. A choice of tradable quotas at the international level 
would provide maximum flexibility for instrument choice at 
the domestic level. 
A tradable quota or permit system has the disadvantage of 
making the marginal cost of emission reductions uncertain, 
whereas a carbon tax has the disadvantage of leaving the level 
at which emissions will be controlled uncertain. The weight 
given to the importance of reducing these different types of 
uncertainty will be crucial in determining the final choice be-
tween competing market-based instruments. Regardless of the 
final mix of instruments adopted, there will remain a high de-
gree of uncertainty about the physical effects of different lev-
els of emissions. 
The consequences of climate change policy will be deter-
mined by the choice of the mix of policy instruments, the 
design and implementation of those policies, and the institu-
tional framework in which the policies must operate. For ex-
ample, regulatory instruments are likely to have a different 
impact on innovation than market-based instruments. Further-
more, the welfare effects of a carbon tax or the government 
sale of tradable permits will depend on whether and how the 
associated revenues are recycled. In some countries monitor-
ing and enforcement may be more difficult than in others, and 
such differences could have a direct impact on the effective-
ness of some policy instruments. 
402 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
11.1 Introduction 
/ / . / . / Guidelines from the FCCC 
The aim in this chapter is to provide an economic assessment 
of possible policy instruments for managing greenhouse gas 
emissions under the Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (FCCC). The Framework Convention contains sev-
eral key guidelines for policy implementation. First is the 
emphasis given to the need for developed countries to dem-
onstrate that they are taking the leading role in policies to con-
trol greenhouse emissions. In essence, developed country 
signatories (as listed in Annex I of the Convention) have ac-
cepted the goal, but not necessarily the requirement, of sta-
bilizing greenhouse gas emissions at 1990 levels by 2000 
(Article 4.2). In ratifying the Convention. Annex I countries 
have effectively accepted a quantitative emission target, al-
though the level of that target remains uncertain. Developing 
country signatories (non-Annex countries) are under no such 
obligation. Rather, the economic needs and special circum-
stances of developing countries (Articles 4.8 and 4.10), and of 
countries highly dependent on incomes from fossil fuels (Ar-
ticle 4.10), will be taken into account in determining specific 
commitments to control emissions. 
To achieve greenhouse emission reductions. Annex I coun-
tries have the option to implement greenhouse policy mea-
sures jointly with other parties to the Convention (Article 
4.2). This provision is consistent with another guiding princi-
ple in the Convention that stipulates that all greenhouse policy 
measures should he cost-effective - that is. that they should 
achieve policy goals at least cost (Article 3). Other key princi-
ples in Article 3 require the parties to promote sustainable de-
velopment, to take precautionary measures to minimize the 
costs of greenhouse uncertainties and risks (noting that where 
there are risks of serious or irreversible damage, lack of scien-
tific certainty should not be used to justify policy deferral). 
and to ensure that measures taken to combat climate change 
do not amount to unfair trade restrictions. 
Prior to the development of the FCCC. the most closely re-
lated international conventions were the Vienna Convention 
for Protection of the Ozone Layer (concluded in 1985) and the 
1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone 
Layer (the text of which was revised in 1990 and again in 
1992). The experience of the parties to the Montreal Protocol 
provides valuable information about the implementation of 
policy approaches within the F C C C 
In this chapter, the factors affecting the policy mix for the 
control of greenhouse gas emissions are reviewed in the light 
of these guiding principles and the general international legal 
framework in which the Convention must operate. 
//. 1.2 The greenhouse 
policy 
problem 
Two characteristics of the greenhouse problem are central to 
the design of policy responses. The first key feature is that it is 
a global problem. It is the total accumulation of greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere that could cause global warming over 
the next centur> ilPCC 1990; |992). regardless of the geo-
graphic source of emissions. In addition, there is a long time 
lag, up to fifty years, between emission reductions and their 
impact on atmospheric concentrations. Thus, the greenhouse 
problem is a pollution problem over space and time, and one 
in which increased absorption can reduce atmospheric con-
centrations of greenhouse gases as effectively as reduced 
emissions. Any benefits from controlling concentrations will 
depend on long-term global cooperation, and the costs of col-
lective control will be incurred long before any potential ben-
efits are realized.-
The second key feature of the greenhouse problem is that 
both the extent of any climate change and the nature of its ef-
fects are uncertain. This means that potential greenhouse poli-
cies must be assessed using a decision-making framework 
that explicitly incorporates risk, uncertainty, and the capacity 
to learn about evolving climatic and economic conditions 
around the world. 
A basic principle in public policy (as for any financial deci-
sion) is to time the introduction of the policy to maximize the 
expected discounted value of the stream of net benefits from 
the initiative. In this context, there may be benefits from wait-
ing to reduce uncertainties before implementing greenhouse 
policies.1 The value of the information gained from waiting 
could allow greenhouse policy to be properly tailored to the 
most likely damage scenario in order to avoid excessive con-
trol costs (Peck and Teisberg, 1993; Leary and Scheraga. 
1994; Richels and Edmonds, 1994). Conversely, there could 
be significant costs in waiting, if waiting makes excessive 
damage costs more likely (Chichilnisky and Heal, 1993) or re-
sults in the need for urgent action at some future time, with as-
sociated disproportionate adjustment costs. 
Greenhouse policy assessment must therefore take into ac-
count the existence of opposing risks. Indeed, one important 
avenue for policy assessment is to examine the extent to 
which policy can be directed to reduce the costs of uncertainty 
and the costs of risk from natural damage caused by the en-
hanced greenhouse effect and from mitigation measures in re-
sponse to climate change concerns. An immediate response to 
the greenhouse problem is to invest in research and develop-
ment to reduce greenhouse uncertainties and subsequently to 
provide new information to decision makers. 
An efficient greenhouse policy would ensure that the costs 
of greenhouse uncertainties, and of associated risks, and the 
costs of emission reductions and adaptation strategies are bal-
anced, at the margin, with the benefits from avoiding damage 
from global warming. One implication of this efficiency crite-
rion is that the optimal policy is the one that achieves a global 
greenhouse target at least cost in the face of risk, uncertainty, 
and the need for further knowledge about the causes and ef-
fects of climate change. However, regardless of the policy ap-
proach adopted, considerable physical uncertainty about both 
the effects and extent of climate change will remain. 
11.2 Greenhouse Policy Instruments and Criteria 
for Policy Assessment 
The variety of instruments available to policymakers to control 
greenhouse «as emissions is outlined here. Such instruments 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
40J 
include conventional regulatory instruments, market-based in-
struments such as taxes, subsidies, and tradable quotas and 
permits, and other complementary policies. In this chapter the 
term "tradable quota" is used to describe internationally traded 
emission allowances. The term "permit" is more commonly 
used in the literature to describe domestic trading schemes, 
and that convention is adopted here. Existing global climate 
change research that has analyzed a broad range of policy in-
struments includes Mintzer (1988); US Congress, Office of 
Technology Assessment (1991); IPCC (1992); National Acad-
emy of Sciences (1992); and McCann and Moss (1993). 
11.2.1 Domestic policy instruments 
11.2.1.1 Conventional regulatory instruments 
One way of controlling activities that both directly and indi-
rectly lead to greenhouse gas emissions is to set standards and 
to regulate the activities of firms or individuals. By mandating 
standards, governments attempt to ban or alter the use of ma-
terials and equipment considered to be damaging. Standards 
are typically applied in areas such as buildings (energy effi-
ciency, for example), fuel use by motor vehicles, energy effi-
ciency of household appliances, and the content of fuels. 
Standards may be voluntary or mandatory. They may be fixed 
or set as targets, or "rolling standards" might be adopted 
(Grubb. 1991). 
11.2.1.2 Market-based instruments 
In using market-based instruments, governments attempt to 
alter price signals to ensure that emitters face direct-cost in-
centives to control emissions. The primary market-based in-
struments for greenhouse management are emission taxes and 
tradable emission permits. 
11.2.1.2.1 Taxes and subsidies 
Under an emission tax, those who produce emissions face a 
tax per unit of emissions.4 All fossil fuels should be taxed at 
the same rate per unit of their long-term global warming po-
tential. A tax on energy content measured in British thermal 
units, the so-called BTU tax, would not satisfy this criterion, 
as it relates to energy use per se rather than to any externali-
ties associated with end products of combustion (see Poterba, 
1993). A tax on the carbon content of fossil fuels, on the other 
hand, would approximate this criterion. Implementing such 
taxes at a uniform rate per tonne of carbon content of fossil 
fuels to curtail carbon emissions assumes that existing ex-
cises on energy products are levied at the optimal level based 
on minimizing the excess burden of taxation and internaliza-
tion of environmental externalities. If such an assumption 
does not hold in practice, the design of carbon taxes becomes 
more complicated. 
Subsidies might be offered for adopting particular tech-
nologies or practices. Such subsidies might be directed at fos-
tering emission abatement or the creation of additional sinks 
by, for example, subsidizing tree planting. 
A subsidy scheme could be linked to a tax scheme by ap-
plying the subsidy to reductions in emissions below a baseline 
and a tax on emissions above the baseline. The rate of subsidy 
would be applied per unit of emissions at the same rate as the 
emission tax. A tax/subsidy scheme would mean that firms 
would not pay a tax on every unit of emissions, but it would 
involve an additional administrative burden in setting the 
baseline for every firm. 
11.2.1.2.2 Tradable permits 
Under an emission-trading scheme, emitters are given per-
mits to emit (the total allocation is the aggregate emission 
cap for the country) and have the option of buying or selling 
permits in the marketplace. Although there are important and 
often subtle differences between taxes and tradable permits, 
under some restrictive circumstances the outcome can be the 
same. Both may target full user-cost pricing of the atmo-
sphere to dispose of net greenhouse gas emissions from 
human activity. When traded on a national market, permit 
prices are established that show the costs of marginal emis-
sions, just as an emission tax does. The difference is that the 
tax is exogenous (in this case, set by the government) and its 
effects on emissions endogenous, whereas emissions are ex-
ogenously determined in the case of a permit system and, 
hence, permit prices are endogenous. 
A tradable-permit system could be used in combination 
with either an international tradable-quota system or an inter-
national carbon tax. In the former case, the domestic permit 
system could either be integrated with an international quota 
system, where the permit-liable parties (say, a limited set of 
wholesale fossil fuel dealers) trade directly on the interna-
tional quota market (see Grubb and Sebenius, 1991; Sandor el 
«/., 1994) or be run as a separate subsystem providing the na-
tional government with a net excess demand for (or supply of) 
emission quotas at the ruling international quota price. In the 
case where governments paid an international tax on carbon 
emissions, it would be up to each government to determine 
beforehand the volume of domestic permits available per pe-
riod. Ideally, this volume should he such that the resulting 
permit price would be equal to the tax rate. If not, nationally 
as well as internationally, too little or too much abatement 
would take place. 
11.2.1.3 Other complementary policies 
A range of other complementary instruments exists that might 
be adopted to moderate greenhouse gas emissions or to pro-
mote adaptation to climate change. Education and provision 
of new information - by promoting research, for example -
may be valuable in changing consumer behaviour with re-
spect to energy consumption and the development and adop-
tion of new technology. Family planning may play an indirect 
role in reducing total energy demand in the future, as might 
more general education directed specifically at women in de-
veloping countries. Modifications of trade policy and reduc-
tions in energy production and consumption subsidies (and 
other market distortions) may also have indirect consequences 
for greenhouse gas emissions. Changes in migration policies 
in some countries may allow more flexibility for developing 
countries to adapt to regional population pressures that may 
arise as a consequence of changes in the incidence of occur-
rences such as severe drought. 
404 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
11.2.2 International 
policy 
instruments 
The use of the available policy instruments will only lead to a 
cost-effective global outcome if certain conditions are met. 
First, unless individual countries undertake cost-effective do-
mestic greenhouse policy measures that are compatible with 
the goal of global efficiency, the policy instruments adopted 
internationally will not lead to that goal. Each individual 
country is free to choose its own instrument or combination of 
instruments to meet its international obligations, but the 
choice of international instruments will, to some extent, dic-
tate the choice of policy instruments at the domestic level. 
This is clearly so in the case of the harmonized carbon/energy 
tax proposed by the European Commission for member states 
of the European Union. Under this regime, every member of 
the Union would impose the same tax rate, although states 
would be free to decide for themselves what to do with the 
revenues from the tax. If nations themselves were taxed by an 
international agency, it would not necessarily follow that na-
tions would choose to impose the same tax domestically. For 
example, they might instead choose to reduce emissions do-
mestically by means of a tradable permit scheme. Similarly, in 
the case of a system of internationally tradable quotas, indi-
vidual countries might choose to implement their obligations 
by means of a domestic tradable permit scheme or through a 
domestic emission tax. 
Second, given that information is not perfect and that dis-
tortions already exist in both international and domestic mar-
kets, the actual market outcomes from the implementation of 
particular greenhouse policies will not necessarily he effi-
cient. The importance of the policy environment is discussed 
in Section 11.3. and implementation issues surrounding the 
adoption of market-based instruments are outlined in Section 
11.6. 
11.2.2.1 Regulatory 
instruments 
It is conceivable that uniform standards could be established 
among countries participating in an international emission re-
duction agreement. But it is likely to he difficult to achieve 
wide agreement about any large set of specific instruments of 
this type. For example, individual countries may adopt stan-
dards for housing insulation, but it is most unlikely that the 
same standards would be applicable in both temperate and 
tropical countries. Moreover, such an approach would limit 
the domestic policy choices of individual countries and. 
hence, their flexibility in adjusting their emissions under an 
international greenhouse gas reduction agreement. Another 
regulatory approach involves agreements by countries on 
fixed national emission levels (a "nontradahlc emission quota" 
system), much in the tradition of the European Union's Large 
Combustion Plants Directive, which specifies reductions in 
the emissions of sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen from 
plants with a thermal rating of 50 M\V or larger. Such an ap-
proach would mean that marginal emission abatement costs 
among participating countries would tend to be different and. 
hence, total abatement costs, globally speaking, would he un-
necessarily high. 
11.2.2.2 International 
taxes and 
harmonized 
domestic 
taxes 
If countries agreed to apply the same level of domestic green-
house or carbon taxes (harmonized domestic taxes), marginal 
abatement costs would tend to be equalized among countries. 
Such an agreement may have to include side payments from 
rich to poor countries if the latter are to be encouraged to par-
ticipate. 
An alternative type of international policy to reduce emis-
sions could be an agreement to levy a uniform international 
tax on greenhouse or carbon emissions in each of the partici-
pating countries. The total international tax revenue would be 
shared among the participating countries according to rules 
established in the agreement. 
If an international tax agreement did not cover all coun-
tries, world fossil fuel prices would decrease and fossil fuel 
use increase in nonpartieipating countries (so-called carbon 
leakage). In addition, since carbon-intensive products would 
he less expensive in such countries, exports of them to the 
participating countries would likely rise. A policy instrument 
might then be introduced by the latter countries to control car-
bon leakage (see Section 11.6.5 for further discussion). For 
example, a carbon tariff might be imposed at a rate corre-
sponding to the tax rate on imported products on the basis of 
their estimated carbon contents. 
In the case of a domestic carbon tax imposed by interna-
tional agreement, the national commitment to impose the tax 
will also vary because perspectives on global warming vary 
from one country to another. If a country has signed such an 
agreement under international pressure, that country could 
make the carbon tax ineffective by reducing existing energy 
taxes, by taxing substitutes for fossil fuels (for example, hy-
droelectricity), by providing subsidies to complements or 
products that are fossil-fuel-energy intensive, and by lax en-
forcement of the tax (see Hoel, 1993). Thus, by following a 
suitable strategy, a free ride becomes possible. A global car-
bon tax imposed by an international agency, on the other 
hand, would impinge on national sovereignty and would 
therefore be difficult to negotiate. 
If global carbon taxes were levied as producer taxes in-
stead of consumer taxes, tax revenue would be collected in 
fossil fuel producer countries instead of consumer countries 
and, hence, would shift the burden between the two types of 
countries (Whalley and Wigle, 1991). The distributional ef-
fects of a "producer cartel" solution may be unacceptable to a 
great many countries and, if used, could give rise to retalia-
tory trade policy measures. (Neither carbon producer taxes 
nor producer quota systems are further discussed in detail in 
this chapter.) 
11.2.2.3 Tradable quotas 
Another 
potentially 
cost-effective 
international 
solution 
would be one in which countries agree to an allocation of car-
bon emission quotas, perhaps reflecting an overall emission 
target. In a practical sense, signatories to the FCCC have im-
plicitly accepted such a quantitative target. International 
quota trading (Sandor et «/., 1994) would establish a quota 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Comlnittin^ Climate Change 
405 
price - an implicit international tax rate - that would tend to 
equalize marginal abatement costs among countries. A carbon 
leakage problem similar to that mentioned above would arise 
to the extent that such an agreement was not global. 
In the case of an international tradable quota scheme, par-
ticipating countries could use whatever domestic policies they 
preferred in order to stay within their final quota entitlements 
once all quota trades were complete. For example, they might 
employ tradable permits, domestic taxes, or regulations. If a 
domestic carbon tax were used, the efficient tax rate for the 
coming period would be the (unknown) quota price level for 
that period. 
11.2.2.4 Other complementary policies 
Technology transfer from industrialized to developing coun-
tries potentially has a large part to play in reducing future 
emissions. One mechanism to facilitate such transfers is joint 
implementation, to the extent that it proves practically feasi-
ble. Joint implementation aims at minimizing the joint costs 
of emission reductions for a group of emitters. In the context 
of emitters who are committed to targets, it could lead to the 
development of a tradable quota scheme. 
11.2.3 Criteria for policy assessment 
In this chapter a range of criteria is used to assess policy in-
struments to manage the greenhouse problem. Two important 
criteria are economic efficiency and distributive justice. The 
efficiency objective or cost-benefit principle is to maximize 
the global net benefits from the use of resources. Both the 
global greenhouse emission target and the preferred policy in-
struments to achieve it are choice variables for satisfying this 
criterion. However, there is considerable uncertainty regard-
ing the effects of unconstrained greenhouse gas emissions at 
this time. Hence, there is uncertainty regarding the benefit and 
cost functions, and as a consequence of this, there is consider-
able uncertainty regarding the optimal (economically effi-
cient) level of control. One practical response is to employ a 
cost-effectiveness objective - that is, to minimize the costs of 
achieving a given global greenhouse emission target. 
The cost-effectiveness of achieving a given but potentially 
time-varying target is a criterion that is employed in much of 
this chapter. Policies may differ in their ability to achieve an 
emission target under changing conditions. A policy that con-
sistently "hits the target" (achieves environmental effective-
ness) and remains cost-effective is desirable. 
11.2.3.1 The choice of policy instruments under 
uncertainty 
In the absence of uncertainty, emission taxes and quantity 
controls, such as a tradable quota system, are equivalent. In-
deed, it would be neither harder nor easier to specify the ap-
propriate tax than the appropriate quantity of quotas. This is 
because the same information is required to specify both. 
However, both the science and economics of climate change 
involve many uncertainties. It is not known precisely how the 
climate will change given different emission trajectories. Nor 
is the cost of following each of these trajectories known. It is 
therefore important to compare these different instruments 
under uncertainty. 
Perhaps surprisingly, uncertainty with respect to the bene-
fits of abatement on its own does not favour either instrument. 
If the marginal abatement cost curve is known, then choice of 
a tax will result in a known quantity of emissions and choice 
of a quantity of tradable quotas will result in a known quota 
price (under the usual assumptions). This means that the out-
come in terms of both emissions and marginal cost can be de-
termined as easily by one instrument as by the other. Although 
uncertainty about the benefits of abatement makes choosing 
the appropriate target difficult, one instrument works as well 
as the other once the target is chosen. 
If the policy goal is to meet a particular emission target, 
then tradable quotas or an equivalent quantity-based instru-
ment will be preferred, insofar as they can guarantee that the 
emission target is met. However, from the point of view of ef-
ficiency this instrument may not be best. 
In an important paper, Weitzman (1974) showed that un-
certainty with respect to the costs of abatement does affect the 
choice between these instruments if the goal of policy is to 
maximize the net benefits of abatement. A substantial litera-
ture in the context of environmental policy followed, includ-
ing major works by Adar and Griffin (1976), Yohe (1977), and 
Watson and Ridker (1984). Where there is uncertainty about 
abatement costs, use of tradable quotas will guarantee that 
emissions do not exceed the quantity of quotas allocated (as-
suming full compliance), irrespective of the costs of doing so. 
Conversely, an emission tax would guarantee that marginal 
abatement costs did not exceed the magnitude of the tax, no 
matter how large or small was the resulting level of emissions. 
What Weitzman shows is that, if the marginal benefit and 
marginal cost curves are linear, the two instruments will be 
equivalent only if the slopes of these curves are equal (in ab-
solute value terms). If the marginal cost curve is steeper than 
the marginal benefit curve, emission taxes will result in a 
more efficient outcome. Conversely, if the slope of the mar-
ginal cost curve is less than the slope of the marginal benefit 
curve, then tradable quotas would be preferred. 
The available evidence indicates that marginal abatement 
costs will be steep once abatement becomes substantial (see, 
for example, Nordhaus, 1991b). although this curve may flat-
ten out considerably if a "backstop technology" becomes 
available. By contrast. little is known about how marginal 
abatement benefits vary with the level of abatement. There is, 
however, some concern that a threshold may exist in the dam-
ages associated with greenhouse gas concentrations (which 
depend, in turn, on emissions and the rate of sequestration). 
Hence, there are arguments that can be made in favour of both 
instruments. 
Although benefit uncertainty on its own has no effect on 
the identity of the optimal (efficient) control instrument, in 
the presence of simultaneous uncertainty in both marginal 
benefits and marginal costs and with some statistical depen-
dence between them, the usual Weitzman result can be re-
versed, depending on the magnitudes of benefit and cost 
406 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
uncertainty and the degree and sign of the correlation between 
them (Stavins, 1996). A positive correlation will always tend 
to favour a quantity instrument and a negative correlation will 
tend to favour a price instrument. 
However, these two instruments are not mutually exclu-
sive, and it turns out that a mixed system can be preferable to 
either of the pure instrument options (see Roberts and S pence, 
1976). Under a mixed system, a certain quantity of quotas 
may be made available. In addition, both a tax and a subsidy 
are imposed, with the tax being higher than the subsidy. If 
costs turn out to he higher than expected, polluters may pay 
the tax instead of purchasing more costly quotas. The tax thus 
serves to cap marginal abatement costs. If, on the other hand, 
costs turn out to he lower than expected, polluters can reduce 
their emissions even further in order to obtain the subsidy. 
The mixed system performs better than either pure system un-
der cost uncertainty because the mixed system effectively has 
two instruments at its disposal. 
A nonlinear emission tax can do better still. Under such a 
tax the marginal tax rate varies with the quantity of emissions. 
The tax schedule should approximate the marginal benefit 
curve. If the marginal benefit curve were known with cer-
tainty, then obviously a marginal tax schedule identical to the 
marginal benefit curve would ensure a fully efficient out-
come, irrespective of the uncertainties regarding abatement 
costs. The marginal benefit curve is not known in the case of 
climate change. However, enough may be known to specify 
two or three steps in the curve. 
For the remainder of this chapter, it will he assumed that a 
given ceiling on emissions has been identified as a target, and 
that governments seek to minimize the costs of meeting this tar-
get. The main concern here is thus with cost-effectiveness 
rather than efficiency as such. This assumption is made partly 
for analytical convenience (only pure tax and tradable quota 
systems are considered in detail) and partly because so much of 
the policy debate about global climate change has focussed on 
the appropriate emission targets. Indeed, the Framework Con-
vention on Climate Change refers explicitly to such targets. 
11.2.3.2 Other 
considerations 
As a practical matter it is also important to distinguish static 
from dynamic cost-effectiveness. Static efficiency refers to a 
short-term operating environment in which technology op-
tions and aggregate primary resource availabilities are fixed; 
dynamic efficiency pertains to a long-term operating environ-
ment in which technology options and primary resource avail-
abilities change. A policy that is cost-effective in the short run 
may not be cost-effective in the long run. 
In addition to the application of the global least-cost prin-
ciple to policies for emission control, the other main criterion 
for policy assessment is the objective of distributive justice. 
This requires that the total net benefits (costs) generated by 
the policy should be "equitably" shared. 
Central to the analysis of the performance of any green-
house policy is the recognition that the real-world operating 
environment involves major sources of greenhouse uncer-
tainty and associated risk regarding future economic and eco-
logical conditions. Decision makers will face the costs o\' 
Table 1 I.I. A Taxonomy of costs of environmental 
regulation 
Government Administration of Environmental Statutes and 
Regulations 
Monitoring enforcement 
Private Sector Compliance Expenditures 
Capital 
Operating 
Other Direct Costs 
Legal and other transactional 
Shifted management focus 
Disrupted production 
Negative Costs 
Natural resource inputs 
Worker health 
Innovation stimulation 
General Equilibrium Effects 
Product substitution 
Discouraged investment 
Retarded innovation 
Transition Costs 
Unemployment 
Obsolete capital 
Social Impacts 
Loss of middle-class jobs 
Economic security impacts 
Source: Jaffe et al. (1995). 
uncertainty and risk from making incorrect decisions. But it is 
possible to reduce these costs by ensuring that policy is flexi-
ble and reversible in response to new information about the 
most cost-effective future strategy. The ability to modify policy 
settings and introduce new policies without generating major 
costs of adjustment are key criteria for greenhouse management. 
Potential net benefits from a policy initiative must also 
take into account the administrative costs of the programme. 
Whether an efficiency criterion (maximizing net benefits) or a 
cost-effectiveness criterion (minimizing aggregate costs) is 
being employed, it is essential that the full measure of costs 
include both implementation costs (typically borne by gov-
ernments) and transaction costs (typically borne by the private 
sector). 
Costs need to be measured correctly. A taxonomy of the 
costs of environmental regulation, beginning with the most 
obvious and moving towards the least direct, is provided in 
Table 11.1/ First, many policymakers, and much of the gen-
eral public, would identify the on-budget costs to government 
of administering (monitoring and enforcing) environmental 
laws and regulations as the cost of environmental regulation. 
However, most analysts would identify the capital and operat-
ing expenditures associated with regulatory compliance as the 
fundamental part of the overall costs of regulation, although a 
substantial share of compliance costs for some environmental 
regulations fall on government rather than private firms - one 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments [or C<>inh(i!liiii> Climate Cltan^i 
407 
example being regulations for contaminants in drinking water. 
Additional direct costs include legal and other transaction 
costs, the effects of refocussed management attention, and the 
possibility of disrupted production. 
Next, the potential "negative costs" (in other words, non-
environmental benefits) of environmental regulation, includ-
ing the productivity impacts of a cleaner environment and the 
potential effects of regulation on innovation, should also be 
considered. General equilibrium effects associated with prod-
uct substitution, discouraged investment,6 and retarded inno-
vation constitute another important layer of costs, as do the 
transition costs of real-world economies responding over time 
to regulatory changes. Finally, there are potential social im-
pacts, such as those on jobs and economic security, that are 
given substantial weight in political forums.7 
This discussion of some of the special difficulties of as-
sessing the cost-effectiveness of alternative policy instru-
ments should not be taken to mean that this single criterion is 
of exclusive or paramount importance. On the contrary, indi-
vidual nations will inevitably choose their own criteria to dis-
tinguish between competing policy instruments. The specific-
criteria chosen will always be a function of the individual so-
cioeconomic and cultural context, but in many cases the fol-
lowing set of criteria will be among those considered: 
(a) 
probability that the environmental goal will be achieved 
(b) 
efficiency or cost-effectiveness 
(c) 
dynamic incentives for innovation and the diffusion of 
improved technologies 
(d) 
flexibility and adaptability to exogenous changes in 
technology, resource use, and consumer tastes 
(e) 
distributional equity 
(0 
feasibility in terms of political implementation and ad-
ministration. 
Finally, in assessing policy options in this chapter both the 
spatial and temporal aspects of emission coverage are consid-
ered. The general design features of economic instruments are 
categorized by the coverage of net greenhouse gas emissions, 
the scope and level of participation, and the point of applica-
tion. For example, an emission control objective could in-
volve imposing a target on all or a subset of all human sources 
and sinks and all or a subset of all greenhouse gases. In addi-
tion, the scope of a policy instrument could involve all or a 
subset of countries. The level of participation in a scheme 
refers to the economic unit responsible for meeting a target. 
Options range from the level of the country to that of individ-
uals or companies. The point of application of the policy sim-
ply refers to the point in the production or consumption chain 
of a good or service at which greenhouse gas emissions are to 
be counted or proxied. 
11.2.4 Coverage of greenhouse gases 
11.2.4.1 The need for comprehensive targets 
Should an initial international programme include all green-
house gases or focus on CO, alone? This question has re-
ceived considerable debate in the literature (see, for example. 
Cristofaro and Scheraga, 1990; Victor, 1991; Stewart and 
Wiener, 1992). The advantage of the more comprehensive 
approach is the additional flexibility it introduces into the 
system, and hence the potential it creates for even greater 
cost-effectiveness. However, the sources and sinks of meth-
ane and nitrous oxide emissions are as yet poorly understood. 
Currently, important anthropogenic sources of emissions of 
methane appear to include domesticated ruminant animals, 
rice cultivation, landfills, and mining. For nitrous oxide, they 
appear to include legume crops and nitrogen fertilizers (How-
den and Munro 1994; Pearce and Warlord 1993). Clearly, 
countries with a comparative advantage in agricultural indus-
tries could be significantly affected by either the exclusion or 
use of a multiple gas scheme. Although CO, is the main 
source of past and present greenhouse concerns, methane and 
nitrous oxide are also significant in radiative forcing. 
By including all the major greenhouse gases (sources and 
sinks) in setting global and any national greenhouse manage-
ment targets, policymakers would avoid throwing away valu-
able knowledge (Schmalensee, 1993). Given a set of weights 
relating the radiative forcing potential of each greenhouse gas 
to a common base (say CO,), a multiple gas market policy 
would only need to involve one quota market or one emission 
tax scheme and one permit market or domestic tax scheme as 
well as one control obligation for each country. At this stage, 
however, these weights are uncertain and may vary with both 
environmental and economic conditions (Hoel and Isaksen, 
1993). 
If the administrative burden is deemed to be too great ini-
tially for the incorporation of net emissions of greenhouse 
gases other than CO, in an international greenhouse manage-
ment programme, the programme still needs to be flexible 
enough for this to be done when implementation costs fall. In-
deed, it could provide incentives to generate such an outcome. 
Care must be taken not to worsen problems for future green-
house management. The international target must therefore be 
comprehensive, as must targets for countries within a coali-
tion that adopts any international market-based policy regime. 
11.2.4.2 Initial coverage ofCO, sources and sinks 
The coverage issue in the case of CO, has been widely dis-
cussed (see, for example, UNCTAD, 1992; OECD, 1992a, b). 
One major question relates to whether consideration should 
be limited only to changes in emissions of CO,, or whether it 
should also include changes in CO, sinks, such as expanding 
forests? Another concerns whether and how an international 
agreement might help retard deforestation and promote refor-
estation (Dudek and LeBIanc, 1992). Deforestation could be 
treated as equivalent to emissions, whereas afforestation ac-
tivities could be a source of emission abatement credits. A 
good deal of care is needed in establishing the accounting 
methodology to ensure that the net effects of land clearing and 
revegetation with alternative species arc measured and that 
domestic consumption and exports of wood products are sep-
arated. 
Whether one is considering net CO, emissions from fossil 
fuel burning or net deforestation, it is helpful and, in some 
policy contexts, even necessary to have a baseline level for 
net emissions in the absence of any policy change, which can 
40S 
Climate ( liait^e /VVi - Ijontiinic 
and Social Dimensions oj Climate 
Change 
be used to assess the effectiveness of the greenhouse policy in 
place. This baseline has yet to be determined for the forestry 
sectors of the world's economies, and cost-effective monitor-
ing techniques have not yet been proven. One of the major 
difficulties is that many trees exist outside forests, and mea-
suring their contribution to carbon sequestration with remote 
sensing devices is extremely difficult. A further and more per-
vasive issue is associated with specifying ex ante a "status 
quo" timepath, against which "improvements" can be mea-
sured. 
The coverage of the scheme may have a major impact on 
the incentive of different countries to participate. With an in-
ternational market programme for CO,, countries like Brazil 
and Indonesia might find it economically attractive, as well as 
environmentally sound, to retard the depletion of their forests 
or to implement reforestation programmes. Under an inter-
national tradable quota regime. CO, emission credits would 
amount to a valuable export commodity from the seller's 
viewpoint and would he an equally valuable import from the 
viewpoint of the buyer (a country that would otherwise have a 
CO, emission deficit). Under an international CO, emission 
tax, net emissions would also be treated symmetrically. 
Currently, there are significant difficulties in measuring the 
carbon stored in trees and how it varies over time (Houghton, 
1992). Hollinger et eil. (1994) have made some progress to-
ward a standardized carbon accounting system for a single-
species plantation forest established on previously cleared 
agricultural land in New Zealand. Use of this accounting sys-
tem within an international system of tradable emission cred-
its has been explored by both MacLaren et al. (1993) and the 
Tasman Institute (1994). Current estimates of the costs of car-
bon sequestration through tree planting vary widely (ranging 
from US$1 to US$50 per short ton of carbon abated). These 
differences reflect the opportunity costs of alternative land 
uses (Stavins, 1995b) as well as the effects of uncertainty (see 
Sedjo, 1994, and the references cited there). However, esti-
mates at the low end of the range refer to developing countries 
and. aside from the limitation of uncertainty, appear promis-
ing in terms of shifting any long-term need for high-cost carbon-
free backstops further into the future. According to current 
estimates, such backstops become economic when the mar-
ginal cost of emissions is around US$250 per ton of carbon 
(Manneand Richels. 1991). 
Satellite imagery is a critical tool in monitoring forestry 
systems. Given the potential stimulus of global net CO, emis-
sion trading, it could he tailored to ensure that coverage is 
complete and backed by verification (OECD, 1992b). Further, 
such a price stimulus for reduced deforestation (and increased 
afforestation) could yield complementary gains in terms of 
sustainable land management practices and global gains in 
biodiversity values. Indeed, the global nature of biodiversity 
values has prompted one suggestion for an international trad-
able quota system in global forestry management (see Sedjo 
1994). 
Hence, an important option value would be preserved by 
including in an\ 
international agreement to control CO, 
sources a provision for all parties to review the adoption of 
sinks at fixed points in time. However, it would be important 
to ensure that the integrity of the existing policy regime be 
preserved as new sinks were included. 
11.3 The Domestic Policy Context 
From the basic theorems of welfare economics it can be de-
duced that if an economy is perfectly competitive, if there is a 
full set of markets, and if information is perfect, then the re-
sulting equilibrium (if it exists) is efficient in the sense that no 
one could be made better off without making someone else 
worse off (Pareto efficiency). The real world does not satisfy 
these conditions. There exist many externalities, of which cli-
mate change is only one. Competition is not perfect, nor in 
many cases is information, and markets are not complete. 
What is more, even if all the conditions of perfect competition 
were satisfied, the resulting Pareto-efficient outcome might 
not accord with society's view of a distribution of resources 
that is equitable or "fair." If certain other conditions hold, then 
an alternative, feasible, Pareto-efficient allocation could be 
sustained as a competitive equilibrium with appropriate lump-
sum taxes and transfers, and so the objectives of efficiency 
and equity need not necessarily clash. But lump-sum taxes 
and transfers are typically infeasible, and, as a consequence, 
distorting taxes and transfers are employed virtually every-
where.8 
The above observations about distortions are important be-
cause many analyses of climate change policy assume that the 
externality of climate change is the only distortion that exists. 
In fact, climate change policy must be considered in the con-
text of real economies, already rife with distortions. A market 
economy can function effectively only if governments define 
property rights and provide for the enforcement of contracts. 
In some countries, even these basic requirements are not met. 
The extent to which governments can provide these basic re-
quirements and correct market failures will in part determine 
GNP. (The importance of GNP. and other economic and social 
factors, in determining future emissions is highlighted in 
Chapter 8.) 
It is also necessary to take into account any distortions 
introduced by governments. In some cases, government in-
terventions can undermine net national income and cause 
environmental damage (see Binswanger. 1989). Another im-
portant determinant of future emissions, as discussed in 
Chapters 3 and 8. is population. Here. too. both market and 
government failures play a role. For example, high rates of 
fertility have been linked to the absence of effective capital 
markets, which makes it difficult or impossible for people to 
obtain social security (see Dasgupta 1993). 
One purpose of this section is to draw attention to the im-
portance of the domestic policy context in evaluating climate 
change policy proposals. The merits of any given proposal de-
pend on this context. Equally, changes in the context have 
implications for emissions. Sometimes these two different 
observations are confused, and another purpose here is to 
clarify the distinction between them. Obviously, the types of 
policies that might warrant discussion here are many. How-
An Economic Assessment 
of Policy Instruments [or Comhttttin;j, Climate 
Change 
4tn> 
ever, the discussion is restricted to a few areas that seem par-
ticularly important and on which some research has already 
been done. 
11.3.1 Preexisting 
market 
distortions 
11.3.1.1 Energy 
subsidies 
The emissions abated by a climate change policy will depend 
not only on the policy itself but also on whether the consump-
tion of energy is subsidized and the magnitude of such subsi-
dies. It is the combination of the climate change policy and 
these subsidies (and indeed other policies) that will determine 
relative prices and hence the incentives to adopt substitutes 
for carbon-intensive fuels. 
In some regions such subsidies are significant (Larsen and 
Shah, 1995). Using border prices as a benchmark, Larsen and 
Shah (1992) calculated that primary fossil fuel subsidies 
worldwide are equivalent to a negative carbon tax of US$40 a 
ton. Larsen and Shah (1995) estimate that global C 0 2 emis-
sions would be reduced by between 4 and 5% if all energy 
subsidies were removed.9 At the same time, eliminating such 
subsidies would increase real incomes by improving effi-
ciency. The reason is that the subsidies distort prices; users 
pay less for fossil fuels than it actually costs to supply them. 
An OECD study using its GREEN model arrives at a simi-
lar result. The OECD estimates that the removal of energy 
subsidies would reduce global emissions by 18% compared 
with the level that would otherwise be attained by 2050 (Bur-
niaux et al., 1992a). Elimination of subsidies could increase 
global real incomes by 0.7% annually, and real incomes in 
non-OECD countries could rise by 1.6% annually. 
Fossil fuels may also receive indirect subsidies from elec-
tricity generation. Electricity is typically subsidized in both 
developed and developing countries. In the U.S.. for example, 
government regulation frequently restricts electricity prices 
from privately owned utilities to a level equal to long-run av-
erage costs, which are often below marginal costs. Power is 
sold by the federal government at approximately 25% be-
low even these levels, because of interest and tax subsidies 
(DCEIA 1992). In developing countries, electricity prices de-
clined in real terms by 25% during the 1980s, and by 1988 
were at an average level just over half as large as the aver-
age level in OECD countries, even though long-run margi-
nal costs in real terms were higher in developing countries 
(Schramm. 1992). In 80% of developing countries, electricity 
prices are, on average, 30% below long-run marginal costs 
(World Bank 1990, 1992). Such distortions lead to excessive 
expenditure on new capacity, failure to generate sufficient in-
ternal funds to maintain or expand service, excessive energy 
consumption, and excessive environmental impacts 
from 
power generation. 
11.3.1.2 
The "local" environmental 
benefits of climate 
change policy 
So far, the effect that the removal of energy subsidies can 
have on income, as conventionally measured by GNP. has 
been stressed. But the effects are likely to be felt more widely. 
One consequence of actions to reduce CO, emissions will he a 
reduction in other pollution. For example. Bye el al.. (1989) 
estimate that a policy that reduced CO : emissions in Norway 
by 20% would have the incidental effect of reducing SO, 
emissions by 21% and NOx emissions by 14%. Larsen and 
Shah (1994) calculate that for Pakistan, for example, a carbon 
tax could be justified on the basis of the benefits of reductions 
in local pollutants alone, despite the fact that Pakistan already 
has high energy-related taxes. 
11.3.1.3 Information and energy 
conservation 
There has long been concern that apparently cost-effective en-
ergy conservation technologies were being adopted and dif-
fused only very gradually and that market penetration rates 
for such technologies were not as high as engineering-based 
models predicted. This may be due partly to imperfect capital 
markets. Another possible reason may be the failure of the 
market to supply appropriate and credible information about 
these technologies (Hassett and Metcalf, 1992; Jaffe and 
Stavins. 1994a). 
Empirical work dating back to Hausman (1979) shows that 
purchases of energy-saving technologies often reflect high 
rates of discount (see Treadwell el al., 1994).'" In other words, 
purchasers of such technologies may insist on earning a 
higher rate of return on this investment than on alternative in-
vestments. In an econometric analysis, Hassett and Metcalf 
(1992) show that future uncertainty regarding energy prices, 
due to past volatility in those prices, can attribute a large op-
tion value to waiting before investing in energy-conserving 
capital. On the other hand it could be argued that uncertainty 
about future energy prices creates an incentive to invest in en-
ergy-efficient equipment to minimize the share of energy 
costs in total costs. This would reduce risk exposure if energy 
prices were more uncertain than other input prices. 
One means of avoiding this dilemma is for the company 
manufacturing the technology to offer a warranty on the prod-
uct's performance. But there is a problem in that the perfor-
mance of the good may depend on how it is used by the 
consumer, as well as on its intrinsic qualities (the moral haz-
ard problem). A full warranty would therefore create an incen-
tive for the consumer to misuse the good. Another problem is 
that there may be a tendency for the users most likely to pur-
chase a more expensive good with a full warranty also to be 
those most likely to misuse the good (the adverse selection 
problem). For both these reasons, warranties may not be able 
to convey the information that would benefit both consumers 
and the firms manufacturing the technology. 
Empirical evidence in the United States (Horowitz and 
Haeri. 1990: Sutherland. 1991) indicates that when informa-
tion on energy efficiency is widely available, the real estate 
market functions efficiently - consumers show a willingness 
to pay more for houses with energy-saving features, all else 
being equal. However. Jaffe and Stavins (1994a, c) demon-
strate that information problems can directly inhibit the diffu-
sion of energy-efficient technologies in new housing. They 
also show that decisions on such investments depend on ex-
410 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
pcctations about the future. If the price of such technologies is 
expected to fall, or (he availability of information about the 
performance of such technologies is expected to increase, 
then consumers may delay making such purchases. Though 
individually rational, such behaviour can lead to less invest-
ment than is socially desirable, depending on whether true 
market failures are involved (J a lie and Stavins, 1994b). This 
creates a potential role for public policy. The provision of 
home energy ratings is an example of such a policy designed 
to encourage the purchase of more efficient homes. 
A number of projects designed to convey information to 
rural people exist in developing countries. One such project is 
the Mount lilgon Conservation and Development Project in 
Uganda, which is designed to provide new information to lo-
cal people to enhance the cost-effective use of local fuel re-
sources and minimize damage to forest reserves (Ugandan 
Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. 1993). 
A more general approach to the provision of information 
could he to use "eco-labelling." In this way. final consumers 
could he informed of the total contribution to greenhouse gas 
emissions as a result of the production of particular consumer 
durables or other items. 
11.3.1.4 
Transport 
A large and growing fraction of CO, emissions arises from 
transport fuel use. Full social (user cost) pricing can promote 
greater efficiency in transport while reducing these emissions 
substantially. Most countries tax gasoline (petrol) to finance 
highways and other public automotive transport services. 
However, some countries do not collect enough from drivers 
to pay the full social costs of automotive travel (Repetto et ai, 
1992). 
Appropriately designed road user charges should also re-
flect the peak-period costs of using congested road capac-
ity (Cameron, 1994). Congestion costs, in the form of time 
delays, accidents, excess fuel costs, and pollution, are an 
increasingly serious urban problem in developed and de-
veloping countries. In the U.S., the cost of time delays 
alone has been estimated to be $50 billion a year (Repetto et 
at., 1992). User charges set at an appropriate level could lead 
to a change in the allocation of resources to the transport task 
and, coincidentally. might also lead to a reduction in green-
house gas emissions, assuming that such charges could be col-
lected cost-effectively. 
11.3.1.5 Agriculture and forestry 
Distortions in agriculture and forestry are common. As al-
ready noted, government subsidies and tax policies have en-
couraged deforestation in the Amazon (see Binswanger. 1989; 
Mahar, 1988). But the distortions in agriculture go further 
than this. The external environmental costs of wood harvest-
ing, including loss o( soil cover and fertility, are substantial 
(Newcombe, 1989). and yet user charges for rights to harvest 
timber on public lands typically do not even cover the re-
placement costs of the wood. In many countries, land must be 
cleared to gain land lights (Pcarce and War ford. 1993). In sub-
Saharan Africa, farmers and nomads carry extra cattle as an 
insurance against droughts and as an asset. Herd si/e mav also 
be taken as a measure of status. Herds are therefore larger 
than they would be if capital and insurance markets were fully 
developed (Dasgupta and Goran-Maler, 1994). 
Underpricing of water in agriculture leads to inefficiency 
in water use, excessive expenditure on irrigation, and a vari-
ety of local environmental and social costs, including soil wa-
terlogging and salinization and the degradation of riverine and 
estuarine environments. Irrigation charges in a sample of six 
developing countries covered only 1-23% of storage and con-
veyance costs during the 1980s. Charges for federally sup-
plied irrigation water in the U.S. cover only 5-20% of these 
costs (Repetto 1986). These charges fail to reflect the mar-
ginal opportunity cost of water in alternative urban and indus-
trial uses, which is typically an order of magnitude higher 
than its value in agriculture. When irrigation water is under-
priced, farmers grow more rice than they otherwise would. 
These practices increase methane emissions (Ranganathan el 
ai, 1994). Proper pricing for water could well generate global 
benefits as well as significant domestic gains. 
11.3.1.6 Policies affecting 
adaptation 
The net adverse effects of climate change will depend not 
only on the extent of climate change, but also on the extent to 
which economies successfully adapt to any change. Some ex-
isting policies may mitigate against adaptation or increase the 
vulnerability of some sectors of the economy to climate 
change. For example, subsidized drought or flood insurance 
may encourage investment in high-risk areas and reduce in-
centives for self-reliance. Similarly, some agricultural support 
policies might discourage farmers from shifting to enterprises 
and production systems better suited to an altered climate. 
11.3.2 Revenue 
recycling 
The abatement achieved by a carbon tax, and the effect of the 
tax on an economy, will depend on what is done with the tax 
revenue. Likewise, a tradable permit scheme can raise the 
same government revenue as a carbon tax if the government 
auctions the permits. The impact of such a scheme on the 
economy will again depend on what is done with the revenue. 
The direct impact on government revenue of the two policies 
can be made equivalent across a variety of cases. No direct 
impact on government revenue would occur if permits were 
grandfathered (that is. allocated on the basis of some histori-
cal record) or tax revenue redistributed to emitters. Intermedi-
ate cases would be represented by partial grandfathering or 
partial redistribution of revenue to emitters. Thus, in prin-
ciple, the same revenue recycling issues apply regardless 
of whether a tax or tradable permit scheme is used (Bohm. 
1995a). although taxes have been studied in more detail in the 
literature. 
There is widespread agreement that revenue recycling can 
significantly lower the costs of a carbon tax (Koopmans et ai, 
1992; Shackleton et ai, 
1992: Goulder. 1992. 1993. 1995; 
Bovenberg and de Mooij. 1994; European Commission. 1994: 
Jorgenson and Wilcoxen. 1994). Some researchers have sug-
gested further that all the abatement costs associated with a 
carbon tax can be eliminated through revenue recycling in the 
All Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting 
form of cuts in income taxes or taxes on payrolls. However, at 
least in the case of cuts in income taxes, research by Goulder 
(1992, 1993, 1995) and related theoretical work by Boven-
berg and de Mooij (1994) reject this stronger claim. Their 
work indicates that the recycling of revenues through income 
tax cuts only partly offsets the total general equilibrium abate-
ment costs implied by a carbon tax (also see Chapters 8 and 9 
of this report). 
None of the above research denies the possibility that rais-
ing revenue from a carbon tax or a permit scheme may in-
crease national income when combined with reductions in a 
burdensome existing tax. However, such a result is an argu-
ment for reform of the taxation system rather than for the in-
troduction of a carbon tax or permit scheme (Bohm, 1995a). It 
may be that some tax other than a carbon tax could result in a 
greater efficiency gain in raising public revenue. If there are 
efficiency arguments for a carbon tax or tradable permit 
scheme and reform of the tax system, then both changes 
should be introduced. 
11.3.3 The broader context for climate change policies 
11.3.3.1 "No-regrets" policies 
Policies or policy reforms that improve the efficiency of an 
economy while also reducing greenhouse gas emissions have 
sometimes been described as "no-regrets" policies because 
they offer sufficient benefits in other contexts that their adop-
tion could not be regretted even if climate change were later 
shown not to be detrimental (also see Chapters 8 and 9). 
The reduction of virtually any distortion is to be encour-
aged, provided equity concerns can be safeguarded. Policy 
reforms that help in this regard are therefore also to be 
welcomed, whatever the consequences for climate change. If 
greenhouse gas emissions are reduced as well, then extra po-
tential gains exist. But even where this is not so, the removal 
of distortions can lead to greater economic welfare. In gen-
eral, such policies should not be linked directly to climate 
change policy. However, their significance for climate change 
policy needs to be recognized, and the prospects of "double 
dividends" from carbon taxes or tradable permit systems can 
give the extra political impetus needed to reduce existing dis-
tortions. These policies will influence both the "business-as-
usual" emission scenario and the effectiveness of any climate 
change policy. 
Although there may be political advantages (particularly in 
terms of providing impetus for reform) in linking so-called 
no-regrets policies to climate change policy, such linkage may 
serve to confuse the policy debate. For example, the observa-
tion that a carbon tax (or auctioned tradable permits) may in-
crease national income when combined with a tax reform is 
really an observation that the structure of taxation could be 
improved. A carbon tax is not the only device available for 
improving public finance, and indeed it may not be the best 
device available; it is possible that a different tax could raise 
revenue more efficiently than a carbon tax. What this means is 
that the merits of a carbon tax will depend on whether the tax 
is evaluated taking all other existing policies as given, or 
whether it is instead evaluated against the background of a 
Climate Change 
411 
(second-best) efficient tax regime. Put differently, estimates 
of the full consequences of a carbon tax must take account of 
how the revenues are to be employed. 
It is not obvious, however, how a carbon tax should he 
evaluated. If the tax is evaluated against the background of a 
(second-best) efficient tax regime, and yet the actual tax 
regime is different, then the evaluation could lead to inappro-
priate public policy. A better approach would be to demon-
strate how the performance of a carbon tax (reflecting both 
the emissions and level of economic activity associated with 
the tax) depends on the policy context, including the regime 
for raising public revenue and the presence of distortions in 
energy pricing. 
11.3.3.2 Adaptation policies-
It is important to draw a clear distinction between the costs 
and benefits of actions taken to reduce the impacts of climate 
change and the costs and benefits of actions taken to reduce 
emissions. The first reduces the potential damage caused by 
climate change directly, whereas the second has the effect of 
reducing emissions of greenhouse gases now, which, in turn, 
will have an impact on future climate. Examples of adaptation 
include such actions as increasing irrigation water availability 
in regions where the climate has become drier, improving re-
frigeration to offset the effects of a warmer climate, and relo-
cating economic activities away from the coast where sea 
levels have risen. Measuring the cost of adaptation is some-
what problematic, given that both ecosystems and economic 
systems are changing all the time and will to some extent 
adapt autonomously to climate change. 
The term "adaptation" may he confusing because actions 
falling into this category can be counted as a cost of climate 
change. To see why adaptation can yield a net benefit, con-
sider the problem of estimating the costs of climate change. 
An estimate might be based on the assumption that there will 
be no adaptation - that is. if sea level rises by say 50 cm, then 
all shoreline property less than 50 cm above sea level will be 
lost. Alternatively, it might be assumed that there will be some 
adaptation - that dikes might be built, for example. The latter 
response is indeed a cost of climate change: It would not need 
to be taken in the absence of climate change. However, the 
response may reduce the damage associated with climate 
change. If the reduction in such damage exceeds the costs of 
adapting, then adaptation should be undertaken (Fankhauser, 
1993). 
Unlike the case of abatement of greenhouse gases, adap-
tation typically involves private goods. If the climate were 
to become drier, a demand would be created for drought-
resistant crop varieties, and the firms that developed these 
would be rewarded by the market. If climate were to become 
more variable, then individuals would seek to insure them-
selves against such changes. Such responses belong in the 
realm of the private sector. However, even when dealing with 
strictly private goods, there may be a role for the state. Das-
gupta (1993), for example, argues that some assistance should 
be given to the assetless in developing countries who are not 
able to command sufficient purchasing power to convert their 
potential labour power into actual labour power. Such as sis-
412 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
tance, perhaps in the form of agrarian reform, not only re-
distributes income but results in an increase in the rate of 
growth of aggregate incomes. Although such policies are al-
ready needed in some countries, the need for them may be in-
creased in the event of climate change. 
However, the principal role for government in the context 
of adaptation is in supplying public goods. Public infrastruc-
ture projects such as building dikes or funding resettlement 
programs are cases in point, as is the funding of public re-
search and development of carbon-free technologies where 
there would otherwise he strong free-riding incentives. Fur-
thermore, if there are risks of increased environmental haz-
ards (drought, flood, lire, famine, pests) then greater hazard 
insurance is an appropriate defensive action. Another type of 
"insurance" could he purchased by increasing public research 
expenditure (for example, increasing efforts in plant breeding 
in order to develop plant cultivars better adapted to new cli-
matic conditions). 
Any adaptation policies should he designed in concert with 
mitigation policies. Moth types of policies are aimed at mini-
mizing the expected damage from climate change. Adaptation 
will he undertaken up to the point where the damage avoided 
by an incremental increase in adaptation equals the associated 
incremental cost. Abatement will he undertaken up to the 
point where the reduction in damage effected by an incremen-
tal unit of abatement equals the incremental cost. However, 
the two types of policies are not entirely equivalent. First, the 
benefits of adaptation are likely to be felt much more quickly 
than the benefits of mitigation, and. second, some types of 
adaptation policies will not he subject to the same problems of 
free riding (see Section 11.6.5) as abatement. For example, if 
a country defends its shoreline by building seawalls, its own 
population, in most cases, will receive all the benefits. This is 
not true of unilateral abatement. 
Recent climate research indicates that local changes in cli-
mate may depend not only on global phenomena such as the 
increase in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases 
but also on local phenomena such as emissions of sulphates. It 
might be argued that sulphate emissions should he reduced to 
prevent damage from acid rain, and that policy on sulphate 
emissions should not he linked to global climate change pol-
icy. However, where local climate can he influenced by local 
policy, it seems that such linkages may nevertheless he made, 
not least because local climate modifications may be less 
costly and may not suffer from free-riding problems. To date. 
research has not considered the economic and policy implica-
tions of local climate modification (but see Section 11.4.2). 
11.4 Regulations, Voluntary Agreements, and other 
Nonmarket-Based Instruments 
The conventional approach to environmental policy in many 
countries has employed policy instruments in the form of uni-
form standards (based on technology or performance) and di-
rect government expenditures on projects that are designed to 
improve the environment (Baumol and Oates. 147": OECD. 
1989; Hahn and Sta\ins. l°°l). Like market-based incen-
tives, the first of these strategies requires that polluters under-
take pollution abatement activities: under the second strategy 
the government itself expends resources on environmental 
quality. Both these strategies figure prominently in current 
and proposed policy measures to address global climate 
change." For the reasons already mentioned in Section 
11.2.2.1, the discussion of regulations is confined to their ap-
plication in a domestic policy context. 
11.4.1 Uniform technology and performance standards 
Uniform regulatory standards (often described as "command-
and-control" regulations) can be loosely categorized as either 
technology-based or performance-based, although the dis-
tinction between these two categories of instruments is often 
unclear. Technology-based (or design) standards typically re-
quire the use of specified equipment, processes, or proce-
dures. In the context of climate change policy, technology-
based standards could require that particular types of 
energy-efficient motors, combustion processes, or landfill gas 
collection technologies be utilized by firms. 
Performance-based standards are more flexible than tech-
nology-based standards, specifying allowable levels of pollu-
tant emissions or polluting activities, but leaving the specific 
methods of achieving those levels to the regulated entities. 
Examples of performance standards for greenhouse gas 
abatement include minimum levels of energy efficiency for ap-
pliances, maximum allowable levels of carbon dioxide emissions 
from combustion, and maximum levels of methane emissions 
from landfills. 
Uniform standards can also take the form of outright bans 
of certain products or processes, such as aerosol sprays con-
taining ozone-depleting substances. Although bans may ap-
pear to be the strictest form of regulation, they may actually 
be a relatively cost-effective policy instrument if low-cost 
substitutes for targeted products are available. Moreover, bans 
or other more proactive design standards may make 
economies of scale in the production of substitutes materialize 
faster than if market mechanisms are used by themselves 
(Bohm and Russell, 1985). 
Although uniform technology and performance standards 
may be effective in achieving established environmental goals 
and standards, they typically lead to economically inefficient 
outcomes in which firms use unduly expensive means to 
control pollution (Tietenberg, 1985; Hahn, 1989; Hahn and 
Stavins. 1991). Because the costs of controlling pollution vary 
greatly among and even within firms, any given aggregate 
pollution control level can be met at minimum aggregate con-
trol cost only if pollution sources are controlled at the same 
marginal cost, as opposed to the same emission level. Indeed, 
depending on the age and location of emission sources and 
available technologies, the cost of controlling a unit of a given 
pollutant may vary by a factor of 100 or more across a range 
of sources (Crandall, 1984). Nonetheless, because perfor-
mance standards give economic agents additional flexibility 
to make choices based on economic criteria, performance-
based standards will generally be more cost-effective than 
technology-based standards. On the other hand, if there is es-
sentially only a single means of achieving a particular perfor-
mance standard, a technology-based standard may save on 
information and administration costs. 
All Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
41J 
In theory, the government could achieve a cost-effective 
allocation of pollution control responsibility among differ-
ent sources if it assigned source-specific control levels that 
equated the marginal costs of control across these sources. 
This approach would, however, require detailed information 
on the pollution control cost functions of individual firms and 
sources - data that governments usually lack and could obtain 
only at great cost, if at all. Although they are not typically de-
signed to address the cost-effectiveness issue, source-specific 
or firm-specific permit programmes are one approach tradi-
tionally taken to adjust regulatory standards to individual cir-
cumstances. If pollutants exhibit highly localized effects, 
such an approach may have distinct advantages over a tax or a 
more general permit system. Global climate change is not, 
however, a localized problem; a unit of greenhouse gas emis-
sion will have roughly the same impact regardless of where it 
is emitted. 
Even if governments were able to use conventional tech-
nology and uniform performance standards to achieve a cost-
effective allocation of pollution control at present, such 
standards would not necessarily provide continuous dynamic 
incentives for the development, adoption, and diffusion of en-
vironmentally and economically superior control technolo-
gies in the future (Bohm and Russell, 1985; Jaffe and Stavins, 
1995). 
All forms of intervention have the potential for inducing or 
forcing some amount of technological change because, by 
their very nature, they induce or require firms to do things 
they would not otherwise do. Performance and technology 
standards can be explicitly designed to be "technology forc-
ing," mandating performance levels that are not currently 
viewed as technologically feasible or mandating technologies 
that are not fully developed (Jochem and Gruber, 1990). The 
problem with this approach, however, is that while regulators 
can assume that some amount of improvement over existing 
technology will always be feasible, it is impossible to know 
just how much. Standards must either be made unambitious or 
else run the risk of being ultimately unachievable, leading to 
political and economic disruption (Freeman and Haveman, 
1971). Another difficulty with a regulatory approach to envi-
ronmental protection is that the regulatory agency may, over 
time, develop such a close working relationship with the regu-
lated industry that it relaxes its enforcement standards in the 
interests of the industry itself. This phenomenon is sometimes 
referred to as "regulatory capture." 
Once a performance standard has been satisfied, there is 
little benefit to the individual firm from developing and/or 
adopting even cleaner technology. In addition, regulated firms 
may fear that if they do develop a cleaner technology, the per-
formance standard will be tightened. Technology standards 
are even worse than performance standards in inhibiting inno-
vation, since, by their very nature, they constrain the tech-
nological choices available, and may thereby remove all in-
centives to develop new technologies that are environmentally 
beneficial (Magat, 1979). For example, when vehicle emis-
sions standards requiring the use of catalytic converters were 
adopted by the European Union,12 incentives to develop lean-
burn engines were reduced. This disincentive occurred be-
cause the technologies are presently incompatible, at least in 
the sense that a lean-burn engine cannot be fitted with a three-
way catalytic converter.1-1 Lean-burn technology (with two-
way converters) capable of meeting Japanese and European 
standards is now available. However, this technology does not 
meet present U.S. emission standards or the stricter standards 
expected to emerge in the near future.14 However, lean-burn 
remains an important and developing approach. Not only does 
it have the potential advantage of reducing CO, emissions sig-
nificantly,15 but it also offers the prospect of reducing other 
emissions more effectively over the lifetime of the automo-
bile."' 
Under some circumstances, however, a performance stan-
dard may provide greater incentives for technological adop-
tion than a marketable permit system (Malueg 1990). There 
are better and worse ways of establishing performance stan-
dards. To take an example, the Corporate Average Fuel Econ-
omy (CAFE) standards in the U.S. are applied to the fleet 
average of every manufacturer and importer. CAFE may thus 
be binding on a manufacturer that sells many larger cars as 
well as some small cars, but not on a manufacturer that sells 
only small cars. The problem here is that the former manufac-
turer may sell small cars that are more energy-efficient than 
the latter manufacturer. In other words, the innovation and 
manufacture of more efficient automobiles may not be re-
warded by these standards. If CAFE differentiated the stan-
dards according to the market segment of each vehicle 
(sub-compact, compact, mid-size, etc.), then firms that sold 
vehicles that were more efficient for their class than required 
by the standard would be rewarded by not having to pay the 
penalty for which the manufacturers of less efficient cars were 
liable. Better still, if manufacturers were allowed to trade in 
energy efficiency credits, then even the manufacturer of the 
most efficient cars would have a continuous incentive to 
develop even more energy-efficient cars. Finally, a tax on 
gasoline (petrol) would not only provide incentives for the 
manufacture of more fuel-efficient cars, but would also pro-
vide incentives for vehicle owners to reduce their fuel con-
sumption. 
As with virtually all policy instruments, the administration 
of uniform standards typically includes programmes for com-
pliance monitoring and enforcement. Although technology-
based standards may seem to be the least cost-effective of the 
policy instruments, if monitoring costs are high in some par-
ticular circumstances they may have an advantage because 
they are relatively easy to monitor and enforce. An inspector 
can simply check whether a particular piece of equipment has 
been installed, rather than continuously monitor information 
on emission levels. Performance standards, in general, and 
pollution charges and marketable permits for non-C02 green-
house gas emissions all require more detailed monitoring sys-
tems. These can suffer from the following problems (Beavis 
and Walker, 1983): 
(a) 
Once emissions leave the source they are usually lost to 
measurement. 
(b) 
Emissions may be random, rather than fixed values, and 
may vary depending on equipment breakdowns, shifts 
in product mix and input quality, or changes in produc-
tion levels. 
414 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
(c) 
Monitoring instruments may be imprecise. 
(d) 
Unless monitoring is continuous, polluters may adjust 
emissions up or down according to the likelihood of in-
spection.17 
11.4.2 Government investment 
Direct government expenditures also play a major role in both 
current and prospective environmental programmes in many 
countries. As Baumol and Oates (1975) have noted, such gov-
ernment activities include projects to 
(a) 
prevent, mitigate, or adapt to changes in environmental 
quality 
(b) 
disseminate information 
(c) 
conduct research 
(d) 
educate specialists and the general public 
Government purchasing policies may also be used in some in-
stances to attempt to achieve secondary goals such as influ-
encing environmental quality. Many environmental ends that 
could he achieved through incentive-based policy instruments 
or uniform standards can also be met directly through govern-
ment-funded projects or programmes. 
The two primary economic rationales for the inclusion of 
direct government investment in an effective overall govern-
ment policy are the public good character of many environ-
mental services and the possibility of economics of scale. 
Public goods arguments for direct government expenditure to 
disseminate information, conduct research, and sponsor edu-
cation programmes are common in debates about much public-
policy. The potential role for government research and in-
formation provision regarding renewable energy and energy-
efficient technologies is particularly prominent in the climate 
change context (Jaffe and Stavins, 1995). Proposed methods 
for addressing climate change through climatic engineering or 
"geoengineering" options are also likely to require direct gov-
ernment involvement, but at this stage far more research 
needs to be conducted before such options can be contem-
plated. For details of some suggested approaches see Nord-
haus (1991a), National Academy of Sciences (1992). and 
Clinton and Gore (1993). 
Government or institutional investment at the international 
level also has a part to play in mitigating climate change. For 
example, the Global Environment Fund's portfolio on re-
newable energy includes support for promising backstop 
technologies such as gasification of wood and crop residue 
coupled with advanced gas turbines in Brazil and anaerobic 
digestion of organic residues from agriculture and urban 
households in India and Pakistan (World Bank. 1993). 
11.4.3 Voluntary agreements 
Beyond mandatory policy instruments, voluntary agreements 
can also play an important role in an overall greenhouse gas 
reduction strategy. The threat of mandatory government inter-
vention may be enough to encourage voluntary agreements. 
Forward-looking firms may undertake some steps in control-
ling greenhouse gas emissions if the\ fear more cosily manda-
tory controls in the absence of voluntary reductions. This 
could explain why voluntary agreements have arisen in some 
cases in domestic energy management.18 The vast majority of 
greenhouse gas reductions from the actions announced or ex-
panded through, for example, the U.S. Climate Change Action 
Plan (Clinton and Gore, 1993) come from voluntary initia-
tives aimed at increasing the energy efficiency of the indus-
trial, commercial, residential, and transport sectors. 
11.4.4 Demand-side management 
Demand-side management may be defined as any activity by 
an electric utility to influence customer use of electricity in 
ways that will produce desired changes in the utility's load 
shape.14 Demand-side management programmes may affect 
the quality of service. For example, a lighting retrofit may im-
prove lighting levels as well as reduce electricity consump-
tion, or electricity supply to water heaters may be interrupted 
during periods of system peak demand. There is an extensive 
literature on demand-side management (EPRI, 1984, 1991: 
Katz, 1992; Kahn, 1992; Hirst, 1993; Ceilings and Chamber-
tin, 1993). 
Demand-side management programmes may enable a util-
ity to reduce or defer capital expenditures. Regulators evalu-
ate the economic costs and benefits of demand-side man-
agement programmes from the perspective of society, all 
customers, participants, nonparticipants, and utility costs.20 
One criterion applied to these programmes is the Rate Impact 
Measure (RIM) test, which measures the ability of a pro-
gramme to reduce costs more than revenues. Programmes that 
pass the RIM test lead to lower rates immediately and are at-
tractive to nonparticipants. Most regulators, however, focus 
on the Total Resource Cost (TRC) test, which measures the 
aggregate benefit to all customers. A programme that passes 
the TRC test but fails the RIM test (and most fall into this cat-
egory) raises rates in the short run but reduces them from what 
they otherwise would have been in the long run.21 
Literature on the effects of demand-side management pro-
grammes on greenhouse gas emissions is sparse. It is too sim-
plistic to assume, however, that demand-side management 
programmes that reduce aggregate demand for electricity au-
tomatically lead to lower emissions of greenhouse gases. For 
example, peak period demand that would be supplied by hy-
draulic or natural gas units could be shifted to periods where it 
is supplied by coal-fired units, resulting in a net increase in 
emissions (Faruqui and Haites. 1991; Haites, 1993). Never-
theless, demand-side management programmes are generally 
expected to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Indeed, some 
argue that such programmes can be regarded as disguised en-
vironmental impact taxes (Sioshansi, 1992). 
Evaluations indicate that many demand-side management 
programmes can be made more cost-effective. There is dis-
agreement in the literature about whether well-designed and 
delivered demand-side management programmes yield net 
benefits (Nadel, 1990) or not (Joskow and Marron. 1993). 
Changes to the electric utility structure in the U.S. have led a 
number of utilities to scale back their demand-side manage-
ment efforts. The prospect of a competitive generation market 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Coinbaiiinx Climate Change 
415 
creates pressure to reduce costs and defers plans for capacity 
additions, thereby reducing the economic justification for de-
mand-side management programmes aimed at reducing ag-
gregate demand for electricity. Demand-side management 
programmes aimed at smoothing demand for electricity con-
tinue to be attractive. 
11.4.5 Distributional impacts 
Any greenhouse policy will have distributional effects on 
firms and households. Regulations impose quantity limits on 
the use of particular inputs or outputs in production and con-
sumption activities. The direct cost of regulation is the reduc-
tion in profits and consumer welfare due to the regulatory 
constraint on choice. The distribution of this cost is often hid-
den, but that does not make it unimportant. For example, 
poorer households tend to own appliances that are cheaper to 
purchase but more costly to run. That is, poorer households 
tend to make appliance purchasing decisions reflecting higher 
effective individual discount rates (Hausman, 1979). A regu-
lation that required all households to purchase more efficient 
appliances would thus disproportionately affect the poor, even 
though by outward appearances it might seem not to. To the 
extent that regulation is not a least-cost option to control 
greenhouse emissions, the excess burden it implies must also 
be distributed. However, with quantity limits - whether in the 
form of conventional regulations or tradable permit systems -
individual emitters do not face an environmental cost for 
emissions that are less than the limit. This is in contrast with 
the distributional consequences of a system that taxes all 
emissions. 
Although the initial incidence of a greenhouse regulation 
will fall on greenhouse-intensive energy users, the final inci-
dence will depend on the ability of firms to pass the costs of 
the regulation to others through higher prices for goods and 
services, and these distributive impacts are likely to differ 
over time. For example, over the the long run the application 
of increasingly strict greenhouse pollution controls to newer 
cars might be regressive (i.e., with costs falling disproportion-
ately on the poor), as low-income earners face substantial in-
creases in used car costs; in the short run, though, low-income 
earners might gain a relatively larger capital reward on selling 
their cars (Tietenberg, 1992). Where the costs of regulation 
are regressive, compensatory transfers may be used, funded 
from a specific tax or general government finances, or the reg-
ulation might be modified, exempting some individuals from 
the regulatory net. 
To date, most applied economics research on potential 
greenhouse policy responses has concentrated on analyzing 
the overall costs and incidence of market-based instruments. 
Multicountry and national studies on the economic impacts of 
regulatory measures are needed. Researchers may need to 
give more emphasis to incorporating real world conditions in 
these models, such as uncertainty and asymmetric informa-
tion in energy markets. This would allow for any differences 
in the informational role of price and quantity controls (as 
well as policy mixes) in determining the size and distribution 
of greenhouse control costs. 
11.5 Market-Based Policy Instruments 
Because of the considerable potential costs of meeting green-
house gas emission targets, one of the central issues for par-
ties to the Framework Convention is the identification of 
least-cost measures, that is. policies that minimize the costs of 
achieving a given greenhouse gas emission target. In this sec-
tion attention is focussed on emission taxes and tradable quo-
tas and permits, the two core market-based instruments that 
directly target least-cost measures to meet greenhouse gas 
emission targets. Mention is also made of joint implementa-
tion, an instrument that can facilitate technology transfer and 
is equivalent to bilateral "trading" in emissions. 
There is an extensive literature on the principles underly-
ing the use of market-based policy instruments for greenhouse 
management (for example, Bohm and Russell, 1985; Baumol 
and Gates. 1988; Stavins, 1988; OECD, 1989, 1993; Tieten-
berg, 1990; Epstein and Gupta, 1990; Dornbush and Poterba, 
1991; Stavins, 1991; Bureau of Industry Economics, 1992; 
Cropper and Gates. 1992; HAS A, 1992a, b; Pillet et al., 1993; 
Hahn and Stavins. 1995). For a summary and assessment of 
the cost and environmental effectiveness of emission taxes 
and tradable quotas in national applications see Howe (1994). 
In a perfectly competitive marketplace, under an emission 
tax or tradable quota scheme, emitters would reduce emis-
sions up to the point where the marginal cost of control equals 
the emission tax rate or the equilibrium price of an emission 
quota. Both instruments would promote dynamic efficiency 
(cost minimization over the long term, when factors of pro-
duction are variable and technological change may be stimu-
lated), as each provides a continuous incentive for research 
and development in emission abatement technologies to avoid 
the tax or quota purchases. Under competitive markets and 
certainty, an emission tax is identical to a tradable emission 
quota scheme in which quota rights are auctioned and rev-
enues are redistributed in the same way (Rajah and Smith, 
1993). 
11.5.1 Domestic carbon taxes 
With market-based policies, there can be incentives to reduce 
greenhouse emissions through the development and use of 
new technologies and by making changes to existing produc-
tion and consumption practices. The aim in using an emission 
tax (a tax per unit of emissions) is to minimize the total eco-
nomic costs of achieving a given emission target. In principle, 
both static and dynamic efficiency gains can be fostered under 
an emission tax. These gains arise where emitters have differ-
ent opportunities for emission control (have different mar-
ginal abatement cost curves) both in the short run, when factors 
of production and technological opportunities are largely fixed, 
and in the long run. when they vary endogenously. 
Most research has focussed on the carbon content of pri-
mary fossil fuels consumed as the most practicable base for a 
tax on greenhouse emissions (Pearce. 1991: Boero et al., 1991; 
Jorgenson and Wilcoxen, 1992; Repetto et al., 1992; Dower 
and Zimmerman, 1992; OECD, 1992a, 1993; Jones and To-
bler, 1993; Pillet el al., 1993; Boyd et al., 1994). A carbon tax 
416 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
is not, however, a perfect proxy for a tax on CO, emissions. 
For example, a carbon tax on fossil fuels provides an incen-
tive to reduce the use of carbon-based fuels, but not to reduce 
CO, emissions by such means as capture (fixation) and dis-
posal of the emissions at source (on carbon removal, see Sec-
tion 11.5.1.1). There may also he, due to leakage or incom-
plete combustion, emissions of other carbon compounds that 
differ from CO, in their greenhouse effects (notably methane). 
In addition, to he consistent, accounting would need to apply 
to domestic emissions resulting from the processing of fuels 
from one energy form to another (as in electricity generation). 
There is a variety of points in the "product cycle" for fossil 
fuels, from production to end use, at which a carbon tax could 
be applied. End use is obviously the point at which emissions 
occur, but monitoring points covered under the policy would 
he fewest, and hence implementation costs lowest, if carbon 
contents were measured and policy applied at the wholesale 
level. 
A carbon tax is a more efficient instrument for reducing en-
ergy sector CO, emissions than taxes levied on some other ba-
sis, such as energy content of fuels or the value of energy 
products {ad valorem energy tax). For example, model simu-
lations of the U.S. economy indicate that an energy tax could 
he between 20 and 4()'/c more costly, and an ad valorem tax 
two to three times more costly, than a carbon tax for equiva-
lent reductions in emissions (Scheraga and Leary, 1992; Jor-
genson and Wilcoxen, 1992). This is because an energy tax 
raises the price of all forms of energy, whether or not they 
contribute to CO, emissions, and would make it more costly 
to substitute lower-emitting or nonemitting energy sources for 
high-emitting energy sources. As a corollary, a combined car-
bon/energy tax would be less efficient and more costly than a 
pure carbon tax. due to its energy tax component. 
11.5.1.1 Related instruments: Deposit refund systems for 
carbon removal 
As already mentioned carbon can be removed from the atmos-
phere by enhancing natural sinks. It could also be removed by 
technical means if cost-effective technologies can he devel-
oped. One policy instrument that might be considered to pro-
vide an incentive to undertake such carbon removal is a 
deposit refund scheme. A deposit refund system can take one 
of several forms. One variant combines a tax (deposit) on a 
commodity with a subsidy for the socially least-cost disposal 
option (a refund). Another uses mandated deposits, which re-
quire private sellers of a commodity to add to the price a 
deposit that will he refunded under certain conditions. Yet 
another uses a performance bond, which requires an agent en-
gaging in specified production activities to avoid certain 
negative consequences of these activities. For surveys of 
current uses of deposit refund systems and descriptions of po-
tential new areas of application, see Bohm (1981): Hahn 
(1988): Russell (1988): Stavins (1988): OECD (1989); Ander-
son et «/.. (1990); Hahn and Stavins (1991): Sigman (1991): 
Stavins (1991): and L'.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(1991).--
For a deposit refund system to be a feasible means of en-
couraging carbon fixation, there must exist alternative actions 
that decision makers can take to avoid creating the environ-
mental externality in question. This could be a choice between 
controlling emissions at source and "end-of-pipe" emissions 
removal. 
Currently, potential emitters of CO, - purchasers of fossil 
fuels for combustion, for example - do not have the option of 
choosing to remove the carbon from emissions.23 On the other 
hand, new techniques for carbon removal may eventually be-
come economically feasible. (In 1993, for example, Japan's 
Ministry of Trade and Industry launched a project on CO, fix-
ation - see MITI, 1993.)24 When and if this option becomes 
available, incentives will exist to choose carbon removal 
when this is less expensive than reducing fossil fuel combus-
tion through improvements in energy generation or use effi-
ciency. This would open up the possibility of applying the 
deposit refund concept to CO, emission reduction. It could, 
for example, provide a mechanism for the inclusion of sinks, 
such as the development of new forests and other changes in 
land management, in a market-based permit or tax system. 
This suggests that it is important, in the meantime, to main-
tain appropriate incentives for research and development of 
technologies that can eventually provide cost-effective op-
tions for carbon removal. The appropriate incentive will exist 
if future carbon removal is known to be subsidized at a level 
equal to the (tax, tradable quota price, or shadow) cost of car-
bon emissions.2S 
Thus, it may be possible to introduce clauses into a future 
climate change protocol that would validate subtractions of 
carbon removal from emissions. This would, in effect, be 
equivalent to creating an international deposit refund system -
a tax/subsidy scheme - where nations would be credited 
for certified carbon removal (estimated carbon emissions 
avoided) by equally large additions to their emission quotas. 
These quotas would be measured by the carbon content of fos-
sil fuel use, equal to production plus imports minus exports. 
Moreover, if fossil fuel use is taxed domestically (directly or 
indirectly through a tradable permit system), and carbon re-
moval is subsidized (credited by a refund of the deposit, equal 
to the tax), the resulting policy package will be an interna-
tional deposit refund system.26 
Other greenhouse gases, such as CFCs, that could be re-
covered when servicing cooling equipment such as refrigera-
tors or air conditioners, could be made subject to a system 
with general deposits (taxes) on CFCs and a refund when and 
if CFCs are recovered, provided that the transaction costs of 
such a system are not prohibitively high (Stavins, 1988: 
Miller and Mintzer, 1986). Obviously, if CFCs are success-
fully phased out in the near future, the role of policy instru-
ments such as deposit refund systems to control CFC 
emissions will be very limited. Still, the problem of CFCs re-
maining in discarded cooling equipment, perhaps for some 
twenty years after their use in new production had been 
phased out. may be significant enough to justify the use of a 
CFC deposit refund system (Bohm. 1981. 1990). Note, how-
ever, that for products that contain CFCs and that have 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Chan^i 
417 
already been purchased by final users, the deposit refund sys-
tem will be one with zero deposits and a positive subsidy. In 
other words, it will collapse into a pure subsidy system. Then, 
one of the advantages of deposit refund systems, that ordinary 
taxes are not required for financing the refund/subsidy incen-
tive, would no longer hold. 
11.5.2 Tradable permits 
A powerful theoretical feature of a perfectly competitive trad-
able domestic permit scheme is that, no matter what the initial 
permit allocation, equilibrium permit prices will be the same 
and the final allocation after domestic trade will be the one 
that minimizes the cost of reducing emissions. Firms 
will want to buy permits if abatement costs exceed the per-
mit price and sell permits in the opposite case. In this way, 
trade will continue until all firms reach a position of indiffer-
ence between buying and selling permits - that is, between 
marginal abatement and additional fossil fuel use. When this 
state is reached, an ex post allocation of permits that mini-
mizes the costs of reducing emissions has also been reached.27 
An international tradable quota scheme could coexist with 
domestic permit schemes within each country, or particular 
countries might choose to meet their emission targets by some 
other means, such as taxes or regulatory systems. In the case 
of a domestic tradable permit scheme, a national government 
would issue emission permits (perhaps time-limited) to whole-
sale dealers in fossil fuels or producers and importers of fossil 
fuels and allow them to trade on a domestic permit market. 
The government could also allow permit holders to trade di-
rectly on an existing international market. Alternatively, to the 
extent that both international quota and domestic permit mar-
kets existed for a particular country, the government could 
trade on the international market and set a definite or prelimi-
nary domestic limit on the volume of domestic permits for 
some period ahead. 
A government could choose one of two main ways to dis-
tribute permits to individual firms. In the first case, firms 
would be given shares of the total permit volume based on 
some historical record ("grandfathering") such as their recent 
fossil fuel sales. The second alternative would be for the gov-
ernment to auction permits. Some combination of these two 
approaches might also be feasible. 
The two approaches differ primarily in two respects. First, 
grandfathering implies a "transfer" of wealth, equal to the 
value of the permits, to existing firms, whereas, when permits 
are auctioned by government, this wealth is transferred to the 
government. The government would then collect revenue sim-
ilar to that from a domestic tax producing the same volume of 
emissions. As with tax receipts, auction revenues could be 
used to reduce preexisting distorting taxes as outlined in Sec-
tion 11.3. Second, since grandfathering improves the wealth 
of incumbent firms and, given uncertainty, may keep them in 
business longer than otherwise, this allocation approach may 
reduce the rate of entry of new firms and slow technological 
change (Bohm, 1994b). 
To date most tradable permit systems have made use of 
eternal permits. However, there are several reasons for prefer-
ring a system of time-limited permits in the case of climate 
change applications. First, to the extent that permits may be 
initially grandfathered, the negative effects mentioned above 
would be mitigated - after emitters were given sufficient time 
to adjust, subsequent allocations of permits could be made by 
auction. Second, potential future policy changes about emis-
sion targets in response to new information, for example, 
could cause significant problems for permit price formation if 
eternal permits were used. An alternative approach would be 
for the government to retain ownership of the permits and 
lease them to firms for a fixed period.-* 
Allowing permits to be banked, that is, allowing permits 
for emissions during a given period (e.g., a year) to be used at 
a later date, is important for both the efficiency and political 
acceptability of a tradable permit scheme. Without a banking 
option permit-liable firms would be confronted with greater 
end-of-period permit price uncertainty. 
Stavins (1995a) considers a market for emission permits in 
which costs are associated with the exchange of permits, and 
he models several alternative types of transaction cost func-
tions. He finds that transaction costs reduce trading levels and 
increase abatement costs and. most important, that in some 
cases, equilibrium permit allocations and hence aggregate 
control costs are sensitive to initial permit distributions. Thus, 
in the presence of transaction costs, the initial distribution of 
permits can matter in terms of efficiency, as well as in terms of 
equity. 
By contrast with international tradable quota systems, 
which have so far been applied on a small scale only (for ex-
ample, under the Montreal Protocol for the international CFC 
production quota trade and for the CFC consumption quota 
trade within the European Union), there is considerable expe-
rience with the use of tradable permit schemes within coun-
tries (see OECD, 1992b: UNCTAD, 1992). In most of these 
applications, permits have been allocated by grandfathering. 
Many of these applications have been designed to deal with 
local air pollution problems, and, as a consequence, the permit 
markets have often been relatively small and far from perfect. 
This contrasts with the case of a tradable carbon permit sys-
tem, which would be nationwide. The contrast would be even 
starker for an international scheme involving many govern-
ments and possibly large firms as well. 
77.5.3 International carbon taxes 
International action would be required to meet a global emis-
sion target. One possibility is that a carbon tax could be im-
posed on nation states themselves by an international agency. 
In this case, the agreement would specify not only tax rate(s) 
but also a formula for reallocating the revenues from the tax. 
Cost-effectiveness would demand that the tax rate be uniform 
across all countries (assuming full participation), but the real-
location of revenues would not have a direct bearing on cost-
effectiveness. As an alternative, the agreement could stipulate 
that all countries should levy the same domestic carbon tax, 
4 IS 
Climate Change J 995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
so-called harmonized domestic carbon taxes. In both cases. 
the tax rate that achieved the coalition's emissions target 
could only be struck through trial and error. The tax rate 
would also need to he adjusted over time as economic condi-
tions change and as more scientific information becomes 
available. 
Uniform tax rates are required for reasons of cost-effec-
tiveness. But the resulting distribution of costs may not con-
form to principles of equity and justice. For this reason, 
transfers of resources may he required. In principle, the two 
versions of an international tax agreement could involve the 
same actual financial transfers, although the transfer princi-
ples may differ. Under the harmonized tax system, the agree-
ment could involve fixed lump-sum payments from rich to 
poor countries, whereas under the first-mentioned interna-
tional tax system, the agreement could specify what shares of 
the total international tax revenues would go to each partici-
pating country (Hoel. 1993). (In a tradable quota system, the 
financial transfers could again, in principle, be the same, but 
would then he represented by sales of time-limited quotas by 
poor countries and quota purchases by rich countries.) 
11.5.4 Tradable quotas 
Under an international tradable emission quota scheme, all 
coalition countries would be allocated a quota for emissions 
(for whatever emission is being controlled). A quota could de-
fine either a right to repeated emissions (for example, one 
tonne of carbon per year over the indefinite future) or a right 
to emit a given volume once only. Thus a quota system could 
comprise either "eternal" quotas of the first type or a series of 
"noneternal" quotas (for example, quotas for five-year peri-
ods) or some combination of both. In the case of either type of 
quota, emission rights could be "banked." In other words, any 
unused right to emit during a given year could be kept and 
used at a later time. 
In each period, countries would be free to buy and sell quo-
tas on an international exchange (on the spot or forward mar-
ket) in order that neither buyer nor seller need be identified. 
Time-limiting the quotas would probably be necessary not 
only to account for uncertainty about the extent of the en-
hanced greenhouse problem hut also to give credibility to the 
system. More specifically, it would be necessary to avoid a 
situation where a government sold quotas, that is. part of the 
nation's wealth, to an extent that would not be honoured by 
future governments in the country. Time-limited quotas would 
also reduce the risk of large countries gaining market power 
on the quota trade market or the need for measures (such as 
limits to quota holdings) to ensure that such market imperfec-
tions were avoided (Bohm 1995b). 
An efficient international tradable quota system presup-
poses a market organization for quota trade (see Sandor el ai. 
1994). In the case of a system for the control of emissions of 
CO,, quotas would have to be denominated according to the 
carbon content of the fossil fuel used. If quotas were to be es-
tablished for the full range o\ greenhouse gases, it would be 
necessary to weight gases according to their estimated (and 
agreed) global warming potential. I-'or any such scheme to be 
effective in controlling emissions, it is clear that there must be 
a reasonable probability of detecting and penalizing those re-
sponsible for unauthorized emissions. This, however, does not 
distinguish a tradable quota system from any other interna-
tional agreement on emission reductions. In what follows, the 
focus is on quota systems for carbon emissions only. 
Negotiations on initial quota allocation are likely to be fa-
cilitated by reference to some criteria such as GNP, real GNP, 
total population, adult population, land area, "basic needs" 
(defined by industry structure and/or local climate), depen-
dence on fossil fuel production, and others (for an overview, 
see UNCTAD, 1992; also see Grubb and Sebenius, 1991; 
Bertram, 1992; Bohm and Larsen, 1993; Hinchy et ai, 1993). 
There are numerous other possibilities (see Chapter 3). Evalu-
ation of proposed rules would need to take account of their in-
ternational trade repercussions. 
Each of the criteria will have adherents, largely those with 
larger allocations under that criterion.2y Several criteria may 
need to be blended to create international consensus on emis-
sion allocations.-10 For example, it is clear that the developing 
countries have relatively little incentive to participate unless 
they see clear economic benefits from an agreement. At the 
same time, the wealthy countries will want to make sure their 
burdens are divided in ways that are perceived as equitable. 
Whatever the initial allocation, subsequent trading can lead to 
a cost-effective outcome.31 This potential for pursuing distrib-
utional objectives while assuring cost-effectiveness is an im-
portant attribute of the tradable quota approach.32 
Compared to an international tax agreement, where the ef-
fect on emissions is uncertain but related lump sum transfer 
payments are known, the tradable quota system has a known 
effect on emissions but quota prices are uncertain and, hence, 
the distributional effects through quota trade are also uncer-
tain. (This is true for fully global agreements; if only a limited 
set of countries is involved, carbon leakage must be taken into 
account in both cases.) This means that the benefits of known 
effects on emissions in a tradable quota system must be 
bought at the price of some distributional uncertainty. Thus, if 
a decision is taken that a poor country should be offered some 
minimum compensation, then initial quota allocations to that 
country would have to be increased as compared with the case 
under certainty. Alternatively, the agreement would have to 
include some co-insurance system. 
Countries allocated quotas surplus to their emission re-
quirements would be able to use the revenue from the sale of 
these surplus quotas to increase their imports relative to their 
exports (Chichilnisky et ai. 1993). Countries allocated quotas 
less than their requirements would have to reduce imports rel-
ative to exports to pay for additional quotas. In this way a 
tradable quota scheme would tend to reallocate world produc-
tion. The allocation of tax revenue from an international car-
bon tax scheme would have similar effects. 
Providing large initial quotas to poor countries for com-
pensatory reasons implies that they would be selling quotas 
primarily to rich countries. Since quota permit prices repre-
sent an implicit or explicit tax on all participating countries, 
the terms of trade within the coalition for countries with the 
same carbon intensities in production would remain unaf-
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
4P) 
fected. Giving some tariff or other protection from competi-
tion from nonparticipating countries, when the agreement 
does not involve all countries, means that industrialization in 
poor countries would not have been made more difficult, rela-
tively speaking, aside from the inevitable consequences of re-
duced global fossil fuel use. In addition, reducing fossil fuel 
use would emerge as a potentially important "export industry" 
for the poor countries. From a distributional point of view, the 
end result would be that poor countries would be perhaps 
fully compensated, whereas rich countries would have to pay, 
first, for their own emission reductions as called for by the 
quota price and, second, for carbon reductions imported 
through quota purchases from abroad. 
77.5.5 Joint implementation 
Joint implementation, provided for by Article 4.2 (a) of the 
FCCC, involves cooperation between two countries, with one 
funding emission reduction in the other to help the first meet 
its reduction commitments." Pilot joint implementation pro-
jects are now being undertaken by a number of countries. Al-
though many of these involve intergovernmental agreements, 
the private sector may also be involved directly. The U.S. Ini-
tiative on Joint Implementation, for example, involves private 
sector proposals being approved by an interagency panel. 
The potential economic merits and demerits of joint imple-
mentation proposals have been widely discussed (Hanisch. 
1991; Hanisch et ai, 1992; Hanisch et «/., 1993; Anderson, 
1993; Barrett, 1995; Jones, 1993; Johnson, 1993; Parikh. 
1994a, b; Reddy, 1993; Bohm, 1994a; Loske and Oberthiir. 
1994; Jepma, 1995). In essence, there are three potential roles 
for joint implementation: (a) as the first step toward establish-
ing an international tradable quota system for greenhouse 
management among parties that have made a firm commit-
ment to limit their emissions; (b) as a cost-effective option for 
developed countries to fund emission reduction projects in de-
veloping countries that have made no such commitments: and 
(c) as an activity for exploring when it is cost-effective to 
bring new emission sources or sinks into an existing interna-
tional greenhouse management scheme. 
A system of joint implementation trades in carbon reduc-
tion projects could develop automatically into an international 
tradable carbon quota system for countries that have carbon 
targets (Bohm. 1994a). Where aggregate targets exist, the 
joint level of aggregate carbon emissions reported is a suffi-
cient monitoring statistic for the actual aggregate abatement 
levels undertaken by each country under a joint carbon reduc-
tion policy. Cost incentives are such that emission reductions 
below the target in one country, when less costly than in an-
other country, would be purchased by. and credited to, the lat-
ter. In particular, when several countries are committed to 
carbon target trading in this fashion, the incremental costs 
of emission reductions will tend to be equalized across 
economies. As a result, an international tradable quota scheme 
could be established once countries commit to binding targets, 
which would in effect then become their tradable quotas. 
The literature on joint implementation has focussed mainly 
on low-cost emission reduction projects in developing coun-
tries. Bohm (1994a) also considers the case of joint imple-
mentation between developed and developing countries, where 
the former commit to binding targets but the latter do not. In 
the absence of binding targets in developing countries it 
would be difficult to determine the net emission reduction ef-
fects due to a specific joint implementation project, since na-
tionwide indirect and direct effects on emissions must be 
counted (see Tietenberg and Victor. 1994). The net emission 
reduction effects of low-cost abatement projects are particu-
larly uncertain, since such projects may be close to being 
profitable and. hence, may he carried out by the market itself 
in the near future. In addition to these systematic risks, there 
are incentives to misrepresent the effectiveness of projects. 
Parties to a joint implementation project may exaggerate the 
project's nationwide net emission reduction effects. A clear-
inghouse version of joint implementation trades between de-
veloped and developing countries would eliminate these 
incentives on the part of the buyer countries. The role of the 
clearinghouse would be to screen and aggregate all projects 
from potential sellers before they are offered as anonymous 
carbon credits to buyers at a market clearing price. 
Another potential role for joint implementation is as a 
complementary exploratory tool for gathering information to 
expand an existing international regime that initially involves 
only international carbon trading resulting from fossil fuel 
emissions. Participating nations could agree to revisit the cov-
erage issue at fixed intervals, modifying strategies to accord 
with the underlying science and economics of climate change. 
Successful joint implementation programmes are those that 
provide the necessary information to incorporate a truly cost-
effective new emission source or sink into an international 
market-based policy. However, this application of joint imple-
mentation raises problems of estimating project emission 
baselines similar to those mentioned in the preceding case, 
and hence difficulties in ascertaining the nationwide net emis-
sion reduction effects of individual noncarhon projects. Cur-
rent and future joint implementation demonstration projects 
could provide additional insight into these estimation prob-
lems, provided there were sufficient incentives for developed 
countries to finance them. 
The potential driving force behind joint implementation is 
that both buyer and seller countries, developed as well as de-
veloping, would benefit from this particular trade as they do 
from other forms of voluntary transactions. However, moni-
toring is a problem in using joint implementation as an instru-
ment for significant cost-effective operations, except for the 
limited case where parties to the FCCC have committed them-
selves to emission targets, primarily for carbon emissions. 
This type of joint implementation amounts to an international 
tradable quota system, the cost-effectiveness of which is de-
termined by the number of countries that have made such 
commitments and want to engage in operations under such a 
system. 
77.5.6 Distributional impacts of market-based measures 
The literature on industrialized countries typically portrays 
carbon taxes and other market-based instruments such as 
420 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
Table 11.2. A Summary of empirical evidence on the redistrihutive 
impact of economic 
instruments 
Instrument 
Author 
Country 
Model 
Results 
Carbon tax 
Bull, Hassett, & 
U.S. 
Melcalf(I993) 
Carbon tax 
DeWitt, 
U.S. 
Dowlatabadi, & 
Kopp(1991) 
Carbon tax 
Jorgenson, 
U.S. 
Slesnick, & 
Wilcoxen(l992) 
Carbon tax 
Potcrba (1991) 
U.S. 
Carbon tax 
Schillo, Giannarelli, 
U.S. 
Kelly, Swanson, 
&Wilcoxen(1992) 
Carbon tax 
Schillo, Giannarelli, 
U.S. 
Kelly, Swanson, 
&Wilcoxen(1992) 
Carbon tax 
Pearson (1992) 
Europe 
Carbon tax 
Carbon tax 
Carbon tax 
BTU tax 
Gasoline tax 
Gasoline tax 
Gasoline tax 
Pearson & Smith 
(1991) 
Shah & Larsen 
(1992) 
Hamilton & 
Cameron (1994) 
Bull, Hassett, & 
Metealf(1993) 
Greening. 
Schipper, & Jeng 
(1993) 
Krupnick. Walls, 
& Hood (1993) 
Poterba(1990) 
Europe 
Pakistan 
Canada 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
U.S. 
Tax on 
International 
Europe 
GHG 
Energy Agency 
emissions 
(1993) 
Tax on 
Smith (1992a, b) 
Europe 
direct fuel 
expenditure 
Tax on 
Smith (1992b) 
UK 
industrial 
energy use 
Computable dynamic general equilib-
rium model; spending behaviour may 
adjust 
Partial equilibrium model; spending 
behaviour may adjust; expenditure 
data; no recycling of tax revenues 
Computable general equilibrium 
model; three stages; intertemporal 
optimization for household 
consumption 
Partial equilibrium model; expenditure 
and income data 
DECO aggregate macroeconomic 
model; expenditure data 
Urban Institute's TRIM2 microsimula-
tion model; two compensation systems 
Partial equilibrium model; spending 
behaviour may/may not adjust (2 
models); Eurostat data 
IPS model of consumer expenditures; 
compensation system; spending 
behaviour may adjust 
Partial equilibrium model; income and 
expenditure data; three scenarios 
CGE model and simulation model of 
household expenditure 
Computable dynamic general equilib-
rium model; spending behaviour may 
adjust 
Partial equilibrium model; expendi-
ture data 
Partial equilibrium econometric 
model; limited adjusting behaviour 
Partial equilibrium model; 
expenditure data 
Partial equilibrium model; 
expenditure data 
Partial equilibrium model; expenditure 
data; spending behaviour may/may not 
adjust: two compensatory systems 
Input/output tables plus consumer 
spending simulation program 
Tax burden is nearly proportional with respect 
to lifetime income 
Distributional impact is regressive and varies 
across regions 
Carbon tax is either mildly progressive or 
regressive depending on the welfare function 
used 
Carbon tax is regressive, but the impact is 
smaller if expenditure data are used 
Depending on the compensation system 
adopted, the carbon tax is regressive to 
neutral 
Carbon tax is regressive with respect to pretax 
income in both scenarios, but it becomes 
regressive to neutral relative to posttax income 
Both models indicate that tax on domestic 
fuels is regressive, while tax on motor fuels is 
mildly progressive 
Ireland and UK show a regressive impact. For 
other countries, the burden is weakly related 
to income 
Carbon tax incidence is either proportional or 
progressive in a developing country context 
Tax burden is moderately regressive with the 
greatest effect on low-income married couples 
Tax burden is nearly proportional with respect 
to lifetime income 
Gasoline tax affects negatively mainly older 
married couples with dependent children. 
Income distributional results not reported 
Gasoline taxes are regressive, much more than 
previous studies since income data are used 
Gasoline tax is broadly regressive if the 
lowest income class is ignored; this 
class devotes a smaller share of its budget to 
gasoline than the lower-middle income class 
Regressive effect on households if no com-
pensatory measures with respect to domestic 
heating; less clear result for motor fuels 
Carbon tax is regressive, but if spending 
behaviour adjusts its impact is smaller; only 
lump-sum transfers make the impact progres-
sive 
Modest effect of changes in prices on 
consumer spending, but negative especially 
for low-income households 
Source: Larsen and Shah (1995). 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
Table 11.3. Carbon tax incidence in developing countries 
421 
Tax incidence with respect to 
Institutional considerations 
Implications for tax shifting 
Income 
Expenditure 
Lifetime income 
a. Foreign ownership and control 
b. Full market power 
Perfectly inelastic demand 
or perfectly elastic supply 
c. Price controls and legal pass-
forward of the tax disallowed 
Completely inelastic supply 
Import quotas and rationed 
foreign exchange 
d. An intermediate case of 
(a) and (b) above 
Borne by foreign treasury through 
foreign tax credits 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
Full forward shifting 
(100% on final consumption) 
Zero forward shifting 
(100% on capital income) 
Reduced rents 
No effect on prices 
(100% on capital income) 
Partial forward shifting 
(31 % to capital income, 
69% to final consumption) 
Regressive 
(pro-rich) 
Progressive 
(pro-poor) 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Proportional 
Less 
regressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Less 
regressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Progressive 
Source: Shah and Larsen (1992) 
emission taxes and gasoline or BTU taxes as regressive be-
cause outlays on fossil fuel consumption as a proportion of 
current annual personal income tend to fall as incomes rise. 
But recent studies (see Table 11.2) using U.S. and European 
data show that carbon taxes are considerably less regressive 
relative to lifetime income or annual consumption expendi-
tures than to annual income (see Poterba, 1991, 1993; Jorgen-
son etai, 1992; Smith, 1992a, b). 
Jorgenson et al. (1992) provide the most detailed assess-
ment to date for the U.S. They decompose the simulated eq-
uity and efficiency impacts of a carbon tax, using an explicit 
national social welfare function. In this decomposition, the 
negative efficiency effect dominates when the carbon tax rev-
enue is rebated as a lump sum, and the much smaller equity 
effect is either mildly progressive or regressive, depending on 
assumptions regarding the nation's aversion to income in-
equality and the measure of progressivity used. 
There is evidence that the same holds true for the rest of 
the world, although for quite a different reason. In developing 
countries, institutional factors play an important role (see 
Shah and Larsen, 1992). In the developing world, progressiv-
ity, or at least low regressivity, could be fostered by three 
mechanisms. First, a significant tax burden could be passed 
on to foreign treasuries, producers, and consumers where 
there is a significant degree of foreign direct investment from 
countries where investors are allowed foreign tax credits 
against domestic liabilities. Second, price controls could be 
applied to limit the ability of producers to pass the tax on to 
consumers in terms of higher prices. Finally, combined with 
binding import quotas or rationed foreign exchange, a tax 
could reduce the excess profits made by the privileged class. 
The existence of factors such as market power are likely to 
lead to regressivity. In this situation, producers could increase 
product prices in order to pass on a carbon tax to consumers. 
As it turns out. in most developing countries, there is some 
combination of the above elements, creating a situation where 
taxes can be only partially shifted to consumers. This means 
that a carbon tax would be either progressive or much less re-
gressive than often suggested (see Table 11.3). Further, it is 
likely to be regressive only for the lowest income groups, 
which could be protected through direct subsidies or alterna-
tive measures. In addition, the overall tax structure could be 
made even less regressive by using a carbon tax to reduce 
other more regressive taxes. 
In principle, if a policy is introduced in order to achieve a 
particular outcome and it is found to be regressive, then the 
theoretically appropriate policy instrument to deal with the 
equity issue is a lump sum transfer to the affected parties. This 
rests on the assumption that there are no nongreenhouse mar-
ket distortions. If such distortions exist, then nonlump-sum 
transfers can improve welfare (Jorgenson et al., 1992). As 
Schillo et al. (1992) explain, if carbon tax revenue is used to 
reduce labour taxes, or a blend of labour and capital taxes, 
then simulated household welfare improves as the adverse ef-
ficiency effect is reversed by the rebate, but at the cost of re-
ducing the equality of wealth. A capital rebate is shown to 
neutralize the efficiency effect but has uneven distributional 
effects. 
11.6 Policy Implementation Issues 
In assessing any of the wide range of instruments as potential 
devices for addressing global climate change, it is imperative 
to give due consideration to the implementation issues that 
can so severely affect real-world outcomes. Such issues need 
to be considered in the design of practical policies, whether at 
the national, multinational, or global level. 
In the case of tradable permit systems, as applied to local 
air pollution problems in the U.S., the claims made for their 
cost-effectiveness have in some cases exceeded what can rca-
422 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate 
Change 
sonably be anticipated. Tietenberg (1980) assimilated the re-
sults from ten analyses of the costs of air pollution control, 
and, in a frequently cited table, indicated the ratio of cost of 
actual regulatory programmes to least-cost benchmarks. Un-
fortunately, the resulting ratios (which ranged from 22.0 to 
1.1) have sometimes been taken by others to be directly in-
dicative of the potential gains from adopting specific ("cost-
effective") mechanisms such as tradable emission permits. 
A more realistic and appropriate comparison would he one 
between actual regulatory policies and either actual trading 
programmes or reasonably constrained theoretical permit pro-
grammes (Hahn and Stavins, 1992). 
A number of factors can adversely affect the performance 
of tradable permit systems: concentration in the permit market 
(llahn, 1984; Misiolek and Elder. 1989); concentration in the 
output market (Malueg. 1990); transaction costs (Stavins, 
1995a); nonprofit-maximizing behaviour, such as sales or 
staff maximization (Tschirhart. 1984); the preexisting regula-
tory environment (Hohi and Burtraw, 1992); and the degree of 
monitoring and enforcement (Keeler, 1991). In the case of 
taxes, research on implementation issues has focussed on ad-
ministrative costs (Polinsky and Shavell, 1982), monitoring 
(Russell, 1990). and enforcement (Harford, 1978; Russell et 
a I.. 1986). 
In the following sections a review is undertaken of what 
is known about some prominent issues regarding the imple-
mentation of (carbon) taxes and/or tradable permit systems. 
Where appropriate, reference is also made to regulatory sys-
tems. It is important to note that most of the research on trad-
able permit schemes is based on experience in the U.S.. where 
such schemes were superimposed on regulatory policies. 
These schemes typically involve a limited number of partic-
ipants and eternal permits allocated by grandfathering. To 
control carbon emissions, however, tradable permit schemes 
might operate where there was no former regulation. They 
would also involve a larger number of participants, and per-
mits might be time-limited and allocated by auction. Thus, ex-
perience in the U.S. may not generalize to such schemes with 
rather different characteristics. 
11.6.1 The "currency " of 
regulation 
Because of the monitoring and enforcement burden associated 
with regulating actual carbon dioxide emissions, the most 
practical "currency" for a tax or tradable permit system would 
presumably he the carbon content of fossil fuels. Given the 
proportional relationship between carbon content and CO, 
emissions and the present lack of practical means of seques-
tering these stack gases, this is a highly appropriate approach. 
Monitoring could rely partly on self-reporting, supplemented 
by international access to national fossil fuel inventories. Un-
der an international carbon tax or tradable permit scheme, im-
plementation costs may be least where incentives to comply 
are self-enforcing. An effective enforcement system makes ul-
timate sanctions credible, so that penalties would rarely need 
to be imposed. Ho\\e\er. in many countries even monitoring 
fossil fuel consumption is not a trivial problem.'' 
11.6.2 Market 
power 
There are two components to the market power problem for 
tradable permit systems (Bureau of Industry Economics, 
1992). The first is the potential for some economic agents to 
influence the permit price. The second is the potential for 
some economic agents to use permits to exercise market 
power in the output market for the product that "generates" 
emissions. Market power in the permit market is sufficient but 
not necessary for market power in the output market (BIE, 
1992). Malueg (1990) argues that market power in the output 
market may reduce economic welfare under a tradable permit 
scheme even if tradable permits are fully cost-effective. 
The degree of competition in the tradable permit market 
will affect the extent to which potential control cost savings 
are likely to be realized. Hahn (1984) considers the case of a 
monopsonist (a price-setting buyer) who forces down the real 
permit price below the competitive level. This behaviour is 
not cost-effective, since the monopsonist buys too few per-
mits (spends too much on abatement) whereas the competitive 
agents will buy too many (thus spending too little on abate-
ment). Misiolek and Elder (1989) consider the converse case 
of a monopolist (a price-setting seller) who forces up the real 
permit price above the competitive level. That is, the monopo-
list spends too little on abatement whereas competitive agents 
spend too much. To the extent that market power derives from 
the initial allocation of permits, one solution may be to limit 
the number of permits held by any player (Tietenberg, 1985). 
This may be achieved by widening the market to many play-
ers, using a variety of means, including limiting the temporal 
duration of permits. 
An emission tax designed to make emitters face the full 
costs of production will tend to result in a cost-effective allo-
cation of the control burden, provided that emitters are all 
price takers (that is, small relative to the size of the market). 
But this outcome does not necessarily occur where emitters 
have some degree of monopoly power in emission-intensive 
output markets (Buchanan, 1969). In principle, a monopolist 
in an output market for an emission-intensive commodity will 
tend to reduce output below the competitive level in order to 
raise its profits. Hence, the welfare gains from reduced emis-
sions must more than offset the losses from the monopolist's 
reduced output for an emission tax to be worthwhile (Cropper 
and Gates. 1992). Which effect dominates is an empirical is-
sue.'5 For example. Gates and Strassman (1984) find that mo-
nopoly power in the output market is unlikely to be a key 
concern in their study of U.S. industries. 
In the case of a scheme to reduce global emissions, there 
typically will be many more participants than under the 
schemes operating in the U.S. This would reduce the problem 
of market power. In an international scheme, firms that are 
large domestic emitters may be required to hold permits as a 
means of broadening the market. If market power poses a 
problem in domestic schemes, government intervention may 
be required, or a tax scheme may be a preferable option. 
The issue of market power warrants further consideration 
in the context of either tax or permit schemes. Whether or not 
OPEC is involved in a scheme, the potential oligopolistic re-
All Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
423 
sponse of oil producers could interfere with the effectiveness 
of attempts to control global emissions (Sinclair, 1992). 
11.6.3 Transaction costs 
Transaction costs are potentially important in the performance 
of tradable permit markets (Baumol and Oates, 1988; Tripp 
and Dudek, 1989; Hahn and Hester, 1989a). Stavins (1995a) 
identifies three potential sources of transaction costs in trad-
able permit markets: 
(a) 
search and information 
(b) 
bargaining and decision 
(c) 
monitoring and enforcement 
The magnitude of these transaction costs will depend on the 
structure of the market and the extent to which individual 
transactions require regulatory approval. If a full market is de-
veloped, a market price for permits will be known, and this 
price will convey all the information parties need in order to 
decide whether to trade. One party would not need to search 
for another to trade with, and the terms of trade would not 
need to be negotiated. Even where such a full market does not 
develop, innovations may serve to keep transaction costs low. 
For example, where there are search and information costs, 
brokers may provide information about pollution control op-
tions and potential trading partners in order to exploit poten-
tial gains from trade. The third source of transaction costs -
monitoring and enforcement - can be significant, but these 
costs are typically borne by the responsible government au-
thority and not by trading partners and, hence, do not fall 
within the notion of transaction costs incurred by firms as de-
fined here. 
There is abundant anecdotal evidence indicating the preva-
lence of significant transaction costs in some U.S. trading pro-
grammes involving mainly local pollution. Atkinson and 
Tietenberg (1991) survey six empirical studies that found 
trading levels - and hence cost savings - in permit markets 
to be lower than anticipated by theoretical models. Liroff 
(1989) suggests that this experience with permit systems 
"demonstrates the need for . . . recognition of the adminis-
trative and related transaction costs associated with transfer 
systems."36 For example, under the U.S. Environmental Pro-
tection Agency's emission trading programme for "criteria air 
pollutants," there is no ready means for buyers and sellers to 
identify one another, and as a result buyers frequently pay 
substantial fees to consultants who assist in the search for 
available permits (Hahn. 1989). At the other extreme, the high 
level of trading that took place under the programme of lead 
rights trading among refineries as part of the U.S. EPA's 
leaded gasoline phasedown has been attributed to the pro-
gramme's minimal administrative requirements and the fact 
that the potential trading partners (refineries) were already ex-
perienced at striking deals with one another (Hahn and Hester, 
1989a). Hence, transaction costs were kept to a minimum and 
there was little need for intermediaries. 
Another source of indirect evidence of the prevalence of 
transaction costs in permit markets comes from the well-
known bias in actual trading toward "internal trading" within 
firms, as opposed to "external trading" among firms. It has 
been hypothesized that the crucial difference favouring the in-
ternal trades and discouraging the external trades is the exis-
tence of significant transaction costs that arise when the trades 
are between one firm and another (Hahn and Hester 1989b). The 
existence of commercial brokers charging significant fees to fa-
cilitate transactions lends further credence to this suggestion. 
However, although this U.S. experience provides valuable 
data for the assessment of trading regimes, it must be borne in 
mind that it is not necessarily relevant to a policy for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions. Most of the U.S. programmes have 
concerned local pollution problems where the market for trad-
ing was very thin and where substantial regulatory oversight 
was required to ensure that the associated environmental ob-
jectives were met. Furthermore, it has partly been concerns 
about future regulatory uncertainty that have discouraged in-
tercompany trading. The lesson from this experience is not 
that trading involves large transaction costs but that trading 
regimes should be designed partly with the aim of keeping 
transaction costs low. 
The effects of transaction costs should be ameliorated in 
markets with relatively large numbers of potential trading 
sources or where formal international or domestic trading ex-
changes have been established. As the pool of potential trad-
ing partners increases, it should be easier for sources to 
identify potential trading partners, even in the absence of for-
mal exchanges, thereby lowering transaction costs. A larger 
number of firms can also mean more frequent transactions, as 
a result of which more information is generated and uncer-
tainty is reduced. 
Economists have tended to give greater emphasis to the 
symmetry between tradable permits and pollution charges 
than to their differences, although the two approaches are not 
symmetrical under conditions of uncertainty (Weitzman, 
1974), in the presence of transaction costs (Stavins, 1995a), or 
under a number of other conditions (Stavins and Whitehead, 
1992). Analyses that have compared taxes and permits have 
assumed zero transaction costs. Systems of pollution taxes 
can also involve substantial administrative costs, both fixed 
(per firm) and variable (Polinsky and Shavell, 1982). 
11.6.4 Free riding and emission leakage problems 
Can a unilateral policy by one country alone or by a group of 
cooperating countries prove effective in abating global green-
house gas emissions? This is an important question, for it is 
total emissions, and not individual country emissions by 
themselves, that determine global concentrations of green-
house gases, and yet some countries seem more willing than 
others to adopt abatement policies.17 The answer depends on 
how the other ("noncooperating") countries respond to the 
unilateral policies adopted by the "cooperating" countries. 
These responses in turn reflect two phenomena; "leakage" 
and "free riding." 
As Barrett (1994a) explains, free riding and leakage can 
undermine any international greenhouse management initia-
424 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
lives, whether they be market-based or rely on regulatory 
measures. Free riding arises when countries that benefit from 
global abatement do not contribute towards its provision. 
Leakage arises when abatement by the cooperating countries 
alters relative world prices (including shadow prices) in a way 
that leads noncooperating countries to increase their emis-
sions. Leakage thus undermines the competitiveness of coop-
erating countries as well as the environmental effectiveness of 
their efforts. 
11.6.4.1 Policies to reduce free riding 
As long as participation in an international greenhouse man-
agement policy is voluntary, countries will have incentives to 
free ride, sharing in the benefits from such a policy without 
sharing in the costs. Hven if there were no leakage, free riding 
would result in abatement being less than would be globally 
optimal, in the sense that the benefit of a small increase in 
global abatement would exceed the associated cost. This issue 
has been examined in a number of studies, including Barrett 
(1992a), Hoel (1992), and Parson and Zeekhauser (1992). 
None of the existing empirical models has been used to esti-
mate the magnitude of potential free riding, although some in-
sights into the gains from full cooperation are provided by 
Barrett (1992a, h. c), Bohm and Larson (1993), Hinchy et al. 
(1994a, b). and Hoel (1992). 
As Hoel (1992). Carraro and Siniscalco (1993), and Barrett 
(1994b) have shown, a stable coalition of cooperating coun-
tries may exist in spite of free-rider incentives. The size of this 
coalition will depend on the ability of the cooperating coun-
tries to punish countries that might withdraw from the coali-
tion and to reward countries that might accede to it. However, 
to be effective, such punishments and rewards must be both 
substantial and credible, and these requirements often clash. 
As a result, the size of the stable coalition may be quite small. 
In fact, these analyses do not consider international trade, and 
where there is trade, free riding will he exacerbated by leak-
age. On the other hand, trade may also provide a vehicle for 
deterring free riding. 
For example, Barrett (1994a) explains how the threat of a 
complete ban on trade in carbon-based fuels and products be-
tween cooperating and noncooperating countries could work 
to support full participation in a greenhouse management 
scheme. The key to this agreement, as with the Montreal Pro-
tocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, is that the 
threatened trade ban would come into effect once a threshold 
level of countries agreed to participate in the scheme. How-
ever, the threshold is determined so that all countries would 
gain from participation once it is reached. In other words, it is 
not necessary that trade he restricted, but rather that the threat 
to impose trade restrictions be credible. 
An actual ban on trade introduces a distortion in the global 
economy and is in this sense undesirable. However, free rid-
ing is itself a distortion, and if trade restrictions reduce free 
riding, they may be beneficial overall. The implication for cli-
mate change policy is that trade restrictions should not neces-
sarily be prohibited. Whether, and under what circumstances 
they should be allowed is a different matter and one requiring 
additional research. 
Finally. Heal (1992) argues that the free-riding problem 
can be exaggerated. He notes that in repeated games it is more 
likely that players will cooperate than in one-shot games. 
There may be reinforcing effects that strengthen the chances 
of forming a stable coalition. An example would be countries 
sharing in the costs of developing abatement technology. 
Since developing countries may benefit from abatement tech-
nology created in developed countries, this may increase their 
incentive to abate. 
11.6.4.2 The severity of emission leakage 
There are two main channels through which emission leakage 
may be transmitted. First, the implementation of a carbon 
abatement policy by a coalition of cooperating countries 
would shift comparative advantage in carbon-intensive goods 
towards noncooperating countries. As a result, production of 
such goods, and emissions, would rise outside the coalition. 
Second, the unilateral policy would have the effect of lower-
ing world demand for carbon-intensive fuels, and thereby re-
duce the world price for such fuels traded in international 
markets. As a result (and ignoring income effects), demand 
for such fuels, and emissions, are likely to rise outside the 
coalition. It should be emphasized that these two responses by 
noncooperating countries do not result from any deliberate 
policy to increase emissions, but rather result from the ab-
sence of a policy to reduce emissions. 
Barrett (1994a) surveys several global simulation studies 
that provide positive leakage estimates, including GREEN, 
12RT. Global 2100, and the Whalley-Wigle model. The leak-
age rate is defined as the increase in emissions by noncooper-
ating countries divided by the reduction in emissions by 
cooperating countries. The evidence of positive emission 
leakage varies widely and is strongly dependent on the model 
used. For example, positive leakage rates are low in GREEN 
(Oliveira-Martins et al., 1992) and high in the Whalley-Wigle 
model (Pezzey, 1992). 
In particular, Pezzey estimates that a 20% reduction in car-
bon emissions within the European Union alone (relative to a 
baseline trend) would be associated with a leakage rate of 
809k In other words, for every 10 tonnes of carbon abated by 
the EU, global emissions would fall by only 2 tonnes. Pezzey 
also calculates that a 20% reduction in OECD emissions 
would be associated with a leakage rate of 70%. These leak-
age rates suggest that unilateral policy would be largely inef-
fective. On the other hand, Oliveira-Martins et al. (1992) 
estimate much lower leakage rates for policies aimed at stabi-
lizing carbon emissions at their 1990 levels. They estimate 
leakage rates for a unilateral EU policy of 11.9% in 1995 and 
2.2% in 2050. and for a unilateral OECD policy of 3.5% in 
1995 and 1.4% in 2050. These leakage rates suggest that leak-
age does not render unilateral policy ineffective. These rates are 
more in accord with those reported by Hanslow et al. (1995). 
who estimate that a policy-induced 20% reduction in CO, in 
Annex I countries would be associated with a leakage rate of 
18%. 
One reason for the difference in these leakage estimates is 
that emission leakage is greater where a country's fossil fuel-
intensive products and fossil fuels have close substitutes. 
All Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Chimin 
425 
Trade flows in GREEN (Oliveira-Martins et al., 1992) are 
based on the Armington assumption that goods produced from 
different countries are imperfect substitutes (implying an ex-
porter has some degree of market power). By contrast, in the 
Whalley-Wigle model goods from different countries are as-
sumed to be perfect substitutes, thus making trade flows more 
sensitive to relative price changes. In MEGABARE, the 
model reported in Hanslow et al. (1995), imported goods 
from different sources are imperfect substitutes. Hinchy and 
Hanslow (1995) report an extension to that model where, in 
its dynamic version, capital is internationally mobile. As 
would be expected, the reported emission leakage rates from 
the dynamic version of MEGABARE are higher than for the 
comparative static version of the model and lie about halfway 
between those reported from GREEN and those from the 
Whalley-Wigle model. 
As already noted, other studies estimate leakage rates 
somewhere between these two sets of estimates. Oliveira-
Martins et al. (1992) estimate negative leakage rates for some 
regions in some years, and Morton et al., (1992) argue that 
leakage may exceed 100% in some cases. Currently, there is 
no consensus among economists about the magnitude of leak-
age. More research is needed, and it would be particularly 
helpful if leakage rates were calculated for identical simula-
tions employing a consistent set of assumptions, as has al-
ready been done in estimating the costs of climate change 
policies (see Dean and Hoeller, 1992). What can be said now 
is that leakage is a potentially serious problem for unilateral 
policies. 
The above studies ignore a possible third channel for leak-
age transmission. Under certain assumptions, noncooperating 
countries will abate their emissions up to the point where their 
own national marginal benefit of abatement equals their own 
marginal cost of abatement (see Barrett, 1994b). In the ex-
treme, this optimization rule will mean that noncooperating 
countries will not abate their emissions at all. However, more 
generally, this rule implies that noncooperating countries will 
abate their emissions by less than they would if they cooper-
ated. Where noncooperating countries do undertake positive 
unilateral abatement, and where the marginal benefit of abate-
ment to noncooperating countries decreases with the level of 
global abatement, an increase in abatement by cooperating 
countries will create an incentive for noncooperating coun-
tries to reduce their abatement. Hence, leakage may occur 
even in the absence of trade. 
11.6.4.3 Policies to reduce leakage 
What can be done to reduce emission leakage? What is cur-
rently known stems from the basic general equilibrium model 
of trade so commonly used. As background, take the some-
what simpler case of the international incidence of a global 
carbon tax. Most of the results from greenhouse modelling 
studies to date are based on the simplifying assumption that 
the global cost-effectiveness of a common carbon tax (or trad-
able quota system) does not depend on the distribution of in-
comes between or within countries; that is, only relative 
prices matter for this cost-effectiveness result. (This is not to 
say that the international distribution of the impacts from 
these policies does not depend critically on what is done with 
tax revenues or initial quota allocations.) 
Hence, as is consistent with basic trade theory, a uniform 
global production tax (quota) on greenhouse emissions is equiv-
alent to a uniform global consumption tax (quota) on these 
emissions. Both minimize the cost to global economic welfare 
of achieving a given global emission target where there is per-
fect foresight. However, there are terms-of-trade gains to net 
fossil fuel exporters under a production tax, and terms-of-trade 
losses to importers. Under a consumption tax, the converse 
holds true. That is, fossil fuel exporters are worse off under a 
consumption tax on emissions, whereas net importers are bet-
ter off. Precisely such results are illustrated in the Whalley-
Wigle model (Dean and Hoeller, 1992). 
What happens in this standard framework when coalition 
membership is less than global? This issue has been examined 
by Markusen (1975), Krutilla (1991), Bohm (1993), Hoel 
(1994, 1995), and Barrett (1994a). Treating the coalition as a 
single entity and the rest of the world as another single entity 
suggests that, if the coalition is a net importer of carbon-
intensive products in the absence of the carbon tax, then a 
tariff should be imposed on its imports to reduce emission 
leakage through the terms of trade. If the coalition is a net ex-
porter of these products in the absence of a carbon tax, then it 
should subsidize its exports. This response minimizes the 
coalition cost of meeting the greenhouse constraint. Precisely 
the same argument holds for leakage through trade in carbon-
based fossil fuels. In addition, instead of using an import tariff 
(export subsidy) the equivalent production subsidy (tax) and 
consumption tax (subsidy) could be applied in the coalition. 
Hoel (1995) shows that if an optimal tariff (subsidy) or its 
equivalent can be employed, then the carbon tax should be 
uniform across all sectors in all coalition countries, but, if not, 
then differential tax rates and exemptions may be required. 
Although border tax adjustments may theoretically be ap-
propriate for reducing leakage, their application poses a num-
ber of practical problems. How are the emissions associated 
with the manufacture of a particular product to be deter-
mined? The Montreal Protocol includes a provision for re-
stricting trade in products made using ozone-depleting 
substances, such as electronics components that are made us-
ing CFCs as a solvent. However, this provision has not been 
implemented, and the Protocol Secretariat was advised in 
1993 that to do so would not be feasible (Van Slooten, 1994). 
To implement the provision would require either sophisticated 
equipment capable of detecting trace residues of CFCs or cer-
tification of the manufacturing facilities of industries in coun-
tries that are not parties to the agreement. In the case of global 
climate change, similar adjustments would be even harder to 
implement, as virtually all production results in some green-
house gas emissions. 
Furthermore, the appropriate border tax adjustments may 
not be compatible with current multilateral trading rules. 
World Trade Organization (WTO) rules allow for border tax 
adjustments where the taxed or controlled inputs are physi-
cally incorporated in the final product. However, in the case 
of greenhouse gases, the concern is typically with the carbon 
emitted in the process of manufacturing a good. A GAIT dis-
-/20 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
pule panel has ruled (in the Superfund case) that adjustments 
may be allowed when the use of inputs can be inferred by as-
suming that the product was manufactured using the "pre-
dominant production method." However, a similar approach 
would not he appropriate in the case of climate change, not 
least because production methods vary so widely. The re-
cently completed Uruguay Round allows energy taxes to be 
remitted on exports of manufactured goods, although there is 
some question about the generality of this provision and 
whether it could he extended to include imports. Plainly, the 
rules for applying border tax adjustments need to be clarified. 
In summary, all the results from basic trade theory hold in 
analyzing emission leakage from a carbon tax or quota (see. 
for example. Woodland, 19X2: Vousden, 1990). However, as 
with a customs union, determining the optimal tariff (subsidy) 
to reduce positive emission leakage from the carbon tax will 
be a complicated calculation, given the extensive but differen-
tial use of carbon-based fuels in all economies and the differ-
ential ability of some countries to exercise market power. 
Trade compliance with WTO rules will also need to be con-
sidered. In addition, further research on the leakage problem 
is warranted to consider strategic interactions between green-
house policies in coalition and noncoalition countries. 
11.6.5 Compliance 
Free-rider deterrence is concerned with securing broad partic-
ipation in an agreement, and leakage reduction is concerned 
with making abatement by cooperating countries more effec-
tive. A related concern is compliance, or the incentives that 
countries have to fulfil their pledges under an international 
agreement. Some international agreements contain explicit 
compliance measures such as trade sanctions. However, it is 
more usual for agreements to seek alternative means for se-
curing compliance (see Chayes and Chaves. 1993). 
Indeed, it is a fundamental norm of international law that 
treaties are to be obeyed, and as a rule countries do not negoti-
ate, sign, and ratify agreements with the intention that they 
will not comply fully with all relevant provisions. Hence, 
compliance is not so great a problem as it is sometimes taken 
to be. More difficult are the problems of negotiating an agree-
ment that requires real sacrifices by the parties and of getting 
countries to sign the agreement in the first place. 
Where compliance is a problem, the reasons are usually in-
nocent. For example, four years after the Montreal Protocol 
was signed, only about half the parties to the agreement had 
complied fully with the reporting requirements of the treaty. 
This was not because these countries hoped to get away with 
noncompliance, but rather because they did not have the re-
sources and technical know-how needed to carry out their 
obligations. On the other hand, compliance with certain oil 
pollution treaties once proved more worrying because non-
compliance was linked to the difficulty o( monitoring and ver-
ifying the amount of oil discharged by tankers at sea. 
However, once an equipment standard was established requir-
ing all new tankers to have separate ballast tanks, monitoring 
became easy and problems o\' noncompliance subsided. In-
deed, monitoring o\' international agreements may be the more 
important problem (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1992). 
The lessons seem to be that treaties should be designed to fa-
cilitate easy monitoring, and that they should also ensure that 
all parties have the means to comply with the requirements of 
the agreements, given the will to do so. 
11.6.6 Information issues, the role of brokers, and 
risk management 
Policy instruments should be designed to provide needed in-
formation. In the case of tradable permit systems, there are 
three ways this can be done: 
(a) 
Government can take actions that directly reduce regu-
latory uncertainty. 
(b) 
Barriers to private brokerage services can be reduced. 
(c) 
Allowance can be made for the development of futures 
markets. 
In the first case, at a minimum, government authorities can 
avoid creating regulatory barriers (such as requirements for 
government preapproval of trades) that drive up transaction 
costs and discourage trading. 
Private provision of brokerage services can also play an 
important role in information provision. Thus, although com-
mercial brokers can certainly be recipients of transaction 
costs, their activities reduce transaction costs below what they 
would otherwise be (Stavins, 1995a). Intermediaries, in gen-
eral, can contribute to social welfare by helping parties econ-
omize on transaction costs. Brokers can play the role of 
consultants, adding value by understanding the regulatory 
process and by maintaining information about prospective 
suppliers and demanders of permits. Under the more con-
ventional function of bringing together buyers and sellers 
("brokering deals" by matching buy orders and sell orders), 
these firms both absorb and reduce transaction costs. Finally, 
brokers may assume risk by buying, holding, and selling per-
mits. 
An important merit of an international tradable quota sys-
tem (compared with an emission tax scheme) is that it can be 
used as a risk management tool to reduce the costs of green-
house risks. Some simple examples of the risk management 
potential of a quota scheme are given below. In these exam-
ples, quotas themselves are used as the hedging instrument. If 
a sophisticated market were to develop, "derivatives" of quo-
tas, such as options and forward and futures contracts, might 
be used to perform these risk management functions more ef-
ficiently. However, in the first instance, the logic of the risk 
management potential of quotas can be brought out most sim-
ply by taking quotas as the instrument. 
In the first example, the use of quotas to reduce risks will 
be considered for investments that have the potential to re-
duce emissions. Such investments include research and devel-
opment into new abatement technologies and the transfer of 
abatement technology across countries. These investments 
may either succeed or fail and. hence, the return to the invest-
ment is uncertain. The key to the risk-reducing role of quotas 
is that the quota price will be negatively correlated with the 
success of the investment. 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
427 
Suppose that quotas (or permits) of some finite duration 
are widely traded. When a new investment with emission re-
ducing potential is announced, the price of quotas will tend to 
fall. This is because there is some probability that the invest-
ment will succeed and it will be expected that there will be 
less need for quotas in the future, resulting in reduced de-
mand. If the investment actually fails, this reduced demand 
will not eventuate and the price of quotas will rise. On the 
other hand, if the investment succeeds it will not be the proba-
bility but the certain success that will influence demand. 
Quota prices will fall. 
Investors can use this negative correlation between the 
price of quotas and the success of the project to reduce the 
variability of their returns. If quotas are bought at the start of 
the project and it fails, investors will be able to sell their quo-
tas above the purchase price. Such a profit will help to offset 
their losses on the project. If the project succeeds, investors 
will suffer a loss on their quota sales. However, by narrowing 
the gap in expected profits between a successful and unsuc-
cessful outcome, quota operations will reduce the risks for 
investors (see Epstein and Gupta, 1990, for a numerical 
example). Risk-averse investors will be willing to trade 
higher average profits for more certain profits. The availabil-
ity of quotas as a risk management tool increases the probabil-
ity that the investment will be undertaken. 
In the second example, the use of quotas (or permits) to 
manage the temporal nature of risk is emphasized. Invest-
ments in some activities such as coal-fired power stations 
have a long payback period and generate emissions. If emis-
sions are taxed, future tax levels may have a critical bearing 
on the return on the investment. There may be sufficient un-
certainty about future tax levels to deter some risk-averse in-
vestors from the project. However, under a quota scheme, if 
there are quotas of sufficient duration, the costs of future 
emissions to investors can be known with certainty. However, 
in a scheme dominated by long-lived quotas, there would be 
inflexibility in adapting emissions to changing information on 
desirable emission levels. A number of ways to reduce this 
problem have been proposed.18 
As mentioned above, a forward or futures market could 
provide a more effective risk management tool than the direct 
use of a quota market in the simple examples described. A for-
ward market for quotas could develop if there were a sufficient 
number of hedgers and speculators, and none of them had ex-
cessive influence over price signals. The latter requirement 
could be met by a rule fixing the maximum share of total net 
emission entitlements held by any one country. By reducing 
the costs of risk and uncertainty, time-limited quotas would 
tend to reduce any nation's incentive to pursue strategic be-
haviour (such as quota hoarding) and could also reduce valid-
ity forecasting problems. 
Once the parties to the agreement know the basis on which 
quotas will be allocated over time, a futures market could de-
velop. Provided contracts are standardized, one of the main 
differences between the forward contracts market described in 
the previous paragraph and a futures market is that the latter 
offers greater liquidity if contracts can be settled by the mone-
tary equivalent of quota transactions, as opposed to the deliv-
ery of the quota itself. As a consequence, more transactions 
are likely in the futures market and this should lead to greater 
information flows, reducing uncertainty and risk and transac-
tion costs. As a consequence, spikes in the quota price would 
tend to be rapidly smoothed out as market players took up 
speculative and hedging positions. 
A major factor favouring a tradable quota scheme, there-
fore, is that a forward and/or futures market based on (net) 
emission quota contracts would provide a way of efficiently 
reducing the elements of uncertainty and risk in greenhouse 
costs. This would reduce the costs of control and stimulate in-
vestment in the research, development, and use of least-cost 
mechanisms for net emission control. For example, suppose a 
country invests in a risky technology transfer project as part 
of a strategy to meet its national greenhouse target. It can hedge 
against the risk of project failure by buying futures. Any profit 
on the futures market transaction can partly compensate for 
any rise in the spot price if it needs to buy quotas. 
In the U.S. an auction system for forward sales of emission 
quotas is provided for in the 1990 amendment to the Clean Air 
Act for controlling domestic sulphur dioxide (SO,) emissions 
from fossil fuel fired power plants. As Howe (1994) notes, the 
amended legislation requires total SO, emissions from the U.S. 
electricity power sector to be around 50% below the 1980 level 
by the year 2000. After January 1, 1995, each of the 111 
power plants directly affected in the first phase of measures 
must hold tradable quotas covering its total annual emissions 
target (its quota allocation), capped at about 50% of the 1980 
level. Currently, allowances may be traded to any party or 
credited ("banked") for future use. In the second phase, begin-
ning January 1, 2000, most electric power utilities will be 
brought within the system. In addition to receiving an annual 
target allowance, quotas for excess emissions may be bought 
directly from other plants or through auctions held by the 
Chicago Board of Trade for the United States Environmental 
Protection Agency. 
The temporal component of any pollution problem can be 
important, but this is particularly so in the case of "stock pol-
lutants," which tend to accumulate in the environment at a 
rate that significantly exceeds their natural rate of decay. Ac-
cumulations of greenhouse gases are of this nature and thus 
raise a set of time-related issues. If the overall goal of some 
public policy were to limit the rate or degree of climate 
change, then significant trade-offs would exist with regard to 
the timing of any proposed reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions. Earlier reductions would have the effect of slowing 
the potential onset of climate change. 
Within the context of a tradable permit system, these tem-
poral considerations can be addressed, to some degree 
through provisions for (or restrictions on) "banking," a mech-
anism that enables firms or nations to make early emission re-
ductions in exchange for the right to emit a comparable 
amount at some later date. This notion could be extended to 
sinks as well as sources. It could be advantageous to allow na-
tions to engage in banking of greenhouse gas allowances, 
since this would allow for intertemporally efficient market ex-
changes and could tend to delay the onset of global climate 
change. 
V2K 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
11.6.7 Implementation issues for economies 
in transition 
Nations with economics in transition from centrally planned 
to market-based systems are likely to exhibit certain charac-
teristics relevant to the choice, design, and implementation of 
greenhouse policy instruments. A small but rapidly growing 
literature has begun to investigate issues of particular concern 
for implementation of environmental policy in transition 
economies, including matters such as the adaptation of exist-
ing environmental tax systems to changing conditions 
(OECD, 1994; Semeniene and Kundrotas, 1994; Markandya, 
1994), historical, institutional, and fiscal factors (Zylicz, 
1994a, b), the use of economic instruments to raise revenue 
for highly constrained government budgets (Zylicz, 1994c, 
Ol'CD, 1994), the environmental impacts and cost-effective-
ness of instruments for air pollution control in specific re-
gions (London Economics, 1993; Csermely, Kaderjak, and 
Lehoc/ki, 1994; Dudek. Kulczynski, and Zylicz. 1993), and 
environmental liability (Bell and Kolaja, 1993). 
High rates of economic growth and price inflation could 
affect the attractiveness of alternative policy instruments over 
time, due, for example, to the rapid inflation of relative permit 
prices or the erosion of unit-based taxes (Stavins and White-
head. 1992). Situations in which a large portion of the econ-
omy is state-owned or the private sector is in its infancy 
suggest the need to validate the usual assumption that emis-
sion sources (firms and individuals) are cost-minimizers and 
that markets are relatively complete (Stavins and Zylicz, 
1994). Enterprises may be protected from bankruptcy, facing 
only "soft budget constraints," or they may have the ability 
to avoid environmental requirements through negotiation 
(OECD, 1994). 
Concentration of product or emission permit markets due 
to inherited industry mixes and possible barriers to entry (for 
example, imperfect capital markets) may also impede the effi-
cient operation of a tradable permit system (Hahn. 1984). Sig-
nificant structural adjustment, including privatization, shifts 
in industrial sector shares in the economy, and disruptions in 
international trading relationships could also affect the stabil-
ity and predictability of greenhouse gas emissions resulting 
from alternative policy instruments. Effective taxes may. for 
example, increase bankruptcies in a period of severe eco-
nomic problems (OECD. 1994). Even after privatization. 
many enterprises may be unable to respond efficiently to pol-
icy because they lack information on technological options 
for pollution control and their cost-effectiveness (OECD. 
1994). 
Other noneconomic characteristics of transition economies 
may also be relevant to the implementation of policy instru-
ments to manage greenhouse gas emissions. Problems may 
arise from the legal and administrative constraints inherited 
from central planning, making monitoring and enforcement 
difficult. A relatively undeveloped sense of corporate respon-
sibility, a lack of public awareness of environmental issues. 
and a lack of pressure from nongovernment organizations 
could further impede effective implementation. Government 
personnel may lack the necessary administrative skills, due to 
a shortage of economic, financial, and accounting skills and 
an inability on the part of government agencies to offer com-
petitive salaries (OECD, 1994). Finally, high ex ante levels of 
pollution, high levels of desired reduction, and a concentrated 
pattern of pollution exposure may present environmental con-
ditions that are more extreme than in many advanced indus-
trialized countries, but they may also provide abundant oppor-
tunities for low-cost abatement. 
11.7 Comparative Assessment of Greenhouse 
Policy Instruments 
In this section an attempt is made to outline the issues that 
need to be considered in determining any greenhouse policy 
mix. Countries differ in their institutional structures, their 
resource endowments, and their levels of industrialization. 
Differences in economic and technical capacities among 
countries offer the potential for emission abatement cost sav-
ing under a harmonized international greenhouse manage-
ment scheme but, at the same time, add complexities in terms 
of reaching final agreement about appropriate policy ap-
proaches and burden sharing. 
Economic instruments are considered by policy makers in 
a political environment. This has several important implica-
tions for the nature of the instruments finally adopted, as well 
as for the potential for reaching an international agreement on 
climate change. 
First, to some extent the choice of instrument will be dic-
tated by existing institutional infrastructure and experience. 
For example, market-based instruments are likely to be seen 
as less appropriate in an economy with a high level of central 
planning than in one with a long history of free enterprise. 
Second, the ability to enforce the different instruments is 
likely to vary across nations. In addition, nations are unlikely 
to grant significant authority to a supranational body that 
would allow for consistent enforcement across countries. 
Third, to the extent that domestic policy is affected, the 
choice of policy instruments at the international level could 
affect the likelihood that an agreement will be reached.39 For 
example, some countries may be unwilling to accept an agree-
ment involving the use of international taxes or harmonized 
domestic taxes. On the other hand, as pointed out earlier, a 
tradable quota scheme leaves open the choice of domestic in-
struments. 
Fourth, any approach that is implemented to control green-
house gases may vary from the textbook application of these 
concepts. There are many reasons why both market-based and 
regulatory approaches deviate from their ideal. Departure of 
actual instruments from their theoretical ideal, however, is not 
sufficient cause for rejection of an approach. 
Fifth, the adoption of any international instruments will 
have some impact on the distribution of wealth between coun-
tries, as will domestic instruments on the distribution of 
wealth within them. Negotiations about distributional issues 
are likely to be crucial in determining the final policy mix that 
is chosen. In the case of domestic taxes and tradable permits, 
some of the government revenue may be returned to the af-
fected parties. Thus, for example, many charging systems in 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate Change 
42V 
Europe are designed to limit pollution recycle revenues to the 
participants or earmark the revenue for specific tasks. Simi-
larly, in the U.S., tradable permits for protecting the environ-
ment are distributed according to the historical pattern of 
emissions (grandfathering). Although the precise nature of the 
distribution will be the subject of vigorous political discus-
sions, countries and special interest groups (including envi-
ronmental groups) are unlikely to accept an agreement that 
substantially shifts the distribution of wealth or political 
power. Since all instruments probably will have to, and also 
can, be connected with compensatory measures - side pay-
ments or specific quota/permit allocations - no difference be-
tween them would arise in this regard. For example, an 
international tax or tradable quota scheme might be designed 
in such a way as to encourage developing countries to join a 
coalition in order that they benefit from international transfers 
of income. 
Sixth, governments are likely to attach more stringent 
monitoring and enforcement requirements to a market-based 
approach for limiting noncarbon greenhouse gas emissions 
than to a regulatory system. For example, environmentalists 
bargained successfully for the installation of continuous emis-
sion monitors as a condition for allowing a tradable allowance 
system for reducing SO,, emissions in the U.S. A similar strat-
egy is likely to be applied if market-based approaches are im-
plemented for limiting noncarbon greenhouse gases or for 
controlling carbon sequestration. One notable difference be-
tween the two control problems is that technology for accu-
rately monitoring many sources and sinks of greenhouse 
gases has not yet been developed. 
And finally, there are several reasons why politicians have 
traditionally taken a regulatory approach, rather than an eco-
nomic incentive-based approach to environmental policy 
(Bohm and Russell, 1985; Hahn and Stavins. 1991). First, in-
dustry tends to favour direct regulation over incentive mecha-
nisms because (a) if a tax instrument is used, the polluter must 
pay fees in addition to controlling costs, although the accep-
tance of this approach will be influenced by any revenue recy-
cling, as mentioned above; and (b) firms may have greater 
influence over the specifics of uniform standards. Second, the 
effects of quantity regulation are likely to be perceived to be 
more certain than pollution charges, whose effect will depend 
on abatement cost functions, which are typically unknown. 
Third, economic efficiency arguments often rely on a rela-
tively sophisticated understanding of market operation and 
price effects which seem indirect when compared with regula-
tion of the polluting activity. Finally, in many countries, econ-
omists play a minor role in the development of environmental 
policy, compared with the number of decision makers with 
backgrounds in law, natural science, or engineering. 
11.7.1 Comparing regulatory systems and market-based 
instruments 
Regulatory policies may be defined as those where the author-
ities determine the level of permissible emissions from an 
emission source. Market-based policies may be defined as 
those where firms are free to determine their level of emis-
sions but must pay some penalty (such as a tax or the purchase 
of an emission permit) determined by the authorities for their 
level of emissions. To minimize the total costs of abatement, 
the level of abatement at each source needs to be chosen to 
equalize the marginal costs of abatement for given output and 
input prices. If the authorities had complete information about 
the marginal costs of abatement at each source, regulatory poli-
cies could be determined to minimize the total costs of abate-
ment. Given that the authorities will not have such complete 
information and typically cannot acquire it at a reasonable 
cost, regulatory approaches tend not to be cost minimizing. 
On the other hand, it is necessary to consider the public as 
well as the private costs of control (Stavins, 1995a). In other 
words, the total costs to be minimized by a truly cost-effective 
environmental policy instrument include both the costs of 
abatement (typically borne by private industry and including 
transaction costs) and the costs of administration (typically 
borne by government in the form of monitoring and enforce-
ment costs). When monitoring and enforcement needs are 
particularly burdensome, performance-based standards in gen-
eral may not be cost-effective. On the other hand, certain forms 
of technology standards, which are typically relatively high-
cost in terms of abatement, can involve only minimal needs 
for adequate monitoring and enforcement. Finally, in addition 
to such concerns about static or allocative cost-effectiveness, 
it is important to consider the relative effects of alternative 
policy instruments on the invention, innovation, and diffusion 
of new technologies. That is, in the long term, it is the dy-
namic efficiency properties of environmental policy instru-
ments that are likely to be most important. 
In the international context, monitoring and enforcement 
requirements would hardly differ with respect to fossil fuel 
use, since fossil fuel output plus imports minus exports would 
have to be reported for each participating country under all 
systems. 
Tradable permits (for emissions during a given time pe-
riod) and taxes are the two major domestic market-based poli-
cies. With tradable permits a national permit exchange would 
develop among permit-liable fossil fuel producers and im-
porters (or wholesale dealers in fossil fuels) after the initial al-
location of permits through recurring government permit 
auctions or (temporary) grandfathering. In this connection 
transaction costs would arise. Under a tax scheme administra-
tive costs would be incurred in payment and collection of the 
tax. The issue of how the costs of violation detection and en-
forcement would differ between policies has not been studied, 
and there does not appear to be any empirical evidence that 
could be applied to the study of these questions. 
There have been a number of empirical studies that suggest 
significant potential cost savings from the adoption of truly 
cost-effective instruments instead of regulatory approaches 
(Tietenberg, 1985). although most of these studies have con-
trasted actual regulatory instrument costs with a theoretical 
cost-minimizing alternative rather than an actual market-
based policy instrument (Hahn and Stavins, 1992). In the final 
analysis, governments are likely to choose a portfolio of in-
struments including both some regulatory and some market-
based approaches. 
4M) 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change 
In economics without well-developed market systems, 
there may be net efficiency gains from applying regulatory 
approaches over a wider range of emission sources. On the 
other hand, the adoption of a market-based approach may 
speed the development of the market system. Net efficiency 
gains may favour the development of market-based systems at 
an earlier date than otherwise would be the case. 
At the international level, there is little scope for using di-
rect regulation of emissions over and above nontradable emis-
sion quotas. Such a quota system would clearly entail extra 
costs to the extent that marginal abatement costs differ among 
countries. Cost-effective candidates for an international 
agreement are tradable quotas and international or harmo-
nized domestic carbon taxes. 
//. 7.2 Comparing domestic tradable permits and 
domestic tax systems 
Both taxes and tradable permits impose costs on industry and 
consumers.••" In effect, they force firms to internalize the costs 
of their pollution. Practically speaking, this means that firms 
will experience financial outlays, either through expenditures 
on pollution controls or through cash payments (buying per-
mits or paying taxes). Taxes and permit prices (especially 
when permits are auctioned by the government) tend to make 
these costs more visible to industry and the public. This may 
be problematic for political reasons, although in the long run 
it may have the advantage of clearly signalling and educating 
the public about the costs and tradeoffs associated with vari-
ous levels of environmental control. 
In principle, there need be no difference between domestic 
carbon taxes and tradable carbon permits from a distributional 
point of view. Moreover, the tax recycling and "double divi-
dend" benefits associated with carbon taxes can exist to the 
same extent for a permit system. Tradable permits may be 
grandfathered, in the short run. to (partly) compensate exist-
ing firms that may not have been sufficiently forewarned 
about the new policy. This choice corresponds to a tax scheme 
where, in a period of transition, all carbon tax revenues arc re-
distributed to the firms that would have received free permits 
under a permit scheme. Alternatively, or after a period of tran-
sition is over, no compensation at all would he paid. This 
would amount to a tax system where the government kept the 
tax revenue (and used it for unrelated purposes) or a permit 
scheme where all permits were auctioned and the government 
retained the sales revenue. Partial matching versions of each 
type of scheme might also be imagined. 
The difficulty of controlling emission levels through taxes 
could be a distinct disadvantage in terms of an international 
agreement. Taxes would have to be varied frequently, given 
the inadequate information base of the authorities, to deter-
mine the appropriate tax level and the need for adjustments in 
response to changes in the level of economic activity and 
changes in relative and absolute price levels. The need for fre-
quent changes in tax levels would add to business uncertainty 
and to the practical difficult) in a political sense of imple-
menting such a policy 
Tradable permit systems may be more susceptible to 
"strategic" behaviour than tax systems. In order for a tradable 
permit system to work effectively, relatively competitive con-
ditions must exist in the permit (and product) market. The de-
gree of competition will help determine the amount of trading 
that occurs and the cost savings that will be realized. Should 
any one firm control a significant share of the total number of 
permits, its activities may influence permit prices. Firms 
might attempt to manipulate permit prices to improve their 
positions in the permit market (say, by withholding permits 
and forcing others to cut production or keeping new entrants 
out). These risks would be reduced by (a) using time-limited 
permits - that is, permits for emissions for a period of, say, 
five years, which could be compatible with a corresponding 
international tradable quota scheme;41 and (b) government 
auctioning of permits.42 
Tradable permits have some advantage over taxes when 
time and uncertainty are introduced into the analysis. A trad-
able permit scheme can be designed to reduce uncertainty 
about the future in a number of ways. One approach would be 
to issue permits with different durations (Bertram, 1992) or 
for a set of future (for example, five-year) periods. Firms un-
dertaking emission-intensive investments with long payback 
periods would be able to reduce uncertainty about future costs 
by buying permits for the desired number of periods. The de-
velopment of a forward or futures market for permits (that 
could be coupled with permits of different duration) would 
provide an even better mechanism to spread the risks associ-
ated with uncertainty about future emission policy. Firms un-
dertaking research and development into technologies to 
reduce emissions would be able to hedge the risks associated 
with the payoff from such technologies through operations in 
the futures market (Epstein and Gupta, 1990). Similarly, firms 
investing in emission-intensive activities would be able to 
hedge against the risks of future policy changes through the 
operations of futures markets. 
To summarize, permits are more effective than taxes in 
achieving given emission targets. The difficulty of controlling 
emissions through taxes could be a disadvantage. The fre-
quent changes in taxes that may be required would add to 
business uncertainty. Permits may be more susceptible to 
strategic manipulation than taxes, but this problem can be re-
duced, as explained above. Permits appear to have a distinct 
advantage in creating the basis for a futures market that could 
enable a more efficient spreading of the risks of future policy 
uncertainty. 
11.7.3 Comparing international tradable quotas and 
tax systems 
As outlined above, economic incentive policies can lead in 
many situations to lower total pollution control costs and spur 
greater technological innovation than conventional regulatory 
approaches. Which incentive-based instrument is most effec-
tive, however, will depend on a number of specific factors. 
The broadest set of possible international applications is con-
sidered below. 
All Economic Assessment 
of Policy Instruments for Combatting 
Climate 
Change 
4.il 
A system of harmonized domestic carbon taxes would in-
volve an agreement about compensatory international fi-
nancial transfers as well as the precarbon tax net tax rates 
on fossil fuels. These taxes would represent (at least) what 
amounts to an estimate of the domestic environmental effects 
of fossil fuel combustion. Internationally acceptable estimates 
of these basic tax levels, which would tend to differ between 
countries, would be difficult to establish. Moreover, no design 
seems feasible and generally acceptable where participants 
are not allowed to undertake policies on their own which indi-
rectly affect fossil fuel use, such as levying a tax on substi-
tutes for carbon and subsidizing complements to carbon 
(Hoel, 1993). Thus, there are significant risks that a tax har-
monization agreement would either never be adopted or fail 
after implementation. 
A system of international taxes, where all participating 
countries were liable to pay a given carbon tax, could include 
an agreement on how tax receipts would be shared among the 
participants. Under such a system countries might retain all or 
part of the taxes raised domestically, and some participants 
(low-income countries) might receive a transfer (Hoel, 1993). 
Each country would have a good knowledge of the amount of 
tax revenue likely to be raised internally. However, less infor-
mation would be available about other countries' tax revenues 
and, hence, there would be uncertainty about the size of the 
net transfers to and from each country. 
A tradable quota scheme leaves each participant to decide 
what domestic policy to use. Such a scheme does not require 
any ongoing side payments. Here, the initial allocation of 
quota entitlements among countries reflects distributional 
considerations. A disadvantage of a tradable quota scheme is 
that the (endogenous) future prices in international quota 
trade are unknown when an agreement on the quota allocation 
is reached. Hence, the exact distributional implications cannot 
be known beforehand. This is the price paid for the main ad-
vantage of such a scheme, namely that the resulting global 
emissions will be known with certainty for a global agreement 
and, net of carbon leakage, for a nonglobal agreement. 
Thus, the choice between a tax and a quota regime remains 
ambiguous. As Yohe (1992) points out, nations facing differ-
ent circumstances could favour different control strategies. 
For example, if a case can be made that the marginal social 
cost of climate change is relatively flat in industrial countries 
because of their comparative advantage in applying technol-
ogy to adapting to change, then such countries might favour a 
tax instrument. On the other hand, developing countries that 
are likely to face much steeper marginal social cost schedules 
because of their lower capacity to adapt may favour a system 
of tradable quotas (perhaps regardless of the initial quota allo-
cation). 
Endnotes 
1. For a comprehensive legal review of the Convention, see Bodan-
sky(1993). 
2. However, it is worth noting that there may be side benefits (in 
health-related factors, for example) as a consequence of any reduc-
lions in pollution arising from reductions in greenhouse gas emis-
sions. 
3. For a general review of the literature on investment under uncer-
tainty, see Pindyck (1991). See also Chapter 10 of this report. 
4. Strictly speaking, the term emission "charge" or "fee" would be 
more appropriate because this is a payment for a right to emit. How-
ever, the term emission "tax" is adopted here because the term "car-
bon tax" is so widely used in the literature. 
5. For a very useful breakdown and analysis of the full costs of en-
vironmental regulations, see Schmalensee (1994). Conceptually, the 
cost of an environmental regulation is equal to "the change in con-
sumer and producer surpluses associated with the regulations and 
with any price and/or income changes that may result" (Cropper and 
Gates, 1992). 
6. For example, if a firm chooses to close a plant because of a new 
regulation (rather than installing expensive control equipment), this 
would be counted as zero cost in typical compliance cost estimates. 
7. For a fuller explanation of these different categories of environ-
mental protection costs, see Jaffc el al. (1995). 
8. Although lump sum taxes and transfers are typically infeasible in 
a single economy, market-based instruments such as a tradable quota 
scheme or a carbon tax can be designed to achieve transfers of goods 
and services between countries to implement the equity criteria listed 
in Section 11.2.3. 
9. They estimate that a carbon tax of USS60-70 per tonne of carbon 
would be required in OECD countries to achieve an equivalent re-
duction in global emissions. 
10. For a comprehensive coverage of discount and social time prefer-
ence rates, see Chapter 4 of this report. 
11. In the case of the United States, for example, see U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency (1989); National Academy of Sciences 
(1992); Clinton and Gore (1993). 
12. This is no longer the case even in Europe, which now has perfor-
mance-based standards as in the U.S. and Japan. 
13. These technologies remain incompatible because of the stringent 
requirements for NOx control. 
14. Currently there are lean-burn Japanese-made vehicles that can 
meet present Japanese standards and that are also available on 
the European market (H. Watson, Melbourne University, personal 
communication). The lower temperatures obtainable in lean-burn 
combustion reduce NOx production but result in less complete com-
bustion of hydrocarbons, forcing a continued reliance on at least 
two-way catalytic converters. These vehicles therefore also incor-
porate two-way catalysts (which control hydrocarbons and carbon 
monoxide), with NOx control being left to careful engine manage-
ment and exhaust gas recirculation. 
15. Lean-burn engines are potentially more fuel-efficient, since by 
definition they use less fuel in the air/fuel mix. A 10% improvement 
in fuel efficiency has been reported for Toyota's lean-burn control 
system with two-way converter (Watson 1994). Such an improve-
ment in fuel efficiency would have to be offset against other effects 
of lean-burn technology, such as lower temperatures of operation and 
less smooth running in the absence of more sophisticated engine-
control systems. Any disincentive to the technological development 
of lean-burn engines is of particular concern in the context of reduc-
ing carbon dioxide emissions from conventionally fuelled cars, since 
vehicle-based "engineering" advances in this respect depend essen-
tially on improving fuel efficiencies. 
16. Lean-burn technologies also have the potential to reduce toxic 
emissions more effectively over the lifetime of the automobile; be-
cause they are a more durable technology than currently available 
catalytic converters, which are constructed with an expected lifetime 
4.U 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
equal to that of the U.S. car (60,000 miles or 100,000 km). However, 
many ears have lifetimes well in excess of this - for example, the 
Australian experience is 240,000 km. The resulting number of older 
cars with malfunctioning converters is a concern, since even a rela-
tively small number of them may he major sources of toxic emis-
sions. 
17. for discussions of relevant enforcement issues see, for example 
Harford (I97X), Shibata and Winrich (19X3), Polinsky and Shaved 
(1979). 
18. See, for example, the experience of the Netherlands cited in 
Lenstra and Bouncy (1994). 
19. Natural gas and water utilities also implement demand-side man-
agement programmes, but they have been most common in electric 
utilities because the cost of meeting peak demand is highest in the 
case of electricity. 
20. These are the co-called California Standard Practice tests (see 
LPRI, 1991). The tests have been criticized on the grounds that they 
provide an incomplete cost-benefit analysis (Herman, 1994). 
21. I'ledric transmission and distribution systems are regarded as 
natural monopolies. Historically, generation technology has exhib-
ited economies of scale, which have produced declining marginal 
costs. Utilities tended to integrate generation and transmission, and 
to a lesser extent distribution, to realize the economies of scale with 
minimal risk. To enable (he utility to recover its full costs, rates were 
based on average costs, which are higher than marginal costs. Mar-
ginal costs vary with the demand for electricity and, during peak 
periods, exceed the average cost. Demand-side management pro-
grammes thai shift demand from peak periods to lower-cost periods 
reduce costs with little loss of revenue. Such programmes can reduce 
current demand and still pass (he RIM test. Load growth creates a 
need to add capacity. This affects future rates regardless of whether 
the marginal costs of the new capacity are higher or lower than those 
of existing capacity. Demand-side management programmes that 
lower load growth defer the need to add capacity and so reduce costs. 
Since the demand-side management costs are incurred earlier than 
the expenditures for new capacity, they lead to an initial increase in 
rates. However, assuming all the estimates to he accurate, the rates 
should ultimately decrease. 
22. A related instrument is the tradable absorption/abatement obliga-
tion. See Read (1994). 
23. It is precisely for this reason that a carbon tax (with relatively 
low monitoring costs) is feasible. In contrast, a true CO, emission lax 
would obviously be extremely costly to monitor and enforce. (Com-
pare this with the case of sulphur dioxide (SO,). Controlling S0 2 
emissions by means of a sulphur content tax on coal would be prob-
lematic, since it would fail to provide incentives for flue gas desul-
phurization (scrubbing), even when this would he the cost-effective 
route to reducing SO, emissions.) 
24. For a further discussion of deearbonization of fuels and flue 
gases, see Chapter 19 of the IPCC Working Group 11 Second Assess-
ment Report. 
25. An option of this kind was used to some extent in the Montreal 
Protocol (Article 1.5). for an analysis of the cost-effective attributes 
of the Protocol, see Rohm (1990). 
26. In addition, uses of fossil fuels for purposes other than combus-
tion, for example, as chemical feedstocks, could be subjected to sim-
ilar deposit refund treatment to "keep the prices right." Likewise, 
products such as lubrication oil could be subjected to the carbon tax 
whereas waste lubrication oil would be entitled to a tax refund if re-
turned for oil recovery or disposal other than by incineration (Bohm. 
1981). 
27. In a static model that has fixed prices and neglects the public 
goods aspect of abatement, transfers have purely distributional ef-
fects. However, this is not the case where economies are growing and 
production technology differs across countries (in the sense that dif-
ferent quantities of capital and emissions are required to produce a 
given output of consumption or capital goods). In this case, transfers 
make it possible to raise the growth rate of an economy above the 
maximum determined by its original productive capacity. This is il-
lustrated by Hinchy and Hanslow (1994), using an /i-country general-
ization of a model developed by Tahvonen and Kuuluvainen (1993). 
28. When permits are leased from government or when time-limited 
permits are auctioned by government, the revenue implications of 
permit schemes approach those of taxes. Theoretical analysis indi-
cates that this is not true in the case where eternal permits are auc-
tioned by government (Bohm, 1994b). 
29. For example, under an allocation system related to population 
levels, the big players in the market would likely be India and China, 
as permit sellers, and the U.S. and perhaps the former Soviet Union, 
as buyers. (See Epstein and Gupta, 1990.) 
30. For example, the Canadians proposed using population and GNP 
combined as allocation criteria when CFC reduction obligations 
were being considered in the development of the Montreal Protocol. 
31. This assumption excludes the potential consequences of signifi-
cant transaction costs. 
32. For a general discussion, see Bohm (1992). "Appropriate" initial 
allocations can serve as an effective device to draw countries - par-
ticularly, developing countries - into an international agreement. On 
this, see Barrett (1992c) and Hinchy et al. (1994a, b). Most proposals 
for allocating control obligations among nations call for proportion-
ately higher rates of reduction in emissions by the industrialized 
countries (and. among the industrialized countries, by the U.S.) and 
substantial reductions in the predicted rates of increase in C 0 2 emis-
sions by most developing countries. See, for example, Krause 
(1989). Flavin (1989), and Wirth and Lashof (1990). 
33. For a comprehensive review of the legal and practical aspects of 
joint implementation, see Kuik et al. (1994). 
34. Monitoring and enforcement are discussed in detail by Tieten-
berg and Victor (1994). 
35. Although there is no cutoff point, it is unlikely that firms or na-
tions could engage in price-setting behaviour if they controlled less 
than 10% of the market (see Scherer, 1980). Ultimately, the ques-
tion is whether other firms present credible threats of entry to the mar-
ket - that is, whether the market is "contestable." If so, it is less likely 
that anticompetitive behaviour can thrive (see Baumol et al., 1982). 
36. Alternative explanations of low observed trading levels have also 
been advanced. These include lumpy investment in pollution-control 
technology: concentration in permit or product markets; the sequen-
tial and bilateral nature of the trading process (in the context of a 
nonuniformly mixed pollutant) leading to some initial trades that 
then preclude better trades from being carried out subsequently 
(Atkinson and Tietenberg, 1991); and the regulatory environment. 
Some of these "alternative explanations" of low trading levels can be 
viewed as special cases of transaction costs, broadly defined. 
37. This problem may exist within groups of countries as well as 
more generally. For a discussion of issues surrounding the attempted 
introduction of a harmonized carbon tax in the European Union and a 
possible alternative policy, see Bergesen et al. (1994). 
38. One proposal is to limit quotas to. say. ten years, with one year 
overlapping for banking and for practical "end-of-period" reasons 
(see Bertram, 1992; OECD, 1992b). In particular, one-tenth of quo-
tas could expire each year and could be replaced by a new issue ac-
cording to a procedure that could be modified, say. every five years. 
This would reduce the costs of uncertainty by providing flexibility to 
adapt to new information, including the entry of new sources and 
sinks into the svstem. It also establishes a market in forward con-
All Economic Assessment 
of Policy Instruments for Combatting Climate 
Change 
-At-
tracts to reduce the costs of greenhouse risks. Quotas of different du-
ration would coexist in the market to cover both short- and long-term 
risks, and the quota price would reflect the costs of risk. 
39. The likelihood of reaching an international environmental agree-
ment will be affected by several factors. See Sebenius (1991). 
40. Compared to conventional regulations, both taxes and permits 
provide an explicit price signal about the marginal cost of limiting 
emissions. 
41. Granting permits for moving periods of, say, five years, instead 
of issuing eternal permits, would reduce the possibility of hoarding 
by a monopolist who could "forever" expose future buyers to leasing 
permits at monopoly prices. 
42. Auctioning could be used to help avoid a situation that may arise 
under grandfathering in which one large firm is allocated a signifi-
cantly large share of permits. However, it could be argued that grand-
fathering would provide an asset that could be sold by a firm wishing 
to leave an industry and would thus facilitate adjustment. 
References 
Adar, Z., and J. M. Griffin, 1976: Uncertainty and the choice of pol-
lution control instruments, Journal of Environmental Economics 
and Management, 3, 178-188. 
Anderson, R., 1993: Joint implementation of climate change mea-
sures: An examination of some issues, paper presented at a Work-
shop on the Experience of the Norway/Mexico/Poland Joint Im-
plementation Demonstration Projects, Mexico, 28-29 October, 
Global Environmental Facility, Washington, DC. 
Anderson, R., L. Hofmann, and M. Rusin, 1990: The use of eco-
nomic incentive mechanisms in environmental management. Re-
search Paper no. 51, American Petroleum Institute, Washington, 
DC, June. 
Atkinson, S., and T. Tietenberg, 1991: Market failure in incentive-
based regulation: The case of emissions trading. Journal of Envi-
ronmental Economics and Management, 21, 17-31. 
Barrett, S., 1992a: Convention on climate change: Economic as-
pects of negotiations, OECD, Paris. 
Barrett, S., 1992b: Reaching a CO^-emission limitation agreement 
for the community: Implications for equity and cost-effective-
ness, European Economy, Special edition 1, 3-24 
Barrett, S., 1992c: "Acceptable" allocations of tradeable carbon 
emission entitlements in a global warming treaty. In Combating 
global warming: Study on a global system of tradeable carbon 
emission entitlements, UNCTAD. ed., pp. 85-113, United Na-
tions, New York. 
Barrett, S., 1994a: Climate change policy and international trade. In 
Climate change: Policy instruments and their implications, pro-
ceedings of the Tsukuba workshop of IPCC Working Group III. 
A. Amaro, B. Fisher, M. Kuroda, T. Morita, and S. Nishioka, eds.. 
pp. 15-33, IPCC, Geneva. 
Barrett, S., 1994b: Self-enforcing international environmental 
agreements, Oxford Economic Papers, 46, 878-894. 
Barrett, S., 1995: The strategy of "joint implementation" in the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, UNCTAD/GID/10, 
United Nations, New York. 
Baumol, W., and W. Gates. 1975: The theory of environmental pol-
icy, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Baumol, W., and W. Gates, 1979: Economics, environmental quality, 
and the quality of life, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Baumol, W.. and W. Gates, 1988: The theory of environmental pol-
icy, Cambridge University Press, New York. 
Baumol, W., J. Panzer, and R. Willig, 1982: Contestable markets 
and the theory of industrial structure, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 
New York. 
Beavis, B., and M. Walker. 1983: Random wastes, imperfect moni-
toring and environmental quality standards, Journal of Public 
Economics, 21,377-387. 
Bell, R.G., and T.A. Kolaja, 1993: Capital privatization and the 
management of environmental liability in Poland, The Business 
Lawyer, 48, (3), 943-961. 
Bergesen, HO., M. Grubb, J.-C. Hourcade, J. Jaeger, A. Lanza, R. 
Loske, L. Sverdrup, and A. Tudini, 1994: Implementing the Euro-
pean CO, commitment: A joint policy proposal, The Royal Insti-
tute of International Affairs. London. 
Bertram, G., 1992: Tradeable emission permits and the control of 
greenhouse gases. Journal of Development Studies, 28(3), 423-
446. 
BIE (Bureau of Industry Economics), 1992: Environmental regula-
tion: The economics of tradeable permits-A survey of theory and 
practice, AGPS, Canberra. 
Binswanger, H., 1989: Brazilian policies that encourage deforesta-
tion in the Amazon, World Bank Environment Department Paper 
no. 16, Washington, DC. 
Bodansky, D., 1993: The United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change: A commentary, Yale Journal of International 
Law, 18,451-558. 
Boero, G., R. Clarke, and L.A. Winters, 1991: The macroeconomic 
consequences of controlling greenhouse gases: A survey, London, 
HMSO. 
Bohi, DR.. and D. Burtraw, 1992: Utility investment behavior and 
the emission trading market. Resource Engineering, 14, 129-153. 
Bohm, P.. 1981: Deposit-refund systems: Theory and applications to 
environmental, conservation and consumer policy, Johns Hop-
kins University Press, Baltimore, for Resources for the Future, 
Washington DC. 
Bohm, P., 1990: Efficiency issues and the Montreal Protocol on 
CFCs, Environment Working Paper no. 40, World Bank, Wash-
ington, DC. 
Bohm, P., 1992: Distributional implications of allowing interna-
tional trade in CO, emissions quotas. The World Economy, 15(1), 
107-114. 
Bohm, P., 1993: Incomplete international cooperation to reduce CO, 
emissions: alternative policies. Journal of Environmental Eco-
nomics and Management, 24 (3), 258-271. 
Bohm, P.. 1994a: On the feasibility of joint implementation of car-
bon emissions reductions. In Climate change: Policy instruments 
and their implications. Proceedings of the Tsukuba workshop of 
IPCC Working Group III. A. Amaro. B. Fisher, M. Kuroda, T. 
Morita, and S. Nishioka, eds.. pp. 181-198, IPCC, Geneva. 
Bohm, P., 1994b: Efficiency aspects of government revenue implica-
tions of carbon taxes and tradeable carbon permits, paper pre-
sented at International Institute of Public Finance, 50th Congress, 
Cambridge, MA, 22-25 August. 
Bohm, P., 1995a: Environmental taxation and the double dividend: 
Fact or fallacy? CSERGE Working Paper, University College, 
London. 
Bohm, P.. 1995b: An analytical approach to evaluating the national 
net costs of a global system of tradeable carbon emission entitle-
ments, UNCTAD/GID/9, Geneva. 
Bohm, P., and B. Larsen, 1993: Fairness in a tradeable-permit treaty 
for carbon emissions reductions in Europe and the former Soviet 
Union, Environmental and Resource Economics, forthcoming. 
Bohm, P., and C. Russell, 1985: Comparative analysis of alternative 
policy instruments. In Handbook of natural resource and energy 
4.U 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
economics, 
vol. I, A. Kneese and J. Sweeney, eds., North-
Holland, Amsterdam. 
Bovenberg, I.., and R. de Mooij, 1994: Environmental levies and 
distortionary taxation, American Economic Review, 84 (4), 1085-
1089. 
Boyd, R., K. Krulilla. and W.K. Visensi. 1994: Energy taxation as 
a poliey instrument to reduce CO, emissions: A net benefit 
analysis. Journal of Environmental 
Economics and 
Management, 
forthcoming. 
Buchanan, J.. 1969: External diseconomies, corrective taxes, and 
market structure. American 
Economic 
Review, 59(1), 174-177. 
Hull, N„ K. Ilassett, and G. Metcalf, 1993: Who pays broad-based en-
ergy taxes? Computing lifetime and regional incidence. Working 
I'aper no. 142, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Gover-
nors of the Federal Reserve System. Washington. DC, September. 
Ilurniaiix, J.-M., JR. Martin, and J. Oliveira-Martins, 1992a: The ef-
fect of existing distortions in energy markets on the costs of poli-
cies to reduce CO, emissions: Evidence from GREEN, OECD 
Economic Studies, 19, Winter, 141-165. 
Burniaux, J.-M., JR. Martin, G. Nicolleti, and J. Oliveira-Martins. 
1992b: The costs of reducing carbon dioxide emissions: Evidence 
from GREEN. Working Paper no. 115. Economics Department, 
OECD. Paris. 
Bye, B..T. Bye, and L. Eorentsen. 1989: S1MEN: Studies of industry, 
environment 
and energy towards 2000, Discussion Paper no. 44. 
Central Bureau of Statistics, Oslo. 
Cameron, M.. 1994: Efficiency and fairness 
on the road, Environ-
mental Defence bund, Oakland, CA. 
Carniro, ('., and D. Sinisealco. 1993: Strategies for the international 
protection of the environment. Journal of Public Economics, 
52, 
309-328. 
Chayes, A., and A.M. Chayes. 1993: On compliance. 
International 
Organization, 
47, 175-205. 
Chichilnisky, G., and G. Heal. 1993: Global environmental risks. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
7(4), Fall. 65-86. 
Chichilnisky, G., G. Heal, and D. Starett, 1993: International emis-
sion permits: Equity and efficiency, mimeo. Columbia University. 
November. 
Clinton, W.J. and A. Gore. Jr., 1993: The climate change action plan. 
The White House, Washington, DC. 
Crandall, R.W. 1984: The political economy of clean air: Practical 
constraints on White House review. In Environmental 
policy un-
der Reagan's Executive Order: The role of benefit-cost 
analysis, 
V. Smith, ed.. Resources for the Future. Washington. DC. 
Cristofaro, A., and J. Scheraga. 1990: Policy implications of a com-
prehensive greenhouse gas budget, mimeo. United States Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency. Washington, DC. September. 
Cropper, M., and W. Oates. 1992: Environmental economics: A sur-
vey. Journal of Economic Literature, 30(2). 675-740. 
Csermely, A., P. Kaderjak. and Z. Lehoezki. 1994: Direct impacts of 
industrial restructuring on air pollutant and hazardous waste 
emissions in Hungary, paper presented at the Fifth Annual Con-
ference of the European Association of Environmental and Re-
source Economists. Budapest. May. 
Dasgupta, P.. 1993: .\/i inquiry 
into well-being 
and 
destitution. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, England. 
Dasgupta, P., and K Goran-Maler. 1994: Poverty, institutions 
and 
the environmental 
resource base. Environment Paper no. 9. World 
Bank. Washington, DC. 
DCEIA (Department of Commerce. Energy Information Administra-
tion). 1992: Federal energy subsidies: 
Direct and indirect 
inter-
ventions in energy miirkets. Energy Information Administration. 
Washington. DC. 
Dean, A., and P. Hoeller. 1992: Costs of reducing CO, emissions: 
Evidence from six global models, OECD Economic Studies, Paris, 
19, Winter, 15-47. 
DeWitt, D.. H. Dowlatabadi, and R. Kopp, 1991: Who bears the bur-
den of energy taxes? Discussion Paper QE91-12, Resources for 
the Future. Washington, DC. 
Dornbush, R., and J.M. Potcrba, 1991: Global warming: 
Economic-
policy responses, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Dower, R.C., and Zimmerman, M.B. 1992: The right climate for car-
bon taxes: Creating economic 
incentives 
to protect the 
atmos-
phere, World Resources Institute, August, Washington, DC. 
Dudek, D.J., and A. LeBlanc, 1992: Preserving 
tropical forests 
and 
climate: The role of trees in greenhouse 
gas emissions 
trading, 
The Environmental Defence Fund, New York. 
Dudek, D„ Z. Kulczynski, and T. Zylicz, 1993: Implementing trade-
able permits in Poland: A case study of Chorzow. In Conference 
Proceedings of the Third Annual Meeting of the European Asso-
ciation of Environmental and Resource Economists, L. Presisner, 
cd., Krakow, Poland, May. 
EPRI (Electric Power Research Institute), 1984: Demand-side 
man-
agement, 
Vol. 1. Overview 
of key issues, EPRI, EA/EM-3597, 
Palo Alto, CA. August. 
EPRI (Electric Power Research Institute), 1991: End-use technical 
assessment guide, vol. 4, Fundamentals and methods, EPRI, CU-
7222, Palo Alto, CA, April. 
Epstein, J., and R. Gupta, 1990: Controlling 
the greenhouse 
effect: 
Five global regimes compared, 
Brookings Occasional Papers. 
Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. 
European Commission, 1994: Taxation, employment and environ-
ment: Fiscal reform for reducing unemployment, European Econ-
omy, 56, 137-177. 
Fankhauser, S., 1993: Greenhouse economics and the costs of 
global warming, PhD thesis. Department of Economics, Univer-
sity College, London. 
Faruqui, A., and E. Haites, 1991: Impact of efficient electricity use 
and DSM programs on United States electricity demand and the 
environment. In Proceedings: 
DSM and the global 
environment, 
Arlington. VA.. 22-23 April, The Conference Connection, Bala 
Cynwyd. PA. 
Flavin, C , 1989: Slowing global warming: A worldwide strategy, World-
watch Paper 91, WorldWatch Institute. Washington, DC. October. 
Freeman, A., and R. Haveman, 1971: Water pollution control, river 
basin authorities, and economic incentives: Some current policy 
issues, Public Policy, 19( 1). 53-74. 
Ceilings, C.W.. and J. Chamberlin, 1993: Demand-side 
manage-
ment: Concepts and methods (2d ed.), The Fairmont Press. Ed-
burn. GA. 
Goulder, L.. 1992: Carbon tax design and US industry performance. 
In Tux policy and the economy, vol. 6, J. Poterba, ed., MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
Goulder, L.. 1993: Energy taxes: Traditional efficiency effects and 
environmental implications. In Tax policy and the economy, vol. 
8. J. Poterba. ed.. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA. 
Goulder, L.. 1995: Effects of carbon taxes in an economy with prior 
tax distortions. Journal of Environmental 
Economics 
and Man-
agement, 
forthcoming. 
Greening, L.. L. Schipper, and H. Jeng. 1993: Evaluation of the dis-
tributional impacts of energy taxes across regions and socioeco-
nomic groups of the United States. Annual Conference on Energy, 
pp. 432-443. 
Grubb, M.. 1991: Energy policies and the greenhouse 
effect, vol. 1. 
Policy Appraisal. 
Royal Institute of International Affairs. Dart-
mouth. England. 
An Economic Assessment of Policy Instruments 
for Combatting 
Climate 
Change 
4J5 
Grubb, M., and J.K. Sebenius, 1991: Participation, allocation and 
adaptability in international tradeable emission permit systems 
for greenhouse gas control. Proceedings 
of OECD Workshop on 
Tradeable 
Emission 
Permits to Reduce Greenhouse 
Gases, Or-
ganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Paris, 
June. 
Hahn, R.W., 1984: Market power and transferable property rights. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
99(4), 753-765. 
Hahn, R.W., 1988: An evaluation of options for reducing hazardous 
waste, Harvard Environmental 
Law Review, 12, 201-221. 
Hahn, R.W., 1989: Economic prescriptions for environmental prob-
lems: How the patient followed the doctor's orders, Journal 
of 
Economic Perspectives, 
3, 95-114. 
Hahn, 
R.W., and G.L. 
Hester, 
1989a: Marketable 
permits: 
Lessons for theory and practice. Ecology 
Law Quarterly, 
16, 
3 6 1 - 4 0 6 . 
Hahn, R.W., and G.L. Hester, 1989b: Where did all the markets go? 
An analysis of EPA's emissions trading program, Yale Journal of 
Regulation, 
6, 109-153. 
Hahn, R.W., and Stavins, R., 1991: Incentive-based environmental 
regulation: A new era from an old idea? Ecology Law 
Quarterly, 
18, 1-42. 
Hahn, R.W., and Stavins, R., 1992: Economic incentives for envi-
ronmental protection: Integrating theory and practice, 
American 
Economic Review, 82, 464-468. 
Hahn, R.W., and Stavins, R., 1995: Trading in greenhouse permits: 
A critical examination of design and implementation issues. In 
Shaping national responses to climate change: A post-Rio 
guide, 
H. Lee, ed., Island Press, Washington, DC. 
Haites, E., 1993: Emissions reductions due to the DSM programs of 
Canadian electric utilities, Proceedings: 
Demand-side 
manage-
ment and the global environment, 
Arlington, VA., 24-25 June. 
The Conference Connection, Bala Cynwyd, PA. 
Hamilton, K., and G. Cameron, 1994: Simulating the distributional 
effects of a Canadian carbon tax, Canadian Public Policy, 20(4), 
385-399. 
Hanisch, T., 1991: Joint implementation of commitments to curb cli-
mate change, Policy Note no. 1991:2. CICERO (Centre for Inter-
national Climate and Energy Research), Oslo. Norway. 
Hanisch, T., R. Pachauri, D. Schmitt. and P. Vellinga. 1992: The cli-
mate convention: Criteria and guidelines for joint implementa-
tion. Policy Note no. 1992:2, CICERO (Centre for International 
Climate and Energy Research), Oslo, Norway. 
Hanisch, T., R. Selrod, A. Torvanger. and A. Aahcim. 1993: Study to 
develop practical guidelines for "Joint Implementation" under the 
UN FCCC, mimeo, CICERO (Centre for International Climate 
and Energy Research), Oslo. Norway. 
Hanslow, K., M. Hinchy. J. Small, B.S. Fisher, and D. Gunasekera, 
1995: Trade and welfare effects of policies to address climate 
change. In Equity and social considerations 
related to 
climate 
change. 
Proceedings of a WG III IPCC Workshop. Nairobi. 
Kenya, 18-22 July, R. Odingo, A. Alusa, F. Mugo, J. Njihia, A. 
Heidenreich, and A. Katama, eds., pp. 313-330, WMO/UNEP, 
Geneva. 
Harford, J.D.. 1978: Firm behavior under imperfectly enforceable 
pollution standards and taxes. Journal of Environmental 
Econom-
ics and Management, 
5, 26-43. 
Hasset, K., and G. Metcalf, 1992: Energy tax credits and 
residential 
investment, 
Working Paper no. 4020, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. 
Hausman, J.. 1979: Individual discount rates and the purchase and 
utilization of energy-using durables, Bell Journal of 
Economics, 
10, 33-54. 
Heal, G.. 1992: International negotiations on emission control. Struc-
tural Change and Economic Dynamics, 3, 223-240. 
Herman, P., 1994: The value test: Its context, description, 
calcula-
tion, and implications, 
California Energy Commission. Sacra-
mento, CA, May. 
Hinchy, M., and K. Hanslow. 1994: Optimal greenhouse policy in a 
multi-country world of growing economics, ABARE paper pre-
sented to the Conference of Economists, Economic Society of 
Australia, Gold Coast. Queensland. 25-28 September. 
Hinchy, M., and K. Hanslow, 1995: Modelling the impact of OECD 
carbon taxes with the MEGABARE model. ABARE paper pre-
sented to the 18th Annual Conference of the International Associ-
ation of Energy Economics, Washington DC, 5-8 July. 
Hinchy, M., K. Hanslow, and B. S. Fisher, 1994a: A dynamic game 
approach to greenhouse policy: Some numerical results. In Cli-
mate change: Policy instruments 
and their implications, 
Proceed-
ings the Tsukuba workshop of IPCC Working Group III. A. 
Amaro. B. Fisher, M. Kuroda. T. Morita, and S. Nishioka, eds., 
pp. 117-131, IPCC. Geneva. 
Hinchy, M., K. Hanslow. and B.S. Fisher, 1994b: A dynamic game 
approach to greenhouse policy: More numerical results, ABARE 
paper presented to the Tasman Institute Conference on Environ-
mental Health and Economic Wealth: Conflict or concord? Can-
berra, 15-16 March, ABARE, Canberra. 
Hinchy, M., S. Thorpe, and B.S. Fisher, 1993: A tradable 
emissions 
permit scheme, ABARE Research Report 93.5, Canberra, Aus-
tralia. 
Hirst, E., 1993, Price and cost impacts of utility DSM programs. The 
Energy Journal, 13(4), 75-94. 
Hoel, M., 1992: International environmental conventions: The case 
of uniform reductions of emissions, Environmental 
and 
Resource 
Economics, 
2, 141-159. 
Hoel, M.. 1993: Harmonization of carbon taxes in international cli-
mate agreements, Environmental 
and Resource Economics, 
3(3), 
June, 221-232. 
Hoel, M., 1994: Efficient climate policy in the presence of free rid-
ers. Journal of Environmental 
Economics 
and Management, 
27 
(3), 259-274, 
Hoel, M„ 1995: Should a carbon tax he differentiated across sectors? 
Journal of Public Economics, 
forthcoming. 
Hoel, M., and I. Isaksen. 1993: Efficient abatement of different 
greenhouse gases, Memorandum no. 5, Department of Econom-
ics, University of Oslo, April. 
Hollinger, D.Y., J.P. MacLaren. P.N. Beets, and J. Turland, 1994: 
Carbon sequestration by New Zealand's plantation forests, New 
Zealand Journal of Eorestry Science. 23(2), 194-208. 
Horowitz, M.. and H. Haeri. 1990: Economic efficiency v energy ef-
ficiency: Do model conservation standards make good sense? En-
ergy Economics, 
12(2). 122-131. 
Horton, G., J. Rollo, and A. Ulph, 1992: The implications for trade 
of greenhouse gas emission control policies, working paper pre-
pared for UK Department of Trade and Industry, London. 
Houghton, R., 1992: A blueprint for monitoring the emissions of 
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases from tropical de-
forestation, mimeo, Woods Hole Research Center, Woods Hole, 
MA. 
Howden, M., and R. Munro, 1994: Methane from Australian live-
stock: implications for industry and climate change, 
Resource 
Sciences Interface, 4, 5-9. 
Howe, C , 1994: Taxes versus tradable discharge permits: A review 
in the light of the US and European experience, 
Environmental 
and Resource Economics, 
4(2), 151-169. 
IIASA (International 
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis), 
436 
Climate 
Change 
1995 - Economic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
1992a: Proceedings 
of the International 
Conference on Economic 
Instruments 
for Air Pollution Control, October IH-20, Volume I, 
Plenary Sessions, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
IIASA, 1992b: Proceedings 
of the International 
Conference on Eco-
nomic Instruments for Air Pollution Control, October IH-20, Vol-
ume 2, Parallel Sessions, IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria. 
International Knergy Agency, 1993: Taxing energy: Why and how. 
Economic Analysis Division. OECD. Paris. 
II'CC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: Climate 
change: The II'CC scientific 
assessment, 
Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
II'CC, 1992: Climate change: The supplementary 
report to the IPCC 
scientific 
assessment. 
Cambridge University Press. Cambridge. 
Jalle, A., and R. Slavins 1994a: The energy paradox and the dillu-
sion of conservation technology. Resource and Energy 
Econom-
ics, 16(2),9I-I22. 
Jalle, A., and R. Slavins, 1994b: The energy efficiency gap: What 
does it mean.' Energy Policy, 22( 10). 804-810. 
JafTe, A., and R. Slavins. 1994c: Energy-efficiency investments and 
public policy. Energy Journal, 15(2). 1-23. 
JalTf, A., and R. Slavins. 1995: Dynamic incentives of environmen-
tal regulation: The effects of alternative policy instruments on 
technology diffusion, Journal of Environmental 
Economics 
and 
Management, 
29, S43-S63. 
JafTe, A.. P. Peterson. P. Portney, and R. Stavins, 1995: Environmen-
tal regulation and the competitiveness of U.S. manufacturing. 
Journal of Economic Literature, 33, 132-163. 
Jepma, C I . led.). 1995: The feasibility 
of joint 
implementation, 
Kluwer Academic Publications, Dordrecht, the Netherlands. 
Joclicin, E., and E. Gruber. 1990: Obstacles to rational electricity 
use and measures to alleviate them. Energy Policy, 
18, 340-
350. 
Johnson, I., 1993: Operational criteria for joint implementation: A 
response, paper presented to the International Conference on the 
Economics of Climate Change. OECD/IEA. Paris. 14-16 June. 
Jones, B.P., and P. Tobler. 1993: Policy measures to achieve green-
house targets, ABARE paper presented at the National Agricul-
tural and Resources Outlook Conference. Canberra, 2-4 Feb-
ruary. ABARE, Canberra. 
Jones, T., 1993: Operational criteria for joint implementation, paper 
presented to the International Conference on the Economics of 
Climate Change, OECD/IEA, Paris, 14-16 June. 
Jorgenson, D., and P. Wilcoxen, 1992: Reducing US carbon diox-
ide emissions: An assessment of different instruments. Discus-
sion Paper no. 1590. Harvard Institute of Economic Research, 
April. 
Jorgenson, D., and P. Wilcoxen. 1994: The economic effects of a 
carbon tax. In Climate change: Policy instruments 
and their im-
plications, 
proceedings of the Tsukuba workshop of IPCC Work-
ing Group III, A. Amaro. B. Fisher, M. Kuroda. T. Morita. and S. 
Nishioka. eds.. pp. 60-72. WMO/UNEP. Geneva. 
Jorgenson, D., D. Slesnick. and P. Wilcoxen. 1992: Carbon taxes 
and economic welfare. In Hrookings papers on economic 
activity: 
Microeconomics, 
pp. 393-431, Brookings Institution, Washington. 
DC. 
Joskow, P., and D. Matron. 1993: What does a ncgawatt really cost? 
Evidence from utility conservation programs. The Energy 
Jour-
nal. 13(4). 41-74. 
Kahn, A.. 1992: Least cost planning generally and DSM in particu-
lar. Resources and Energy. 14, 177-185. 
Katz, M.. 1992: Demand side management: Reflections of an irrev-
erent regulator. Resi'itrces timl Energy. 14, 1S7-203. 
Keeler, AG.. 1991: Noncompliant firms in transferable discharge 
permit markets: Some extensions, Journal of Environmental 
Eco-
nomics and Management, 
21, 180-189. 
Kolstad, C , 1982: Looking vs. leaping: The timing of CO, control 
in the face of uncertainty and learning, mimeo, Department of 
Economics, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL. 
Koopmans, G., M. Mors, and J. Scherp, 1992: The likely economic 
impact of the proposed carbon/energy tax in the European Com-
munity, paper presented to an International Workshop on Costs, 
Impacts and Possible Benefits of CO, Mitigation, Laxenburg, 
Austria, 28-30 September. 
Krause, F, 1989: Energy policy in the greenhouse: 
From 
warming 
fate to warming limit - Benchmarks 
for a global climate 
conven-
tion, Dutch Ministry of Housing, Physical Planning and Environ-
ment and the European Environmental Bureau, The Hague, the 
Netherlands. 
Krupnick, A., M. Walls, and H. Hood, 1993: The distributional and 
environmental implications of an increase in the federal gasoline 
tax, Discussion Paper ENR 93-24, Resources for the Future. 
Washington, DC. 
Krutilla, K., 1991: Environmental regulation in an open economy, 
Journal of Environmental 
Economics 
and Management, 
20(2), 
127-142. 
Kuik, O., P. Peters, and N. Schrijver (eds.), 1994: Joint 
implementa-
tion to curb climate change: Legal and economic aspects, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht/Boston/London. 
Larsen, B., and A. Shah, 1992: World fossil fuel subsidies and 
global carbon emissions. Policy Research Working Paper Series 
no. 1002, World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Larsen, B., and A. Shah. 1994: Global tradeable carbon permits, par-
ticipation incentives and transfers. Oxford Economic 
Papers, 46, 
841-856. 
Larsen, B., and A. Shah. 1995: Global climate change, energy subsi-
dies, and national carbon taxes. In Public economics and the envi-
ronment in an imperfect 
world, L. Bovenberg and S. Cnossen, 
eds., pp. 113-132. Kluwer, Dordrecht. 
Lashof, D., and D. Ahuja, 1990: Relative contributions of green-
house gas emissions to global warming, Nature, 344, 529-531. 
Leary, N., and J. Scheraga, 1994: Policies for the efficient reduction 
of CO, emissions. International 
Journal of Global Energy 
Issues. 
6(1/2)". 103-107. 
Lenstra, W.. and M. Bonney. 1994: The role of regulation in Dutch 
climate change policy. In Climate change: 
Policy 
instruments 
and their implications, 
proceedings of the Tsukuba workshop of 
IPCC Working Group III. A. Amaro, B. Fisher, M. Kuroda, T. 
Morita, and S. Nishioka, eds., pp. 241-247, IPCC, Geneva. 
Liroff, R.A.. 1989: The evolution of transferable emission privileges 
in the United States, paper presented at the Workshop on Eco-
nomic Mechanisms for Environmental Protection, Jelenia Gora, 
Poland. 
London Economics, 1993: Study of economic policy instruments 
for 
the control of air pollution in Poland. London. 
Loske, R.. and S. Oberthiir, 1994: Joint implementation under the 
climate change convention. International 
Environmental 
Affairs. 
6(1). Winter. 
MacLaren, J.P.. S.J. Wakelin. and P.N. Beets, 1993: Projected 
car-
bon sequestration 
by forestry plantings 
commencing 
in 1991. a 
contract report for the Ministry of Forestry, New Zealand Forest 
Research Institute Ltd.. Wellington. 
Magat, W.A.. 1979: The effects of environmental regulation on in-
novation. Law and Contemporary 
Problems, 43, 4-25. 
Mahar. D.. 1988: Government policies and deforestation in Brazil's 
Amazon Region. Environment Department Working Paper no. 7. 
World Bank. Washington. DC. 
All Economic Assessment 
of Policy Instruments for Combatting 
Climate 
dimiyc 
-/.•>' 7 
Malueg, D., 1990: Welfare consequences of emission credit trading 
programs, Journal of Environmental Economies and Manage-
ment, 18(1), 66-77. 
Manne, A.S., and R.G. Richels, 1991: International trade in carbon 
emission rights: A decomposition procedure, AEA Papers and 
Proceedings, 81(2), 135-139. 
Markandya, A., 1994: Environmental taxation: A review of experi-
ence in economies in transition, paper presented at the 50th Con-
gress of the International Institute of Public Finance. Cambridge, 
MA. 
Markusen, J., 1975: International externalities and optimal tax 
structure, Journal of International Economics, 5(1), 15-29. 
McCann, R.J., and S.J. Moss. 1993: Nuts and bolts: The implica-
tions of choosing greenhouse-gas emission reduction strategies. 
Policy Study no. 171, Reason Foundation, Los Angeles, CA. 
Miller, A., and I. Mintzer, 1986: The sky is the limit: Strategies for 
protecting the ozone layer, Research Report no. 3, World Re-
sources Institute, Washington, DC. 
MITI (Ministry of Trade and Industry), 1993: Technology renais-
sance for the environment and energy, mimeo, Special Committee 
on Energy and Environment, Government of Japan, Tokyo, Sep-
tember. 
Mintzer, I., 1988: Living in a warmer world: Challenges for policy 
analysis and management. Journal of Policy Analysis and Man-
agement, 7(3), 445-459. 
Misiolek, W., and E. Elder, 1989: Exclusionary manipulation of mar-
kets for pollution rights. Journal of Environmental Economics 
and Management, 16(2), 156-166. 
Nadel, S., 1990: Electric utility programs: A review of the lessons 
taught by a decade of program experience. In Proceedings: ACEEE 
1990 summer study on energy efficiency in buildings, American 
Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, vol. 8, pp. 179-205, 
Washington, DC. 
National Academy of Sciences, 1992: Policy implications of green-
house warming: Mitigation, adaptation, and the science base. 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Newcombe, K., 1989: An economic justification for rural afforesta-
tion. In Environmental management and economic development, 
G. Schramm and J. Warlord, eds., Johns Hopkins Press for the 
World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Nordhaus, W., 1991a: The costs of slowing climate change: A sur-
vey. Energy Journal, 12( 1), 37-64. 
Nordhaus, W., 1991b: To slow or not to slow: The economics of the 
greenhouse effect, Economic Journal, 101, 920-937. 
Oates, W., and D. Strassman, 1984: Effluent fees and market struc-
ture, Journal of Public Economics, 24( 1), 29-46. 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
1989: Economic instruments for environmental protection, Paris. 
OECD, 1992a: Climate change: Designing a practical ta.x system, 
Paris. 
OECD, 1992b: Climate change: Designing a tradeable permits sys-
tem, Paris. 
OECD, 1993: International economic instruments and climate change, 
Paris. 
OECD, 1994: Taxation and the environment in European economies 
in transition, Paris. 
Oliveira-Martins, J., J.-M. Bumiaux, and J.P. Martin, 1992: Trade 
and the effectiveness of unilateral C0 2 abatement policies: Evi-
dence from GREEN. OECD Economic Studies, 19, Winter, 123-
140. 
Parikh, J.. 1994a: Joint implementation and sharing commitments: 
A southern perspective, proceedings of a workshop on "Inte-
grated Assessment for Climate Change," International Institute 
for Applied Systems Analysis. Laxenburg. Austria. 16-18 Octo-
ber. 
Parikh, J., 1994b JI: survey II: Supporting North-South cooperation. 
Climate Change Bulletin, Issue 4, 3d quarter, pp. 5-6. 
Parson, E., and R. Zeckhauser. 1992: Co-operation in the un-
balanced commons, mimeo, John F. Kennedy School of Gov-
ernment, Harvard University, Cambridge. MA. In Harriers to 
conflict resolution, K.J. Arrow el ai, eds., Norton, New York. 
Pearce, 0., 1991: The role of carbon taxes in adjusting to global 
warming, Economic Journal, 101, July, 938-948. 
Pearce, D.. and J. Warlord. 1993: World without end, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, England. 
Pearson, M., 1992: Equity issues and carbon taxes. Climate change: 
Designing a practical tax system, OECD Documents, Paris. 
Pearson, M., and S. Smith, 1991: The European carbon tax: An as-
sessment of the European Commission's proposals. Institute for 
Fiscal Studies, London. 
Peck, S., and T. Teisberg, 1993: Global warming uncertainties and 
the value of information: An analysis using CETA, Resource and 
Energy Economics, 15( I). 87-107. 
Pezzey, J.. 1992: Analysis of unilateral CO, control in the European 
Community and OECD, Energy Journal', 13(3), 159-171. 
Pillet, G., W. Hediger, S. Kypreos, and C. Corbaz, 1993: The eco-
nomics of global warming, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villagcn PS I. 
Switzerland. 
Pindyck, R., 1991: Irreversibility, uncertainty, and investment. Jour-
nal of Economic Literature, 29(3), I I 10-1148. 
Polinsky, A.M.. and S. Shavell, 1979: The optimal trade-off between 
the probability and magnitude of fines, American Economic Re-
view, 59(5), 880-891. 
Polinsky, A.M., and S. Shavell. 1982: Pigouvian taxation with ad-
ministrative costs, Journal of Public Economics, 19, 385-394. 
Poterba, J.M., 1990: Is the gasoline tax regressive? NBER Working 
Paper no. 3578, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam-
bridge. MA. 
Poterba, J.M., 1991: Tax policy to combat global warming: On de-
signing a carbon tax. Working Paper no. 3649, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, Cambridge. MA. 
Poterba, J.M., 1993: Global warming policy: A public finance per-
spective. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7(4), 47-63. 
Rajah, N., and S. Smith, 1993: Taxes, tax expenditures, and environ-
mental regulation, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 9(4), 41 - 64. 
Ranganathan, H., H.-U. Neuc, and P. Pingali, P. 1994: Global cli-
mate change: Role of rice in methane emissions and prospects 
for mitigation. International Rice Research Institute, Manila, 
March. 
Read, P.. 1994: Responding to global warming: The technology, eco-
nomics, and politics of sustainable energy, ZED Books, London. 
Reddy, A., 1993: Operational criteria for joint implementation: A re-
sponse, paper presented to the International Conference on the 
Economics of Climate Change, OECD/IEA, Paris, 14-16 June. 
Repetto, R.. 1986: Skimming and water: Rent-seeking and the per-
formance of public irrigation systems, World Resources Institute, 
Washington, DC. 
Repetto, R.. R. Dower, R. Jenkins, and J. Geoghegan, 1992: Green 
fees: How a tax shift can work for the environment and the econ-
omy, World Resources Institute, Washington, DC. 
Richels, R., and J. Edmonds. 1994: The economics of stabilizing at-
mospheric C0 2 concentrations. In Climate change: Policy in-
struments and their implications. Proceedings of the Tsukuba 
workshop of IPCC Working Group III. A. Amaro, B. Fisher, M. 
Kuroda, T. Morita, and S. Nishioka, eds., pp. 73-81, IPCC, 
Geneva. 
4JS 
Climate 
Change 
IW5 
- lieonomic 
and Social 
Dimensions 
of Climate 
Change 
Roberts, M.J., and M. S pence. 1976: Effluent charges and licenses 
under uncertainty. Journal 
of Public 
Economics, 
vol. 5. pp. 
193-208. 
Russell, C.S., 1988: Economic incentives in the management of haz-
ardous wastes. Columbia 
Journal 
of Environmental 
Law, 13, 
257-274. 
Russell, C.S., 1990: Monitoring and enforcement. In Public 
policies 
for environmental 
protection, 
P. Portney, ed., ch. 7, Johns Hop-
kins University Press, Baltimore. 
Russell, C.S., W. Harrington, and W.J. Vaughan, 1986: 
Enforcing 
pollution 
control laws, Johns Hopkins University Press. Balti-
more, Ml). 
Sandor, R., J. Cole, and E. Kelly. 1994: Study on model rules and 
regulation 
for a global 
C6>, emissions 
credit market. 
United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), 
Geneva. 
ScheniKii, J., and N. Leary. 1992: Improving the efficiency of poli-
cies to reduce CO, emissions, Energy Policy, 20(5). 394-404. 
Scherer, KM.. 1980: Industrial market structure and economic 
per-
formance. 
Rand-McNally College Publishing. Chicago. 
Schillo, B.. L. Giannarelli, D. Kelly. S. Swanson, and P. Wileoxen, 
1992: The distributional impacts of a carbon tax. drafting work-
ing paper. Energy Policy Branch, US Environmental Protection 
Agency. February. 
Schnialensee, R.. 1993: Comparing greenhouse gases for policy pur-
poses. Energy Journal, 14, 245-255. 
Schniiilensee, R.. 1994: The costs of environmental protection. In 
Balancing economic growth and environmental 
goals, M B . Ko-
lowski, ed., pp. 55-75. American Council for Capital Formation 
Center for Policy Research. Washington. DC. 
Schramm, G.. 1992: Issues and problems in the power sector of de-
veloping countries, mimeo. World Bank. Washington. DC. 
Sehenius, J.K.. 1991: Negotiating a regime to control global warm-
ing. In Creenliouse 
warming: 
Negotiating 
a global regime. R. 
Benedick. A. Chaves. D. Lashof, J. Matthews. W. Nit/.e. E. 
Richardson, J. Sehenius. P. Thachcr. and D. Wirth, eds.. pp. 
69-98. World Resources Institute. Washington. DC. 
Sedjo, P.. 
1994: Forests to capture carbon: Tradeable permit 
schemes. In Climate change: Policy instruments 
and their impli-
cations, proceedings of the Tsukuba workshop of IPCC Working 
Group III. A. Amaro. B. Fisher. M. Kuroda. T. Morita. and S. 
Nislnoka. eds.. pp. 145-154. IPCC. Geneva. 
Semeniene, I)., and A. Kundrotas. 1994: From theory to practice: 
Environmental taxes in a time of economic uncertainty, paper 
presented at the 50th Congress of the International Institute of 
Public Finance. Cambridge. MA. 
Shackleton, R.. M. Shelby. A. Cristofaro. R. Brinncr. J. Yanchar. L. 
Goulder. D. .lorgenson. P. Wileoxen. P. Pauly. and R. Kaufman. 
1992: The efficiency 
value of carbon tax revenues, mimeo. 
United States Environmental Protection Agency. Washington. 
DC. 
Shah, A., and B. Larsen. 1992: Carbon taxes, the greenhouse effect 
and developing countries. Working Paper WPS 957. Policy Re-
search Department. World Bank. Washington. DC. 
Shihata, II.. and S. Winrich. 19X3: Control of pollution when the of-
fended defend themselves. Economica. 50, 425-437. 
Sicilian. II.. 1991: A comparison of public policies for lead recycling, 
mimeo. Department o\' Economies. MIT. Cambridge. MA. No-
vember. 
Sinclair, P.. 1992: High does nothing and rising is worse: Carbon 
taxes should decline to cut harmful emissions. Manchester 
School 
of Economic ami Social Studies. 60( I ). 41-52. 
Sioshansi, !•"., I°°2: Demand side management and environmental 
externalities: Ramifications on utility resource planning, Utilities 
Policy. 2(4). 321-325. 
Smith, S„ 1992a: The distributional consequences of taxes on en-
ergy and the carbon content of fuels. In European economy: 
The 
economics of limiting CO, emissions, Special Edition no. I, Com-
mission for the European Communities, Brussels. 
Smith, S., 1992b: Distributional effects of a European carbon tax. 
Nota di Lavoro 22.92, Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei, Milan, 
Italy. 
Stavins, R.N. (ed.). 1988: Project 88 - Harnessing 
market forces to 
protect our environment: 
Initiatives for the new president, 
Public 
Policy Study sponsored by Senator Timothy E. Wirth, Colorado, 
and Senator John Heinz, Pennsylvania, Washington, DC, De-
cember. 
Stavins, R.N., (ed.), 1991: Project 88 - Round II, incentives for ac-
tion: Designing 
market-based 
environmental 
strategies, 
Public 
Policy Study sponsored by Senator Timothy E. Wirth, Colorado, 
and Senator John Heinz, Pennsylvania, Washington, DC, May. 
Stavins, R.N., 1995a: Transaction costs and tradeable permits, Jour-
nal of Environmental 
Economics and Management, 
29, 133-148. 
Stavins, R.N., 1995b: The costs of carbon sequestration: A revealed-
preference approach, working paper, John F. Kennedy School of 
Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, September. 
Stavins, R.N., 1996: Correlated uncertainty and policy instrument 
choice. Journal of Environmental 
Economics 
and 
Management, 
forthcoming. 
Stavins, R„ and B. Whitehead, 1992: Pollution charges for environ-
mental protection: A policy link between energy and environ-
ment, Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 
17, 187-
211. 
Stavins, R.N., and T. Zylicz, 1994. Environmental policy instrument 
design in a transition economy, working paper, John F. Kennedy 
School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA. 
Stewart, R.. and J. Wiener, 1992: The comprehensive approach to 
global climate policy: Issues of design and practicality, Arizona 
Journal of International 
and Comparative 
Law, 9, 85-113. 
Sutherland, R.. 1991: Market barriers to energy-efficiency invest-
ments. Energy Journal, 12(3), 15-34. 
Tahvonen, O., and J. Kuuluvainen. 1993: Economic growth, pollu-
tion and renewable resources. Journal of Environmental 
Econom-
ics and Management, 
24(2), 101-118. 
Tasman Institute, 1994: A framework 
for trading carbon 
credits 
from New Zealand's forests, Research Report No. C6, Tasman In-
stitute, Melbourne. 
Tietenherg, T. H.. 1980: Transferable discharge permits and the con-
trol of stationary source air pollution: A survey and synthesis, 
Land Economics, 56, 391-416. 
Tietenherg, T.H.. 1985: Emissions trading: An exercise in reforming 
pollution policy. Resources for the Future, Washington, DC. 
Tietenherg, T.H.. 1990: Economic instruments for environmental 
regulation. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 6(1), 17-33. 
Tietenherg, T.H.. 1992: Environmental 
and natural 
resource 
eco-
nomics. HarperCollins. New York. 
Tietenherg, T.H.. and D. Victor. 1994: Implementation issues for a 
tradeable permit approach to controlling global warming. In Cli-
mate change: Policy instruments 
and their implications, 
proceed-
ings of the Tsukuba workshop of IPCC Working Group III, A. 
Amaro. B. Fisher. M. Kuroda. T. Morita, and S. Nishioka. eds., 
pp. 155-172. IPCC. Geneva. 
Treadwell, R.. S. Thorpe, and B. Fisher. 1994: Should we have sec-
ond thoughts about "no regrets"".' The economics 
of 
climate 
change: Proceedings 
of an OECD/IEA 
Conference, 
pp. 255-272. 
OECD/IEA. Paris. 
An Economic Assessment 
of Policy Instruments for Comhatiini; Climate C'litmye 
/ . I " 
Tripp, J.T.B., and D.J. Dudek. 1989: Institutional guidelines for de-
signing successful transferable rights programs. Yale Journal of 
Regulation, 6, 369-391. 
Tschirhart, J.T., 1984: Transferable discharge permits and profit-
maximizing behavior. In Economic perspectives on acid deposi-
tion control, T.D. Crocker, ed., Butterworth Publishers. Boston. 
MA. 
Ugandan Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 1993: Re-
habilitation and development plan 1993/94-1995/96, vol. 2 -
mimeo, Priority Projects, December. 
Ulph, A., and D. Ulph, 1994: Global warming: Why irreversibility 
may not require lower current emissions of greenhouse gases. 
Discussion Paper No. 9402, Department of Economics, Univer-
sity of Southampton, Southampton, UK. 
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development), 
1992: Combating global warming: Study of a global system of 
tradeable carbon emission entitlements. United Nations, New 
York. 
U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, 1991: Changing 
by degrees: Steps to reduce greenhouse gases, OTA, Washington, 
DC. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1989: Policy options for 
stabilizing global climate, draft report to Congress, Washington, 
DC. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 1991: Economic incen-
tives: Options for environmental protection, Office of Policy, 
Planning, and Evaluation, Economic Incentives Task Force, 21P-
2001, Washington, DC, March. 
U.S. General Accounting Office, 1992: International agreements 
are not well monitored, GAO, GAO/RCED-92-43, Washington, 
DC. 
Van Slooten, R., 1994: The case of the Montreal Protocol. In Trade 
and environment: Processes and production methods, pp. 87-91, 
OECD, Paris. 
Victor, D., 1991: Limits of market-based strategies for slowing 
global warming: The case of tradeable permits, Policy Sciences, 
24(2), pp. 199-222. 
Vousden, N., 1990: The economics of trade protection, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Watson, H.. 1994: Engines of the future, paper delivered to the Soei 
ety of Automotive Engineers. 1994 Automotive Industry Outlook 
Conference, World Congress Centre. Melbourne, October (>. 
Watson, W.D.. and R.G. Ridker. 1984: Losses from effluent taxes 
and quotas under uncertainty. Journal of Environmental Econom-
ics and Management, 11,310-326. 
Weitzman, M.L., 1974: Prices vs. quantities. Review of Economies 
Studies. 41,477-491. 
Whalley, J., and R. Wigle, 1991: The international incidence of car-
bon taxes. In Global warming: Economic policy responses, R. 
Dornbusch and J. Poterba, eds.. pp. 71-97, MIT Press. Cam-
bridge, MA. 
Wirth, D.. and 0. Lashof. 1990: Beyond Vienna and Montreal 
Multilateral agreements on greenhouse gases, Ambio, 19, 305 
311. 
Woodland, A., 1982: International trade and resource allocation. 
North-Holland, Amsterdam. 
World Bank, 1990: Review of electricity tariffs in developing coun-
tries, mimeo. Industry and Energy Department, Washington. DC. 
World Bank, 1992: The bank's role in the electric power sector. 
mimeo. Washington, DC. 
World Bank, 1993: The World Bank and the environment - Eiseal 
1993, Washington, DC. 
Yohe, G., 1977: Comparisons of price and quantity controls: A sur-
vey, Journal of Comparative Economics. 1, 213-233. 
Yohe, G., 1992: Carbon emissions taxes: Their comparative advan-
tage under uncertainty, Annual Review of Energy and Environ-
ment, 17,301-326. 
Zylicz, T„ 1994a: Implementing environmental policies in Central 
and Eastern Europe. In Investing in natural capital: The ecologi-
cal economics approach to sustainability, A. Jansson, M. Ham-
mer, C. Folke, and R. Costanza, eds., Island Press, Washington. 
DC. 
Zylicz, T., 1994b: In Poland, it's time for economics, Environmental 
Impact Assessment Review, 14(2, 3), 79-94. 
Zylicz, T., 1994c: Pollution taxes as a source of budgetary revenues 
in economies in transition, paper presented at the 50th Congress 
of the International Institute of Public Finance, Cambridge, MA. 
Appendix 1 
CONTRIBUTORS TO THE IPCC WG III SECOND ASSESSMENT REPORT 
Persons who served as a lead author or contributor for one or more of the chapters of the Working Group HI contribution 
to the IPCC Second Assessment Report or to Climate Change 1994 are listed below in alphabetical order. The authors and 
contributors of each chapter are listed at the beginning of the chapter. 
A. Aaheim 
A.N. Achanta 
J.M. Alcamo 
A. Amano 
K.J. Arrow 
M. Asaduzzaman 
P.G. Babu 
T. Banuri 
S. Barrett 
P. Bohm 
A. Bouwman 
J. Byrne 
W.U. Chandler 
G. Chichilnisky 
W.R. Cline 
Z. Dadi 
O. Davidson 
H. Dowlatabadi 
J.A. Edmonds 
S. Fankhauser 
S. Faucheux 
D. Finon 
B.S. Fisher 
G. Froger 
F. Gassmann 
H. Geller 
J. Goldemberg 
K. Goran-Maler 
M. Grubb 
A. Griibler 
CICERO, University of Oslo, Norway 
University of North Carolina and Tata Energy Research Institute, India 
RIVM - National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection, Netherlands 
Kwansei Gakuin University, Japan 
Stanford University, U.S. 
Bangladesh Institute of Development Studies, Bangladesh 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, India 
Sustainable Development Policy Institute, Pakistan 
London Business School and Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Envi-
ronment (CSERGE), UK 
Stockholm University, Sweden 
RIVM - National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection, Netherlands 
University of Delaware, U.S. 
Battelle Institute, U.S. 
Columbia University, U.S. 
Institute for International Economics, U.S. 
Beijing Energy Research Institute, China 
University of Sierra Leone, Sierra Leone 
Carnegie Mellon University, U.S. 
Battelle Institute, U.S. 
Global Environment Facility, U.S. 
Universite de Versailles, France 
Institut d'Economie et de Politique de l'Energie, CNRS, Grenoble, France 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE), Australia 
Universite de Versailles, France 
Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland 
American Council for an Energy Efficient Economy, U.S. 
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Beijer International Institute of Ecological Economics. .Sweden 
The Royal Institute of International Affairs. UK 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. Austria 
442 
Appendix 1 
H.I'. Ilaites 
Margaree Consultants Inc., Canada 
K. Ilalsnies 
UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environment, RIS0 National Laboratory, 
Denmark 
W. I lediger 
Paul Scherrer Institute, Switzerland 
C. A. I lendriks 
Institute for Prospective Technologies, Spain 
M.lloel 
University of Oslo, Norway 
K. Ilogan 
Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. 
S. W. I long 
Construction and Economy Research Institute of Korea, Korea 
J.-C. I lourcade 
CIRED/CNRS, France 
M. 1 linchy 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE), Australia 
M. Jaccard 
Simon Eraser University and British Columbia Utilities Commission, Canada 
U.K. Jacobson 
University of Michigan, U.S. 
M. Jefferson 
World Energy Council, UK 
C.J. Jepma 
Open University/University of Groningen, Netherlands 
S. Kane 
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. 
S. Kavi Kumar 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, India 
A. Kolesov 
Tsentr po Effektivnomu Ispolzovanlu Energii, Russia 
I'. Krause 
International Project for Sustainable Energy Paths and Lawrence Berkeley National Labo-
ratory, U.S. 
M. Kuroda 
Keio University, Japan 
E. La Rovere 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
G. Leach 
Stockholm Environment Institute, UK 
R.S. Maya 
Southern Centre lor Energy and Environment, Zimbabwe 
P. Meier 
IDEA, Inc., U.S. 
I. Mint/.er 
University of Maryland at College Park, U.S. 
M. Al-Moneef 
King Saud University, Saudi Arabia 
WD. Montgomery 
Charles River Associates. Inc., U.S. 
T. Morita 
National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan 
J.K.E. Mubazi 
Makerere University, Uganda 
M. Munasinghe 
The World Bank and University of Colombo, Sri Lanka 
P.M. Nastari 
Fundacao Getulio Vargas and Datagro Ltda, Brazil 
R.K. Pachauri 
Tata Energy Research Institute, India 
J. Parikh 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, India 
K. Parikh 
Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, India 
E.A. Parson 
Harvard University, U.S. 
D.W. Pearce 
Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment (CSERGE), Univer-
sity College of London, United Kingdom 
S.C. Peck 
Electric Power Research Institute, U.S. 
S. A. Pegov 
Institute for Systems Studies, Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia 
G.J. Pillct 
Paul Scherrer Institute, currently ECOSYS SA, Switzerland 
A. Qureshi 
Climate Institute. U.S. 
J. Reilly 
Department of Agriculture, U.S. 
K.R. Richards 
Pacific Northwest National Laboratories, U.S. 
R. Richels 
Electric Power Research Institute, U.S. 
J.B. Robinson 
University of British Columbia, Canada 
J. Rotmans 
RIVM - National Institute of Public Health and Environmental Protection, Netherlands 
V.L. Sana 
Ministry of Housing. Land. Town, and Country Planning, Mauritius 
W. Sassin 
Forschungszentrum Jiilich. Austria 
L. Schrattenholzer 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Austria 
R. A. Sedjo 
Resources for the Future. U.S. 
R.G. Shackleton 
Environmental Protection Agency, U.S. 
A. Shah 
The World Bank, U.S. 
X. Shaoxiong 
Ministry of Power Industry. China 
PR. Shukla 
Indian Institute of Management. Ahmedabad, India 
D. Siniscalco 
Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattei, Italy 
Y. Sokona 
ENDA - TM Programme-Energie. Senegal 
R. Smiitieri 
Department of the Treasury. U.S. 
Appendix I 
44 
R.N. Stavins 
Harvard University, U.S. 
J. Stiglitz 
Council of Economic Advisors, U.S. 
P. Sturm 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, France 
C.E. Suarez 
Institute de Economia Energelica/Fundacion Bariloche, Argentina 
A. Sugandhy 
Ministry of Environment, Indonesia 
T.J. Teisberg 
Teisberg Associates, U.S. 
S. Thorpe 
Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics (ABARE), Australia 
R.S.J. Tol 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands 
A. Tudini 
ISTAT, Italy 
A. van der Veen 
University of Twente, Netherlands 
P. Vellinga 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Netherlands 
J. Weyant 
Stanford University, U.S. 
F. Yamin 
Foundation for International Environmental Law and Development, UK 
Appendix 2 
REVIEWERS OF THE IPCC WG III REPORT 
The persons named below all contributed to the peer review of the IPCC Working Group III Report. Although every at-
tempt was made by the Lead Authors to incorporate their comments, in some cases these formed a minority opinion 
which could not be reconciled with the larger consensus. Therefore, there may be persons below who still have points of 
disagreement with areas of the Report. 
ALBANIA 
II Demi raj 
Hydrometeorological Institute, Academy of Sciences 
AUSTRALIA 
.1. Daley 
T. Weii-
Business Council of Australia 
Department of Primary Industries and Energy 
AUSTRIA 
T. Balabanov 
P.V. Gilli 
I. Ismail 
B. Okogu 
Y. Sinyak 
J. van de Vate 
D. Victor 
Institute for Advanced Studies 
Institut fur Warmetechnik, TU Graz 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
International Atomic Energy Agency 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
BANGLADESH 
M. Asaduzzaman 
Bangladesh Institute of Developmental Studies 
BELGIUM 
J. Delbeke 
J. Dreze 
G. Koopman 
M. Mors 
C. Pimenta 
Commission of the European Communities 
Center for Operations Research and Econometrics 
European Commission 
European Commission 
Globe EC. 
Appendix 2 
44 
BRAZIL 
J. Moreira 
L.P. Rosa 
R. Schaeffer 
Biomass Users Network 
COPPE/UFRJ 
COPPE/UFRJ 
BULGARIA 
A. Yotova 
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
CANADA 
N. Beaudoin 
F.K. Hare 
M. Jaccard 
J. Last 
R. Pocklington 
J. Robinson 
G. Wall 
Environment Canada, Global Air Issues Branch 
University of Toronto 
Simon Eraser University 
University of Ottawa 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
University of British Columbia 
University of Waterloo 
CHILE 
E. Figueroa 
CENRE, University of Chile 
CHINA 
D. Yihui 
Chinese Academy of Meteorological Sciences 
DENMARK 
K. Halsnaes 
B. S0rensen 
UNEP Collaborating Centre on Energy and Environment, RIS0 National Laboratory 
B0skilde University, Physics Department 
FRANCE 
G. Bernier 
C. Blondin 
J.Y. Caneill 
S. Faucheux 
J.-C. Hourcade 
P. Sturm 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
METEO FRANCE 
Electricite de France, Direction des Etudes et Recherches 
Universite de Versailles 
CIRED/CNRS 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
GERMANY 
J. Blank 
H. Gottinger 
P. Henneike 
E. Jochem 
M. Leimbach 
R. Pethig 
W. Strobele 
Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat Munster 
IIEEM 
Wuppertal Institut 
Fraunhofer-Institut fur Systemtechnik und Innovationsforschung 
Potsdam-Institut for Climate Impact Research 
Universitat-Gesamthochschule Siegen 
Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat Munster 
GREECE 
D. Katochianou 
Centre of Planning and Economic Research 
HONG KONG 
W. Barron 
University of Hong Kong 
-W6 
Appendix 2 
HUNGARY 
T. Palvolgyi 
T. I a i ago 
Ministry for Environment and Regional Policy 
Ministry for Environment and Regional Policy 
INDONESIA 
K. Abdullah 
Institut Pertanian Bogor 
ITALY 
R. Brinkman 
M.Contaldi 
M. Farrell 
D. Siniscalco 
A. Tuclini 
G. Tosato 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
ENEA 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
Fondazione ENI Enrico Mattel 
ISTAT 
ENEA 
JAPAN 
N. Goto 
Y. Matshoka 
S. Mori 
Y. Tanaka 
I. Tsu/.aka 
Kanazawa University 
Faculty of Engineering, Kyoto University 
Science University of Tokyo 
Environment Agency 
GISPRI 
KKNYA 
Y. Adebayo 
United Nations Environment Programme 
LATVIA 
I. Shteinbuka 
Ministry of Finance 
MALAYSIA 
H. Chan 
Malaysian Institute of Economic Research 
MALDIVES 
A. Majeed 
Department of Meteorology 
MALI 
M. Diallo lam 
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique et Technologique 
NETHERLANDS 
K. Blok 
G. Gelauff 
J. Gupta 
C.W. Lee 
W. Lenstra 
H. Merkus 
J.B. Opschoor 
E. Tellegen 
R.S.J. Tol 
T. van der Burg 
E. van Imhoff 
H. Volleberch 
D. Wolfson 
E. Worrell 
Utrecht University 
Central Planning Bureau 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 
University of Groningen, Faculty of Economics 
Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment 
Ministry of Housing, Physical Planning and Environment 
Institute for Social Studies 
University of Amsterdam 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam 
Erasmus University 
NIDI 
Erasmus University 
Scientific Council for Government Policy 
Utrecht University 
Appendix 2 
447 
NEW ZEALAND 
P. Maclaren 
P. Read 
New Zealand Forest Research Institute 
Massey University 
NORWAY 
A. Aaheim 
O. Benestad 
L. Lorentsen 
CICERO 
University of Oslo 
Royal Ministry of Finance 
POLAND 
B. Greinert 
W. Kamrat 
M. Lissowska 
Technical University of Gdansk 
Technical University of Gdansk 
Central School of Economics 
PORTUGAL 
T. Moreira 
University of Evora 
RUSSIA 
K. Kondratyev 
Russian Academy of Sciences 
SPAIN 
V. Alcantara 
S. Lopez 
J. Pacqual 
Autonomous University of Barcelona 
Autonomous University of Barcelona 
Autonomous University of Barcelona 
SWEDEN 
B. Bolin 
P. Soderbaum 
Chairman, IPCC 
Swedish University of Economics 
SWITZERLAND 
M. Beniston 
G. Fritz 
S. Kypreos 
W. Seifritz 
R. Slooff 
N. Sundararaman 
Department of Geography, ETH-Zurich 
Paul Scherrer Institute 
Paul Scherrer Institute 
Chapfstr.4, CH-5200 Windisch 
World Health Organization 
IPCC Secretariat 
UGANDA 
J. Mubazi 
Makerere University 
UNITED KINGDOM 
N. Adger 
A. Atkinson 
S. Boehmer-Christians 
R. Booth 
N. Collins 
T. Cooper 
G. Dupont 
P. Ekins 
K. Gregory 
M. Grubb 
J. Houghton 
I. Hughes 
CSERGE 
University of Cambridge 
University of Sussex 
Shell International Petroleum Company Limited 
World Conservation Monitoring Centre 
Global Commons Institute 
Shell International Petroleum Company 
Birkbeck College, University of London 
CGS Centre for Business and the Environment 
The Royal Institute of International Affairs 
Working Group I, IPCC 
Coal Research Establishment 
44K 
Appendix 2 
M. Jefferson 
A. McCulloch 
S. Mansoob Murshed 
J. Penman 
F. Yamin 
World Energy Council 
ICI Chemicals and Polymers Limited 
Northern Ireland Economic Research Centre 
UK Department of Environment 
Foundation for International Environmental Law and Development 
UNITED STATES 
J. Ausubel 
R. Beck 
R. Borgwardt 
J. Byrne 
W.T. Christian 
R. Fngelman 
B. Flannery 
R. Ford 
D. Hall 
W. Harrison 
D. Hill 
C. Holmes 
R.O.Jones 
W. Kempton 
L. Kozak 
N. l.eary 
G. Mai land 
R. Mendelsohn 
A. Miller 
A. Olende 
D. Pearlman 
R. Promboin 
R. Schmalensee 
D. Shelor 
J. Shlaes 
T. Siddiqi 
D. Spencer 
J. de Steiguer 
M. Steinberg 
T. Teisberg 
S. Vavrik 
G. Yohe 
Rockefeller University 
Edison Electric Institute 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
University of Delaware 
ARCO 
Population Action International 
Exxon Research and Engineering Company 
Westminster College 
California State University 
Douglas Hill, P.E., PC. 
National Mining Association 
American Petroleum Institute 
University of Delaware 
Southern Company Services Inc. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Yale University 
University of Maryland 
United Nations (DPCSD) 
The Climate Council 
Amoco Corporation 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Department of Energy 
Global Climate Coalition 
East-West Center 
Simteche 
U.S. Forest Service 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
Teisberg Associates 
Yale Law School 
Wesleyan University 
VENEZUELA 
L. Perez 
Ministerio de Energia y Minas 
VIET NAM 
N. Thi Loc 
N. Van Hai 
Hydrometeorological Service 
Hydrometeorological Services 
YUGOSLAVIA 
R. Pesic 
University of Belgrade 
