 
1 
 
 
SIXTY-FIRST SESSION OF THE IPCC 
27 July – 2 August 2024, Sofia, Bulgaria 
 
Decisions adopted by the Panel  
 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 1.  Adoption of the Provisional Agenda 
Documents:  IPCC-LXI/Doc.1 and IPCC-LXI/Doc.1, Add.1  
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session adopts the Provisional 
Agenda as contained in document IPCC-LXI/Doc.1.  
 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 2.  Admission of Observer Organizations 
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 3, Rev.1 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session decides to grant the following 
organizations IPCC observer status, in accordance with the IPCC Policy and Process for Admitting 
Observer Organizations: 
1) 
Bureau international des poids et mesures (BIPM) 
2) 
Children and Youth International (CYI)  
3) 
Save the Climate 
4) 
Central American Commission on Environment and Development (CCAD) 
5) 
International Society of City and Regional Planners (ISOCARP) 
6) 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
7) 
Woodwell Climate Research Center (Woodwell) 
8) 
Wellcome Trust (Wellcome) 
9) 
West African Science Service Centre on Climate Change and Adapted Land Use (WASCAL) 
10) Human Rights and Environment Improvement Centre (HREIC) 
11) The Degrees Initiative (Degrees) 
12) Coalition Climat pour la Biodiversité et le Développement (CCBD) 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 3. Ad Hoc Group on Lessons Learned from the sixth assessment cycle 
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 9  
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session appreciates and takes note 
of the work of the Ad Hoc Group on Lessons Learned from the Sixth Assessment Cycle but also notes 
that this work does not reflect Panel consensus and the topics are indicative, not exhaustive. These 
topics may be further discussed during the seventh assessment cycle in an inclusive and transparent 
manner within the IPCC as appropriate.  
 
 
 
 
2 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 4. Matters related to other IPCC activities – IPCC Scholarship Programme    
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 8 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session agrees to the amendment of 
the IPCC Scholarship Programme Trust Deed as to the election of a Chair of the Board of Trustees, 
and accordingly requests the IPCC Secretariat to present the amendment to the Trust Deed for the 
Panel’s approval at the Sixty-second Session of the IPCC. 
 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 5. Seventh assessment report (AR7) products – Outline of the Special 
Report on Climate Change and Cities 
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 2, Rev. 1 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session decides:   
 
(1) To agree on the outline of the Special Report on Climate Change and Cities as contained in Annex 
1 to this document.  
 
(2) That the time schedule for the production of the Special Report is as follows: 
 
9 August – 20 September 2024 
 
Call for nominations of authors 
23 September – 19 December 
 
Selection of authors 
10–15 March 2025 
First Lead Author Meeting 
21–25 July 2025 
 
Second Lead Author Meeting 
17 October – 12 December 2025 
 
Expert Review of the First Order Draft 
12–16 January 2026 
Third Lead Author Meeting 
8 May – 3 July 2026 
Government and Expert Review of the Second Order 
Draft 
3–7 August 2026 
Fourth Lead Author Meeting 
11 December 2026 – 5 February 2027 
Final Government Distribution of the Final Draft and 
Government Review of the Summary for 
Policymakers 
15–19 March 2027 
Approval of the Summary for Policymakers and 
acceptance of the Special Report 
 
 
(3) That the budget for the production of the Special Report is as contained in Decision IPCC-LX-10 
on the IPCC Trust Fund Programme and Budget. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
ANNEX 1 
 
IPCC Special Report on Climate Change and Cities 
 
 
Summary for Policymakers 
Technical Summary 
 
 
Chapter 1: Cities in the context of climate change: framing of the report 
 
• 
Integrated storyline of the report, chapter narrative, sequence, and linkages to other relevant 
processes and assessments 
  
• 
Framing and defining urban systems and settlements, and their regional and climatic 
characteristics (including complex, cascading, compounding, and repeating risks) 
  
• 
Sustainable development and climate resilience, acknowledging the diversity of development 
status of cities and countries  
  
• 
Cities as hotspots of effects of hazards and emissions, losses and damages, vulnerabilities, 
exposure, and impacts, while also being key climate actors 
  
• 
Framing of multi-dimensional urban characteristics, including physical, socioeconomic and 
environmental features  
  
• 
Treatment of urban vulnerabilities, marginalized areas and people, gender, equity, informality and 
justice 
  
• 
Psychology, perception, behaviour and attitudes toward climate change and cities 
  
• 
Interconnection between local context and global context (governance, science, and climate 
change), and between urban and rural systems 
  
• 
Assessment methodologies, including following a regional approach, diverse knowledge systems 
(including Indigenous Knowledge), practitioner expertise, city networks, and considered time 
frames and spatial scales 
 
 
Chapter 2: Cities in a changing climate: trends, challenges and opportunities  
  
• 
Understanding and learning from the past (global climate, hazards, crises, socioeconomic 
developments); past, current and future global and city-specific climate (trends, means, extremes) 
 
• 
Urbanization, urban service, common and different urban development trends (population, 
demographics, informality and inequity, development stage, land use, geography, minorities and 
intersectionality, urban extent, form, path dependencies, lock-in, retreat, reconstruction, growth 
and decline, resource and carbon footprint, health and wellbeing, waste management, 
ecosystems, economy, finance and insurance, work, artificial intelligence and digitalization) 
 
• 
Urban emissions trends including consumption-based emissions; the role of cities in emissions 
and mitigation; future global and city-level scenarios, considering local options, equity, sustainable 
development, infrastructure, and informal settlements 
 
 
4 
• 
City-specific risks and their global and regional climatic impact-drivers (extremes and their 
attribution, slow-onset events, e.g., sea level rise); compounding and cascading risks; scenarios 
with and without risk reduction, adaptation, resilience building, changes in vulnerability and 
exposure across systems and sectors, including eco-systems and biodiversity, food, health and 
housing, innovative technologies/methods (measurements and models) 
  
• 
Current mitigation and adaptation, planned and unplanned relocation, losses and damages 
experienced, and the socio-economic trends that shape them, including policy, governance, 
colonization 
  
• 
Understanding the two-way interaction/feedback between cities, regions and countries, science 
behind the interactions (understanding the biophysical mechanisms); social interactions; climate 
and air quality, and other environmental changes, multi-hazard components (compounding and 
cascading hazards) 
  
• 
Data, information, tools accessibility/availability/usability/transparency  
  
• 
Uncertainties, implementation gaps, unprecedented situations 
  
• 
Complexity and the need to contextualized climate change within broader societal trends 
(geopolitical, polarizing societal trends) and goals (Sustainable Development Goals), justice, 
cascading effects on critical infrastructure 
  
  
Chapter 3: Actions and solutions to reduce urban risks and emissions 
 
• 
Common and context specific urban mitigation options for spatial planning, energy (heating, 
cooling, electricity), existing and new buildings and infrastructure, mobility and transport, water, 
land, food, demand-side measures and behavioral change and cross-sectoral, integrated 
approaches in urban systems such as circularity  
  
• 
Common and context specific urban adaptation and disaster risk reduction options for managing 
risks in natural, ecological and human systems (including but not limited to physical infrastructure, 
urban nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based adaptation, and planning and social policies 
such as relocation, health systems, early warning systems) 
  
• 
Evaluation of city actions across mitigation and adaptation, and responding to losses and 
damages such as reconstruction and rehabilitation, including lessons-learned, effectiveness and 
feasibility, mitigation measures with baseline emissions inventories and targets adopted by cities 
 
• 
Urban observation and modelling tools for monitoring and evaluation for sectors and unaccounted 
sources 
  
• 
Local risk assessments using scientific information, Indigenous Knowledge, and local knowledge 
of impacts, types and scales of adaptation responses (including positive experiences and 
outcomes, and aspects of maladaptive practices) and adaptation cycles in various regions and 
contexts 
  
• 
Integrating mitigation and adaptation into sustainable development and just transitions, planning 
approaches under and for uncertainty, synergies and trade-offs, nexus approaches, social 
innovation, climate resilient development, adaptation targets and the role of cities in net-zero 
targets 
 
• 
Metrics for assessing mitigation and adaptation options in the context of sustainable development 
and the characteristics of and within cities, including service provisioning that delivers health and 
well-being for all 
  
 
5 
• 
Case studies/best practices/stories related to climate resilient development, adaptation, 
decarbonization and low-carbon development in a diverse range of cities 
  
  
Chapter 4: How to facilitate and accelerate change 
 
• 
New ways of planning under and for uncertainty; the likelihood of tipping points  
 
• 
Providing climate and information services to enable action, including evaluation of mitigation, 
adaptation, responses to losses and damages, and the cost and benefits of action and inaction, 
and sustainable development 
 
• 
Innovation in governance, urban planning policies, decision-making, technology, urban service 
provision, energy access and shelter, infrastructure, social systems, and finance, including 
adoption of innovation, facilitation of societal trends, acknowledging the diverse capacities 
 
• 
Institutional capacities, competencies, inclusive multi-level governance 
  
• 
Indigenous Knowledge, local knowledge, diverse knowledge systems and values 
  
• 
Policies for behavioural and lifestyle changes including demand-side mitigation measures, 
education for empowerment, community engagement, social movements and communications 
  
• 
Finance, financial instruments, legal frameworks, economic and policy instruments 
  
• 
Holistic planning and systems thinking approach towards decarbonized and climate resilient cities 
  
• 
Structural inequity, gender, colonialism, and justice 
  
• 
Enabling conditions for poverty eradication, equity in just transitions 
  
• 
Political will and leadership 
  
• 
Conflicting goals and trade-offs 
  
  
Chapter 5: Solutions by city types and regions 
 
This chapter contains a synthesis of solution-relevant information and a collection of case studies by 
city types in the context of urban sustainable development, distinguished by multi-dimensional 
characteristics such as:  
 
• 
Geographical location (regions)  
 
• 
Development stage 
 
• 
Informality  
  
• 
City climate and projections 
  
• 
Climatic impact-drivers 
  
• 
Adaptation and mitigation options 
  
• 
Sectoral contributions to the economy 
 
 
6 
• 
Migration, urbanization and demographic trends  
 
• 
Fragility and conflict situations 
  
• 
Losses and damages, vulnerability, impacts and risks 
 
• 
Early warning systems 
  
• 
Capacities  
  
• 
Inclusiveness, equity and justice  
  
• 
Governance  
  
• 
Climate finance 
  
  
Annex I: Glossary  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 6. Options for Expert Meetings and Workshop for the seventh assessment 
cycle 
 
Documents: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 7; IPCC-LXI/Doc. 7, Add. 1 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session: 
 
Invites the Bureaus of the Working Groups/TFI and the IPCC Chair to bring forward proposals for Expert 
Meetings and Workshops at the Sixty-second Session of the IPCC (IPCC-62) and future IPCC sessions, 
in line with Appendix A, paragraph 7.1 of the IPCC Principles and Procedures, taking into account the 
views expressed by Member governments at the Sixty-first Session (IPCC-61) regarding document 
IPCC-LXI/Doc. 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI-7. Seventh assessment report (AR7) products – Outline of the 2027 IPCC 
Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-Lived Climate Forcers 
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 6 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session decides:  
 
(1) To prepare a Methodology Report with the following title” 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on 
Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers”; 
 
(2) To agree on the Terms of Reference for the production of a Methodology Report as contained 
in Annex 1, the Table of Contents as contained in Annex 2, the Instructions to Experts and 
Authors as contained in Annex 3, the Workplan as contained in Annex 4, each annex as attached 
to this Decision; and 
 
(3) That the budget for the production of the Methodology Report is as contained in Decision 
IPCC-LX-10 on the IPCC Trust Fund Programme and Budget. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Annex 1. Terms of Reference 
 
2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers 
Background 
1. 
At the 49th Session (IPCC-49) held in May 2019 (in Kyoto, Japan) the IPCC approved the Task Force on 
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (TFI) to produce an IPCC Methodology Report on SLCFs following 
the Appendix A to the Principles Governing IPCC Work (Decision IPCC-XLIX-7). 
2. 
IPCC TFI carried out preparatory work including Expert Meetings1 during the AR6 cycle. The Scoping 
Meeting produced the draft Table of Contents, which is outlined in Annex 2.  
Scope 
3. 
The new Methodology Report will provide guidance on SLCF emissions which are: 
- Anthropogenic, not including secondary human-induced substances 
- National 
- Annual 
- Reported in mass units for each individual emitted species. 
4. 
Coverage: 
- Taking into account that this work aims to cover all IPCC inventory sectors with categories where the 
science is assessed to be robust enough to provide guidance for a Tier 1 methodological approach 
and have a relative contribution to the global/regional emissions of the species, species2 assessed 
and potentially covered by the new Methodology Report will be NOX, CO, NMVOCs, SO2, NH3, BC 
and OC, as well as emissions of primary particulate matter relevant for radiative forcing, as 
appropriate.  
- Methane and halogenated species under Montreal Protocol and Kigali Amendment will not be 
covered since these are already addressed by the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines), the 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for 
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (Wetlands Supplement) and the 2019 Refinement 
to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2019 Refinement). 
- For NMVOCs, the methodology should provide estimates for total NMVOCs. The speciation of 
NMVOCs should be considered by authors, as appropriate. 
- Anthropogenic emissions3 only, where anthropogenic refers to emissions from human activities and 
from managed4 land. 
- Sources covered are those of anthropogenic emissions, where scientific evidence is available; while 
for others, guidance could be provided as a basis for future methodological development. 
- Geographical and temporal coverage is national and annual level, and authors should also consider 
guidance on spatial and temporal disaggregation of SLCF emissions. 
5. 
Key elements: 
- Structure: Information on each sector will be synthesised into a single document (a volume for each 
of the inventory sectors: Energy, Industrial Process and Product Use (IPPU), Agriculture, Forestry 
and Other Land Use (AFOLU), Waste. There will also be a volume on cross-cutting issues, including 
reporting tables). 
 
 
 
1  The Joint 1st and 2nd IPCC Expert Meeting on SLCFs: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/mtdocs/2110_SLCF.html 
   The 3rd IPCC Expert Meeting on SLCFs: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/mtdocs/2204_SLCF_EM3.html 
2  Given the uncertainties in the radiative forcing of H2 and taking note that H2 has not yet been well assessed as a climate forcer by IPCC 
WGI, H2 emissions relevant for radiative forcing are to be considered by the authors as an Appendix subtitled “Basis for future 
methodological development” subject to the IPCC’s Principles and Procedures on review and adoption. 
3  as defined in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines), the 2013 Supplement to the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands (Wetlands Supplement) and the 2019 Refinement to the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2019 Refinement). 
4   land where human interventions and practices have been applied to perform production, ecological or social functions. 
 
10 
- Content of cross-cutting guidance: The volume for cross-cutting issues will include: introduction5, with 
guidance on SLCF species and definitions, approaches to data collection6; uncertainties; 
methodological choice and identification of key categories; time series consistency; quality 
assurance/quality control (QA/QC) and verification; and reporting guidance and tables. 
- Content of sectoral guidance: The volumes for each sector will include tiered methodological 
approaches; decision trees; methods and emission factors, where appropriate; cross-references as 
necessary to avoid double counting or omissions of emissions; sector-specific guidance on 
uncertainty assessment and QA/QC; and reporting and documentation guidance. 
Approach 
6. 
The result of the work will be an IPCC Methodology Report “2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories 
for Short-lived Climate Forcers”. 
7. 
The authors will ensure consistency with categories and build on the   methodological guidance within the 
2006 IPCC Guidelines, Wetlands Supplement and 2019 Refinement.  
8. 
The authors will follow “Instructions to Experts and Authors” presented in Annex 3 to ensure a consistent 
and coherent approach across all the volumes and chapters, including the use of common terminology. 
9. 
Importantly, the authors will provide guidance based on the good practice7 guidance definition and the 
structured tiered approach described in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, Wetlands Supplement and 2019 
Refinement.  
10. The production of the Methodology Report will be completed in 2027 as noted in the work plan in Annex 4 
following Decision IPCC-LX-9. 
 
 
 
5  considering the importance for climate effects of spatial distribution and temporal resolution of SLCF emissions, and changes in co- 
emitted species 
6  including generic methods of measurements, approaches to estimate BC/OC, including on techniques of measurement and all variables 
used to derive emission factors, NMVOC speciation, spatial distribution and temporal resolution, technology, and abatement information. 
7 "Good practice" is a key concept for inventory compilers to follow in preparing national greenhouse gas inventories. The key concept does not change 
in the 2019 Refinement. The term "good practice" has been defined, since 2000 when this concept was introduced, as "a set of procedures intended to 
ensure that greenhouse gas inventories are accurate in the sense that they are systematically neither over- nor underestimates so far as can be judged, 
and that uncertainties are reduced so far as practicable". This definition has gained general acceptance amongst countries as the basis for inventory 
development and its centrality has been retained for the 2019 Refinement. Certain terms in the definition have been updated based on feedback from 
the statistics community, such that this definition can be also understood as "a set of procedures intended to ensure that greenhouse gas inventories are 
accurate in the sense that they are systematically neither over- nor underestimates so far as can be judged, and that they are precise so far as 
practicable" in the context of refinement of Chapter 3 of Volume 1. 
Good Practice covers choice of estimation methods appropriate to national circumstances, quality assurance and quality control at the national level, 
quantification of uncertainties and data archiving and reporting to promote transparency. 
 
 
 
11 
Annex 2. Table of Contents 
 
2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers 
 
Overview 
Volume 1. General Guidance 
 
Introduction  
(including, but not limited to: Background on SLCFs and their importance for climate, Key differences 
between SLCFs and GHGs emissions, Holistic approaches to SLCFs and the importance of co-emitted 
species, Spatial distribution and temporal resolution and relevance to climate effects, Interlinkages with 
meteorology, Importance of technologies and abatement technologies) 
 
Approaches to Data Collection  
(including, but not limited to: Spatial distribution and temporal resolution, Measurement techniques, 
NMVOC speciation, Technologies and Abatement technologies) 
 
Uncertainties 
 
Methodological Choice and Identification of Key Categories 
(including, but not limited to KCA by SLCF species, Issues of co-emitted species in SLCF KCA) 
 
Timeseries consistency 
(including, but not limited to: Addressing changes in measurement techniques, Addressing changes in 
technologies, including for abatement) 
 
QA/QC and Verification 
(including, but not limited to: Consistency with co-emitted GHGs and SLCFs, Comparison with 
global/regional inventories, Comparisons with atmospheric observations and models) 
 
Reporting guidance and Tables  
Volume 2. Energy Sector 
 
Introduction 
 
Stationary combustion  
 
Mobile combustion 
 
Fugitive Emissions 
 
Other  
Volume 3. IPPU Sector 
 
Introduction 
 
Mineral Industry 
 
Chemical Industry 
 
Metal Industry 
 
Non-Energy products from fuels and Solvent Use 
 
Other  
Volume 4. AFOLU Sector 
 
Introduction 
 
Generic methodologies 
 
Consistent representation of land 
 
Emissions from Livestock and Manure Management 
 
Land use categories 
 
Managed soil8 
 
Other  
Volume 5. Waste Sector 
 
Introduction 
 
Solid Waste Disposal 
 
Biological Treatment of Solid Waste 
 
Incineration and Open Burning of Waste 
 
Wastewater Treatment and Discharge 
 
Other 
 
 
 
 
8 As expanded by the Wetlands Supplement guidance/categorization 
 
12 
Annex 3.  Instructions to Experts and Authors 
 
2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers 
 
1. 
Work on a 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers will be guided by 
the IPCC procedures for the Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Adoption, Approval and Publication of the 
IPCC Reports (Appendix A to the Principles Governing the IPCC Work9). This document is consistent with 
the IPCC procedures and applies to all experts engaged in the production of a new Methodology Report.  
2. 
In this document the term “experts” covers Co-Chairs, members of the TFI Bureau (TFB), technical support 
unit (TSU) Staff, Coordinating Lead Authors (CLAs), Lead Authors (LAs), and Review Editors (REs) as well 
as Contributing Authors (CAs) and Expert Reviewers. 
3. 
These notes are intended as guidance to experts contributing to a new Methodology Report. They are 
intended to ensure a consistent and coherent approach across all the volumes or chapters and to promote 
common terms used. 
Confidentiality 
4. 
Authors meetings are closed meetings. Any discussions are confidential except for any published report of 
the meeting. This is to ensure that experts participating in the meetings can express themselves and discuss 
issues freely and openly. 
5. 
The IPCC considers the drafts of a new Methodology Report, prior to acceptance, to be pre-decisional, 
provided in confidence to reviewers, and not for public distribution, quotation or citation. 
6. 
The TSU will keep drafts of a new Methodology Report sent for the IPCC review, any comments received 
on them and the responses by authors. All written expert and government review comments will be made 
available to reviewers on request. These will be made available on the IPCC website as soon as possible 
after the acceptance by the Panel and the finalisation of the report.  
Conflict of Interest 
7. 
It is important that all experts involved in the IPCC activities avoid any conflict of interest or the direct and 
substantial appearance of a conflict of interest. It is recognised that many experts in Emission Inventories 
are employed by, or funded by, parties with some interest in the outcome (e.g. most inventory compilers 
are funded by national governments or industry). It is therefore important to be open and transparent about 
financial and other interests. 
8. 
The IPCC implements a Conflict of Interest (COI) Policy10  that applies to all individuals directly involved in 
the preparation of IPCC reports, including senior IPCC leadership (IPCC Chair and Vice-Chairs), other 
Bureau and Task Force Bureau members, authors with responsibilities for report content (CLAs, LAs), 
Review Editors and staff of the TSU. The overall purpose of this policy is to protect the legitimacy, integrity, 
trust, and credibility of the IPCC and of those directly involved in the preparation of reports, and its activities.  
9. 
Before an individual is appointed as a CLA, LA and RE for a new Methodology Report, the TFB will request 
the individual to complete a Conflict of Interest Disclosure Form (“the COI Form”) contained in Annex B to 
the COI Policy which will be submitted to the TSU. The TFB will then evaluate the form to determine whether 
the individual has a conflict of interest that cannot be resolved. 
10. All CLAs, LAs and REs will inform the TSU annually of any changes in the information provided in their 
previously submitted COI Form. The TFB will evaluate the revised information. 
11. All COI Forms and any records of the deliberations of the COI Expert Advisory Group, deliberations and/or 
decisions of the COI Committee in relation to conflict of interest issues in respect of specific individuals and 
any information disclosed by individuals for the purposes of the COI Policy will be transferred to the 
Secretariat after they have been reviewed and will be securely archived by the Secretariat and retained for 
a period of five years after the end of the assessment cycle during which the relevant individual contributed, 
after which the information will be destroyed. Subject to requirement to notify the existence of a conflict of 
interest to others, the information referred to above will be considered confidential and will not be used for 
any purpose other than consideration of conflict of interest issues under these Implementation Procedures 
without the express consent of the individual providing the information. 
 
 
 
9 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/09/ipcc-principles-appendix-a-final.pdf 
10 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/09/ipcc-conflict-of-interest-2016.pdf 
 
13 
Responsibilities of authors and other experts 
12. The role of authors is to impartially assess ALL the available literature and to describe the best 
methodologies available. Experts should be impartial. Authors should review all literature available up to a 
cut-off date to be decided by the TFB as part of the agreed work plan. 
13. After drafting the report authors will be asked to consider all comments received on the drafts and to adjust 
and revise the text accordingly. They should document their responses. If they do not accept a comment 
this should be explained. Review Editors should check whether the accepted changes were fully 
incorporated in the revised text. 
14. Responsibilities and duties of authors and other experts are currently explained in more detail in the IPCC 
procedures for the Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Adoption, Approval and Publication of the IPCC 
Reports (Appendix A to the Principles Governing the IPCC Work). 
Literature 
15. The use of literature should be open and transparent. In the drafting process, emphasis is to be placed on 
the assurance of the quality of all cited literature. Priority should be given to peer-reviewed scientific, 
technical and socio-economic literature if available. 
16. It is recognized that other sources provide crucial information for IPCC Reports. These sources may include 
reports from governments, industry, and research institutions, international and other organizations, or 
conference proceedings. Use of this literature brings with it an extra responsibility for the author teams to 
ensure the quality and validity of cited sources and information as well as providing an electronic copy. In 
general, newspapers and magazines are not valid sources of scientific information. Blogs, social networking 
sites, and broadcast media are not acceptable sources of information for IPCC Reports. Personal 
communications of scientific results are also not acceptable sources. 
17. For any sources written in a language other than English, an executive summary or abstract in English is 
required. 
18. All sources will be integrated into a reference section of an IPCC Report. 
19. For more details of the procedure on the use and referencing of literature in IPCC Reports, see Annex 2 to 
the IPCC procedures for the Preparation, Review, Acceptance, Adoption, Approval and Publication of the 
IPCC Reports (Appendix A to the Principles Governing the IPCC Work). 
Principles of the new Methodology Report 
20. Guidance in the new Methodology Report should be understandable and easy to implement. Lead authors 
should make efforts to balance the need to produce a comprehensive self-contained report with reasonable 
limits to the length and detail of the guidance. In particular: 
a. 
The guidance should follow a cookbook approach by providing clear step by step instructions. It 
should not try to be a textbook. Detailed background information on emission processes, scientific 
studies, etc. is generally referenced rather than included.  
b. 
Lead authors must consider relevant scientific developments and national methods used by countries 
in their inventories. 
c. 
Authors should bear in mind that the target audience is a diverse group of readers who are primarily 
concerned with the elaboration of national inventories.  For this reason, the emphasis should be on 
ensuring clear communication of practical and understandable guidance. 
21. This work aims to cover all IPCC inventory sectors with categories where the science is considered to be 
robust enough to provide guidance for a Tier 1 methodological approach and have a relative11 contribution 
to the global/regional emissions of the species, using the significance and prioritization criteria as shown 
below. 
Significance and prioritization criteria 
• 
Significance of the category and the species within the sector on a global/regional scale. Categories 
significant only for a limited number of particular countries, currently or in the foreseeable future, 
may not meet this criterion. 
• 
Sufficient data availability and maturity of scientific advances to provide a basis for methodological 
development, including: 
o 
Ability to develop default emission factors and parameters 
o 
Feasibility of obtaining the necessary data to implement the methods 
 
 
11 i.e. not insignificant 
 
14 
22. The general structure, approach and definitions used in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, such as tiered approach 
and decision trees will be followed. Annexes may be used where necessary to contain additional data to 
support the methodologies, although large numbers of annexes will probably not be necessary. Appendices 
are not ruled out where scientific knowledge is insufficient for countries to agree full methodologies, but 
please avoid as far as possible work on areas that have to be relegated to an appendix. Appendices should 
be sub-titled by “Basis for future methodological development”.  
Definitions 
23. The following terms will be used throughout the new Methodology Report, and it is essential that all Lead 
Authors have a common understanding of their meaning and relevance. 
24. Tier A Tier refers to a description of the overall complexity of a methodology and its data requirements. 
Higher tier methods are generally more complex and data-intensive than lower tier methods. The guidance 
for each category should contain at least a Tier 1 method, and in many cases there will be a Tier 2 and Tier 
3. The general expectation is that Tier 2 and Tier 3 methods will both be consistent with good practice 
guidance for key sources, although in some cases Tier 3 will be preferred. 
25. Tier 1 approaches are simple methods that can be applied by all countries in all circumstances. Default 
values for the emission factors and any other parameters needed must be supplied (see below for 
documentation needed).  
26. Tier 2 methods should in principle follow the same methodological approach as Tier 1 but allow for higher 
resolution country specific emissions factors and activity data. In some categories, this may not be the case. 
These methods should better replicate the parameters affecting the emissions. Country specific emission 
factors are needed and possibly more parameters will also be needed.  
27. Tier 3 methods give flexibility either for country specific methods including modelling or direct measurement 
approaches, or for a higher level of disaggregation, or both. This is a more complex method, often involving 
a model. This will replicate many features of nation emissions and require specific parameters for each 
country. 
28. Default information is data that is appropriate for use where there is no better detailed, country specific 
information. If appropriate, authors may specify regional default data. Users of the guidelines should be 
encouraged to try to find better country specific data. Default data are appropriate for Tier 1 methods and 
the guidelines should contain all the default values needed. Emission factors for higher tiers need not be 
specified because it is a function of higher tier methods to find data reflecting national circumstances. 
Default information is included primarily to provide users with a starting point from which they can develop 
their own national assumptions and data. Indeed, national assumptions and data are always preferred 
because the default assumptions and data may not always be appropriate for specific national contexts. In 
general, therefore, default assumptions and data should be used only when national assumptions and data 
are not available. 
29. Decision Trees. A decision tree is a graphical tool to assist countries in selecting from the IPCC methods.   
30. Key categories are inventory categories which individually, or as a group of categories (for which a 
common method, emission factor and activity data are applied) are prioritised within the national inventory 
system because their estimates have a significant influence on a country’s total inventory in terms of the 
absolute level, the trend, or the level of uncertainty in emissions. Key category analysis should be performed 
species by species. The appropriate threshold to define key categories should be considered by authors. 
31. Sector refers to the four sectors of the guidelines (Energy; Industrial Process and Product Use (IPPU); 
Agriculture, Forests and Other Land Use (AFOLU) and Waste) these are divided into categories and 
subcategories. 
a. 
Sector 1 
b. 
Category 1.A 
c. 
Sub-category 1st order 1.A.1 
d. 
Sub-category 2nd order 1.A.1.a 
e. 
Sub-category 3rd order, 1.A.1.a.i 
32. Worksheets. These will be printed versions of spreadsheet tables, that, when filled in, enable the user to 
perform the emission estimation. They should contain all the calculations and written text with any formulae. 
Additional worksheets may be required to compile the results of the worksheets into the reporting tables.  
33. Reporting Tables are tables that present the calculated emission inventory and sufficient detail of other 
data used to prepare the inventories for others to understand the emission estimates. 
 
 
 
 
15 
34. Usage:  
a. “Good Practice” is defined in the 2019 Refinement as follows: “a key concept for inventory compilers 
to follow in preparing national greenhouse gas inventories. The key concept does not change in the 
2019 Refinement. The term "good practice" has been defined, since 2000 when this concept was 
introduced, as "a set of procedures intended to ensure that greenhouse gas inventories are accurate 
in the sense that they are systematically neither over- nor underestimates so far as can be judged, 
and that uncertainties are reduced so far as practicable". This definition has gained general 
acceptance amongst countries as the basis for inventory development and its centrality has been 
retained for the 2019 Refinement. Certain terms in the definition have been updated based on 
feedback from the statistics community, such that this definition can be also understood as "a set of 
procedures intended to ensure that greenhouse gas inventories are accurate in the sense that they 
are systematically neither over- nor underestimates so far as can be judged, and that they are precise 
so far as practicable" in the context of refinement of Chapter 3 of Volume 1”.  
The concept mentioned above should be applied to all species dealt with in this report. 
b. Good Practice covers choice of estimation methods appropriate to national circumstances, quality 
assurance and quality control at the national level, quantification of uncertainties and data archiving 
and reporting to promote transparency. 
c. 
“Shall” should not be used. Either say “Good Practice is…” or say what needs to be done or what 
should be done. These all indicate what needs to be done to comply with Good Practice. 
d. 
"Be encouraged to" indicates a step or activity that will lead to higher quality inventory but are not 
required for ensuring consistency with the IPCC Guidelines.  
e. 
“Recommend” should not be used. In the GPG2000, the word “recommend” was avoided and 
“Suggested” was used instead. 
f. 
“Inventory agency” is the body responsible for actually compiling the inventory, perhaps from 
contributions from a number of other bodies while “inventory compiler” is the person actually 
compiling the inventory, 
Reporting Tables and worksheets 
35. Worksheets reflect the application of tier 1 methods only, due to the varied implementation of higher tier 
methods by countries. Lead authors should stress the importance of documentation and archiving of 
particular types of information of relevance to each category, although advice may be given of what needs 
to be reported for transparency at higher Tiers. 
Emission factors and methods 
36. Authors should provide default emission factors and parameters. In doing this work, they should draw on 
the widest possible range of available literature, scientific articles and country reports. 
37. All data reported in the guidance as IPCC default values shall be justified by authors by providing TSU with 
all background data used, and the source of those data, as well as all information on the method applied to 
derive the default values from the background data, as needed to replicate the calculation, in a timely 
manner as drafts are being developed. Background data should be compiled in the attached form (Appendix 
1) to facilitate the upload in the Emission Factor Database (EFDB).  Lead authors should be familiar with 
the draft cross-cutting guidance on data collection in Volume 1 and the guidance on cross-cutting issues in 
this note on terms, data types, data demands of methods and stratification requirements.  Default data 
should also meet the EFDB evaluation criteria – robustness, documentation, and applicability12.   
38. Authors should develop guidance to provide additional information on rationale, references and background 
information on parameters used for estimating of default values where such information is available (similar 
to Annexes in Chapter 10, Volume 4, of the 2019 Refinement), with a view to enhancing the transparency 
and applicability of default values presented in the new Methodology Report. 
39. Single IPCC default emission factors might not be ideal for any one country, but they can be recommended 
provided that regional factors are unavailable, and the defaults are representative of typical conditions as 
far as can be determined.  It may be necessary or appropriate to provide a range of default emission factors 
along with clear guidance about how countries should select from within the range. Lead authors may also 
provide multiple default emission factors, disaggregated by region, technology (including abatement 
technologies), or another relevant classification scheme. 
40. It is important to provide more default emission factors that reflect the unique conditions of developing 
countries. In general, default emission factors for Tier 1 should represent emissions without category-
specific mitigation measures, as well as relevant abatement technologies for which data are available. 
 
 
12 EFDB evaluation criteria: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/EFDB/documents/EFDB_criteria.pdf 
 
16 
41. Users of the guidelines should be encouraged to develop and use country specific data. Emission factors 
for higher tiers need not be specified in the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived 
Climate Forcers. Default information is included primarily to provide users with a starting point from which 
they can develop their own national assumptions and data. Indeed, national assumptions and data are 
always preferred because the default assumptions and data may not always be appropriate for specific 
national contexts. 
42. The basic principle concerning national methods will continue to apply – countries are encouraged to use 
national data or methods so long as they are consistent with the IPCC Guidelines. 
43. Authors shall prefer IPCC methods applied to estimate GHG emissions when those can be straightforwardly 
applied to estimate SLCF emissions as well as when those can be applied mutatis mutandis. The use of 
consistent methodologies allows inventory-compilers to use the same datasets for both sets of estimates. 
This is to enhance efficiency in the use of resources available to inventory-compilers and thus to promote 
accuracy of estimates. 
44. Where the method applied for SLCF differs from that applied to estimate GHG emissions from the same 
source, or the source is not covered in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, in addition to methodological guidance, 
guidance on activity data sources available at international level, and where possible at national level, will 
be provided. 
45. Authors should note the issue of double-counting, for example in the Energy sector the IPCC default method 
for combustion assumes an Oxidation Factor equal to 1 resulting in all carbon calculated as CO2, while the 
addition of SLCF methods will require to estimate also other carbon compounds (CH4, CO, NMVOC and 
BC/OC). Authors should provide guidance to inventory compilers on how to address the issue of double-
counting. 
46. For BC/OC emissions, authors should provide guidance, including on techniques of measurement and all 
variables used to derive emission factors. 
47. In considering the methodologies for SLCF emissions in the AFOLU sector, authors should not include 
natural background emissions from land as these are not considered to be anthropogenic. 
Boxes 
48. Consistent with the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, the new Methodology Report may contain Boxes, which 
should not be used to provide methodological guidance, but for information purposes or providing 
examples. 
Decision trees 
49. Consistent with the format and structure of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, the new Methodology Report may 
contain a decision tree for some sub-categories to assist countries in selecting from the IPCC methods. 
These decision trees link the choice of IPCC methods to national circumstances via specific questions about 
data availability and status as a key category13.  
50. To ensure consistency in decision tree logic and format across categories, lead authors should adhere to 
the following requirements: 
a. 
The decision trees should be based on a series of questions with clear yes/no answers, and two 
subsequent branches along yes/no paths.   
b. 
The decision trees should start with assessing data availability for the highest tier method, and then 
direct countries step-wise towards lower tier methods if activity data, emission factors or other 
parameters are not available.   
c. 
The decision tree should indicate the lowest tier method that is judged to be appropriate for estimating 
emissions from a key category. 
d. 
If data are not available for the method referred to in c, the ‘No’ response should direct the reader to 
the question “Is this a key category?”  If the answer to this is ‘Yes’, the decision tree should 
recommend that the country collect the necessary data to implement a higher tier method.  If the 
answer is ‘No’, then the decision tree can recommend a lower tier method. There is no need to deal 
with the case for a key source where a country does not have the resources to gather additional data 
needed to implement higher Tier methods. This is dealt with in Volume 1 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines.  
e. 
The branches of the decision trees should end in ‘out-boxes’ that correspond to specific tiers identified 
in the guidance for that category and are labelled by Tier.  Lead authors may also recommend out-
boxes for hybrid tiers. 
 
 
13 The most appropriate choice of estimation method (or tier) may also depend on national circumstances, including the availability of 
resources and advice on this will be given in the cross-cutting volume. 
 
17 
 
f. 
Lead authors may develop separate decision trees for different sub-categories.  Alternatively, they 
may include decision tree options for selecting different tiers for different sub-categories.  This second 
option is appropriate if it is advantageous to recommend a higher tier method only for significant sub-
categories rather than for the entire category. Decision trees that use the ‘significance’ criterion 
must include the “25-30% rule”14, as reassessed by authors.  
51. Additional Formatting Guidelines (see example): 
a. 
Decision trees should be drafted in separate files. The TSU will integrate these files into the main text 
at a later date. 
b. 
Decision trees should NOT ask the question: “Does this source occur in the country?” This is because 
decision trees will only be used for sources which occur.  
c. 
There should be a “START” box. 
d. 
“Diamonds” should be used for questions/decisions. 
e. 
“Squares” should be used for all other information. 
f. 
The out-boxes should be individually numbered. 
g. 
The text font should be Times New Roman 10pt. 
h. 
Text should be centred within the boxes. 
 
14 As defined in the 2019 Refinement (i.e., a significant sub-category is one that makes up more than 25-30% of emissions from a category). 
 
18 
Example. Decision tree for estimating emissions from fuel combustion  
      (Figure 1.2 Chapter 1 Volume 2 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines) 
 
 
 
19 
Units 
52. SI units shall be used throughout: in text, equations, worksheets and tables.  Emissions have to be 
expressed in mass units and units have to be used consistently within each sector. When similar activity 
data is used for different sectors same units need to be used (CLAs have to take care about such 
harmonisation). Conversion factors have to be provided (for example to estimate N2O from N). Where input 
data available may not be in SI units conversions should be provided. 
53. Standard abbreviations for units and chemical compounds are given in Appendix 2.  
 
20 
Appendix 1. EFs and parameters Documentation 
 
This form should be used to document all EFs and parameters used in the new Methodology Report. This gives 
the minimum information that should be considered by the authors. 
 
Author1 
  
IPCC Category 
  
Name of EFs / parameters 
 
Activity, e.g. Fuel2 in the Energy 
Sector 
  
 Species3: 
 CO 
NOx 
 … 
… 
… 
Value: 
 
 
 
 
 
Unit: 
 
 
 
 
 
Uncertainty (as +/% or 2.5 and 
97.5 percentiles )4 
 
 
 
 
 
Applicability5 – fill in as necessary 
if data not generally applicable. 
Describe appropriate 
Technologies, Practices, 
Abatement Technologies, Region, 
and/or Regional Conditions 
  
Source of data (chose one) 
Measurement - Scientific Literature 
Other Measurement 
National Inventory Report 
Calculated 
Based on fuel quality  
Expert Judgement6 
Method of derivation of the value 
(e.g., arithmetic mean, weighted 
mean, adjustment of a literature 
data by expert judgment etc. 
 
Reference7 
  
URL 
 
Abstract in English (if the abstract 
is in another language) 
 
 
Note: 
1. 
The author is the LA/CA/CLA who writes the relevant section and proposes the data. 
2. 
Fuels as defined in the Energy volume of the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-
lived Climate Forcers 
3. 
Add additional species as required 
4. 
As defined by cross-cutting volume 
5. 
Only to be completed where it is necessary to specify the applicability of the data 
6. 
Attach the elicitation protocol 
7. 
As reference to document, report, calculation or if expert judgement to those involved (Names or group 
e.g. “Waste BOG on Solid Waste Disposal Sites”) with DOI, where possible 
 
21 
Appendix 2. Units and Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviations of, and how to spell, chemical species 
BC 
 
Black Carbon 
CCl4 
 
Carbon tetrachloride 
CF4 
 
Tetrafluoromethane 
C2F6 
 
Hexafluoroethane 
CFCs 
 
Chlorofluorocarbons 
CH4 
 
Methane 
CO 
 
Carbon monoxide 
CO2 
 
Carbon dioxide 
EC 
 
Elemental Carbon 
H2 
 
Hydrogen 
HFCs 
 
Hydrofluorocarbons 
NH3 
 
Ammonia 
NMVOCs 
 
Non-methane volatile organic compounds 
NOX 
 
Nitrogen oxides 
N2O 
 
Nitrous oxide15  
OC 
 
Organic Carbon 
PFCs 
 
Perfluorocarbons 
PMx 
 
 Particulate Matter (x – micrometres) 
S 
 
Sulphur 
SF6 
 
Sulphur hexafluoride 
SO2 
 
Sulphur Dioxide 
 
 
 
15 In the IUPAC N2O is officially named “Dinitrogen Oxide”. However, “nitrous oxide” is widely used and understood in the emission inventory 
community and by the UNFCCC and so, to avoid confusion, will be used.   
 
22 
Units and abbreviations 
cubic metre 
 
m3 
hectare 
 
ha 
gram 
 
g 
gigagram 
 
Gg 
tonne 
 
t 
gigatonne 
 
Gt 
joule 
 
J 
degree Celsius 
 
℃ 
calorie 
 
cal 
year 
 
Yr 
capita 
 
Cap 
gallon 
 
gal 
dry matter 
 
Dm 
atmosphere 
 
atm 
 
Prefixes and multiplication factors  
Multiplication Factor 
Abbreviation 
Prefix 
Symbol 
1 000 000 000 000 000 1015 
peta 
P 
1 000 000 000 000 
1012 
tera 
T 
1 000 000 000 
109 
giga 
G 
1 000 000 
106 
mega 
M 
1 000 
103 
kilo 
k 
100 
102 
hecto 
h 
10 
101 
deca 
da 
0.1 
10-1 
deci 
d 
0.01 
10-2 
centi 
c 
0.001 
10-3 
milli 
m 
0.000 001 
10-6 
micro 
μ 
 
 
 
 
23 
Standard equivalents  
1 tonne of oil equivalent 
(toe) 
 
1 x 1010 calories 
103 toe 
 
41.868 TJ 
1 short ton 
 
0.9072 tonne 
1 tonne 
 
1.1023 short tons 
1 tonne 
 
1 megagram 
1 kilotonne 
 
1 gigagram 
1 megatonne 
 
1 teragram 
1 gigatonne 
 
1 petagram 
1 kilogram 
 
2.2046 lbs 
1 hectare 
 
104 m2 
1 calorieIT 
 
4.1868 joule 
1 atmosphere 
 
101.325 kPa 
 
 
 
24 
Annex 4. Workplan 
 
2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-lived Climate Forcers 
 
Date 
Action 
Comments 
February 2024 
Scoping Meeting 
Prepare ToR, ToC, Workplan and Guidance to authors 
February 2024 
TFB36 Meeting 
Adoption of Outcomes of the Scoping Meeting and 
Submission to IPCC 
3rd quarter 2024 
IPCC-61 
IPCC Plenary approves ToR, ToC, Workplan and 
Guidance to authors 
3rd quarter 2024 
Call for Nomination of Authors 
and Review Editors 
IPCC invites nominations from governments and 
international organizations 
3rd quarter 2024 
Establishment of the Steering 
Committee 
TFB select members to join TFI Co-Chairs in the 
Steering Group (to ensure consistency across all the 
volumes and continuity with the earlier IPCC inventory 
reports) 
4th quarter 2024 
Selection of Coordinating 
Lead Authors, Lead Authors 
and Review Editors 
Selection by TFB considering expertise and 
geographical and gender balance 
1st half 2025 
1
st Lead Author Meetings  
LAM1 to develop zero order draft (ZOD) 
2nd half 2025 
2
nd Lead Author Meeting 
To develop first order draft (FOD) for review 
1st quarter 2026 
(8 weeks) 
Expert Review 
8 weeks review by experts 
1st half 2026 
Science Meeting 
A small meeting of CLAs and some LAs to discuss 
specific issues that require intensive discussion to 
reinforce the writing process 
1st half 2026 
3
rd Lead Author Meeting 
To consider comments and produce second order draft 
(SOD) for review 
2nd half 2026 
Literature cut-off date (one 
week before SOD Review) 
Peer-reviewed papers accepted by the cut-off date 
(even if not yet published) will be considered. Non-peer-
reviewed documents which are made publicly available 
by the cut-off date. 
2nd half 2026 
(8 weeks) 
Government & Expert Review 
8 weeks review by governments and experts 
1st half 2027 
4
th Lead Author Meeting 
To consider comments and produce final draft (FD) 
1st half 2027 
Government Review  
Distribute to governments for their consideration prior to 
approval (at least 4 weeks prior to the Panel) 
2nd half 2027 
Adoption/acceptance by IPCC 
Final draft submitted to IPCC Panel for 
adoption/acceptance 
2nd half 2027 
Publication 
Electronic means 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI-8.  Approval of the Draft report of the Sixtieth Session of the IPCC  
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 11, Rev.2 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session approves the report of the 
Sixtieth Session of the IPCC, as contained in document IPCC-LXI/Doc.11, Rev.2.   
 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI- 9. Strategic Planning Schedule for the seventh assessment cycle 
 
Documents: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 10; IPCC-LXI/INF. 15 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session:   
 
(1) Notes the document IPCC-LXI/Doc.10 submitted by the IPCC Chair and document IPCC-
LXI/INF.15 prepared by the Co-Chairs of the Working Groups and TFI. 
 
(2) Recalling the Decision IPCC-LX-9 and in accordance with paragraph 4.1 of Appendix A of the 
Principles governing the work of the IPCC, based on the reports of the scoping meetings of the 
Working Group and Task Force on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories reports, the Panel will 
agree at its Sixty-second Session on the scope, outline, and the work plan including schedule 
and budget.  
 
(3) Notes the Decision IPCC-LXI-5. Seventh assessment report (AR7) products – Outline of the 
Special Report on Climate Change and Cities and Decision IPCC-LXI-7 Seventh assessment 
report (AR7) products – Outline of the 2027 IPCC Methodology Report on Inventories for Short-
Lived Climate Forcers. 
 
 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI-10.  Conflict of Interest Committee on the Conflict of Interest disclosure 
form 
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 5 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session accepts the recommendations 
of the sub-committee of the COI Committee on the revision of the COI disclosure form as set out in 
Annex I to this decision.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
ANNEX I 
 
ANNEX A 
 
DRAFT REVISED COI DISCLOSURE FORM 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
NAME:  
ADDRESS: 
E-MAIL ADDRESS: 
TELEPHONE: 
CURRENT EMPLOYER: 
FUNCTION/ROLE IN IPCC: 
 
PLEASE CONSULT THE ATTACHED GUIDANCE INFORMATION (SEE ANNEX 1) BEFORE 
COMPLETING THE FORM BELOW  
PLEASE FURTHER NOTE: 
 
“Yes” responses do not necessarily affect or prevent your participation in IPCC activities. Answering 
“Yes” to a question on this form does not necessarily mean that a conflict is present or that you will be 
unable to perform your designated function/role in the IPCC. If in doubt about whether an interest should 
be disclosed, individuals are encouraged to disclose that information.  
 
1. 
APPOINTMENTS AND ACTIVITY 
 
 
Do you hold any position or appointment, or any business or professional relationships (whether 
commercial or non-financial) with other bodies related to climate science, such as the UNFCCC or 
others?  
 
 
Yes 
No 
Details: 
 
27 
 
2. 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONSULTING 
 
Do you receive any remuneration from employment or consulting, including services as a technical or 
other adviser from a commercial entity or other organization with an interest related to the subject of the 
IPCC work in which you are engaged? 
 
Yes     No 
  
 
Details: 
 
 
3. 
RESEARCH SUPPORT 
 
Do you receive financial support (including but not limited to grants, consultancies, sponsorship, or 
honoraria for speaking or facilitating training) or non-financial support (including but not limited to 
premises, equipment, facilities, assistants, paid travel) from any commercial entity or other organization 
with an interest related to the subject of the IPCC work? 
 
Yes 
No 
 
Details: 
 
 
4. 
INVESTMENT INTERESTS 
 
Do you have investments (including but not limited to stocks, bonds, stock options, other securities such 
as short sales) or commercial business interests (including but not limited to ownership, partnership, 
joint ventures, board memberships, controlling interests), in any commercial entity with an interest 
related to the subject of the IPCC work? (Please also include indirect investments such as a trust or 
holding company. You may exclude mutual funds, pension funds or similar investments that are broadly 
diversified and over which you exercise no control.) 
 
Yes 
No 
 
Details: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 
5. 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
 
Do you own any intellectual property rights (including but not limited to patents, trademarks or 
commercial copyrights including pending applications) or proprietary knowledge in a technology or 
process being used for commercial purposes that might be affected by the IPCC work?  
 
Yes 
 No 
 
Details: 
 
 
6. 
PUBLIC STATEMENTS AND POSITIONS 
 
As part of a regulatory, legislative or judicial process, are you providing any expert opinion or testimony 
related to the subject of the IPCC work for a commercial entity or other organization? 
Yes No 
Details: 
 
 
7. 
NON-FINANCIAL INTERESTS  
 
Are you engaged in any professional or other activities (including but not limited to editorial functions,  
official (paid or unpaid) function in a government agency or international organization, advisory 
committee associated with a public or private sector organization, board member of a public or private 
sector organization, board member of non-profit organization, board member of advocacy group),  which 
outside parties could consider might represent or give rise to a conflict of interest, or the perception of 
a conflict of interest with regard the IPCC work with which you are engaged? 
Yes 
No 
 
Details: 
 
 
8. 
FINANCIAL INTERESTS  
 
Do you hold any additional financial interests which outside parties could consider might represent or 
give rise to a conflict of interest, or the perception of a conflict of interest with regard to the IPCC work 
with which you are engaged? 
Yes 
No 
 
Details: 
 
 
 
29 
9. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
 
If not already disclosed above, are you aware of any aspect of your work for the IPCC that will enable 
you to obtain access to proprietary information or create for you a competitive advantage in your 
professional, financial or business dealings? 
 
Yes 
No 
Details: 
 
 
To your knowledge, could the outcome of your work for the IPCC adversely affect the interests of any 
other persons or entities with whom you have substantial common personal, professional, financial or 
business interests (such as your adult children or siblings, close professional colleagues, administrative 
unit or department)? 
 
 
Yes 
No 
 
Details: 
 
Which organisation is covering, partly or in full, your IPCC related travel costs?   
 
Details: 
 
 
Are you receiving any payments (other than for travel costs) or honoraria for speaking publicly on the 
subject of the IPCC work in which you are engaged? 
 
 
Yes 
No 
 
Details: 
 
Is there any other aspect of your background or present circumstances not addressed above that you 
consider might be perceived as affecting your objectivity or independence?     
                                                 
 
 
 
Yes 
No 
Details: 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
DECLARATION 
 
I hereby declare that the information in and accompanying this disclosure is true and complete to the 
best of my knowledge and belief.  I declare that I have disclosed all associations required for disclosure 
under the IPCC Conflict of Interest Policy; and that, except as declared, I do not consider that any of 
the associations present a conflict of interest. 
 
Should there be any change to the above information and declaration, I will promptly notify the 
IPCC Secretariat and complete a new declaration of interest form that describes the changes. 
This includes any change that occurs before or during my work with the IPCC and through the period 
of my engagement up to finalization or publication of results, or completion of the activity concerned. 
 
I understand that information about my interests will be held by the IPCC for a period of five years after 
the end of the assessment cycle during which I contributed, after which the information will be destroyed. 
Subject to requirement to notify the existence of a conflict of interest to others under paragraph 6 of the 
Implementation Procedures, I understand that these forms will be considered confidential and will be 
reviewed in accordance with the COI Implementation Procedures. 
 
 
I hereby declare that I will comply with the IPCC COI Policy and the Implementation Procedures.  
 
 
Name: 
 
 
Signature:                                                                               
 
 
 
Date: 
 
 
 
 
31 
ANNEX 1 
 
GUIDANCE NOTE FOR COMPLETION OF THE CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE FORM 
 
You have been invited to serve on the IPCC because of your professional standing and expertise. As 
outlined in the IPCC Conflict of Interest Policy, the role of the IPCC demands that it pay special attention 
to issues of independence and potential bias in order to maintain the integrity of, and public confidence 
in, its products and processes. It is essential that the work of the IPCC is not compromised by any 
conflict of interest for those who execute it. In view of this, disclosure of certain circumstances is 
necessary to ensure that the work of the IPCC is not compromised by conflicts of interest. In filling out 
this form, therefore, we rely on your professionalism, common sense, and honesty. 
These arrangements and disclosure of interests are required as a matter of due diligence, to ensure 
appropriate assurance for the IPCC in matters of conflict of interest, professional and scientific integrity, 
and to protect the IPCC and participants from reputational risk. 
This declaration of interests, and disclosure of conflicts of interest or potential conflicts of interest, is 
required under the IPCC Conflict of Interest Policy and Implementation Procedures.  
You should disclose interests that could: i) significantly impair your objectivity in carrying out 
your duties and responsibilities for the IPCC, or ii) create an unfair advantage for you or any 
person or organization; and which could result in your securing a direct and material gain 
through outcomes in an IPCC product. For the purposes of this policy, circumstances that could 
lead a reasonable person to question your objectivity, or whether an unfair advantage has been 
created, constitute a potential conflict of interest and should be disclosed in this form.  
You must also declare any relevant interests of parties with whom you have current contractual 
relationships or substantial common interests and which could be perceived as unduly 
influencing, or likely to unduly influence, your judgement (for example your employer(s), close 
professional associates, your administrative unit or department, sponsoring or funding entities).  
A brief description of details should be provided in relation to any question below. You should aim to 
provide sufficient and explicit information to allow the IPCC to form a view on whether the circumstances 
disclosed give rise to an actual or potential conflict of interest. If in doubt about whether an interest 
should be disclosed, individuals are encouraged to disclose that information. 
Please sign and date this form on the last page, and return the form to the Secretary of the IPCC with 
a Curriculum Vitae and information supporting these disclosures where applicable.  Retain a copy for 
your records. 
You must promptly inform the IPCC Secretariat if there is any change in this information prior to or 
during the course of your work or meetings for the IPCC. This form and the declarations contained 
therein must be completed before participation in the IPCC activity can be confirmed.  
Answering “Yes” to a question on this form does not necessarily mean that a conflict is present 
or that you will be unable to perform your designated function/role in the IPCC. If in doubt about 
whether an interest should be disclosed, individuals are encouraged to disclose that 
information. This information will be assessed as a whole on the basis of the principles 
contained in the COI Policy (https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/09/ipcc-conflict-of-
interest-2016.pdf). In particular, what constitutes or not a COI is defined in paragraphs 11 to 17 
of that document (reproduced below). If in doubt about whether an interest should be disclosed,  
 
32 
 
individuals are encouraged to seek advice from IPCC Secretariat Legal Officer (please contact ipcc-
sec@wmo.int for contact information). 
Definition of « Conflict of Interest » (paragraphs 11 to 17 of the IPCC COI Policy 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/09/ipcc-conflict-of-interest-2016.pdf). 
Conflict of Interest 
11. A “conflict of interest” refers to any current professional, financial or other interest which could: i) 
significantly impair the individual’s objectivity in carrying out his or her duties and responsibilities for the 
IPCC, or ii) create an unfair advantage for any person or organization. For the purposes of this policy, 
circumstances that could lead a reasonable person to question an individual’s objectivity, or whether an 
unfair advantage has been created, constitute a potential conflict of interest. These potential conflicts 
are subject to disclosure. 
 
12. Conflict of interest policies in scientific assessment bodies typically make a distinction between 
“conflict of interest” and “bias,” which refers to a point of view or perspective that is strongly held 
regarding a particular issue or set of issues. In the case of author and review teams, bias can and should 
be managed through the selection of a balance of perspectives. For example, it is expected that IPCC 
author teams will include individuals with different perspectives and affiliations. Those involved in 
selecting authors will need to strive for an author team composition that reflects a balance of expertise 
and perspectives, such that IPCC products are comprehensive, objective, and 
neutral with respect to policy. In selecting these individuals, care must be taken to ensure that biases 
can be balanced where they exist. In contrast, conflict of interest exists where an individual could secure 
a direct and material gain through outcomes in an IPCC product. Holding a view that one believes to be 
correct, but that one does not stand to gain from personally is not a conflict of interest. 
 
13. The conflict of interest requirements in this policy are not designed to include an assessment of 
one's behavior or character or one's ability to act objectively despite the conflict of interest. 
 
14. This policy applies only to current conflicts of interest. It does not apply to past interests that have 
expired, no longer exist, and cannot reasonably affect current behavior. Nor does it apply to possible 
interests that may arise in the future but that do not currently exist, as such interests are inherently 
speculative and uncertain. For example, a pending application for a particular job is a current interest, 
but the mere possibility that one might apply for such a job in the future is not a current interest. 
 
15. Professional and other non-financial interests need to be disclosed only if they are significant and 
relevant. If in doubt about whether an interest should be disclosed, individuals are encouraged to seek 
advice from the appropriate IPCC body as defined in Annex A. Significant and relevant interests may 
include, but are not limited to, senior editorial roles, advisory committees associated with private sector 
organizations, and memberships on boards of non-profit or advocacy groups. However, not all such 
associations necessarily constitute a conflict of interest. 
 
16. Financial interests need to be disclosed only if they are significant and relevant. These may include, 
but are not limited to, the following kinds of financial interests: employment relationships; consulting 
relationships; financial investments; intellectual property interests; and commercial interests and 
sources of private-sector research support. Individuals should also disclose significant and relevant 
financial interests of any person with whom the individual has a substantial business or relevant shared 
interest. If in doubt about whether an interest should be disclosed, individuals are encouraged to seek 
advice from the appropriate IPCC body as defined in Annex A “Implementation”. 
 
33 
 
17. To prevent situations in which a conflict of interest may arise, individuals directly involved in or 
leading the preparation of IPCC reports should avoid being in a position to approve, adopt, or accept 
on behalf of any government the text in which he/she was directly involved. 
 
 
 
34 
 
Decision IPCC-LXI-11. Matters related to other IPCC activities – Terms of Reference of the IPCC 
Publications Committee 
 
Document: IPCC-LXI/Doc. 4 
 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change at its Sixty-first Session agrees on the Terms of 
Reference of the IPCC Publication Committee, as contained in Annex 1 to this decision. 
 
 
 
35 
ANNEX 1 
 
 
DRAFT TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE IPCC PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE 
 
 
Terms of Reference 
 
1. The IPCC Publications and Translations Committee (hereafter known as the “Committee”) Terms 
of Reference are intended to be in line with and not conflict with the IPCC principles and procedures. 
 
Purpose and Scope 
 
2. 
The Committee is established for the duration of the respective assessment cycle, to oversee the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Panel and Bureau with regards to publications, 
translations and access to literature and advise the IPCC Secretariat on: 
 
a. 
Technical specifications and Terms of Reference for procurement of WMO translation 
services; 
b. 
Technical specifications and Terms of Reference for procurement processes for printing and 
publishing services for IPCC products; 
c. 
Management of citation data for past and future IPCC reports and their main components;   
d. 
Timely establishment of editorial sub-committees for translation into each official UN 
language; 
e. 
Proposals for enhancing quality and review of translations of scientific and technical IPCC 
products; 
f. 
Options for enhancing access to literature for IPCC authors.  
 
Appointment of Members 
 
3. 
The Committee shall be composed of nine members:  
 
• 
two from each Working Group and Task Force for Inventories Bureau;  
• 
one IPCC Vice Chair to be the Chair of the Committee.  
 
Additionally, the Head of the IPCC Secretariat and Co-Chairs of TG-Data, or their delegates, will 
serve in an advisory role to the Committee. 
 
4. 
The members will be appointed by their respective Working Group and Task Force Co-Chairs taking 
into account overall gender and regional representation, with a view to collective UN language 
expertise. The Chair to the Committee will be appointed by the IPCC Chair from amongst the IPCC 
Vice-Chairs. 
 
5. 
Working Group and TFI members will be supported by their respective TSUs, as needed.  
 
Modus operandi  
 
6. 
The Committee: 
 
a. 
Will meet as necessary at a time and location to be established by the Chair of the 
Committee. Such meetings may take place by electronic means unless they are organized in 
the margins of other IPCC meetings which will take place in person; 
b. 
Will reach decisions by consensus; where consensus is deemed not possible, the matter will 
be referred back to the Bureau; 
 
36 
c. 
Five members of the Committee including the IPCC Vice-Chair shall constitute a quorum; 
d. 
Will liaise with the WMO Publication Board to ensure coordination, planning and scheduling 
related to establishment of a WMO Tender Evaluation Board (“TEB”) and in the 
bidding/evaluation process for IPCC publications and any related products; 
e. 
Have at least two members of the Committee offer to serve on the TEB for an IPCC 
publication/procurement process overseen by the WMO. Such Committee members will 
serve on the TEB in their personal capacity and will need to be able to meet the neutrality 
and conflict of interest test for membership; 
 
may seek advice from qualified experts, such as librarians, publishing organizations and 
international scientific bodies; 
f. 
[Will identify options for the expansion of access to literature for IPCC authors and for 
implementing these following guidance of the IPCC Bureau; 
g. 
Will undertake to prepare best practices for producing translations of IPCC products; 
h. 
Will agree annually on an implementation plan; 
i. 
Will report regularly to the Bureau. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
