Climate Change 1995 
The Science of Climate Cliange 
Climate Change 1995 
The Science of Climate Change 
Edited by J.T. Houghton, 
L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, 
A. Kattenberg and K. Maskell 
Production Editor: J.A. Lakeman 
Contribution of WGI to the Second Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
CAMBRIDGE 
U N I V E R S I T Y P R E S S 
Published by the Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 IRP 
40 West 20th Street, New York, N Y 10011-4211, USA 
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia 
© Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1996 
First published 1996 
Printed in Great Britain at the University Press, Cambridge 
Л catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
Library of Congress cataloguing in publication data available 
ISBN 0 521 56433 6 hardback 
ISBN 0 521 56436 0 paperback 
GE 
Contents 
Foreword 
vii 
Preface 
xi 
SuiBmary for Policymakers 
1 
Technical Summary 
9 
1 
The Climate System: an Overview 
51 
2 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
65 
3 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
133 
4 
Climate Processes 
193 
5 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
229 
6 
Climate Models-Projections of Future Climate 
285 
7 
Changes in Sea Level 
359 
8 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
407 
9 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses to Environmental Change and Feedbacks to Climate 
445 
10 
Marine Biotic Responses to Environmental Change and Feedbacks to Climate 
483 
11 
Advancing our Understanding 
517 
Appendix! 
Organisation of IPCC 
533 
Appendix 2 
List of Major IPCC Reports 
535 
Appendix 3 
Contributors to Climate Change 1995 - The Science of Climate Change 
537 
Appendix 4 
Reviewers of Climate Change 1995 - The Science of Climate Change 
551 
Appendix 5 
Acronyms 
565 
Appendix 6 
Units 
569 
Appendix 7 
Some Chemical Symbols 
571 
Foreword 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
was jointly established by the World Meteorological 
Organisation and the United Nations Environment 
Programme in 1988, in order to: (i) assess available 
scientific information on climate change, (ii) assess the 
environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate 
change, and (iii) formulate response strategies. The IPCC 
First Assessment Report was completed in August 1990 
and served as the basis for negotiating the U N Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. The IPCC also completed 
its 1992 Supplement and "Climate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC 
IS92 Emission Scenarios" to assist the Convention process 
further. 
In 1992, the Panel reorganised its Working Groups II 
and III and committed itself to complete a Second 
Assessment in 1995, not only updating the information on 
the same range of topics as in the First Assessment, but 
also including the new subject area of technical issues 
related to the economic aspects of climate change. We 
applaud the IPCC for producing its Second Assessment 
Report (SAR) as scheduled. We are convinced that the 
SAR, like the earlier IPCC Reports, will become a standard 
work of reference, widely used by policymakers, scientists 
and other experts. 
This volume, which forms part of the SAR, has been 
produced by Working Group I of the IPCC, and focuses on 
the science of climate change. It consists of 11 chapters 
covering the physical climate system, the factors that drive 
climate change, analyses of past climate and projections of 
future climate change, and detection and attribution of 
human influence on recent climate. 
As usual in the IPCC, success in producing this report 
has depended upon the enthusiasm and co-operation of 
numerous busy scientists and other experts world-wide. 
We are exceedingly pleased to note here the very special 
efforts made by the IPCC in ensuring the participation of 
scientists and other experts in its activities, in particular in 
the writing, reviewing, and revising of its reports. The 
scientists and experts from the developed, developing and 
transitional economy countries have given of their time 
very generously, and governments have supported them, in 
the enormous intellectual and physical effort required, 
often going substantially beyond reasonable demands of 
duty. Without such conscientious and professional 
involvement, the IPCC would be greatly impoverished. 
We express to all these scientists and experts, and the 
governments who supported them, our sincere appreciation 
for their commitment. 
We take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the 
following individuals for nurturing another IPCC report 
through to a successful completion: 
Prof. Bolín, the Chairman of the IPCC, for his able 
leadership and skilful guidance of the IPCC; the Co-
Chairmen of Working Group I, Sir John Houghton (United 
Kingdom) and Dr. L.G. Meira Filho (Brazil); the Vice-
Chairmen of the Working Group, Prof. Ding Yihui 
(China), Mr. A . B . Diop (Senegal) and Prof. D. Ehhalt 
(Germany); 
Dr. B.A. Callander, the Head of the Technical Support 
Unit of the Working Group and his staff, Ms. K. Maskell, 
Mrs. J. A. Lakeman and Mrs. F. Mills, with additional 
assistance from Dr. N . Harris (European Ozone Research 
Co-ordinating Unit, Cambridge), Dr. A. Kattenberg (Royal 
Netherlands Meteorological Institute); and Dr. N . 
Sundararaman, the Secretary of the IPCC and his staff 
including Mr. S. Tewungwa, Mrs. R. Bourgeois, Ms. C. 
Ettori and Ms. C. Tanikie. 
G.O.P. Obasi 
Secretary-General 
World Meteorological Organisation 
Ms. E . Dowdeswell 
Executive Director 
United Nations Environment Programme 
Climate Change 1995 
The Science of CUmate Change 
Prepared by Working Group 1 
IPCC reports are formally described as "approved" or "accepted". An "approved" 
report has been subject to detailed, line-by-line discussion and agreement in a plenary 
meeting of the relevant IPCC Working Group. For practical reasons only short 
documents can be formally approved, and larger documents are "accepted" by the 
Working Group, signifying its view that a report presents a comprehensive, objective 
and balanced view of the subject matter In this report, the Summary for Policymakers 
has been approved, and the Technical Summary and Chapters 1 to 11 have been 
accepted, by Working Group I. 
M A K I N G R E F E R E N C E T O THIS R E P O R T 
When citing information from a specific chapter of this report (as distinct from the Policymakers' or Technical Summary) 
please give proper credit to the Lead Authors. Do not simply refer to IPCC (1995) or the editors. 
Preface 
This report is the most comprehensive assessment of the 
science of climate change since Working Group I (WGI) of 
the IPCC produced its first report Climate Change: The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment in 1990. It enlarges and 
updates information contained in that assessment and also 
in the interim reports produced by WGI in 1992 and 1994. 
The first IPCC Assessment Report of 1990 concluded that 
continued accumulation of anthropogenic greenhouse gases 
in the atmosphere would lead to climate change whose rate 
and magnitude were likely to have important impacts on 
natural and human systems. The IPCC Supplementary 
Report of 1992, timed to coincide with the final 
negotiations of the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change in Rio de Janeiro (June 1992), added 
new quantitative information on the climatic effects of 
aerosols but confirmed the essential conclusions of the 
1990 assessment concerning our understanding of climate 
and the factors affecting it. The 1994 WGI report Radiative 
Forcing 
of Climate Change examined in depth the 
mechanisms that govern the relative importance of human 
and natural factors in giving rise to radiative forcing, the 
"driver" of climate change. The 1994 report incorporated 
further advances in the quantification of the climatic effects 
of aerosols, but it also found no reasons to alter in any 
fundamental way those conclusions of the 1990 report 
which it addressed. 
We believe the essential message of this report continues 
to be that the basic understanding of climate change and the 
human role therein, as expressed in the 1990 report, still 
holds: carbon dioxide remains the most important 
contributor to anthropogenic forcing of climate change; 
projections of future global mean temperature change and 
sea level rise confirm the potential for human activities to 
alter the Earth's climate to an extent unprecedented in 
human history; and the long time-scales governing both the 
accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and 
the response of the climate system to those accumulations, 
means that many important aspects of climate change are 
effectively irreversible. Further, that observations suggest 
"a discernible human influence on global climate", one of 
the key findings of this report, adds an important new 
dimension to the discussion of the climate change issue. 
An important political development since 1990 has been 
the entry into force of the U N Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (FCCC). IPCC is recognised as a prime 
source of scientific and technical information to the FCCC, 
and the underlying aim of this report is to provide objective 
information on which to base global climate change 
policies that will meet the ultímate aim of the FCCC -
expressed in Article 2 of the Convention - of stabilisation 
of greenhouse gases at some level that has yet to be 
quantified but which is defined as one that will "prevent 
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
system". Because the definition of "dangerous" will 
depend on value judgements as well as upon observable 
physical changes in the climate system, such policies will 
not rest on purely scientífic grounds, and the companion 
IPCC reports by WGII on Impacts, Adaptations 
and 
Mitigation of Climate Change, and by WGIII on Economic 
and Social Dimensions of Climate Change provide some of 
the background information on which the wider debate will 
be based. Together the three W G reports establish a basis 
for an IPCC synthesis of information relevant to 
interpreting Article 2 of the F C C C . A n important 
contribution of WGI to this synthesis has been an analysis 
of the emission pathways for carbon dioxide that would 
lead to a range of hypothetical stabilisation levels. 
This report was compiled between October 1994 and 
November 1995 by 78 lead authors from 20 countries. 
First drafts of the chapters were circulated for informal 
review by experts in early 1995, before further revision in 
March. At that time, drafts of the Summary for 
Policymakers and the Technical Summary were also 
prepared by the lead authors assisted by a few additional 
experts with experience of the science-policy interface. 
Formal review of the chapters and the summaries by 
governments, non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and 
individual experts took place during May to July. Over 400 
contributing authors from 26 countries submitted draft text 
and information to the lead authors and over 500 reviewers 
from 40 countries submitted valuable suggestions for 
improvement during the review process. The hundreds of 
comments received 
were carefully analysed and 
assimilated in a revised document that was distributed to 
countries and NGOs six weeks in advance of the fifth 
session of WGI in Madrid, 27-29 November 1995. There, 
the Summary for Policymakers was approved in detail and 
the rest of the report accepted. Participants included 177 
xii 
Preface 
delegates from 96 countries, representatives from 14 NGOs 
and 28 lead authors. 
We wish first of all to express our sincere appreciation to 
the lead authors whose expertise, diligence and patience 
have undeфinned the successful completion of this effort, 
and to the many contributors and reviewers for their 
valuable and painstaking work. We are grateful to the 
governments of Sweden, U K and U S A which hosted 
drafting sessions in their countries, and to the government 
of Spain which hosted the final session of Working Group I 
in Madrid at which the documents were accepted and 
approved. The IPCC Trust Fund, contributed to by many 
countries, supported the participation of many developing 
country scientists in the completion of this report. The 
WGI Technical Support Unit was funded by the U K 
government with assistance from the Netherlands, and we 
echo the appreciation expressed in the Foreword to the 
members of the Technical Support Unit. The graphics 
section of the U K Meteorological Office provided skilful 
assistance in the preparation of the hundreds of diagrams of 
this report. 
Bert Bolin 
IPCC chairman 
John Houghton 
Co-chair (UK) IPCC WGI 
L. Gylvan Meira Filho 
Co-chair (Brazil) IPCC WGI 
Summary for Policymakers 
This summary, approved in detail at the fifth session of IPCC Working Group I, 
(Madrid, 27-29 November 1995), represents the formally agreed statement of 
the IPCC concerning current understanding of the science of climate change. 
Summary for Policymakers 
Considerable progress has been made in the understanding 
of climate change' science since 1990 and new data and 
analyses have become available. 
Greenhouse gas concentrations liave continued to increase 
Increases in greenhouse gas concentrations since pre-
industrial times (i.e., since about 1750) have led to a 
positive radiative forcing^- of climate, tending to warm the 
surface and to produce other changes of climate. 
• 
The atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, 
inter alia carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and 
nitrous oxide (NjO) have grown significantly: by 
about 30%, 145% and 15% respectively (values for 
1992). These trends can be attributed largely to 
human activities, mostly fossil fuel use, land-use 
change and agriculture. 
• 
The growth rates of CO,, CH^ and N , 0 concentrations 
were low during the early 1990s. While this apparently 
natural variation is not yet fully explained, recent data 
indicate that the growth rates are currendy comparable 
to those averaged over the 1980s. 
• 
The direct radiative forcing of the long-lived 
greenhouse gases (2.45 Wm"^) is due primarily to 
increases in the concentrations of COj (1.56 Wm"^), 
CH4 (0.47 Wm-2) and Щ0 (0.14 Wm'^) (1992 values). 
• 
Many greenhouse gases remain in the atmosphere for 
a long time (for CO2 and N2O, many decades to 
centuries), hence they affect radiative forcing on long 
time-scales. 
• 
The direct radiative forcing due to the CFCs and 
HCFCs combined is 0.25 Wm"^. However, their net 
radiative forcing is reduced by about 0.1 Wm"^ because 
they have caused stratospheric ozone depletion which 
gives rise to a negative radiative forcing. 
• 
Growth in the concentration of CFCs, but not 
H C F C s , 
has 
slowed 
to 
about 
zero. 
The 
concentrations of both CFCs and HCFCs, and their 
consequent ozone depletion, are expected to decrease 
substantially by 2050 through implementation of the 
Montreal Protocol and its Adjustments and 
Amendments. 
• 
At present some long-lived greenhouse gases 
(particularly MFCs (a CFC subsritute), PFCs and 
SF6) contribute little to radiative forcing but their 
projected growth could contribute several per cent to 
radiative forcing during the 21st century. 
• 
If caibon dioxide emissions were maintained at near 
current (1994) levels, they would lead to a nearly 
constant 
rate of increase 
in 
atmospheric 
concentrations for at least two centuries, reaching 
about 500 ppmv (approaching twice the pre-
industrial concentration of 280 ppmv) by the end of 
the 21st century. 
• 
A range of carbon cycle models indicates that 
stabilisation of atmospheric COj concentrations at 
450, 650 or 1000 ppmv could be achieved only if 
global anthropogenic COj emissions drop to 1990 
levels by, respectively, approximately 40, 140 or 240 
years from now, and drop substantially below 1990 
levels subsequently. 
• 
Any eventual stabilised concentration is governed 
more by the accumulated anthropogenic C O j 
emissions from now until the time of stabilisation, 
than by the way those emissions change over the 
period. This means that, for a given stabilised 
concentration value, higher emissions in early 
decades require lower emissions later on. Among the 
range of stabilisation cases studied, for stabilisation 
at 
450, 
650 
or 
1000 
ppmv 
accumulated 
anthropogenic emissions over the period 1991 to 
2100 are 630 GtC^, 1030 GtC, and 1410 GtC 
respectively ( ± approximately 15% in each case). 
' Climate change in IPCC Working Group I usage refers to any 
change in climate over time whether due to natural variability or 
as a result of human activity. This differs from the usage in the 
Framework Convention on Climate Change where climate change 
refers to a change of climate which is attributed directly or 
indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the 
global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate 
variability observed over comparable time periods. 
^ A simple measure of the importance of a potential climate 
change mechanism. Radiative forcing is the perturbation to the 
energy balance of the Earth-atmosphere system (in watts per 
square metre [Wm'^]). 
3 1 GtC = 1 biUion (105) tonnes of carbon. 
4 
Summary for Policymakers 
For comparison the corresponding accumulated 
emissions for IPCC IS92 emission scenarios range 
from 770 to2190GtC. 
• 
Stabilisation of CH4 and NjO concentrations at 
today's levels would involve reductions in 
anthropogenic emissions of 8% and more than 50% 
respectively. 
• 
There is evidence that tropospheric 
ozone 
concentrations in the Northern Hemisphere have 
increased since pre-industrial times because of human 
activity and that this has resulted in a positive radiative 
forcing. This forcing is not yet well characterised, but 
it is estimated to be about 0.4 Wm"^ (15% of that from 
the long-lived greenhouse gases). However the 
observations of the most recent decade show that the 
upward trend has slowed significantly or stopped. 
Anthropogenic aerosols tend to produce negative 
radiative forcing 
• 
Tropospheric aerosols (microscopic airborne 
particles) resulting from combustion of fossil fuels, 
biomass burning and other sources have led to a 
negative direct forcing of about 0.5 Wm'^, as a global 
average, and possibly also to a negative indirect 
forcing of a similar magnitude. While the negative 
forcing is focused in particular regions and 
subcontinental areas, it can have continental to 
hemispheric scale effects on climate patterns. 
• 
Locally, the aerosol forcing can be large enough to 
more than offset the positive forcing due to 
greenhouse gases. 
• 
In contrast to the long-lived greenhouse gases, 
anthropogenic aerosols are very short-lived in the 
atmosphere, hence their radiative forcing adjusts 
rapidly to increases or decreases in emissions. 
Climate has changed over the past century 
At any one location year-to-year variations in weather can be 
large, but analyses of meteorological and other data over 
large areas and over periods of decades or more have 
provided evidence for some important systematic changes. 
• 
Global mean surface air temperature has increased by 
between about 0.3 and 0.6°C since the late 19th 
century; the additional data available since 1990 and 
the re-analyses since then have not significantly 
changed this range of estimated increase. 
• 
Recent years have been among the warmest since 
1860, i.e., in the period of instrumental record, despite 
the cooling effect of the 1991 Mt. Pinatubo volcanic 
eruption. 
• 
Night-time temperatures over land have generally 
increased more than daytime temperatures. 
• 
Regional changes are also evident. For example, the 
recent warming has been greatest over the mid-
latitude continents in winter and spring, with a few 
areas of cooling, such as the North Atlantic ocean. 
Precipitation has increased over land in high latitudes 
of the Northern Hemisphere, especially during the 
cold season. 
• 
Global sea level has risen by between 10 and 25 cm 
over the past 100 years and much of the rise may be 
related to the increase in global mean temperature. 
• 
There are inadequate data to determine whether 
consistent global changes in climate variability or 
weather extremes have occurred over the 20th century. 
On regional scales there is clear evidence of changes 
in some extremes and climate variability indicators 
(e.g., fewer frosts in several widespread areas; an 
increase in the proportion of rainfall from extreme 
events over the contiguous states of the USA). Some 
of these changes have been toward greater variability; 
some have been toward lower variability. 
• 
The 1990 to mid-1995 persistent warm-phase of the 
El Niûo-Southern Oscillation (which causes droughts 
and floods in many areas) was unusual in the context 
of the last 120 years. 
The balance of evidence suggests a discernible human 
influence on global climate 
Any human-induced effect on climate will be superimposed 
on the background "noise" of natural climate variability, 
which results both from internal fluctuations and from 
external causes such as solar vaiiability or volcanic eruptions. 
Detection and attribution studies attempt to disdnguish 
between anthropogenic and natural influences. "Detection of 
change" is the process of demonstrating that an observed 
Summary for Policymakers 
5 
change in climate is highly unusual in a statistical sense, but 
does not provide a reason for the change. "Attribution" is the 
process of establishing cause and effect relations, including 
the testing of competing hypotheses. 
Since the 1990 IPCC Report, considerable progress has 
been made in attempts to distinguish between natural and 
anthropogenic influences on climate. This progress has been 
achieved by including effects of sulphate aerosols in addition 
to greenhouse gases, thus leading to more realistic estimates 
of human-induced radiative forcing. These have then been 
used in climate models to provide more complete simulations 
of the human-induced climate-change "signal". In addition, 
new simulations with coupled atmosphere-ocean models 
have provided important infonnation about decade to century 
time-scale natural internal climate variability. A further major 
area of progress is the shift of focus from studies of global-
mean changes to comparisons of modelled and observed 
spatial and temporal patterns of climate change. 
The most important results related to the issues of 
detection and attribution are: 
• 
The limited available evidence from proxy climate 
indicators suggests that the 20th century global mean 
temperature is at least as warm as any other century 
since at least 1400 AD. Data prior to 1400 are too 
sparse to allow the reliable estimation of global mean 
temperature. 
• 
Assessments of the statistical significance of the 
observed global mean surface air temperature trend 
over the last century have used a variety of new 
estimates of natural internal and externally forced 
variability. These are derived from instrumental data, 
palaeodata, simple and complex climate models, and 
statistical models fitted to observations. Most of 
these studies have detected a significant change and 
show that the observed warming trend is unlikely to 
be entirely natural in origin. 
• 
More convincing recent evidence for the attribution 
of a human effect on climate is emerging from 
pattern-based studies, in which the modelled climate 
response to combined forcing by greenhouse gases 
and anthropogenic sulphate aerosols is compared 
with observed geographical, seasonal and vertical 
patterns of atmospheric temperature change. These 
studies show that such pattern correspondences 
increase with time, as one would expect as an 
anthropogenic signal increases in strength. 
Furthermore, the probability is very low that these 
correspondences could occur by chance as a result of 
natural internal variability only. The vertical patterns 
of change are also inconsistent with those expected 
for solar and volcanic forcing. 
• 
Our ability to quantify the human influence on global 
climate is currently limited because the expected 
signal is still emerging from the noise of natural 
variability, and because there are uncertainties in key 
factors. These include the magnitude and patterns of 
long term natural variability and the time-evolving 
pattern of forcing by, and response to, changes in 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and 
land surface changes. Nevertheless, the balance of 
evidence suggests that there is a discernible human 
influence on global climate. 
Climate is expected to continue to change in the future 
The IPCC has developed a range of scenarios, IS92a-f, of 
future greenhouse gas and aerosol precursor emissions 
based on assumptions concerning population and economic 
growth, land-use, technological changes, energy 
availability and fuel mix during the period 1990 to 2100. 
Through understanding of the global carbon cycle and of 
atmospheric chemistry, these emissions can be used to 
project atmospheric concentrarions of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols and the perturbation of natural radiative 
forcing. Climate models can then be used to develop 
projections of future climate. 
• 
The increasing realism of simulations of current and 
past climate by coupled atmosphere-ocean climate 
models has increased our confidence in their use for 
projection of future climate change. Important 
uncertainties remain, but these have been taken into 
account in the full range of projections of global 
mean temperature and sea level change. 
• 
For the mid-range IPCC emission scenario, IS92a, 
assuming the "best estimate" value of climate 
sensitivity' and including the effects of future 
increases in aerosol, models project an increase in 
' In IPCC reports, climate sensitivity usually refers to the long 
term (equilibrium) change in global mean surface temperature 
following a doubling of atmospheric equivalent COj concentration. 
More generally, it refers to the equilibrium change in surface air 
temperature following a unit change in radiative forcing (°C/Wm'). 
6 
Summary for Policymakers 
global mean surface air temperature relative to 1990 
of about 2°C by 2100. This estimate is approximately 
one third lower than the "best estimate" in 1990. This 
is due primarily to lower emission scenarios 
(particularly for CO, and the CFCs), the inclusion of 
the cooling effect of sulphate aerosols, and 
improvements in the treatment of the carbon cycle. 
Combining the lowest IPCC emission scenario 
(IS92c) with a "low" value of climate sensitivity and 
including the effects of future changes in aerosol 
concentrations leads to a projected increase of about 
1°C by 2100. The corresponding projection for the 
highest IPCC scenario (IS92e) combined with a 
"high" value of climate sensitivity gives a warming 
of about 3.5°C. In all cases the average rate of 
warming would probably be greater than any seen in 
the last 10,000 years, but the actual annual to decadal 
changes would include considerable natural 
variability. Regional temperature changes could 
differ substantially from the global mean value. 
Because of the thermal inertia of the oceans, only 50-
90% of the eventual equilibrium temperature change 
would have been realised by 2100 and temperature 
would continue to increase beyond 2100, even if 
concentrations of greenhouse gases were stabilised 
by that time. 
Average sea level is expected to rise as a result of 
thermal expansion of the oceans and melting of 
glaciers and ice-sheets. For the IS92a scenario, 
assuming the "best estimate" values of climate 
sensitivity and of ice melt sensitivity to warming, and 
including the effects of future changes in aerosol, 
models project an increase in sea level of about 50 
cm from the present to 2100. This estimate is 
approximately 25% lower than the "best estimate" in 
1990 due to the lower temperature projection, but 
also reflecting improvements in the climate and ice 
melt models. Combining the lowest emission 
scenario (IS92c) with the "low" climate and ice melt 
sensitivities and including aerosol effects gives a 
projected sea level rise of about 15 cm from the 
present to 2100. The corresponding projection for the 
highest emission scenario (IS92e) combined with 
"high" climate and ice-melt sensitivities gives a sea 
level rise of about 95 cm from the present to 2100. 
Sea level would continue to rise at a similar rate in 
future centuries beyond 2100, even if concentrations 
of greenhouse gases were stabilised by that time, and 
would continue to do so even beyond the time of 
stabilisation of global mean temperature. Regional 
sea level changes may differ from the global mean 
value owing to land movement and ocean current 
changes. 
• 
Confidence is higher in the hemispheric-to-
continental scale projections of coupled atmosphere-
ocean climate models than in the regional 
projections, where confidence remains low. There is 
more confidence in temperature projections than 
hydrological changes. 
• 
A l l model simulations, whether they were forced 
with increased concentrations of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols or with increased concentrations of 
greenhouse gases alone, show the following features; 
greater surface warming of the land than of the sea in 
winter; a maximum surface warming in high northern 
latitudes in winter, litüe surface warming over the 
Arctic in summer; an enhanced global mean 
hydrological cycle, and increased precipitation and 
soil moisture in high latitudes in winter. All these 
changes are associated with identifiable physical 
mechanisms. 
• 
In addition, most simulations show a reduction in the 
strength of the north Atlantic thermohaline 
circulation and a widespread reduction in diurnal 
range of temperature. These features too can be 
explained in terms of identifiable physical 
mechanisms. 
• 
The direct and indirect effects of anthropogenic 
aerosols have an important effect on the projections. 
Generally, the magnitudes of the temperature and 
precipitation changes are smaller when aerosol 
effects are represented, especially in northern mid-
latitudes. Note that the cooling effect of aerosols is 
not a simple offset to the warming effect of 
greenhouse gases, but significantly affects some of 
the continental scale patterns of climate change, most 
noticeably in the summer hemisphere. For example, 
models that consider only the effects of greenhouse 
gases generally project an increase in precipitation 
and soil moisture in the Asian summer monsoon 
region, whereas models that include, in addition, 
some of the effects of aerosols suggest that monsoon 
precipitation may decrease. The spatial and temporal 
distribution of aerosols greatly influence regional 
projections, which are therefore more uncertain. 
Summary for Policymakers 
7 
• 
A general warming is expected to lead to an increase 
in the occurrence of extremely hot days and a 
decrease in the оссштепсе of extremely cold days. 
• 
Warmer temperatures will lead to a more vigorous 
hydrological cycle; this translates into prospects for 
more severe droughts and/or floods in some places 
and less severe droughts and/or floods in other 
places. Several models indicate an increase in 
precipitation intensity, suggesting a possibility for 
more extreme rainfall events. Knowledge is currently 
insufficient to say whether there will be any changes 
in the occurrence or geographical distribution of 
severe storms, e.g., tropical cyclones. 
• 
Sustained rapid climate change could shift the 
competitive balance among species and even lead to 
forest dieback, altering the terrestrial uptake and 
release of carbon. The magnitude is uncertain, but 
could be between zero and 200 GtC over the next one 
to two centuries, depending on the rate of climate 
change. 
There are still many uncertainties 
Many factors currenüy limit our ability to project and 
detect future climate change. In particular, to reduce 
uncertainties further work is needed on the following 
priority topics: 
• 
estimation of future emissions and biogeochemical 
cycling (including sources and sinks) of greenhouse 
gases, aerosols and aerosol precursors and projections 
of future concentrations and radiative properties; 
• 
representation of climate processes in models, 
especially feedbacks associated with clouds, oceans, 
sea ice and vegetation, in order to improve projections 
of rates and regional patterns of climate change; 
• 
systematic collection of long-term instrumental and 
proxy observations of climate system variables (e.g., 
solar output, atmospheric energy balance components, 
hydrological cycles, ocean characteristics and 
ecosystem changes) for the purposes of model testing, 
assessment of temporal and regional variability and 
for detection and attribution studies. 
Future unexpected, large and rapid climate system changes 
(as have occurred in the past) are, by their nature, difficult to 
predict. This implies that future climate changes may also 
involve "suфrises". In particular these arise from the non­
linear nature of the climate system. When rapidly forced, 
non-linear systems are especially subject to unexpected 
behaviour. Progress can be made by investigating non-linear 
processes and sub-components of the climaric system. 
Examples of such non-linear behaviour include rapid 
circularion changes in the North Aflanric and feedbacks 
associated with teiTcstrial ecosystem changes. 
Technical Summary 
Prepared by the lead authors taking into account comments arising from extensive 
review by individual experts, governments and non-governmental organisations 
This summary, part of the background material on which the Summary for 
Policymakers is based, has been accepted by the IPCC but not approved in detail. 
Acceptance by the IPCC signifies the Panel's view that the summary presents a 
comprehensive, objective and balanced view of the subject matter. 
CONTENTS 
A Introduction 
13 
В Greenhouse Gases, Aerosols and their Radiative Forcing 13 
B . l Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
14 
B.2 Methane (CH4) 
17 
B.3 Nitrous oxide (NjO) 
19 
B.4 Halocarbons and other halogenated compounds 
19 
B.5 Ozone (O3) 
19 
B.5.1 Tropospheric Ozone 
20 
B.5.2 Stratospheric Ozone 
20 
B.6 Tropospheric and stratospheric aerosols 
20 
B.7 Summary of radiative forcing 
21 
B.8 Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
21 
B. 9 Emissions and concentrations of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols in the future 
23 
B.9.1 The IS92 emission scenarios 
23 
B.9.2 Stabilisation of greenhouse gas and aerosol 
concentrations 
25 
С Observed Trends and Patterns in Climate and 
Sea Level 
26 
C. 1 Has the climate warmed? 
26 
C.2 Is the 20th century warming unusual? 
28 
C.3 Has the climate become wetter? 
28 
C.4 Has sea level risen? 
29 
C. 5 Has the climate become more variable and/ 
or extreme? 
30 
D Modelling Climate and Climate Change 
30 
D. 1 The basis for confidence in climate models 
30 
D.2 Climate model feedbacks and uncertainties 
34 
E Detection of Climate Change and Attribution 
of Causes 
35 
E. 1 Better simulations for defining a human-induced 
climate change "signal" 
35 
E.2 Better simulations for estimating natural internal 
climate variability 
36 
E,3 Studies of global mean change 
36 
E.4 Studies of patterns of change 
36 
E.5 Qualitative consistency 
37 
E. 6 Overall assessment of the detection and 
attribution issues 
37 
F The Prospects for Future Climate Change 
39 
F. 1 Forcing scenarios 
39 
F.2 Projections of climate change 
39 
F.2.1 Global mean temperature response to 
IS92 emission scenarios 
39 
F.2,2 Global mean sea level response to IS92 
emission scenarios 
40 
F.2.3 Temperature and sea level projections 
compared with IPCC ( 1990) 
41 
F.3 Spatial patterns of projected climate change 
41 
F.3.1 Continental scale patterns 
41 
F.3.2 Regional scale patterns 
43 
F.3.3 Changes in variability and extremes 
44 
F.4 Effects of stabilising greenhouse gas concentrations 
45 
F.5 The possibility of surprises 
45 
G Advancing our Understanding 
46 
References 
47 
Glossary 
48 
Technical Summary 
13 
A Introduction 
The IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group (WGI) 
was established in 1988 to assess available information on 
the science of climate change, in particular that arising 
from human activities. In performing its assessments the 
Working Group is concerned with: 
• 
developments in the scientific understanding of past 
and present climate, of climate variability, of climate 
predictability and of climate change including 
feedbacks from climate impacts; 
• 
progress in the modelling and projection of global 
and regional climate and sea level change; 
• 
observations of climate, including past climates, and 
assessment of trends and anomalies; 
• 
gaps and uncertainties in current knowledge. 
The first Scientific Assessment in 1990 concluded that 
the increase in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse 
gases since the pre-industrial period' had altered the energy 
balance of the Earth/atmosphere and that global warming 
would result. Model simulations of global warming due to 
the observed increase of greenhouse gas concentrations over 
the past century tended towards a central estimate of about 
Г С while analysis of the instrumental temperature record, 
on the other hand, revealed warming of around 0.5°C over 
the same period. The 1990 report concluded: "The size of 
this warming is broadly consistent with predictions of 
climate models, but it is also of the same magnitude as 
natural climate variability. Thus the observed increase could 
be largely due to this natural variability; alternatively this 
variability and other human factors could have offset a still 
larger human-induced greenhouse warming." 
A primary concern identified by IPCC (1990) was the 
expected continued increase in greenhouse gas concentrations 
as a result of human activity, leading to significant climate 
change in the coming century. The projected changes in 
temperature, precipitation and soil moisture were not uniform 
over the globe. Anthropogenic aerosols were recognised as a 
possible source of regional cooling but no quantitative 
estimates of their effects were available. 
The IPCC Supplementary Report in 1992 confirmed, or 
found no reason to alter, the major conclusions of IPCC 
(1990). It presented a new range of global mean 
temperature projections based on a new set of IPCC 
emission scenarios (IS92 a to f) and reported progress in 
quantifying the effects of anthropogenic aerosols. Ozone 
' The pre-industrial period is defined as the several centuries 
preceding 1750. 
depletion due to chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) was 
recognised as a cause of negative radiative forcing, reducing 
the global importance of CFCs as greenhouse gases. 
The 1994 WGI report on Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change provided a detailed assessment of the global 
carbon cycle and of aspects of atmospheric chemistry 
governing the abundance of non-COj greenhouse gases. 
Some pathways that would stabilise atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations were examined, and new or 
revised calculations of Global Warming Potential for 38 
species were presented. The growing literature on 
processes governing the abundance and radiative properties 
of aerosols was examined in considerable detail, including 
new information on the climatic impact of the 1991 
eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. 
The Second IPCC Assessment of the Science of Climate 
Change presents a comprehensive assessment of climate 
change science as of 1995, including updates of relevant 
material in all three preceding reports. Key issues 
examined in the Second Assessment concern the relative 
magnitude of human and natural factors in driving changes 
in climate, including the role of aerosols; whether a human 
influence on present-day climate can be detected; and the 
estimation of future climate and sea level change at both 
global and continental scales. 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (FCCC) uses the term "climate change" to refer 
exclusively to change brought about by human activities. A 
more generic usage is common in the scientific community 
where it is necessary to be able to refer to change arising 
from any source. In particular scientists refer to past 
climate change and address the complex issue of separating 
natural and human causes in currently observed changes. 
However, the climate projections covered in this document 
relate only to future climate changes resulting from human 
influences, since it is not yet possible to predict the 
fluctuations due to volcanoes and other natural influences. 
Consequently the use of the term "climate change" here, 
when referring to future change, is essentially the same as 
the usage adopted in the FCCC. 
В Greenhouse Gases, Aerosols and their Radiative 
Forcing 
Human activities are changing the 
atmospheric 
concentrations and distributions of greenhouse gases and 
aerosols. These changes can produce a radiative forcing by 
changing either the reflection or absorption of solar 
radiation, or the emission and absorption of terrestrial 
radiation (see Box 1). 
14 
Technical Summary 
Box 1: What drives changes in climate? 
The Eaith absorbs radiation from the Sun, mainly at the surface. This energy is then redistributed by the atmospheric 
and oceanic circulation and radiated to space at longer ("terrestrial" or "infrared") wavelengths. On average, for the 
Earth as a whole, the incoming solar energy is balanced by outgoing terrestrial radiation. 
Any factor which alters the radiation received from the Sun or lost to space, or which alters the redistribution of 
energy within the atmosphere, and between the atmosphere, land and ocean, can affect climate. A change in the energy 
available to the global Earth/atmosphere system is termed here, and in previous IPCC reports, a radiative forcing. 
Increases in the concentrations of greenhouse gases will reduce the efficiency with which the Earth cools to space. 
More of the outgoing terrestrial radiation from the surface is absorbed by the atmosphere and emitted at higher 
altitudes and colder temperatures. This results in a positive radiative forcing which tends to warm the lower 
atmosphere and surface. This is the enhanced greenhouse effect - an enhancement of an effect which has operated in 
the Earth's atmosphere for billions of years due to the naturally occurring greenhouse gases: water vapour, carbon 
dioxide, ozone, methane and nitrous oxide. The amount of warming depends on the size of the increase in 
concentration of each greenhouse gas, the radiative properties of the gases involved, and the concentrations of other 
greenhouse gases already present in the atmosphere. 
Anthropogenic aerosols (small particles) in the troposphere, derived mainly from the emission of sulphur dioxide 
from fossil fuel burning, and derived from other sources such as biomass burning, can absorb and reflect solar 
radiation. In addition, changes in aerosol concentrations can alter cloud amount and cloud reflectivity through their 
effect on cloud properties. In most cases tropospheric aerosols tend to produce a negative radiative forcing and cool 
climate. They have a much shorter lifetime (days to weeks) than most greenhouse gases (decades to centuries) so their 
concentrations respond much more quickly to changes in emissions. 
Volcanic activity can inject large amounts of sulphur-containing gases (primarily sulphur dioxide) into the 
stratosphere which are transformed into aerosols. This can produce a large, but transitory (i.e., a few years), negative 
radiative forcing, tending to cool the Earth's surface and lower atmosphere over periods of a few years. 
The Sun's output of energy varies by small amounts (0.1%) over an 11-year cycle, and variations over longer 
periods occur. On time-scales of tens to thousands of years, slow variations in the Earth's orbit, which are well 
understood, have led to changes in the seasonal and latitudinal distribution of solar radiation; these changes have 
played an important part in controlling the variations of climate in the distant past, such as the glacial cycles. 
Any changes in the radiative balance of the Earth, including those due to an increase in greenhouse gases or in 
aerosols, will tend to alter atmospheric and oceanic temperatures and the associated circulation and weather patterns. 
These will be accompanied by changes in the hydrological cycle (for example, altered cloud distributions or changes 
in rainfall and evaporation regimes). 
Any human-induced changes in climate will be superimposed on a background of natural climatic variations which 
occur on a whole range of space- and time-scales. Natural climate variability can occur as a result of changes in the 
forcing of the climate system, for example due to aerosol derived from volcanic eruptions. Climate variations can also 
occur in the absence of a change in external forcing, as a result of complex interactions between components of the 
climate system such as the atmosphere and ocean. The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is an 
example of such natural "internal" variability. To distinguish anthropogenic climate changes from natural valuations, it 
is necessary to identify the anthropogenic "signal" against the background "noise" of natural climate variability. 
Information on radiative forcing was extensively 
reviewed in IPCC (1994). Summaries of the information in 
that report and new results are presented here. The most 
significant advance since IPCC (1994) is improved 
understanding of the role of aerosols and their 
representation in climate models. 
B.l 
Carbon dioxide {CO2) 
C O , concentrations have increased from about 280 ppmv 
in pre-industrial dmes to 358 ppmv in 1994 (Table 1, and 
Figure la). There is no doubt that this increase is largely 
due to human activities, in particular fossil fuel 
combustion, but also land-use conversion and to a lesser 
Technical Summary 
Table 1: A sample of greenhouse gases affected by human activities. 
15 
COj 
N2 
CFC-11 
HCFC-22 
(a CFC 
substitute) 
CF4 
(a perfluoro-
carbon) 
Pre-industrial concentration 
-280 ppmv 
-700 ppbv 
-275 ppbv 
zero 
zero 
zero 
Concentration in 1994 
358 ppmv 
1720 ppbv 
312§ppbv 
268§ pptv± 
110 pptv 
72§ pptv 
Rate of concentration change* 
1.5 ppmv/yr 
10 ppbv/yr 
0.8 ppbv/yr 
0 pptv/yr 
5 pptv/yr 
1.2 pptv/yr 
0.4%/yr 
0.6%/yr 
0.25%/yr 
0%/yr 
5%/yr 
2%/yr 
Atmospheric lifetime (years) 
50-200"^t 
12+tt 
120 
50 
12 
50,000 
§ 
Estimated from 1992-93 data. 
t 
1 pptv = 1 part per trillion (million million) by volume. 
tt 
No single lifetime for COj can be defined because of the different rates of uptake by different sink processes, 
t t t This has been defined as an adjustment time which takes into account the indirect effect of methane on its own lifetime. 
* 
The growth rates of COj, CH^ and NjO are averaged over the decade beginning 1984 (see Figures 1 and 3); halocarbon 
growth rates ai-e based on recent years (1990s). 
extent cement production (Table 2). The increase has led to 
a radiative forcing of about +1.6 Wm~^ (Figure 2). Prior to 
this recent increase, СОт concentrations over the past 1000 
years, a period when global climate was relatively stable, 
fluctuated by about ±10 ppmv around 280 ppmv. 
The annual growth rate of atmospheric C O j 
concentration was low during the early 1990s (0.6 ppmv/yr 
in 1991/92). However, recent data indicate that the growth 
rate is currently comparable to that averaged over the 
1980s, around 1.5 ppmv/yr (Figure lb). Isotopic data 
suggest that the low growth rate resulted from fluctuations 
in the exchanges of CO^ between the atmosphere and both 
the ocean and the terrestrial biosphere, possibly resulting 
from climatic and biospheric variations following the 
eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in June 1991. While 
understanding these short-term fluctuations is important, 
fluctuarions of a few years' durarion are not relevant to 
projections of future concentrations or emissions aimed at 
estimating longer rime-scale changes to the climate system. 
The esrimate of the 1980s' carbon budget (Table 2) 
remains essenrially unchanged from IPCC (1994). While 
recent data on anthropogenic emissions are available, there 
are insufficient analyses of the other fluxes to allow an 
update of this decadal budget to include the early years of 
the 1990s. The net release of carbon from tropical land-use 
change (mainly forest clearing minus regrowth) is roughly 
balanced by carbon accumulation in other land ecosystems 
due to forest regrowth outside the tropics, and by transfer to 
other reservoirs stimulated by CO2 and nitrogen fertilisation 
and by decadal time-scale climatic effects. Model results 
suggest that during the 1980s, CO2 fertilisation resulted in a 
transfer of carbon from the atmosphere to the biosphere of 
0.5 to 2.0 GtC/yr and nitrogen fertiUsation resulted in a 
transfer of carbon from the atmosphere to the biosphere of 
between 0.2 and 1.0 GtC/yr. 
C O t is removed from the atmosphere by a number of 
processes that operate on different time-scales, and is 
subsequently transferred to various reservoirs, some of 
which eventually return C O j to the atmosphere. Some 
simple analyses of COj changes have used the concept of a 
single characteristic time-scale for this gas. Such analyses 
are of limited value because a single time-scale cannot 
capture the behaviour of COj under different emission 
scenarios. This is in contrast to methane, for example, 
whose atmospheric lifetime is dominantiy controlled by a 
single process: oxidation by OH in the atmosphere. For 
CO2 the fastest process is uptake into vegetation and the 
surface layer of the oceans which occurs over a few years. 
Various other sinks operate on the century time-scale (e.g., 
transfer to soils and to the deep ocean) and so have a less 
immediate, but no less important, effect on the 
atmosphericconcentration. Within 30 years about 40-60% 
of the CO2 currentiy released to the atmosphere is removed. 
However, if emissions were reduced, the CO^ in the 
vegetation and ocean surface water would soon equilibrate 
with that in the atmosphere, and the rate of removal would 
16 
Technical Summary 
380 
360 
340 
i= 
320 
300 
280 
260 
(a) 
380 
С D57 
- D47 
Siple 
* South Pole 
- - Mauna Loa 
Fossil CO2 emissions 
- 
One hundred year 
running mean 
360 -
340 -
320 -
280 
1 
/ 
1 
1 
1 
-
1 
1 
у 
-
I 
\ 
. 
. 
, 
, 
Ü 
5 
Ю 
E 
0 
8 
800 
2000 
2 
0 
• 1958 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 
Year 
Figure 1: (a) COj concentrations over tiie past 1000 years from 
ice core records (D47, D57, Siple and South Pole) and (since 
1958) from Mauna Loa, Hawaii, measurement site. All ice core 
measurements were taken in Antarctica. The smooth curve is 
based on a hundred year running mean. The rapid increase in CO^ 
concentration since the onset of industrialisation is evident and 
has followed closely the increase in CO^ emissions from fossil 
fuels (see inset of period from 1850 onwards), (b) Growth rate of 
CO2 concentration since 1958 in ppmv/yr at Mauna Loa. The 
smooth curve shows the same data but filtered to suppress 
variations on time-scales less than approximately 10 years. 
then be determined by the slower response of woody 
vegetation, soils, and transfer into the deeper layers of the 
ocean. Consequently, most of the excess atmospheric COj 
would be removed over about a century although a portion 
would remain airborne for thousands of years because 
ü-ansfer to the ultimate sink - ocean sediments - is very slow. 
There is large uncertainty associated with the future role 
of the terrestrial biosphere in the global carbon budget for 
several reasons. First, future rates of deforestation and 
regrowth in the tropics and mid-latitudes are difficult to 
predict. Second, mechanisms such as C 0 2 fertilisation 
remain poorly quantified at the ecosystem level. Over 
decades to centuries, anthropogenic changes in atmospheric 
C 0 2 content and climate may also alter the global 
distribution of ecosystem types. Carbon could be released 
rapidly from areas where forests die, although regrowth 
could eventually sequester much of this carbon. Estimates 
of this loss range from near zero to, at low probabilities, as 
much as 200 GtC over the next one-to-two centuries, 
depending on the rate of climate change. 
The marine biota both respond to and can influence 
climate change. Marine biota play a critical role in 
Technical Summary 
17 
Table 2: Annual average anthropogenic carbon budget for 
1980 to 1989. CO2 sources, sinks and storage in the 
atmosphere are expressed in GtC/yr. 
CO2 sources 
(1) Emissions from fossil fuel 
combustion and cement production 
5.5+0.5* 
(2) Net emissions from changes in 
1.6 ±1.0® 
tropical land-use 
(3) Total anthropogenic emissions = (1) + (2) 
7.1 ± 1.1 
Partitioning amongst reservoirs 
(4) Storage in the atmosphere 
3.3 + 0.2 
(5) Ocean uptake 
2.0 ±0.8 
(6) Uptake by Northern Hemishere 
0.5 ± 0.5* 
forest regrowth 
(7) Inferred sink; 3-(4+5+6) 
1.3± 1.5§ 
Notes: 
* For comparison, emissions in 1994 were 6.1 GtC/yr. 
@ Consistent with Chapter 24 of IPCC WGII (1995). 
# This number is consistent with the independent estimate, 
given in IPCC WGII (1995), of 0.7±0.2 GtC/yr for the mid-
and high latitude forest sink. 
§ This inferred sink is consistent with independent estimates, 
given in Chapter 9, of carbon uptake due to nitrogen 
fertilisation (0.5+1.0 GtC/yr), plus the range of other uptakes 
(0-2 GtC/yr) due to COj fertilisation and climatic effects. 
depressing the atmospheric COj concentration significantly 
below its equilibrium state in the absence of biota. Changes 
in nutrient supply to the surface ocean resulting from 
changes in ocean circulation, coastal runoff 
and 
atmospheric deposition, and changes in the amount of sea 
ice and cloudiness, have the potential to affect marine 
biogeochemical processes. Such changes would be 
expected to have an impact (at present unquantifiable) on 
the cycling of CO2 and the production of other climatically 
important trace gases. It has been suggested that a lack of 
iron limits phytoplankton growth in certain ocean areas. 
However, it is not likely that iron fertilisation of COj 
uptake by phytoplankton can be used to draw down 
atmospheric COj. even massive continual seeding of 10-
15% of the world oceans (the Southern Ocean) until 2100, 
if it worked with 100% efficiency and no opposing side-
effects (e.g., increased NjO production), would reduce the 
atmospheric COj build-up projected by the IPCC (1990) 
"Business-as-usual" emission scenario by less than 10%. 
3 
-2 
-
Halocarbons 
N2O 
Tropospheric 
aerosols ~ direct effect 
CO2 
• . 
^ - 
^ 
Fossil 
fuel 
Solar 
r h 
Biomass 
, T 
1 
Sulphate 
^ 
^ 
burning 
| 
| 
Tropospheric - i - 1 
L I Z J 
Stratospheric 
ozone 
' 
' 
ozone 
-'-
Troposphe 
- indire 
с aerosols 
)t effect 
Confidence level 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Very 
Very 
Very 
Very 
low 
low 
low 
low 
Figure 2: Estimates of the globally and annually averaged 
anthropogenic radiative forcing (in Wm"^) due to changes in 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols from pre-industrial 
times to the present (1992) and to natural changes in solar output 
from 1850 to the present. The height of the rectangular bar 
indicates a mid-range estimate of the forcing whilst the итог bars 
show an estimate of the uncertainty range, based largely on the 
spread of published values; the "confidence levef indicates the 
author's confidence that the actual forcing lies within this error bar. 
The contributions of individual gases to the direct greenhouse 
forcing is indicated on the first bar. The indirect greenhouse 
forcings associated with the depletion of stratospheric ozone and 
the increased concentration of tropospheric ozone are shown in the 
second and third bar respectively. The direct contributions of 
individual tropospheric aerosol component are grouped into the 
next set of three bars. The indirect aerosol effect, arising from the 
induced change in cloud properties, is shown next; quantitative 
understanding of this process is very limited at present and hence 
no bar representing a mid-range estimate is shown. The final bar 
shows the estimate of the changes in radiative forcing due to 
variations in solar output. The forcing associated with stratospheric 
aerosols resulting from volcanic eruptions is not shown, as it is very 
variable over this time period. Note that there are substantial 
differences in the geographical distribution of the forcing due to the 
well-mixed greenhouse gases (mainly CO2, ЩО, CH^ and the 
halocarbons) and that due to ozone and aerosols, which could lead 
to significant differences in their respective global and regional 
cUmate responses. For this reason, the negative radiative forcing 
due to aerosols should not necessarily be regarded as an offset 
against the greenhouse gas forcing. 
B.2 Methane (CHJ 
Methane is another naturally occurring greenhouse gas 
whose concentration in the atmosphere is growing as a 
result of human activities such as agriculture and waste 
disposal, and fossil fuel production and use (Table 3). 
18 
Technical Summary 
Table 3: Estimated sources and sinks of methane for 1980 to 1990. All figures are in Tg'^( CH^)/yr. The current global 
atmospheric burden ofCH^ is about 5000 Tg(CH^). 
(a) Observed atmospheric increase, estimated sinks and sources derived to balance the budget. 
Individual estimates 
Total 
Atmospheric increase* 
Sinks of atmospheric CH^: 
tropospheric OH 
stratosphere 
soils 
Total atmospheric sinks 
Implied sources (sinks + atmospheric increase) 
490 (405-575) 
40 (32^8) 
30 (15-45) 
37 (35-40) 
560 (460-660) 
597 (495-700) 
(b) Inventory of identified sources. 
Individual estimates 
Total 
Natural sources 
Anthropogenic sources: 
Fossil fuel related 
Total biospheric 
Total anthropogenic sources 
Total identified sources 
100 (70-120) 
275 (200-350) 
160(110-210) 
375 (300-450) 
535 (410-660) 
ITg = 1 million million grams, which is equivalent to 1 million tonnes. 
Applies to 1980-1990 average. Table 1 and the stabilisation discussion in Section B.9.2 use the average for 1984-1994. 
Global average methane concentrations increased by 6% 
over the decade starting in 1984 (Figure 3). Its 
concentration in 1994 was about 1720 ppbv, 145% greater 
than the pre-industrial concentration of 700 ppbv (Table 1, 
Figure 3). Over the last 20 years, there has been a decline 
in the methane growth rate: in the late 1970s the 
concentration was increasing by about 20 ppbv/yr, during 
the 1980s the growth rate dropped to 9-13 ppbv/yr. Around 
the middle of 1992, methane concentrations briefly stopped 
growing, but since 1993 the global growth rate has returned 
to about 8 ppbv/yr. 
Individual methane sources are not well quantified. 
Carbon isotope measurements indicate that about 20% of the 
total annual methane emissions are related to the production 
and use of fossil fuel. In total, anthropogenic activities are 
responsible for about 60-80% of current methane emissions 
(Table 3). Methane emissions from natural wetlands appear 
to contribute about 20% to the global methane emissions to 
the atmosphere. Such emissions will probably increase with 
global warming as a result of greater microbial activity. In 
1992 the directradiative forcing due to the increase in 
methane concentration since pre-industrial times was about 
-hO.47 Wm-2 (Figure 2). 
1900 I 
1 
^ — г 
1550 I 
I 
I 
1 
1 
1 
^ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1—-I 
1 
84 
86 
88 
90 
92 
94 
Year 
Figure 3: Global methane concentrations (ppbv) for 1983 to 
1994. Concentrations observed at Mould Bay, Canada are also 
shown. 
Changes in the concentration of methane have clearly 
identified chemical feedbacks. The main removal process 
for methane is reaction with the hydroxyl radical (OH). 
Addition of methane to the atmosphere reduces the 
concentration of tropospheric O H which can in turn feed 
back and reduce the rate of methane removal. 
Technical Summary 
19 
The adjustment time for a pulse of methane added to the 
atmosphere has been revised to 12 (±3) years (compared 
with 14.5 (±2.5) years in IPCC (1994)). Two factors are 
responsible for the change: (a) a new estimate for the 
chemical removal rate (11% faster); and (b) inclusion of 
the uptake of methane by soils. The revised global sink 
strength is 560 (±100) Tg(CH4)/year, higher than the 1994 
estimate, but still consistent with the previous range of 
global source strength. 
B,3 Nitrous oxide (N2O) 
There are many small sources of nitrous oxide, both natural 
and anthropogenic, which are difficult to quantify. The 
main anthropogenic sources are from agriculture and a 
number of industrial processes (e.g., adipic acid and nitric 
acid production). A best estimate of the current (1980s) 
anthropogenic emission of nitrous oxide is 3 to 8 Tg(N)/yr. 
Natural sources are poorly quantified, but are probably twice 
as large as anthropogenic sources. Nitrous oxide is removed 
mainly by photolysis (breakdown by sunlight) in the 
stratosphere and consequently has a long lifetime (about 120 
years). 
Although sources cannot be well quantified, atmospheric 
measurements and evidence from ice cores show that the 
atmospheric abundance of nitrous oxide has increased 
since the pre-industrial era, most likely owing to human 
activities. In 1994 atmospheric levels of nitrous oxide were 
about 312 ppbv; pre-industrial levels were about 275 ppbv 
(Table 1). The 1993 growth rate (approximately 0.5 
ppbv/yr) was lower than that observed in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s (approximately 0.8 ppbv/yr), but these short-
term changes in growth rate are within the range of 
variability seen on decadal time-scales. The radiative 
forcing due to the change in nitrous oxide since pre-
industrial times is about -1-0.14 Wm"^ (Figure 2). 
B.4 Halocarbons and other halogenated compounds 
Halocarbons are carbon compounds containing fluorine, 
chlorine, bromine or iodine. Many of these are effective 
greenhouse gases. For most of these compounds, human 
activities are the sole source. 
Halocarbons that contain chlorine (CFCs and HCFCs) 
and bromine (halons) cause ozone depletion, and their 
emissions are controlled under the Montreal Protocol and 
its Adjustments and Amendments. As a result, growth rates 
in the concentrations of many of these compounds have 
already fallen (Figure 4) and the radiative impact of these 
compounds will slowly decline over the next century. The 
contribution to direct radiative forcing due to concentration 
increases of these CFCs and HCFCs since pre-industrial 
1 — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — \ — I — I — I — I — I — I — г 
i
n
n 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
78 
80 
82 
84 
86 
88 
90 
92 
94 
Year 
Figure 4: Global CFC-11 concentrations (pptv) for 1978 to 
1994. As one of the ozone-depleting gases, the emissions of CFC-
11 are controlled under the Montreal Protocol and hs Adjustments 
and Amendments. Observations at some individual measurement 
sites are also shown. 
times is about +0.25 Wmr^-. Halocarbons can also exert an 
indirect negative radiative forcing through their depletion 
of stratospheric ozone (see Section B.5.2). 
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs, e.g., CF^, C2Fg) and sulphur 
hexafluoride (SFg) are removed very slowly from the 
atmosphere with estimated lifetimes greater than 1000 
years. As a result, effectively all emissions accumulate in 
the atmosphere and will continue to influence climate for 
thousands of years. Although the radiative forcing due to 
concentration increases of these compounds since pre-
industrial times is small (about -i-O.Ol Wm^^), it may 
become significant in the future if concentrations continue 
to increase. 
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are being used to replace 
ozone-depleting substances in some applications; their 
concentrations and radiative impacts are currently small. If 
emissions increase as envisaged in Scenario IS92a, they 
would contribute about 3% of the total radiative forcing 
from all greenhouse gases by the year 2100. 
B.5 Ozone (Oj) 
Ozone is an important greenhouse gas present in both 
the stratosphere and troposphere. Changes in ozone cause 
radiative forcing by influencing both solar and terrestrial 
radiation. The net radiative forcing is strongly dependent 
on the vertical distribution of ozone change and is 
particularly sensitive to changes around the tropopause 
level, where trends are difficult to estimate due to a lack of 
reliable observations and the very large natural variability. 
The patterns of both tropospheric and stratospheric ozone 
20 
Technical Summary 
changes are spatially variable. Estimation of the radiative 
forcing due to changes in ozone is thus more complex than 
for the well-mixed greenhouse gases. 
B.5.1 Tropospheric Ozone 
In the troposphere, ozone is produced during the oxidation 
of methane and from various short-lived precursor gases 
(mainly carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (N0^^) and 
non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHC)). Ozone is also 
transported into the troposphere from the stratosphere. 
Changes in tropospheric ozone concentration are spatially 
variable, both regionally and vertically, making assessment 
of global long-term trends difficult. In the Northern 
Hemisphere, there is some evidence that tropospheric 
ozone concentrations have increased since 1900, with 
strong evidence that this has occurred in many locations 
since the 1960s. However, the observations of the most 
recent decade show that the upward trend has slowed 
significantly or stopped. Model simulations and the limited 
observations together suggest that ozone concentrations 
throughout the troposphere may have doubled in the 
Northern Hemisphere since pre-industrial times, an 
increase of about 25 ppbv. In the Southern Hemisphere, 
there are insufficient data to determine if tropospheric 
ozone has changed, except at the South Pole where a 
decrease has been observed since the mid-1980s. 
Changes in tropospheric ozone have potentially 
important consequences for radiative forcing. The 
calculated global average radiative forcing due to the 
increased concentration since pre-industrial times is -t-0.4 
(±0.2) Wm-2. 
B.5.2 Stratospheric Ozone 
Decreases in stratospheric ozone have occurred since the 
1970s, principally in the lower stratosphere. The most 
obvious feature is the annual appearance of the Antarctic 
"ozone hole" in September and October. The October 
average total ozone values over Antarctica are 50-70% lower 
than those observed in the 1960s. Statistically significant 
losses in total ozone have also been observed in the mid-
latitudes of both hemispheres. Little or no downward trend 
in ozone has been observed in the tropics (20°N-20°S). The 
weight of recent scientific evidence strengthens the previous 
conclusion that ozone loss is due largely to anthropogenic 
chlorine and bromine compounds. Since the stratospheric 
abundances of chlorine and bromine are expected to 
continue to grow for a few more years before they decline 
(see Section B.4), stratospheric ozone losses are expected to 
peak near the end of the century, with a gradual recovery 
throughout the first half of the 2Ist century. 
The loss of ozone in the lower stratosphere over the past 
15 to 20 years has led to a globally averaged radiative 
forcing of about -O.I Wm^^. This negative radiative 
forcing represents an indirect effect of anthropogenic 
chlorine and bromine compounds. 
B.6 Tropospheric and stratospheric aerosols 
Aerosol is a term used for particles and very small droplets 
of natural and human origin that occur in the atmosphere; 
they include dust and other particles which can be made up 
of many different chemicals. Aerosols are produced by a 
variety of processes, both natural (including dust storms 
and volcanic activity) and anthropogenic (including fossil 
fuel and biomass burning). Aerosols contribute to visible 
haze and can cause a diminution of the intensity of sunlight 
at the ground. 
Aerosols in the atmosphere influence the radiation 
balance of the Earth in two ways: (i) by scattering and 
absorbing radiation - the direct effect, and (ii) by 
modifying the optical properties, amount and lifetime of 
clouds - the indirect effect. Although some aerosols, such 
as soot, tend to warm the surface, the net climatic effect of 
anthropogenic aerosols is believed to be a negative 
radiative forcing, tending to cool the surface (see Section 
B.7 and Figure 2). 
Most aerosols with anthropogenic sources are found in 
the lower troposphere (below 2 km). Aerosols undergo 
chemical and physical transformations in the atmosphere, 
especially within clouds, and are removed largely by 
precipitation. Consequently aerosols in the lower 
troposphere typically have residence times of a few days. 
Because of their short lifetime, aerosols in the lower 
troposphere are distributed inhomogeneously with maxima 
close to the natural (especially desert) and anthropogenic 
(especially industrial and biomass combustion) source 
regions. Aerosol particles resulting from volcanic activity 
can reach the stratosphere where they are transported 
around the globe over many months or years. 
The radiative forcing due to aerosols depends on the size, 
shape and chemical composition of the particles and the 
spatial distribution of the aerosol. While these factors are 
comparatively well-known for stratospheric aerosols, there 
remain many uncertainties concerning tropospheric aerosols. 
Since IPCC (1994), there have been several advances in 
understanding the impact of tropospheric aerosols on climate. 
These include: (i) new calculations of the spatial distribution 
of sulphate aerosol largely resulting from fossil fuel combus-
tion and (ii) the ñrst calculation of the spatial distribution of 
soot aerosol. The impact of these developments on the calcu-
lation of aerosol radiative forcing is discussed in Section B.7. 
Technical Summary 
21 
B.7 Summary of radiative forcing 
Globally averaged radiative forcing is a useful concept for 
giving a first-order estimate of the potential climatic 
importance of various forcing mechanisms. However, as 
was emphasised in IPCC (1994), there are limits to its 
utility. In particular, the spatial patterns of forcing differ 
between the globally well-mixed greenhouse gases, the 
regionally varying tropospheric ozone, and the even more 
regionally concentrated tropospheric aerosols, and so a 
comparison of the global mean radiative forcings does not 
give a complete picture of their possible climatic impact. 
Estimates of the radiative forcings due to changes in 
greenhouse gas concentrations since pre-industrial times 
remain unchanged from IPCC (1994) (see Figure 2). These 
are +2.45 Wm'^ (range: -1-2.1 to -1-2.8 Wm'^) for the direct 
effect of the main well-mixed greenhouse gases (COj, 
CH4, Щ0 and the halocarbons), +0.4 Wm^' (range: 0.2 to 
0.6 Wm^2) for tropospheric ozone and -0.1 Wm"^ (range: 
-0.05 to -0.2 Wm"-) for stratospheric ozone. 
The total direct forcing due to anthropogenic aerosol 
(sulphates, fossil fuel soot and organic aerosols from 
biomass burning) is estimated to be -0.5 Wm"^ (range: 
-0.25 to -1.0 Wm"2). This estimate is smaller than that 
given in IPCC (1994) owing to a reassessment of the model 
results used to derive the geographic distribution of aerosol 
particles and the inclusion of anthropogenic soot aerosol for 
the first time. The direct forcing due to sulphate aerosols 
resulting from fossil fuel emissions and smelting is estimated 
to be -0.4 Wm-2 (range: -0.2 to -0.8 Wm-2). -^he first 
estimates of the impact of soot in aerosols from fossil fuel 
sources have been made: significant uncertainty remains but 
an estimate of +0.1 Wm"^ (range: 0.03 to 0.3 Wm"^) is 
made. The direct radiative forcing since 1850 of particles 
associated with biomass burning is estimated to be -0.2 
Wm-2 (range: -0.07 to -0.6 Wm^), unchanged from IPCC 
(1994). It has recently been suggested that a significant 
fraction of the tropospheric dust aerosol is influenced by 
human activities but the radiative forcing of this component 
has not yet been quantified. 
The range of estimates for the radiative forcing due to 
changes in cloud properties caused by aerosols arising from 
human activity (the indirect effect) is unchanged from 
IPCC (1994) at between 0 and -1.5 Wm-2. Several new 
studies confirm that the indirect effect of aerosol may have 
caused a substantial negative radiative forcing since pre-
industrial times, but it remains very difficult to quantify, 
more so than the direct effect. While no best estimate of the 
indirect forcing can currently be made, the central value of 
-0.8 Wm-2 has been used in some of the scenario 
calculations described in Sections B.9.2 and F.2. 
There are no significant alterations since IPCC (1994) 
in the assessment of radiative forcing caused by changes 
in solar radiative output or stratospheric aerosol loading 
resulting from volcanic eruptions. The estimate of 
radiative forcing due to changes in solar radiative output 
since 1850 is +0.3 Wm-2 (range: +0.1 to +0.5). Radiative 
forcing due to volcanic aerosols resulting from an 
individual eruption can be large (the maximum global 
mean effect from the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo was -3 to 
-4 Wm-2), 
j^^jg 
Qj^jy g 
years. However, the 
transient variations in both these forcings may be 
important in explaining some of the observed climate 
variadons on decadal rime-scales. 
B.8 Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
The Global Warming Potential is an attempt to provide a 
simple measure of the relative radiative effects of the 
emissions of various greenhouse gases. The index is 
defined as the cumularive radiative forcing between the 
present and some chosen time horizon caused by a unit 
mass of gas emitted now, expressed relarive to that for 
some reference gas (here CO^ is used). The future global 
warming commitment of a greenhouse gas over a chosen 
time horizon can be estimated by multiplying the 
appropriate G W P by the amount of gas emitted. For 
example, GWPs could be used to compare the effects of 
reductions in C O 2 emissions relative to reductions in 
methane emissions, for a specified rime horizon. 
Derivation of GWPs requires knowledge of the fate of 
the emitted gas and the radiative forcing due to the amount 
remaining in the atmosphere. Although the GWPs are 
quoted as single values, the typical uncertainty is ±35%, 
not including the uncertainty in the carbon dioxide 
reference. Because GWPs are based on the radiative 
forcing concept, they are difficult to apply to radiatively 
important constituents that are unevenly distributed in the 
atmosphere. No attempt is made to define a GWP for 
aerosols. Additionally the choice of time horizon will 
depend on policy considerations. 
GWPs need to take account of any indirect effects of the 
emitted greenhouse gas if they are to reflect correctly 
future warming potential. The net GWPs for the ozone-
depleting gases, which include the direct "warming" and 
indirect "cooling" effects, have now been estimated. In 
IPCC (1994), only the direct GWPs were presented for 
these gases. The indirect effect reduces their GWPs. but 
each ozone-depleting gas must be considered individually. 
The net GWPs of the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) tend to 
be positive, while those of the halons tend to be negative. 
The calculation of indirect effects for a number of other 
22 
Technical Summary 
Table 4: Global Warming Potential referenced to the updated decay response for the Bern carbon cycle model and future 
CO2 atmospheric concentrations held constant at current levels. 
Species 
Chemical 
Lifetime 
Global Warming Potential 
Formula 
(Time Horizon) 
(years) 
20 years 
100 years 
500 years 
C02 
CO2 
variable^ 
1 
1 
1 
Methane* 
CH4 
12±3 
56 
21 
6.5 
Nitrous oxide 
NjO 
120 
280 
310 
170 
HFC-23 
CHF3 
264 
9,100 
11,700 
9,800 
HFC-32 
CH2F2 
5.6 
2,100 
650 
200 
HFC-41 
CH3F 
3.7 
490 
150 
45 
HFC-43-lOmee 
17.1 
3,000 
1,300 
400 
HFC-125 
C2HF5 
32.6 
4,600 
2,800 
920 
HFC-134 
C2H2F4 
10.6 
2,900 
1,000 
310 
HFC-134a 
CH2FCF3 
14.6 
3,400 
1,300 
420 
HFC-152a 
C2H4F2 
1.5 
460 
140 
42 
HFC-143 
C2H3F3 
3.8 
1,000 
300 
94 
HFC-143a 
C2H3F3 
48.3 
5,000 
3,800 
1,400 
HFC-227ea 
C3HF7 
36.5 
4,300 
2,900 
950 
HFC-236fa 
C3H2F6 
209 
5,100 
6,300 
4,700 
HFC-245ca 
C3H3F5 
6.6 
1,800 
560 
170 
Sulphur hexafluoride 
SF6 
3,200 
16,300 
23,900 
34,900 
Perfluoromethane 
CF4 
50,000 
4,400 
6,500 
10,000 
Perfluoroethane 
C2F6 
10,000 
6,200 
9,200 
14,000 
Perfluoropropane 
C3F8 
2,600 
4,800 
7,000 
10,100 
Perfluorobutane 
^4FlO 
2,600 
4,800 
7,000 
10,100 
Perfluorocyclobutane 
C-C4F8 
3,200 
6,000 
8,700 
12,700 
Perfluoropentane 
C5F12 
4,100 
5,100 
7,500 
11,000 
Perfluorohexane 
CfiFu 
3,200 
5,000 
7,400 
10,700 
Ozone-depleting substances'*' 
e.g., CFCs and HCFCS 
^ 
Derived from the Bern carbon cycle model. 
* 
The GWP for methane includes indirect effects of tropospheric ozone production and stratospheric water vapour production, as 
in IPCC (1994). The updated adjustment time for methane is discussed in Section B.2. 
t 
The Global Warming Potentials for ozone-depleting substances (including all CFCs, HCFCs and halons, whose direct GWPs have 
been given in previous reports) are a sum of a direct (positive) component and an indirect (negative) component which depends 
strongly upon the effectiveness of each substance for ozone destruction. Generally, the halons are likely to have negative net 
GWPs, while those of the CFCs are likely to be positive over both 20- and 100-year time horizons (see Chapter 2, Table 2.8). 
Technical Summary 
23 
~\ 
г 
(a) 
T 
1 \ 
1 1 
r 
/ 
/ 
/ 
-Л 
_ j 
1 
1 — I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
IS92e IS92f 
IS92e 
-I IS92f 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS92C 
2000 
2020 
2080 
2100 
2040 
2060 
Year 
Figure 5: (a) Total anthropogenic COj emissions under the IS92 emission scenarios and (b) the resulting atmospheric COj 
concentrations calculated using the "Bern" carbon cycle model and the carbon budget for the 1980s shown in Table 2. 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS92C 
2100 
gases (e.g., N0^,, CO) is not currently possible because of 
inadequate characterisation of many of the atmospheric 
processes involved. 
Updates or new GWPs are given for a number of key 
species (Table 4), based on improved or new estimates of 
atmospheric lifetimes, molecular radiative forcing factors, 
and improved representation of the carbon cycle. Revised 
lifetimes for gases destroyed by chemical reactions in the 
lower atmosphere (particularly methane, HCFCs and 
HFCs) have resulted in GWPs that are slightly lower 
(typically by 10-15%) than those cited in IPCC (1994). 
The IPCC definition of GWP is based on calculating the 
relative radiative impact of a release of a trace gas over a 
time horizon in a constant background atmosphere. In a 
future atmosphere with larger COj concentrations, such as 
occur in all of the IPCC emission scenarios (see Figure 5b), 
we would calculate slightly larger GWP values than those 
given in Table 4. 
B.9 Emissions and concentrations of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols in the future 
B.9.1 The IS92 emission scenarios 
The projection of future anthropogenic climate change 
depends, among other things, on assumptions made about 
future emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosol 
precursors and the proportion of emissions remaining in the 
atmosphere. Here we consider the IS92 emission scenarios 
(IS92a to f) which were first discussed in IPCC (1992). 
The IS92 emission scenarios extend to the year 2100 and 
include emissions of COj, CH^, NjO, the halocarbons 
(CFCs and their substitute HCFCs and HFCs), precursors 
of tropospheric ozone and sulphate aerosols and aerosols 
from biomass burning. A wide range of assumptions 
regarding future economic, demographic and policy factors 
are encompassed (IPCC, 1992). In this report, the 
emissions of chlorine- and bromine-containing halocarbons 
listed in IS92 are assumed to be phased out under the 
Montreal Protocol and its Adjustments and Amendments 
and so a single revised future emission scenario for these 
gases is incorporated in all of the IS92 scenarios. 
Emissions of individual HFCs are based on the original 
IS92 scenarios, although they do not reflect current 
markets. COj emissions for the six scenarios are shown in 
Figure 5 a. 
The calculation of future concentrations of greenhouse 
gases, given certain emissions, entails modelling the 
processes that transform and remove the different gases 
from the atmosphere. For example, future concentrations of 
CO2 are calculated using models of the carbon cycle which 
model the exchanges of CO2 between the atmosphere and 
the oceans and terrestrial biosphere (see Section B . l ) ; 
atmospheric chemistry models are used to simulate the 
removal of chemically active gases such as methane. 
A l l the IS92 emission scenarios, even IS92c, imply 
increases in greenhouse gas concentrations from 1990 to 
2100 (e.g., CO2 increases range from 35 to 170% (Figure 
5b); CH4 from 22 to 175%; and N2O from 26 to 40%). 
For greenhouse gases, radiative forcing is dependent on 
the concentration of the gas and the strength with which it 
absorbs and re-emits long-wave radiation. For sulphate 
aerosol, the direct and indirect radiative forcings were 
calculated on the basis of sulphur emissions contained in 
24 
Technical Summary 
E 
5 4 
O) 
Ç 
'o 
о 
Cù 
> 2 
•S 
ce 
1 
1 
1 -• 
I 
(b) 
—
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-
-
Diomass aerosol 
Sulphate aerosol - indirect 
1 
1 
1 
( 
I 
I 
( 
I 
( 
Í 
1750 1800 
1850 1900 1950 
Year 
2000 
2050 2100 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
1.2 
1.0 
E 0.8 
^ 0.6 
p 0.4 H 
re 
-0.2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Г" 
1 
1 
1 
1 
C ^ ^ A ^ ^ ' 
' 
'-
_ 
^ 
, , 
- 
- ' ' - ' - Ç ' / S r . c i j r e a 
H F C s 
Str_a\^b.  
r::.-r-^T 
I
I
I  
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
2080 
2100 
Year 
Figure 6: (a) Total globally and annually averaged historical radiative forcing from 1765 to 1990 due to changes in greenhouse gas 
concentrations and tropospheric aerosol emissions and projected radiative forcing values to 2100 derived from the IS92 emissions 
scenarios, (b) Radiative forcing components resulting from the IS92a emission scenario for 1990 to 2100. The "Total non-COj trace 
gases" curve includes the radiative forcing from methane (including methane related increases in stratospheric water vapour), nitrous 
oxide, tropospheric ozone and the halocarbons (including the negative forcing effect of stratospheric ozone depletion). Halocarbon 
emissions have been modified to take account of the Montreal Protocol and its Adjustments and Amendments. The three aerosol 
components are: direct sulphate, indirect sulphate and direct biomass burning, (c) Non-COj trace gas radiative forcing components. 
"CI/Br direcf ' is the direct radiative forcing resulting from the chlorine and bromine containing halocarbons; emissions are assumed to 
be controlled under the Montreal Protocol and its Adjustments and Amendments. The indirect forcing from these compounds (through 
stratospheric ozone depletion) is shown separately (Strat. O3). All other emissions follow the IS92a Scenario. The tropospheric ozone 
forcing (Trop. O3) takes account of concentration changes due only to the indirect effect of methane. 
the IS92 scenarios. The radiative forcing due to aerosol 
from biomass burning was assumed to remain constant at 
-0.2 Wm~2 after 1990. The contribution from aerosols is 
probably the most uncertain part of future radiative forcing. 
Figure 6a shows a single "best estimate" of historical 
radiative forcing from 1765 to 1990 (including the effects 
of aerosols), followed by radiative forcing for Scenarios 
IS92 a to f. Figures 6b and с show the contribution to 
future radiative forcing from various components of the 
IS92a Scenario; the largest contribution comes from COj, 
with a radiative forcing of almost +6 Wm"^ by 2100. The 
negative forcing due to tropospheric aerosols, in a globally 
Technical Summary 
25 
averaged sense, offsets some of the greenhouse gas 
positive forcing. However, because tropospheric aerosols 
are highly variable regionally, their globally averaged 
radiative forcing will not adequately describe their possible 
climatic impact. 
Future projections of temperature and sea level based on 
the IS92 emissions scenarios are discussed in Section F. 
B.9.2 Stabilisation of greenhouse gas and aerosol 
concentrations 
An important question to consider is: how might 
greenhouse gas concentrations be stabilised in the future? 
If global CO2 emissions were maintained at near current 
(1994) levels, they would lead to a nearly constant rate of 
increase in atmospheric concentrarions for at least two 
centuries, reaching about 500 ppmv (approaching twice the 
pre-industrial concentration of 280 ppmv) by the end of the 
21st century. 
In IPCC (1994), carbon cycle models were used to 
calculate the emissions of C O 2 which would lead to 
stabilisation at a number of different concentration levels 
from 350 to 750 ppmv. The assumed concentration profiles 
leading to stabilisation are shown in Figure 7a (excluding 
350 ppmv). Many different stabilisation levels, time-scales 
for achieving these levels, and routes to stabilisation could 
have been chosen. The choices made are not intended to 
have policy implications; the exercise is illustrative of the 
relationship between CO2 emissions and concentrations. 
Those in Figure 7a assume a smooth transition from the 
current average rate of COj concentration increase to 
stabilisation. To a first approximation, the stabilised 
concentration level depends more upon the accumulated 
amount of carbon emitted up to the time of stabilisation, 
than upon the exact concentration path followed en route to 
stabilisation. 
New results have been produced to take account of the 
revised carbon budget for the 1980s (Table 2), but the main 
conclusion, that stabilisation of concentration requires 
emissions eventually to drop well below current levels, 
remains unchanged from IPCC (1994) (Figure 7b). 
Because the new budget implies a reduced terrestrial sink, 
the allowable emissions to achieve stabilisation are up to 
10% lower than those in IPCC (1994). In addition, these 
calculations have been extended to include alternative 
pathways towards stabilisation (Figure 7a) and a higher 
stabilisation level (1000 ppmv). The alternative pathways 
assume higher emissions in the early years, but require 
steeper reductions in emissions in later years (Figure 7b). 
The 1000 ppmv stabilisation case allows higher maximum 
emissions, but still requires a decline to current levels by 
1000 
2000 2050 
2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 2350 
Year 
Г IS92a 
"2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 2350 
Year 
Figure 7: (a) CO2 concentration profiles leading to stabilisation 
at 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv following the pathways defined in 
IPCC (1994) (solid curves) and for pathways that allow emissions 
to follow IS92a until at least 2000 (dashed curves). A single 
profile that stabilises at a COj concentration of 1000 ppmv and 
follows IS92a emissions until at least 2000 has also been defined, 
(b) CO2 emissions leading to stabilisation at concentrations of 
450, 550, 650, 750 and 1000 ppmv following the profiles shown 
in (a). Current anthropogenic COj emissions and those for IS92a 
are shown for comparison. The calculations use the "Bern" 
carbon cycle model and the carbon budget for the 1980s shown in 
Table 2. 
about 240 years from now and further reductions thereafter 
(Figure 7b). 
The accumulated anthropogenic CO2 emissions from 
1991 to 2100 inclusive are shown in Table 5 for the profiles 
leading to stabilisation at 450, 550, 650, 750 and 1000 ppmv 
via the profiles shown in Figure 7a and, for comparison, the 
IS92 emission scenarios. These values are calculated 
26 
Technical Summary 
Table 5: Total anthropogenic CO2 emissions accumulated 
from 1991 to 2100 inclusive (GtC). All values were 
calculated using the carbon budget for 1980s shown in 
Table 2 and the Bern carbon cycle model. 
Case 
Accumulated COj emissions 
1991 to 2100 (GtC) 
IS92 scenarios 
с 
770 
d 
980 
b 
1430 
a 
1500 
f 
1830 
e 
2190 
Concentration Concentration 
profiles A" 
profiles 
Stabilisation at 
450 ppmv 
630 
650 
550 ppmv 
870 
990 
650 ppmv 
1030 
1190 
750 ppmv 
1200 
1300 
1000 ppmv 
-
1410 
* 
As in IPCC ( 1994) - see Figure 7a. 
t 
Profiles that allow emissions to follow IS92a until at least 
the year 2000 - see Figure 7a. 
using the "Bern" carbon cycle model. Based on the results in 
IPCC (1994) it is estimated that values calculated with 
different carbon cycle models could be up to approximately 
15% higher or lower than those presented here. 
If methane emissions were to remain constant at 1984-
1994 levels (i.e., those sustaining an atmospheric trend of 
+10 ppbv/yr), the methane concentration would rise to about 
1850 ppbv over the next 40 years. If methane emissions 
were to remain constant at their current (1994) levels (i.e., 
those sustaining an atmosphere trend of 8ppbv/yr), the 
methane concentration would rise to about 1820 ppbv over 
the next 40 years. If emissions were cut by about 30 
Tg(CH4)/yr (about 8% of current anthropogenic emissions), 
CH4 concentrations would remain at today's levels. These 
estimates are lower than those in IPCC (1994). 
If emissions of N , 0 were held constant at today's level, 
the concentration would climb from 312 ppbv to about 400 
ppbv over several hundred years. In order for the 
concentration to be stabilised near current levels, 
anthropogenic sources would need to be reduced by more 
than 50%. Stabilisation of PFCs and SFg concentrations 
can only be achieved effectively by stopping emissions. 
Because of their short lifetime, future tropospheric 
aerosol concentrations would respond almost immediately 
to changes in emissions. For example, control of sulphur 
emissions would immediately reduce the amount of 
sulphate aerosol in the atmosphere. 
С Observed Trends and Patterns in Climate and Sea 
Level 
Section В demonstrated that human activities have changed 
the concentrations and distributions of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols over the 20th century; this section discusses 
the changes in temperature, precipitation (and related 
hydrological variables), climate variability and sea level 
that have been observed over the same period. Whether the 
observed changes are in part induced by human activities is 
considered in Section E. 
C.l Has the climate warmed? 
Global average surface air temperature, excluding 
Antarctica, is about 15°C. Year-to-year temperature 
changes can be computed with much more confidence than 
the absolute global average temperature. 
The mean global surface temperature has increased by 
about 0.3° to 0.6°C since the late 19th century, and by 
about 0.2° to 0.3°C over the last 40 years, the period with 
most credible data (see Figure 8 which shows data up to 
the end of 1994). The warming occurred largely during two 
periods, between 1910 and 1940 and since the mid-1970s. 
The estimate of warming has not significantly changed 
since the IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992). Warming is 
evident in both sea surface and land-based surface air 
5 
- 0 . 6 -
o 
^ 
_0,8 I 
! 
L- ' 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
1 I 
'i860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 2000 
Year 
Figure 8: Combined land-surface air and sea surface temperatures 
(°C) 1861 to 1994, relative to 1961 to 1990. The solid curve 
represents smoothing of the annual values shown by the bars to 
suppress sub-decadal time-scale variations. The dashed smoothed 
curve is the con'esponding result from IPCC (1992). 
Technical Summary 
90N 
60N 
27 
30N 
30S-
60S 
90S 
120E 
120W 
120E 
-2 
-1.5 
-1 
-0.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
Figure 9: Cliange (from 1955-74 to 1975-94) of annual land-surface air temperature and sea surface temperature. 
2 
temperatures. Urbanisation in general and desertification 
could have contributed only a small part (a few hundredths 
of a degree) of the overall global warming, although 
urbanisation influences may have been important in some 
regions. Indirect indicators, such as borehole temperatures 
and glacier shrinkage, provide independent support for the 
observed warming. Recent years have been among the 
warmest since 1860, i.e., in the period of instrumental 
record. 
The warming has not been globally uniform. The recent 
warmth has been greatest over the continents between 
40°N and 70°N. A few areas, such as the North Aflantic 
Ocean north of 30°N, and some surrounding land areas, 
have cooled in recent decades (Figure 9). 
As predicted in IPCC (1992) and discussed in IPCC 
(1994), relatively cooler global surface and tropospheric 
temperatures (by about 0.5°C) and a relatively warmer 
lower stratosphere (by about I.5°C) were observed in 1992 
and early 1993, following the I99I eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo. Warmer temperatures at the surface and in the 
lower troposphere, and a cooler lower stratosphere, 
reappeared in 1994 following the removal by natural 
processes of Mt. Pinatubo aerosols from the stratosphere. 
The general tendency toward reduced daily temperature 
range over land, at least since the middle of the 20th 
century, noted in IPCC (1992), has been confirmed with 
more data (which have now been analysed for more than 
40% of the global land area). The range has decreased in 
many areas because nights have warmed more than days. 
Minimum temperatures have typically increased twice as 
much as maximum temperatures over the last 40 years. A 
likely explanation, in addition to the effects of enhanced 
greenhouse gases, is an increase in cloud cover which has 
been observed in many of the areas with reduced diurnal 
temperature range. An increase in cloud reduces diurnal 
temperature range both by obstructing daytime sunshine, 
and by preventing the escape of terrestrial radiation at 
night. Anthropogenic aerosols may also have an influence 
on daily temperature range. 
Temperature trends in the free atmosphere are more 
difficult to determine than at the surface as there are fewer 
data and the records are much shorter. Radiosonde data 
which are available for the period since the 1950s show 
warming trends of around O.I°C per decade, as at the 
surface, but since 1979 when satellite data of global 
tropospheric temperatures became available, there appears 
to have been a slight cooling (about -0.06X per decade), 
whereas surface measurements still show a warming. These 
apparently contradictory trends can be reconciled if the 
diverse response of the troposphere and surface to short-
28 
Technical Summary 
term events such as volcanic eruptions and El Niño are 
taken into account. After adjustment for these transient 
effects, both tropospheric and surface data show slight 
warming (about 0.1 °C per decade for the troposphere and 
nearly 0.2°C per decade at the surface) since 1979. 
Cooling of the lower stratosphere has been observed 
since 1979 both by satellites and weather balloons, as noted 
in IPCC (1992) and IPCC (1994). Current global mean 
stratospheric teiTiperatures are the coldest observed in the 
relatively short period of the record. Reduced stratospheric 
temperature has been projected to accompany both ozone 
losses in the lower stratosphere and atmospheric increases 
of carbon dioxide. 
C.2 Is the 20th century warming unusual? 
In order to establish whether the 20th century warming is 
part of the natural variability of the climate system or a 
response to anthropogenic forcing, information is needed 
on climate variability on relevant time-scales. As an 
average over the Northern Hemisphere for summer, recent 
decades appear to be the warmest since at least 1400 from 
the limited available evidence (Figure 10). The warming 
over the past century began during one of the colder 
periods of the last 600 years. Prior to 1400 data are 
insufficient to provide hemispheric temperature estimates. 
Ice core data from several sites suggest that the 20th 
century is at least as warm as any century in the past 600 
years, although the recent warming is not exceptional 
everywhere. 
Large and rapid climatic changes occurred during the 
last glacial period (around 20,000 to 100,000 years ago) 
and during the transition period towards the present 
1.0 I—I 
1—I 1—' 1—I 1 1 1—I 1 1—I 1 — I — 1 
1 1 1—I 
1—r— 
Q" 0.8 - Northern Hemisphere Summer (JJA) 
°^ . g _ for decades from 1400-09 to 1970-79, 
>< • 
relative to 1961-90 
о 0.4|-
o 0.2 -
-1 0 I—I—I—I—I I I I I ,
1
,
1
, 
1500 
1600 
1700 
1800 
1900 
Year 
Figure 10: Decadal summer (June to August) temperature index 
for the Northern Hemisphere (to 1970-1979) based on 16 proxy 
records (tree-rings, ice cores, documentary records) from North 
America, Europe and East Asia. The thin line is a smoothing of 
the same data. Anomalies are relative to 1961 to 1990. 
interglacial (the last 10,000 years, known as the 
Holocene). Changes in annual mean temperature of about 
5°C occuned over a few decades, at least in Greenland and 
the North Atlantic, and were probably linked to changes in 
oceanic circulation. These rapid changes suggest that 
climate may be quite sensitive to internal or external 
climate forcings and feedbacks. The possible relevance of 
these rapid climate changes to future climate is discussed 
in Section F.5. 
Temperatures have been less variable during the last 
10,000 years. Based on the incomplete evidence available, 
it is unlikely that global mean temperatures have varied by 
more than Г С in a century during this period. 
C.3 Has the climate become wetter? 
As noted in IPCC (1992), precipitation has increased over 
land in high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, 
especially during the cold season. A step-like decrease of 
precipitation occurred after the 1960s over the subtropics 
and tropics from Africa to Indonesia. These changes are 
consistent with changes in streamflow, lake levels and soil 
moisture (where data analyses are available). Precipitation, 
averaged over global land areas, increased from the start of 
the century up to about 1960. Since about 1980 
precipitation over land has decreased (Figure 11). 
There is evidence to suggest increased precipitation over 
the central equatorial Pacific Ocean in recent decades, with 
decreases to the north and south. Lack of data prevents us 
from reaching firm conclusions about other precipitation 
changes over the ocean. 
Estimates suggest that evaporation may have increased 
over the tropical oceans (although not everywhere) but 
decreased over large portions of Asia and North America. 
There has also been an observed increase in atmospheric 
water vapour in the tropics, at least since 1973. 
601—I 
. 
. I 
E 
2 -60 
L ' — I — I — I — I — 1 — I — I — I — I — I — I — I — 1 — I — I — J — , — 
Q- 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 11: Changes in land-surface precipitation averaged over 
regions between 55°S and 85°N. Annual precipitation departures 
from the 1961-90 period are depicted by the hollow bars. The 
continuous curve is a smoothing of the same data. 
Technical Summary 
29 
(a) 
Temperature indicators 
L A N D 
*** stratosphere 
(0.6 °C decrease 1979-94) 
troposphere 
' 0.3 °C increase 1958-94 
" * little change 1979-94 
*** N.H. Spring snow cover 
(10% decrease 1973-94) 
*** near surface air 
(0.3 to 0.6 °C Increase since late 19th century) 
' mountain glaciers 
(general retreat this century) 
*** land night-time air 
temperatures rising faster 
than daytime temperatures 
(1951-90) 
* ground temperatures 
(mostly warming) 
(b) 
Hydrological indicators 
O C É 
* high clouds 
(increase 1951-81) 
L A N D 
* mid-level clouds 
(increase N.H. mid-latitude 1951-81) 
* convective clouds 
(increase 1951-81) 
* fair weather cumulus 
(decrease 1951-81) 
" mid- to high-latitude clouds 
(increasing 1900-1980's) 
' mid- to high-latitude precipitation 
(increasing since 1900) 
* N.H. sub-tropical precipitation 
(10% decrease since 1970) 
* water vapour 
(increase 1973-88) 
A 
Л
А 
Л 
A 
A 
A
'
A 
A 
* evaporation in FSU & USA 
(decreasing since 1950) 
* soil moisture In FSU 
(increasing last 20-25 years) 
** run-off consistent with 
precipitation changes 
O C E A N 
Asterisk indicates confidence level (i.e., assessment): *** high, '* medium, * low 
Figure 12: Summary of observed climatic trends during the instrumental period of record. 
Cloudiness appears to have increased since the 1950s 
over the oceans. In many land areas where the daily 
temperature range has decreased (see Section C . l ) , 
cloudiness increased from the 1950s to at least the 
1970s. 
Snow cover extent over the Northern Hemisphere land 
surface has been consistently below the 21-year average 
(1974 to 1994) since 1988. Snow-radiation feedback has 
amplified springtime warming over mid- to high latitude 
Northern Hemisphere land areas. 
A summary of observed climate trends is shown in 
Figure 12. 
C.4 Has sea level risen? 
Over the last 100 years global sea level has risen by about 
10 to 25 cm, based on analyses of tide gauge records. A 
30 
Technical Summary 
major source of uncertainty in estimating the rate of rise is 
the influence of vertical land movements, which are 
included in sea level measurements made by tide gauges. 
Since IPCC (1990), improved methods for filtering out the 
effects of long-term vertical land movements, as well as 
greater reliance on the longest tide-gauge records for 
estimating trends, have provided greater confidence that 
the volume of ocean water has, in fact, been increasing and 
causing sea level to rise within the indicated range. 
It is likely that much of the rise in sea level has been 
related to the concurrent rise in the global temperature over 
the last 100 years. On this time-scale, the warming and 
consequent expansion of the oceans may account for about 
2 to 7 cm of the observed rise in sea level, while the 
observed retreat of glaciers and ice-caps may account for 
about 2 to 5 cm. Other factors are more difficult to 
quantify. Changes in surface and ground water storage may 
have caused a small change in sea level over the last 100 
years. The rate of observed sea level rise suggests that 
there has been a net positive contribution from the huge ice 
sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, but observations of the 
ice sheets do not yet allow meaningful quantitative 
estimates of their separate contributions. The ice sheets 
remain a major source of uncertainty in accounting for past 
changes in sea level, because there are insufficient data 
about these ice sheets over the last 100 years. 
C.5 Has the climate become more variable and/or extreme? 
Many of the impacts of climate change may result from 
changes in climate variability or extreme weather events. 
Some reports have already suggested an increase in 
variability or extremes has taken place in recent decades. 
Do meteorological records support this? 
There are inadequate data to determine whether 
consistent global changes in climate variability or extremes 
have occurred over the 20th century. On regional scales 
there is clear evidence of changes in some extremes and 
climate variability indicators (e.g., fewer frosts in several 
widespread areas; an increase in the proportion of rainfall 
from extreme events over the contiguous states of the 
USA). Some of these changes have been toward greater 
variability; some have been toward lower variability. 
There have been relatively frequent El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation waiTO phase episodes, with only rare excursions 
into the other extreme of the phenomenon since 1977, as 
noted in IPCC (1990). This behaviour, and especially the 
persistent warm phase from 1990 to mid-1995, is unusual 
in the last 120 years (i.e., since instrumental records 
began). The relatively low rainfall over the subtropical land 
areas in the last two decades is related to this behaviour. 
D Modelling Climate and Climate Change 
Climate models which incorporate, in various degrees of 
complexity, mathematical descriptions of the atmosphere, 
ocean, land, biosphere and cryosphere, are important tools 
for understanding climate and climate change of the past, 
the present and the future. These models, which use 
primarily physical laws and physically based empirical 
relations, are very much more complete than, for example, 
models based on statistical relationships used in less 
quantitative disciplines. Detailed projections of future 
climate change rely heavily on coupled atmosphere-ocean 
models (see Box 2). How much confidence should we have 
in predictions from such models? 
D.l The basis for confidence in climate models 
As discussed in Section B, changes in the radiatively active 
ttace gases in the atmosphere produce radiative forcing. For 
equivalent COj concentrations equal to twice the pre-
industrial concentration, the positive radiative forcing is 
about +4 Wm 2. To restore the radiative balance other 
changes in climate must occur. The initial reaction is for the 
lower atmosphere (the troposphere) and the Earth's surface to 
warm; in the absence of other changes, the warming would 
be about 1.2°C. However, heating not only changes 
temperatures, but also alters other aspects of the climate 
system and various feedbacks ai^e invoked (see Section D.2). 
The key role of climate models is to quantify these feedbacks 
and determine the overall climate response. Further, the 
wanning and other climate effects will not be uniform over 
the Earth's surface; an important role of models is to simulate 
possible continental and regional scale climate responses. 
Climate models include, based on our current 
understanding, the most important large scale physical 
processes governing the climate system. Climate models 
have improved since IPCC (1990), but so too has our 
understanding of the complexity of the climate system and 
the recognition of the need to include additional processes. 
In order to assess the value of a model for projections of 
future climate, its simulated climate can be compared with 
known features of the observed current climate and, to a 
less satisfactory degree, with the more limited information 
from significantly different past climate states. It is 
important to realise that even though a model may have 
deficiencies, it can still be of value in quantifying the 
climate response to anthropogenic climate forcing (see also 
Box 2). Several factors give us some confidence in the 
ability of climate models to simulate important aspects of 
anthropogenic climate change in response to anticipated 
changes in atmospheric composition: 
Technical Summary 
31 
Box 2: What tools are used to project future climate and how are they used? 
Future climate is projected using climate models. The most highly developed climate models are atmospheric and 
oceanic general circulation models (GCMs). In many instances GCMs of the atmosphere and oceans, developed as 
separate models, are combined, to give a coupled G C M (termed here a coupled atmosphere-ocean model). These 
models also include representations of land-surface processes, sea ice related processes and many other complex 
processes involved in the climate system. GCMs are based upon physical laws that describe the atmospheric and 
oceanic dynamics and physics, and upon empirical relationships, and their depiction as mathematical equations. These 
equations are solved numerically with computers using a three-dimensional grid over the globe. For climate, typical 
resolutions are about 250 km in the horizontal and 1 km in the vertical in atmospheric GCMs, often with higher 
vertical resolution near the surface and lower resolution in the upper troposphere and stratosphere. Many physical 
processes, such as those related to clouds, take place on much smaller spatial scales and therefore cannot be properly 
resolved and modelled explicitly, but their average effects must be included in a simple way by taking advantage of 
physically based relationships with the larger scale variables (a technique known as parametrization). 
Useful weather forecasts can be made using atmospheric GCMs for periods up to about ten days. Such forecasts 
simulate the evolution of weather systems and describe the associated weather. For simulation and projection of 
climate, on the other hand, it is the statistics of the system that are of interest rather than the day-to-day evolution of 
the weather. The statistics include measures of variability as well as mean conditions, and are taken over many 
weather systems and for several months or more. 
When a model is employed for climate projection it is first run for many simulated decades without any changes in 
external forcing in the system. The quality of the simulation can then be assessed by comparing statistics of the mean 
climate, the annual cycle and the variability on different time-scales with observations of the current climate. The 
model is then run with changes in external forcing, for instance with changing greenhouse gas concentrations. The 
differences between the two climates provide an estimate of the consequent climate change due to changes in that 
forcing factor. This strategy is intended to simulate changes or perturbations to the system and partially overcomes 
some imperfections in the models. 
Comprehensive coupled atmosphere-ocean models are very complex and take large computer resources to run. To 
explore all the possible scenarios and the effects of assumptions or approximations in parameters in the model more 
thoroughly, simpler models are also widely used and are constructed to give results similar to the GCMs when globally 
averaged. The simplifications may involve coarser resolution, and simplified dynamics and physical processes. An 
example is the upwelling diffusion-energy balance model. This represents the land and ocean areas in each hemisphere 
as individual "boxes", with vertical diffusion and upwelling to model heat transport within the ocean. 
Early climate experiments, using atmospheric GCMs coupled to a simple representation of the ocean, were aimed at 
quantifying an equilibrium climate response to a doubling of the concentration of (equivalent) COj in the atmosphere. 
Such a response portrays the final adjustment of the climate to the changed CO^ concentration (see Glossary). The 
range of global warming results is typically between 1.5 and 4.5°C. The temporal evolution and the regional patterns 
of climate change may depend significantly on the time dependence of the change in forcing. It is important, therefore, 
to make future projections using plausible evolving scenarios of anthropogenic forcing and coupled atmosphere-ocean 
models so that the response of the climate to the forcing is properly simulated. These climate simulations are often 
called "transient experiments" (see Glossary) in contrast to an equilibrium response. 
The main uncertainties in model simulations arise from the difficulties in adequately representing clouds and their 
radiative properties, the coupling between the atmosphere and the ocean, and detailed processes at the land surface. 
(i) 
The most successful climate models are able to 
simulate the important large-scale features of the 
components of the climate system well, including 
seasonal, geographical and vertical variations which 
are a consequence of the variation of forcing and 
dynamics in space and time. For example. Figure 13 
shows the geographical distribution of December to 
February surface temperature and June to August 
precipitation simulated by comprehensive coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models of the type used for climate 
prediction, compared with observations. The large 
scale features are reasonably well captured by the 
Technical Summary 
33 
models, although at regional scales more discrepancies 
can be seen. Other seasons are similarly well 
simulated, indicating the ability of models to 
reproduce the seasonal cycle in response to changes in 
solar forcing. The improvement since IPCC (1990) is 
that this level of accuracy is achieved in models with a 
fully-interactive ocean as compared to the majority of 
models that employed simpler schemes used in 1990. 
(ii) 
Many climate changes are consistently projected by 
different models in response to greenhouse gases and 
aerosols and can be explained in terms of physical 
processes which are known to be operating in the real 
world, for example, the maximum warming in high 
northern latitudes in winter (see Section F). 
(iii) The models reproduce with reasonable fidelity other less 
obvious variations in cUmate due to changes in forcing: 
• 
Some atmospheric models when forced with observed 
sea surface temperature variations can reproduce with 
moderate to good skill several regional climate 
variations, especially in parts of the tropics and sub-
tropics. For example, aspects of the large scale 
interannual atmosphere fluctuations over the tropical 
Pacific relating to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
phenomenon are captured, as are interannual 
variations in rainfall in north-east Brazil and to some 
extent decadal variations in rainfall over the Sahel. 
• 
As discussed in IPCC (1994), stratospheric aerosols 
resulting from the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in June 
1991 gave rise to a short-lived negative global mean 
radiative forcing of the troposphere which peaked at 
-3 to -4 Wm"2 a few months after the eruption and 
had virtually disappeared by about the end of 1994. 
A climate model was used to predict global 
temperature variations between the time of the 
eruption and the end of 1994 and the results agreed 
closely with observations (Figure 14). Such 
agreement increases confidence in the ability of 
climate models to respond in a realistic way to 
transient, planetary-scale radiative forcings of large 
magnitude. 
• 
Previous IPCC reports demonstrated the ability of 
models to simulate some known features of 
palaeoclimate. Only modest progress has been made 
in this area, mainly because of the paucity of reliable 
data for comparison. 
0.4 
Ü 
0.2 
05 
^ 
0.0 
< 
E 
2-0.2 
я 
о -0.4 
с 
< 
' ' ' Ч ' ' ' ' Ч I I I ' Ч 
I I I I I 
Observed land surface air temperature 
and nigfit marine air temperature 
(relative to April-June 1991) 
Model predictions 
-0.6 
AMJ 
I 
90 AMJ 91 AMJ 92 AMJ 93 AMJ 94 AMJ 95 AMJ 96 AMJ 97 
Year 
Figure 14: Predicted and observed changes in global land and 
ocean surface air temperature after the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. 
Lines represent changes of three-month running mean temperature 
from April to June 1991 until March to May 1995. The two model 
lines represent predictions starting from different initial 
atmospheric conditions. 
• 
Currently available model simulations of global 
mean surface temperature trend over the past half 
century show closer agreement with observations 
when the simulations include the likely effect of 
aerosol in addition to greenhouse gases (Figure 15). 
(iv) The model results exhibit "natural" variability on a 
wide range of time- and space-scales which is 
broadly comparable to that observed. This "natural" 
variability arises from the internal processes at work 
in the climate system and not from changes in 
external forcing. Variability is a very important 
1.5 
Ô 
о 
Ф 
g'l.O 
CO 
sz 
о I 0.5 
аЗ 
QL 
E 
^ 00 
ПЗ 
.Q 
О 
О 
-0.5 
Greenhouse gases 
Greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols 
Observed 
1860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
Year 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Figure 15: Simulated global annual mean warming from 1860 to 
1990 allowing for increases in greenhouse gases only (dashed 
curve) and greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols (solid curve), 
compared with observed changes over the same period. 
34 
Technical Summary 
aspect of the behaviour of the climate system and has 
important implications for the detection of climate 
change (see Section E). The year to year variations of 
surface air temperature for the current climate are 
moderately realistic in model simulations at the 
larger space-scales. For example the smaller 
variability over the oceans compared with continental 
interiors is captured. Too low interannual variability 
of the tropical east and central Pacific Ocean 
temperatures associated with the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is one deficiency. 
No current coupled atmosphere-ocean model 
simulates all aspects of ENSO events, but some of 
the observed interannual variations in the atmosphere 
associated with these events are 
captured. 
Climate models are calibrated, in part, by introducing 
adjustments which are empirically determined. The most 
sttiking example of these are the systematic adjustments (the 
so-called flux adjustments) that are used in some models at the 
atmosphere-ocean interface in order to bring the simulated 
climate closer to the observed state. These adjustments are 
used to compensate for model errors, for example 
inadequacies in the representation of clouds in atmospheric 
models. Flux adjustments, which can be quite large in some 
models, are used to ensure that the simulated present day 
climate is reaUstic and hence that climate feedback processes 
operate in the appropriate range in climate change simulations. 
Many features of the response of models with and without 
flux adjustments to increasing greenhouse gases are 
qualitatively similar. The most substantial differences in 
simulated climate change can generally be traced to 
deficiencies in the simulation of current climate in the 
unadjusted models, for example, systematic errors in sea ice. 
The main unknown regarding the use of adjustments in 
models is the extent to which they allow important non-linear 
processes to operate in the models. They have been tested 
with a good degree of success against known climate 
variations including the seasonal cycle and the perturbations 
mentioned above. This provides some conñdence in their use 
for future climate perturbations caused by human activities. 
In summary, confidence in climate models has increased 
since 1990. Primary factors that have served to raise our 
confidence are model improvements, e.g., the successful 
incorporation of additional physical processes (such as 
cloud microphysics and the radiative effects of sulphate 
aerosols) into global coupled models, and the improvement 
in such models' simulation of the observed changes in 
climate over recent decades. Further confidence will be 
gained as models continue to improve. 
D.2 Climate model feedbacks and uncertainties 
Warming from radiative forcing will be modified by 
climate feedbacks which may either amplify (a positive 
feedback) or reduce (a negative feedback) the initial 
response. The likely equilibrium response of global surface 
temperature to a doubling of equivalent carbon dioxide 
concentration (the "climate sensitivity") was estimated in 
1990 to be in the range 1.5 to 4.5 °C, with a "best estimate" 
of 2.5°C. The range of the estimate arises from 
uncertainties in the climate models and in their internal 
feedbacks, particularly those concerning clouds and related 
processes. No strong reasons have emerged to change these 
estimates of the climate sensitivity. The present activities 
regarding incorporation of these feedback processes in 
models are described below. 
Water vapour feedback 
An increase in the temperature of the atmosphere increases 
its water holding capacity and is expected to be 
accompanied by an increase in the amount of water vapour. 
Since water vapour is a powerful greenhouse gas, the 
increased water vapour would in turn lead to a further 
enhancement of the greenhouse effect (a positive feedback). 
About half of this feedback depends on water vapour in 
the upper troposphere, whose origin and response to 
surface temperature increase is not fully understood. 
Feedback by water vapour in the lower troposphere is 
unquestionably positive and the preponderance of evidence 
points to the same conclusion for upper tropospheric water 
vapour. Feedbacks resulting from changes in the decrease 
of temperature with height can partially compensate the 
water vapour feedback. 
Cloud/radiative feedback 
Several processes are involved in cloud/radiative feedback. 
Clouds can both absorb and reflect solar radiation (which 
cools the surface) and absorb and einit long-wave radiation 
(which warms the surface), depending on cloud height, 
thickness and cloud radiative properties. The radiative 
properties of clouds depend on the evolution of atmospheric 
water in its vapour, liquid and ice phases and upon 
atmospheric aerosols. The processes are complex and, 
although considerable progress has been made since IPCC 
(1990) in describing and modelling those cloud processes 
that are most important for determining radiative and hence 
temperature changes, their uncertainty represents a 
significant source of potential error in climate simulation. 
This potential error can be estimated by first noting that 
if clouds and sea ice are kept fixed according to their 
observed distributions and properties, climate models 
Technical Summary 
35 
would all report climate sensitivities in the range of 2 to 
3°C. Modellers have shown for various assumptions that 
physically plausible changes in cloud distribution could 
either as much as double the warming expected for fixed 
clouds or, on the other hand, reduce it by up to ГС. The 
range in estimated climate sensitivity of 1.5 to 4.5°C is 
largely dictated by this uncertainty. 
Ocean circulation 
Oceans play an important role in climate because they 
carry large amounts of heat from the tropics to the poles. 
They also store large amounts of heat, carbon and CO2 and 
are a major source of water to the atmosphere (through 
evaporation). Coupling of atmospheric and oceanic GCMs 
(see Box 2) improves the physical realism of models used 
for projections of future climate change, particularly the 
timing and regional distribution of the changes. 
Several models show a decrease or only marginal 
increase of sea surface temperatures in the northern North 
Atlantic in response to increasing greenhouse gases, related 
to a slowing down of the thermohaline circulation as the 
climate warms. This represents a local negative 
temperature feedback, although changes in cloud cover 
might be an important factor. The main influence of the 
oceans on simulations of climate change occurs because of 
their large heat capacity, which introduces a delay in 
warming that is not uniform spatially. 
Ice and snow albedo feedback 
An ice or snow covered surface strongly reflects solar 
radiation (i.e., it has a high "albedo"). As some ice melts at 
the warmer surface, less solar radiation is reflected leading 
to further warming (a positive feedback), but this is 
complicated by clouds, leads (areas of open water in sea 
ice) and snow cover. 
The realism of simulated sea ice cover varies 
considerably between models, although sea ice models that 
include ice dynamics are showing increased accuracy. 
Land-surface/atmosphere interactions 
Anthropogenic climate changes, 
e.g., 
increased 
temperature, changes in precipitation, changes in net 
radiative heating and the direct effects of C O j , will 
influence the state of the land surface (soil moisture, 
albedo, roughness, vegetation). In turn, the altered land 
surface can feed back and alter the overlying atmosphere 
(precipitation, water vapour, clouds). Changes in the 
composition and structure of ecosystems can alter not only 
physical climate, but also the biogeochemical cycles (see 
Section B). Although land-surface schemes used in current 
GCMs may be more sophisticated than in IPCC (1990), the 
disparity between models in their simulation of soil 
moisture and surface heat and moisture fluxes has not been 
reduced. Confidence in calculation of regional projections 
of soil moisture changes in response to greenhouse gas and 
aerosol forcing remains low. 
Changes in vegetation can potentially further modify 
climate locally and regionally by altering the exchange of 
water and energy between the land surface and atmosphere. 
For example, forests spreading into tundra in a warmer 
world would absorb a greater proportion of solar energy 
and increase the warming. This feedback would be 
modified by land-use changes such as deforestation. 
Coupled atmosphere-ocean models used for climate change 
studies do not yet include such interactions between 
climate and vegetation, and such feedbacks may have 
important effects on regional climate change projection. 
E Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of 
Causes 
An important question is: does the instrumental record of 
temperature change show convincing evidence of a human 
effect on global climate? With respect to the increase in 
global mean temperature over the last 100 years, IPCC 
(1990) concluded that the observed warming was "broadly 
consistent with predictions of climate models, but it is also 
of the same magnitude as natural climate variability". The 
report went on to explain that "the observed increase could 
be largely due to this natural variability; alternatively this 
variability and other human factors could have offset a still 
larger human-induced greenhouse warming". 
Since IPCC (1990), considerable progress has been 
made in the search for an identifiable human-induced effect 
on climate. 
E.l Better simulations for defining a human-induced 
climate change "signal" 
Experiments with GCMs are now starting to incorporate 
some of the forcing due to human-induced changes in 
sulphate aerosols and stratospheric ozone. The inclusion of 
these additional factors has modified in important ways the 
picture of how climate might respond to human influences. 
Furthermore, we now have information on both the timing 
and spatial patterns of human-induced climate change from 
a large (>18) number of transient experiments in which 
coupled atmosphere-ocean models are driven by past 
and/or projected future time-dependent changes in CO^ 
concentration (used as a surrogate to represent the 
combined effect of COj concentration and other well-
36 
Technical Summary 
mixed greenhouse gases; see "equivalent C O j " in the 
Glossary). Some of these experiments have been repeated 
with identical forcing but starting from a slightly different 
initial climate state. Such repetitions help to better define 
the expected climate response to increasing greenhouse 
gases and aerosols. However, important uncertainties 
remain; for example, no model has incorporated the full 
range of anthropogenic forcing effects. 
E.2 Better simulations for estimating natural internal 
climate variability 
In observed data, any "signal" of human effects on climate 
must be distinguished from the background "noise" of 
climate fluctuations that are entirely natural in origin. Such 
natural fluctuations occur on a variety of space- and time-
scales, and can be purely internal (due to complex 
interactions between individual components of the climate 
system, such as the atmosphere and ocean) or externally 
driven by changes in solar variability or the volcanic 
aerosol loading of the atmosphere. It is difficult to separate 
a signal from the noise of natural variability in the 
observations. This is because there are large uncertainties 
in the evolution and magnitude of both human and natural 
forcings, and in the characteristics of natural internal 
variability, which translate to uncertainties in the relative 
magnitudes of signal and noise. 
In the modelled world, however, it is possible to perform 
multi-century control experiments with no human-induced 
changes in greenhouse gases, sulphate aerosols or other 
anthropogenic forcings. Since 1990, a number of such 
control experiments have been performed with coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models. These yield important 
information on the patterns, time-scales, and magnitude of 
the "internally generated" component of natural climate 
variability. This information is crucial for assessing 
whether observed changes can be plausibly explained by 
internal climatic fluctuations, but constitutes only one part 
of the "total" natural variability of climate (since such 
control runs do not include changes in solar output or 
volcanic aerosols). Uncertainties still remain in estimates 
of both internal and total natural climate variability, 
particularly on the decadal-to-century time-scales. 
E.3 Studies of global mean change 
Most studies that have attempted 
to detect 
an 
anthropogenic effect on climate have'used changes in 
global mean, annually averaged temperature only. These 
investigations compared observed changes over the past 
10-100 years with estimates of internal or total natural 
variability noise derived from palaeodata, climate models. 
or statistical models fitted to observations. Most but not all 
of these studies show that the observed change in global 
mean, annually averaged temperature over the last century 
is unlikely to be due entirely to natural fluctuations of the 
climate system. 
These global mean results cannot establish a clear cause 
and effect link between observed changes in atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations and changes in the Earth's 
surface temperature. This is the attribution issue. 
Attribution is difficult using global mean changes only 
because of uncertainties in the histories and magnitudes of 
natural and human-induced forcings: there are many 
possible combinations of these forcings that could yield the 
same curve of observed global mean temperature change. 
Some combinations are more plausible than others, but 
relatively few data exist to constrain the range of possible 
solutions. Nevertheless, model-based estimates of global 
temperature increase over the last 130 years are more 
easily reconciled with observations when the likely cooling 
effect of sulphate aerosols is taken into account, and 
provide qualitative support for an estimated range of 
climate sensitivity consistent with that given in IPCC 
(1990) (Figure 16). 
E.4 Studies of patterns of change 
To better address the attribution problem, a number of 
recent studies have compared observations with model-
predicted patterns of temperature-change in response to 
anthropogenic forcing. The argument underlying pattern-
based approaches is that different forcing mechanisms 
("causes") may have different patterns of response 
("effects"), particularly if one considers the full three- or 
even four-dimensional structure of the response, e.g., 
temperature change as a function of latitude, longitude, 
height and time. Thus a good match between modelled and 
observed multi-dimensional patterns of climate change 
would be difficult to achieve for "causes" other than those 
actually used in the model experiment. 
Several studies have compared observed patterns of 
temperature change with model patterns of change from 
simulations with changes in both greenhouse gases and 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols. These comparisons have 
been made at the Earth's surface and in vertical sections 
through the atmosphere. While there are concerns 
regai^ding the relatively simple treatment of aerosol effects 
in model experiments, and the neglect of other potentially 
significant contributions to the radiative forcing, all such 
pattern 
comparison 
studies 
show 
significant 
correspondence between the observations and model 
predictions (an example is shown in Figure 17). Much of 
Technical Summary 
37 
о 
0.75 
0.50 
0.25 
CO 
E о с 
со CD 
^ 0.00 
« 
-0.25 ^ 
: (a) -
1 
1 
I ' l l 
OBS 
ДГ2х=1.5°С 
--- 
ДГ2х=2.5°С 
1-' 
Ли 
- - ДГ2х=4.5°С 
jf\ к 
: pi 
" 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 
1 , 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 г 1 1 1 ' 
1850 
1910 
1940 
Time (years) 
1970 
2000 
о 
о 
со 
E о с 
CD 
Q) 
D ? 
Ф 
Q. 
E 
Ф 
0.75 
0.50 
0,25 
0.00 
-0.25 
-0.50 
1 
1 1 1 
1 
;(b) 
-
- Au 
1 
1
1
1
1 
OBS 
ДГ2х=1.5°С 
ДГ2х=2.5°С 
ДГ2х=4.5°С 
1 1 1 1 
1 1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 
1
. 
; 
P 
—1—1—1—J 1 1 1 1 1 1 1—1—I 
1 1 1 1 i l 
1850 
1970 
2000 
1880 
1910 
1940 
Time (years) 
Figure 16: Observed ciianges in global mean temperature over 
1861 to 1994 compared with those simulated using an upwelling 
diffusion-energy balance climate model. The model was run first 
with forcing due to greenhouse gases alone (a) and then with 
greenhouse gases and aerosols (b). 
the model-observed correspondence in these experiments 
occurs at the largest spatial scales - for example, 
temperature differences between hemispheres, land and 
ocean, or the troposphere and stratosphere. Model 
predictions are more reliable at these spatial scales than at 
the regional scale. Increasing confidence in the 
identification of a human-induced effect on climate comes 
priinarily from such pattern-based work. For those seasons 
during which aerosol effects should be most pronounced 
the pattern correspondence is generally higher than that 
achieved if model predictions are based on changes in 
greenhouse gases alone (Figure 17). 
As in the global mean studies, pattern-oriented detection 
work relies on model estimates of internal natural 
variability as the primary yardstick for evaluating whether 
observed changes in temperature patterns could be due to 
natural causes. Concerns remain regarding the reliability of 
this yardstick. 
E.5 Qualitative consistency 
In addition to quantitative studies, there are broad areas of 
qualitative agreement between observations and those 
model predictions that either include aerosol effects or do 
not depend critically on their inclusion. As in the 
quantitative studies, one must be cautious in assessing 
consistency because the expected climate change signal 
due to human activities is still uncertain, and has changed 
as our ability to model the climate system has improved. In 
addition to the surface warming, the model and observed 
commonalities in which we have most confidence include 
stratospheric cooling, reduction in diurnal temperature 
range, sea level rise, high latitude precipitation increases 
and water vapour and evaporation increase over tropical 
oceans. 
E.6 Overall assessment of the detection and attribution 
issues 
In summary, the most important results related to the issues 
of detection and attribution are: 
• 
The limited available evidence from proxy climate 
indicators suggests that the 20th century global mean 
temperature is at least as warm as any other century 
since at least 1400 AD. 
Data prior to 1400 are too 
sparse to allow the reliable estimation of global mean 
temperature (see Section C.2). 
• 
Assessments of the statistical significance of the 
observed global mean temperature trend over the last 
century have used a variety of new estimates of 
natural internal and externally forced variability. 
These are derived from instrumental data, palaeodata, 
simple and complex climate models, and statistical 
models fitted to observations. Most of these studies 
have detected a significant change and show that the 
observed warming trend is unlikely to be entirely 
natural in origin. 
• 
More convincing recent evidence for the attribution 
of a human effect on climate is emerging from 
pattern-based studies, in which the modelled climate 
response to combined forcing by greenhouse gases 
and anthropogenic sulphate aerosols is compared 
with observed geographical, seasonal and vertical 
patterns of atmospheric temperature change. These 
studies show that such pattern correspondences 
increase with time, as one would expect as an 
anthropogenic 
signal increases in strength. 
Furthermore, the probability is very low that these 
correspondences could occur by chance as a result of 
natural internal variability only. The vertical paUerns 
38 
Technical Summary 
(a) 
90°S 
180° 
135°W 
90°W 
45°W 
0° 
45°E 
90°E 
135°E 
180° 
(b) 
90°N 
90°S 
180° 
135°W 
90°W 
45°W 
0° 
45°E 
90°E 
135°E 
180° 
-2.5 
-1.5 
-0.5 
0.5 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
о 
о 
/1 
Figure 17: Annual mean near-surface air temperature changes (°C) from equilibrium response experiments with an atmospheric G C M 
with a mixed-layer ocean coupled to a tropospheric chemistry model, forced with present-day atmospheric concentrations of CO^ (a) 
and by the combined effects of present-day COj levels and sulphur emissions (b). Observed temperature changes from 1955-74 to 
1975-94, shown in Figure 9, are qualitatively more similar to the changes in the combined forcing experiment than in the COj only 
experiment. 
Technical Summary 
39 
of change are also inconsistent with those expected 
for solar and volcanic forcing. 
• 
Our ability to quantify the human influence on global 
climate is currenfly limited because the expected 
signal is still emerging from the noise of natural 
variability, and because there are uncertainties in key 
factors. These include the magnitude and patterns of 
long-term natural variability and the time-evolving 
pattern of forcing by, and response to, changes in 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, and 
land-surface changes. Nevertheless, the balance of 
evidence suggests that there is a discernible human 
influence on global climate. 
F The Prospects for Future Climate Change 
F.l Forcing scenarios 
Projections of future anthropogenic climate change depend, 
amongst other things, on the scenario used to force the 
climate model. The IS92 emission scenarios are used here 
for projections of changes in global mean temperature and 
sea level. The IS92 scenarios include emissions of both 
greenhouse gases and aerosol precursors (see Section 
B.9.1) and for the first time both factors have been taken 
into account in the global mean temperature and sea level 
projections (Section F.2). 
In many coupled model experiments the forcing scenario 
is simplified by summing the radiative forcings of all the 
trace gases (COj, CH^, O3, etc.) and treating the total 
forcing as if it came from an "equivalent" concentration of 
COj. The rate of increase of "equivalent CO2" in these 
experiments is often assumed to be a constant +l%/yr 
(compounded). For comparison the IS92a Scenario, 
neglecting the effect of aerosols, is equivalent to a 
compounded rate of increase varying from 0.77 to 
0.84%/yr during the 21st century. 
The projections of global mean temperature and sea 
level changes do not come directly from coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models. Though these are the most 
sophisticated tools available for making projections of 
future climate change they are computationally expensive, 
making it unfeasible to produce results based on a large 
number of emission scenarios. In order to assess global 
temperature and sea level projections for the full range of 
IS92 emission scenarios, simple upwelling diffusion-
energy balance models (see Box 2) can be employed to 
interpolate and extrapolate the coupled model results. 
These models, used for similar tasks in IPCC (1990) and 
IPCC (1992), are calibrated to give the same globally 
averaged temperature response as the coupled atmosphere-
ocean models. 
The climate simulations here are called projections 
instead of predictions to emphasise that they do not 
represent attempts to forecast the most likely (or "best 
estimate") evolution of climate in the future. The 
projections are aimed at estimating and understanding 
responses of the climate system to possible forcing 
scenarios. 
F.2 Projections of climate change 
F.2.1 Global mean temperature response to IS92 emission 
scenarios 
Using the IS92 emission scenarios, which include 
emissions of both greenhouse gases and aerosol precursors 
(Section B.9.1) projected global mean temperature changes 
relative to 1990 were calculated for the 21st century. 
Temperature projections assuming the "best estimate" 
value of climate sensitivity, 2.5°C, (see Section D.2) are 
shown for the full set of IS92 scenarios in Figure 18. For 
IS92a the temperature increase by 2100 is about 2°C. 
Taking account of the range in the estimate of climate 
sensitivity (1.5 to 4.5°C) and the full set of IS92 emission 
scenarios, the models project an increase in global mean 
temperature of between 0.9 and 3.5°C (Figure 19). In all 
cases the average rate of warming would probably be 
greater than any seen in the last 10,000 years, but the actual 
annual to decadal changes would include considerable 
natural variability. Because of the thermal inertia of the 
oceans, global mean temperature would continue to 
2.5 
о 2.0 
CD 
D) 
С 
CO 
JZ 
" 1.5 
Щ 
|-1.0 
03 
« 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
, 
^ 
// 
-
/ / 
/ / 
<^_J 
1 —J 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
IS92e 
IS92f 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92CI 
IS920 
2000 
2020 
2060 
2080 
2100 
2040 
Year 
Figure 18: Projected global mean surface temperature changes 
from 1990 to 2100 for the full set of IS92 emission scenarios. A 
climate sensitivity of 2.5°C is assumed. 
40 
Technical Summary 
Ü 
Including changes in aerosol beyond 1990 À 
• • • Constant 1990 aerosol 
)• IS92e/4.5 
У IS92a/2.5 
> IS92C/1.5 
2100 
Figure 19: Projected global mean surface temperature change 
extremes from 1990 to 2100. The highest temperature changes 
assume a climate sensitivity of 4.5°C and the IS92e emission 
scenario; tlie lowest a climate sensitivity of 1.5°C and the IS92c 
emission scenario and the mid-range curve a climate sensitivity of 
2.5°C and the IS92a Scenario. The solid curves include the effect 
of changing aerosol; the dashed curves assume aerosol emissions 
remain constant at their 1990 levels. 
increase beyond 2100 even if concentrations of greenhouse 
gases were stabilised at that time. Only 50-90% of the 
eventual temperature changes are realised at the time of 
greenhouse gas stabilisation. All scenarios show substantial 
climate warming, even when the negative aerosol radiative 
forcing is accounted for. Although C O j is the most 
important anthropogenic greenhouse gas, the other 
greenhouse gases contribute significantly (about 30%) to 
the projected global warming. 
To allow closer comparison with the projections presented in 
IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992) and to illustrate the sensitivity of 
future global temperature to changes in aerosol concenttations, 
the same series of calculations were performed neglecting 
future aerosol changes, i.e. aerosol concentrations were held 
constant at 1990 levels. These lead to higher projections of 
temperamre change. Taking account of the range in the estimate 
of climate sensitivity and the full set of IS92 emission scenaiios, 
the models project an increase in global mean temperature of 
between 0.8 and 4.5°C. For IS92a, assuining the "best estimate" 
of chmate sensitivity, the temperature increase by 2100 is about 
2.4°C. For comparison, the corresponding temperamre increase 
for IS92a presented in IPCC (1992) was 2.8°C. The projections 
in IPCC (1990) were based on an earlier set of emission 
scenarios, the "best estimate" for the increase in global 
temperature by 2100 (relative to 1990) was 3.3°C. 
F.2.2 Global тест sea level response to IS92 emission-
scenarios 
Using the IS92 emission scenarios, including greenhouse gas 
and aerosol precursors, projected global mean sea level 
increases relarive to 1990 were calculated for the 21st 
century. Sea level projections assuming the "best estimate" 
values for cUmate sensitivity and ice melt are shown for the 
full set of IS92 scenarios in Figure 20. For IS92a, the sea 
level rise by 2100 is 49 cm. For comparison, the "best 
estimate" of global sea level rise by 2100 given in IPCC 
(1990) was 66 cm. Also taking account of the ranges in the 
estimate of climate sensitivity and ice melt parameters, and 
the full set of IS92 emission scenarios, the models project an 
increase in global mean sea level of between 13 and 94 cm 
(Figure 21). During the first half of the next century, the 
choice of emission scenario has relatively little effect on the 
projected sea level rise due to the large thermal inertia of the 
ocean-ice-atmosphere climate system, but has increasingly 
larger effects in the latter part of the next century. In 
addition, because of the thermal inertia of the oceans, sea 
level would continue to lise for many centuries beyond 2100 
even if concentrations of greenhouse gases were stabilised at 
that time. The projected rise in sea level is primarily due to 
thermal expansion as the ocean waters warm, but also due to 
increased melting of glaciers. 
In these projections, the combined contributions of the 
Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are projected to be 
relatively minor over the next century. However, the 
possibiUty of large changes in the volumes of these ice 
sheets (and, consequently, in sea level) cannot be ruled out, 
although the likelihood is considered to be low. 
Changes in future sea level will not occur uniformly 
around the globe. Recent coupled atmosphere-ocean model 
IS92e 
IS92f 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS920 
2100 
Figure 20: Projected global mean sea level rise from 1990 to 
2100 for the full set of IS92 emission scenarios. A climate 
sensitivity of 2.5 °C and mid-value ice melt parameters are 
assumed. 
Technical Summary 
41 
IS92e/high 
JlS92a/mid 
— •• 
—IS92C/IOW 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 21: Projected global mean sea level rise extremes from 
1990 to 2100. The highest sea level rise curve assumes a climate 
sensitivity of 4.5°C, high ice melt parameters and the IS92e 
emission scenario; the lowest a climate sensitivity of 1.5°C, low 
ice melt parameters and the IS92c emission scenario and the 
middle curve a climate sensitivity of 2.5°C, mid-value ice melt 
parameters and the IS92a Scenario. 
not incorporate the effect of carbon uptake through 
COj fertilisation, resulting in higher future C O j 
concentrations for given emissions in IPCC (1990). 
The inclusion of aerosol effects in the pre-1990 
radiative forcing history. The estimated historical 
changes of radiative forcing up to 1990, used in this 
report for global mean temperature and sea level 
projections, includes a component due to aerosols. 
This particularly affects projections of sea level rise, 
which are strongly influenced by the history of 
radiative forcing over the last century. 
Revised (and more realistic) parameters in the simple 
upwelling diffusion-energy balance climate model. 
The inclusion in the model of spatial variations in the 
climate sensitivity and the effect of changing strength 
of the thermohaUne circulation, to accord with coupled 
atmosphere-ocean general circulation models. 
experiments suggest that the regional responses could 
differ substantially, owing to regional differences in 
heating and circulation changes. In addition, geological and 
geophysical processes cause vertical land movements and 
thus affect relative sea levels on local and regional scales. 
Tides, waves and storm surges could be affected by 
regional climate changes, but future projections are, at 
present, highly uncertain. 
F.2.3 Temperature and sea level projections compared 
with IPCC (1990) 
The global average temperature and sea level projections 
presented here for 1990 to 2100, both excluding and 
including changing aerosol emissions, are lower than the 
corresponding projections presented in IPCC (1990). 
Taking into account the negative radiative forcing of 
aerosols reduces projections of temperature and sea level 
rise. Those projections which exclude the effect of 
changing aerosol emissions are lower than IPCC (1990) for 
a number of reasons, mainly: 
• 
The revised (IS92) emission scenarios have been 
used for all greenhouse gases. This is particularly 
important for CO, and CFCs. 
• 
Revised treatment of the carbon cycle. The carbon 
cycle model used to calculate future temperature and 
sea level rise in IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992) did 
• 
The use of improved models for the ice melt 
component of sea level rise. 
F.3 Spatial patterns of projected climate change 
Although in global mean terms, the effect of including 
aerosols is to reduce the projected warming (see Section 
F.2), it can be misleading to consider only the global mean 
surface temperature, which does not give an effective 
indication of climate change at smaller spatial scales. 
Because aerosols are short-lived, they are unevenly 
distributed across the globe, being concentrated near 
regions where they are emitted. As a result, the spatial 
pattern of aerosol forcing is very different to that produced 
by the long-lived well-mixed greenhouse gases and, when 
considering patterns of climate change, their cooling effect 
is not a simple offset to the warming effect of greenhouse 
gases, as might be implied from the global mean results. 
Aerosols are likely to have a significant effect on future 
regional climate change. 
Confidence is higher in hemispheric to continental scale 
projections of cUmate change (Section F.3.1) tiian at regional 
scales (Section F.3.2), where confidence remains low. 
F.5.7 Continental scale patterns 
In IPCC (1990), estimates of the patterns of future climate 
change were presented, the most robust of which related to 
continental and larger spatial scales. The results were based 
on G C M experiments which included the effect of greenhouse 
gases, but did not take into account the effects of aerosols. 
42 
Technical Summary 
The following provides some details of the changes on 
continental scales in experiments with greenhouse gases 
alone (generally represented by a 1%/yr increase in COj) 
and increases in greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations 
(using aerosol concentration derived from the IS92a 
Scenario). It is important to realise that, in contrast to the 
many model results with C O , alone, there are only two 
recent coupled atmosphere-ocean model simulations that 
include the effects of both aerosols and COj, neither of 
which have yet been thoroughly analysed. We have 
concentrated on those changes which show most 
consistency between models, and for which plausible 
physical mechanisms have been identified. 
Temperature and Precipitation 
A l l model simulations, whether they are forced with 
increased concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, 
or with increased greenhouse gas concentrations alone, 
show the following features: 
• 
generally greater surface warming of the land than of 
the oceans in winter, as in equilibrium simulations 
(Figures 22 and 23); 
• 
a minimum warming around Antarctica and in the 
northern North Atlantic which is associated with 
deep oceanic mixing in those areas; 
• 
maximum warming in high northern latitudes in late 
autumn and winter associated with reduced sea ice 
and snow cover; 
• 
littie warming over the Arctic in summer; 
• 
little seasonal variation of the warming in low 
latitudes or over the southern circumpolar ocean; 
• 
a reduction in diurnal temperature range over land in 
most seasons and most regions; 
• 
an enhanced global mean hydrological cycle; 
• 
increased precipitation in high latitudes in winter. 
Including the effects of aerosols in simulations of future 
climate leads to a somewhat reduced surface warming, 
mainly in middle latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. 
The maximum winter warming in high northern latitudes is 
less extensive (compare Figures 22 and 23). 
However, adding the cooling effect of aerosols is not a 
simple offset to the warming effect of greenhouse gases, 
but significantly affects some of the continental scale 
patterns of climate change. This is most noticeable in 
summer where the cooling due to aerosols tends to weaken 
monsoon circulations. For example, when the effects of 
both greenhouse gases and aerosols are included, Asian 
summer monsoon rainfall decreases, whereas in earlier 
simulations with only the effect of greenhouse gases 
represented, Asian summer monsoon rainfall increased. 
90°W 
0= 
90°E 
180° 
-6 
-4 
-2 
0 
Figure 22: The pattern of suiface temperature change projected at the time of COj doubling from a transient coupled model experiment. 
Technical Summary 
43 
45°N 
0^ 
45°S 
180° 
90°W 
0° 
90°E 
180° 
-6 
-4 
-2 
0 
6 
Figure 23: The pattern of surface temperature change projected by a transient coupled model at the time of COj doubling when both 
COo and aerosol concentration increases are taken into account. 
Conversely, the addition of aerosol effects leads to an 
increase in precipitation over southern Europe, whereas 
decreases are found in simulations with greenhouse gases 
only. These changes will be sensitive to the aerosol 
scenario used, and the details of the parametrization of the 
radiative effects of aerosol. Other forcings, including that 
due to increases in tropospheric ozone, soot and the 
indirect effect of sulphate aerosols have been neglected and 
could influence these results. In general, regional 
projections are also sensitive to model resolution and are 
affected by large natural variability. Hence confidence in 
regional projections remains low. 
With increases in COj only, two coupled atmosphere-
ocean models show a pattern of SST (sea surface 
temperature) change, precipitation change and anomalies in 
wind and ocean currents that resemble the warm phase of 
ENSO, as well as the observed decadal time-scale SST 
anomalies of the 1980s and early 1990s. This is 
characterised by a reduction of the east-west SST gradient 
in the tropical Pacific, though the magnitude of this effect 
varies among models. 
Soil moisture 
Although there is less confidence in simulated changes in 
soil moisture than in those of temperature, some of the 
results concerning soil moisture are dictated more by 
changes in precipitation and evaporation than by the 
detailed response of the surface scheme of the climate 
model. All model simulations, whether they are forced with 
increased concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols, 
or with increased greenhouse gas concentrations alone, 
produce predominantly increased soil moisture in high 
northern latitudes in winter. Over the northern continents in 
summer, the changes in soil moisture are sensitive to the 
inclusion of aerosol effects. 
Ocean circulation 
In response to increasing greenhouse gases, most models 
show a decrease in the strength of the northern North 
Atlantic oceanic circulation further reducing the strength of 
the warming around the North Atlantic. The increase in 
precipitation in high latitudes decreases the surface salinity, 
inhibiting the sinking of water at high latitude, which 
drives this circulation. 
F.3.2 Regional scale patterns 
Estimation of the potential impacts of climate change on 
human infrastructure and natural ecosystems requires 
projections of future climate changes at the regional scale, 
rather than as global or continental means. 
44 
Technical Summary 
Since IPCC (1990), a greater appreciation has been 
developed of the uncertainties in making projections at the 
regional scale. There are several difficulties: 
• 
The global climate models used for future projections 
are run at fairly coarse resolution and do not 
adequately depict many geographic features (such as 
coastlines, lakes and mountains), surface vegetation, 
and the interactions between the atmosphere with the 
surface which become more important on regional 
scales. Considerable spread exists among model 
projections on the regional scale even when climate 
model experiments are driven by the same future 
radiative forcing scenario. 
• 
There is much more natural variation in local climate 
than in climate averaged over continental or larger 
scales. This variation arises from locally generated 
variability from storms, interactions between the 
atmosphere and the oceans (such as ENSO), and 
from variations in soil moisture, sea ice, and other 
components of the climate system. Series or 
ensembles of model predictions started from different 
initial conditions allow both the mean climate and the 
superimposed variability to be determined. 
• 
Because of their uneven spatial distribution, human 
induced tropospheric aerosols are likely to greatly 
influence future regional climate change. At present, 
however, there are very few projections of climate 
change with coupled atmosphere-ocean models (the 
type of model that gives more reliable information on 
the regional scale) which include the radiative effects 
of aerosols. Those that have been run include a very 
simplified representation of aerosol effects. 
» 
Land-use changes are also believed to have a 
significant impact on temperature and precipitation 
changes, especially in the tropics and subtropics. 
Climate model experiments have shown the 
likelihood of substantial local climate change 
associated with deforestation in the Amazon, or 
desertification in the Sahel. Changes in land-use on 
small scales which cannot be foreseen are expected 
to continue to influence regional climate. 
Because of these problems, no information on future 
regional climate change is presented here. However, 
this situation is expected to improve in the future as a 
result of: 
• 
more coupled atmosphere-ocean model experiments 
with aerosol effects included; 
• 
improvements in models, both from increased 
resolution and improved representation of small-
scale processes; 
• 
more refined scenarios for aerosols and other 
forcings, 
F.3.3 Changes in variability and extremes 
Small changes in the mean climate or climate variability 
can produce relatively large changes in the frequency of 
extreme events (defined as events where a certain threshold 
is surpassed); a small change in the variability has a 
stronger effect than a similar change in the mean. 
Temperature 
A general warming tends to lead to an increase in 
extremely high temperature events and a decrease in 
extremely low temperatures (e.g., frost days). 
Hydrology 
Many models suggest an increase in the probability of 
intense precipitation with increased greenhouse gas 
concentrations. In some areas a number of simulations 
show there is also an increase in the probability of dry days 
and the length of dry spells (consecutive days without 
precipitation). Where mean precipitation decreases, the 
likelihood of drought increases. New results reinforce the 
view that variability associated with the enhanced 
hydrological cycle translates into prospects for more severe 
droughts and/or floods in some places and less severe 
droughts and/or floods in other places. 
Mid-latitude storms 
In the few analyses available, there is little agreement 
between models on the changes in storminess that might 
occur in a warmer world. Conclusions regarding extreme 
storm events are obviously even more uncertain. 
Hurricanes/Tropical cyclones 
The formation of tropical cyclones depends not only on sea 
surface temperature (SST), but also on a number of 
atmospheric factors. Although some models now represent 
tropical storms with some realism for present day climate, 
the state of the science does not allow assessment of future 
changes. 
El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
Several global coupled models indicate that the ENSO-like 
SST variability they simulate continues with increased 
Technical Summary 
45 
COj- Associated witii the mean increase of tropical SSTs 
as a result of increased greenhouse gas concentrations, 
there could be enhanced precipitation variability associated 
with ENSO events in the increased COj climate, especially 
over the tropical continents. 
F.4 Effects of stabilising greenhouse gas concentrations 
Possible global temperature and sea level response to the 
scenarios for stabilising concentrations discussed in 
Section B.9.2 were calculated with the same upwelling 
diffusion-energy balance model used for the results in 
Sections F.2.1 and F.2.2. 
For each of the pathways leading to stabilisation, the 
climate system shows considerable warming during the 
21st century. Figure 24 shows temperature increases for the 
cases which stabilise at concentrations of 650 and 450 
ppmv for different climate sensitivities. Stabilisation of the 
concentration does not lead to an immediate stabilisation of 
the global mean temperature. The global mean temperature 
is seen to continue rising for hundreds of years after the 
concentrations have stabilised in Figure 24 due to long 
time-scales in the ocean. 
As shown in Figure 25, the long-term sea level rise 
"commitment" is even more pronounced. Sea level 
350 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
Year 
2400 
2500 
Figure 24: The global mean surface temperature response to the 
CO, concentration pathways leading to stabilisation at 450 
(dashed curves) and 650 (solid curves) ppmv (see Figure 7a) for a 
climate sensitivity of 1.5, 2.5 and 4.5 °C. The changes shown are 
those arising from COj increases alone. The date of concentration 
stabilisation is indicated by the dot. Calculations assume the 
"observed" history of forcing to 1990, including aerosol effects 
and then COj concentration increases only beyond 1990. 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
Year 
2400 
2500 
Figure 25: The global mean sea level response to the CO2 
concentration pathways leading to stabilisation at 450 (dashed 
curves) and 650 (solid curves) ppmv (see Figure 7a) for a climate 
sensitivity of 1.5, 2.5 and 4.5 °C. The changes shown are those 
arising from COj increases alone. The date of concentration 
stabilisation is indicated by the dot. Calculations assume the 
"observed" history of forcing to 1990, including aerosol effects 
and then CO^ concentration increases only beyond 1990. 
continues to rise, at only a slowly declining rate, for many 
centuries after greenhouse gas concentrations and 
temperatures have stabilised. 
F.5 The possibility of surprises 
Unexpected external influences, such as volcanic eruptions, 
can lead to unexpected and relatively sudden shifts in the 
climatic state. Also, as the response of the climate system 
to various forcings can be non-linear, its response to 
gradual forcing changes may be quite irregular. Abrupt and 
significant changes in the atmospheric circulation 
involving the North Pacific which began about 1976 were 
described in IPCC (1990). A related example is the 
apparent fluctuation in the recent behaviour of ENSO, with 
warm conditions prevailing since 1989, a pattern which has 
been unusual compared to previous ENSO behaviour. 
Another example is the possibility that the West 
Antarctic ice sheet might "surge", causing a rapid rise in 
sea level. The current lack of knowledge regarding the 
specific circumstances under which this might occur, either 
in total or in part, limits the ability to quantify this risk. 
Nonetheless, the likelihood of a major sea level rise by the 
year 2100 due to the collapse of the West Antarcfic ice 
sheet is considered low. 
46 
Technical Summary 
In the oceans the meridional overturning might weaken 
in a future climate. This overturning (the thermohaline 
circulation) is driven in part by deep convection in the 
northern North Atlantic Ocean and keeps the northern 
North Atlantic Ocean several degrees warmer than it would 
otherwise be. Both the study of palaeoclimate from 
sediment records and ice cores and modelling studies with 
coupled climate models and ocean G C M s can be 
interpreted to suggest that the ocean circulation has been 
very different in the past. Both in these observations and in 
the ocean models, transitions between different types 
of circulation seem to occur on a time-scale of a few 
decades, so relatively sudden changes in the regional 
(North Atlantic, Western Europe) climate could occur, 
presumably mainly in response to precipitation and 
runoff changes which alter the salinity, and thus 
the density, of the upper layers of the North Atlantic. 
Whether or not such a sudden change can actually 
be realised in response to global warming and how 
strong a perturbation is required to cause a transition 
between types of circulation are still the subject of much 
debate. 
In terrestrial ecological systems, there are thresholds in 
the sustained temperature and water availability at which 
one biological population is replaced by another. Some 
replacement, e.g., in tree species, is slow while some, e.g., 
in micro-organisms is rapid. Minimum temperatures exist 
for the survival of organisms in winter, and the populations 
of such organisms may move polewards as the climate and 
especially night-time temperatures warm. If the transitions 
are not orderly, sudden shifts in ecosystem functioning will 
occur. These may have impacts of direct human relevance 
(as discussed in IPCC WGII (1995)) but may also have 
surprising impacts on climate via effects on albedo, aerosol 
forcing, the hydrological cycle, évapotranspiration, C O , 
release and methane cycling, for example (see Sections B . l 
and D.2). 
G Advancing our Understanding 
An important long-term goal is the accurate projection of 
regional climate change, so that potential impacts can be 
adequately assessed. Progress towards this objective 
depends on determining the likely global magnitude and 
rate of human-induced climate change, including sea level 
change, as well as the regional expressions of these 
quantities. The detection and attribution of human-induced 
climate change is also most important. To achieve these 
objectives requires systematic and sustained global 
observations of relevant variables, as well as requiring the 
effective co-operation and participation of many nations. 
The most urgent scientific problems requiring attention 
concern: 
(i) 
the rate and magnitude of climate change and sea 
level rise: 
• 
the factors controlling the distribution of clouds and 
their radiative characteristics; 
• 
the hydrological cycle, including precipitation, 
evaporation and runoff; 
• 
the distribution and time evolution of ozone and 
aerosols and their radiative characteristics; 
• 
the response of terrestrial and marine systems to 
climate change and their positive and negative 
feedbacks; 
• 
the response of ice sheets and glaciers to climate; 
• 
the influence of human activities on emissions; 
• 
the coupling between the atmosphere and ocean, and 
ocean circulation; 
• 
the 
factors 
controlling 
the 
atmospheric 
concentrations of carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gases; 
(ii) 
detection and attribution of climate change: 
• 
systematic observations of key variables, and 
development of model diagnostics relating to climate 
change; 
• 
relevant proxy data to construct and test 
palaeoclimatic time-series to describe natural 
variability of the climate system; 
(iii) 
regional patterns of climate change: 
• 
land-surface processes and their link to atmospheric 
processes; 
• 
coupling of scales between global climate models 
and regional and smaller scale models; 
• 
simulations with higher resolution climate models. 
The research activities for each objective are strongly 
interconnected. Such research is and needs to be conducted 
by individual investigators in a variety of institutions, 
as well as by co-ordinated international efforts which 
pool national resources and talents in order to more 
efficiently engage in large-scale integrated field and 
modelling programmes to advance our understanding. 
Technical Summary 
47 
References 
IPCC, (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) 1990: 
Climate Change: 
The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: CUmate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B . A . 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 198 pp. 
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change and an Evaluation 
of the IPCC 1892 
Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 339 pp. 
IPCC WGII, 1995: Climate Change 1995-Imp.acts, Adaptations and 
Mitigations of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses: The 
Second Assessment Report of the Inter-Governmental Panel on 
CUmate Change. R.T. Watson, M.C. Zinyowera and R.H. Moss 
(eds.). Cambridge University Press, New York, USA. 
48 
Technical Summary 
Glossary 
Aerosols 
Climate change (FCCC usage) 
Climate change (IPCC usage) 
Climate sensitivity 
Diurnal temperature range 
Equilibrium climate experiment 
Equivalent COj 
Evapotranspiration 
Greenhouse gas 
Airborne particles. The term has also come to be associated, erroneously, with 
the propellant used in "aerosol sprays". 
A change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity 
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in addition to 
natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods. 
Climate change as referred to in the observational record of climate occurs 
because of internal changes within the climate system or in the interaction 
between its components, or because of changes in external forcing either for 
natural reasons or because of human activities. It is generally not possible clearly 
to make attribution between these causes. Projections of future climate change 
reported by IPCC generally consider only the influence on climate of 
anthropogenic increases in greenhouse gases and other human-related factors. 
In IPCC reports, climate sensitivity usually refers to the long-term (equilibrium) 
change in global mean surface temperature following a doubling of atmospheric 
C O j (or equivalent C O 2 ) concentration. More generally, it refers to the 
equilibrium change in surface air temperature following a unit change in 
radiative forcing (°CAVm~2). 
The difference between maximum and minimum temperature over a period of 24 
hours 
An experiment where a step change is applied to the forcing of a climate model 
and the model is then allowed to reach a new equilibrium. Such experiments 
provide information on the difference between the initial and final states of the 
model, but not on the time-dependent response. 
The concentration of CO^ that would cause the same amount of radiative forcing 
as the given mixture of COj and other greenhouse gases. 
The combined process of evaporation from the Earth's surface and transpiration 
from vegetation. 
A gas that absorbs radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of 
radiation (infrared radiation) emitted by the Earth's surface and by clouds. The 
gas in turn emits infrared radiation from a level where the temperature is colder 
than the surface. The net effect is a local trapping of part of the absorbed energy 
and a tendency to warm the planetary surface. Water vapour (HjO), carbon 
dioxide (COj), nitrous oxide ( N 2 O ) , methane (CH^) and ozone ( O 3 ) are the 
primary greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. 
Ice-cap 
A dome-shaped glacier usually covering a highland near a water divide. 
Ice sheet 
A glacier more than 50,000 km^ in area forming a continuous cover over a land 
surface or resting on a continental shelf. 
Technical Summary 
49 
Radiative forcing 
A simple measure of the importance of a potential climate change mechanism. 
Radiative forcing is the perturbation to the energy balance of the Earth-
atmosphere system (in Wm^^) following, for example, a change in the 
concentration of carbon dioxide or a change in the output of the Sun; the climate 
system responds to the radiative forcing so as to re-establish the energy balance. 
A positive radiative forcing tends to warm the surface and a negative radiative 
forcing tends to cool the surface. The radiative forcing is normally quoted as a 
global and annual mean value. A more precise definition of radiative forcing, as 
used in IPCC reports, is the perturbation of the energy balance of the surface-
troposphere system, after allowing for the sti'atosphere to re-adjust to a state of 
global mean radiative equilibrium (see Chapter 4 of IPCC (1994)). Sometimes 
called "climate forcing". 
Spatial scales 
continental 
10 - 100 million square kilometres (km^) 
regional 
100 thousand - 10 million km^ 
local 
less than 100 thousand km^ 
Soil moisture 
Water stored in or at the continental surface and available for evaporation. In 
IPCC (1990) a single store (or "bucket") was commonly used in climate models. 
Today's models which incorporate canopy and soil processes view soil moisture 
as the amount held in excess of plant "wilting point". 
Stratosphere 
The highly stratified and stable region of the atmosphere above the troposphere 
{qv.) extending from about 10 km to about 50 km. 
Thermohaline circulation 
Large scale density-driven circulation in the oceans, driven by differences in 
temperature and salinity. 
Transient climate experiment 
An analysis of the time-dependent response of a climate model to a time-varying 
change of forcing. 
Troposphere 
The lowest part of the atmosphere from the surface to about 10 km in altitude in 
mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km in high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on 
average) where clouds and "weather" phenomena occur. The troposphere is 
defined as the region where temperatures generally decrease with height. 
1 
The Climate System: an overview 
K.E. TRENBERTH, J.T. HOUGHTON, L.G. MEIRA FILHO 
CONTENTS 
1.1 Climate and the Climate System 
55 
1.2 The Driving Forces of Climate 
56 
1.2.1 The Global Energy Balance 
56 
1.2.2 The Greenhouse Effect 
57 
1.2.3 Mars and Venus 
58 
1.2.4 Spatial Structure of Climate and Climate Change 
59 
1.3 Anthropogenic Climate Change 
59 
1.3.1 The Enhanced Greenhouse Effect 
59 
1.3.2 Effects of Aerosols 
60 
1.4 
Climatic Response 
60 
1.4.1 Eeedbacks 
60 
1.4.2 The Role of the Oceans 
61 
1.4.3 The Role of Land 
61 
1.5 Observed Climate Change 
61 
1.6 Prediction and ModelUng of Climate Change 
62 
1.6.1 Climate Models 
62 
1.6.2 Chmate Predictability 
62 
1.6.3 Chmate Projections 
63 
References 
64 
The Climate System: an overview 
55 
1.1 Climate and the Climate System 
Changes in climate, whether from natural variability or 
anthropogenic causes and over a range of time-scales, can 
be identified and studied from different climate variables. 
Because humans live in and breathe the atmosphere it is 
natural to focus on the atmospheric changes where 
phenomena and events are loosely divided into the realms 
of "weather" and "climate". The large fluctuations in the 
atmosphere from hour-to-hour or day-to-day constitute the 
weather; they occur as weather systems move, develop, 
evolve, mature and decay as forms of atmospheric 
turbulence. These weather systems arise mainly from 
atmospheric instabilities and their evolution is governed by 
non-linear "chaotic" dynamics, so that they are not 
predictable in an individual deterministic sense beyond a 
week or two into the future. 
Climate is usually defined to be average weather, 
described in terms of the mean and other statistical 
quantities that measure the variability over a period of time 
and possibly over a certain geographical region. Climate 
involves variations in which the atmosphere is influenced 
by and interacts with other parts of the climate system, and 
"external" forcings. The internal interactive components in 
the climate system (Figure 1.1) include the atmosphere, the 
oceans, sea ice, the land and its features (including the 
vegetation, albedo, biomass, and ecosystems), snow cover, 
land ice (including the semi-permanent ice sheets of 
Antarctica and Greenland and glaciers), and hydrology 
(including rivers, lakes and surface and subsurface water). 
The greatest variations in the composition of the 
atmosphere involve water in various phases in the 
atmosphere, as water vapour, clouds containing liquid water 
and ice crystals, and hail. However, other constituents of the 
atmosphere and the oceans can also change thereby 
bringing in considerations of atmospheric chemistry, marine 
biogeochemistry, and land surface exchanges. 
The components normally regarded as external to the 
system include the Sun and its output, the Earth's rotation, 
Sun-Earth geometry and the slowly changing orbit, the 
physical components of the Earth system such as the 
distribution of land and ocean, the geographic features on 
the land, the ocean bottom topography and basin 
configurations, and the mass and basic composition of the 
atmosphere and ocean. These components determine the 
Rivers 
Lakes 
Land-Biomass 
Coupling 
Changes in the Ocean: 
Circulation, Biogeochemistry 
Biomass 
Changes in/on the Land Surface: 
Orography, Land Use, Vegetation, Ecosystems 
Figure 1.1: Schematic view of the components of the global climate system (bold), their processes and interactions (thin arrows) and 
some aspects that may change (bold arrows). 
56 
The Climate System: an overview 
mean climate which may vary from natural causes. A 
change in the average net radiation at the top of the 
atmosphere due to perturbations in the incident solar 
radiation or the emergent infrared radiation leads to what is 
known as radiative forcing of the system. Changes in the 
incident radiation energy from the Sun or changes in 
atmospheric composition due to natural events like 
volcanoes are possible examples. Other external forcings 
may occur as a result of human activities, such as increases 
in greenhouse gases. In this report we are particularly 
concerned with the latter. 
Changes in any of the climate system components, 
whether internal and thus a part of the system, or from the 
external forcings, cause the climate to vary or to change. 
Thus climate can vary because of alterations in the internal 
exchanges of energy or in the internal dynamics of the 
climate system. For example. El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO) events arise from natural coupled interactions 
between the atmosphere and the ocean centred in the 
tropical Pacific. As such they are a part of climate and they 
lead to large and important systematic variations in weather 
patterns (events such as floods and droughts) throughout 
the world from year to year. Often, however, climate is 
taken to refer to much longer time-scales - the average 
statistics over a 30-year period is a widespread and long-
standing working definition. On these longer time-scales, 
ENSO events vanish from mean statistics but become 
strongly evident in the measures of variability: the 
variances and the extremes. However, the mean climate is 
also influenced by the variability. These considerations 
become very important as we develop models of the 
climate system as tools to predict climate change. 
1,2 The Driving Forces of Climate 
1.2.1 The Global Energy Balance 
The source of energy which drives the climate is the 
radiation from the Sun. Much of this energy is in the 
visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum although some 
extends beyond the red into the infrared and some extends 
beyond the violet into the ultraviolet. The amount of 
energy per second falling on a surface one square metre in 
area facing the Sun outside the atmosphere is about 1370 
W. Because of the spherical shape of the Earth, at any one 
Climate Change Definitions 
Although the common definition of climate refers to the average of weather, the definition of the climate system must 
include the relevant portions of the broader geophysical system which increasingly interacts with the atmosphere as the 
time period considered increases. For the time-scales of decades to centuries associated with the change of climate due 
to the effect of enhanced greenhouse warming, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change defines 
the climate system to be "the totaUty of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere and geosphere and their interactions". 
The concept of climate change has recently acquired a number of different meanings in the scientific literature and 
in relevant international fora. There is a simple view that climate change refers to any change of the classical 3û-year 
climatology, regardless of its causes. Often "climate change" denotes those variations due to human interference while 
"climate variations" refers to the natural variations. Sometimes "climate change" designates variations longer than a 
certain period. Finally, "climate change" is sometimes taken in the literature to mean climate fluctuations of a global 
nature, which is an inteфretation used in parts of this report and which includes the effects due to human actions, such 
as the enhanced greenhouse effect, and those due to natural causes such as stratospheric aerosols from volcanic 
eruptions. One complication with this definition is the anthropogenic changes of climate on a restricted space scale, a 
good example of which is the heat island phenomenon by which highly urbanised areas may have a mean temperature 
which is higher than it would otherwise have been. 
Nevertheless, for the purposes of the United Nations Convention on Climate Change, the definition of climate 
change is: "a change of climate which is attributed directly or indirectiy to human activity that alters the composition of 
the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable time periods." 
Further, the Convention considers, for purposes of mitigation measures, only those greenhouse gases which are not 
controlled by the Montreal Protocol and its Amendments (i.e., ozone-depleting substances such as CFCs and the 
HCFCs), presumably on the grounds that the latter are covered by a separate international legal instrument. This 
definition thus introduces the concept of the difference between climate with the effect of human-induced increase in 
the concentration of greenhouse gases and that which would be realised without such human interference. This point is 
important scientifically for both detection and prediction because at least one of these climate states has to be modelled. 
The Climate System: an overview 
57 
Figure 1.2: The incoming solar radiation (right) illuminates only part of the Earth while the outgoing long-wave radiation is distributed 
more evenly. On an annual mean basis, the result is an excess of absorbed solar radiation over the outgoing long-wave radiation in the 
tropics, while there is a deficit at middle to high latitudes (far left), so that there is a requirement for a poleward heat ttansport in each 
hemisphere (arrows) by the atmosphere and the oceans. This radiation distribution results in warm conditions in the tropics but cold at 
high latitudes, and the temperature contrast results in a broad band of westeriies in the extra-tropics of each hemisphere in which there 
is an embedded jet stream (shown by the "ribbon" arrows) at about 10 km above the Earth's surface. The flow of the Jetstream over the 
different underiying surface (ocean, land, mountains) produces waves in the atmosphere and adds geographic spatial structure to climate. 
The excess of net radiation at the equator is 68 Wm'^ and the deficit peaks at - 100 Wm-^ at the South Pole and -125 Wm-^ at the 
North Pole; from Trenberth and Solomon (1994). 
time half the Earth is in night (Figure 1.2) and the average 
amount of energy incident on a level surface outside the 
atmosphere is one quarter of this or 342 Wm'^. About 31% 
of this energy is scattered or reflected back to space by 
molecules, microscopic airborne particles (known as 
aerosols) and clouds in the atmosphere, or by the Earth's 
surface, which leaves about 235 Wm'^ on average to warm 
the Earth's surface and atmosphere (Figure 1.3). 
To balance the incoming energy, the Earth itself must 
radiate on average the same amount of energy back to 
space (Figure 1.3). It does this by emitting thermal "long-
wave" radiation in the infrared part of the spectrum. The 
amount of thermal radiation emitted by a warm surface 
depends on its temperature and on how absorbing it is. For 
a completely absorbing surface to emit 235 W m ' of 
thermal radiation, it would have a temperature of about 
- I 9 ° C . This is much colder than the conditions that 
actually exist near the Earth's surface where the annual 
average global mean temperature is about I5°C. However, 
because the temperature in the troposphere - the lowest 10¬
15 km of the atmosphere - falls off quite rapidly with 
height, a temperature of - I 9 ° C is reached typically at an 
altitude of 5 km above the surface in mid-latitudes. 
1.2.2 The Greenhouse Effect 
Some of the infrared radiation leaving the atmosphere 
originates near the Earth's surface and is transmitted 
relatively unimpeded through the atmosphere; this is the 
58 
The Climate System: an overview 
Incoming 
Solar 
Radiation 
342 W m-2 
Emitted by 
Atmosphere 
. _ 
. 
24 
78 
•iûibsorbed by Surface i-Hiermals Evapo-
transpiration 
Outgoing 
Longwave 
Radiation 
235 W m"2 
40 
Atmospheric 
Window 
Greenhouse 
Gases 
350 
390 
Surface 
Radiation 
324 
Back 
Radiation 
324 
Absorbed by Surface-
Figure 1.3: The Earth's radiation and energy balance. The net incoming solar radiation of 342 Wm'^ is partially reflected by clouds and 
the atmosphere, or at the surface, but 49% is absorbed by the surface. Some of that heat is returned to the atmosphere as sensible 
heating and most as évapotranspiration that is realised as latent heat in precipitation. The rest is radiated as thermal infrared radiation 
and most of that is absorbed by the atmosphere which in turn emits radiation both up and down, producing a greenhouse effect, as the 
radiation lost to space comes from cloud tops and parts of the atmosphere much colder than the surface. The partitioning of the annual 
global mean energy budget and the accuracy of the values are given in Kiehl and Trenberth (1996). 
radiation from areas where there is no cloud and which is 
present in the part of the spectrum known as the 
atmospheric "window" (Figure 1.3). The bulk of the 
radiation, however, is intercepted and absorbed by the 
atmosphere which in turn emits radiation both up and 
down. The emissions to space occur either from the tops of 
clouds at different atmospheric levels (which are almost 
always colder than the surface), or by gases present in the 
atmosphere which absorb and emit infrared radiation. Most 
of the atmosphere consists of nitrogen and oxygen (99% of 
dry air) which are transparent to infrared radiation. It is the 
water vapour, which varies in amount from 0 to about 2%, 
carbon dioxide and some other minor gases present in the 
atmosphere in much smaller quantities which absorb some 
of the thermal radiation leaving the surface and emit 
radiation from much higher and colder levels out to space. 
These radiatively active gases (see Chapter 2 for details) 
are known as greenhouse gases because they act as a partial 
blanket for the thermal radiation from the surface and 
enable it to be substantially warmer than it would 
otherwise be, analogous to the effects of a greenhouse. 
This blanketing is known as the natural greenhouse effect. 
Clouds also absorb and emit thermal radiation and have 
a blanketing effect similar to that of the greenhouse gases. 
But clouds are also bright reflectors of solar radiation and 
thus also act to cool the surface. While on average there is 
strong cancellation between the two opposing effects of 
short-wave and long-wave cloud radiative forcing (Chapter 
4) the net global effect of clouds in our current climate, as 
determined by space-based measurements, is a small 
cooling of the suiface. 
1.2.3 Mars and Venus 
Similar greenhouse effects also occur on our nearest 
planetary neighbours. Mars and Venus. Mars is smaller 
than the Earth and possesses, by Earth's standards, a very 
thin atmosphere (the pressure at the Martian surface is less 
than 1% of that on Earth) consisting almost entirely of 
carbon dioxide which contributes a small but significant 
greenhouse effect. The planet Venus, by contrast, has a 
The Climate System: an overview 
59 
much thicker atmosphere, largely composed of carbon 
dioxide, with a surface pressure nearly 100 times that on 
Earth. The resulting greenhouse effect on Venus is very 
large and leads to a surface temperature of about 500°C 
more than it would otherwise be. 
1.2.4 Spatial Structure of Climate and Climate Change 
For the Earth, on an annual mean basis, the excess of solar 
over outgoing long-wave radiation in the tropics and the 
deficit at mid- to high latitudes (Figure 1.2) sets up an 
equator-to-pole temperature gradient that results, with the 
Earth's rotation, in a broad band of westerlies in each 
hemisphere in the troposphere. Embedded within the mid-
latitude westerlies are large-scale weather systems which, 
along with the ocean, act to transport heat polewards to 
achieve an overall energy balance. These weather systems 
are the familiar migrating cyclones and anticyclones (i.e., 
low and high pressure systems) and their associated cold 
and warm fronts. 
Because of the land-ocean contrasts and obstacles such 
as mountain ranges, the mid-latitude westerlies and the 
embedded jet stream (Figure 1.2) in each hemisphere 
contain planetary-scale waves. These waves are usually 
geographically anchored but can change with time as 
Figure 1.4: The anomalies in surface temperature over the Northern 
Hemisphere for the winter of December 1993 to February 1994 
relative to the mean for 1951 to 1980. Temperature anomalies 
exceeding Г С are stippled and those below - 1°C are hatched. 
The spatial structure seen here is inherent in the atmospheric 
dynamics and regions of below-normal temperatures should be 
expected even in the presence of an overall mean that is 0.2°C 
above normal. Data courtesy of David Parker. 
heating patterns change in the atmosphere. A consequence 
is that anomalies in climate on seasonal-to-annual time-
scales typically occur over large geographic regions with 
surface temperatures both above and below normal in 
different places. An example for the Northern Hemisphere 
winter season, December 1993 to February 1994, is shown 
in Figure 1.4. The strong cold anomaly over north-eastern 
parts of North America was accompanied by many cold 
and snowy outbreaks, yet warmer-than-normal conditions 
prevailed over most of the rest of the hemisphere. Relative 
to 1951 to 1980, the result was a hemispheric anomaly in 
surface temperature of -l-0.2''C. Extensive regions of above 
and below normal temperatures are the rule, not the 
exception, as should clearly be expected from the wave 
motions in the atmosphere. A bout of below average 
temperatures regionally may not be inconsistent with 
global warming, just as an interval of above normal 
temperatures may not indicate global warming. 
1.3 Anthropogenic Climate Change 
Climate can vary for many reasons. In particular, human 
activities can lead to changes in atmospheric composition 
and hence radiative forcing through, for instance, the 
burning of fossil fuels or deforestation, or through 
processes which increase the number and distribution of 
aerosols. Altered properties of the surface because of 
changes in land-use can also give rise to changes in 
climate. It is especially these effects due to human 
activities with which we are concerned in this report. 
1.3.1 The Enhanced Greenhouse Effect 
The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has 
increased by more than 25% in the past century and since 
the beginning of the industrial revolution, an increase 
which is known to be in large part due to combustion of 
fossil fuels and the removal of forests (Chapter 2). In the 
absence of controls, projections are that the future rate of 
increase in carbon dioxide amount may accelerate and 
concentrations could double from pre-industrial values 
within the next 50 to 100 years (IPCC, 1994). 
The increased amount of carbon dioxide is leading to 
climate change and will produce, on average, a global 
warming of the Earth's surface because of its enhanced 
greenhouse effect - although the magnitude and 
significance of the effects are not yet fully resolved. If, for 
instance, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere 
were suddenly doubled, but with other things remaining the 
same, the outgoing long-wave radiation would be reduced 
by about 4 Wm"2. To restore the radiative balance, the 
60 
The Climate System: an overview 
atmosphere must warm up and, in the absence of other 
changes, the warming at the surface and throughout the 
troposphere would be about 1.2°C. However, many other 
factors will change, and various feedbacks come into play 
(see Section 1.4.1), so that the best estimate of the average 
global warming for doubled carbon dioxide is 2.5°C 
(IPCC, 1990). Such a change is very large by historical 
standards and would be associated with major climate 
changes around the world. 
Note that if the carbon dioxide were removed from the 
atmosphere altogether, the change in outgoing radiation 
would be about 30 Wm^^ - 7 or 8 times as big as the change 
for doubling - and the magnitude of the temperature change 
would be similarly enhanced. The reason is that the carbon 
dioxide absorption is saturated over part of the spectral 
region where it absorbs, so that the amount of absorption 
changes at a much smaller rate than the concentration of the 
gas (Chapter 2). If concentrations of carbon dioxide are 
more than doubled, then the relationship between radiative 
forcing and concentration is such that each further doubUng 
provides a further radiative forcing of about 4 Wm"2. 
Several other greenhouse gases are also observed to be 
increasing in concentration in the atmosphere because of 
human activities (especially biomass burning, landfills, rice 
paddies, agriculture, animal husbandry, fossil fuel use and 
industry). These include methane, nitrous oxide, and 
tropospheric ozone, and they tend to reinforce the changes 
in radiative forcing from increased carbon dioxide (Chapter 
2). The human-introduced chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) also 
produce a greenhouse effect although offset somewhat by 
the observed decreases in lower stratospheric ozone since 
the 1970s, caused principally by the CFCs and halons 
(IPCC, 1994). 
1.3.2 Effects of Aerosols 
Human activities also affect the amount of aerosol in the 
atmosphere which influences climate in other ways. The 
main direct effect of aerosols is the scattering of some solar 
radiation back to space, which tends to cool the Earth's 
surface. Some aerosols can also influence the radiation 
budget by directly absorbing solar radiation leading to local 
heating of the atmosphere and, to a lesser extent, by 
absorbing and emitting thermal radiation. A further 
influence of aerosols is that many of them act as nuclei on 
which cloud droplets condense. A changed concentration 
therefore tends to affect the number and size of droplets in 
a cloud and hence alters the reflection and the absorption of 
solar radiation by the cloud. 
Aerosols occur in the atmosphere from natural causes; 
for instance, they are blown off the surface of deserts or 
dry regions. The eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in the 
Philippines in June 1991 added considerable amounts of 
aerosol to the stratosphere which, for about two years, 
scattered solar radiation leading to a loss of radiation at the 
surface and a cooling there. Human activities contribute to 
aerosol particle formation mainly through injection of 
sulphur dioxide into the atmosphere (which contributes to 
acid rain) particularly from power stations, and through 
biomass burning. 
Because human-made aerosols typically remain in the 
atmosphere for only a few days they tend to be 
concentrated near their sources such as industrial regions. 
The radiative forcing therefore possesses a very strong 
regional pattern (Chapters 2, 6 and 8), and the presence of 
aerosols adds further complexity to possible climate 
change as it can help mask, at least temporarily, any global 
warming arising from increased greenhouse gases. 
However, the aerosol effects do not cancel the global-scale 
effects of the much longer-lived greenhouse gases, and 
significant climate changes can still result. 
1.4 Climatic Response 
1.4.1 Feedbacks 
The increases in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and 
changes in aerosol content produce a change in the radiative 
forcing (Chapter 2). The determination of the climatic 
response to this change in forcing is complicated by 
feedbacks. Some of these can amplify the original warming 
(positive feedback) while others serve to reduce it (negative 
feedback) (Chapter 4). An example of the former is water 
vapour feedback in which the amount of water vapour in the 
atmosphere increases as the Earth warms and, because 
water vapour is an important greenhouse gas, it will amplify 
the warming. However, increases in cloud may act either to 
amplify the warming through the greenhouse effect of 
clouds or reduce it by the increase in albedo (which 
measures reflectivity); which effect dominates depends on 
the height and type of clouds and varies greatly with 
geographic location and time of year. Ice-albedo feedback is 
another potentially important process that may lead to 
amplification of temperature changes in high latitudes. It 
arises because decreases in sea ice, which has high albedo, 
decrease the radiation reflected back to space and thus 
produces warming which may further decrease the sea ice 
extent. However, increased open water may lead to more 
atmospheric water vapour and increased fog and low cloud 
amount, offsetting the change in surface albedo. 
There are a number of feedbacks involving the biosphere 
which are especially important when considering details of 
The Climate System: an overview 
61 
the carbon cycle and the impacts of climate change. The 
behaviour of ecosystems on the surface of the Earth 
(Chapter 9) and biogeochemical processes within the 
oceans (Chapters 2 and 10) are greatly influenced by 
changes in atmospheric composition and climate. The 
availability of surface water and the use of the Sun's 
energy in photosynthesis and transpiration in plants 
influence the uptake of carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere as plants transform the carbon and water into 
usable food. Changes in vegetation affect surface albedo, 
évapotranspiration and roughness. Much remains to be 
learned about these feedbacks and their possible influences 
on predictions of future carbon dioxide concentrations and 
climate, and models used for future projections have not 
yet incorporated them. 
1.4.2 The Role of the Oceans 
The oceans cover 70% of the Earth's surface and through 
their fluid motions, their high heat capacity, and their 
ecosystems they play a central role in shaping the Earth's 
climate and its variability. Wind stress at the sea surface 
drives the large-scale ocean circulation in its upper layers. 
Water vapour, evaporated from the ocean surface, provides 
latent heat energy to the atmosphere. The ocean circulation is 
an effective means of redistributing heat and fresh water 
around the globe. The oceans store heat, absorbed at the 
surface, for varying durations and release it in different places 
thereby ameliorating temperature changes over nearby land 
and contributing substantially to the variability of climate on 
many time-scales. Additionally, the ocean thermohaline^ 
circulation allows water from the surface to be carried into 
the deep ocean where it is isolated from atmospheric 
influence and hence it may sequester heat for periods of a 
thousand years or more. The oceans absorb carbon dioxide 
and other gases and exchange them with the atmosphere in 
ways that alter with ocean circulation and cUmate variability. 
In addition, it is likely that marine biotic responses to cUmate 
change wiU resuh in feedbacks (Chapter 10). 
Any study of the climate and how it might change must 
include an adequate description of processes in the ocean 
(Chapter 4) together with the coupUng between the ocean 
and the atmosphere (Chapter 6). 
1.4.3 The Role of Land 
The heat penetration into land associated with the annual 
cycle of surface temperature is limited to about the 
uppermost 2 m and the heat capacity of land is much less 
1 The circulation driven by changes in sea water density arising 
from temperature (thermal) or salinity (haline) effects. 
than that of a comparable depth of ocean. Accordingly, 
land plays a much smaller role in the storage of heat. A 
consequence is that the surface air temperature changes 
over land occur much faster and are much larger than over 
the oceans for the same heating and, because we live on 
land, this directiy affects human activities. The land surface 
encompasses an enormous variety of topographical features 
and soils, differing slopes (which influence runoff and 
radiation received) and water capacity. The highly 
heterogeneous vegetative cover is a mixture of natural and 
managed ecosystems that vary on very small spatial scales. 
Changes in soil moisture affect the disposition of heat and 
whether it results in sensible heating or évapotranspiration 
(and subsequently latent heating) and changes in vegetation 
alter the albedo, roughness, and évapotranspiration. The 
land surface and its ecosystems play an important role in 
the carbon cycle (Chapter 9), the hydrological cycle and in 
surface exchanges of trace gases. Currently, many of these 
land surface processes are only crudely represented in 
global climate models. 
1.5 Observed Climate Change 
Given that climate change is expected from anthropogenic 
effects, what have the observed changes been? Because the 
high quality of much-needed long time-series of 
observations is often compromised, special care is required 
in interpretation. Most observations have been made for 
other purposes, such as weather forecasting, and therefore 
typically suffer from changes in instrumentation, exposure, 
measurement techniques, station location and observation 
times, and there have been major changes in the distribution 
and numbers of observations. Adjustments must be devised 
to take into account all these influences in estimating the 
real changes that have occurred. For the more distant past, 
proxy data from climate-sensitive phenomena, such as 
from tree rings, ice cores, coral cores, and pollen in marine 
sediments are used. 
Questions of how the climate has varied in the past, 
whether there has been recent warming and the structure of 
climate change in three dimensions are addressed in 
Chapter 3. Analysis of observations of surface temperature 
show that there has been a global mean warming of 0.3 to 
0.6°C over the past one hundred years. The observed trend 
of a larger increase in minimum than maximum 
temperatures is apparently linked to associated increases in 
low cloud amount and aerosol as well as to the enhanced 
greenhouse effect (Chapters 3 and 4). There is good 
evidence for decadal changes in the atmospheric 
circulation which contribute to regional effects, and some 
62 
The Climate System: an overview 
evidence for ocean changes. Changes in precipitation and 
other components of the hydrological cycle vary 
considerably geographically. Changes in climate variability 
and extremes are beginning to emerge, but global patterns 
are not yet apparent. 
Changes in climate have occurred in the distant past as 
the distribution of continents and their landscapes have 
changed, as the so-called Milankovitch changes in the orbit 
of the Earth and the Earth's tilt relative to the ecliptic plane 
have varied the insolation received on Earth, and as the 
composition of the atmosphere has changed, all through 
natural processes. Recent new evidence from ice cores 
drilled through the Greenland ice sheet have indicated that 
changes in climate may often have been quite rapid and 
large, and not associated with any known external forcings. 
Understanding the spatial scales of this variability and the 
processes and mechanisms involved is very important as it 
seems quite possible that strong nonlinearities may be 
involved. These may result in large changes from relatively 
small perturbations by provoking positively reinforcing 
feedback processes in the internal climate system. Changes 
in the thermohaline circulation in the Atlantic Ocean are 
one way such abrupt changes might be realised (Chapters 4 
and 6). An important question therefore is whether there 
might be prospects for major surprises as the climate 
changes. 
Rates of change of radiative forcing induced by human 
activities are exceedingly rapid compared with the historical 
record. This raises questions about how, for instance, 
surface ecosystems might adapt to such change (Chapter 9). 
1.6 Prediction and Modelling of Climate Change 
To quantify the response of the climate system to changes 
in forcing it is essential to account for all the complex 
interactions and feedbacks among the climate system 
components (Figure 1.1). It is not possible to do this 
reliably using empirical or statistical models because of the 
complexity of the system, and because the possible 
outcomes may go well beyond any conditions ever 
experienced previously. Instead the response must be found 
using numerical models of the climate system based upon 
sound well-established physical principles. 
1.6.1 Climate Models 
Global climate models include as central components 
atmospheric and oceanic general circulation models 
(GCMs), as well as representations of land surface 
processes, sea ice and all other processes indicated in 
Figure l.I. Models and their components are based upon 
physical laws represented by mathematical equations that 
describe the atmospheric and oceanic dynamics and 
physics. These equations are solved numerically at a finite 
resolution using a three-dimensional grid over the globe. 
Typical resolutions used for climate simulations in 1995 
are about 250 km in the horizontal and 1 km in the vertical 
in atmospheric G C M s . As a result, many physical 
processes cannot be properly resolved but their average 
effects 
must be included through a parametric 
representation (called parametrization) that is physically 
based (Chapter 4). 
A n essential component of climate models is the 
description of the interactions among the different 
components of the climate system. Of particular 
importance is the coupling between the two fluid 
components, the atmosphere and the ocean. Ensuring this is 
adequately simulated is one of the greatest challenges in 
climate modelling (Chapter 4). A frontier and future 
research challenge is to bring more complete chemistry, 
biology, and ecology into the climate system models 
(Chapters 9, 10, and II) and to improve the representation 
of physical processes. Once validated, these models will 
become valuable tools for advancing our understanding 
and quantifying and reducing the uncertainty in future 
predictions. 
Comprehensive climate models are very complex and 
take large computer resources to run. To explore all the 
possible scenarios and the effects of assumptions or 
approximations in parameters in the model more 
thoroughly, simpler models are also widely used and are 
constructed to give similar results to the GCMs when 
globally averaged (Chapter 6). 
1.6.2 Climate Predictability 
An important and fundamental question concerns the 
extent to which the climate is predictable; i.e., are there 
climate "signals" large enough to be distinguished from the 
"noise" of natural variability that may be potentially 
predictable. Reliable weather forecasts can be made using 
atmospheric GCMs for periods up to ten days (Chapter 5), 
beyond which time detailed predictability is lost because of 
the dominance of chaotic dynamics in weather systems. 
For some parts of the world, however, some predictability 
exists for statistical averages of weather (i.e., the climate) 
up to a year or so ahead. Such predictability is largely due 
to the influence of the patterns of sea surface temperatures 
on the atmosphere. El Niño events provide the dominant 
example. Prediction of changes in sea surface temperatures 
in turn requires that climate models be able to adequately 
simulate the coupling between ocean and atmosphere. 
The Climate System: an overview 
63 
The predictability considered so far concerns the internal 
variability. Climate changes arising from changes in 
external forcing can also be predictable, as is evidenced 
from several sources. Firstly, there is the mean annual 
cycle which climate models simulate very well. Secondly, 
there is the existence of the regularities observed in past 
climates which were forced by changes in the distribution 
of solar radiation arising from the variations in the 
geometry of the Sun-Earth orbit. Models show some 
success in simulating these past climates. Thirdly, there is 
the success of climate models in simulating the changes 
due to the effects of stratospheric aerosols from the Mt. 
Pinatubo volcanic eruption. In addition, there is the 
evidence provided by the performance of the models 
themselves in simulating the effects of hypothetical 
situations, such as changes in solar radiation; the resulting 
climate changes are largely reproducible and thus 
potentially predictable. 
Predictability is a function of spatial scales. Atmospheric 
variability arising from internal instabilities is huge on 
small scales; it is mainly the variability on larger scales 
influenced by the interactions of the atmosphere with other 
parts of the climate system that is predictable. Figure 1.5 
shows the natural variability of the annual mean surface 
temperature on several different spatial scales from a 
climate model simulation for 200 years. The vertical scale 
is the same on all three plots, and the standard deviation 
goes from О.ГС for the Southern Hemisphere to 0.5°C for 
Australia to 0.8°C for a grid square with sides about 500 
km in south-east Australia. This example highlights the 
much greater natural variability that can be experienced on 
smaller scales which makes detection of the small 
systematic signal, such as might arise from enhanced 
global mean greenhouse forcing, much more difficult to 
achieve on regional scales. 
1.6.3 Climate Projections 
When a model is employed for climate prediction it is first 
run for many simulated decades without any changes in 
external forcing in the system. The quality of the simulation 
can then be assessed by comparing the mean, the annual 
cycle and the variability statistics on different time-scales 
with observations of the climate. In this way the model is 
evaluated (Chapter 5). The model is then run with changes in 
external forcing, such as with a possible future profile of 
greenhouse gas concentrations (Chapter 2). The differences 
between the climate statistics in the two simulations provide 
an estimate of the accompanying climate change (Chapter 6). 
A long-term change in global mean surface air 
temperature arising from a doubling of carbon dioxide is 
(a) 
I 
1.00^ 
Southern Hemisphere 
я 
0.60 
1 
0.00 
M e a n = 0 . 0 0 
S t c i e v = o . n 
25 
60 
75 
100 
Year from start of experiment 
Australia 
125 
150 
175 
200 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
126 
150 
175 
200 
Year from start of experiment 
(c) Single model grid box in south-east Australia 
11 
' 
100 
125 
150 
175 
200 
Year from start of experiment 
Figure 1.5: Annual-average surface air temperature (°C) from a 
200-year integration of a coupled atmosphere-ocean model from 
the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory run at low resolution 
of about 500 km spacing. The model is in statistical equilibrium 
and has no trends in climate forcing applied. The three panels 
show results for (a) the Southern Hemisphere, (b) Australia, and 
(c) a grid box in south-east Australia. (Courtesy J. Mahlman, S. 
Manabe, T. Delworth and R. Stouffer). 
64 
The Climate System: an overview 
often used as a benchmark to compare models and as an 
indication of the climate sensitivity of the models. The 
range of results is typically an increase of 1.5° to 4.5°C. 
However, the concentrations of greenhouse gases will not 
level off at doubling and the regional patterns of cUmate 
change depend significantly on the time dependence of the 
change in forcing. It is important, therefore, to make future 
projections using plausible evolving scenarios of 
anthropogenic forcing so that the response of the climate to 
the forcing is properly simulated. 
Accordingly, the focus of Chapter 6 is on projections of 
future climate using possible scenarios of greenhouse gas 
and aerosol emissions. Because of uncertainties in the 
scenarios, it is worth noting that these outlooks are not 
predictions so much as climate change estimates which can 
be used to assess possible impacts on the environment and 
society (IPCC Working Group II), such as the changes in 
sea level (Chapter 7), and for planning and policy puфoses 
(IPCC Working Group III). However, definitive 
projections of possible local climate changes, which are 
most needed for assessing impacts, are the most 
challenging to do with any certainty. Further, it is desirable 
to examine and evaluate the past observational record by 
running models forced with realistic radiative forcing. It is 
in this way that it may be possible to attribute the observed 
changes to particular changes in forcing, such as from 
volcanic or solar origins, and to achieve detection of the 
effects of human activities and specifically the effects from 
increases in aerosols and greenhouse gases (Chapter 8). 
The models used in climate projections are valuable 
tools for helping to quantify possible outcomes under 
various scenarios. They are used with the observations and 
all the other evidence to make the best assessments 
possible. The models are still undergoing development and 
their capabilities will improve in the future as past and new 
observations are analysed and improved understanding is 
obtained. 
References 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1994.- Climate Change 1994 Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change and an Evaluation 
of the IPCC IS92 
Emission 
Scenarios. J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, H. Lee, 
B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N . Harris and K . Maskell (eds). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 339 pp. 
Kiehl, J.T. and K.E. Trenberth, 1996: Earth's annual global mean 
energy budget. Bull. Am. Met. Soc. (submitted). 
Trenberth, K . E . and A . Solomon, 1994: The Global Heat 
Balance: Heat transports in the atmosphere and ocean. Clim. 
Dyn., 10, 107-134. 
2 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
D. SCHIMEL, D. ALVES, I. ENTING, M . HEIMANN, 
R JOOS, D. RAYNAUD, T. WIGLEY (2.1) 
M. PRATHER, R. DERWENT, D. EHHALT, R ERASER, 
E. SANHUEZA, X. ZHOU (2.2) 
R JONAS, R. CHARLSON, H. RODHE, S. SADASIVAN (2.3) 
K.R SHINE, Y FOUQUART, V. RAMASWAMY, 
S. SOLOMON, J. SRINIVASAN (2.4) 
D. ALBRITTON, R. DERWENT, L ISAKSEN, M . L A L , D. WUEBBLES (2.5) 
Contributors: 
F. Alyea, T.L. Anderson, M. Andreae, D. Blake, O. Boucher, C. Briihl, J. Butler, 
D. Cunnold, J. Dignan, E. Dlugokencky, J. Elkim, I. Fung, M. Geller, D. Hauglustaine, 
J. Haywood, J. Heintzenberg, D. Jacob, A. Jain, CD. Keeling, S. Khmelevtsov, 
H. Le Treut, J. Lelieveld, L Levin, M. Maiss, G. Marland, S.F. Marshall, P. Midgley, 
B. Miller, J.F.B. Mitchell, SMontzka, H. Nakane, P. Novelli, B. O'Neill, D. Oram, 
S. Penkett, J.E. Penner, S. Pinnock, R. Prinn, P. Quay, A. Robock, S.E. Schwartz, 
P. Simmonds, A. Slingo, F Stordal, E. Sulzman, P. Tans, A. Wahner, R. Weiss, T. Whorf 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
69 
Introduction 
75 
2.1 CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
76 
2.1.1 Inü-oduction 
76 
2.1.2 Atmospheric COj Concentrations and the 
Status of the COj Growth Rate Anomaly 
80 
2.1.3 Concentration Projections and Stabilisation 
Calculations 
82 
2.1.3.1 Effects of carbon cycle model 
recalibration 
83 
2.1.3.2 Effects of uncertainties in deforestation 
and CO2 fertilisation 
84 
2.1.4 Bomb Lifetime vs. Perturbation Lifetime 
85 
2.1.5 Recent Bomb Radiocarbon Results and their 
Implication for Oceanic COj Uptake 
86 
2.2 Other Trace Gases And Atmospheric Chemistry 
86 
2.2.1 Introduction 
86 
2.2.2 Atmospheric Measurements and their Implications 87 
2.2.2.1 Methane 
87 
2.2.2.2 Nitrous oxide 
88 
2.2.2.3 Halocarbons 
88 
2.2.2.4 Other perhalogenated species 
90 
2.2.2.5 Tropospheric ozone 
90 
2.2.2.6 Stratospheric ozone 
90 
2.2.2.7 Stratospheric water vapour 
91 
2.2.2.8 Carbon monoxide 
91 
2.2.3 Chemical Lifetimes and Budgets 
91 
2.2.3.1 The methane budget 
94 
2.2.3.2 The tropospheric ozone and hydroxyl 
radical budget 
95 
2.2.3.3 Aircraft and ozone 
96 
2.2.4 IS92 Scenarios 
96 
2.3 Aerosols 
103 
2.3.1 Summary of 1994 Report and Areas of 
Development 
103 
2.3.2 Modelling of Tropospheric Aerosol 
Distributions 
105 
2.3.3 Optical Characteristics of Aerosols 
106 
2.3.4 Influence of Aerosols on Clouds 
107 
2.4 Radiative Forcing 
108 
2.4.1 Greenhouse gases 
109 
2.4.1.1 Halocarbon radiative forcing 
109 
2.4.1.2 Radiative forcing due to stratospheric 
ozone changes 
109 
2.4.1.3 Impact of ozone depletion on other 
radiatively active species 
111 
2.4.1.4 Other climate-chemistry interactions 
111 
2.4.2 Tropospheric Aerosols 
112 
2.4.2.1 Direct forcing due to sulphate aerosols 
resulting from fossil fuel emissions and 
smelting 
112 
2.4.2.2 Soot aerosols 
113 
2.4.2.3 Other aerosol types and sources 
114 
2.4.2.4 Effect of aerosols on cloud properties 
114 
2.4.3 Stratospheric Aerosols 
115 
2.4.4 Solar Variability 
115 
2.4.5 Summary 
118 
2.5 Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
118 
2.5.1 Introduction 
118 
2.5.2 Net GWPs for Ozone-Depleting Gases 
120 
2.5.3 Updated GWPs For Otiier Gases 
122 
2.5.4 Recent Studies Relating to the Challenges in 
Calculating GWPs for Some Chemical Species 
122 
References 
124 
SUMMARY 
Climate change can be driven by changes in the 
atmospheric concentrations of a number of radiatively 
active gases and aerosols. We have clear evidence that 
human activities have affected concentrations, distributions 
and life cycles of these gases. These matters, discussed in 
this chapter, were assessed at greater length in IPCC WGI 
report "Radiative Forcing of Climate Change" (IPCC 
1994). The following summary contains some material 
more fully discussed in IPCC (1994): bullets containing 
significant new information are marked "***"; those 
containing information which has been updated since IPCC 
(1994) are marked "**"; and those which contain 
information which is essentially unchanged since IPCC 
(1994) are marked "*". 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
* Carbon dioxide concentrations have increased by almost 
30% from about 280 ppmv in the late 18th century to 358 
ppmv in 1994. This increase is primarily due to combustion 
of fossil fuel and cement production, and to land-use 
change. During the last millennium, a period of relatively 
stable climate, concentrations varied by about ±10 ppmv 
around the pre-industrial value of 280 ppmv. On the 
century time-scale these fluctuations were far less rapid 
than the change observed over the 20th century. 
*** The growth rate of atmospheric CO2 concentrations 
over the last few years is comparable to, or slightiy above, 
the average of the 1980s (-1.5 ppmv/yr). On shorter 
(interannual) time-scales, after a period of slow growth (0.6 
ppmv/yr) spanning 1991 to 1992, the growth rate in 1994 
was higher (~2 ppmv/yr). This change in growth rate is 
similar to earlier short time-scale fluctuations, which 
reflect large but transitory perturbations of the carbon 
system. Isotope data suggest that the 1991 to 1994 
fluctuations resulted from natural variations in the 
exchange fluxes between the atmosphere and both the land 
biota and the ocean, possibly partly induced by interannual 
variations in climate. 
*** As well as the issue of natural fluctuations discussed 
above, other issues raised since IPCC (1994) have been 
addressed. There are some unresolved concerns about the 
''^C budget which may imply that previous estimates of the 
atmosphere-to-ocean flux were slightly too high. However, 
the carbon budget remains within our previously quoted 
uncertainties and the implications for future projections are 
minimal. Suggestions that the observed decay of bomb-^'*C 
implies a very short atmospheric lifetime for C O , result 
from a mis-understanding of reservoir lifetimes. Current 
carbon cycle modelling is based on principles that have 
been well-understood since the 1950s and correctly 
accounts for the wide range of reservoir time-scales that 
affect atmospheric concentration changes. 
** The major components of the anthropogenic 
perturbation to the atmospheric carbon budget, with 
estimates of their magnitudes over the 1980s, are: (a) 
emissions from fossil fuel combustion and cement 
production (5.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr); (b) atmospheric increase (3.3 
± 0.2 GtC/yr); (c) ocean uptake (2.0 ± 0.8 GtC/yr); (d) 
tropical land-use changes (1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr); and (e) 
Northern Hemisphere forest regrowth (0.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr). 
Other potential terrestrial sinks include enhanced terrestrial 
carbon storage due to COj fertilisation (0.5-2.0 GtC/yr) and 
nitrogen deposition (0.2-1.0 GtC/yr), and possibly response 
to climatic anomalies. The latter is estimated to be a sink of 
0-1.0 GtC/yr over the 1980s, but this term could be eitiier a 
sink or a source over other periods. This budget is changed 
from IPCC (1994) by a small adjustment (from 3.2 to 3.3 
GtC/yr) to the atmospheric rate of increase and a 
corresponding decrease in "other terrestrial sinks" from 1.4 
to 1.3 GtC/yr. 
* In IPCC (1994) calculations of future CO2 concentrations 
and emissions from 18 different carbon cycle models were 
presented based on the IPCC (1992) carbon budget. 
Concentrations were derived for the IS92 emission 
scenarios. Future CO2 emissions were derived leading to 
70 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
stable CO2 concentration levels at 350, 450, 550, 650 and 
750 ppmv. Inter-model differences varied with time and 
were up to ±15% about the median value. Biogeochemical 
(apart from COj fertilisation) and climate feedbacks were 
not included in these calculations. The results showed that in 
order for atmospheric concentrations to stabilise at 750 
ppmv or below, anthropogenic emissions must eventually 
fall well below today's levels. Stabilisation of emissions at 
1990 levels is not sufficient to stabilise atmospheric CO2: if 
anthropogenic emissions are held constant at 1990 levels, 
modelled atmospheric concentrations of COj continue to 
increase throughout the next century and beyond. 
*** These calculations have been re-run based on the 
revised IPCC (1994) carbon budget discussed above. These 
changes result in higher concentration projections by 15 
ppmv (IS92c) to 40 ppmv (IS92e) in the year 2100. In 
terms of radiative forcing, the additional amounts in the 
year 2100 are 0.2-0.3 Wm^^. Emissions requirements to 
achieve stabilisation are correspondingly reduced by up to 
about 10%. These changes are within the overall 
uncertainties in the calculations. 
*** The implied future COj emissions were calculated for 
additional cases to investigate the effect of lower 
reductions in COj emissions in the early years by using 
CO2 concentration profiles which closely followed the 
IS92a emission scenario for 10-30 years after 1990. 
Concentrations stabilised at the same date and levels as in 
the earlier scenarios, viz 350, 450, 550, 650 and 750 ppmv. 
Stabilisation at 1000 ppmv, above the range previously 
examined, was also investigated. These new calculations, 
while not necessarily spanning the full range of future 
emission options, still show the same characteristic long-
term emissions behaviour as found previously; namely an 
eventual decline to emissions well below present levels. 
Methane (CH^ 
** The atmospheric methane concentration increased from 
about 700 ppbv in pre-industrial times to I72I ppbv in 1994. 
** Over the last 20 years, there has been a decline in the 
methane growth rate: in the late 1970s the concentration 
was increasing at about 20 ppbv/yr; during the 1980s the 
growth rate dropped to 9-13 ppbv/yr. Around the middle of 
1992, methane concentrations briefly stopped growing, but 
since 1993 the global growth rate has returned to about 8 
ppbv/yr. Several causes for the anomaly in 1992/93 have 
been proposed, but none is individually able to explain all 
the observations. 
*** The loss of methane through reaction with 
tropospheric hydroxyl radical, the main sink of CH4, is 
11% faster than recommended in IPCC (1994) owing to an 
improved estimate of the concentration of methyl 
chloroform in the atmosphere. The new recommendation 
for the C H 4 turnover time, 8.6yr (which includes 
tropospheric OH, stratospheric loss and uptake by soils), 
results in an inferred global loss of 560 ± 100 Tg(CH4)/yr. 
** Methane has clearly identified chemical feedbacks. 
Addition of C H 4 to the atmosphere reduces the 
concentration of tropospheric hydroxyl radical which can 
subsequently reduce the rate of C H 4 removal, thus 
lengthening the effective duration of the added CH^ and 
any derived perturbations (e.g., in tropospheric ozone). Our 
estimate of the adjustment time for an added pulse of CH^ 
is 12.2 ± 3 yr compared with the IPCC (1994) 
recommendation of 14.5 ± 2.5 yr that did not include soil 
sinks and whose estimated uncertainty only included the 
range in the feedback factors. 
** If methane emissions were held constant at 1984-1994 
levels (i.e., those sustaining an atmospheric trend of -t-10 
ppbv/yr), C H 4 would rise to about 1850 ppbv over the next 
40 years, an additional radiative forcing of around -1-0.05 
Wm'^. If emissions were cut by about 30 T g ( C H 4 ) / y r 
(about 8% of current anthropogenic emissions), C H ^ 
concentrations would remain at today's levels. These 
estimates are reduced from those in IPCC (1994) which 
were based on the average 1980s trend of 13 ppbv/yr and a 
longer adjustment time. Estimates of current C H ^ 
emissions are roughly 20-40% from natural sources, 20% 
from anthropogenic fossil fuel related sources and the 
remaining 40-60% from other anthropogenic sources. 
Nitrous oxide (N2O) 
* Atmospheric N2O concentrations have increased from 
about 275 ppbv in pre-industrial times to 311 ppbv in 1992. 
The trend during the 1980s was -t-0.25%/yr with substantial 
year-to-year variations. This growth rate, 0.8 ppbv/yr, 
corresponds to an imbalance between sources and sinks of 
about 3.9 Tg(N20)/yr. If these emissions were frozen then 
N2O levels would rise slowly to about 400 ppbv over the 
next two centuries, an additional radiative forcing of about 
0.3 Wm~2. Natural sources are probably twice as large as 
anthropogenic ones. 
Halogenated compounds 
*** The atmospheric abundance of methyl chloroform 
(CH3CCI3) increased steadily by about 4-5%/yr from 1978 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
/1 
until mid-1990, when it levelled off. In 1994 it decreased 
by about 8%. This was the first reported global decrease in 
a halocarbon whose emissions are regulated by the 
Montreal Protocol and its Amendments. The rates of 
decrease are consistent with the reported phase-out of 
industrial emissions. Measurements show that the 1993 
growth rate of CFC-12 has further declined, and that CFC-
11 concentrations peaked at about 265 pptv. 
*** Global HCFC-22 levels have continued to grow. The 
mean concentration in 1994 was approximately 110 pptv, 
with a growth rate (1992 to 1994) of about 5 pptv/yr. 
Global abundances of HCFC-142b and -141b are still 
small, approximately 6 and 2 pptv, respectively. However, 
they grew by 20% and 65%, respectively, in 1994, 
presumably in response to their increasing use as CFC 
substitutes. 
*** Perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride (SFg) are 
removed very slowly from the atmosphere with estimated 
hfetimes greater than 1000 years. As a result, effectively 
all emissions accumulate in the atmosphere and will 
continue to influence climate for thousands of years. 
Currently their concentrations and associated radiative 
forcings are low but they may become significant in the 
future if emissions continue. 
** Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are being used to replace 
ozone-depleting substances in some applications; their 
concentrations and radiative impacts are currently 
negligible. However, with increased use, their contribution 
to radiative forcing will increase. 
Tropospheric ozone (O^) 
* Model simulations and limited observations together 
suggest that tropospheric ozone has increased, perhaps 
doubled, in the Northern Hemisphere since pre-industrial 
times. In the 1980s, however, the trends were variable, 
being small or non-existent. At the South Pole, a decrease 
has been observed, and in the Southern Hemisphere as a 
whole, there are insufficient measurements to draw strong 
inferences about long-term changes. 
* Uncertainties in the global budget of tropospheric ozone 
are associated primarily with our lack of knowledge of the 
distribution of ozone, its short-lived precursors (N0^,, 
hydrocarbons, CO) and atmospheric transport. These 
uncertainties severely limit our ability to model and predict 
tropospheric ozone on a global scale. We cannot determine 
with confidence the relative importance of anthropogenic 
sources (principally surface combustion of fossil fuel and 
biomass, and aircraft) compared to natural sources 
(lightning, soils, stratospheric input) in controlling the 
global NOj^ distribution. 
* The possible increase in tropospheric ozone resulting 
from emissions of subsonic aircraft cannot currently be 
calculated with confidence. The resulting radiative effect 
may be significant, but it is unlikely to exceed the effect of 
the CO2 from the combustion of aviation fuel, about 3% of 
current fossil fuel combustion. 
*** The IS92 scenarios for emissions of greenhouse and 
related gases are used to calculate future concentrations of 
greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations (and hence 
radiative forcing) up to 2100. These calculations use a 
simple model based on current lifetimes, except for CH^ 
whose lifetime responds to its own increase. Changes in 
NO^, hydrocarbon and CO emissions (IS92) would be 
expected to alter tropospheric OH and ozone, but there is 
no current consensus how to include growth in these 
emissions. The changes in ozone resulting from the 
estimated changes in CH4 are calculated. 
Stratospheric ozone (0^) 
* Trends in total column ozone at mid-latitudes in both 
hemispheres are significant in all seasons (averaging about 
- 4 to -5%/decade since 1979) and are largely attributable 
to increases in halocarbons. Little or no change has 
occurred in the tropics. 
* Unusually low values of total ozone (lower than would 
be expected from an extrapolation of the 1980s trend) were 
observed in the 1991 to 1993 period, especially at Northern 
mid- and high latitudes. Antarctic ozone "holes" in the 
1990s have been the most severe on record; for instance, 
parts of the lower stratosphere contained extremely low 
amounts of ozone, corresponding to local depletions of 
more than 99%. 
Aerosols 
* Atmospheric aerosol in the troposphere influences 
climate in two ways, directly through the scattering and 
absorption of solar radiation, and indirectly through 
modifying the optical properties and lifetime of clouds. 
* Estimation of tropospheric aerosol radiative forcing is 
more complex and uncertain than radiative forcing due to 
the well-mixed greenhouse gases for several reasons. First, 
both the direct and indirect radiative effect of aerosol 
72 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
particles depend strongly on particle size and chemical 
composition and cannot be related to aerosol mass source 
strengths in a simple manner. Second, the indirect radiative 
effect of aerosols depends on complex processes involving 
aerosol particles and the nucleation and growth of cloud 
droplets. Last, aerosols in the lower troposphere have short 
lifetimes (around a week) and so their spatial distribution is 
highly inhomogeneous and strongly correlated with their 
sources. 
* Many lines of evidence suggest that anthropogenic 
aerosol has increased the optical depth (a measure of the 
direct aerosol effect) over and downwind of industrial 
regions and that this increase is very large compared with 
the natural background in these regions. Major 
contributions to the anthropogenic component of the 
aerosol optical depth arise from sulphates (produced from 
sulphur dioxide released as a result of fossil fuel 
combustion) and from organics released by biomass 
burning. 
*** Preliminary results suggest that a substantial fraction 
of the soil dust aerosol is subject to influence by human 
activity. 
*** Improvements have been made to models of the 
distribution of anthropogenic aerosols and these 
calculations have now been extended to soot aerosols. As a 
result, more confidence can be placed on the distributions 
used for calculations of direct aerosol forcing. 
* Future concentrations of anthropogenic sulphate aerosols 
will depend on both fossil fuel use and emission controls. 
Even if the total global emissions of SO, were stabilised, 
there are likely to be major changes in the geographical 
distribution of the SOj emissions and, hence, the aerosol 
concentration, in the 21st century. 
Radiative forcing 
* The use of global mean radiative forcing remains a 
valuable concept for giving a first-order estimate of the 
potential climatic importance of various forcing 
mechanisms. However, there are limits to its utility; in 
particular, the spatial patterns of forcing due to the well-
mixed greenhouse gases and tropospheric aerosols are very 
different, and a comparison of the global mean radiative 
forcings does not give a complete picture of their possible 
climatic impact. For example, if the global mean radiative 
forcing were to be zero due to cancellation of positive and 
negative forcings from different mechanisms, this cannot 
be taken to imply the absence of regional-scale or possibly 
even global climate change. 
** Estimates of the radiative forcing due to changes in 
greenhouse gas concentrations since pre-industrial times 
remain unchanged from IPCC (1994). These are -1-2.45 
Wm"- (with an estimated uncertainty of 15%) for the direct 
effect of the well-mixed greenhouse gases (COj, CH^, NjO 
and the halocarbons), between -ЬО.2 and +0.6 Wm"- for 
tropospheric ozone and —0.1 Wm~^ (with a factor of two 
uncertainty) for stratospheric ozone. Chemical feedbacks 
from stratospheric ozone depletion (i.e., increased U V in 
the troposphere) have been proposed that could ainplify its 
negative forcing but these are not yet well quantified. 
*** The total direct forcing due to tropospheric aerosols 
(sulphate aerosols, fossil fuel soot and aerosols from 
biomass burning) is estimated to be —0.5 Wm~- (with a 
factor of two uncertainty). The uncertainty in the direct 
forcing due to sulphate aerosols resulting from fossil fuel 
emissions and smelting has been slightly reduced since 
IPCC (1994) owing to a re-evaluation of the available 
modelled aerosol spatial distributions; the radiative forcing 
relative to pre-industrial times is estimated to be -0.4 Wm~^ 
(with a factor of two uncertainty). An estimate of -fO.l 
Wm^2 (with at least a factor of three uncertainty) is 
proposed for the radiative forcing due to soot from fossil 
fuel sources. The direct radiative forcing since 1850 from 
particles associated with biomass burning remains 
unchanged from IPCC (1994) at -0.2 Wm^^ (with a factor 
of three uncertainty). 
** The radiative forcing due to changes in cloud droplet 
radii (and possible associated changes in cloud water 
content, amount and thickness) as a result of aerosols 
arising from human activity (the indirect effect) remains 
very difficult to quantify, more so than the direct effect. 
Several new studies support the view that it has caused a 
negative radiative forcing since pre-industrial times. The 
estimate from IPCC (1994) is unchanged at between 0 and 
-1.5 Wm"2. 
** Large volcanic eruptions can significantly increase the 
aerosol content in the stratosphere and cause a radiative 
forcing for a few years. For instance, the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo in 1991 caused a transient but large global mean 
radiative forcing that reached between - 2 and - 4 Wm'^^ 
for about one year. The uneven distribution of volcanic 
eruptions during the past century or so means that the 
transient variations in volcanic forcing may have been 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
73 
important in some of the observed climate variations on the 
decadal scale. 
* Extension of current understanding of the relationship 
between observed changes in solar output and other 
indicators of solar variability suggests that long-term 
increases in solar irradiance since the 17th century Maunder 
Minimum might have been climatically significant. A 
global mean radiative forcing of a few tenths of a Wm'^ 
since 1850 has been suggested, but uncertainties are large. 
Global Warming Potential (GWP) 
* Policymakers may need a means of estimating the 
relative radiative effects of the various greenhouse gases. 
The GWP is an attempt to provide such a measure. The 
index is defined as the cumulative radiative forcing 
between the present and some chosen later time "horizon" 
caused by a unit mass of gas emitted now, expressed 
relative to some reference gas (here COj is used). The 
future global warming commitment of a greenhouse gas 
over the reference time horizon is the appropriate GWP 
multiplied by the amount of gas emitted. For example, 
GWPs could be used to estimate the effect of a given 
reduction in CO^ emissions compared with a given 
reduction in CH4 emissions, for a specified time horizon. 
** The set of Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) for 
greenhouse gases that is presented in this chapter is an 
update and expansion of that presented in IPCC (1994). 
Three new gases have been added to the suite of GWPs 
presented. The typical uncertainty is ±35% relative to the 
carbon dioxide reference. The time horizons of the GWPs 
are 20, 100, and 500 years. 
* GWPs have a number of important limitations and 
underlying assumptions (see IPCC (1994)). For example, 
the GWP concept is currently inapplicable to gases and 
aerosols that are very unevenly distributed, as is the case 
for tropospheric ozone and aerosols and their precursors. 
Further, the indices and the estimated uncertainties are 
intended to reflect global averages only, and do not account 
for regional effects. 
*** The net GWPs for the ozone-depleting gases, which 
include the direct "warming" and indirect "cooling" 
effects, have now been estimated. In IPCC (1994), only the 
direct GWPs were presented for these gases. The indirect 
effect 
reduces 
their 
net 
GWPs: 
those of 
the 
chloroflurocarbons (CFCs) tend to be positive, while those 
of the halons tend to be negative. The calculation of 
indirect effects for a number of other gases (e.g., N0^) is 
not 
currently 
possible 
because 
of 
inadequate 
characterisation of many of the atmospheric processes 
involved. 
*** Revised lifetimes for gases destroyed by chemical 
reactions in the lower atmosphere (particularly methane 
and the CFC substitutes) are based upon a recent reference 
gas re-calibration, resulting in GWPs that are slightiy lower 
(typically by 10-15%) than those cited in IPCC (1994). 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
75 
Introduction 
In 1994, IPCC WGI produced a report entitled "Radiative 
Forcing of Climate Change". Two main topics were 
addressed: 
(a) 
the relative climatic importance of anthropogenically 
induced changes in the atmospheric concentrations 
and distribution of different greenhouse gases and 
aerosols; 
(b) 
possible routes to stabilisation of greenhouse gas 
concentrations in the atmosphere. 
Each section of this chapter contains a summary and 
update of the material presented in one of the first 5 
chapters of the 1994 report to which the reader is referred 
for a fuller discussion. 
Clear evidence has been presented in past IPCC WGI 
reports (1990, 1992, 1994) that the atmospheric 
concentrations of a number of radiatively active gases have 
increased over the past century as a result of human activity. 
Most of these trace gases possess strong absorption bands in 
the infrared region of the spectrum (where energy is emitted 
and absorbed by the Earth's surface and atmosphere) and 
they thus act to increase the heat trapping ability of the 
atmosphere and so drive the climate change considered in 
this report. The other atmospheric constituents which are 
important in climate change are aerosols (suspensions of 
particles in the atmosphere) which tend to exert a cooling 
effect on the atmosphere. 
The relative importance of the various constituents is 
assessed using the concept of radiative forcing. A change 
in the concentration of an atmospheric constituent can 
cause a radiative forcing by perturbing the balance between 
the net incoming radiation and the outgoing terrestrial 
radiation. A radiative forcing is defined to be a change in 
average net radiation (either solar or terrestrial in origin) at 
the top of the troposphere (the tropopause). As defined 
here, the incoming solar radiation is not considered a 
radiative forcing, although a change in the amount of 
incoming solar radiation would be a radiative forcing. 
Similarly changes in clouds and water vapour resulting 
from alterations to the general circulation of the 
atmosphere are considered to be climate feedbacks (see 
Chapter 4) rather than radiative forcings. However, 
changes caused, for example, in clouds through the indirect 
aerosol effect and in water vapour through the oxidation of 
methane in the stratosphere, are counted as indirect 
radiative forcings. Radiative forcing was discussed in detail 
in IPCC (1994): Section 2.4 contains a summary and 
update of that material. 
The concentration of an atmospheric constituent depends 
on the size of its sources (emissions into and production 
within the atmosphere) and sinks (chemical loss in the 
atmosphere and removal at the Earth's surface). These 
processes act on different time-scales which, singly and on 
aggregate, define the various lifetimes of the atmospheric 
constituent (see box "Definition of Time-scales"). The past 
changes in the concentrations of the stable gases are 
relatively well known as they can be found by measuring 
the concentrations in air bubbles trapped in ice cores in 
Greenland and Antarctica. The past changes in the 
concentrations of the less stable gases and of aerosols are 
harder to quantify. 
Estimation of possible future changes in the concentration 
of an atmospheric constituent requires a quantitative 
understanding of the processes that remove the constituent, 
and estimates of its future emissions (and/or atmospheric 
production). The former is discussed in this chapter for a 
wide range of atmospheric constituents. Estimating the 
emissions, however, is outside the scope of this report and 
the so-called IS92 scenarios (IPCC, 1992) are used here 
because they cover a wide range of possible future emissions 
and because both their strengths and weaknesses are 
relatively well-known (Alcamo etal, 1995). 
The first three sections of this chapter discuss the factors 
that affect the atmospheric abundance of carbon dioxide 
(Section 2.1), the other trace gases (Section 2.2) and 
aerosols (Section 2.3). Section 2.4 discusses the radiative 
forcing that arises from changes in the concentrations of 
these atmospheric constituents and from changes in solar 
output. IPCC (1990) introduced the global warming 
potential (GWP) as a measure of possible future 
commitments to global warming resulting from current 
anthropogenic emissions. The G W P is defined as the 
cumulative radiative forcing between the present and some 
chosen later time "horizon" caused by a unit mass of gas 
emitted now, expressed relative to that of some reference 
gas (COj has typically been used). A GWP is thus not a 
simple measure as it involves a number of assumptions 
(e.g., the time-scale, the reference gas) and a number of 
scientific uncertainties (e.g., lifetime, radiative properties -
discussed in IPCC (1994)). These issues and revised values 
of the GWPs of a wide range of gases are presented in 
Section 2.5. 
An intriguing, but still unresolved issue is whether there 
is an underlying cause for the variations in the trends of a 
number of trace gases including carbon dioxide (CO2), 
methane (CH^) and nitrous oxide (NjO) which are 
discussed individually later in this chapter. In the early 
1990s, particularly between 1991 and 1993, the rates of 
76 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
increases of these gases became smaller and, at certain 
times and places, negative. A number of mechanisms have 
been proposed for each gas, but no quantitative resolution 
has yet been made. One common factor is the eruption of 
Mt. Pinatubo in June 1991 which may have affected the 
sources and sinks of COj, CH^ and NjO through changes 
in 
meteorology, 
atmospheric 
chemistry 
and/or 
biogeochemical exchange at the Earth's surface (see 
Sections 2.1.2, 2.2.2.1 and 2.2.2.2). However, no consensus 
has been reached as to whether the changes in the growth 
rates are linked or not. 
2.1 CO2 and the Carbon Cycle 
2.1.1 Introduction 
Two factors have increased attention on the carbon cycle: 
the observed increase in levels of atmospheric CO2 (-280 
ppmv in 1800; -315 ppmv in 1957; -358 ppmv in 1994); 
and the Framework Convention on Climate Change 
( F C C C ) under which nations have to assess their 
contributions to sources and sinks of COj and to evaluate 
the processes that control C O j accumulation in the 
atmosphere. Over the last several years, our understanding 
of the carbon cycle has improved, particularly in the 
DEFINITION OF TIME-SCALES 
Throughout this report different time-scales are used to characterise processes affecting trace gases and aerosols. The 
following terminology is used in this chapter. 
Turnover time (T) is the ratio of the mass (Af) of a reservoir - e.g., a gaseous compound in the atmosphere - and the 
total rate of removal (5) from the reservoir: T = MIS 
In cases where there are several removal processes (5¡), separate turnover times (T^) can be defined with respect to 
each removal process: T. = M/S-
Adjustment time or response time (T^ is the time-scale characterising the decay of an instantaneous pulse input into 
the reservoir. Adjustment time is also used to characterise the adjustment of the mass of a reservoir following a step 
change in the source strength. 
Lifetime is a more general term often used without a single definition. In the Policymakers Summary and elsewhere in 
this report, lifetime is sometimes used, for simplicity, as a surrogate for adjustment time. In atmospheric chemistry, 
however, lifetime is often used to denote the turnover time. 
In simple cases, where the global removal of the compound in question is directly proportional to the global reservoir 
content (-S" = кМ, with k, the removal frequency, being a constant), the adjustment time almost equals the turnover time 
(T^ = T). An example is CFC-11 in the atmosphere which is removed only by photochemical processes in the 
stratosphere. In this case Г = 
= 50 years. 
In other situations, where the removal frequency is not constant or there are several reservoirs that exchange with each 
other, the equality between T and 
no longer holds. An extreme example is that of CO2. Because of the rapid 
exchange of CO^ between the atmosphere and the oceans and the terrestrial biota, the turnover time of CO2 in the 
atmosphere (7") is only about 4 years. However, a large part of the CO2 that leaves the atmosphere each year is 
returned to the atmosphere from these reservoirs within a few years. Thus, the adjustment time of CO2 in the 
atmosphere (Г^) is actually determined by the rate of removal of carbon from the surface layer of the oceans into the 
deeper layers of the oceans. Although an approximate value of about 100 years may be given for the adjustment time 
of CO2 in the atmosphere, the actual adjustment is faster in the beginning and slower later on. 
Methane is another gas for which the adjustment time is different from the turnover time. In the case of methane the 
difference arises because the removal {S) - which is mainly through chemical reaction with the hydroxyl radical in the 
troposphere - is related to the amount of methane (M) in a non-linear fashion, i.e., S - кМ, with к decreasing as M 
increases. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
77 
Figure 2.1: The global carbon cycle, showing the reservoirs (in GtC) and fluxes (GtC/yr) relevant to the anthropogenic perturbation as 
annual averages over the period 1980 to 1989 (Eswaran et al, 1993; Potter et al, 1993, Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993). The 
component cycles are simplified and subject to considerable uncertainty. In addition, this figure presents average values. The riverine 
flux, particularly the anthropogenic portion, is currently very pooriy quantified and so is not shown here. Evidence is accumulating that 
many of the key fluxes can fluctuate significantly from year to year (terrestrial sinks and sources: INPE, 1992; Ciais et al, 1995a; 
export from the marine biota: Wong et al, 1993). In contrast to the static view conveyed by figures such as this one, the carbon system 
is clearly dynamic and coupled to the climate system on seasonal, interannual and decadal time-scales (e.g., Schimel and Sulzman, 1995). 
quantification and identification of mechanisms for tertestrial 
exchanges, and in the preliminary quantification of feedbacks. 
An overview of the carbon cycle is presented in Figure 2.1. 
IPCC (1994) (Schimel et al., 1995) specifically 
addressed four areas: 
(a) 
the past and present atmospheric COj levels; 
(b) 
the atmospheric, oceanic, and ten-estrial components 
of the global carbon budget; 
(c) 
feedbacks on the carbon cycle; 
(d) 
the results of a model-based examination of the 
relationship between 
future 
emissions and 
atmospheric concentrations (addressing, in particular. 
the requirements for achieving stabilisation of 
atmospheric CO2 concentrations). 
In this introduction we summarise the earlier review, 
updating it where appropriate, before discussing four 
specific issues. 
In Section 2.1.2 we re-address the issue of the early 
1990s slow-down in the atmospheric growth rate of CO2, 
as recent evidence shows that growth rates are once again 
rising. We also present modelled emissions and 
concentrations calculated on the basis of the carbon budget 
presented in 1994, and compare the results with those 
presented earlier based on the 1992 budget. In addition, we 
78 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
address some concerns of the reviewers of the 1994 report. 
For example, an expanded analysis of the sensitivity of the 
model calculations to the extremely uncertain estimates of 
global net deforestation is presented in Section 2.1.3.2. 
Further, we discuss the published suggestion that the 
carbon cycle calculations carried out to date could be in 
error (Starr, 1993), and we explain why these suggestions 
are wrong. Lastly, we present recent evidence that suggests 
a slightly smaller magnitude for the oceanic COj sink, and 
discuss the implications of this in terms of concentration 
and emissions projections. 
Atmospheric CO2 levels 
Precise, direct measurements of atmospheric COj started in 
1957 at the South Pole, and in 1958 at Mauna Loa, Hawaii. 
At this time the atmospheric concentration was about 315 
ppmv and the rate of increase was -0.6 ppmv/yr. The 
growth rate of atmospheric concentrations at Mauna Loa 
has generally been increasing since 1958. It averaged 0.83 
ppmv/yr during the 1960s, 1.28 ppmv/yr during the 1970s, 
and 1.53 ppmv/yr during the 1980s. In 1994, the 
atmospheric level of COj at Mauna Loa was 358 ppmv. 
Data from the Mauna Loa station are close to, but not the 
same as, the global mean. 
Atmospheric concentrations of C O j have been 
monitored for shorter periods at a large number of 
atmospheric stations around the world (e.g., Boden et al., 
1991). Measurement sites are distributed globally and 
include sites in Antarctica, Australia, Asia, Europe, North 
America and several maritime islands, but, at present, 
nowhere on the continents of Africa or South America. The 
globally averaged C O j concentration, as determined 
through analysis of N O A A / C M D L data (Boden et al., 
1991; Conway et al., 1994), increased by 1.53 ± 0.1 
ppmv/yr over the period 1980 to 1989. This corresponds to 
an annual average rate of change in atmospheric carbon of 
3.3 ± 0.2 GtC/yr. Other carbon-containing compounds like 
methane, carbon monoxide and larger hydrocarbons 
contain - 1 % of the carbon stored in the atmosphere (with 
even smaller percentage changes) and can be neglected in 
the atmospheric carbon budget. There is no doubt that the 
increase shown by the atmospheric record since 1957 is 
due largely to anthropogenic emissions of CO2. The record 
itself provides important insights that 
support 
anthropogenic emissions as a source of the observed 
increase. For example, when seasonal and short-term 
interannual variations in concentrations are neglected, the 
rise in atmospheric CO2 is about 50% of anthropogenic 
emissions (Keeling et al., 1989a, 1995) with the inter-
hemispheric difference growing in parallel to the growth of 
fossil emissions (Keeling et al., 1989b; Siegenthaler and 
Sarmiento, 1993). 
The atmospheric CO2 concentration records prior to 
1957 mainly come from air bubbles in ice cores, although 
some values have been inferred indirectly from isotopic 
data. Ice cores provide a direct record of past atmospheric 
composition back to well before the industrial revolution. 
Information between 1000 and 9000 years ago is less 
certain because of ice defects. Prior to that, the data show 
natural variations, the most noticeable of which is an 
increase in CO2 level of about 80 ppmv that paralleled the 
last interglacial warming. Throughout this record, there is 
no direct evidence that past changes in CO2 levels were as 
rapid as those of the 20th century; early indications that 
such rapid changes may have occurred during the last 
glacial period have not been confirmed (Neftel et al., 
1988). Over the last 1000 years, CO2 concentrations in the 
atmosphere have fluctuated ± 10 ppmv around 280 ppmv, 
until the recent increase to a concentration of ~358 ppmv, 
with a current rate of increase of -1.6 ppmv/yr (1994). 
The Anthropogenic Carbon Budget 
The major components of the atmospheric carbon budget 
are anthropogenic emissions, the atmospheric increase, 
exchanges between the ocean and the atmosphere, and 
exchanges between the terrestrial biosphere and the 
atmosphere (Table 2.1). Emissions from fossil fuels and 
cement production averaged 5.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr over the 
decade of the 1980s. In 1990 the emissions were 6.1 ±0.6 
GtC. The measured average annual rate of atmospheric 
increase in the 1980s was 3.3 ± 0.2 GtC/yr. Average ocean 
uptake during the decade has been estimated by a 
combination of modelling and measurements of carbon 
isotopes and atmospheric oxygen/nitrogen ratios to be 2.0 
± 0.8 GtC/yr. 
Averaged over the 1980s, terrestrial exchanges include 
a tropical source of 1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr from ongoing 
changes in land-use, based on land clearing rates, biomass 
inventories and modelled forest regrowth. Recent satellite 
data have reduced uncertainties in the rate of deforestation 
for the Amazon, but rates for the rest of the tropics remain 
poorly quantified. For the tropics as a whole, there is 
incomplete information on initial biomass and rates of 
regrowth. There is currentiy no estimate available for the 
years 1990 to 1995. The tropical analyses do not account 
for a number of potential terrestrial sinks. These include 
the regrowth of mid- and high latitude Northern 
Hemisphere forests (1980s mean value of 0.5 ± 0.5 
GtC/yr), enhanced forest growth due to CO2 fertilisation 
(0.5-2.0 GtC/yr), nitrogen deposition (0.2-1.0 GtC/yr) 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
79 
Table 2.1: Average annual budget of CO2 perturbations for 1980 to 1989. Fluxes and reservoir changes of carbon are 
expressed in GtC/yr, error limits correspond to an estimated 90% confidence interval. 
CO2 sources 
(1) Emissions from fossil fuel combustion and cement production 
(2) Net emissions from changes in tropical land-use 
(3) Total anthropogenic emissions = (l)+(2) 
Partitioning amongst reservoirs 
(4) Storage in the atmosphere 
(5) Ocean uptake 
(6) Uptake by Northern Hemisphere forest regrowth 
(7) Other terrestrial sinks = (3)-((4)+(5)+(6)) 
(CO2 fertilisation, nitrogen fertilisation, climatic effects) 
IPCC 1992+ 
IPCC 1994* 
Estimates for 1980s budget 
IPCC 1995 
5.5 ±0.5^ 
1.6 ±1.0^ 
7.1 ± 1.1 
3.4 ±0.2^ 
2.0 ±0.8^ 
not accounted for 
1.7 ± 1.4 
5.5 ±0.5 
1.6 ± 1.0 
7.1 ± 1.1 
3.2 ±0.2 
2.0 ±0.8 
0.5+0.5 
1.4 ±1.5 
5.5±0.5« 
1.6± 1.05 
7.1 ± 1.1 
3.3±0.2§ 
2.0±0.8§ 
0.5±0.5§ 
1.3 ±1.5 
t Values given in IPCC (1990, 1992). 
* Values given in IPCC (1994). 
Д Values used in the carbon cycle models for the calculations presented in IPCC (1994). 
§ Values used in the carbon cycle models for the calculations presented here. 
and, possibly, response to climatic anomalies (O-I.O 
GtC/yr). The latter term, although thought to be positive 
over the 1980s, and in 1992 to 1993 in response to the Mt. 
Pinatubo eruption of 1991 (Keeling et al., 1995), could be 
either positive or negative during other periods. 
Partitioning the sink among these processes is difficult, 
but it is likely that all components are significant. While 
the CO2 fertilisation effect is the most commonly cited 
terrestrial uptake mechanism, existing model studies 
indicate that the magnitudes of the contributions from each 
process are comparable, within large ranges of 
uncertainty. For example, some model-based evidence 
suggests that the magnitude of the COj fertilisation effect 
is limited by interactions with nutrients and other 
ecological processes. Experimental confirmation from 
ecosystem-level studies, however, is lacking. As a result, 
the role of the terrestrial biosphere in controlling past 
atmospheric C O j concentrations is uncertain, and its 
future role is difficult to predict. 
The Influence of Climate and other Feedbacks on the 
Carbon Cycle 
The responses of terrestrial carbon to climate are complex, 
with rates of biological activity generally increasing with 
warmer temperatures and increasing moisture. Storage of 
carbon in soils generally increases along a gradient from 
low to high latitudes, reflecting slower decomposition of 
dead plant material in colder environments (Post et al., 
1985; Schimel et al., 1994). Global ecosystem models 
based on an understanding of underlying mechanisms are 
designed to capture these patterns, and have been used to 
simulate the responses of terrestrial carbon storage to 
changing climate. Models used to assess the effects of 
warming on the carbon budget point to the possibility of 
large losses of terrestrial carbon (-200 GtC) over the next 
few hundred years, offset by enhanced uptake in response 
to elevated CO2 (that could eventually amount to 100-300 
GtC). Effects of changing land-use on carbon storage also 
may be quite large (Vloedbeld and Leemans, 1993). 
Experiments that incorporate the record of past changes of 
climate (e.g., the climate of 18,000 years ago) suggest 
major changes in terrestrial carbon storage with climate. 
See Chapter 9 for a more complete discussion of these 
issues. 
Storage of carbon in the ocean may also be influenced 
by climate feedbacks through physical, chemical and 
biological processes. Initial model results suggest that the 
effects of predicted changes in circulation on the ocean 
carbon cycle are not large (lOs rather than 100s of ppmv in 
the atmosphere). However, exploration of the long-term 
80 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
impacts of warming on ocean circulation patterns has just 
begun; hence, analyses of climate impacts on the oceanic 
carbon cycle must be viewed as preliminary. See Chapter 
10 for a more complete discussion of these issues. 
Modelling Future Concentrations of Atmospheric CO2 
For IPCC (1994), modelling groups from many countries 
were asked to use published carbon cycle models to 
evaluate the degree to which COj concentrations in the 
atmosphere might be expected to change over the next 
several centuries, given a standard set of emission 
scenarios (including changes in land-use) and levels for 
stabilisation of COj concentrations (350, 450, 550, 650 and 
750 ppmv (S350-S750)). Models were constrained to 
balance the 1992 IPCC version of the 1980s mean carbon 
budget and to match the atmospheric record of past COj 
variations using CO2 fertilisation as the sole sink for the 
terrestrial biosphere. These analyses were re-done for this 
report, using the Bern (Siegenthaler and Joos, 1992; Joos et 
al, 1996), Wigley (Wigley, 1993), and Jain (Jain et al, 
1995) models as representatives of the whole model set. 
The new calculations incorporated more recent information 
about the atmospheric COj increase and a revised net land-
use flux. As complete data are not yet available for a 1990s 
budget, the 1980s mean values were again used as a 
reference calibration period to account for the influence of 
natural variability. This choice does not affect the results in 
any significant way (see Chapter 9). 
The stabilisation analyses explored the relationships 
between anthropogenic emissions and atmospheric 
concentrations. The analyses were based on a specific set 
of concentration profiles constrained to match present-day 
(1990) conditions and to achieve stabilisation at different 
levels and different future dates. The levels chosen 
(350-750 ppmv) spanned a realistic range (which has been 
extended in this report). Stabilisation dates were chosen so 
that the emissions changes were not unrealistically rapid. 
Precise pathways were somewhat arbitrary, loosely 
constrained by the need for smooth and not-too-rapid 
emissions changes (see Enting et al. (1994) for detailed 
documentation). Alternative pathways are considered in 
this report. The models were used to perform a series of 
inverse calculations to determine fossil emissions (land-use 
emissions were prescribed). These calculations: 
(I) 
determined the time course of carbon emissions from 
fossil fuel combustion required to arrive at the 
selected CO2 concentration stabilisation profiles 
while matching the past atmospheric record and the 
1980s mean budget; and 
(2) 
assessed (by integration) the total amount of fossil 
carbon released. 
For stabilisation at 450 ppmv in the 1994 calculaflons, 
fossil emissions had to be reduced to about a third of 
today's levels (i.e., to about 2 GtC/yr) by the year 2200. 
For stabilisation at 650 ppmv, reductions by 2200 had to be 
about two-thirds of current levels (i.e., 4 GtC/yr). This 
clearly indicates that stabilisation of emissions at 1990 
levels is not sufficient to stabilise atmospheric CO2. These 
results are independent of the assumed pathway to 
concentration stabilisation (as shown later in this report), 
although the detailed changes in future anthropogenic 
emissions do depend on the pathway selected. 
For the 18 models used for IPCC (1994), the implied 
fossil emissions differed. Initial differences were small, 
increasing with time to span a range up to ±15% about the 
median. In addition, the maximum range of uncertainty in 
fossil emissions associated with the parametrization of CO2 
fertilisation (evaluated with one of the models) varied 
± 10% about the median for low stabilisation values and 
± 1 5 % for higher stabilisation values. For these 1994 
calculations, the use of CO2 fertilisation alone to control 
terrestrial carbon storage, when in fact other ecological 
mechanisms are likely to be involved, probably results in 
an underestimate of future concentrations (for given 
emissions) or an overestimate of emissions (for the 
stabilisation profiles). The revised calculations presented 
here use a lower fertilisation factor and so the associated 
bias is likely to be smaller. IPCC (1994) reported these 
results in terms of total anthropogenic emissions, direcüy 
addressing the requirements 
of the 
F C C C 
and 
coincidentally removing the loss of generality arising from 
choosing a specific land-use flux. 
2.1.2 Atmospheric CO2 Concentrations and the Status of 
the CO2 Growth Rate Anomaly 
The decline in the growth rate of CÓ2 in 1992 is one of the 
most noticeable changes in the carbon cycle in the recent 
record of observation (Conway et al, 1994). The decline in 
the short time-scale growth rate (based on interannual data 
filtered to remove annual cycle variations and considering 
the mean growth rates for overlapping 12-month periods) 
to 0.6 ppmv/yr in 1992 is considerable when contrasted 
with the mean rate over 1987 to 1988 of 2.5 ppmv/yr, until 
recently the highest one-year mean growth rate ever 
recorded. Examination of the CO2 growth rate record 
reveals, in fact, considerable variability over time (Figure 
2.2, which is the updated version of Figure 1.2 in Schimel 
et al, 1995). The magnitude of individual anomalies in the 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
81 
COj growth rate depends on what is defined as "normal" 
for the long-term trend. At Mauna Loa, for example, the 
1987 to 1988 increase was similar to a variation which 
occurred in 1972 to 1973 (see Figure 2.2). 
How are these changes explained, and do they matter? 
Analyses of the recent changes suggest that both the 
relative and absolute magnitudes of ocean and terrestrial 
processes vary substantially from year-to-year and that 
these changes cause marked annual time-scale changes in 
the COT growth rate. Although the oceanic and biospheric 
sources of CO2 cannot be distinguished by examining the 
concentration data alone, they can be distinguished by 
looking at observations of the stable carbon isotope ratio 
('•^C to ^^C) of atmospheric COj. Carbon dioxide release 
from the ocean has nearly the same '^C to ^'C ratio as 
atmospheric COj, whereas cai'bon of biospheric origin is 
substantially depleted in ^^C. As such, it is clearly 
distinguishable from carbon originating from the ocean. 
The use of atmospheric transport modelling to analyse 
spatial distributions of CO^ and '•'СО, provides additional 
information (Ciais et al., 1995a, b). To study interannual 
CO2 fluctuations, Keeling et al. (1989a, 1995) removed the 
seasonal cycle and the long-term fossil fuel-induced trend 
from the direct atmospheric record to obtain anomalies in 
CO2 concentration at Mauna Loa and the South Pole. 
Anomalies of the order of 1-2 ppmv are found; a small 
signal compared to the long-term increase (about 80 
ppmv). The interannual C O j variations must reflect 
imbalances in the exchange fluxes between the atmosphere 
and the terrestrial biosphere and/or the ocean. 
The isotopic data and modelling studies suggest that 
earlier short-term COj anomalies on the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) time-scale reflected two opposing 
effects: reduced net primary production of the terrestrial 
biosphere possibly due to reduced precipitation in monsoon 
regions, and a concomitant, temporary increase in oceanic 
CO, uptake due to a reduction of the CO, outgassing in the 
Pacific equatorial ocean (Keeling et al., 1989b, 1995; Volk, 
1989; Siegenthaler, 1990; Winguth et al, 1994). The most 
recent anomaly seems to be unusual as it cannot be directly 
related to an ENSO event. Keeling and co-workers suggest 
that it may have been induced by a global anomaly in air 
temperature. 
While the evidence for pronounced 
interannual variability in both marine and terrestrial 
exchange fluxes is strong (Bacastow, 1976; Francey et al, 
1995) the exact magnitude and timing of the variations in 
these exchange fluxes remains controversial (Keeling et 
al, 1989a, 1995; Feely etal, 1995; Francey etal, 1995). 
Year 
Figure 2.2: Growth rate of CO2 concentrations since 1958 in ppmv/year at the Mauna Loa, Hawaii station. The high growth rates of the 
late 1980s, the low growth rates of the early 1990s, and the recent upturn in the growth rate are all apparent. The smoothed curve shows 
the same data but filtered to suppress variations on time-scales less than approximately 10 years. (Sources: C D . Keeling and T.P. Worf, 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, and P. Tans, N O A A C M D L . The Keeling and N O A A results are in close agreement. The Mauna 
Loa Observatory is operated by the NOAA.) 
82 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Most of the global carbon cycle models used in IPCC 
(1994) (Schimel et ai, 1995) address only the longer term 
(10 year time-scale) direct perturbation of the global 
carbon cycle due to anthropogenic emissions. These 
models assume that the physical, chemical, and biological 
processes that control the exchange fluxes of carbon 
between the different reservoirs change only as a function 
of the carbon contents. Hence these models ignore any 
perturbations due to fluctuations in climate and are thus not 
able to reproduce these shorter-term atmospheric COj 
variations. Nevertheless, some of the more complex 
models are founded on physico-chemical and biological 
principles that also operate on shorter time-scales and first 
attempts to model these interannual variations have been 
attempted (Kaduk and Heimann, 1994; Winguth et al., 
1994; Sarmiento et al., 1995). An improved understanding 
of the rapid fluctuations of the global carbon cycle would 
help to further develop and validate these models and 
eventually should help to quantify some of the potential 
feedbacks addressed in Chapters 9 and 10. 
We now know that short-term growth rates increased 
inarkedly through 1993 and 1994, and are currently at 
levels above the long-term (decadal time-scale) mean 
(Figure 2.2). As best as can be established, the anomaly of 
the early 1990s represented a large but transient 
perturbation of the carbon system. 
2.1.3 Concentration Projections and Stabilisation 
Calculations 
Fossil fuel burning and cement manufacture, together with 
forest harvest and other changes of land-use, all transfer 
carbon (mainly as COj) to the atmosphere. This 
anthropogenic carbon then cycles between the atmosphere, 
oceans and the terrestrial biosphere. Because an important 
component of the cycling of carbon in the ocean and 
terrestrial biosphere occurs slowly, on time-scales of 
decades to millennia, the effect of additional fossil and 
biomass carbon injected into the atmosphere is a long-
lasting disturbance of the carbon cycle. The record itself 
provides important insights that support anthropogenic 
emissions as a source of the observed increase. For 
example, when seasonal and short-term interannual 
variations in concentrations are neglected, the rise in 
atinospheric COj is about 50% of anthropogenic emissions 
(Keeling et al., 1989a) with the inter-hemispheric 
difference growing in parallel to the growth of fossil 
emissions (Keeling et al., 1989a; Siegenthaler and 
Sarmiento, 1993). These aspects are in accord with our 
understanding of the carbon cycle, and agree with model 
simulations of it. A n additional important indicator of 
anthropogenically-induced atmospheric change is provided 
by the ''^C levels preserved in materials such as tree rings 
and corals. The '"^C concentration measured in tree rings 
decreased by about 2% during the period 1800 to 1950. 
This isotopic decrease, known as the Suess effect (Suess, 
1955), provides one of the most clear demonstrations that 
the increase in atmospheric CO2 is due largely to fossil fuel 
inputs. 
In this section, the relationships between future 
concentration changes and emissions of COj are examined 
through use of models that simulate the major processes of 
the carbon cycle. In the context of future climate change, 
carbon cycle model calculations play a central role because 
the bulk of projected radiative forcing changes comes from 
CO2. In IPCC (1994), two types of carbon cycle 
calculations relating future C O j concentration and 
emissions were presented: concentration projections for the 
IPCC 1992 (IS92) emission scenarios; and emissions 
estimates for a range of concentration stabilisation profiles 
directly addressing the stabilisation goal in Article 2 of the 
FCCC. 
As noted above, these emissions-concentrations 
relationships have been re-calculated because the previous 
results were based on a 1980s mean budget from IPCC 
(1992) that has been revised in three ways: 
(1) 
In the 1992 budget the net land-use flux for the 
decade of the 1980s was 1.6 GtC/yr and the 
atmospheric increase was 3.4 GtC/yr. The more 
recent estimate of the net land-use flux, however, is 
significantiy lower (1.1 GtC/yr). 
(2) 
IPCC (1994) presented a change in atmospheric COj 
over the 1980s of 3.2 GtC/yr, a value that has been 
further revised to 3.3 GtC/yr (Komhyr et al, 1985; 
Conway etal, 1994; Tans, pers. comm). 
(3) 
Minor changes have been made to the industrial 
emissions data for the 1980s, although these do not 
noticeably change the 1980s mean. These changes 
mean that the additional sinks required to balance the 
budget (which were and still are assigned to the COj 
fertilisation effect in the model calculations) are 
smaller than assumed in calculations presented in 
IPCC (1994). Consequentiy, when the new budget is 
used, future concentration projections for any given 
emission scenario are larger relative to those 
previously presented, and the emissions consistent 
with achieving stabilisation of concentrations are 
lower. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
83 
Three different models were used to carry out these 
calculations: the Bern model (Siegenthaler and Joos, 1992; 
Joos et al., 1996) and the models of Wigley (Wigley, 1993) 
and Jain (Jain et al., 1995). Changes relative to the 
previous calculations are virtually the same for each model. 
The methodology used was the same as in IPCC (1994), as 
documented in Enting et al. (1994). New results were 
produced for concentrations associated with emission 
scenarios IS92a-f and emissions associated 
with 
stabilisation profiles S350-S750. Impulse response 
functions were also revised for input into G W P 
calculations. 
In addition, stabilisation calculations were performed 
for a profile with a 1000 ppmv stabilisation level (SIOOO) 
and for variations on S350-S750 in which the pathway to 
stabilisation was changed markedly. These latter profiles 
(WRE350-WRE750), from Wigley et al. (1995), were 
designed specifically to follow closely the IS92a 
"existing policies" emission scenario for 10-30 years 
after 1990. Coupled with S350-S750 results, these new 
profiles give insights into the range of emissions options 
available for any given stabilisation level, although they 
still do not necessarily span the full option range. It 
should be noted that, even though concentration 
stabilisation is still possible if emissions initially follow 
an existing policies scenario, this cannot be interpreted 
as endorsing a policy to delay action to reduce emissions. 
Rather, the WRE scenarios were designed to account for 
inertia in the global energy system and the potential 
difficulty of deparring rapidly from the present level of 
dependence on fossil fuels. Wigley et al. (1995) stress 
the need for a full economic and environmental 
assessment in the choice of pathway to stabilisation. 
Both the S350-S750 and the WRE350-WRE750 profile 
sets require substantial reductions in emissions at some 
future rime and an eventual emissions level well below 
that of today. 
The SIOOO profile was designed to explore the emissions 
consequences of an even higher stabilisation level; the 
emissions implied by this case follow IS92a closely out to 
2050. The results show that, even with such a high 
stabilisation level, the same characteristic emissions curve 
arises as found for S350-S750. This scenario is by no 
means derived to advocate such a high stabilisation level. 
The environmental consequences of such a level have not 
been assessed, but they are certain to be very large. It 
should be noted that recent emissions are low compared to 
IS92a-projected emissions (emissions were essentially the 
same in 1990 and in 1992, at 6.1 GtC/yr), although the 
slow-down may be temporary. 
950 
900 
850 
„ 
800 
I 
750 
g 700 
I «50 
Я 600 
с 
550 
g 500 
О 
ü 
450 
400 J 
350 -
250 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
solid = 1992 budget 
dashed = 1994 revised budget 
2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 
Year 
IS92e 
IS92a 
IS92C 
Figure 2.3: COj concentrations resulting from emission scenarios 
IS92a, c, and e plotted using both the 1992 budget and the 1994 
budget. Solid lines represent model results based on the 1992 
budget calibration, dashed lines, calibration with the 1994 budget. 
The differences between results is small (of order 20 ppmv 
change in projected concentradon by the year 2100). The changes 
from revising the budget result in changes in radiative forcing of 
approximately 0.2 Wm'^. 
2.1.3.1 Effects of carbon cycle model recalibration 
The effects of using the 1992 versus the 1994 budget with 
IS92 Scenarios a, c, and e are shown in Figure 2.3. The 
results show that the impact of the new budget on projected 
future concentrations is noticeable but relatively minor. In 
the year 2100, the concentrarions increase by about 15 
ppmv (IS92c), 25 ppmv (IS92a) and 40 ppmv (IS92e). All 
three models gave similar results. In terms of radiative 
forcing increases, the 2100 values are 0.20 Wm'^ (IS92c), 
0.25 Wm^2 (is92a), and 0.26 Wm"-^ (IS92e). These 
changes are all small compared to the overall forcing 
changes over 1990 to 2100 for these scenarios. 
Figure 2.4 shows changes in the emissions requirements 
for the S450 and S650 profiles due to changes between the 
1992 and 1994 budgets. The net effect of these changes is 
quite complex as it involves compensating effects due to 
different budget factors. Changing the 1980s mean net 
land-use flux from 1.6 GtC/yr to 1.1 GtC/yr (by reducing 
the fertilisation factor required to give a balanced budget) 
leads to emissions that are about 10% lower than given 
previously (Schimel et al., 1995). This reduction is 
modified slightiy by the changes in concentration history 
and profiles, and by an even smaller amount due to the 
change in the fossil fuel emissions history, leading to the 
results presented in Figure 2.4. The changes shown in 
Figure 2.4 arise from the complex 1п1еф1ау of a number of 
factors; but the overall conclusion (that emissions must 
eventually decline to substantially below current levels) 
remains unchanged. 
84 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
solid = 1992 budget 
dashed = 1994 revised budget 
1 9 9 0 
2 0 2 0 
2 0 5 0 
2 0 8 0 
2 1 1 0 
2 1 4 0 
2 1 7 0 
2 2 0 0 
2 2 3 0 
2 2 6 0 
2 2 9 0 
Year 
Figure 2.4 Anthropogenic CO2 
emissions for revised 
concentration stabilisation profiles S450 and S650 resulting from 
model projections initialised with the 1992 budget (solid curve: 
net land-use flux = 1.6 GtC/yr) and the 1994 budget (dashed 
curve: net land-use flux =1.1 GtC/yr). 
We 
have carried out several new calculations to illustrate 
the effects of the choice of pathway leading to stabilisation 
of modelled emissions and uptake. In Figures 2.5 and 2.6 
we show the effect of pathway in more detail by employing 
the profiles of Wigley et al. (1995) (WRE below). Figure 
2.5 shows the different pathways, reaching stabilisation at 
the same time in each case, for target levels of 450 ppmv to 
750 ppmv. The corresponding anthropogenic emissions are 
shown in Figure 2.6, which shows two things: first, that the 
emissions required to achieve any given stabilisation target 
are quite sensitive to the pathway taken to reach that target; 
and second, that it is possible to achieve stabilisation even 
if the initial emissions pathway follows the IS92a Scenario 
for 
some period of time. There is, of course, a penalty for 
this: having higher emissions initially requires a larger and 
possibly sharper drop in emissions later, to lower levels 
than otherwise (also see Enting, 1995). This is a direct 
consequence of the fact that cumulative emissions tend to 
become (at the stabilisation point or beyond) similar no 
matter what the pathway. If cumulative emissions are 
constrained to be nearly constant, then what is gained early 
must be lost later. 
Figures 2.5 and 2.6 also show the case for stabilisation at 
1000 ppmv (in the year 2375). The profile here was 
constructed to follow the IS92a Scenario out to 2050 (using 
the model of Wigley (1993)) and is just one of a number of 
possible pathways. Even with this high target, to achieve it 
requires an immediate and substantial reduction below 
IS92a after 2050, with emissions peaking around 2080 and 
then undergoing a long and steady decline to, eventually. 
- - 
s 1000 
s 750 
S 650 
S 550 
S 450 
2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 
Year 
2250 2300 2350 
Figure 2.5: Stabilisation pathways used to illustrate sensitivity of 
allowed emissions to choice of pathway. The solid curves are 
based on the revised versions of the original S450 to S750 
stabilisation profiles, incorporating minor changes to account for 
the revised concentration history. The dashed curves show slower 
approaches to stabilisation and are from Wigley et al. (1995). 
Stabilisation at 1000 ppmv is plotted for comparison (SIOOO). 
values well below the current level. Although offset 
substantially, the general shape of the emissions curve for 
SIOOO is similar to all other curves. 
2.1.3.2 Effects of uncertainties in deforestation and 
CO2 
fertilisation 
The future uptake of COj by the terrestrial biosphere is 
critical to the global carbon balance. In the above 
concentration projections and emissions results, the 
terrestrial biosphere uptake was determined by the COj 
fertilisation factor, which in turn is determined mainly by the 
value assumed for the 1980s mean land-use emissions (if the 
ocean uptake is taken as a given). Thus, as in Wiglçy (1993) 
and Enting et al. (1994), we can assess the effects of 
fertilisation and future terrestrial uptake uncertainties by 
changing the 1980s mean land-use term used in initiaUsing 
the carbon cycles models. Because the ocean uptake is held 
constant, this results in changing the modelled C O , effect. 
The sensitivity of the calculated emissions for COj 
stabilisation at 450 and 650 ppmv to these uncertainties is 
shown in Figure 2.7 (cf. Figure 1.16 in Schimel etal, 1995). 
The results from all three models used in the present 
analysis show that uncertainty in the strength of the CO2 
fertilisation effect leads to significant differences in 
emissions deduced for any specified concentration profile. 
Reducing the uncertainty in emissions due to past land-use 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
85 
20 
15 
О 
a 
w 
с 
о 
ü) 
со 
10 
о 
О 
о 
с 
0) 
о, 5 
8-
с 
< о. 
riS92a 
. X 
^ 
Current 
•^^^ 
^ 
anthropogenic 
V COg emissions 
2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 2350 
Year 
Figure 2.6; Sensitivity of emissions to tlie pathway to 
stabilisation. The pathways, which stabilise at 450 ppmv to 750 
ppmv, are shown in Figure 2.5. Results for stabilisation at 1000 
ppmv (also from Figure 2.5) are shown for comparison. (The 
results shown are calculated using the Bern model.) 
4 GtC/yr 1980s net deforestation 
11 GtC/yr 1980s net deforestation 
18 GtC/yr 1980s net deforestation 
2000 
2050 
2100 
2150 
Year 
2200 
2250 
2300 
Figure 2.7: Sensitivity of the COj emissions for the S450 and 
S650 concentration stabilisation profiles to the magnitude of the 
net land-use flux. The 1994 "best guess" for the magnitude of this 
flux is 1.1 GtC/yr (dashed curve). The range shown is for net 
land-use tluxes of 0.4-1.8 GtC/yr. The 1992 "best guess" was 1.6 
GtC/yr. This sensitivity is equivalent to assessing the sensitivity 
to the magnitude of the COj fertilisation effect. (The results 
shown are calculated using the Bern model.) 
change is therefore very important in order to constrain the 
overall range of projections from carbon cycle models. At 
the same time, independent estimates of the global 
fertilisation effect may be used as a direct test of the value 
used in model calculations and so can also help to reduce 
uncertainties in projections. Estimates of the CO2 
fertilisation effect from terrestrial ecosystem models are 
now becoming available (see Chapter 9). 
2.1.4 Bomb Lifetime vs. Perturbation Lifetime 
Some recentiy published work (Starr, 1993) has argued that 
the post-industrial increase of atmospheric CO2 may be due 
largely to natural variation rather than to human causes. 
This argument hinges on a presumed low value for the 
"lifetime" of COj in the atmosphere. The argument is as 
follows: if the atmospheric lifetime were short, then large 
net CO2 fluxes into the atmosphere would have been 
required to produce the observed concentration increases; 
if it were long, smaller fluxes would yield the observed 
increases. Proponents of a natural cause assert that the CO, 
lifetime is (and has remained) only a decade or less. The 
"evidence" for such a short lifetime includes the rapid 
decline of bomb ''^C in the atmosphere following its 1964 
peak. A lifetime this short would require fluxes much 
larger than those estimated from fossil fuel burning in 
order to produce the observed atmospheric increase; 
therefore, the reasoning goes, the build-up can only be 
partiy human-induced. 
Atmospheric CO2 is taken up by the ocean and the 
biospheric carbon pools if a disequihbrium exists between 
atmosphere and the ocean (i.e., if the partial pressure of 
CO2 in the atmosphere is higher than in the surface ocean) 
and if the uptake by plant growth is larger than the CO2 
released by the biosphere by respiration and by decay of 
organic carbon (heterotrophic respiration). For terrestrial 
ecosystems, the removal of radiocarbon and that of 
anthropogenic COj from the atmosphere are different. 
Carbon storage corresponds to the difference in net primary 
production (plant growth, NPP) and decay of organic 
carbon plus plant respiration. Radiocarbon, however, is 
assimilated in proportion to the product of NPP and the 
atmospheric ''^C/'^C ratio, and is released in proportion to 
the decay rate of organic matter and its ^'^C/^'C ratio. 
For oceans, one needs to differentiate between the 
amount or concentration of radiocarbon in the atmosphere 
and the isotopic ratio '"^C/'-C. The ratio, a non-linear 
function of the CO2 and '"^C concentration, is often 
confused 
with 
concentration, 
giving 
rise to 
misunderstanding. The removal of bomb-radiocarbon 
atoms is governed by the same mechanisms as the removal 
of anthropogenic CO2. The removal of small pulse inputs 
of CO2 and '''C into the atmosphere by air-sea exchange 
follows the same pathways for both model tracers. 
However, an atmospheric perturbation in the isotopic ratio 
86 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
disappears much faster than the perturbation in the number 
of '"^C atoms as shown in Figure 2.8 (Siegenthaler and 
Oeschger, 1987; Joos etal, 1996). 
Thus a ^'^C perturbation, such as the bomb '"^C input into 
the atmosphere, induces a net transfer of '"^C into oceans 
and biosphere. Because the ^"^002 molecules generated 
from the bomb tests represent a negligible CO2 excess and, 
more importantly, because the atmospheric '"^C/'^C ratio is 
changed considerably by the '"^C input, this results in a 
large isotopic disequilibrium between the atmosphere and 
the oceanic and terrestrial biospheric reservoirs. 
Because of the different dynamic behaviour, '"^C can not 
be taken as a simple analogue tracer for the excess 
anthropogenic CO2, a fact that has long been known to the 
carbon cycle modelling community (e.g., Revelle and 
Suess, 1957; Oeschger ei a/., 1975; Broecker ei a/., 1980). 
2.1.5 Recent Bomb Radiocarbon Results and their 
Implication for Oceanic CO2 Uptake 
Two recent assessments of bomb radiocarbon in the entire 
global carbon system (i.e., the troposphere, stratosphere, 
terrestrial biosphere and the ocean (Broecker and Peng, 
1994; Hesshaimer et al, 1994)) imply a suфrising global 
imbalance during the decade after the bomb tests, when. 
1.0 
3 
< 
0.2 
0.0 
1 
• 
1 
" 
Г — 
' 
• — 
Ш х С О ^ о 
- V 
2xC0,/ 
Isotopic Ratio 
\ 
„ 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Year 
Figure 2.8; Atmospheric response to a pulse input of carbon at time 
t = 0 for CO2 and for a perturbation of the isotopic ratio ('^C/'-^C or 
i^C/i^C), obtained by using the ocean-atmosphere compartments of 
the Bern model with no biosphere. The response of the atmospheric 
CO2 concentration to a pulse input depends on the pulse size and 
the CO2 background concentration. The dashed line is for a 
doubling of pre-industrial COj concentration (280 ppmv) at t = 0; 
the dashed-dotted line is for an increase of pre-industrial COj 
concentration by one quarter (70 ppmv) at t = 0; the soUd line 
shows the decrease of an isotopic perturbation. Note the more rapid 
decline in the isotopic ratio, in accord with observations. 
apart from the relatively very small natural cosmic 
production, no major '"^C source existed. 
This imbalance may be explained either by a hidden high 
(above 30 km height) stratospheric bomb ^'^C inventory not 
detected in the existing observations, which is unlikely, or 
by an overestimated bomb radiocarbon inventory in the 
terrestrial biosphere or the ocean or both. The calculated 
biospheric reservoir uptake would have to be reduced by 
about 80% in order to achieve the global bomb radiocarbon 
balance. Such a reduction is very unlikely, as it strongly 
contradicts observations of bomb ^^C in wood (e.g., in tree 
rings: Levin et al, 1985) and soils (Harrison et al, 1993). A 
more likely, albeit tentative, explanation is that previous 
estimates of the oceanic bomb '^C inventory compiled from 
the observations of the GEOSECS program (1973-78) 
(Broecker et al, 1985) are too high by approximately 25%. 
This is slightly larger than the generally accepted uncertainty 
of this quantity. Because this explanation is inconsistent with 
a new assessment of the oceanic observations (Broecker et 
al, 1995) the issue is still not fully resolved. 
Observations of the distribution and inventories of bomb-
produced radiocarbon constitute the key tracer either to 
calibrate simple ocean carbon models or to validate the 
upper ocean transport calculated by three-dimensional 
ocean carbon models. Therefore a downward revision of the 
oceanic '"^C inventory during the GEOSECS time period 
would have implications for our quantitative view of the 
global carbon cycle, requiring a smaller role for the oceans, 
and hence larger tertestrial uptake (or lower releases from 
land-use change). The implied changes in the carbon 
budget, although large (-0.5 GtC/yr), are within existing 
uncertainties and thus do not require any fundamental 
changes in understanding, but rather indicate the importance 
of adequate global sampling of critical variables. 
2.2 ОШег Trace Gases And Atmospheric Chemistry 
2.2.1 Introduction 
Changes in the concentration of a number of gases 
(methane, nitrous oxide, the halocarbons and ozone) have 
resulted in a combined radiative forcing which is similar in 
magnitude to that of CO2 since pre-industrial times. Their 
concentrations in the atmosphere depend on chemical 
processes, which regulate their removal rates (methane, 
nitrous oxide, halocarbons) and sometimes their production 
as well (ozone). The chemistry of the atmosphere is 
complex and the many reactions are closely inter-related. 
In this section the discussion of the sources, sinks, 
lifetimes and trends of methane, nitrous oxide, halocarbons 
and ozone presented in IPCC (1994) is summarised and 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
87 
updated as is tlie discussion of the possible stabilisation of 
the atmospheric concentrations of these gases. Some of the 
discussion in IPCC (1994) is not updated here and the main 
points are now briefly summarised. 
An intercomparison of tropospheric chemistry/transport 
models using a short-lived tracer showed how critical the 
model description of the atmospheric motions is, finding a 
high degree of consistency between three dimensional 
models, but distinctly different results among two 
dimensional models. This finding, illustrating the low 
degree of confidence we should have in numerical 
simulations involving gases such as tropospheric ozone and 
its precursors, still holds. 
Our ability to model tropospheric ozone is not restricted 
solely by the limitations of our chemistry/transport models. 
Equally important is our lack of quantitative knowledge of 
the global sources and distribution of tropospheric ozone 
and its short-lived precursors (active nitrogen oxides 
(NOjj), hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide). For example, 
even the relative importance of the anthropogenic N0,^ 
sources (transport of surface pollution out of the boundary 
layer, direct injection by aircraft) and natural sources 
(lightning, soils, stratospheric input) is not well known. 
Again, no major advances have been made in this field 
since IPCC (1994). 
IPCC (1994) also described a model study which 
investigated the impact of a 20% increase in methane 
concentrations. Two main results were found: 
(a) 
the chemical feedback of methane on tropospheric 
chemistry changes the methane removal rate by 
between -0.17% and -0.35% for each 1% increase in 
the methane concentration; 
(b) 
increases of about 1.5 ppbv in tropospheric ozone 
occur in the tropics and summertime mid-latitudes, 
though there is a factor of 3 or more difference 
between models. 
The first result was used to infer that the methane 
adjustment time was about 1.45 times the turnover time 
and the latter to estimate the ratio, about 0.25, of radiative 
forcing from the induced tropospheric ozone increase to 
that from the methane increase. These findings still hold. 
2.2.2 Atmospheric Measurements and their Implications 
2.2.2.1 Methane 
Atmospheric methane (CH4) has been increasing since the 
beginning of the 19th century; current levels, 1721 ppbv, 
are the highest ever observed, including ice core records 
Year 
t(b) 
15 
> 
X3 
Q. 
В 
5 
о 
D) 
I Ü 
lOh 
oh 
1 
1 
г 
Hemisphere 
Northern 
Southern 
Year 
Figure 2.9: (a) Global average methane mixing ratios, together 
with the methane concentrations observed at Mould Bay, Canada, 
(b) The growth rates in average methane concentrations in the 
Northern and Southern Hemispheres (Dlugokencky et al, 1994 
a,c; E. Dlugokencky (NOAA) unpublished data). 
that go back 160,000 years (Chappellaz et al, 1990). That 
increase has not been regular. In the late 1970s methane grew 
at an annual rate of about 20 ppbv/yr (Blake & Rowland, 
1988). More extensive atmospheric measurements have been 
made since 1984. These indicate lower growth rates through 
the 1980s, averaging about 13 ppbv/yr, declining through the 
decade to about 9 ppbv/yr in 1991 (Dlugokencky et al, 
1994a; Blake and Rowland, updated data). 
During 1992/93, extremely low growth rates were 
observed (Dlugokencky et al, 1994b), and during 1992 
methane stopped growing at some locations. In 1994 
(Figure 2.9) global methane growth rates recovered to 
about 8 ppbv/yr, close to the range of rates observed 
throughout the period 1984 to 1991 (13-9 ppbv/yr). Recent 
data for the high northern latitudes from Mould Bay, 
Canada show this pattern in growth rates (Figure 2.9). 
Atmospheric methane is still increasing albeit at a rate less 
than that observed over the previous decades. 
88 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
There has been considerable speculation and modelling 
of the possible cause(s) of the 1992/93 anomaly. From 
methane isotope data, i.e., the relative abundance of '-^CH^ 
to '^CH^, Lowe et al. (1994) suggest that decreased 
emissions of fossil fuels in the Northern Hemisphere 
(Dlugokencky et al., 1994c) and decreased biomass 
burning in the tropics may have played significant roles. 
Schauffler and Daniel (1994) suggest that enhanced 
tropospheric-stratospheric exchange, caused by the 
additional stratospheric heating by the Mt. Pinatubo 
aerosol, could have been a contributory factor in 1992. 
Bekki et al. (1994) propose a mechanism related to Mt. 
Pinatubo, whereby significantly reduced stratospheric 
ozone levels following the eruption caused enhanced levels 
of U V to reach the troposphere (a known effect) and 
resulted in increased tropospheric hydroxyl radical (OH) 
levels and increased methane destruction (a model result). 
Hogan and Harriss (1994) have suggested that temperature 
effects on natural wetlands are a possible contributing 
cause. Many of these factors contributed to the observed 
methane anomaly in 1992/93, but at present it is not clear 
what their relative contributions are, whether they can fully 
explain the observed anomalies in concentration and 
isotopic composition, or even whether we have identified 
all of the important processes. 
(a) 
u 
о 
• « 
О) 
ç 
(b) 
Q. 
О 
1 
Oí 
С 
х 
250 
200 h 
150 h 
—
i
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
г 
. 
CFC-11 
T
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
—
1
— 
1 
1 1 1 L í 
1 1 J 1 f J 
Ireland 
Oregon 
Tasmania 
NOAA/CMDL 
(global) 
1 í í 1 r 1 
160 
140 
120 
100 
80 
60 
~\—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—I—r 
methylchloroform 
Ireland 
Oregon 
• Tasmania 
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 
Year 
2.2.2.2 Nitrous oxide 
Nitrous oxide is a major greenhouse gas because it has a 
long atmospheric lifetime (-120 years) and large radiative 
forcing about -200 times that of carbon dioxide on a per 
molecule basis (IPCC, 1994). Nitrous oxide levels continue 
to grow in the global, background atmosphere. The 1993 
growth rate (approximately 0.5 ppbv/yr) was lower than 
observed in the late 1980s-early 1990s (approximately 0.8 
ppbv/yr). This lower growth rate has been tentatively 
associated with global cooling due to aerosols emitted by 
Mt. Pinatubo affecting N2O soil emission rates (Bouwmann 
et al, 1995), but the changes in NjO growth rates are within 
the range of variabiUty seen on decadal time-scales (Prinn et 
al, 1990; Khalil and Rasmussen, 1992; Elkins et al, 1994; 
Prather et al, 1995; Prinn et al, 1995a). Zander et al 
(1994a) have updated trends in column abundance of N2O 
from 1950 to 1990 that are broadly consistent with data 
obtained at remote surface stations. 
2.2.2.3 Halocarbons 
Chlorocarbons and bromocarbons strongly absorb infrared 
radiation (a direct warming) and also destroy ozone in the 
lower stratosphere (an indirect cooling since ozone is a 
strong greenhouse gas) (IPCC, 1994; WMO/UNEP, 1995). 
Figure 2.10: (a) Global average (NOAA) and selected station 
(AGAGE) mixing ratios of CFC-11 (Cunnold etal, 1994; Prinn 
et al, 1995a; A G A G E unpublished data), (b) Mixing ratios of 
methyl chloroform from selected A G A G E stations (Prinn et al, 
1995a,b; A G A G E unpublished data). 
The slowdown in the growth rates of atmospheric 
chlorofluorocarbons, particularly CFC-II and CFC-12 
(Elkins etal, 1993; Cunnold etal, 1994) is consistent with 
the rapid phase-out of CFC consumption required by the 
Montreal Protocol and its Amendments (Copenhagen). 
Further data from the N O A A - C M D L and A G A G E 
networks (Elkins et al, 1994; Prinn et al, 1995a) show that 
CFC-11 global abundances probably stopped growing in 
early 1993, whereas CFC-12 growth rates declined from 
about 10 pptv/year (1991 to 1992) to 7 pptv/year'(1992 to 
1993). By mid-1994 global levels of CFC-12 had almost 
stopped growing and CFC-11 levels had started to decline 
(Figure 2.10). 
These changes in atmospheric concentrations of CFC-11 
and -12, clearly a response to large reductions in emissions, 
are probably in advance of those predicted to occur under 
the Montreal Protocol and its Amendments (see IS92a 
Scenario, Section 2.2.4). The inventory approach to the 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
estimation of recent production and emissions of CFC-11 
and -12 has become increasingly uncertain (Fisher and 
Midgley, 1994). The major uncertainty in the release of 
CFC-11 is now associated with release from closed cell 
foams while that for CFC-12 is the estimation of 
unreported production. 
Methyl chloroform, a relatively short-lived species in the 
atmosphere (about 5 years) compared to the CFCs (about 50 
years or more), is also a major source of stratospheric 
chlorine and so is regulated by the Montreal Protocol and its 
Amendments. Its concentration grew regularly at about 
4-5%/yr until 1990, levelled off towards the end of 1991, 
and fell in 1994 by about 8% (Figure 2.10, Prinn et ai, 
1995b) - the first reported global decrease in the 
atmospheric abundance of an anthropogenic chemical whose 
emissions are regulated by the Montreal Protocol and its 
Amendments. This dramatic reduction is consistent with the 
known emissions (Midgley and McCulloch, 1995), models 
of atmospheric transport and chemistry, including the control 
by tropospheric hydroxyl radicals (Prinn et ai, 1995b). 
HCFCs 
(hydrochlorofluorocarbons) and HFCs 
(hydrofluorocarbons) are being used increasingly as interim 
(HCFC) and longer term (HFC) substitutes for CFCs, in 
response to the requirements of the Montreal Protocol and 
its Amendments. Their GWP values are typically less than 
the CFCs they replace, but are nevertheless high compared 
to carbon dioxide. Global data for HCFC-22 (Montzka et 
al., 1993, 1994a; Elkins et al, 1994; Figure 2.11) indicate a 
mean mixing ratio in 1994 of approximately 110 pptv with a 
constant growth rate (1992 to 1994) of about 5 pptv/yr. A 
new analysis of spectroscopic data confirms that from the 
mid-1980s to the early 1990s HCFC-22 levels grew at about 
7%/yr in the Northern Hemisphere (Irion et al., 1994; 
Zander et ai, 1994b). Other HCFCs such as HCFC-142b 
and -141b are being used increasingly as substitutes for 
CFC-12 and -II in the production of closed cell foams 
(Elkins et al., 1994; Montzka et ai, 1994b; Oram et al., 
1995; Schauffler et ai, 1995) (Figure 2.11). These gases 
show rapidly accelerating growth rates since 1993. In the 
remote Southern Hemisphere (Cape Grim, Tasmania), 
HCFC-142b increased from 0.2 pptv in 1978 to 3 pptv in 
1993; and HCFC-I4Ib, from 0.1 pptv in 1982 to 0.5 pptv in 
1993 (Figure 2.11). These N O A A - C M D L data for 1994 
give a mean concentration and growth rate of about 0.6 
pptv/yr (21%/yr) for HCFC-142b, and 2 pptv/yr (67%/yr) 
for HCFC-14lb. Analyses of both data sets indicate that 
industry estimates of emissions (AFEAS, 1995) may be low. 
Simultaneous air-sea observations of methyl bromide in 
the east Pacific (40°N-55°S) and mid-Atlantic Oceans 
(53°N-45°S) during 1994 show that surface waters were 
89 
(a) 
1201-
l i o o 
с 
^ 40 
(b) 
Cl 
Q. 
О 
•*= 
2 
со 
с 
X 
20 
4 
3 
2 
1 
О 
1^ 
I I I I I I I I—I—г 
HCFC-22 
О NOAA/CMDL 
• CSIRO/SIO 
..... 
_| 1 1 1_ 
' 1—1—I—I I I—I—1—I—I—\—I—1—1—г 
О NOAA/CMDL 
• CS1RO/UEA 
ООО 
58°* 
HCFc-i42b ;* 
r • 
• 
«M* • • Лт» • • 
•••• 
HCFC-141b 
-t 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i_ 
78 80 82 84 
_1 I 
I 
L 
88 
90 92 94 
Year 
Figure 2.11: (a) HCFC-22 mixing ratios at Cape Grim, Tasmania 
(4Г8), as observed in N O A A flasks (Montzka et ai, 1993, 
1994a; Elkins et al., 1994) and in the Cape Grim air ai-chive (P. 
Eraser, unpublished data), (b) HCFC-I41b and HCFC-142b 
mixing ratios at Cape Grim, as observed in N O A A flasks 
(Montzka et al., 1994b; Elkins et al., 1994) and in the Cape Grim 
air archive (Oram et al, 1995). 
undersaturated in all areas except for coastal and upwelling 
regions (Butler, 1994; Lobert et al., 1995). The global 
mean atmospheric abundance is about 10 pptv, with an 
interhemispheric ratio of 1.3. Previously, the oceans were 
thought to be a net source of methyl bromide of about 35 X 
10^ g/yr (Khalil et ai, 1993), but extrapolation of these 
new measurements to the global oceans gives a net air-to-
ocean sink of approximately 15 X lO^g/yr (Lobert et al, 
1995). The turnover time of atmospheric methyl bromide 
with respect to oceanic uptake and degradation is about 
3-4 years, and the turnover time for all sinks is about 1.2 
years, which includes the revised estimate for removal by 
OH (Section 2.2.3). 
A re-analysis of six years of global halon-1211 and -
1301 data shows these species are continuing to grow 
90 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
nearly linearly, in contrast with earlier reports (Butler et 
al, 1992). These two halons represent about 30% of 
organic bromine in the remote atmosphere and hence of the 
ozone-depleting bromine that reaches the stratosphere. In 
1993 the halon-1211 abundance was about 2 pptv growing 
at 0.1-0.2 pptv/yr, and that of halon-1301 was 3 pptv 
growing at 0.2 pptv/yr (Butíer et al, 1994; Elkins et al, 
199A; J. Butler, unpublished data). Production of halons 
has already been phased out under the Montreal Protocol 
and its amendments, and emissions depend on release of 
the cuiTcntly existing "banks" of halons stored primarily in 
fire-fighting systems. 
2.2.2.4 Other perhalogenated species 
There is a group of trace gases, the exclusively 
anthropogenic 
perfluorinated 
species 
such as 
tetrafluoromethane (CF4), hexafluorethane (CE3CF3) and 
sulphur hexafluoride (SFg), that have very long 
atmospheric lifetimes (greater than 1000 years) and large 
GWP (Global Warming Potential) values (Ko et al, 1993). 
Tetrafluoromethane and hexafluorethane are by-products 
released to the atmosphere during the production of 
aluminium. Sulphur hexafluoride is principally used as a 
dielectric 
fluid in heavy electrical equipment. 
Comparaflvely small emissions of these species will 
accumulate and lead to radiatively significant atmospheric 
concentrations. Current concentrations of CF^ and CF3CF3 
probably exceed 70 and 2 pptv respectively (Prather et al, 
1995) and global average concentrations of SFg were 3-4 
pptv, growing at 0.2 pptv/year in 1994 (Maiss and Levin, 
1994; Maiss et al, 1996; Figure 2.12). 
f—I—I—\—I—:—I—I—I—I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1—q 
3.5 
3.0 
Q. 2.5 
0 
2.0 
С 
'x 1.5 
1.0 
0.5 
с—I—I—I—1—I—1 
I—1 I—I 1 
I — I — 1 — \ — I — d 
78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 
Year 
Figure 2.12: Sulphur hexatluoride concentrations measured at 
Cape Grim, Tasmania (41°S) from 1978 to 1994. The 
measurements were made at the University of Heidelberg on the 
CSIRO/Bureau of Meteorology air archive (Maiss et al, 1996, M . 
Maiss, unpublished data). 
2.2.2.5 Tropospheric ozone 
There is observational evidence that tropospheric ozone 
(about 10% of the total-column ozone) has increased in the 
Northern Hemisphere (north of 20°N) over the past three 
decades (Logan, 1994; Harris et al, 1995). The available 
measurements have been made primarily in industrialised 
countries so their geographic coverage is limited. Even so 
the trends are highly regional. They are smaller in the 
1980s than in the 1970s and are negative at some locations 
(Tarasick et al, 1995). European measurements at surface 
sites also indicate a doubling in the lower-tropospheric 
ozone concentradons since earlier this century. At the 
South Pole, a decrease has been observed since the mid-
1980s. Elsewhere in the Southern Hemisphere, there are 
insufficient data to draw strong inferences. IPCC (1994) 
estimated that tropospheric ozone in the Northern 
Hemisphere has doubled, from 25 to 50 ppbv, since the 
pre-industrial. There is no new information to change or 
strengthen this tentative conclusion. The tropospheric 
ozone budget is discussed in Section 2.3.3.2. 
2.2.2.6 Stratospheric ozone 
Downward trends in total-column ozone conflnue to be 
observed over much of the globe. Decreases in ozone 
abundances of about 4-5% per decade at mid-latitudes in 
the Northern and Southern Hemispheres are observed by 
both ground-based and satellite-borne monitoring 
instruments. At mid-latitudes, the losses continue to be 
larger during winter/spring than during summer/fall in both 
hemispheres, and the depletion increases with latitude, 
particularly in the Southern Hemisphere. Little or no 
downward trends are observed in the tropics (20°N-20°S). 
While the current two-dimensional stratospheric models 
simulate the observed trends quite well during some 
seasons and latitudes, they underestimate the trends by 
factors of 1.5 to 3 in winter/spring at mid- and high 
latitudes. Several known atmospheric processes involving 
chlorine and bromine that affect ozone in the lower 
stratosphere are difficult to simulate numerically and have 
not been adequately incorporated into these models. A 
comprehensive review of issues pertaining to atmospheric 
ozone was recently completed (WMO/UNEP, 1995). 
The average stratospheric ozone depletion over the last 
decade, as well as the large, but transient loss probably 
associated with Mt. Pinatubo's injection of sulphur dioxide 
(SOj) into the stratosphere, are expected to have affected 
various chemical cycles in the troposphere. Several groups 
(Madronich and Granier, 1992; Bekki et al., 1994; 
Fuglesvedt et al., 1994) have modelled increases in 
tropospheric OH due to enhanced fluxes of solar ultraviolet 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
91 
radiation reaching the troposphere. Others have speculated 
on more involved mechanisms linking stratospheric 
changes to tropospheric effects: changes in cloud radiative 
properties (Toumi et al., 1994; Rodhe and Cratzen, 1995; 
Section 2.4.1.3) and changes in troposphere-stratosphere 
turnover (Kinnison et al., 1994; Schauffler and Daniel, 
1994). While such mechanisms have been identified, there 
is as yet no consensus regarding the changes in tropospheric 
chemistry that occurred during this period. 
2.2.2.7 Stratospheric water vapour 
Stratospheric water vapour is a direct greenhouse gas 
(IPCC, 1990) as well as a critical chemical component of 
ozone chemistry (indirect effect). It is expected to increase 
as a result of increasing CH^ abundances and also possibly 
from increases in tropopause temperatures that allow more 
water vapour to enter the stratosphere. Stratospheric water 
vapour measurements made over Boulder, Colorado 
(40°N) from 1981 to 1994 show increases that are 
statistically significant at some altitudes in the lower 
stratosphere (Oltmans and Hofmann, 1995). These 
increases are only partly explained by the concurrent 
increases in methane and may point to other long-term 
trends in the stratosphere. However, these results at a 
single site do not necessarily point to a global trend (see, 
for example, the different geographic trends in total ozone, 
WMO/UNEP(1992)). 
2.2.2.8 Carbon monoxide 
Carbon monoxide (CO), not itself an important greenhouse 
gas, is an important component of the oxidising capacity of 
the troposphere. It is short-lived, responds rapidly to 
changes in sources or its sink, the O H radical, and 
contributes to formation of tropospheric ozone. 
Intercomparison of CO standards at atmospheric levels 
from three laboratories ( N O A A - C M D L , NASA-Langley 
and Fraunhofer-Institut) indicate general agreement to 
within 2% (Novelli et al., 1994a) and allow us to combine 
the different observational records. The recently reported 
global trend of - 6 to -8%/yr since 1990 (IPCC 1994; 
Novelli et al., 1994b) has been observed in another global 
observational network but at a smaller rate of —2 to 
-3%/yr (Khalil and Rasmussen, 1994). At Mace Head, 
Ireland, however, small increases in CO (О.б^/уг) for 1990 
to 1992 have been reported for pollurion-free samples 
while decreases (—13%/yr) are found for air masses that 
originated over Europe (Derwent et al., 1994). These 
observations reflect the difficulty in determining global 
trends from short records for a gas such as CO. Several 
causes of these different "trends" have been postulated and 
include reduced CO emissions from biomass burning and 
urban sources, increased OH-sink, possibly from enhanced 
stratospheric ozone depletion following the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo in 1991 (Bakwin et al., 1994; Bekki et al., 1994; 
Khalil and Rasmussen, 1994; Novelli et el., 1994b). As in 
the case of the CH^ anomaly in 1992/93, a single, dominant 
cause has not been quantitatively established. A recently 
published revision to one of the sources of CO (oxidation 
of isoprene and other hydrocarbons, Miyoshi et ai, 1994) 
is still consistent with the previous IPCC budget. 
2.2.3 Chemical Lifetimes and Budgets 
The atmospheric lifetimes of gases other than COj are 
determined predominantly by chemical reactions. The term 
"lifetime" can refer to a specific process, a globally 
integrated loss (turnover time), or the duration of 
perturbations in the atmospheric concentration (adjustment 
rime). These different definitions are discussed in the box. 
In the case of CH^ and CO these gases' abundances 
influence OH concentrations and hence their own losses: 
adjustment times for additions of CH^ or CO are longer 
than their respective turnover times (Prather, 1994). 
There is little new information on the stratospheric 
losses of the greenhouse gases, and hence the 
recommended lifetimes for certain gases, e.g., NjO and the 
CFCs, remain as in IPCC (1994). Fisher and Midgley 
(1994) have evaluated the empirical lifetime of CFC-11, 56 
yr, from fitting observations to emissions, including 
uncertainty in the latter. Cunnold et al. (1994) analysed the 
same data with a different model and report a shorter 
lifetime of 44 yr. Allowing for uncertainties in the 
emissions and the absolute calibration, these are consistent 
with the IPCC üfetime of 50 yr. Morris et al. (1995) have 
evaluated the possible effects of ion reactions on the 
lifetimes of the fully fluorinated compounds and have 
shown that, even for the most extreme assumptions, the 
lifetimes of perfluoroalkanes and SFg are greater than 1000 
years. 
The lifetimes of all those gases that react primarily with 
tropospheric OH are revised downward relative to IPCC 
(1994) by about 10%. That revision includes CH4 and other 
hydrocarbons, the HCFCs and other halogenated species 
that contain one or more hydrogen-atoms, and is based on a 
revised estimate of the mean global O H concentration. 
That in turn is based on a revision of the budget of methyl 
chloroform (Prinn et al., 1995b) which serves as a 
reference to estimate mean global OH concentrations. A 
recent recalibration of the methyl chloroform absolute 
standard by A G A G E gave a value of 0.82 times that of 
their previous reported value (Prinn et al, 1995b; 1992) 
92 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
lowering the estimate of the atmosphere CH3CCI3 burden 
by the same factor and lowering the turnover time of 
CH3CCI3 to 4.8 ± 0.2 years (Prinn et al., 1995b) as 
compared to 5.7 ± 0.3 yr (Prinn et al., 1992). 
The new A G A G E calibration also removes much of the 
previous difference with the N O A A / C M D L calibration 
noted previously (Eraser et al., 1994; IPCC, 1994). Using 
atmospheric models (Bloomfield et al, 1994), an average 
of the two calibrations results in a recommended empirical 
turnover time of 4.9 ± 0.4 yr (compared with 5.4 ± 0.6 in 
IPCC 1994) which is in close agreement with the estimate 
by Prinn et al. (1995b). After allowing for the loss to the 
stratosphere and the uptake by the oceans, the removal time 
for CH3CCI3 through reaction with troposphere O H is 
inferred to be 5.9 ± 0.7 yr. That value is used to recalculate 
the lifeümes of the other gases reacting with OH: for CH4 
see Table 2.2 and Section 2.2.3.1; for the other greenhouse 
and ozone-depleting gases see Table 2.2 and Section 2.5. 
Table 2.2: Lifetimes for radiatively active gases and halocarbons 
SPECIES 
LIFETIME 
CONCENTRATION 
CURRENT 
RADIATIVE 
(ppbv) 
GROWTH 
FORCING 
Year 
Uncert. 
1992 
pre-ind. 
ppbv/yr 
Wm"^ 
Wm-^ 
/ppbv 
NATURAL AND ANTHROPOGENICALLY INFLUENCED GASES 
carbon dioxide 
CO2 
variable 
356,000 
278,000 
1,600 
1.8 X 10-5 1 56 
methane 
C H 4 @ 
12.2 
25% 
1714 
700 
8 
3.7 X 10"4 0.47 
nitrous oxide 
N20 
120 
311 
275 
0.8 
3.7 X 10-3 0 14 
methyl chloride 
CH3C1 
1.5 
25% 
-0.6 
-0.6 
-0 
0 
methyl bromide 
CHjBr 
1.2 
32% 
0.010 
< 0.010 
-0 
0 
chloroform 
CHCI3 
0.51 
300% 
-0.012 
-0 
0.017 
methylene chloride 
СН2С12 
0.46 
200% 
-0.030 
-0 
0.03 
carbon monoxide 
CO 
0.25 
50-150 
-0 
$ 
GASES PHASED OUT BEFORE 2000 UNDER THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL AND ITS AMENDMENTS 
CFC-11 
CCI3F 
50 
10% 
0.268 
0 
-1-0.000** 
0.22 
0.06 
CFC-12 
CCI2F2 
102 
0.503 
0 
+0.007** 
0.28 
0.14 
CFC-113 
CCI2FCCIF2 
85 
0.082 
0 
0.000** 
0.28 
0.02 
CFC-114 
CCIF2CCIF2 
300 
0.020 
0 
0.32 
0.007 
CFC-115 
CF3CCIF2 
1700 
<0.01 
0 
0.26 
<0.003 
carbon tetrachloride 
CCI4 
42 
0.132 
0 
-0.0005** 
0:10 
0.01 
methyl chloroform 
CH3CCI3 
4.9 
8% 
0.135* 
0 
-0.010** 
0.05 
0.007 
halon-1211 
CBrClF2 
20 
0.007 
0 
.00015 
halon-1301 
CBrFj 
65 
0.003 
0 
.0002 
0.28 
halon-2402 
СВгр2СВгр2 
20 
0.0007 
0 
CHLORINATED HYDROCARBONS CONTROLLED BY THE MONTREAL PROTOCOL AND ITS AMENDMENTS 
HCFC-22 
CHCIF2 
12.1 
20% 
0.100 
0 
+0.005** 
0.19 
HCFC-123 
CF3CHCI2 
1.4 
25% 
0 
0.18 
HCFC-124 
CF3CHCIF 
6.1 
25% 
0 
0.19 
HCFC-141b 
CH3CFCI2 
9.4 
25% 
0.002 
0 
О.ООГ* 
0.14 
HCFC-142b 
C H 3 C F 2 C I 
18.4 
25% 
0.006 
0 
0.001** 
0.18 
HCFC-225ca 
C3HF5CI2 
2,1 
35% 
0 
0.24 
HCFC-225cb 
C3HF5CI2 
6.2 
35% 
0 
0.28 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Table 2.2: continued 
93 
SPECIES 
LIFETIME 
CONCENTRATION 
CURRENT 
RADIATIVE 
(ppbv) 
GROWTH 
FORCING 
Year 
Uncert. 
1992 
pre-ind. 
ppbv/yr 
Wm-2 
Wm-2 
/ppbv 
PERFLUORINATED COMPOUNDS 
sulphur hexafluoride 
3200 
0.032 
0 
-t-0.0002 
0.64 
0.002 
perfluoromethane 
CF4 
50000 
0.070 
0 
+0.0012 
0.10 
0.007 
perfluoroethane 
C2F6 
10000 
0.004 
0 
0.23 
perfluoropropane 
C3F8 
2600 
0 
0.24 
perfluorobutane 
С4РШ 
2600 
0 
0.31 
perfluoropentane 
C5F12 
4100 
0 
0.39 
perfluorohexane 
C^Fu 
3200 
0 
0.46 
perfluorocyclobutane 
c-C.Fj 
3200 
0 
0.32 
ANTHROPOGENIC GREENHOUSE GASES NOT REGULATED (PROPOSED OR IN USE) 
HFC-23 
CHF3 
264 
45% 
0.18 
HFC-32 
CHjF. 
5.6 
25% 
0.11 
HFC-41 
C H 3 F 
3.7 
0.02 
HFC-43-lOmee 
C5H2F10 
17.1 
35% 
0.35 
HFC-125 
C2HF5 
32.6 
35% 
0.20 
HFC-134 
C F 2 H C F 2 H 
10.6 
200% 
0.18 
HFC-134a 
CH2FCF3 
14.6 
20% 
0.17 
HFC-143 
C F 2 H C H 2 F 
3.8 
50% 
0.11 
HFC-143a 
CH3CF3 
48.3 
35% 
0.14 
HFC-152a 
C H 3 C H F 2 
1.5 
25% 
0.11 
HFC-227ea 
C 3 H F , 
36.5 
20% 
0.26 
HFC-236fa 
C3H2F, 
209 
50% 
0.24 
HFC-245ca 
C3H3F5 
6.6 
35% 
0.20 
HFOC-125e 
C F 3 O C H F 2 
82 
300% 
HFOC-134e 
C H F 2 O C H F 2 
8 
300% 
trifluoroiodomethane 
CF3I 
< 0.005 
0.38 
Notes: This table lists only the direct radiative forcing from emitted gases. The indirect effects due to subsequent changes in 
atmospheric chemistry, notably ozone (see below), are not included. The Wm"^ column refers to the radiative forcing since the pre-
industrial, and the Wm-^/ppbv column is accurate only for small changes about the current atmospheric composition (see Section 2.4 
and IPCC (1994)). In particular, COj, CH^ and N2O concentration changes since pre-industrial times are too lai-ge to assume linearity; 
the formulae reported in IPCC(1990) are used to evaluate their total contribution. 
A blank entry indicates that a value is not available. Uncertainties for many lifetimes have not been evaluated. The concentrations of 
some anthropogenic gases are small and difficult to measure. The pre-industtial concentrations of some gases with natural sources are 
difficult to determine. Radiative forcings are only given for those gases with values greater than 0.001 Wm^^. 
ig>Methane increases are calculated to cause increases in tropospheric ozone and stratospheric H2O; these indirect effects, about 25% of 
the direct effect, are not included in the radiative forcings given here. 
$ The direct radiative forcing due to changes in the CO concentration is unlikely to reach a few hundredths of a Wm"^ (see Section 
2.4.1). The direct radiative forcing is hard to quantify (see Section 2.2.4). 
** Gases with rapidly changing growth rates over the past decade, recent trends since 1992 are reported. 
# The change in CH3CI3 concentration is due to the recalibration of the absolute standards used to measure this gas (see Section 2.2.3). 
Stratospheric ozone depletion due to halocarbons is about - 2 % (globally) over the period 1979 to 1990 with half as much again 
occurring both immediately before and since; the total radiative forcing is thus now about -0.1 Wm'^. Tropospheric ozone appears to 
have increased since the 19th Century over the northern mid-latitudes where few observational records are available; if over the entire 
Northern Hemisphere, tropospheric ozone increased from 25 ppb to 50 ppb at present, then the radiative forcing is about -t-0.4 Wm-^. 
94 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
2.2.3.1 The methane budget 
The budget for CH4 is given in Table 2.3. The estimate for 
the atmospheric turnover time of CH^ has been revised to 
8.6 ± 1.6 yr down from 10 ± 2 yr in the previous IPCC 
report. Two factors are responsible for that change: (a) a 
new estimate for the chemical removal rate (11% faster; 
see Section 2.2.3); and (b) the uptake by soils (included in 
the previous budget, but not in the calculation of the 
turnover time). The estimated error of the lifetime is based 
on two major uncertainties: that in the tropospheric 
turnover time of methyl chloroform, ±12%, and that in the 
rate constants of the reactions of CH^ and CH3CCI3 with 
OH. The new adjustment time for CH^ is 12.2 ± 3 yr; its 
error also includes the uncertainty in the feedback factor, 
±17% (see Table 2.4). 
The revised removal rate implies that the global sink 
strength is 560 ± 100 Tg(CH4)/yr, higher than the 1994 
estimate. Given the uncertainties in the global strengths of 
the individual CH^ sources, this implied atmospheric sink 
can still be matched by the estimated total sources (535 
± 125 Tg(CH4)/yr) given in IPCC (1994). 
CH4 has many clearly identified chemical feedbacks. 
One already mentioned is that increases in atmospheric 
C H 4 concentrations, however small, will reduce the 
tropospheric concentrations of the hydroxyl radical, which 
in turn will increase the lifetime of CH4 in the troposphere, 
and amplify the original perturbation in the C H 4 
concentration (Prather, 1994). That feedback expresses 
itself in an adjustment time that is larger than the CH^ 
turnover time. The ratio of adjustment time to turnover 
time depends on the exact formulation of the chemistry and 
varies between models. Table 2.4 presents such ratios 
along with the CH4 global mean lifetimes (i.e., turnover) 
obtained from various models. The ratio, also called 
feedback factor in IPCC (1994), varies between 1.2 and 1.7 
and is not correlated with the CH4 lifetimes obtained by the 
models, which vary from 8.7 to 13.2 years. This suggests 
that the feedback factor does not depend on the CH4 
turnover time. Thus there is no reason to revise the ratio of 
adjustment time to turnover time used in IPCC (1994), 
Another feedback loop has been suggested by King and 
Schnell (1994), who argue that increases in the 
Table 2.3: Estimated sources and sinks of methane for 1980 to 1990. 
(a) Observed atmospheric increase, calculated sinks and implied sources derived to balance the budget. 
Individual estimates 
Total 
Atmospheric increase 
Sinks of atmospheric CH^: 
tropospheric OH 
stratosphere 
soils 
Total atmospheric sinks 
Implied sources (sinks + atmospheric increase) 
490 (405-575) 
40 (32-48) 
30 (15-45) 
37 (35^0) 
560 (460-660) 
597 (495-700) 
(b) Inventory of identified sources. 
Natural sources 
Anthropogenic sources: 
Total anthropogenic sources 
Total identified sources 
Fossil fuel related 
Total biospheric 
100 (70-120) 
275(200-350) 
160(110-210) 
375 (300^50) 
535 (410-660) 
Notes: All figures are in TgCCH^j/yr, 1 Tg = 1 million million grams which is equivalent to 1 million tonnes. The total amount of 
CH4 in the atmosphere is 4850 Tg, 
The only change since IPCC (1994) is the estimate of loss through reaction with tropospheric OH, Estimates of individual sources 
(not shown) remain unchanged. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Table 2.4: Methane adjustment time relative to turnover time from delta-CH4 simulations (IPCC, 1994) 
95 
Model 
Sensitivity® 
Adjustment/turnover 
Lifetime'^ (yr) 
U.Camb/2D 
-0,17% 
1.23 # 
13.2 
AER/2D 
-0.18% 
1.26* 
11.9 
UEA/HarwelI/2D 
-0.20% 
1.29 § 
9.8 
LLNL/3D 
-0.22% 
1.32* 
8.7 
AER/2D 
-0.26% 
1.39 § 
12.5 
U.Oslo/3D 
-0.34% 
1.61 § 
9.2 
LLNL/2D 
-0.35% 
1.62 S 
11.5 
@ The %-change in CH4 loss frequency (= 1/lifetime) per 1% increase in CH4. 
CH4 global mean turnover time. 
# Uses fixed CO concentrations. 
§ Uses CO fluxes. 
atmospheric CH^ may inhibit the microbial uptake of CH^ 
in soils via a process that couples soil methane and 
ammonia. That process would also amplify the original 
perturbation in the CH4 concentrations. However, the effect 
of that mechanism is expected to be small, since the global 
sink strength for the microbial uptake of CH^ by soils is 
small, about 30 Tg(CH4)/yr. 
If emissions were held constant at 1984-1994 levels 
(corresponding to current growth of 10 ppbv/yr), then 
methane levels would rise to about 1850 ppbv over the next 
40 years. If emissions were cut by about 30 Tg(CH4)/yr, 
about 8% of anthropogenic emissions (Table 2.3), then 
methane concentrations would remain at today's levels. These 
numbers are reduced from IPCC (1994), which used a current 
growth rate of 13 ppbv/yr and a longer adjustment time. 
2.2.3.2 The tropospheric ozone and hydroxyl radical budget 
Tropospheric ozone is one of the more reactive, radiatively 
active trace gases whose distribution is controlled by a 
complex interplay of chemical, radiative and dynamical 
processes. Ozone is transported down into the troposphere 
from the stratosphere at mid- and high latitudes, destroyed 
at the Earth's surface, produced by the photo-oxidation of 
CO, methane and other hydrocarbons in the presence of 
NOjj (NO2 and NO), and destroyed by ultraviolet 
photolysis and reaction with HO,, (HOj and OH) radicals. 
The interplay between these processes results in local 
tropospheric turnover times for ozone varying from days to 
weeks. Hence, its concentration varies with latitude, 
longitude, altitude, season and time of day. 
Most of the oxidation of long-lived radiatively active 
gases such as CH^, CH3CI, CHjBr, CH3CCI3 and HCFCs 
takes place in the tropics, where high U V and humidity 
promote the formation of OH from photolysis of ozone 
(Prather and Spivakovsky, 1990; Thompson, 1992). Ozone 
in the tropical troposphere thus plays a critical role in 
controlling the oxidising power of the atmosphere. An 
analysis of aircraft observations over the tropical South 
Atlantic (Jacob et al, 1993b) indicates a close balance in 
the tropospheric column between photochemical 
production and loss of ozone, with net production in the 
upper troposphere balancing net loss in the lower 
troposphere. The production of ozone is driven by N0^^ 
originating from continental sources (biomass burning, 
lightning, soils). Transport from the stratosphere is 
negligible as a source of tropospheric ozone or N0,^ in this 
particular region. By extrapolation, Jacob et al. (1993b) 
proposed a general mechanism for the origin of ozone in 
the tropical troposphere: convection over the continents 
injects NOj^ to high altitudes, leading to net ozone 
production in the upper troposphere; eventually the ozone 
subsides over the oceans and net loss takes place in the 
lower troposphere, closing the ozone cycle. The proposed 
mechanism implies a great sensitivity of the oxidising 
power of the atmosphere to the N 0 ^ emissions from 
tropical continents. Unfortunately there has been no real 
increase either in our confidence in numerical simulations 
of global tropospheric ozone or in the measurements of 
ozone, particularly in the tropics and the Southern 
Hemisphere, needed to test the simulations. 
96 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
The photolysis of ozone and its reactions with HO^ 
radicals, in addition to controlling the ozone lifetime and 
budget, 
are important components 
of the 
fast 
photochemical balance of the sunlit troposphere. This 
balance establishes a small steady state concentration of the 
highly reactive hydroxyl (OH) radical which control the 
removal of most trace gases including methane, carbon 
monoxide, N0^^ and a wide range of organic compounds. 
The global tropospheric concentration of hydroxyl radicals 
thus determines the oxidising capacity of the troposphere, 
the build-up of radiatively active gases and the flux of 
some ozone-depleting halocarbons to the stratosphere. 
There is increasing observational evidence that we 
understand and are able to measure and model local 
concentrations of OH (e.g., Poppe et ah, 1994; Wennberg 
et al, 1994; Millier et al, 1995). However, our knowledge 
of the global OH distribution is still limited by our ability 
to model accurately the large range of conditions that 
determine the O H concentration (e.g., O3, NO,,, 
hydrocarbons, cloud cover). The global and hemispheric 
mean value of O H can be derived from analyses of 
observations of methyl chloroform and '"^CO. Analysis of 
atmospheric ^^^CO data has been used to argue for an 
asymmetry in the mean tropospheric O H between 
hemispheres, with about 20% more '"^CO (and hence 20% 
less average OH) in tiie Northern Hemisphere (Мак et al, 
1994). Similar results come from the 12-box atmospheric 
model fitting of methyl chloroform (Prinn et al, 1995b), 
but some 3-D models fit the observed CH3CCI3 without 
significant asymmetry in OH. More evidence is needed to 
be certain of any hemispheric asymmetry in tropospheric 
OH. The low uncertainty in O H levels (± 12%) is limited, 
however, to globally integrated quantities. Confidence in 
the seasonality is limited. 
2.2.3.3 Aircraft and ozone 
The climatic impact of aircraft, due to emissions of 
particles, water vapour and NO^, remains a serious concern 
in research and assessment (e.g., Graedel, 1994; Schumann 
and Wurzel, 1994; Stolarski and Wesoky, 1995). The 
potential impact of a supersonic fleet operating in the 
stratosphere has been studied and reviewed extensively. 
Stratospheric ozone depletion (a negative radiative forcing) 
due to emission of N0^ is currenfly predicted to be small, 
less than 1%, provided a new generation of engines with 
NOj^ emission indices of 3 to 8g (NO2) per kg of fuel can 
be built (Wahner et al, 1995). 
Climatic effects due to the addition of HjO and sulphur 
to the stratosphere need to be assessed, and additional 
uncertainties remain about the ability of the 2-D 
assessment models to simulate the accumulation of 
exhaust products. Effects of the subsonic fleet, which adds 
NOjj primarily to the upper troposphere, centre on the 
ozone increases expected in the upper troposphere 
(positive radiative forcing) and on the modification of 
clouds through the emission of particles and contrails. The 
former effect depends strongly on the background 
concentrations of NO,,, O3 and H j O in the upper 
troposphere (Ehhalt and Rohrer, 1994), for which 
observations are extremely sparse. As a result the ability 
of chemical transport models to simulate these background 
concentrations in the upper troposphere remains untested, 
and the modelled impact of aircraft NO^, on ozone remains 
quite uncertain (Derwent, 1994; Ehhalt and Rohrer, 1994; 
Hauglustaine et al, 1994). 
2.2.4 IS92 Scenarios 
The trace gas scenarios and consequent radiative forcing 
from the IS92 scenarios (IPCC 1992 and Appendices) are 
used in Chapter 6 to illustrate the implications of different 
emission pathways. There are still considerable 
uncertainties in the chemical models used to simulate 
possible future atmospheres, and we have chosen here to 
use the simple consensus on current time-scales and 
budgets given here and in IPCC (1994) to calculate future 
concentrations corresponding to the IS92 emission 
scenarios. The projections of trace gas concentrations from 
1990 to 2100 using IS92 scenarios for CH4, N2O, 
tropospheric O3, CFCs and chlorocarbons, HCFCs, 
stratospheric O3 and HFCs are given in Tables 2.5 a-e. 
We adopt turnover and adjustment times for the 
greenhouse gases as described in IPCC (1994) and updated 
in Table 2.2. For CH^, the chemical feedback of its 
concentration on its own lifetime has been included as a 
sensitivity factor: the atmospheric loss rate (i.e., not 
including soil loss) decreases by 0.30% for every 1% 
increase in the methane concentration above 1700 ppbv. 
Thus as CH4 increases from 1700 to 4100 ppbv, the global 
turnover time (including soil loss) increases from 8.6 to 
11.0 yr. Since the IS92 emissions for CH4 and N2O are 
inconsistent with observations and these lifetimes, they 
were adjusted so that the concentrations in the 1990s 
matched the observations. This constant offset from the 
original IS92 scenarios is effectively a redefinition of the 
natural, baseline emissions. No attempt has been made to 
adjust the IS92 scenarios to match the 1992/93 anomaly. 
Changes in tropospheric O3 are those induced by changes 
in CH4 alone: those from N0^^ changes, which may be 
equally important, are neglected since they cannot be 
quantified with confidence. The tropospheric ozone 
i 
T3 
t/3 
tZÍ 
Os 
2 
—< 
г - 
Г--
"П 
o 
t - - 
O O 
0 0 
i n 
^ 
" 
O s 
o 
<N 
O N 
— 
(N 
^ 
(N 
<N 
en 
^ 
o 
o 
lO 
<N 
_ 
OO 
OS 
O 
r-4 
( N I 
Г ч 1 
r v ] 5 
en 
<N 
O 
—< 
o 
^ 
0 0 
<n 
r - 
r~ 
0 0 
so 
ГЛ 
<N1 
^ 
0 0 
m 
г - 
P - 
0 0 
o 
ON 
o 
( N 
O 
^ 
" 
O O 
O 
r- 
O O 
0 0 
O N 
о 
O N 
о 
< N 
О 
^ 
0 0 
r- 
r- 
0 0 
О С 
s 
o! 
o 
ni 
s 
Й 
2 2. Й 
C N 
O N 
ND 
o 
CNI 
o 
^ 
oo 
m 
oo 
0 0 
ON 
ON 
ÛO 
о 
о 
— 
( N 
( M 
fN 
cl 
N O 
C N l 
O N 
oo 
ON 
0 0 
(N 
oo 
oo 
m 
oo 
^ 
en 
ON 
ON 
CM 
r-
4~l 
ON 
ON 
( N 
OO 
ON 
NO 
•ÑI-
NO 
OO 
ON 
5 
NO 
en 
tr-, 
5 
NO 
o\ 
(N 
CM 
О 
t -
0 0 
Г 4 
V O 
0\ 
C N l 
<N 
ce 
о 
N O 
r n 
oo 
ON 
m 
i r i 
0 0 
(SI 
NO 
ON 
О 
-H 
-H 
(N 
(N 
(N 
(N 
en 
N O 
(N 
<N 
ON 
(N 
(N 
О 
U-l 
N O 
^1 
i^i 
s O 
N O 
(N 
O N 
о 
ON 
(N 
О 
О 
I N 
i n 
ON 
O 
— 
i n 
СЧ 
en 
О 
•—1 
ч о 
r n 
i n 
en 
NO 
NO 
ON 
о 
о 
ON 
о 
>o 
ND 
ON 
о 
(N 
(N 
(N 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
en 
un 
о 
о 
«n 
о 
>n 
CM 
CM 
en 
m 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
O N 
C M 
T t -
O N 
о 
en 
en 
T t 
с 
1 ^ 
O N 
о 
O N 
en 
N O 
N O 
en 
о 
CM 
CM 
C 4 
CM 
es 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
C 4 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
0 0 
CM 
so 
O N 
— 
CM 
0 0 
N D 
m 
p- 
oo 
ON 
о 
oo 
IT) 
CM g g 
fN 
CM 
eN 
CM 
CN 
CN 
N O 
— 
I - ~ 
T t - 
— 
un 
N O 
en 
en 
en 
en 
CM 
ICI 
N O 
о 
r - 
^ 
—' 
i n 
N O 
en 
en 
en 
en 
О 
i n 
о 
i n 
о 
i n 
о 
o 
r -o 
0 0 
о 
0 0 
о 
S g 
о 
CM 
CM 
CM 
е-м 
CM 
CM 
см 
> 
а. 
X 
и 
00 
г¬
см 
р 
C
l 
O N 
к ) 
о 
-а 
I 
с 
о 
M 
и 
O N 
N O 
- О 
•s 
а 
M l 
-а 
а 
В 
N O 
0 0 
«U 
Я ) 
ад см 
•а ст, 
H 
H 
en 
ОС 
см 
C
l 
en 
en 
CM 
I 
s 
e 
«il 
о s 
S 
i 
3 
<4 
i 
и n 
tZ3 
I 
о 
ON 
с о 
m 
С О 
m 
о 
ON 
CC) 
со 
со 
со 
cc^ 
О 
oo 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
2 
со 
^ 
0 0 
со 
г—< 
^ 
C S 
со 
со 
со 
ON 
о 
^ 
ON 
со 
0 0 
со 
г-
( N 
со 
22 я 
со 
со 
со 
0 0 
со 
0 0 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
со 
ON 
со 
со 
ON 
со 
со 
со 
0 0 со 
со 
ON 
со 
s 
s 
s 
IT) 
—' 
IT) 
m 
СП 
IT) 
I
D 
СП 
СП 
СП 
СП 
s 
NO 
ON 
со 
о 
uo 
о 
со 
8 
со 
NO 
— 
^ 
uo 
CO 
CO 
CO 
s 
CO 
NO 
CO 
CO 
NO 
CO 
NO 
Ю 
CO 
СП 
г п 
СП 
о 
1 / ^ 
Г<1 
<N 
со 
NO 
NO 
CO 
со 
со 
wo 
— 
NO 
1> 
CO 
CO 
.—I 
NO 
'—' 
NO 
NO 
CO 
CO 
CO 
о 
о 
CO 
0 0 
CO 
ON 
ND 
CO 
0 0 
NO 
CO 
NO 
co 
NO 
I--
CO 
NO 
0 0 
0 0 
CO 
<N 
oo 
CO 
о 
ND 
о 
ON 
CO 
CO 
CO 
CO 
NO 
ON 
CO 
о 
0 0 
CO 
co 
о 
o 
о 
CO 
0 0 
CO 
о 
0 0 
CO 
o 
C N l 
oo 
ON 
§ 5 5 
NO 
0 0 
CO 
CO 
0 0 
CO 
ND 
NO 
о 
oo 
ON 
ON 
о 
CO 
CO 
CO 
^ 
о 
0 0 о 
C N l 
U-) 
о 
о 
о 
IN 
<N 
U1 
о 
5Í 5' 
oo 
ç 
о 5 5 
g 
qi 5 
ON 
I N 
NO 
0 0 
ON 
ON 
ON 
CO 
CO 
CO 
CO 
"Л 
r - 
ON 
OO 
OO 
0 0 
CO 
CO 
CO 
oo 
I N 
NO 
? 5 5 
g 
CO 
Г -
^ 5 
§ 
2 
i
l 
I i 
oo 
a 
о 
( N 
•a 
ON 
С О 
со 
s 
со 
со 
0 0 
со 
IT) 
и 
t / î 
о 
о 
(N 
d 
о 
d 
d 
о 
d 
d 
о 
d 
d 
о 
d 
(M 
d 
d 
ON 
d 
ON 
d 
d 
d 
d 
о 
<N 
i n 
d 
d 
d 
NO 
d 
NO 
d 
о 
. о 
§^ 8 _ 
^ 
( N 
C N l 
СП 
OO 
со 
oo 
С О 
со 
oo 
<N 
0 0 
d 
о 
oo 
0 0 
C N j 
lO 
о —< 
—• о 
CN 
0 0 
ci 
C N l 
О
О
О 
(N 
(N 
( N 
m 
(SI о 
о 
со 
о 
(N 
NO 
T Í 
со 
со 
со 
с^ 
1 0 
со 
о 
с4 
оо 
со 
0 0 
со 
0 1 
1Л) 
i n 
—; 
r i 
со 
о 
U-) 
ON 
i n 
i n 
NO 
oo 
iri 
0 0 
0 0 
о 
m о 
NO 
r i 
i n 
со 
i n 
i n 
m о 
(N 
CN 
q 
r i 
r^ 
i n 
о 
NO 
о 
n 
ON 
NO 
0 0 
NO 
0 0 
0 0 
i n 
i n 
r i 
r i 
ri 
r- 
« 
i n 
NO 
i n 
ri 
со 
ri 
i n 
ND 
о 
r i 
0 0 
NO 
— 
0 0 
i n 
со 
о 
о -< ri 
0 0 
NO 
i n 
s 
M 
s 
со 
r i 
r i 
r i 
CN 
1-^ 
о 
C N l 
i n 
r^ 
со ON 
2 
2 
r
l 
C N l 
— 
о 
r i 
r i 
r i 
r i 
q 
ON 
oo NO 
oo -< 
r^ 
0 Ó 
0 Ó 
oo 
r - 
0 0 
0 0 
i n 
о 
oo ON 
о 
о 
_ 
n 
n 
M s 8 
о 
ce 
s:. 
о 
E о 
О ) 
s 
о 
5^ 
ON 
и и 
5 
s 
I 
O í 
^ 
II 
\ 
I 
Di) H 
0 3 
o 
C3 
я 
o -a 
со 
0 0 
n 
g 
•S 
s 
t 
§ § 
1 
S 
-S s s 
о 
Î 
•S 
'К <3 
й su 
к 
5^ 
.о 
о" 
Í 
0 0 
s 
.3 
î 
I-
Sí 
О 
•о 
и 
Î 
X 
и 
и 
è 
C^OO^r)r^a\t^^ncn 
—
^
О
О
О
О
О
О
О
О 
c 4 - H - - ; _ ; o o o o o d d c ¿ o o o d d 
о 
я s о 
чо о in 
оо os 
ON оо г - г -
i n 
N
O 
m
i 
O
s 
г - 
— i n о 
i n 
о 
i n 
i n 
^ 
с о 
I T ) 
O
O
O
O
O
^
O
N
O
O
N
O
m 
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o 
o o o o c i i n 2 S ^ Í Í ° ° ' ^ < ^ < x 
—
l
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O 
о 
i n о 
о 
— 
— 
( N i n г - 
ON 
—^ ra ON 
0
0 
O N O
N 
( N 
CM ( N 
<N S 2 
O S ( N m 
^ 
" 
P- i n 
СП 
„ „ „ о о 
о 
so 
2 Я 
IM 
^ 
см S 
— 
«M 
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о
о 
i n Tl-
Г-- 
m 
Os so 
m 
i n C l 
см m о 
ГМ C l 
0 0 
so 
о 
— 
C
M
^
I
n
r
-
O
O
O
N
O
N
O
N
O
N
O
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O 
O
s
O
O
O
O
O
O
s
O
N
O
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
t
-
-
(
-
~
r
-
-
|
-
-
s
O 
—
i
C
l
C
l
C
l
C
l
C
M
~
-
^
-
H
«
^
-
H
-
^
«
^ 
— — 
so 
so i n i n m m 
<N 
^ :2 й 
C l 
r - m 
oo 
CO 
O S 
O
N O
s OO 
oo 
0 0 
о 
r - 
Г - - 
Г - -
c i 
oo i n CI 
so 
i n i n i n 
^ ^ 5 
s. ^ Z!. 
(П in m 
o
m
m
c
i
r
-
c
M
i
n
s
o 
c i 
о 
O
N 
oo c- m 
^ 
c i 
"
C
M
c
l
t
n
-
^
m
m
m 
— < r - - * c n r M C I ( n s D O N C l 
o
c
-
i
n
m 
— 
o
s
r
-
m
r
o
c
i 
i
n
^
'
^
'
^
^
c
n
r
n
m
i
n
c
o 
g
c
i
o
o
i
n
c
i
o
o
s
o
o
g 
( n c S c N C M C M C l C M C M C l 
m 
CO CI m 
ON 
2 
P - CI so ON 
0
0 
CI 
CI CM 
CM 
CM Os 
CI CM 
0 0 
O N 
O N CM 
N O 
о O S 
CM 
о 
0
0
0
s
-
^
c
n
N
0
O
4
Ï
-
0
N
'
*
O 
O
s
o
o
o
o
c
-
s
o
s
o
m
'
*
^
'
* 
CD in о in ô m 
г - г - 
0
0 0
0 ON 
O
N 
ON 
O
N 
O
N 
ON O
s 
O
N 
О 
i n О 
m О i n 
^ 
„ 
„ 
C l см с о с о 
О 
р 
Ç? О 
о 
о 
О 
см 
с ) см 
o
m
o
i
n
o
m
o
m
o
i
n
o
i
n
o 
^
i
^
-
i
n
m
s
o
s
o
c
-
r
^
o
o
o
o
o
s
O
N
O 
_ _ _ _ 
_ о о о о о о о о о о о о — . 
с
м
с
м
с
м
с
м
с
м
с
м
с
м
с
м
с
м
о
с
м
с
м
с
м
г
м
с
м
с
м
о
с
м 
см 
см 
S 
CM 
^ 
о 
см 
— см 
^ о. 
о. 
г> -а 
Ü о 
!2 
см 
i n 
с о 
fo 
аз 
i 
и аз 
и 
и 
аз 
и 
и 
и 
fN 
о 
— 
1/-^ NO 
in ^ 
^ 
oo -îj-
ON 
с 
-St 
C-, 
(N 
г о 
rr-, 
rr-, 
— 
M 
OO 
0
0 OO 
О 
r
O 
i
r
i 
ro — 
О 
О 
Г
Ч
М
и
-
>
ч
О
О
О
О
О
О 
с о 
NO 
<N 
чО 
с о 
с о 
v r ^ 
— H 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
.—I 
1—J 
J 
1^ 
C> 
ON 
о 
_ 
_ >o о 
u-i о uo 
O
N
O
N
O
O 
— 
— 
(
N
0
0 
ON 
ON о 
о 
о 
о 
о 
Ó 
— 
( N ( N ( N ( N ( N ( N < N 
8 
-о 
с 
я 
Ü 
и 
i r - е й 
2 
о 
е 
si? 
й -
ON 
С 
^ '-В 
S ё 
It 
и â 
[i, « 
и s 
к = 
(D E 
•S 'Я 
'S l 
ni 
- - 4 
•s % 
g l 
,g ¡2 -3 
111 
-g I .S 
i Si s 
^ 
tu D p 
d i s 
с 
Т З 
? 
^ s 
X 
0 0 'S 
ON 
ON 
и 
fe 
в 
С 
8 
I 
Si 
и 
я 
ON t"^ « 
ON 
О 2 
и 
ON 
—^ 
ON 
^ 
О ON 
0 0 
— 
< 
Ш 
Рн Й — 
<; _« §^ 
с о. — 
•а .5 .2 
1 I 
^ I I 
Sí â 2 
ON 
я 
2 1 § 
•S S -о 
i 1 i 
III 
о 
s 
i 
i 
I 
i, 
.o 
i 
s o 
I 
<4 
CM 
-H M 
и 
( Л 
t i 
•в 
2 Й 
Гт-, 
M 
I 
01 
t í 
О 
см 
0 0 
см 
[С! см г~ 
Í8 
§ 
VO 
2. 
о 
in 
о 
^ 
^ 
в 
— — см 
со 
in —" 
со 
см 
о 
см 
_ 
, ^ 
с - 
см 
0 0 
со 
ю 
2 
2 
4D 
о 
in 
о 
— см 
О
О
О 
см см см 
0\ 
0 0 
см 
NO 
in 
CM 
in 
CM 
о 
CN 
0 0 
in 
о m — 
CO 
ON о 
CO 
NO 
Г -
T t 
ON 
CM 
CM 
О 
со 
CM 
о 
со 
in 
m 
со 
Cl 
CM 
CM 
in 
со 
о 
CM 
со 
2 
ON 
„ 
NO 
СО 
0 0 
0 0 
f O 
^ 
CM 
со c¬
ON 
2 
!£; 22 
ON 
со 
0 0 
0 0 
CM 
NO 
m 
CM 
0 0 
4 t 
со 
CM 
CM 
CM 
NO 
о 
m 
CM 
CM 
о 
NO 
о 
NO 
o o 
CO 
NO 
C O 
1^ 
in 
NO 
CM 
о 
2 
CM 
CO 
— 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
o o 
о с--
0 0 со 
NO 
^ 
0 0 
in —^ 
m 
NO 
ON 
ON 
CM 
о 
o 
CO 
NO 
1^ 
ON 
0 0 
NO 
CO 
CO 
CO 
m 
S 
CM 
CO 
1^ 
ON о 
0 0 
ON 
CM 
NO 
Г -
ND 
CO 
OO 
~ 
S 
2 
о 
in 
о 
о 
CM 
CM 
0 0 
o o 
ON 
t--
c o 
ON 
CO 
гч1 
о 
CM 
<N 
s 
2: 
2 
22 
CN 
22 
о 
Cl 
о 
o o 
о 
0 0 
CM 
o o 
o o 
NO 
NO 
со 
NO 
ON 
i-~ 
P-
о 
CM 
in 
CM 
0 0 
о 
CM 
o o 
о 
^ 
о 
o o 
8 
CM 
0 0 
о 
r-~ — 
о 
—< со 
CM 
CM 
CM 
CM 
o o 
о 
•—• со 
со •ît 
CM 
CN 
CM 
NO 
CM 
0 0 
NO 
ON 
0 0 
о 
ON 
m 
со 
in 
in 
NO 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
1^ 
-H 
CM 
о 
f-M 
in 
NO 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
0 0 
CM 
с- 
о 
o o 
ON 
—I 
m 
со 
CM 
NO 
CM 
со 
со 
CM 
XI- 
in 
NO 
/-Ч1 
í^l 
/^1 
in 
о 
in 
о 
o o 
ON 
ON 
о 
о 
о 
о 
-< 
^1 
í^l 
(-vi 
/^1 
ND 
NO 
МЗ 
c i 
ó 
со 
CM 
s 
•s 
ON 
со 
CM 
0 0 
CM 
0 0 
CM 
o o 
о 
o o 
0 0 
o o 
о 
о 
CM 
ON 
со 
in 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
103 
increase, +1.5 ppbv for a 20% increase in CH^, is based on 
the IPCC (1994) analysis of the delta-CH^ simulations. 
A major simplification of the IS92 scenarios is that we 
have chosen to ignore the changing emissions of the short-
lived gases: CO, VOC (volatile organic compounds) and 
NOj^. Although we would like to include a complete 
atmospheric simulation with changing emissions of the 
major greenhouse gases and also these short-lived gases, 
there are two compelling reasons why this cannot be done at 
this time. First, there is not a strong enough consensus on 
how to treat the short-lived gases in the currently available 
coarse resolution global models, and on how the chemical 
feedbacks couple these highly reactive species with CH4. 
Second, the impact of these short-lived species depends 
critically on where and when these gases are emitted. For 
example, the IS92 scenarios do not differentiate between 
aircraft, urban combustion and diffuse agricultural NO^^ 
emissions. The yield of ozone (a greenhouse gas) per 
emitted NO^, molecule depends critically on these local 
conditions (e.g., Chameides et ai, 1994; Schumann and 
Wurzel, 1994; Derwent, 1996). Thus until we have a 
consensus on the tropospheric chemistry models and until 
the scenarios for short-lived gases include spatially resolved 
emissions (and speciated in the case of VOC), the IS92 
calculations cannot include these short-lived gases. This 
decision is not a recommendation to use the extremely 
simplified representation of atmospheric chemistry in 
integrated models (e.g., Prather, 1988; Wigley, 1995). 
To illustrate the potential importance of these short-lived 
gases, Derwent (1996) used the U K M O 2-D model to 
calculate the C H 4 increases resulting from a full IS92a 
Scenario. The scenario includes the projected growth in 
NO^, C O and V O C emissions (with additional 
assumptions about the location and speciation of 
emissions), and the model includes a fairly full set of 
chemical feedbacks on tropospheric O 3 and OH. As a 
result the increases in tropospheric O 3 and N 0 ^ also 
change the oxidising capacity of the atmosphere and 
partially offset the C H 4 chemical feedback described 
above. The increases in C H 4 for this 2-D model are 
approximately 20% less than those in the simplified CH4 
feedback-only model used here. 
In another simplification of the IS92 scenarios, the 
chlorine and bromine containing halocarbons are assumed 
to be controlled by the Montreal Protocol and its 
Amendments (London, 1990; Copenhagen, 1992), and thus 
we give a single scenario for the greenhouse gases and for 
the ozone depletion they cause. The Copenhagen '92 
amendments do not define phaseout steps for individual 
HCFCs and some latitude is allowed in implementing the 
schedule which is fixed overall. We have chosen to 
illustrate the effects of the ozone-depleting substances with 
a scenario described in Table 2.5 which tends towards an 
upper limit to chlorine levels. Ozone depletion is scaled to 
tropospheric chlorine loading. Brominated halocarbons 
also contribute to ozone loss but they are not included in 
the table because they are not significant greenhouse gases 
in terms of direct forcing because of their low 
concentrations. Also, if the chlorine-plus-bromine-
equivalent loading is used, no significant difference in the 
scaled future ozone depletion is apparent. Based on 
satellite and ground-based trends (Harris et al., 1995), 
ozone depletion between 1979 (2.44 ppbv chlorine loading) 
and 1990 (3.64 ppbv) is taken as -2% in the global mean, 
with - 1 % occurring prior to 1979. With the linear fit, this 
model assumes depletion began at approximately 1.8 ppbv 
tropospheric chlorine. The lag in time between troposphere 
and stratosphere, the slightly different reactivities of the 
chlorocarbons and the inclusion of bromocarbons, are 
important to the details of ozone depletion (e.g., 
W M O / U N E P , 1995), but are not significant for these 
radiative forcing scenarios. 
2,3 Aerosols 
2.3.1 Summary of1994 Report and Areas of 
Development 
Aerosols influence climate in two ways, directly through 
scattering and absorbing radiarion and indirectly through 
modifying the optical properries and lifetime of clouds. 
IPCC (1994) concluded that uncertainties in the 
estimation of direct aerosol forcing arose from the limited 
information on the spatial and temporal distribution of 
aerosol particles as well as of the optical properties of the 
pardcles themselves. While a body of observations of 
sulphate aerosol was available, there were only limited 
data on a global scale for other aerosol components. 
Furthermore, the sensitivity of the optical properties to 
the size distribution of the particles, as well as to their 
chemical composition, made it difficult to relate the 
aerosol forcing to emissions in a simple manner. Model 
distributions based on the present sources and sinks along 
with empirically determined optical properties have been 
used to estimate direct forcing although it is recognised 
that changes in the sources, even if total emissions are 
conserved, are likely to give a different magnitude as well 
as geographical distribution of the forcing. Similarly, 
although some local studies had been made of the impact 
of aerosol particles on cloud optical properties, there had 
been few observational studies either of possible global 
104 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Table 2.6: Source strength, atmospheric burden, extinction efficiency and optical depth due to the various types of aerosol 
particles (after IPCC (1994), Andreae (1995) and Cooke and Wilson (1996)). 
Source 
Flux 
(Tg/yr) 
Global mean 
column burden 
(mg m-2) 
Mass extinction 
Global mean 
coefficient 
optical depth 
(hydrated) (m^ g'l) 
Natural 
Primary 
Soil dust (mineral aerosol) 
Sea salt 
Volcanic dust 
Biological debris 
1500 
1300 
33 
50 
32.2 
7.0 
0.7 
1.1 
0.7 
0.4 
2.0 
2.0 
0.023 
0.003 
0.001 
0.002 
Secondary 
Sulphates from natural precursors, as (N114)2504) 
102 
2.8 
Organic matter from biogenic VOC 
55 
2.1 
Nitrates from NO, 
22 
0.5 
5.1 
5.1 
2.0 
0.014 
0.011 
0.001 
Anthropogenic 
Primary 
Industrial dust, etc. 
Soot (elemental carbon) from fossil fuels 
Soot from biomass combustion 
100 
8 
5 
2.1 
0.2 
0.1 
2.0 
10.0 
10.0 
0.004 
0.002 
0.001 
Secondary 
Sulphates from SOj as {NH4)2S04 
Biomass burning 
Nitrates from N O . 
140 
80 
36 
3.8 
3.4 
0.8 
5.1 
5.1 
2.0 
0.019 
0.017 
0.002 
changes in cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) or ice 
nuclei, which might be attributed to anthropogenic 
aerosol particles, or of the global influence of aerosol 
particles on cloud optical properties. The problem of the 
influence of aerosol particles on cloud lifetime and extent, 
and hence on the spatially and temporally averaged cloud 
optical thickness, was recognised but could not be 
quantified. 
Several areas of research have been developed since 
the preparation of IPCC (1994) and these are discussed in 
this update. In particular, model studies of aerosol 
distribution and the consequent direct forcing have been 
extended and now include non-sulphate aerosol. Forcing 
by soot aerosol, and the optical depth due to soil dust, 
including natural and anthropogenic components, have 
been estimated. (We define soot as the light-absorbing 
aerosol produced by incomplete combustion of carbon-
based fuels, as distinct from non-absorbing organic 
aerosols from, for example, biomass combustion. Some 
authors use the term "black carbon" for this component.) 
In the context of indirect forcing, recent work has 
suggested a possible role for organic particles as CCN. 
Furthermore, recent field measurements have provided 
further data on the relationships between aerosol particles 
and cloud droplet concentration. As discussed by Jonas et 
al. (1995), the climatic influence of stratospheric aerosol 
due to volcanic eruptions is comparatively well 
understood so that the modelled and observed cooling 
following the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo are in good 
agreement. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
105 
2.3.2 Modelling of Tropospheric Aerosol Distributions 
Whereas estimates of the radiative forcing of greenhouse 
gases can be based on measured concentrations of these 
gases in the atmosphere, the forcing due to aerosol particles 
at the present time has to be calculated from model spatial 
distributions. This is because the aerosol particles have a 
short lifetime in the atmosphere and are therefore much 
less uniformly distributed than the more long-lived 
greenhouse gases. The physical and radiative properties of 
aerosols are more variable and less well characterised than 
the equivalent properties of greenhouse gases. While there 
are many interactions between different chemical species 
in aerosols it has proved useful to consider the different 
species as independent. 
The simplest way to estimate the average concentration 
of aerosol particles is to apply a box model in which the 
global rate of emission is multiplied by an average turnover 
time, estimated from the efficiency of the removal 
processes, to yield a global burden. Such first-order 
estimates have been made for anthropogenic sulphate 
(Charlson et ai, 1990; Charlson et ai, 1992) and soot 
(Penner, 1995). Radiative forcings estimated from the 
aerosol loadings predicted using such models tend to be 
overestimates, compared with those based on more detailed 
models, partly because box models neglect the spatial 
correlation that exists between aerosol concentration and 
cloudiness since large industrial emissions are in relatively 
cloudy regions. Forcing estimates which include explicit 
consideration of the spatial variability of the aerosol 
distribution, cloudiness and solar radiation have to be 
based on three-dimensional models of the global aerosol 
distribution. Such models have been developed for aerosol 
sulphate (Langner and Rodhe, 1991; Taylor and Penner, 
1994; Feichter et al., 1996; Pham et al., 1995), for soot 
(Penner et ai, 1993; Cooke and Wilson, 1996), and for 
mineral dust (Tegen and Fung, 1994). 
Most estimates of the radiative forcing due to 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols have been based on the 
sulphate distributions calculated by Langner and Rodhe 
(1991) using the MPI-Mainz MOGUNTIA model. In order 
to illustrate the sensitivity of the result to assumptions 
about the rate of oxidation of sulphur dioxide (SO-,) to 
sulphate in clouds, one of the key processes in the sulphur 
cycle, Langner and Rodhe (1991) made two separate 
simulations. One simulation was based on immediate 
oxidation of SO2 as soon as it encounters cloud, the other 
assumed a delayed rate of oxidation corresponding to some 
degree of oxidant limitation. The former case, referred to 
by the authors as the "standard" case (it might also have 
been named the "fast oxidation" case) gave a global 
sulphate burden of 0.77 TgS compared with 0.55 TgS for 
the "slow oxidation" case. The forcing estimates by 
Charlson et al. (1991), Kiehl and Briegleb (1993) and 
Haywood and Shine (1995) are all based on the "slow 
oxidation" simulation of Langner and Rodhe (1991). Had 
the "fast oxidation" case been used, the forcing would have 
been proportionally increased (Kiehl and Rodhe, 1995). 
The simulations by Pham et al. (1995) and Feichter et al. 
(1996) using different models gave global sulphate burdens 
of 0.8 and 0.61 TgS respectively. The high value of Pham 
et al. (1995) is partly due to their assumption of a 
considerably higher anthropogenic SOj emission (92 
TgS/yr) than the other studies (about 70 TgS/yr). 
The average turnover time of aerosol sulphate, defined 
as the ratio of the global burden to the total rate of removal, 
falls in the range 4-5 days in all of the model simulations 
referred to above. The parametrization of precipitation 
scavenging of aerosol sulphate, which is the dominant 
removal pathway, and of the oxidation of SOj to sulphate, 
are probably the two largest sources of uncertainty in the 
sulphate simulations. From the additional model 
simulations, lai^gely independent of the Langner and Rodhe 
(1991) study, that have been published during the past few 
years, there is some basis for estimating the uncertainty 
range for the global sulphate burden of roughly 0.5 to 0.8 
TgS. However, more global observations are needed to 
verify these model calculations. 
Other anthropogenic gaseous precursors of aerosol 
particles include nitrogen oxides and volatile organic 
compounds (VOCs) from fossil fuel combustion. Although 
their contribution to radiative forcing may well be more 
substantial than indicated in Table 2.6 - some studies (e.g., 
Diederen et ai, 1985) suggest that in highly polluted 
regions aerosol nitrate may be as important as aerosol 
sulphate for scattering visible light - no attempt has been 
made to estimate their global optical depth based on 
detailed modelling. 
The study by Cooke and Wilson (1996) of soot is based 
on the MOGUNTIA model, as used by Langner and Rodhe 
(1991) in their sulphate study. The global source strength 
of soot from industrial and biomass combustion was 
estimated to be about 13 TgC/yr and the global burden 0.26 
Tg. This model study provides the first consistent estimate 
of the global distribution of soot from which its direct 
radiative forcing can be estimated, for example using the 
approach of Haywood and Shine (1995). 
The Tegen and Fung (1994) study of mineral dust is 
based on a source strength of 3000 Tg/yr, distributed 
between four size categories. The estimated turnover time 
of these categories ranged from 13 days for the clay 
106 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
fraction witii an effective radius of 0.7 [am to 1 iiour for 
sand with an effective radius of 38 ц т . No attempt was 
made to separate out an anthropogenic component of the 
mineral dust and therefore it is not possible, from these 
results, to estimate the climate forcing by this aerosol 
component. However, recent studies by Tegen and Fung 
(1995) based on analysis of satellite observations suggest 
that a substantial amount (possibly 30-50%) of the soil 
dust burden may be influenced by human activities. No 
attempt has been made to estimate the global radiative 
forcing due to this anthropogenic component. 
Table 2.6, adapted from IPCC (1994), contains revised 
and updated quantities for carbonaceous aerosols (organics 
and soot) including separate entries for fossil fuel and 
biomass combustion sources of carbonaceous aerosols. As 
in IPCC (1994), the main conclusions to be drawn from 
this table are: 
(a) 
Natural sources represent around 90% of the total 
mass emission to the atmosphere of aerosols and 
their precursors; but 
(b) 
Anthropogenic emissions are estimated to result in 
almost half of the global mean aerosol optical depth 
because of their size and optical properties, the major 
contribution arising from SO2. 
It is important to recognise that some fraction of the soot 
aerosols from biomass combustion is natural; however it is 
included here as anthropogenic, owing to a lack of detailed 
knowledge of the actual frequency of occun^ence of natural 
fires initiated, for example, by lightning. Andreae (1995) 
estimates that biomass burning has increased by a factor of 
two or three since the mid-19th century, although large 
uncertainties remain concerning the history of the source 
strength of soot from biomass burning. 
Caution should be exercised when considering global 
aerosol loadings and especially their trends with time. 
Figure 2.13 shows the Northern Hemisphere and regional 
source strengths of SOj (expressed as sulphur), and 
illustrates the lack of uniform trends and the current rapid 
growth of the Asian source. 
2.3.3 Optical Characteristics of Aerosols 
Sulphate aerosol is a large anthropogenic contributor to 
optical depth and is the best understood and most easily 
quantified of the key aerosol types. The second most 
important anthropogenic aerosol particle type is 
carbonaceous; taken together the two typically comprise 
over 80% of the sub-micrometre aerosol mass in industrial 
70 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
' 
I860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 2.13; Natural and fossil fuel combustion sources of SOj in 
the Northern Hemisphere (after Dignon and Hameed, 1989; 1992). 
regions (Jonas et al., 1995). In contrast to the 
predominantly scattering effect of sulphate aerosol, 
carbonaceous aerosol absorbs solar radiation. While the 
uncertainty regarding the direct radiative forcing of 
sulphates has been narrowed somewhat (Section 2.4), 
increased recognition has been given to the role of 
carbonaceous aerosols, both organic compounds and soot. 
Neither the sources nor the ambient-air properties of these 
carbon-containing aerosols have been adequately 
characterised. As a result, the relative uncertainties in the 
calculated radiative forcing by carbonaceous aerosols are 
even larger than for the sulphates. In addition, sampling, 
measurement and chemical analysis methods for 
carbonaceous aerosols have not been standardised, and 
molecular characterisation is difficult and seldom 
attempted. Thus much of the present data set on 
carbonaceous aerosols must be viewed as not being truly 
appropriate for calculation of direct radiative forcing. 
Further, the lack of molecular information and the 
simultaneous lack of detailed information on water 
solubility and surface chemical properties make it difficult 
to address properly the role of carbonaceous particles as 
CCN. Nonetheless, some progress has been made towards 
bounding the direct forcing by both soot and organic 
aerosols, while empirical evidence has emerged that 
implicates organic aerosol particles in the process of cloud 
droplet formation (Novakov and Penner, 1993). 
Referring back to Table 2.6, the source strengths of 
carbonaceous aerosol particles (organic as well as soot) are 
based on emission factors relating the mass of aerosol 
produced to the mass of carbon burned in the fuel. Some of 
the data on emission factors were obtained in the 
laboratory and some were derived from atmospheric 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
107 
sampling. While in a small number of cases the particle 
size distribution of the aerosol was measured, in most 
experiments only the total aerosol mass was measured. For 
the case of organic aerosol particles, the suggested size 
distribution is similar to that of sulphates (with the mass 
mainly in the 0.1 - 1.0 |лт diameter range) so that there 
should be reasonable similarity between the scattering 
efficiencies of organic and sulphate aerosol (Penner et al., 
1992). However, since the data on soot emissions have not 
been acquired with any standardisation of sampling or 
analysis techniques, the emission factors must be regarded 
as preliminary estimates. Many of the soot emission data 
have been obtained from studies relating to inhalation and 
human health effects and these studies involve sampling of 
particles up to about 10 |xm in diameter. As can be seen 
from Figure 2.14, the absorption efficiency of spherical 
soot particles is calculated to be a strong function of 
particle size, with little absorption occurring for particles 
larger than about 1 |xm equivalent diameter. The 
dependence of absorption by non-spherical particles on 
their equivalent aerodynamic diameter is not well known. 
This, together with the fact that the atmospheric residence 
time of particles larger than 1 ixm 
is much shorter than that 
for 
small particles, suggests that the use of existing 
emission data is uncertain and likely to overestimate both 
particle mass concentration and light absoфtion. Specific 
size-resolved sampling is needed to delineate the amount of 
soot emitted as particles smaller than 1 |xm; in the absence 
of optical characterisation of soot from different sources, 
the existing data should be regarded more as upper limits 
on soot emissions than as current best estimates. 
In 
spite of the large uncertainties concerning the 
composition and magnitude of the source strength of 
carbonaceous aerosols, the single scattering albedo со = 
a-^^/(o-j^+ ^ap) 
^""^ 
been, measured (a^,^^ and cr^^ 
are the scattering and absorption cross-sections of the 
aerosol particles). The results show finite but highly 
variable light absoфtion by soot (Waggoner et ai, I98I; 
White, 1990; Haywood and Shine, 1995). Table 3.3 of 
IPCC (1994) gives a range 0.8 s; w 
0.95 for low 
humidity polluted continental air, and higher values, 0.9 =s 
CO =s 1.0 for clean continental or remote marine conditions. 
While few data exist for biomass combustion smoke, values in 
the range from 0.5 to greater than 0.9 have been reported with 
a mean value for low relative humidity aerosol of 0.83 
±0.11 
(Radke et al, 1991). Because these quantities were 
measured using heated or highly desiccated samples, the 
ambient values of single scattering albedo would be 
expected to be considerably higher due to hygroscopic 
growth, giving a relative increase of ст^^^ compared with 
1 1 
-
i 
i 
i 
i — 1 
l
i
l
i
l
í 
i 
i — 1 
1 1 1 1 |-
1 0 -
9 -
)i = 550 nm 
absorption per unit mass 
_ 
•. extinction per unit mass  
7 -
7 
6 -
Ъ 
5
-
\ - 
-
4 
-
\ 
3 -
2 -
\ \ . . . . 
0 -
1 
1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 
1 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
1 
1 
Г
-
Г
Т
Т
№ 
"•OI 
0.1 
1.0 
10 
Particle diameter D (^m) 
Figure 2.14: АЬ80ф110п and extinction of spherical soot particles 
per unit mass as a function of particle size for light with a 
wavelength of 550 nm. The refractive index was assumed to be 
1.773-0.6261 and the calculations by S.F. Marshall (pers. comm.) 
assume Mie scattering. 
a^p. Due to the large uncertainty ranges of both the source 
strength of soot and the single scattering albedo of the 
aerosol particles, it is necessary at present to adopt the 
precedent of Haywood and Shine (1995) who concluded 
that the role of light absoфtion by soot is uncertain but that 
the range of the climate forcing which results is bounded 
(see Section 2.4). 
As 
pointed out in IPCC (1994) there are difficulties 
associated with the determination of the scattering efficiency 
of sulphate aerosol. The difficulties have not been fully 
resolved (Hegg etal., 1993, 1994; Anderson etal, 1994). 
Some measurements of aerosol properties in China have 
been made (e.g., Shi et al., 1994; Wu and Chen, 1994), but 
it remains difficult to evaluate adequately the effects of the 
aerosol particles in the Asian region, where the source 
strengths are increasing rapidly. 
2.3.4 Influence of Aerosols on Clouds 
The suggestion that aerosol particles might modify the 
cloud droplet size distribution and hence the radiative 
properties of clouds, on a global scale, was supported in 
IPCC (1994) by the satellite observations of Han et al. 
(1994) which showed evidence of systematic differences in 
the effective radius of the cloud droplets between the 
Northern and Southern Hemispheres, with smaller droplets 
in the Northern Hemisphere. More recentiy this hypothesis 
has been supported by observations of seasonal coherence 
of 
CCN 
and cloud optical depths at Cape Grim, Tasmania 
(Boers etal., 1994). 
The problem of quantifying the relationship between 
aerosol source strengths and the droplet size distribution in 
108 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
low-level water cloud is complex because of the number of 
processes involved, including chemical processes in the 
emissions and the interaction between cloud dynamics and 
microphysics. Jonas et al. (1995) showed examples of 
empirical relationships only between aerosol particle 
number concentrations and droplet concentrations. Studies 
by Jones et al. (1994), Boucher and Lohmann (1995) and 
Hegg et al. (1993) have provided further insight into the 
importance of the exact form of this relationship when 
estimating the possible range of indirect radiative forcing 
due to sulphate aerosol, but it is clear that no universal 
relationship exists which could be applied in all regions. 
Calculations by Chuang and Penner (1995) have also 
demonstrated the impact of aerosol particles produced by 
oxidation of SOj in the modification of the cloud droplet 
population. It is clear, however, that the present results are 
not sufficient to provide global relationships which might 
be used with confidence in calculations of global forcing. 
Observations of cloud properties by Alkezweeny et al. 
(1993) demonstrate the impact of anthropogenic aerosol 
particles on cloud optical properties. Recent field 
experiments off the coast of California ( M A S T , the 
Monterey Area Ship Track experiment) and in the Arctic 
have provided further evidence for the impact of aerosol 
particles. Preliminary analyses of these experiments, and 
other studies (e.g., Hindman and Bodowski, 1994; 
Hindman et ai, 1995), have largely confirmed the impact 
of non-absorbing aerosol particles in increasing the albedo 
of clouds through their effect on the droplet concentration. 
The results emphasise that the sensitivity of clouds to 
aerosol particles is highly variable and is reduced in 
regions of high natural aerosol loading. There remain, 
however, some systematic differences between calculated 
and observed values of infrared albedo which may be due 
to the inhomogeneous nature of the cloud layers (Hayasaka 
et al, 1994). Whether such inhomogeneities affect the 
sensitivity of cloud optical properties to droplet 
concentration has not been determined: there is some 
evidence that the optical properties of inhomogeneously 
mixed clouds are less sensitive to droplet concentration 
than more uniform clouds (Novakov et al, 1994). 
Experiments by Perry and Hobbs (1994) have also 
confirmed earlier results suggesting that regions close to 
clouds may act as favoured regions for the production of 
particles. These results again point to the complexity of the 
relationship between emissions and C C N concentrations. 
Kulmala et al (1995) have suggested that the presence of N0,^ 
may also modify the nucleation process but measurements to 
illustrate its importance have not yet been made. 
Calculations by Jensen and Toon (1994) have suggested 
that conclusions concerning the sensitivity of cloud 
properties to aerosol particle concentration which relate to 
low level water cloud may not easily be transferred to the 
impact on upper tropospheric ice clouds. Their calculations 
assume that homogeneous nucleation of ice is the dominant 
mechanism by which ice crystals are produced in these 
clouds and that nucleation is relatively insensitive to the 
number of aerosol particles, although Sassen et al (1995) 
provided observations that suggest the modification of 
cirrus by incursion of stratospheric aerosol particles. The 
extent to which aerosol particles influence the optical 
properties of ice clouds, especially ice clouds formed at 
lower levels, has still to be determined. 
The problem of quantifying the impact of aerosol 
particles on cloud lifetime, through their impact on 
precipitation processes, was mentioned in IPCC (1994) 
although there were few quantitative results that could be 
used to assess the global impact of such changes which 
directly affect the mean optical thickness of the clouds. The 
problem was highlighted by Pincus and Baker (1994) who 
suggested that the impact of changes in the mean optical 
thickness might be comparable with the radiative effect of 
changing the droplet size distribution at cloud top. The 
problem is more acute for thin clouds in which precipitation 
is light but critical to the evolution of the cloud. 
2.4 Radiative Forcing 
The changes in greenhouse gas and aerosol concentrations 
reported in previous sections lead to a perturbation of the 
planetary radiation budget which is referred to here as 
"radiative forcing". It is the purpose of this section to 
report on calculations of the radiative forcing since pre-
industrial times due to a number of mechanisms and to 
indicate the degree of confidence in these estimates. 
The detailed rationale for using radiative forcing was 
given in IPCC (1994). It gives a first-order estimate of the 
potential climatic importance of various forcing 
mechanisms. The radiative forcing drives the climate to 
respond but, because of uncertainties in a number of 
feedback mechanisms (see Chapter 4), the radiative forcing 
can be calculated with more confidence than the 
consequent climate response. There are, however, limits to 
the utility of radiative forcing as neither the global mean 
radiative forcing, nor its geographical pattern, indicate 
properly the likely three-dimensional pattern of climate 
response; the general circulation models discussed in 
Chapters 5 and 6 are the necessary tools for the evaluation 
of climate response. 
This section limits itself to mechanisms which, via their 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
109 
interaction with solar or thermal infrared radiation, act to 
drive climate change. Changes in atmospheric water 
vapour, cloudiness or surface albedo which are a response 
to a radiative forcing and which, in turn, act to modify the 
climate response via their radiative effects, are considered 
in Chapter 4; similarly, recent studies of our fundamental 
understanding of the interaction of clouds with radiation 
are discussed in Chapter 4. 
The definition of radiative forcing adopted in previous 
IPCC reports (1990, 1992, 1994) has been the perturbation 
to the net irradiance (in Wm"^) at the tropopause after 
allowing for stratospheric temperatures to re-adjust (on a 
time-scale of a few months) to radiative equilibrium, but 
with the surface and tropospheric temperature and 
atmospheric moisture held fixed. This stratospheric 
adjustment is of crucial importance in evaluating properly 
the radiative forcing due to changes in stratospheric ozone 
and is important at the 5-10% level for changes in some 
other greenhouse gases; it is of less importance for changes 
in aerosol concentrations (see IPCC 1994). In this section, 
the reported radiative forcings due to greenhouse gas 
changes (including ozone) include the stratospheric 
temperature adjustment; all other forcings do not and are 
thus "instantaneous" values. 
2.4.1 Greenhouse gases 
Estimates of the adjusted radiative forcing due to changes 
in the concentrations of the so-called well-mixed 
greenhouse gases (COj, CH^, 
and the halocarbons) 
since pre-industrial times remain unchanged from IPCC 
(1994); the forcing given there is 2.45 Wm"^ with an 
estimated uncertainty of 15%. COj is by far the most 
important of the gases, contributing about 64% of the total 
forcing. We know of no new estimates of the forcing due to 
changes in tropospheric ozone since pre-industrial times 
and retain the estimate of between 0.2 and 0.6 Wm^^. 
Evans and Puckrin (1995) report measurements of the 
contribution of carbon monoxide to the greenhouse effect. 
The global mean radiative forcing due to the changes in 
carbon monoxide concentration is unlikely to exceed a few 
hundredths of a Wm~^; its role in modifying tropospheric 
ozone is likely to be of greater importance for climate. 
The basic physical understanding of the ways in which 
greenhouse gases absorb and emit thermal infrared 
radiation (e.g.. Goody and Yung, 1989) is supported by 
abundant observations of the spectrally resolved infrared 
emission by the clear-sky atmosphere (e.g., Kunde et al., 
1974; Lubin, 1994). Barrett (1995)'s suggestion that 
greenhouse gases are unable to emit significant amounts of 
infrared radiation is contradicted by these observations. 
2.4.1.1 Halocarbon radiative forcing 
In IPCC (1994) it was noted that the radiative forcing per 
mass (or molecule) of a number of halocarbons was based 
on unpublished material for which details were not 
available. Since then Pinnock et al. (1995) have reported 
the integrated absorption cross-sections and radiative 
forcing of eighteen hydrohalocarbons, a number of which 
have not previously been reported. In addition, they 
examined the dependence of the radiative forcing on a 
number of assumptions concerning the effects of clouds 
and overlapping species. For most gases, the values 
reported by Pinnock et al. (1995), relative to CFC-11, are 
within 15% of the values given in Table 4.3 of IPCC 
(1994); since this is within the likely error of the estimates, 
we do not amend our earlier recommendations. For two 
gases, HFC-32 and HFC-236fa, more substantial 
discrepancies are found. We favour results from models for 
which details are available, and hence, in Table 2.7, the 
values for HFC-32 and HFC-236fa are updated. In 
addition, values for HFC-41 and HFC-272ca, which were 
not reported in IPCC (1994), are given. 
A significant issue raised by Pinnock et al. (1995) 
concerns the absolute forcing due to CFC-11. A value of 
0.22 Wm~2/ppbv has been used in IPCC reports since IPCC 
(1990). Pinnock et al. obtain a value some 20% higher. 
Part of the problem may relate to the range of 
measurements of the absorption cross-section reported in 
the literature (see e.g., L i and Varanasi, 1994); however, 
the precise source of the discrepancy has not been 
established. If the Pinnock et al. (1995) value is confirmed 
by other work, the radiative forcing contribution of CFC-
11 would have to be increased. Since in IPCC reports the 
radiative forcing due to other halogenated compounds has 
been reported relative to C F C - 1 1 , their absolute 
contribution would also have to be increased. 
Roehl et al. (1995) reported absorption cross-sections 
and radiative forcings for 5 perfluorocarbons. The Roehl et 
al. values are favoured here as they are now published and 
form a consistent set of values for the perfluorocarbon 
series. The values are given in Table 2.7. It should be noted 
that there is a substantial discrepancy (30%) between the 
new value for C2Fg and the IPCC (1994) value; the source 
of this discrepancy has not been established. 
2.4.1.2 Radiative forcing due to stratospheric ozone 
changes 
The radiative forcing due to changes in ozone is more 
difficult to calculate than those of the other greenhouse 
gases for a number of reasons. First, ozone changes cause a 
significant change in both solar and thermal infrared 
по 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
radiation. Second, tlie effect of stratospheric temperature 
change as a consequence of ozone loss in the lower 
stratosphere significantly modifies the radiative forcing. 
Finally, uncertainty in the spatial distribution of the ozone 
loss, in particular in the vertical, introduces significant 
uncertainties in the consequent radiative forcing. These 
issues were discussed in detail in IPCC (1994) who 
concluded that the adjusted radiative forcing as a result of 
decreases in stratospheric ozone was about —0.1 Wm"^ 
with a factor of 2 uncertainty. 
Molnar et al. (1994) calculated the radiative forcing and 
the equilibrium surface temperature response due to 
stratospheric ozone loss in the 1980s with a two-
dimensional radiative-convective seasonal climate model. 
Using ozone data for broad latitude belts (90°-30°N, 
30°N-30°S and 30°-90°S) their calculations reaffirm the 
sensitivity of the forcing to uncertainties in the vertical 
profile of ozone depletion (see IPCC 1994); Molnar et al. 
(1994) find uncertainties in the forcing of up to 50%. Their 
climate response results suggest that the surface cooling 
due to stratospheric ozone loss in the 1980s offsets about 
30% of the warming due to well-mixed greenhouse gas 
increases over the same period. The offset is about a factor 
of two greater than that expected from radiative forcing 
calculations alone and appears to be due to the 
representation of the meridional transport of heat in the 
model. Because of a lack of other published studies, 
especially using three dimensional models, this result must 
be viewed with caution. 
The reduction in stratospheric chlorine and bromine 
loading which will result from the Montreal Protocol and 
its Amendments is expected to lead to a recovery of the 
stratospheric ozone layer over the next century 
(WMO/UNEP, 1995). During the 1980s the ozone loss 
partially offsets the forcing due to the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases, but in the early decades of the next 
century the ozone recovery constitutes a positive radiative 
forcing that acts to enhance the effect of the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases. Solomon and Daniel (1996) have 
estimated the consequences of the recovery on radiative 
forcing using the IPCC (1990) Business-as-usual Scenario. 
The transition from ozone loss to ozone recovery changes 
the decadal increment of the greenhouse gas plus ozone 
forcing from about 0.44 Wm-^/decade for the 1980s to 
about 0.59 Wm-2/decade for the period 2000 to 2009. If the 
ozone changes are ignored, the increment of the forcing is 
0.52 Wm-2/decade for the 1980s and 0.56 "^mr^látcz.áQ for 
2000 to 2009. Hence the changes in stratospheric ozone 
lead to a significant transient acceleration of the 
greenhouse gas radiative forcing. This acceleration may be 
even greater, if the ozone forcing is enhanced by the effects 
of the depletion on tropospheric constituents via the 
Table 2.7: Radiative forcings due to halocarbons for a per unit mass and a per molecule increase in atmospheric 
concentration relative to CFC-1 L The table shows direct forcings only. The values here are for gases for which the IPCC 
(1994) values have been updated or for gases not hitherto reported. The absolute forcing due to CFC-11 is taken from 
IPCC (1990) and is 0.22 AX Wmr- where ЛХ is the perturbation to the volume mixing ratio of CFC-11 in ppbv. 
Gas 
AF per unit mass 
ДГ per molecule 
Source 
relative to CFC-11 
relative to CFC-11 
• HFC-32 
C H 2 F 2 
1.32 
0.50 
Pinnock etal. (1995) 
+ HFC-41 
C H 3 F 
0.44 
0.11 
Pinnock era/. (1995) 
* HFC-236fa 
C F 3 C H 2 C F 3 
0.90 
1.00 
Pinnock efa/. (1995) 
+ HFC-272ca 
C F 2 H C H 2 C H 3 
0.57 
0.33 
Pinnock etal. (1995) 
0.73 
0.47 
Roehl etal (1995) 
' C 2 F 6 
1.04 
1.05 
Roehl etal (1995) 
^CsFg 
0.80 
1.11 
Roehl etal. (1995) 
+ Г F 
0.80 
1.40 
Roehl etal (1995) 
^C^F,^ 
0.85 
1.79 
Roehl e/fll (1995) 
*СбР,4 
0.83 
2.08 
Roehl etal (1995) 
* Denotes value is amended from IPCC (1994) value. 
+ Denotes gas not previously reported in IPCC reports. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
111 
increased penetration of U V (see Section 2.4.1.3). Solomon 
and Daniel (1996) show that if the ozone forcing were to 
be doubled as a consequence of the tropospheric changes, 
the forcing in the 1980s would be 0.36 Wm"-/decade, 
increasing to about 0.61 Wm^^/decade for 2000 to 2009. 
2.4.1.3 Impact of ozone depletion on other radiatively 
active species 
Depletion of stratospheric ozone can affect 
the 
distributions of other radiatively active species (see Section 
2.2). Thus, the net radiative forcing due to ozone-depleting 
gases such as CFCs and halons depends not only upon the 
induced ozone depletion but also upon the subsequent 
chemical changes that can follow from stratospheric ozone 
depletion. Most notable among these is the dominant role 
of stratospheric ozone in controlling the transmission of the 
ultraviolet radiation to the troposphere and, in turn, the 
tropospheric O H concentrations that regulate the 
abundances of gases such as methane, HFCs, HCFCs and 
tropospheric ozone (e.g., Fuglestvedt et ai, 1994). 
Madronich and Granier (1992) emphasised that through 
this mechanism ozone depletion could play a role in 
determining methane trends. The modelling study of Bekki 
et al. (1994) provides support for this mechanism by 
examining the role of enhanced ozone depletion following 
the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo upon the reduced methane 
growth rates observed at that time. However, other 
processes may also have affected the observed methane 
response as noted in Section 2.2. Bekki et al. (1994) also 
emphasised that the observed global ozone depletion of 
about 3% would be expected to produce an indirect 
negative radiative forcing due to methane decreases and 
associated tropospheric ozone decreases that is about 
30-50% of the forcing due to the ozone depletion alone. 
Thus this study suggests a total radiative forcing associated 
with ozone depletion that could be 30-50% more negative 
than estimates of this forcing that neglect the impact of 
ultraviolet transmission changes upon methane and 
tropospheric ozone. Because the bulk of methane 
destruction normally takes place in tropical latitudes while 
ozone depletion maximises in mid- and high latitudes, the 
details of such estimates are dependent on the uncertainties 
in the latitudinal distribution of ozone depletion, as well as 
tropospheric transport characteristics. 
Toumi et al. (1994) discussed another indirect chemical 
mechanism that could make the total radiative forcing due 
to ozone depletion even more negative. They pointed out 
that increases in tropospheric O H should be expected to 
increase the rate of oxidation of S O T to form sulphuric 
acid, which in turn provides the source of cloud 
condensation nuclei and hence has the potential to enhance 
the negative radiative forcing associated with aerosols; 
however, the importance of this mechanism has been 
challenged by Rodhe and Crutzen (1995). Toumi et al. 
(1994) used the same simple approach as that taken by 
Charlson et al. (1992) to relate increases in SOj oxidation 
to cloud albedo. They found that the observed decreases in 
ozone could have led to a negative radiative forcing due to 
this mechanism as large as 40-800% of the radiative 
forcing due to the ozone depletion itself. The many 
uncertainties associated with estimates of radiative forcing 
due to sulphate-induced cloud changes are discussed in 
Section 2.3.4. Toumi et al. (1994) also emphasised the 
uncertainties associated with the lack of convective 
transport in their two-dimensional model. 
In spite of large uncertainties, the two studies taken 
together suggest that the total radiative forcing due to 
ozone depletion including indirect chemical effects relating 
to tropospheric OH is likely to exceed that obtained from 
the ozone depletion alone, perhaps by a factor of two or 
more. Any radiative forcing associated with methane 
changes will already be implicitly accounted for in the 
estimates of the forcing due to changes in the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases. The forcing resulting from changes in 
cloud properties would be in addition to the radiative 
forcing of -0.1 W m ' - (with a factor of two uncertainty) 
due to stratospheric ozone change proposed in IPCC 
(1994). However, given the uncertainties in characterising 
the ozone-induced effect on clouds, we believe it to be too 
premature to suggest a revised value for the forcing (or the 
eiTor bars) associated with stratospheric ozone change. 
2.4.1.4 Other climate-chemistiy interactions 
A recent study of the impact of enhanced emission of 
pollutants in the Asian region on key chemical species 
using a 3-D chemical transport model suggests increases of 
free tropospheric ozone up to 30% for a doubling of N0^. 
emissions during the summer months (Berntsen et al., 
1996). These increases in tropospheric ozone cause a local 
radiative forcing of 0.5 Wm^^ which is about 50% of the 
negative radiative forcing in the same region due to the 
direct effect of sulphate aerosols. 
Hauglustaine et al. (1994) used a 2-D dynamical-
radiation-chemistry model to estimate the effect of current 
day aircraft emissions of N0^, on tropospheric ozone and, 
hence, on radiative forcing (although it should be noted 
that there are limitations in using 2-D models in such 
studies, see Section 2.2 and IPCC (1994)). The resulting 
radiative forcing is small. The global and annual mean 
radiative forcing due to aircraft N0,^ emissions is only 
112 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
+ 0.02 Wm~^, compared to their estimate of 0.1 Wm"^ 
from surface sources; the aircraft effect is greatest in 
northern mid-latitudes, reaching -Ю.08 Wm"^ in summer. 
One effect of these ozone increases is to increase the 
model's tropospheric OH concentrations; the subsequent 
decrease in methane lifetimes (and hence concentration) is 
found to offset the positive forcings by about 30%. 
2.4.2 Tropospheric Aerosols 
Aerosols can directly influence the radiation budget by 
scattering/absorption (this is referred to as the "direct" 
aerosol effect); they can also influence it by altering the 
structure and radiative properties of clouds (the "indirect" 
aerosol effect). 
There is a large uncertainty range particularly for the 
radiative forcing due to the effect of aerosols on cloud 
properties. As also emphasised in IPCC (1994), the aerosol 
radiative forcing is spatially very inhomogeneous so that a 
direct comparison of the global mean forcing WÚÍ the 
forcing due to other mechanisms might not give a complete 
picture. Nevertheless, the global mean value remains a 
useful single-parameter method of comparing different 
aerosol forcing estimates. 
It should also be recognised that aerosol forcing 
estimates tend to be "partial derivatives": i.e., the forcing 
that would result from that aerosol component alone. 
Because of interactions between different aerosol 
components, the radiative properties of multi-component 
aerosols are not necessarily the same as the sum of the 
individual components (as will be discussed for soot 
aerosols in Section 2.4.2.2); the same consideration applies 
to the effect of aerosols on cloud properties. 
A number of authors have reported a long-term decline 
in solar radiaüon reaching the surface at some locations 
using routine observations of global solar radiation since 
the 1950s (e.g., Liepert et al, 1994; Stanhill and Moreshet, 
1994; L i et ai, 1995). There are several potential factors 
that could cause such a change. These include the increased 
scattering from aerosols and changes in water vapour and 
cloud amounts. Thus the decline may be a direct indication 
of aerosol forcing but it may also be an indication of water 
vapour and/or cloud feedbacks as a consequence of recent 
climate change. Such observations may, nevertheless, 
provide useful additional information with which to 
constrain model estimates in the future. 
2.4.2.1 Direct forcing due to sulphate aerosols resulting 
from fossil fuel emissions and smelting 
A number of new estimates of the direct radiative forcing 
due to sulphate aerosols arising from fossil fuel burning 
and smelting have become available. As discussed in 
Section 2.3, the estimates of the direct forcing due to 
sulphate aerosols can differ because of significant 
differences in the source strength or representation of 
chemistry in the models used to construct sulphate aerosol 
climatologies. The Languor and Rodhe (1991) cHmatology 
derived using the MOGUNTIA model is available for a 
"standard" case and a so-called "slow oxidation" case in 
which the oxidation of SOj in clouds is reduced. The slow-
oxidation case yields sulphate burdens in better agreement 
with more detailed models (see Section 2.3.2); the sulphate 
burden in the standard case is 40% higher for the present 
day. The newer Pham et al. (1995) climatology has a 
burden 45% higher than the Langner and Rodhe slow-
oxidation case, due to a combination of faster oxidation 
and higher source strengths. 
Kiehl and Rodhe (1995) have computed the direct 
radiative forcing due to sulphate aerosol using the Pham et 
al (1995) climatology. They obtained a global and annual 
mean forcing of -0.66 Wm"^. During July the magnitude 
of the aerosol forcing was a maximum at — 11 Wm"^ in 
central Europe and —7.2 Wm"^ over Eastern China. These 
values are sufficient to make the sulphate plus greenhouse 
gas forcing since pre-industrial times substantially negative 
in these regions. 
Boucher and Anderson (1995) examined the dependence 
of the radiative forcing on the size and chemical form of the 
sulphate aerosol, including the humidity dependence. For 
reasonable changes in these parameters they find a variation 
in the global mean forcing of only ±20%. They emphasise 
that the effect of changing size and composition of aerosols 
must be included self-consistently in all parameters that 
affect the radiative forcing calculation, as there is a tendency 
for the different effects to compensate. Kiehl and Briegleb 
(1993) had earlier shown a similar result for variations in 
particle size only. Boucher and Anderson's study 
incorporates the Langner and Rodhe (1991) "standard" 
sulphate climatology into the Laboratoire de Météorologie 
Dynamique du CNRS (LMD) G C M . Sulphate optical 
properties incorporate laboratory measurements of humidity-
dependent sulphate particle growth. They compute a "base 
case" global mean radiative forcing of -0.29 Wm~^, which 
is similar to the estimate of Kiehl and Briegleb (1993) but 
implies a 21% lower forcing per unit mass of sulphate, since 
Kiehl and Briegleb use the "slow oxidation" sulphate 
climatology. This difference is primarily due to the 
incorporation by Boucher and Anderson of the dependence 
of the asymmetry factor on humidity. 
Chuang et al. (1994) have coupled a tropospheric 
chemistry model to the Livermore/NCAR Community 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Climate Model (CCMl) to estimate the sulphate forcing for 
both direct scattering by the aerosols and the effect of the 
sulphate on cloud droplet effective radii. They obtain a 
global mean forcing of -0.92 Wm"^ and attribute -0.45 
Wm-2 of fjjjg Jo jj^g direct effect. This direct forcing is 
significantly smaller than the earlier direct radiative forcing 
estimate of —0.9 Wm^-^ by the same group (Taylor and 
Penner, 1994). Most of this difference is due to the use of a 
humidity-dependent scattering coefficient in Chuang et al. 
(1994); Taylor and Penner (1994) had previously shown 
that use of such a humidity dependence led to a global 
mean forcing of - 0 . 6 Wm--. The remainder of the 
difference is attributed to the overprediction of sulphate 
concentrations in Europe in Taylor and Penner (1994). 
Haywood and Shine (1995) modified the simple 
radiation model used by Charlson et al. (1991) by 
incorporating a geographically and seasonally varying 
surface albedo; they used the aerosol optical properties 
appropriate for 0.7 p,m (instead of 0.55 |xm), which 
Blanchet (1982) showed gave irradiances in reasonable 
agreement with more rigorous multi-spectral calculations. 
They compared the clear sky forcing using two sulphate 
data sets - the "slow-oxidation" case of Langner and 
Rodhe (1991) and the Penner et al. (1994) sets. Both sets 
yielded a global mean forcing of about -0.33 Wm-^ 
although there was a marked difference in the seasonal 
variation of this forcing, with the Penner et al. set giving 
the more marked variation. 
Direct forcing due to the scattering by aerosols in cloudy 
skies is generally smaller than in clear skies. Chuang et al. 
(1994) attribute about 25% of the direct forcing to cloudy 
regions. Boucher and Anderson (1995) get 22% and report 
that Kiehl and Briegleb's (1993) results give an estimated 
40%. A l l of these values appear to have been obtained 
using a simplified global mean analysis and indicate the 
need for a more detailed calculation of the clear and cloudy 
sky contributions. The contribution of the cloudy sky 
forcing is ignored in simpler models such as Charlson et al. 
(1991) and Haywood and Shine (1995). 
If the Langner and Rodhe (1991) source strengths and 
slow oxidation case are used, there appears to be some 
convergence in estimates of the direct effect of sulphate 
aerosols on the basis of the above estimates; this indicates 
that the uncertainties in radiative transfer calculations are 
likely to be less than the uncertainties in the column burden 
of sulphate aerosols. A central value of -0.4 Wm-^, with a 
factor of 2 uncertainty is suggested (i.e., a range from —0.2 
to -0.8 Wm-2); 
IPCC (1994) the range was given as 
—0.25 to —0.9 Wm-2. Although this is a small change, we 
believe it is justified, as the upper limit (-0.9 Wm-2) 
113 
based on the Taylor and Penner (1994) estimate which, as 
discussed above, has been revised. 
2.4.2.2 Soot aerosols 
Much of the work on aerosol radiative forcing to date has 
concentrated on the role of sulphate aerosols. However, 
soot aerosols absorb radiation at solar wavelengths, so 
increases in the amount of soot may result in a positive 
radiative forcing. The quantitative understanding of the 
effects of soot on radiative forcing is still poor. Size-
segregated climatologies of the distribution of soot are not 
currently available (see Section 2.3.2). Uncertainties in the 
size-dependent optical properties of soot particles pose a 
major complication in assessing the radiative forcing. 
In the atmosphere, soot may be mixed with other 
components (Ogren, 1982), such as the non-absorbing 
sulphates, and the manner of the mixing has a significant 
bearing on the optical characteristics of the composite 
aerosol. Conceptual models of aerosol mixtures have been 
proposed, ranging from external mixtures (where the 
sulphate and soot aerosols are separate entities) to internal 
mixtures (e.g., concentric spheres with soot as the core or 
the shell of an aerosol (Ackerman and Toon, 1981)). In 
general, calculations demonstrate that when an absorber is 
internally mixed with a scattering particle the degree of 
absorption by the composite particle can be enhanced 
considerably (e.g., Heintzenberg, 1978; Ackerman and 
Toon, 1981). Thus, the quantitative aspects concerning the 
amount of radiation scattered and absorbed, besides being 
governed by the amount of the absorbing substance, also 
depend on the nature of the mixture and the optical mixing 
rules. Soot particles are often non-spherical, further adding 
to the uncertainty in their radiative properties (Chylek et 
al., 1981). A recent theoretical development (Chylek et al, 
1995) has focused on developing general solutions for the 
radiative effect of soot present in sulphate aerosols; this 
study suggests that for high soot/sulphate mass ratios, a 
composite particle can cause a considerable reduction in 
the negative radiative forcing due to sulphate aerosol only. 
Haywood and Shine (1995) have explored the possible 
effects of soot from fossil fuel sources on the clear-sky 
radiation budget using a simple radiation model (see 
Section 2.4.2.1). They generate soot distributions by 
making the simple assumption that it is a fixed mass 
fraction of the sulphate aerosol distributions given by 
Langner and Rodhe (1991) and Penner et al. (1994); thus, 
they neglect the effects of differences in the sources and 
life cycles of soot and sulphate which may lead to 
significantly different spatial distributions. The global 
mean forcing ranged from +0.03 Wm-2 for a soot/sulphate 
114 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
mass ratio of 0.05 using an external mixture to +0.24 
Wm"^ for a soot/suiphate mass ratio of 0.1 using an 
internal mixture; these can be compared with their 
calculated sulphate only forcing of —0.33 Wm"^. Since the 
effect of soot is highest over high albedo surfaces, its 
impact was greatest in the Northern Hemisphere; the ratio 
of Northern to Southern Hemisphere forcing was reduced 
from about 4 for sulphate only to 1.3 for the soot/sulphate 
mass ratio of 0.1 and an internal mixture. 
Much work needs to be done to explore the validity of 
the assumptions made in this study and to extend it to 
cloudy regions. There are two distinct ways that clouds 
affect the soot forcing. First, soot placed above clouds with 
high albedos is able to cause a greater positive forcing than 
the same amount of soot over a low albedo surface. 
Second, if soot exists as an internal mixture with cloud 
liquid water, this could enhance the absorption 
considerably (see e.g., Danielson et ai, 1969; Chylek et al, 
1984; Chylek and Hallett, 1992). Sulphate aerosols lead to 
less solar radiation being absorbed by the Earth/atmosphere 
system as a whole and by the surface; soot aerosols 
increase the absorption by the system but decrease that 
reaching the surface. Therefore, the overall climate effect 
may differ from that with sulphate aerosols. It is clear that 
components of aerosol other than sulphate (including 
organics and soot) need to be considered if the total effects 
of aerosols are to be established. 
Although it is very preliminary, we adopt an estimate for 
the global mean forcing due to soot aerosols of 
approximately +0.1 Wm"- since pre-industrial times, with 
an uncertainty of at least a factor of 3. 
2.4.2.3 Other aerosol types and sources 
The forcing estimates described above are mainly for 
aerosols produced from fossil fuel burning and smelting. 
Biomass burning is a source of aerosols with potential for 
significant radiative forcing. We are unaware of any 
significant developments in this area and retain the IPCC 
(1994) estimate for the global mean radiative forcing since 
1850 of -0.2 Wm"2 
a factor of 3 uncertainty. This 
uncertainty has been underlined by the work of Chylek and 
Wong (1995) who have shown the direct radiative forcing 
to be dependent on the aerosol size distribution. 
As discussed in Section 2.3.2, Tegen and Fung (1995) 
have estimated the visible optical depth of mineral dust 
from land surfaces as a result of human activity. To 
evaluate the resultant radiative forcing will require account 
of the modulating effects of cloud and the dependence of 
the forcing on the albedo of the underlying surface. Robock 
and Graf (1994) have also drawn attention to the fact that 
in the pre-industrial period this, and other effects related to 
land surface modification, might have contributed a 
significant forcing. 
2.4.2.4 Effect of aerosols on cloud properties 
The effects of aerosols on changing the radiative properties 
of clouds were discussed in IPCC (1994). Two effects were 
identified: the effect on cloud albedo due to decreases in 
the droplet effective radius and the consequent effect of 
this decrease on cloud liquid water content and possibly 
cloud cover. The difficulties in quantifying the indirect 
effect of aerosols were stressed (see also the review by 
Schwartz and Slingo (1996)). As discussed in Section 
2.3.4, there has been no significant increase in our 
understanding of the indirect effect since IPCC (1994). The 
purpose of this section is to report on recent estimates of 
the indirect radiative forcing due to aerosols; modelling 
studies continue to use simplified relationships between 
aerosol concentrations and droplet sizes. Thus, the 
similarity in the results from different groups need not 
imply added confidence in the estimates. 
Boucher and Lohmann (1995) have used two GCMs 
(LMD and E C H A M ) to estimate the indirect effect of 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols on cloud albedo, by 
relating sulphate aerosol loading to cloud droplet number 
concentration. The sulphate aerosol distribution is derived 
using the MOGUNTIA model, as used by Langner and 
Rodhe (1991), and uses the standard oxidarion rate. A 
range of different assumptions was made on the sulphate 
cloud droplet number concentration relationship: the global 
mean results fell in the range -0.5 to -1.5 Wm~2, with a 
Northern Hemisphere - Southern Hemisphere ratio of 
between 2 and 4; the smaller ratios are from the E C H A M 
G C M . The methods used in this study are similar to those 
of Jones et al. (1994) reported in IPCC (1994); they 
obtained a global mean forcing of -1.3 Wm^^ ^j^jj ^ 
North/South ratio of 1.6. 
Chuang et al (1994) (see Section 2.4.2.1) included a 
simplified representation of the effect of sulphate aerosol 
on cloud properties in their G C M study. They attributed 
-0.47 Wm"^ of their model derived forcing to the effect of 
sulphate on cloud albedo. 
A different approach has been pursued by Boucher 
(1995) who used the low cloud droplet effective radii 
derived from satellite measurements by Han et al. (1994). 
Han et al (1994) found that the mean droplet radius in the 
Northern Hemisphere was U mm, which was 0.7 mm 
lower than in the Southern Hemisphere. Boucher attributed 
this difference to anthropogenic aerosol production and 
computed a forcing of between —0.6 and —1.0 Wm"^ 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
115 
averaged between 0 and 50°N. Boucher acknowledges the 
many simplifications inherent in this analysis; for example, 
other studies (such as Jones et ai, 1994) have derived a 
significant Southern Hemisphere forcing because the 
cleaner clouds there are more susceptible to changes in 
aerosol amounts. The method also assumes the 
interhemispheric differences are solely related to human 
activity. Boucher's values can be interpreted as the 
difference in anthropogenic forcing between the 
hemispheres. An estimate of the global mean forcing can 
then be made by applying the ratio of the forcing between 
the two hemispheres derived in the G C M studies and by 
assuming that Boucher's value for 0 to 50°N is 
representative of the entire Northern Hemisphere. Using an 
interhemispheric ratio of 3 together with Boucher's values 
yields a global mean forcing of between —0.6 and —1.0 
Wm-2; lower interhemispheric ratios would yield more 
negative global mean forcings. 
Pincus and Baker (1994) have explored the possible 
effect of changes in droplet size on cloud thickness due to 
the suppression of precipitation. They use a simple model 
of the marine boundary layer. They find that the effect of 
precipitarion suppression on cloud albedo can make the 
radiative forcing due to droplet effective radii changes 
alone more negative by between 50 and 200%. The 
applicability of such a model on larger scales is unclear but 
the conclusions reinforce those of the Boucher et al. (1995) 
G C M study. 
These studies continue to indicate that the effect of 
aerosols on cloud droplet effective radius may be 
substantial although it remains very uncertain. We retain 
the range of 0 to -1.5 Wm-^ suggested in IPCC (1994). 
Our quantitative understanding is so limited at present that 
no mid-range estimate is given. 
2.4.3 Stratospheric Aerosols 
The volcanic eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991 initiated a 
major global scale radiative forcing. The forcing was 
transient in nature reaching its most negative global mean 
value (-3 to - 4 Wm-2) in eariy 1992 (Hansen et al., 1992; 
updated by Hansen et al., 1995). Since that time, the 
stratospheric aerosol optical depths have declined and 
latest observations (e.g., Jager et al, 1995) indicate that the 
negative radiative forcing associated with Pinatubo 
aerosols has largely been removed. McCormick et al. 
(1995) and Hansen et al. (1995) have presented reviews of 
the atmospheric effects, including the radiative forcing, of 
the Pinatubo eruption. The climatic consequences of 
Pinatubo aerosols are discussed in Chapter 3. 
Robock and Free (1995) use ice core acidity and 
sulphate records to deduce a new index of volcanic activity 
since 1850; they use 8 high latitude Northern Hemisphere 
cores, 5 high latitude Southern Hemisphere cores and 1 
tropical core in their analysis. They compare their results 
with previous volcanic indices, including those of 
Khmelevtsov et al. (1996) and Sato et al. (1993). There is a 
general agreement between the records. In particular, even 
though there may have been no cumulative century scale 
trends in volcanic aerosol loading, there have been 
significant shorter time-scale variations in loading. Figure 
2.15 shows estimates of the variation of the visible optical 
depth from Sato et al. (1993) and Robock and Free (1995). 
The associated radiative forcing is shown for the Sato et al. 
(1993) data (using the simple parametrization that the 
forcing in Wm-2 jg _3Q tijjies the visible optical depth (see 
Lacis et al. (1992)). The forcing is not shown for the 
Robock and Free (1995) data as these are more 
representative of high latitudes and give added weight to 
the influence of high latitude eruptions; they are, therefore, 
less representative of global mean conditions. The period 
from about 1850 to 1920 was characterised by frequent 
eruptions of possible climatic significance; 1920 to 1960 
was a period of reduced aerosol loading; and since 1960 
the aerosol loading has on average again been higher. The 
decadal mean radiative forcings due to volcanic aerosols in 
the stratosphere may have varied by as much as 1.5 Wm 2 
since 1850; hence such a variation can be large compared 
to the decadal-scale variation in any other known forcing. 
These studies continue to support the conclusion that 
volcanic activity may be important in explaining some of 
the interdecadal variation in surface temperature during the 
instrumental record. 
Changes in cirrus cloud properties as a result of the 
incursion of stratospheric aerosols into the upper 
tropcsphere are a possible source of additional radiative 
forcing, as mentioned in IPCC (1994) (see also Section 
2.3.4). Sassen et al. (1995) and Wang et al. (1995) have 
provided further case-study evidence of cirrus modification 
by this mechanism. The extent of the effect, and even the 
sign of the resulting radiative forcing, remain unclear. 
2.4.4 Solar Variability 
IPCC (1994) reviewed direct observations of solar 
variability since 1978, presented correlative and theoretical 
studies of possible solar-climate connections, and 
described methods used to infer possible solar changes 
prior to the period of direct observations. Evidence 
suggests that the solar output was significantly lower 
during the Maunder Minimum (mainly in the 17th 
century), while recent observations and theoretical 
116 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
(a) 
f 
I 
8¬
03 
> 
0.20 -
0.15 -
0.10 -
0.05 -
0.00 1850 
(b) 
0.20 -
Q. 
Ф 
•D 
•5 
Ü 
Q-
O 
3 
I 
0.15 -
0.10 
0.05 
0.00 
-7.0 
-6.0 
-4.0 
-3.0 
-2.0 
-1.0 
0 
1850 
1870 
1890 
1910 
1930 
Year 
1950 
1970 
1990 
5 >< 
3" 
I 
I 
3 
Figure 2.15: (a) Variation of global mean visible optical depth, and the consequent radiative forcing (Wm'^) resulting from 
stratospheric aerosols of volcanic origin from 1850 to 1993, as estimated by Sato et al (1993). The radiative forcing has been estimated 
using the simple relationship given in Lacis et al (1992) where the radiative forcing is -30 times the visible optical depth, (b) Variation 
of visible optical depth from the ice core volcanic index of Robock and Free (1995) for 1850 to 1985. The Robock and Free (1995) 
index has been normalised so that their Northern Hemisphere mean agrees with the Sato et al Northern Hemisphere optical depth for 
the mid-1880 Krakatau peak. Since Robock and Free's analysis is largely based on high latitude measurements, it is not likely tobe 
representative of the global mean. 
calculations imply that the radiative forcing due to changes 
in the Sun's output over the past century has been 
considerably smaller than anthropogenic forcing. 
Estimates of the distant past and future role of solar 
variability for global radiative forcing are based upon 
observations and models of solar physics. For a concise 
review of solar processes and predictive models, see NRC 
(1994); solar-climate relationships have also been reviewed 
in Nesme-Ribes (1994). Empirical parametrizations have 
been developed to relate solar output fluctuations due to 
dark sunspots and bright faculae to indices such as the solar 
He I 1083 nm line (see, e.g.. Lean et al, 1992; Foukal, 
1994a), while others have also considered possible changes 
in the solar diameter and rotation rate (e.g., Nesme-Ribes et 
al, 1993) and comparisons of the behaviour of our Sun to 
other stars (Lockwood et al, 1992). It is important to 
consider the age (Radick, 1994) and physical properties 
(e.g., photospheric magnetic structures) of such 
comparison stars and their relationship to the contemporary 
sun (Foukal, 1994b). 
A recent paper by Zhang et al (1994) helps to bracket 
the range of variability observed in sun-like stars and hence 
the likely past and future variability of our Sun. They noted 
that empirical models based upon sunspots and faculae do 
not account for all irradiance variations observed over an 
activity cycle (see also N R C (1994)) and base their 
con-elation on an observed relationship between brightness 
and excess chromospheric emission, using the Ca II H and 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
117 
К (396.8 nm and 393.3 nm) flux as the index. Using 33 
sun-like stars, they estimate to 95% confidence that the 
solar brightness increase between the Maunder Minimum 
and the decade of the 1980s was likely to be 0.4 ± 0.2%. 
The lower limit of 0.2% (equivalent to a radiative forcing 
of 0.48 Wm"^) agrees with the estimates of Lean et al. 
(1992) and Hoyt and Schatten (1993), while the upper range 
of 0.6% is in reasonable agreement with Nesme-Ribes et 
al. (1993) and corresponds to a radiative forcing of 1.4 
Wnr^. 
The radiative forcing since 1850 is likely to be no 
more than 50% of that since the Maunder Minimum (see 
IPCC 1994). This study thus provides support for the 
conclusions reached in IPCC (1994) that solar variations of 
the past century are highly likely to have been considerably 
smaller than the anthropogenic radiative forcings and 
expands that conclusion to show that the variations in solar 
output over the coming century are unlikely to exceed 
those observed since the Maunder Minimum. 
I 
E 
g 
•y 
о 
О) 
> 
î 
с 
ra 
CD 
E 
ra 
о 
Halocarbons 
N2O 
GH4 
GO2 
Tropospheric 
aerosols - direct effect 
Fossil 
fuel 
Biomass 
Sulphate 
_[_ 
burning 
Solar 
-2 
Tropospheric 
Stratospheric 
ozone 
ozone 
Tropospheric aerosols 
- indirect effect 
Confidence level 
High 
Low 
Low 
Low 
Very 
Very 
Very Very 
low 
low 
low 
low 
Figure 2.16: Estimates of the globally and annually averaged anthropogenic radiative forcing (in Wm^^) due to changes in 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and aerosols from pre-industrial times to the present day and to natural changes in solar output from 
1850 to the present day. The height of the rectangular bar indicates a mid-range estimate of the forcing whilst the error bars show an 
estimate of the uncertainty range, based largely on the spread of published values; our subjective confidence that the actual forcing lies 
within this error bar is indicated by the "confidence level". The contributions of individual gases to the direct greenhouse forcing is 
indicated on the first bar. The indirect greenhouse forcings associated with the depletion of stratospheric ozone and the increased 
concentration of tropospheric ozone are shown in the second and third bar respectively. The direct contributions of individual 
tropospheric aerosol components are grouped into the next set of three bars. The indirect aerosol effect, arising from the induced change 
in cloud properties, is shown next; our quantitative understanding of this process is very limited at present and hence no bar 
representing a mid-range estimate is shown. The final bar shows the estimate of the changes in radiative forcing due to variations in 
solar output. The forcing associated with stratospheric aerosols resulting from volcanic eruptions is not shown, as it is very variable 
over this time period; Figure 2.15 shows estimates of this variation. Note that there are substantial differences in the geographical 
distribution of the forcing due to the well-mixed greenhouse gases (COj, N2O, CH^ and the halocarbons) and that due to ozone and 
aerosols, which could lead to significant differences in their respective global and regional climate responses (see Chapter 6). For this 
reason, the negative radiative forcing due to aerosols should not necessarily be regarded as an offset against the greenhouse gas forcing. 
118 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
2.4.5 Summary 
Figure 2.16 sliows our best estimates of the global mean 
radiative forcing due to a number of mechanisms since pre-
industrial times. As was emphasised in IPCC (1994), the 
global mean forcing must be used with caution. In 
particular, the offset between positive and negative 
contributions to the global mean forcing does not take into 
account the fact that the regional distributions of the 
radiative forcing due, for example, to greenhouse gases and 
sulphate aerosols, are quite different. Thus even if, by 
coincidence, the global mean forcing were to be zero, due to 
a fortuitous cancellation between global mean forcings of 
opposite signs, this must not be taken to imply the absence 
of regional or possibly even global scale climate change. 
It was also stressed in Section 4.7.1 of IPCC (1994) that 
different forcing mechanisms have different levels of 
confidence associated with them. The forcing due to the 
well-mixed greenhouse gases (COj, CH^, NjO and the 
CFCs) have the highest confidence, as they are based on 
well-characterised observations of the changes in gas 
concentration since pre-industrial times. On the other hand, 
estimates of the changes in concentrations of tropospheric 
ozone and tropospheric aerosols rely largely on model 
estimates which still have significant uncertainties. In 
Figure 2.16 the error bar indicates an estimate of the 
uncertainty range, based largely on the spread in the 
available literature; our subjective confidence that the 
actual forcing lies within this error bar is indicated by the 
"confidence level". 
Our estimates of the contributions to radiative forcing 
since pre-industrial times due to changes in the well-mixed 
greenhouse gases are unchanged from those given in IPCC 
(1994) (i.e., a total of 2.45 Wm^^); this remains the best 
determined radiative forcing. The estimates of the radiative 
forcing due to changes in ozone have also remained 
unchanged; these are 0.2 to 0.6 Wm^^ for tropospheric 
ozone and -0.1 Wm~2 (with a factor of 2 uncertainty) for 
stratospheric ozone. The most significant issue to be raised 
in work since IPCC (1994) concerns the consequences of 
stratospheric ozone depletion; the increased penetration of 
ultraviolet radiation into the troposphere may have a 
significant impact on tropospheric chemistry and a number 
of constituents of climatic relevance; as estimates of these 
effects are so preliminary, the IPCC (1994) forcing due to 
stratospheric ozone change, and the associated confidence 
level, are unaltered. 
There has been a slight reduction in the uncertainty 
associated with our estimate of the range of the direct 
radiative forcing due to sulphate aerosols; the forcing is 
now estimated to be -0.4 Wm~2, with a factor of two 
uncertainty. In Figure 2.16, the contributions of different 
aerosol types to the direct aerosol forcing have been 
separated for clarity, although, due to interaction between 
them, the total direct aerosol forcing may not be the sum of 
the individual components. The contribution of soot 
aerosols is given as -bO.l Wm"^ with an uncertainty range 
of at least a factor of 3, although our confidence in this 
value is very low. The contribution of biomass burning 
remains at the IPCC (1994) value, with a central value of 
-0.2 Wm-2 ^jjjj ^ factor of 3 uncertainty. Thus the total 
direct aerosol forcing is estimated to be -0.5 Wm-2 ^-^^^^ ^ 
factor of 2 uncertainty. 
The quantification of the effect of aerosols on cloud 
properties remains difficult. Although there have been 
further studies of the effect of aerosols on cloud properties 
(the indirect effect) the estimated range of 0 to -1.5 Wm-2 
proposed in IPCC (1994) has not been changed. Since our 
quantitative understanding of this process is so limited at 
present, no mid-range estimate is given. 
The estimate for the forcing due to changes in solar 
output since 1850 remains unchanged from the IPCC 
(1994) value of +0.1 to +0.5 Wm-2. The available 
evidence indicates that natural variations in the radiative 
forcing, due to volcanic eruptions and changes in solar 
output, may have been important in determining some of 
the decadal scale variations in global climate over the past 
150 years. Nevertheless, the cumulative radiative forcing 
due to human activity remains large compared to these and, 
on this evidence, this radiative forcing would be expected 
to have played a more significant role in determining the 
long-term trends in climate over the past 150 years. 
It was noted in IPCC (1994) that changes in surface 
albedo could, potentially, contribute to radiative forcing; 
because of the problems discussed in IPCC (1994), it is 
still not possible to produce a reliable quantification of the 
contribution. 
2.5 Trace Gas Radiative Forcing Indices 
2.5.1 Introduction 
Pohcymakers may need a means of estimating the relative 
radiative effects of various greenhouse gases. Chapter 5 of 
IPCC (1994) discussed in detail the current state of 
knowledge of trace gas radiative forcing indices used for 
this purpose. The definition and general limitations of a 
simple index were reviewed in Section 5.1 of that report. 
The choice of C O j as the reference molecule for 
calculations of the relative Global Warming Potential 
(GWP) and the resulting sensitivity of GWPs to incomplete 
knowledge of the response time of COj were the subjects 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
119 
of Section 5.2.1. The sensitivities of GWPs to possible 
changes in the future composition of the Earth's 
atmosphere (Section 5.2.2.1) and future water vapour and 
clouds (Section 5.2.2.2) were shown to be of order 20%. 
GWPs representing the direct radiative forcing of 38 
chemical species were given, including hydro-
fluorocarbons, hydrochlorofluorocarbons, chlorofluoro-
carbons, perfluorocarbons, NjO and CH4 (Section 5.2.4). 
The need to consider indirect effects on GWPs was also 
discussed (Section 5.2.5), and the indirect effects on the 
methane G W P were specifically estimated (Section 
5.2.5.2), A typical uncertainty of these GWPs is ±3 5 % 
relative to the COj reference. The product of GWP and 
estimated current emissions for primary greenhouse gases 
(one approximate measure of the commitment to future 
radiative forcing from contemporary emissions) was 
presented for selected gases (Section 5.2.6). Choices of 
time horizon and the use of GWPs in policy formation 
were also considered. 
In the short time since IPCC (1994) there have been a 
limited number of new scientific studies that expand upon 
knowledge of GWPs and their uncertainties; it is our goal 
to summarise briefly these new findings here. They pertain 
to three specific subjects: 
(i) 
net GWPs for ozone-depleting 
gases. In IPCC 
(1994), only the direct GWPs for ozone-depleting 
gases (i.e., "warming" or positive radiative forcing) 
were presented. This current update describes an 
estimate of the net (i.e., direct "warming" and 
indirect "cooling" or negative radiative forcing) 
GWPs and uncertainties for ozone-depleting gases. 
(ii) 
updated or new GWPs for a number of key species 
due to improved or new estimates of atmospheric 
lifetimes (Section 2.2) or relative radiative forcing 
per unit mass (Section 2.4). Three new gases have 
been added to the suite of GWP estimates presented 
below and the GWPs of several others have been 
improved. 
Table 2.8: Net GWPs per unit mass emission for halocarbons including indirect effects for time horizons from 1990 
(adapted from Daniel et al, 1995). 
Time Horizon = 2010 
Time Horizon = 2090 
(i.e., after 20 years) 
(i.e., after 100 years) 
Uncertainty in a 
Uncertainty in 
Direct 
Uncertainty in a 
Uncertainty in 
Direct 
cooling 
cooling 
compound 
min 
max 
min 
max 
min 
max 
min 
max 
CFC-11 
2100 
2900 
1200 
2900 
4900 
1300 
1700 
540 
2100 
3800 
CFC-12 
6400 
6800 
6000 
6800 
7800 
6600 
6800 
6200 
7100 
8100 
CFC-113 
3300 
3700 
2800 
3800 
4900 
3100 
3300 
2600 
3600 
4800 
HCFC-22 
3600 
3700 
3500 
3700 
4000 
1300 
1300 
1300 
1400 
1500 
HCFC-142b 
3700 
3800 
3600 
3800 
4100 
1600 
1700 
1600 
1700 
1800 
H-1301 
-97600 
-22700 
-31400 
-14100 
6100 
-85400 
-22400 
-30700 
-14100 
5400 
HCFC-141b 
920 
1200 
660 
1200 
1800 
270 
350 
170 
370 
600 
CH3CI3 
-710 
-420 
-1000 
-400 
300 
-220 
-140 
-320 
-130 
100 
CCI4 
-1500 
-550 
-2600 
-500 
1900 
-1500 
-1100 
-2400 
-650 
1400 
HCFC-123 
120 
170 
60 
170 
300 
30 
50 
20 
50 
90 
HCFC-124 
1300 
1400 
1300 
1400 
1500 
410 
420 
390 
430 
470 
The COj function from the Bern model was used for the decay function (slightly revised from IPCC (1994 ) as discussed in Section 2.1) 
and future concentrations of COj were assumed to be constant. Lifetimes for HCFCs and CH3CI3 are revised based upon new 
information on CH3CI3 calibration discussed in detail in Section 2.2. The effects of the uncertainties in the relative efficiency of 
bromine versus chlorine (a ) in ozone loss and in the magnitude of the ozone cooling are shown separately (see text). Direct GWPs 
are shown for comparison. 
120 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
(iii) expanded understanding 
of the difficulties 
in 
calculating GWPs for some chemicals. A number of 
new studies have explored some of the scientific 
challenges related to the chemical production of 
tropospheric ozone, which is a key factor in estimates 
of GWPs that include indirect effects for several 
trace gases. These challenges are briefly reviewed 
here regarding their implications for the calculation 
ofreUableGWPs. 
2.5.2 Net GWPs for Ozone-Depleting Gases 
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and halons effectively absorb 
infrared radiation, thereby contribuflng to the positive 
radiative forcing induced by greenhouse gases. However, 
their role in depleting stratospheric ozone also leads to a 
negative radiative forcing, particularly for ozone losses 
near the tropopause (Lacis et ai, 1990; Ramaswamy et al, 
1992). Ramaswamy et al. (1992) concluded that the 
globally averaged decrease in radiaüve forcing due to 
stratospheric ozone depletion including both infrared and 
solar effects 
represents an indirect effect that 
approximately balanced the globally averaged increase in 
direct radiative forcing due to halocarbons during the 
decade of the 1980s. Therefore, the net GWPs for ozone-
depleting gases should consider both direct and indirect 
terms, together with their inherent uncertainties. 
Daniel et al. (1995) estimated the indirect effects of 
ozone depletion upon the GWPs for halocarbons. They 
assumed that the indirect and direct radiative effects of 
halocarbons can be compared to one another in a globally 
averaged sense, an assumption that is being tested with 
two- and three-dimensional models (see Chapter 8 of 
WMO/UNEP, 1995; Chapter 4 of IPCC, 1994; Section 2.4 
of this report; Molnar et al, 1994). Daniel et al (1995) 
combined estimates of the negative radiative forcing due to 
ozone depletion for the 1980s with an evaluation of past 
and future ozone loss contributions for each halocarbon. 
They assumed that the indirect negative forcing for each 
halocarbon depends linearly upon its contribution to 
stratospheric active chlorine or bromine release and 
examined the net radiative forcing that can be attributed to 
each gas. The resulting net GWPs are, of course, smaller 
than the earlier values consisting of the direct (positive) 
component alone (e.g., IPCC, 1994). However, a primary 
conclusion of their study was that some gases, such as the 
CFCs, are likely still to be a net positive forcing agent, 
while for compounds such as the halons and CHjBr, the 
situation is reversed. This is due to the enhanced chemical 
effectiveness of brominated compounds compared to 
chlorinated species for ozone loss (see Chapter 13 of 
W M O / U N E P , 1995). Carbon tetrachloride (CCI4) and 
methyl chloroform (CH3CCI3), while not as effective as the 
bromocarbons for ozone destruction, contain several 
chlorine atoms per molecule and release them readily in the 
stratosphere, making them relatively effective ozone 
destroyers (and hence "cooling agents") as well. 
Insofar as significant ozone loss likely occurs only for 
stratospheric active chlorine levels above a certain 
threshold, the total negative radiative forcing caused by 
any halocarbon depends upon the abundances of others and 
cannot be specified independent of past abundances and 
future scenarios (see Daniel et al, 1995). This implies that 
GWPs for halocarbons based upon the indirect effects 
estimated for injection of an infinitesimally small amount 
of added gas cannot be used to calculate directly the total 
radiative impact of the true amount of that gas in the 
Earth's atmosphere; this limitation is similar to that for 
methane discussed in IPCC (1994). Further, the net GWPs 
for ozone depletors refer to an explicit period from a 
chosen start date (e.g., the present) to the end of the time 
horizon. 
Daniel et al. (1995) considered the 
following 
uncertainties in deriving the net GWPs for halocarbons: (i) 
likely variations in the scenario for future concentrations of 
ozone-depleting gases (from W M O / U N E P , 1995), (и) 
uncertainties in the globally averaged relative efficiency of 
bromine for ozone loss as compared to chlorine (a, 
assumed to lie between 40 and 200), and (iii) uncertainties 
in the magnitude of the cooling in the lower stratosphere 
due to uncertainties in the ozone loss profile (estimated by 
Schwarzkopf and Ramaswamy (1993) to be about ±30%). 
They found that the GWPs were not very sensitive to the 
adopted range of possible scenarios • for 
future 
concentrations of halocarbons nor to the exact values of the 
threshold assumed. However, the GWPs for bromocarbons 
were found to be extremely sensitive to the chosen value of 
a, while those for CFCs were quite sensitive to the adopted 
uncertainty in the negative radiative forcing in the 1980s. 
Table 2.8 shows the uncertainty range for net halocarbon 
GWPs over 20- and 100-year time horizons from these 
sensitivity studies and compares them to GWPs for the 
direct effect only (adapted from Daniel et al (1995) for the 
CO2 denominator used here; see Section 2.1). 
In addition to the indirect GWP component introduced 
by the ozone loss itself, there are other recognised indirect 
effects that may be associated with halocarbon GWPs. In 
the past year, several authors have noted that the impact of 
changing U V radiation due to ozone depletion upon OH 
and hence tropospheric chemistry could play a role in 
determining the total radiative cooling effect of ozone loss 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
121 
Table 2.9: Global Warming Potential {mass basis) referenced to the updated decay response for the adopted carbon cycle 
model (see Section 2.1) and future CO 2 atmospheric concentrations held constant at current levels. Typical uncertainties 
are about ±35%. 
Species 
Chemical 
Lifetime and 
Global Warming Potential 
formula 
reference 
20 years 
(Time Horizon) 
100 years 
500 years 
CO, 
CO2 
Bern model, 
revised 
1 
1 
1 
HFC-23 
CHF3 
264 (a) 
9100 
11,700 
9800 
HFC-32 
CH2F2 
5.6 (a) 
2100 
650 
200 
HFC-41 
CH3F 
3.7 (a) 
490 
150 
45 
HFC-43-lOmee 
17.1 (a) 
3000 
1,300 
400 
HFC-125 
C2HF5 
32.6 (a) 
4600 
2,800 
920 
HFC-134 
C2H2F4 
10.6 (a) 
2900 
1,000 
310 
HFC-134a 
CH2FCF3 
14.6 (a) 
3400 
1,300 
420 
HFC-152a 
C2H4F2 
1.5 (a) 
460 
140 
42 
HFC-143 
C2H3F3 
3.8(a) 
1000 
300 
94 
HFC-143a 
C2H3F3 
48.3 (a) 
5000 
3800 
1400 
HFC-227ea 
C3HF7 
36.5 (a) 
4300 
2900 
950 
HFC-236fa 
C3H2F, 
209 (a) 
5100 
6300 
4700 
HFC-245ca 
C3H3F5 
6.6 (a) 
1800 
560 
170 
Chloroform 
CHClj 
0.51 (a) 
14 
4 
1 
Methylene chloride 
CH2C12 
0.46 (a) 
31 
9 
3 
Sulphur hexafluoride 
SF6 
3200 (b) 
16300 
23900 
34900 
Perfluoromethane 
CF4 
50000 (b) 
4400 
6500 
10000 
Perfluoroethane 
C2F6 
10000 (b) 
6200 
9200 
14000 
Perfluoropropane 
C3F8 
2600 (b) 
4800 
7000 
10100 
Perfluorobutane 
'-'4F10 
2600 (b) 
4800 
7000 
10100 
Perfluoropentane 
C5F12 
4100 (b) 
5100 
7500 
11000 
Perfluorohexane 
CfiFu 
3200 (b) 
5000 
7400 
10700 
Perfluorocyclobutane 
C-C4F8 
3200 (b) 
6000 
8700 
12700 
Methane** 
CH4 
12.2+3 (a) 
56 
21 
6.5 
Nitrous oxide 
N2O 
120 (c) 
280 
310 
170 
Trifluoroiodomethane 
CF3I 
<0.005 (c) 
<3 
<1 
<1 
**The GWP for methane includes indirect effects of tropospheric ozone production and stratospheric water vapour production, as in 
IPCC (1994). The updated adjustment time for methane is taken from the discussion in Section 2.2 of this report. 
(a) Based upon the revised CH3CI3 lifetime from Prinn et al. (1995b) and updated chemical kinetic data where appropriate from 
JPL(1994), see Section 2.2 and Table 2.2. Also includes updated information relating to radiative forcing per molecule from 
Section 2.4 based upon Pinnock et al. (1995), where appropriate. 
(b) See Section 2.4 and Roehl et al. (1995) for discussion of radiative forcing per molecule for these gases. Lifetimes as in IPCC 
(1994). 
(c) As in IPCC (1994). 
122 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
(see, e.g., Bekki et al. 1994 and Toumi et al, 1994) and 
hence would be a factor in the magnitude of halocarbon 
GWPs. The magnitudes of the negative radiative forcing 
associated with these newly identified mechanisms are 
currently considered quite uncertain (particularly that 
related to the OH role in indirect aerosol formation, see 
Section 2.4 of this report and Rodhe and Crutzen (1995)). 
Enhanced negative radiative forcing would also be 
associated with the large changes in ozone inferred from 
some satellite measurements near the tropical tropopause 
(see Chapter 1 of WMO/UNEP, 1995). These currently ill-
quantified processes were not considered by Daniel et al. 
(1995) and are not included here. All of them would act to 
decrease the net halocarbon GWPs if they prove to be 
significant. 
If improved understanding shows that the ozone 
depletion-related negative radiative forcing is larger than 
currently estimated, it would tend to reduce the GWPs for 
all ozone-depleting gases. However, this would not change 
the general conclusions regarding relative GWPs of ozone-
depletors as indicated in Table 2.8. For example, if the 
magnitude of negative radiative forcing associated with 
ozone loss were to prove to be larger by a factor of two 
(see Toumi et al, 1994), it would imply that the net GWPs 
for halons would become even more negative, that for 
CFC-11 would be clo.se to zero, and that for CFC-12 would 
be reduced, but would still be positive. On the other hand, 
some studies suggest that the direct radiative forcings per 
molecule of halocarbons may be about 20% larger than 
current estimates (see Pinnock et al, 1995). If the direct 
radiative forcings per molecule of halocarbons have indeed 
been underestimated by this amount, the net GWPs for 
halocarbons would increase. In no case would the increase 
in GWP exceed the increase in direct forcing, but would be 
considerably smaller for those gases (such as halons) with 
large negative contributions. The uncertainties in positive 
radiative forcing contributions are presently thought to be 
smaller than those relating to negative radiative forcing 
described above. The numbers presented in Table 2.8 
should be considered illustrative of the relative values of 
GWPs among ozone-depleting gases, but their absolute 
magnitudes are presently subject to considerable 
quantitative uncertainties (at least ±50%). Current 
scientific evidence suggests that they are unlikely to be 
very much more positive than the values indicated, but 
could be more negative. 
2.5.3 Updated GWPs For Other Gases 
As was the practice in IPCC (1994), the same relative 
radiative forcings per unit mass are used for both the 
radiative forcing estimates of Section 2.4 and the GWPs 
presented here; they are summarised in Table 2.7 (Section 
2.4.1.1). Note that overlapping absorptions are included 
(see Section 2.4 and IPCC, 1994). Sensitivities to possible 
future changes in COj, water vapour and clouds were 
shown to be of order ±20% in IPCC (1994). Since IPCC 
(1994), the molecular parameters for CF^, C2Fg, CjF^, 
C4F1Q, C5Fj2, and CgFj4 were reported in a consistent 
study by Roehl et al. (1995) and are considered the most 
appropriate to use now. In addition, Pinnock et al. (1995) 
presented a detailed and consistent laboratory and radiative 
transfer study of the radiative forcing per unit mass of a 
number of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs). Improved radiative 
forcings per unit mass for HFC-32 and HFC-236fa are 
available from that work, and the forcing for HFC-41 was 
presented for the first time. Table 2.9 presents the resulting 
updates and additions. 
The indirect contributions to the methane GWP due to 
tropospheric ozone and stratospheric water vapour 
production are included here, and the best estimate of the 
contributions to the total methane GWP from those sources 
remain the same as in IPCC (1994). The decay response for 
CO2 has also been re-evaluated to refine the representation 
of the carbon cycle in Section 2.1. As in IPCC (1994), the 
decay response of the Bern carbon cycle model is used here 
for GWP calculations. Lifetimes are taken from Section 2.2 
(Table 2.2) and include updated kinetic rate constants as 
well as lifetimes for methyl chloroform and related gases 
based on the study of Prinn et al. (1995b). 
2.5.4 Recent Studies Relating to the Ùhallenges in 
Calculating GWPs for Some Chemical Species 
GWPs are simple, globally averaged indices with many 
limitations, as emphasised in Chapters 2 and 5 of IPCC 
(1994). As noted, key factors in GWP calculations include 
atmospheric lifetimes and distributions, as well as radiative 
properties. For a gas whose chemical lifetime is shorter 
than the time-scale for mixing in the troposphere (order of 
months within a hemisphere and a year globally), the 
distribution (and in turn, the chemical lifetime) can be 
strongly sensitive to local sources, sinks and transport. 
Current models are limited in their ability to reproduce 
faithfully the global transport and chemistry of short-lived 
gases in the troposphere, in part because of difficulties in 
representing physical and chemical processes occurring on 
relatively small spatial scales compared to the model 
resolution. These processes include the vertical transport 
due to deep convection (as shown by the ^^-^Rn model 
intercomparison described in Chapter 2 of IPCC (1994)) 
and boundary layer chemistry and transport. Accurate 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
123 
representation of precipitation and liquid phase chemistry 
associated with clouds and rain also represent major 
challenges for two- and three-dimensional global models. 
In addition, aerosol optical effects on radiative forcing are 
spatially variable, insofar as they depend upon factors such 
as surface albedo. Due to these and other limitations (see 
Section 2.3 and Chapter 3 of IPCC (1994)), GWPs for the 
short-lived sulphur gases that are thought to contribute to 
negative radiative forcing through aerosol formation cannot 
be estimated with confidence at present and therefore were 
included neither in IPCC (1994) nor are they in this 
assessment. 
Several anthropogenic gases are believed to contribute to 
the chemical production of tropospheric ozone which is 
central in the calculation of many of the indirect 
components of GWPs. Tropospheric ozone is a radiatively 
important gas (particularly in the upper troposphere), and 
there is evidence that its abundance has increased 
significantly in the past century in many locations because 
of human activities (see IPCC, 1994; Derwent, 1994). 
Emissions of nitrogen oxides (N0^^), non-methane 
hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and methane are believed 
to play prominent roles in such trends. It would be highly 
desirable to determine the indirect GWPs associated with 
ozone production for these gases. However, with the 
important exception of methane, all of these compounds 
have very short atmospheric lifetimes of days or months, 
making confidence in model calculations of their spatial 
distributions and source/sink relationships considerably 
lower than those for long-Uved gases (IPCC, 1994). The 
chemical production of tropospheric ozone and oxidative 
properties of the atmosphere are strongly sensitive to the 
NOjj abundance and emission rates; some authors have 
discussed these chemical non-hnearities in detail (see e.g., 
Liu et ai, 1987; Sillman et al, 1990; Thompson, 1992; 
Kleinman, 1994). The impact of emissions of short-lived 
gases upon the radiative forcing due to tropospheric ozone 
changes depends upon factors including the location of the 
emission and model-calculated OH and N0,^ distributions, 
which in turn depend upon the uncertain convection, 
boundary layer, and chemical processes discussed above. 
A number of recent studies have examined the 
sensitivity of tropospheric ozone production to emissions 
of short-lived gases using a range of models of varying 
resolution and illustrate the challenge of calculating GWPs 
for such gases. We briefly review their findings here. 
Thompson et al. (1994) examined the regional budget of 
carbon monoxide over the central USA and its role in 
ozone production using a detailed high-resolution model 
including deep convection based upon direct cloud 
observations. They concluded that deep convection over 
the central USA acts as a "chimney" for transport of carbon 
monoxide and other ozone precursors to the free 
troposphere and they estimated a gross production of ozone 
in the free troposphere of about 1 Gmoi/day due to carbon 
monoxide transport and subsequent chemistry. Jacob et al. 
(1993a,b) used a continental-scale photochemical model 
including a subgrid nested scheme to arrive at a similar 
value of 1.2 Gmol/day (see the discussion of Jacob et al. in 
Thompson et al, 1994). Jacob et al. (1993b) also found 
that direct export of ozone produced at low altitudes by 
pollution in the USA accounted for about 4.3 Gmol/day 
while N0,^ export led to about 4.0 Gmol/day of free 
tropospheric ozone increase. All of these processes could 
contribute significantly to the hemispheric ozone budget as 
evidenced by comparison with the cross-tropopause 
transport of ozone over the entire Northern Hemisphere in 
summer of about 18-28 Gmol/day estimated by Jacob et al. 
(1993b). The studies of Jacob et al. ( 1993a,b) and 
Thompson et al. (1994) taken together underline the 
importance of convection and suggest that models with 
sufficient resolution and representation of physical 
processes may be able to predict key elements of 
tropospheric chemistry. Studies of other regions such as 
Europe and Asia (e.g., Berntsen et al, 1996) show similar 
results. However, these model studies are constrained only 
by limited observations, and liquid phase chemistry in 
clouds is also important for some gases, (e.g., Lelieveld 
and Crutzen, 1994). Hence their uncertainties remain large. 
Sensitivity studies show some of the non-linearities 
involved in ozone formation. Jacob et al. (1993b) found 
that reducing N0^ emissions by 50% from 1985 levels 
would reduce rural ozone concentrations over the eastern 
USA by about 15%, while reducing hydrocarbon emissions 
by 50% would have less than a 4% effect except in the 
largest urban plumes. Strand and Hov (1994) presented a 
global two-dimensional chemistry transport model that 
includes a parameterized treatment of convection (Strand 
and Hov, 1993). These authors found that a global 50% 
reduction in anthropogenic nitrogen oxide emissions led to 
about twice as large a reduction in ozone production as the 
same reduction in emissions of anthropogenic volatile 
organic compounds. While the findings of Strand and Hov 
(1994) are qualitatively similar to those reported by Jacob 
et al. (1993b), the differences between them direcfly 
illustrate the difficulty of quantitative estimation of global 
GWPs for such gases. 
In contrast, the much longer lifetime of methane (in 
excess of several years) leads to a nearly well-mixed global 
tropospheric distribution and a lesser dependence of its 
124 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
GWP upon these factors. Further, much of the chemical 
destruction of methane occurs in relatively clean regions in 
the tropics, improving confidence in the calculation of the 
methane adjustment time and ozone effects as compared to 
more short-lived gases (Chapter 2 of IPCC, 1994). 
Accordingly, the indirect GWP for methane was deemed 
estimatable in IPCC (1994), but not those for much shorter 
lived gases. 
References 
Ackerman, T.P. and O.B. Toon, 1981: Absorption of visible 
radiation in atmosphere containing mixtures of absorbing and 
nonabsorbing particles. Appl. Opt., 20, 3661-3668. 
AFEAS (Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability 
Study), 1995: Historic Production, Sales and 
Atmospheric 
Release of HCFC-142b, SPA-AFEAS, Washington, DC, USA, 
pp. 1-14. 
Alcamo, J., A. Bouwman, J. Edmonds, A. Griibler, T. Morita and 
A. Sugandhy, 1995: An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission 
Scenarios. In: Climate Change ¡994: Radiative Forcing of 
Climate Change and An Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission 
Scenarios., 
J.T. Houghton, L . G . Meira Filho, J. Bruce, 
Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N . Harris and K. 
Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Alkezweeny, A . J . , D. Burrows and C. Grainger, 1993: 
Measurements of cloud-droplet size distributions in polluted 
and unpolluted stratiform clouds. /. Appl. Met., 32, 106-115. 
Anderson, T.L., R.J. Charlson, W.H. White and P.H. McMurry, 
1994: Comment on "Light scattering and cloud condensation 
nucleus activity of sulfate aerosol measured over the Northeast 
Atlantic Ocean" by D.A. Hegg et ai, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 
25947-25949. 
Andreae, M.O., 1995: Climate effects of changing atmospheric 
aerosol levels. In: Future Climate of the World: A modelling 
perspective, 
World Survey and Climatology, 
Vol.XVI., 
A. 
Henderson-Sellers (ed.)., Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
Bacastow, R.B., 1976: Modulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide 
by the Southern Oscillation. Nature, 261, 116-118. 
Bakwin, P., P. Tans and P. NovelU, 1994: Carbon monoxide 
budget in the Northern Hemisphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 
433-436. 
Barrett, J., 1995: The roles of carbon dioxide and water vapour 
in 
warming and cooling the 
Earth's 
troposphere. 
Spectrochimica Acta, 51A, 415-417. 
Bekki, S., K . S . Law and J.A. Pyle, 1994: Effects of ozone 
depletion on atmospheric CH^ and CO concentrations. Nature, 
371, 595-597. 
Berntsen, T., I.S.A. Isaksen, W.C. Wang and X.Z. Liang, 1996: 
Impacts from increased anthropogenic sources in Asia on 
tropospheric ozone and climate: A global 3-D model study. 
Tellus, (In press). 
Blake, D.R. and F.S. Rowland, 1988: Continuing woridwide 
increase in tropospheric methane, 1978-1987. Science, 239, 
1129-1131. 
Blanchet, J.P., 1982: Application of Chandrasekhar mean to 
aerosol optical properties. Atmosphere-Ocean, 20, 189-206. 
Bloomfield, P, 1994: Inferred lifetimes. In: NASA Report on 
Concentrations, Lifetimes and Trends of CFCs, Halons and 
Related Species, J. Kaye, S. Penkett and F. Ormond (eds.), 
N A S A Reference Report No. 1339, 3.1-3.23. 
Boden, T.A., R.J. Sepanski and F.W. Stoss, 1991: Trends '91: A 
compendium of data on global change. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, 
ORNUCDIAC-46. 
Boers, R., G.P. Ayers and J.L. Gras, 1994: Coherence between 
the seasonal variation in satellite derived cloud optical depth 
and boundary layer C C N concentrations at a mid-latitude 
southern hemisphere station. Tellus, 46B, 123-131. 
Boucher, O., 1995: G C M estimate of the indirect aerosol forcing 
using satellite-retrieved cloud droplet effective radii. J. 
Climate, 8, 1403-1409. 
Boucher, O. and T.L. Anderson, 1995: G C M assessment of the 
sensitivity of direct climate forcing by anthropogenic sulfate 
aerosols to aerosol size and chemistry. J. Geophys. Res. 100, 
26061-26092. 
Boucher, O. and U . Lohmann, 1995: The sulfate-CCN-cloud 
albedo effect. A sensitivity study with two general circulation 
models. TeUus, 47B, 281-300. 
Boucher, O., H. Le Treut and M.B. Baker, 1995: Precipitation 
and radiation modelling in a G C M : Introduction of cloud 
microphysical processes./. Geophys. Res. 100, 1639.5-16414. 
Bouwman, A . , K . van der Hoek and J. Olivier, 1995; 
Uncertainties in the global source distribution of nitrous oxide. 
/. Geophys. Res., 100, 2785-2800. 
Broecker, W.S. and T.-H. Peng, 1994: Stratospheric contribution 
to the global bomb radiocarbon invemtory: Model vs. 
observation. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 377-384. 
Broecker, W.S., T.-H. Peng and R. Engh, 1980; Modelling the 
carbon system. Radiocarbon, 22, 565-598. 
Broecker, W.S., T.-H. Peng, G. Ostlund and M . Stuiver, 1985; 
The distribution of bomb radiocarbon in the ocean. /. Geophys. 
Res., 90, 6953-6970. 
Broecker, W.S., S. Suthedand, W. Smethie, T.-H. Peng and G. 
Oestlund, 1995; Oceanic radiocai'bon; Separation of the natural 
and bomb components. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 
9, 
263-288. 
Butler, J., 1994; The potential role of the ocean in regulating 
atmospheric methyl bromide. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 185-188. 
Butler, J., J. Elkins, B. Hall, S. Cummings and S. Montzka, 1992: 
A decrease in the growth rates of atmospheric halon 
concentrations. Nature, 359, 403^05. 
Buder, J., J. Elkins, B. Hall, S. Montzka, S. Cummings, P. Fraser 
and L. Porter, 1994: Recent trends in the global atmospheric 
mixing ratios of halon-1301 and halon-1211. In; Baseline 91, 
A . 
Dick 
and 
J. 
Gras 
(eds.), 
29-32, 
Bureau 
of 
Meteorology/CSIRO. 
Chameides, W.L., P.S. Kasibhatala, J. Yienger and H. Levy II, 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
125 
1994; Growth of continental-scale metro-agro-plexes, regional 
ozone pollution and world food production. Science, 
264, 
74-77. 
Chappellaz, J., J.M. Barnola, D. Raynaud, Y.S. Korotkevich and 
C. Lorius, 1990: Ice-core record of atmospheric methane over 
the past 160,000 years. Nature, 345, 127-131. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langner and H. Rodhe, 1990; Sulfate aerosol 
and climate. Nature, 348, 22. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langner, H . Rodhe, C.B. Leovy and S.G. 
Warren, 1991: Perturbation of the northern hemisphere 
radiative balance by backscattering from anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols. Tellus, 43A-B, 152-163. 
Charlson, R. J., S.E. Schwartz, J.M. Hales, R.D. Cess, J.A. 
Coakley Jr., J.E. Hansen and D.J. Hoffman, 1992: Climate 
forcing by anthropogenic aerosols. Science, 255, 423-430. 
Chuang, C.C. and J.E. Penner, 1995: A study of the relationship 
between anthropogenic sulfate and cloud droplet nucleation. 
Preprints, AMS Conf. on Cloud Physics, Dallas, January 1995, 
pp. 493^97. 
Chuang, C . C , J.E. Penner, K.E. Taylor and J.J. Walton, 1994; 
Climate effects of anthropogenic sulfate; simulation from a 
coupled chemistry, climate model. Preprints of the Conference 
on Atmospheric 
Chemistry, Nashville, Tennessee, January 
1994, American Meteorological Society, Boston USA, pp. 
170-174. 
Chylek, P. and J. Hallett, 1992; Enhanced absorption of solar 
radiation by cloud droplets containing soot particles in their 
surface. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 118, 167-172. 
Chylek, P. and J. Wong, 1995; Effect of absorbing aerosols on 
global radiation budget. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 929-931. 
Chylek, P., V . Ramaswamy, R. Pinnick and R. Cheng, 1981: 
Optical properties and mass concentration of carbonaceous 
aerosols. Appl. Opt., 20, 2980-2985. 
Chylek, P., V. Ramaswamy and R.J. Cheng, 1984; Effect of graphitic 
carbon on the albedo of clouds. J. Atmos. ScL, 41, 3076-3084. 
Chylek, P., G. Videen, D. Ngo, R.G. Pinnick and J.D. Klett, 
1995; Effect of black carbon on the optical properties and 
climate forcing of sulfate aerosols. /. Geophys. Res., 100, 
16325-16332. 
Ciais, P., P.P. Tans, J.W.C. White, M . Trolier, R.J. Francey, J.A. 
Berry, D.R. Randall, P.J. Sellers, J.G. CoUatz and D.S. 
Schimel, 1995a; Partitioning of ocean and land uptake of C O , 
as inferred by S'^C measurements from the N O A A Climate 
Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory Global Air Sampling 
Network. J. Geophys. Res., lOOD, 5051-5070. 
Ciais, P., P.P. Tans, M . Trolier, J.W.C. White and R.J. Francey, 
1995b; A large northern hemisphere terrestrial C O j sink 
indicated by ' ^ C / ' ^ C of atmospheric C O j . Science, 
269, 
1098-1102. 
Conway, T.J., P.P. Tans, L.S. Waterman, K.W. Thoning, D.R. 
Buanerkitzis, K.A. Maserie and N . Zhang, 1994; Evidence for 
interannual variability of the carbon cycle from the 
N O A A / C M D L global air sampling network. /. Geophys. Res., 
99D, 22831-22855. 
Cooke, W.F. and J.J.N. Wilson, 1996: A global black carbon 
aerosol model. J. Geophys. Res. (submitted). 
Cooper, D.L., T.P. Cunningham, N.L.Allan and A. McCuUoch, 
1992: Tropospheric lifetimes of potential CFC replacements -
rate co-efficients for reaction with the hydroxyl radical. Atmos. 
Env. 26A, 1331-1334. 
Cunnold, D., P. Fraser, R. Weiss, R. Prinn, P. Simmonds, B. 
Miller, F. Alyea and A. Crawford, 1994: Global trends and 
annual releases of CFC-11 and -12 estimated from A L E / G A G E 
and other measurements from July 1978 to June 1991. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 1107-1126. 
Daniel, J., S. Solomon and D. Albritton, 1995: On the evaluation 
of halocarbon radiative forcing and global warming potentials. 
/. Geopliys. Res., 100, 1271-1285. 
Danielson, R.E., D.R. Moore and H.C. Van de Hulst, 1969; The 
transfer of visible radiation through clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 26, 
1078-1087, 
Derwent, R, 1994: The estimation of global warming potentials for 
a range of radiatively active gases. In: Non-C02 
Greenhouse 
Gases, J, van Ham, L,J,H,M, Janssen and R,J, Swart, (eds,), 
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp, 289-299, 
Derwent, R,G,, 1996: The influence of human activities on the 
distribution of hydroxyl radicals in the troposphere, Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Land., A, 354, 1-30, 
Derwent, R„ P, Simmonds and W, Collins, 1994; Ozone and 
carbon monoxide measurements at a remote maritime location. 
Mace Head, Ireland, from 1990 to 1992. Atmos. Env., 28, 
2623-2637. 
Diederen, H.S.M.A., R. Guicherit and J.C.T. Hollander, 1985; 
Visibility reduction by air pollution in the Netherlands. Atmos. 
Env., 19, 377-383. 
Dignon, J. and S. Hameed, 1989; Global emissions of nitrogen 
and sulfur oxides from 1860 to 1980. JAPCA, 39, 180-186. 
Dignon, J. and S. Hameed, 1992: Emission of nitrogen oxides and 
sulfur oxides from the former Soviet Union. Ambio, 
21, 
481-482. 
Dlugokencky, E., P. Lang and K . Masarle, 1994a: Flask 
measurements of methane. In: CMDL No. 22 Summary Report 
1993, J. Peterson and R.Rossen, (eds.), U.S. Department of 
Commerce/NOAA/ERL, 22-24. 
Dlugokencky, E.J., K.A. Masarle, P.M. Lang, P.P. Tans, L.P. 
Steele and E.G. Nisbet, 1994b; A dramatic decrease in the 
growth rate of atinospheric methane in the Northern 
Hemisphere during 1992. Geophys. Res. Lett, 21, 45^8. 
Dlugokencky, E.J., L.P. Steele, P.M. Lang and K.A. Masarie, 
1994c; The growth rate and distribution of atmospheric 
methane. /. Geopliys. Ре.ч., 99, 17021-17043. 
Ehhalt, D.E. and F. Rohrer, 1994; The impact of commercial 
aircraft on tropospheric ozone, Proc. 7th Priestley Conference, 
24-27 June 1994, Lewisburg, Pennsylvania. 
Elkins, J., T. Thompson, T. Swanson, J. Butler, B. Hall, S. 
Cummings, D. Fisher and A. Raffo, 1993; Decrease in the 
growth rates of atmospheric chlorofluorocarbons-11 and -12. 
Nature, 364, 780-783. 
126 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Elkins. J., J. Butler, S. Montzka, R. Myers, T. Baring, S. 
Cummings, G. Dutton, J. Giliga, A. Hayden, J. Lobert, T. 
Swanson, D. Hurst and C. Volk, 1994: Nitrous Oxide and 
Halocarbon Division Report. In: CMDL No. 22 Summary 
Report 1993. J. Peterson and R.Rossen (eds.) US Department 
of Commerce/NOAA/ERL, pp. 72-91. 
Enting, I.G., 1995: Analysing the conflicting requirements of the 
framework convention on climate change. Climatic Change, 
3L5-18. 
Enting, I.G., T.M.L. Wigley and M . Heimann, 1994: Future 
emissions and concentrations of carbon dioxide: Key 
ocean/atmosphere/land 
analyses. CSIRO 
Division 
of 
Atmospheric Research Technical Paper No. 31, 120 pp. 
Eswaran, H., E. Van den Berg and P. Reich, 1993: Organic 
carbon in soils of the world. Soil Sci. Soc. America J., 57. 
192-194. 
Evans, W.F.J, and E. Puckrin, 1995: An observation of the 
greenhouse radiation associated with carbon monoxide. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, 22, 925-928. 
Feely, R.F., R. Wanninkhof, C E . Cosca, P.P. Murphy, M.F. 
Lamb and M . D . Steckley, 1995: C O j distributions in the 
equatorial Pacific during the 1991-92 ENSO event. Deep-Sea 
Research II, 42, 365-386. 
Feichter, J., E. Kjellstrom, H. Rodhe, F. Dentener, J. Lelieveld 
and G-J. Roelofs, 1996: Simulation of the tropospheric sulfur 
cycle in a global climate model. Atmos. Env., (In press). 
Fisher, D. and P. Midgley, 1994: Uncertainties in the calculation 
of atmospheric releases of chlorofluorocarbons. J. Geophys. 
Res., 99, 16643-16650. 
Foukal, P., 1994a: Stellar luminosity variations and global 
warming. Science, 247, 556-558. 
Foukal, P., 1994b: Response to Radick (1994). Science, 266, 
1073. 
Francey, R.J., P.P. Tans, C E . Allison, I.G. Enting, J.W.C. White 
and M . Trolier, 1995: Changes in oceanic and terrestrial carbon 
uptake since 1982. Nature, 373, 326-330. 
Fraser, P., S. Penkett, M . Gunson, R. Weiss and F.S. Rowland, 
1994: Measurements. In: Concentrations, Lifetimes and Trends 
of CFCs, Halons and Related species, J. Kaye, S. Penkett and 
F. Ormond (eds.), N A S A Report No. 1339, pp. 1.1-1.68. 
Fuglestvedt, J.S., I.E. Jonson and I.S.A. Isaksen, 1994: Effects of 
reduction in stratospheric ozone on tropospheric chemistry 
through changes in photolysis rates. Tellus, 46B, 172-192. 
Goody, R . M . and Y . L . Yung, 1989: Atmospheric 
Radiation. 
Oxford University Press. 
Graedel, Т.Е., D. Cariolle, M.A. Geller, J.L. Kerrebrock, D.H. 
Lister, K . Mauersberger, S.A. Penkett, U . Schmidt, S.E. 
Schwartz and S. Solomon, 1994: Atmospheric 
Effects of 
Stratospheric 
Aircraft, 
an evaluation 
of NASA's 
interim 
assessment. National Academy Press, Washington DC, USA. 
Han, Q., W.B. Rossow and A.A. Lacis, 1994: Near-global survey 
of effective droplet radii in liquid water clouds using ISCCP 
data. /. Climate, 7, 465-^97. 
Hansen, J., A . Lacis, R. Ruedy and M . Sato, 1992: Potential 
climate impact of Mt. Pinatubo eruption. Geophys. Res. Lett, 
19,215-218. 
Hansen, J., M . Sato. R. Ruedy, A . Lacis, К, Asamoah, S. 
Borenstein, E. Brown, B. Cairns, G. Caliri, M . Campbell, B. 
Cun-an, S. de Castro, L. Druyan, M . Fox, C. Johnson, J. Lerner, 
M.P. McCormick, R. Miller, P. Minnis, A . Morrison, L. 
Pandolfo, I. Ramberran, F. Zaucker, M . Robinson, P. Russell, 
K. Shah, P. Stone, I. Tegen, L , Thomason, J. Wilder and H. 
Wilson, 1996: A Pinatubo climate modelling investigation. To 
appear in The Effects of Mt. Pinatubo on the Atmosphere and 
Climate, NATO ASI Seies Volume, Subseries I, 
"Global 
Environmental 
Change, G. Fiocco, D. Fua and G. Visconti 
(eds.), Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
Harris, N.R.P., G. Ancellet, L. Bishop, D.J. Hofmann, J.B. Kerr, 
R.D. McPeters, M , Préndez, W. Randel, J. Staehelin, B.H. 
Subbaraya, A. Volz-Thomas, J.M. Zawodny and C S . Zerefos, 
1995: Ozone Measurements. In: Scientific Assessment of Ozone 
Depletion: 
1994, Global Ozone Research and 
Monitoring 
Project Report No. 37, World Meteorological Organisation, 
Geneva, pp. 1.1-1.54. 
Harrison, K., W. Broecker and G. Bonani, 1993: A strategy for 
estimating the impact of CO^ fertilisation on soil carbon 
storage. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 69-80. 
Hauglustaine, D.A., С Granier, G.P. Brasseur and G. Megie, 
1994: Impact of present aircraft emissions of nitrogen oxides 
on tropospheric ozone and climate forcing. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
21,2031-2034. 
Hayasaka, T., M . Kuji and M . Tanaka, 1994: Air truth validation 
of cloud albedo estimated from N O A A advanced very high 
resolution radiometer data. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 18685-18694. 
Haywood, J . M . and K . P . Shine, 1995: The effect of 
anthropogenic sulfate and soot aerosol on the clear sky 
planetary radiation budget, Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 603-606. 
Hegg, D.A., R.J. Ferek and P.V. Hobbs, 1993: Light scattering 
and cloud condensation nucleus activity of sulfate aerosol 
measured over the Northeast Atlantic Ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 
98, 14887-14894. 
Hegg, D.A., R.J. Ferek and P.V. Hobbs, 1994: Reply to comment 
by Anderson etal. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 25951-25954. 
Heintzenberg, J., 1978: Light scattering parameters of internal 
and external mixtures of soot and non-absorbing material in 
atmospheric aerosols. Proc. Conf. on Carbonaceous Particles 
in the Atmosphere, Berkeley, California, 1978, pp. 278-281. 
Hesshaimer, V., M . Heimann and I. Levin, 1994: Radiocarbon 
evidence suggesting a smaller oceanic CO2 sink than hitherto 
assumed. Nature, 370, 201-203. 
Hindman, E.E. and R. Bodowski, 1994: A marine stratus layer 
modified by ship-produced C C N and updrafts. Preprints, 6th 
WMO Scientific Conference on Weather Modification, Sienna. 
Hindman, E.E„ W . M . Porch, J.G. Hudson and P.A. Durkee, 
1995: Ship-produced cloud lines of 13 July 1991. Atmos. Env., 
28, 3393-3403. 
Hogan, K . and R. Harriss, 1994: Comment on " A dramatic 
decrease in the growth rate of atmospheric methane in the 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
127 
Northern Hemisphere during 1992" by E. J. Dlugokencky et al. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2445-2446. 
Hoyt, D.V. and K.H. Schatten, 1993: A discussion of plausible 
solar irradiance variations, 1700-1992. /. Geophys. Res., 98 
( A l l ) , 18895-18906. 
INPE, 1992: Deforestation 
in Brazilian Amazonia. 
Instituto 
Nacional de Pesquisas Especiáis, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B . A . 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1994: CUmate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of 
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC ¡S92 Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B.A. Callander, E.F. Haites, N . Harris and K. Maskell 
(eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Irion, F., M . Brown, G. Toon and M . Gunson, 1994: Increase in 
atmospheric H C F C - 2 2 over southern California from 
1985-1990. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 1723-1726. 
Jacob, D.J., J.A. Logan, R . M . Yevich, G . M . Gardner, C M . 
Spivakovsky, S.C. Wofsy, J.W. Munger, S. Sillman, M.J. 
Prather, M.O. Rodgers, H. Westberg and P.R. Zimmerman, 
1993a: Simulation of summertime ozone over North America. 
/ Geophys. Res., 98, 14797-14816. 
Jacob, D.J., J.A. Logan, G . M . Gardner, R . M . Yevich, C M . 
Spivakovsky, S.C. Wofsy, S. Sillman and M.J. Prather, 1993b: 
Factors regulating ozone over the United States and its export 
to the global atmosphere. J. Geopliys. Res., 98, 14817-14826. 
Jager, H., O. Uchino, T. Nagai, T. Fujimoto, V. Freudenthaler 
and F. Homburg, 1995: Ground-based remote sensing of the 
decay of the Pinatubo eruption cloud at 3 northern hemispheric 
sites. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 607-610. 
Jain, A.K., H.S. Kheshgi, M.I. Hoffert and D.J. Wuebbles, 1995: 
Distribution of radiocarbon as a test of global carbon cycle 
models. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 9, 153-166. 
Jensen, E.J. and O.B. Toon, 1994: Ice nucleation in the upper 
troposphere: sensitivity to aerosol number density, temperature, 
and cooling rate. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2019-2022. 
Jonas, P.R., R.J. Charison and H . Rodhe, 1995: Aerosols. In: 
Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of CUmate Change 
and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios, J.T. 
Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. 
Callander. E. Haites, N . Harris and K . Maskell (eds). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Jones, A., D.L. Roberts and A. Slingo, 1994: A climate model 
study of the indirect radiative forcing by anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols. Nature, 370, 450-453. 
Joos, F., M . Bruno, R. Fink, U . Siegenthaler, T. Stocker, С. Le 
Quéré and J.L. Sarmiento, 1996: An efficient and accurate 
representation of complex oceanic and biospheric models of 
anthropogenic carbon uptake. Tellus (In press). 
JPL, 1994: Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for Use in 
Stratospheric Modelling, Jet Propulsion Laboratory report 
94-26. 
Kaduk, J. and M . Heimann, 1994: The climate sensitivity of the 
Osnabrilck Biosphere Model on the E N S O timescale. 
Ecological Modelling, 75/76, 239-256. 
Keeling, C D . , S.C. Piper and M . Heimann, 1989a: A three-
dimensional model of atmospheric COj transport based on 
observed winds: 4. Mean annual gradients and interannual 
variations. In; Aspects of CUmate VariabUity in the Pacific and 
Western Americas, Geophysical Monograph 55, D.H. Peterson 
(ed.), American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp. 
305-363. 
Keeling, C D . , R.B. Bacastow, A.F. Carter, S.C. Piper, T.P. 
Whorf, M . Heimann, W.G. Mook and H. Roeloffzen, 1989b: A 
three-dimensional model of atmospheric COj transport based 
on observed winds: 1. Analysis and observational data. In: 
Aspects of CUmate VariabiUty in the Pacific and Western 
Americas. Geophysical Monograph 55, D.H. Peterson (ed.), 
American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp. 165-236. 
Keeling, C D . , T.P. Whorf, M . Wahlen and J. van der Plicht, 
1995: Interannual extremes in the rate of rise of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide since 1980. Nature, 375, 666-670. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1992: The global sources of 
nitrous oxide. / Geophys. Res., 97, 14651-14660. 
Khalil, M.A.K. and R.A. Rasmussen, 1994: Global decrease of 
atmospheric carbon monoxide concentration. Nature, 
370, 
639-641. 
Khalil, M.A.K., R.A. Rasmussen and R. Gunawardena, 1993: 
Atmospheric methyl bromide: nends and global mass balance. 
J. Geophys. Res., 98, 2887-2896. 
Khmelevtsov, S.S., D.I. Busygina and Y . G . Kaufman, 1996: 
Modelling the spatial and temporal distribution and optical 
characteristics of stratospheric aerosols of volcanic origin./. 
Geophys. Res. (Submitted). 
Kiehl, J.T. and B.P. Briegleb, 1993: The relative role of sulfate 
aerosols and greenhouse gases in climate forcing. Science, 260, 
311-314. 
Kiehl, J.T. and H. Rodhe, 1995: Modeling geographical and 
seasonal forcing due to aerosols. In Aerosol Forcing of 
Climate, R.J. Charlson and J. Heintzenberg (eds.), John Wiley, 
Chichester, pp. 281-296. 
King, G. and S. Schnell, 1994: Effect of increasing atmospheric 
methane concentration on ammonium inhibition of soil 
methane consumption. Nature, 370, 282-284. 
Kinnison, D.E., K.E. Grant, P.S. Connell, D.A. Rotman and D.J. 
Wuebbles, 1994: The chemical and radiative effects of the 
Mount Pinatubo eruption. /. Geophys. Res., 99, 25705-25731. 
Kleinman, L . , 1994: Low and high N 0 ^ tropospheric 
photochemistry. J Geophys. Res., 99, 16831-16838. 
Ko, M . , N . Sze, W-C. Wang, G. Shia, A. Goldman, F. Murcray, 
D. Murcray and C.Rinsland, 1993: Atmospheric sulfur 
hexafluoride: sources, sinks and greenhouse warming. J. 
Geophys. Res., 98, 10499-10507. 
128 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
Komhyr, W.D., R.H. Gammon, T.B. Harris, L.S. Waterman, T.J. 
Conway, W.R. Taylor and K . W . Thoning, 1985: Global 
atmospheric COj distribution and variations from 1968-1982 
N O A A / G M C C CO2 flask sample data. J. Geophys. Res., 90, 
5567-5596. 
Kulmala, M . , R. Korhonen, A. Laaksonen and T. Vesala, 1995: 
Changes in cloud properties due to N0^ emissions. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 22, 239-242. 
Kunde, V . G . , B.J. Conrath, R . A . Hanel, W.C. Maguire, C. 
Prabhakara and V . V . Salomonson, 1974: The Nimbus-4 
Infrared Spectroscopy Experiment, 2. Comparison of observed 
and theoretical radiances from 425 to 1450 cm"'. /. Geophys. 
Res, 79,111-liA. 
Lacis, A . A . , D.J. Wuebbles and J.A. Logan, 1990: Radiative 
forcing by changes in the vertical distribution of ozone. /. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 9971-9981. 
Lacis, A., J. Hansen and M . Sato, 1992: Climate forcing by 
stratospheric aerosols. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 1607-1610. 
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, 1991: A global three-dimensional 
model of the global sulfur cycle. /. Atmos. Chem., 13, 255-263. 
Lean, J., A. Skumanich and O. White, 1992: Estimating the Sun's 
radiative output during the Maunder minimum. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 19, 1591-1594. 
Lelieveld, J. and P.J. Crutzen, 1994: Role of deep cloud 
convection in the ozone budget of the troposphere. Science, 
264, 1759-1761. 
Levin, I., B. Kromer, H. Schoch-Fischer, M . Bruns, M . Münnich, 
D. Berdau, J.C. Voge) and K.O. Münnich, 1985: 25 years of 
tropospheric ''*C observations in Central Europe. Radiocarbon, 
11, 1-19. 
Li, X . , X . Zhou, W. L i and L . Chen, 1995: The cooling of 
Sichuan province in recent 40 years and its probable 
mechanisms. Acta Meteorológica Sinica, 9, 57-68. 
Li, Z. and P. Varanasi, 1994: Measurements of the absorption 
cross-sections of CFC-11 at conditions representing various 
model atmospheres. /. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiât. Transfer, 52, 
137-144. 
Liepert, В., P. Fabian and H. Grassl, 1994: Solar radiation in 
Germany - observed trends and an assessment of their causes. 
Part I: Regional approach. Beitr. Phys. Atmosph., 67, 15-29. 
Liu, S.C., M . Trainer, E.G. Fehsenfeld, D . D . Parrish, E.J. 
Williams, D.W. Fahey, G. Huebler and P.C. Murphy, 1987: 
Ozone production in the rural troposphere and the impUcations 
for regional and global ozone distributions. J. Geophys. Res., 
92,4191-4207. 
Lobert, J., J. Bufler, S. Montzka, L. Geller, R. Myers and J. 
Elkins, 1995: A net sink for atmospheric methyl bromide in the 
east Pacific Ocean. Science, 267, 1002-1005. 
Lockwood, G.W., B.A. Skiff, S.L. Bahúnas and R.R. Radick, 
1992: Long-term solar brightness changes estimated from a 
survey of Sun-like stars. Nature, 360, 653-655. 
Logan, J.A., 1994: Trend in the vertical distribution of ozone: an 
analysis of ozonesonde data. / Geophys. Res., 99, 25553-25585. 
Lowe, D., C. Brenninkmeijer, G. Brailsford, K. Lassey and A. 
Gomez, 1994: Concentration and '^C records of atmospheric 
methane in New Zealand and Antarctica: evidence for changes 
in methane sources. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 16913-16925. 
Lubin, D., 1994: Infrared radiative properties of the maritime 
Antarctic atmosphere. J. Climate, 1, 121-140. 
Madronich, S. and C. Granier, 1992: Impact of recent total ozone 
changes on tropospheric ozone photodissociation, hydroxyl 
radicals and methane trends. Geophys. Res. Lett, 19, 465-467. 
Maiss, M . and I. Levin, 1994: Global increase in sulfur 
hexafluoride observed in the atmosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
21, 569-572. 
Maiss, M . , P. Steele, R. Francey, P. Eraser, R. Langenfelds, N. 
Trivett and I. Levin, 1996: Sulfur hexafluoride: a powerful, 
new atmospheric tracer, Atmos. Env. (in press) 
Мак, J., C. Brenninkmeijer and J. Tamaresis, 1994: Atmospheric 
' ' ' с о observations and their use for estimating carbon 
monoxide removal rates. /. Geophys. Res., 99, 22915-22922. 
McCormick, M.P., L.W. Thomason and C.R. Trepte, 1995: 
Atmospheric effects of the Mt. Pinatubo eruption. Nature, 373, 
399-404. 
Midgley, P. and A. McCulloch, 1995: The production and global 
distribution of emissions to the atmosphere of 1,1,1-
trichloroethane (methyl chloroform). Atmos. Env., 29, 
1601-1608. 
Miyoshi, A., S. Hatakeyama and N. Washida, 1994: OH radical-
initiated photooxidation of isoprene: an estimation of global 
CO production. /. Geophys. Res., 99, 18779-18787. 
Molnar, G.I., M . K W. Ко, S. Zhou and N.D. Sze, 1994: Climatic 
consequences of observed ozone loss in the 1980s: Relevance 
to the greenhouse problem. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 25755-25760. 
Montzka, S., R.Myers, J. Bufler, J. Elkins and S. Cummings, 
1993; Global tropospheric distribution and calibration scale of 
HCFC-22. Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 703-706. ' 
Montzka, S., M . Nowick, R. Myers, J. Elkins, J. Bufler, S. 
Cummings, P. Eraser and L. Porter 1994a; N O A A - C M D L 
chlorodifluoromethane observations at Cape Grim. In: Baseline 
91, A. Dick and J. Gras (eds.). Bureau of Meteorology/CSIRO, 
pp. 25-28. 
Montzka, S., R. Myers, J. Butler and J. Elkins, 1994b; Early 
trends 
in 
the 
global 
tropospheric 
abundance 
of 
hydrochlorotluorocarbon-141b and -142b. Geophys. Res. Lett, 
21, 2483-2486. 
Morris, R., T. Miller, A. Viggiano, J. Paulson, S. Solomon and 
G. Reid, 1995: Effects of electron and ion reactions on 
atmospheric lifetimes of fully fluorinated compounds. J. 
Geophys. Re.i., 100, 1287-1294. 
Müller, M . , A . Kraus and A . Hofzumahaus, 1995; ОзО('О) 
photolysis frequencies determined from spectroradiometric 
measurements of solar actinic UV-radiation: comparison with 
chemical actinometer measurements. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 
679-682. 
Neftel, A., H . Oeschger, T. Staffelbach and B. Stauffer, 1988: 
CO2 record in the Byrd ice core 50,000-5,000 years BP. 
Nature, 331,609-611. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate Change 
129 
Nesme-Ribes, E., 1994: The Solar Engine and Its Influence on 
Terrestrial 
Atmosphere and Climate. N A T O ASI Series, 
Springer, New York. 
Nesme-Ribes, E., E.N. Eerreira, R. Sadourny, H. Le Treut and 
Z . X . L i , 1993: Solar dynamics and its impact on solar 
irradiance and the terrestrial climate. /. Geophys. Res., 98, 
18923-18935. 
Novakov, T. and J.E. Penner, 1993: Large contribution of organic 
aerosols to cloud condensation nuclei concentrations. Nature, 
365, 823-826. 
Novakov, T., С. Rivera-Carpió, J.E. Penner and C P . Rogers, 
1994: The effect of anthropogenic sulfate aerosols on marine 
droplet concentrations, Tellus, 46B, 132-141. 
Novelli, P., J. Collins, R. Myers, G. Sachse and H. Scheel, 1994a: 
Re-evaluation of the N O A A / C M D L carbon monoxide 
reference scale and comparisons with C O reference gases at 
NASA-Langley and at the Fraunhofer-Institut. J. Geophys. 
Res.,99, 18779-18787. 
Novelli, P., K. Masaiie, P. Tans and P. Lang, 1994b: Recent changes 
in atmospheric carbon monoxide. Science, 263, 1587-1590. 
NRC, 1994: Solar Influences on Global Change. A National 
Research 
Council 
report. 
National Academy Press, 
Washington DC, USA. 
Oeschger, H., U . Siegenthaler and A. Guglemann, 1975: A box-
diffusion model to study the carbon dioxide exchange in nature. 
Tellus, 11, 168-192. 
Ogren, J. A., 1982: Deposition of particulate elemental carbon 
from the atmosphere. In: Particulate carbon: Atmospheric Life 
Cycle, G.T. Wolff and R.L. Klimisch (eds.). Plenum Press, 
New York, 379-391. 
Oltmans, S.J. and D.J. Hofmann, 1995: Increase in lower 
stratospheric water vapour at a mid-latitude northern 
hemisphere site from 1981 to 1994. Nature, 374, 146-149. 
Oram, D., P. Eraser, C. Reeves and S. Penkett, 1995: 
Measurements of HCFC-142b and HCFC-141b in the Cape 
Grim air archive: 1978-1993. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 22, 
2741-2744. 
Penner, I.E., 1995: Carbonaceous aerosols influencing 
atmospheric radiation: Black and organic carbon. In; Aerosol 
Forcing of Cimate, R.J. Charlson and J. Heintzenberg (eds.). 
John Wiley and Sons Ltd., Chichester, pp.91-108. 
Penner, I.E., R.E. Dickinson and C A . O'Neill, 1992; Effects of 
aerosol from biomass burning on the global radiation budget. 
Science, 256, 1432-1434. 
Penner, J.E., H. Eddleman and T. Novakov, 1993; Towards the 
development of a global inventory for black carbon emissions. 
Atmo.4. Env., 27A, 1277-1295. 
Penner, I.E., C.S. Atherton and Т.Е. Graedel, 1994; Global 
emissions and models of photochemically active compounds. 
To appear in 37th OHOLO Conference Series, Plenum Press, 
New York. 
Perry, K.D. and P.V. Hobbs, 1994; Further evidence for particle 
nucleation in clear air adjacent to marine cumulus clouds. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 22803-22818. 
Pham, M . , G. Mégie, J.E. Millier, G. Brasseur and С. Granier, 
1995; A three-dimensional study of the tropospheric sulfur 
cycle. / Geophys. Re.s., 100, 26061-26092. 
Pincus, R. and M.B. Baker, 1994; Effect of precipitation on the 
albedo susceptibility of clouds in the marine boundary layer. 
Nature, 372, 250-252. 
Pinnock, S., M.D. Huriey, K.P. Shine, T.J. Wallington and T.J. 
Smyth, 
1995; 
Radiative 
forcing 
of 
climate 
by 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons and hydrofluorocarbons. J. Geophys. 
Res., 100, 23227-23238. 
Poppe, D. J. Zimmermann, R. Bauer, T. Brauers, D. Briining, 
J.Callies, H.-P. Dorn, A . Hofzumahaus, F.-J. Johnen, A . 
Khedim, H.Koch, R. Koppmann, H. London, K.-P. Müller, R. 
Neuroth, С Plass-Dülmer, U . Piatt, F. Rohrer, E.-P. Roth, J. 
Rudolph, U.Schmidt, M . Wallasch and D. Ehhalt, 1994: 
Comparison of measured O H concentrations with model 
calculations. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 16633-16642. 
Post, W.M., J. Pastor, P.J. Zinke and A.G. Stangenberger, 1985: 
Global patterns of soil nitrogen storage. Nature, 317, 613-616. 
Potter, C.S., J.T. Randerson, C.B. Field, P.A. Maison, P . M . 
Vitousek, H.A. Mooney and S.A. Klooster, 1993; Terrestrial 
ecosystem production: A process model based on global satellite 
and surface data. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 1, 811-841. 
Prather, M.J., 1988: An Assessment Model for 
Atmospheric 
Composition, N A S A Conf Publ. CP-3203, 64 pp. 
Prather, M.J., 1994; Lifetimes and eigenstates in atmospheric 
chemistry. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 801-804. 
Prather, M.J. and C M . Spivakovsky, 1990; Tropospheric OH 
and the lifetimes of hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs). /. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 18723-18729. 
Prather, M . , R. Derwent, D. Ehhalt, P. Fraser, E. Sanhueza 
and X . Zhou, 1995; Other trace gases and atmospheric 
chemistry. In; Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of 
Climate 
Change and an Evaluation 
of the IPCC IS92 
Emission Scenarios, 
J.T. Houghton, L . G . Meira Filho, J. 
Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N . Harris 
and K . M a s k e l l (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, U K . 
Prinn, R., D. Cunnold, R. Rasmussen, P. Simmonds, F.Alyea, 
A.Crawford, P. Fraser and R. Rosen, 1990: Atmospheric 
emissions and trends of nitrous oxide deduced from 10 years of 
A L E - G A G E data. J. Geophys. Res.. 95, 18369-18385. 
Prinn, R., D. Cunnold. P. Simmonds. F. Alyea, R. Boldi, A. 
Crawford, P. Fraser, D. Gutzler, D. Hartiey, R. Rosen and R. 
Rasmussen, 1992; Global average concentration and trend for 
hydroxyl radicals deduced from A L E / G A G E trichloroethane 
(methylchloroform) data for 1978-1990. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 
2445-2461. 
Prinn, R., R. Weiss, P. Eraser, P. Simmonds, F. Alyea and D. 
Cunnold, 1995a; DOE-CDIAC World Data Center (Internet: 
cdp@ornl.gov) dataset no. DB-1001. 
Prinn, R., R. Weiss, B. Miller, J. Huang, F. Alyea, D. Cunnold, 
P. Eraser, D. Hartley and P. Simmonds, 1995b; Atinospheric 
trends and lifetime of trichloroethane and global average 
130 
Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change 
hydroxyl radical concentrations based on 1978-1994 
A L E / G A G E measurements. Science, 269, 187-192. 
Radick, R.R., 1994; Stellar variability and global warming. 
Science, 266, 1072. 
Radke, L.E., D.A. Hegg, P.V. Hobbs, J.D. Nance, J.H. Lyons, 
K.K. Laursen, R.E. Weiss, P.J. Riggan and D.E. Ward, 1991; 
Particulate and trace gas emission from large biomass fires in 
North America. ImGlobal Biomass Burning, J.S. Levine (ed.), 
MIT Press, pp. 209-224. 
Ramaswamy, V., M.D. Schwarzkopf and K.P. Shine, 1992; 
Radiative forcing of climate from halocarbon-induced global 
stratospheric ozone loss. Nature, 355, 810-812. 
Revelle, R. and H.E. Suess, 1957; Carbon dioxide exchange 
between atmosphere and ocean and the question of an increase 
of atmospheric COj during the past decades. Tellus, 9, 18-27. 
Robock, A. and M.P. Free, 1995; Ice cores as an index of global 
volcanism from 1850 to the present. J. Geophys. Res., 100, 
11549-11568. 
Robock, A. and H.E. Graf, 1994; Effects of preindustrial human 
activities on climate. Chemosphere, 29, 1087-1099. 
Rodhe, H. and P. Crutzen, 1995; Climate and CCN. Nature, 375, 
111. 
Roehl, С М . , D. Boglu, С Brühl and G.К. Moortgat, 1995; 
Infrared band intensities and global warming potentials of CF4, 
CjFg, C3F8, C4F10, C5F12 and CgFi4. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 
815-818. 
Sarmiento, I.E., С Le Quéré and S.W. Pacala, 1995; Limiting 
future atmospheric carbon dioxide. Global 
Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 9, 121-137. 
Sassen, K., D.O'C. Starr, G.G. Mace, M.R. Poellot, S.H. Melfi, 
W.L. Eberhard, J.D. Spinhirne, E.W. Eloranta, D.E. Hagen and 
J. Hallett, 1995: The 5-6 December 1991 FIRE IFO П jet 
stream cirrus case study: possible influences of volcanic 
aerosols. J. Atmos. Sci., 52, 97-123. 
Sato, M . , I.E. Hansen, M.P. McCormick and J.B. Pollack 1993: 
Stratospheric aerosol optical depths, 1850-1990. J. Geophys. 
Res, 98, 22987-22994. 
Schauffler, S . M . and J.S. Daniel. 1994; On the effects of 
stratospheric circulation changes on trace gas trends. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 25747-25754. 
Schauffler, S.M., W.H. Pollock, E.L. Atlas, L.E. Heidt and J.S. 
Daniel, 1995: Atmospheric distributions of HCFC-141b. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 819-822. 
Schimel, D.S. and E. Sulzman, 1995: Variability in the earth 
climate system: Decadal and longer timescales. Reviews of 
Geophysics, Supplement July 1995, 873-882. 
Schimel, D.S., B.H. Braswell Jr., E.A. Holland, R. McKeown, D.S. 
Ojima, Т.Н. Painter, W.J. Parton and A.R. Townsend, 1994; 
Climatic, edaphic and biotic controls over carbon and turnover of 
carbon in soils. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 279-293. 
Schimel, D., I. Enting, M. Heimann, T.M.L. Wigley, D. Raynaud, 
D. Alves and U . Siegenthaler, 1995; COj and the carbon cycle. 
In: Climate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of Climate 
Change and an Evaluation 
of the IPCC IS92 
Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Schumann. E. and D. Wurzel, eds., 1994; Impact of Emissions 
from Aircraft and Spacecraft Upon the Atmosphere. Proc. 
International Scientific Colloquium, 18-20 Apr 1994, Koln, 
DLR Report 94-06, 496 pp. 
Schwartz, S.E. and A. Slingo, 1996: Enhanced shortwave cloud 
radiative forcing due to anthropogenic aerosols. Clouds, 
Chemistry and Climate, Proceedings 
of NATO 
Advanced 
Research Workshop, P. Crutzen and V . Ramanathan (eds.), 
Springer, Heidelberg, pp. 191-236. 
Schwarzkopf, M.D. and V. Ramaswamy, 1993; Radiative forcing 
due to ozone in the 1980s: dependence on altitude of ozone 
change. Geophys. Res. Lett, 20, 205-208. 
Shi, G.Y., X.B. Fan, J.D. Guo, L. Xu, R.M, Hu, J.P. Chen and B. 
Wang, 1994; Measurements of the atmospheric aerosols' 
optical properties in HEIFE area. Proc. Int. Conf. on HEIFE, 
Nov 8-12, Kyoto, Japan, pp. 642-647. 
Siegenthaler, U . 1990; El Niiîo and atmospheric COj, Nature, 
345, 295-296. 
Siegenthaler, U. and F. Joos, 1992: Use of a simple model for 
studying oceanic tracer distributions and the global carbon 
cycle. Tellus, 44B, 186-207. 
Siegenthaler, U . and H . Oeschger, 1987; Biospheric COj 
emissions during the past 200 years reconstructed by 
deconvolution of ice core data. Tellus, 39B, 140-154. 
Siegenthaler, U, and J.L. Sarmiento, 1993: Atmospheric carbon 
dioxide and the ocean. Nature, 365, 119-125. 
Sillnian, S., J.A. Logan and S.C Wofsy, 1990; The sensitivity of 
ozone to nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons in regional ozone 
episodes. /. Geophys. Res., 95, 1837-1851. 
Solomon, S. and J.S. Daniel, 1996; Impact of the Montreal 
Protocol and its amendments on the rate of change of global 
radiative forcing, dim. Change, 32. 7-17. 
Stanhill, G. and S. Moreshet 1994; Global radiation climate 
change at seven sites remote from surface sources of pollution. 
Clim. Change, 26, 89-103. 
Starr, C , 1993; Atmospheric CO^ residence time and the carbon 
cycle. Energy, 18, 1297-1310, 
Stolarski, R,S. and H.L. Wesoky, 1995; The Atmospheric Effects 
of Stratospheric Aircraft: A Fourth Program Report, NASA 
Ref Publ., 1359,246 pp. 
Strand, A. and O. Hov, 1993: A two-dimensional zonally averaged 
transport model including convective motions and strategy for 
numerical solution. /. Geophys. Res., 98, 9023-9037. 
Strand, A. and O. Hov, 1994: A two-dimensional global study of 
tropospheric ozone production. J. Geophys. 
Res., 
99, 
22877-^22895. 
Suess, H.E., 1955: Radiocarbon concentration in modern wood. 
Science, 122,415-417. 
Tarasick, D.W., D.I Wardle, J.B. Kerr, J.J. Bellefleur and J. 
Davies, 1995; Tropospheric ozone trends over Canada; 
1980-1993. Geophys. Res. Lett, 22, 409-412. 
Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change 
131 
Taylor, K.E. and J.E. Penner, 1994: Response of the climate 
system to atmospheric aerosols and greenhouse gases. Nature, 
369, 734-737. 
Tegen, I. and I. Fung, 1994: Modelling of mineral dust in the 
atmosphere: Sources, transport and optical thickness. /. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 22897-22914. 
Tegen, I. and 1. Fung, 1995: Contribution to the atmospheric 
mineral aerosol load from land surface modification. J. 
Geophys. Res., 100, 18707-18726. 
Thompson, A . M . , 1992: The oxidising capacity of the Earth's 
atmosphere: probable past and future changes. Science, 256, 
1157-1165. 
Thompson, A.M., K.E. Pickering, R.R. Dickeison, W.G. Ellis Jr., 
D.J. Jacob, J.R. Scala, W-K. Tao, D.P. McNamara. J. Simpson, 
1994: Convective transport over the central United States and 
its role in regional CO and ozone budgets. /. Geophys. Res., 99, 
18703-18711. 
Toumi, R., S. Bekki and K.S. Law, 1994: Indirect influences of 
ozone depletion on climate forcing by clouds. Nature, 372, 
348-351. 
Vloedbeld, M . and R. Leemans, 1993: Quantifying feedback 
processes in the response of the terrestrial carbon cycle to 
global change: The modelling approach of IMAGE-2. Water, 
Air and Sou Pollution, 70, 615-628. 
Volk, T., 1989: Effect of the equatorial Pacific upwelling on 
atmospheric C O ^ during the 1982-83 EÍ Niiîo. 
Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 3, 267-279. 
Waggoner, A.P., R.E. Weiss, N.C. Ahlquist, D.S. Covert, S. Will 
and R.J. Charlson, 1981: Optical characteristics of atmospheric 
aerosols. Aimos. Env., 15, 1891-1909. 
Wahner, A., M.A. Geller, F. Arnold, W.H. Brune, D.A. Cariolle, 
A . R . Douglass, C. Johnson, D . H . Lister, J.A. Pyle, R. 
Ramaroson, D. Rind, F. Rohrer, U . Schumann and A . M . 
Thompson, 1995: Subsonic and supersonic aircraft emissions. 
In: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 1994, Global 
Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report No. 37, World 
Meteorological Organisahon, Geneva, pp. 11.1-11.32. 
Wang, P - H . , P. Minnis and G . K . Yue, 1995: Extinction 
coefficient (1 pm) properties of high-altitude clouds from solar 
occultation measurements (1985-1990): Evidence of volcanic 
aerosol effect. /. Geophys. Res., 100, 3181-3199. 
Wennberg, P.O., R.C. Cohen, R.M. Stimpfle, J.P. Koplow, J.G. 
Anderson, R.J. Salawitch, D.W. Fahey, E.L. Woodbridge. E.R. 
Keim, R.S. Gao, C.R. Webster, R.D. May, D.W. Toohey, L . M . 
Avallone, M.H. Profitt, M . Loewenstein, J.R. Podolske, K.R. 
Chan, and S.C. Wofsy, 1994: Removal of stratospheric O3 by 
radicals: in situ measurements of OH, HOj, NO, NO,, CIO and 
BrO. Science, 266, 398^04. 
White, W., 1990: The contribution of fine particle scattering to 
total extinction. §4.1^.4 in Visibility: Existing and bhtoriccd 
conditions - causes and effects. Acid deposition science and 
technology report 24, US Government Printing Office. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1993: Balancing the global carbon budget. 
Implications for projections of future carbon dioxide 
concentration changes. Tellus, 45B, 409-425. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1995: Global-mean temperature and sea level 
consequences of greenhouse gas concentration stabilization. 
Geophys. Res. Lett.. 22, 45-48. 
Wigley, T.M.L., R. Richels and J.A. Edmonds, 1995; Economic 
and environmental choices in the stabilization of C O j 
concentrations; choosing the "right" emissions pathway. 
Nature, 379, 240-243. 
Winguth, A.M.E., M . Heimann, K.D, Kurz, E. Maier-Reimer, U. 
Mikolajewicz and J. Segeschneider, 1994; E l Niño Southern 
Oscillation related fluctuations of the marine carbon cycle. 
Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 39-63. 
WMO/UNEP, 1992: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 
1991. Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report 
No. 25, Worid Meteorological Organization. Geneva. 
WMO/UNEP, 1995; Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 
1994. Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report 
No. 37. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva. 
Wong, C.S., Y . - H . Chan, J.S. Page, G . E . Smith and R . D . 
Bellegay, 1993; Changes in equatorial COj flux and new 
production estimated from COj and nutrient levels in Pacific 
surface waters during the 1986/87 El Niño. Tellus, 45B, 64-79. 
Wu, D. and W. Chen, 1994; Intra-annual variation features of 
mass distribution and water soluble composition distribution of 
atmospheric aerosols over Guangzhou, Acta 
Meteorológica 
Sínica, 52, 499-505. 
Zander, R., D.H. Ehhalt, C P . Rinsland, U . Schmidt, E. Mahieu, 
M.R. Gunson, C.B. Farmer, M.C. Abrams and M.K.W. Ko, 
1994a; Secular trend and seasonal variability of the column 
abundance of N^O above the Jungfraujoch station determined 
from IR solar spectra. / Geophys. Res., 99, 16745-16756. 
Zander, R., E. Mahieu, Ph. Demoulin, С Rinsland, D. Weisenstein, 
M . Ко, N. Sze and M . Gunson, 1994b; Secular evolution of the 
vertical column abundances of HCFC-22 in the earth's 
atmosphere infen'ed from ground-based IR solar observations at 
the Jungfraujoch and at Kitt Peak, and comparison with model 
observations. J. Almos. Chem., 18, 129-148. 
Zhang, Q., W.H. Soon, S.L. Baliunas, G.W. Lockwood, B.A. 
Skiff and R.R. Radick, 1994; A method of determining possible 
brightness variations of the Sun in past centuries from 
observations of solar-type stars. Astrophys. 
J., 
427, 
L111-L114. 
3 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
N. NICHOLLS, G.V. GRUZA, J. JOUZEL, T.R. KARL, L.A. OGALLO, 
D. E. PARKER 
Key Contributors: 
J.R. Christy, J. Eischeid, P.Ya. Groisman, M. Hulme, P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight 
Contributors: 
J.K. Angelí, S. Anjian, P.A. Arkin, R.C. Balling, M.Yu. Bardin, R.G. Barry, W. BoMin, R.S. Bradley, K.R. Briffa, 
A. M. Carleton, D.R. Cayan, F.H.S. Chiew, J.A. Church, E.R. Cook, T.J Crowley R.E. Davis, N.M. Datsenko, 
B. Dey H.E Diaz, Y. Ding, W. Drosdowsky, M.L. Duarte, J.C. Duplessy, D.R. Easterling, W.P. Elliott, 
B. Findlay, H. Flohn, C.K. Folland, R. Franke, P. Erich, D.J. Gaffen, V.Ya. Georgievsky B.M. Ginsburg, 
YS. Golubev, J. Gould, N.E. Graham, D. Gullet, S. Hastenrath, A. Henderson-Sellers, 
M. Hoelzle, W.D. Hogg, 
G.J. Holland, L.C. Hopkins, N.N. Ivachtchenko, D. Karoly, R.W. Katz, W. Kininmonth, N.K. 
Kononova, 
LV. Korovkina, G. Kukla, C.W. Landsea, S. Levitus, T.J. Lewis, H.E. Lins, J.M. Lough, T.A. McMahon, 
L. Malone, J.A. Marengo, E. Mekis, A. Meshcherskya, 
P.J. Michaels, E. Mosley-Thompson, 
S.E. Nicholson, 
J. Oerlemans, G. Ohring, G.B. Pant, T.C. Peterson, N. Plummer, EH. Quinn, E.Ya. Ran'kova, V.N. Razuvaev, 
E. V. Rocheva, C.E Ropelewski, K. Rupa Kumar, M.J. Salinger, B. Sauter, H. Schmidt, E. Semenyuk, 
LA. Shiklomanov, M. Shinoda, LI. Soldatova, D.M. Sonechkin, R.W. Spencer, N. Speranskaya, A. Sun, 
K.E. Trenberth, C. Tsay, J.E. Walsh, B. Wang, К Wang, M.N. Ward, S.G. Warren, Q. Xu, T. Yasunari 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Has the Climate Warmed? 
3.2.1 Background 
3.2.2 Surface Temperature 
3.2.2.1 Land-surface air temperature 
137 
3.3.6 Evaporation 
3.3.6.1 Land 
141 
3.3.6.2 Ocean 
3.3.7 Water Vapour 
141 
3.3.8 Clouds 
141 
3.3.8.1 Land 
141 
3.3.8.2 Ocean 
141 
3.3.9 Summary of Section 3.3 
3.2.2.2 Sea surface temperature 
142 
3.2.2.3 Laud and sea combined 
143 
3.2.2.4 Changes in the diurnal temperature range 
144 
3.2.3 Tropospheric and Lower Stratospheric 
Temperatures 
146 
3.2.3.1 Data reliability 
147 
3.2.3.2 Tropospheric trends 
147 
3.2.3.3 Lower strato-spheric trends 
148 
3.2.4 Subsurface Ocean Temperatures 
149 
3.2.5 Indirect Measures 
149 
3.2.5.1 Retreat of glaciers 
149 
3.2.5.2 Borehole temperatures 
149 
3.2.5.3 Sea ice extent and mass 
150 
3.2.5.4 Coral bleaching 
150 
3.2.6 Mt. Pinatubo in the Temperature Record 
151 
3.2.7 Possible Shift of Phase of the Annual Temperature 
Cycle 
151 
3.2.8 Summary of Section 3.2 
151 
3.3 Has the Climate Become Wetter? 
151 
3.3.1 Background 
151 
3.3.2 Precipitation 
152 
3.3.2.1 Land 
152 
3.3.2.2 Ocean 
156 
3.3.3 Concomitant Changes of Precipitation and 
Temperature 
156 
3.3.4 Snow Cover, Snowfall, and Snow Depth 
156 
3.3.5 Land-surface and Subsurface Water 
158 
3.3.5.1 Streamflow 
158 
3.3.5.2 Lake levels 
159 
3.3.5.3 Soil moisture 
159 
160 
160 
161 
161 
162 
162 
162 
163 
3.4 Has the Atmospheric/Oceanic Circulation Changed? 163 
3.4.1 Background 
163 
3.4.2 El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
163 
3.4.3 Northern Hemisphere Circulation 
165 
3.4.4 Southern Hemisphere Circulation 
167 
3.4.5 Summary of Section 3.4 
167 
3.5 Has the Climate Become More Variable or Extreme? 168 
3.5.1 Background 
168 
3.5.2 Climate Variability 
168 
3.5.2.1 Temperature 
168 
3.5.2.2 Precipitation and related moisture indices 168 
3.5.2.3 Atmospheric circulation 
169 
3.5.3 Extreme Weather Events 
169 
3.5.3.1 Tropical cyclones 
169 
3.5.3.2 Extra-tropical storminess 
170 
3.5.3.3 Intense rainfalls 
171 
3.5.3.4 Extreme temperatures 
172 
3.5.3.5 Tornadoes, thunderstorms, dust storms, and 
fire weather 
172 
3.5.4 Summary of Section 3.5 
173 
3.6 Is the 20th Century Warming Unusual? 
173 
3.6.1 Background 
173 
3.6.2 Climate of the Past I ООО Years 
174 
3.6.3 Rapid Cimate Changes in the Last 150,000 Years 177 
3.6.4 Summary of 3.6 
179 
3.7 Are the Observed Trends Internally Consistent? 
179 
References 
181 
SUMMARY 
Has the climate warmed? 
• 
The estimate of warming since the late 19th century 
has not significantly changed since the estimates in 
IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992), although the data 
have been reanalysed, and more data are now 
available. Global surface temperatures have 
increased by about 0.3 to 0.6°C since the late-19th 
century, and by about 0.2 to 0.3°C over the last 40 
years (the period with most credible data). The 
warming has not been globally uniform. Some areas 
have cooled. The recent warming has been greatest 
over the continents between 40° and 70°N. 
• 
The general, but not global, tendency to reduced 
diurnal temperature range over land, at least since the 
middle of the 20th century, noted in IPCC (1992), has 
been confirmed with more data (representing more 
than 40% of the global land mass). The range has 
decreased in many areas because nights have warmed 
more than days. Cloud cover has increased in many of 
the areas with reduced diurnal temperature range. 
Minimum temperature increases have been about 
twice those in maximum temperatures. 
• 
Radiosonde and Microwave Sounding Unit 
observations of tropospheric temperature show slight 
overall cooling since 1979, whereas global surface 
temperature has warmed slightly over this period. 
There are statistical and physical reasons (e.g., short 
record lengths; the different transient effects of 
volcanic activity and El Nino-Southern Oscillation) 
for expecting different recent trends in surface and 
tropospheric temperatures. After adjustment for these 
transient effects, which can strongly influence trends 
calculated from short periods of record, both 
tropospheric and surface data show slight warming 
since 1979. Longer term trends in the radiosonde 
data, since the 1950s, have been similar to those in 
the surface record. 
• 
Cooling of the lower stratosphere since 1979 is 
shown by both Microwave Sounding Unit and 
radiosonde data (as noted in IPCC, 1992), but is 
larger (and probably exaggerated because of changes 
in instrumentation) in the radiosonde data. The 
cuiTcnt (1994) global stratospheric temperatures are 
the coolest since the start of the instrumental record 
(in both the satellite and radiosonde data). 
:• 
As predicted in IPCC (1992), relatively cool surface 
and tropospheric temperatures, and a relatively 
warmer lower stratosphere, were observed in 1992 
and 1993, following the 1991 eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo. Warmer surface and tropospheric 
temperatures 
reappeared 
in 1994. Surface 
temperatures for 1994, averaged globally, were in the 
warmest 5% of all years since 1860. 
• 
Further work on indirect indicators of warming such 
as borehole temperatures, snow cover, and glacier 
recession data, confirm the IPCC (1990) and (1992) 
findings that they are in substantial agreement with 
the direct indicators of recent warmth. Variations in 
sub-surface ocean temperatures have been consistent 
with the geographical pattern of surface temperature 
variations and trends. 
• 
As noted in IPCC (1992) no consistent changes can 
be identified in global or hemispheric sea ice cover 
since 1973 when satellite measurements began. 
Northern Hemisphere sea ice extent has, however, 
been generally below average in the early 1990s. 
Has the climate become wetter? 
• 
There has been a small positive (1%) global trend in 
precipitation over land during the 20th century, 
although precipitation has been relatively low since 
about 1980. Precipitation has increased over land in 
138 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere, especially 
during the cold season, concomitant with temperature 
increases. A step-like decrease of precipitation 
occurred after the 1960s over the subtropics and 
tropics from Africa to Indonesia, as temperatures in 
this region increased. The various regional changes 
are consistent with changes in streamflow, lake 
levels, and soil moisture (where data are available 
and have been analysed). 
• 
There is evidence to suggest increased precipitation 
over the central equatorial Pacific Ocean, in recent 
decades, with decreases to the north and south. Little 
can be said about precipitation changes elsewhere 
over the ocean. 
• 
Northern Hemisphere snow cover extent has been 
consistently below the 21 year (1974-1994) average 
since 1988. Snow-radiation feedback has amplified 
spring-time warming over mid- to high latitude 
Northern Hemisphere land areas. 
• 
Evaporation appears to have decreased since 1951 
over much of the former Soviet Union, and possibly 
also in the U S A . Evaporation appears to have 
increased over the tropical oceans (although not 
everywhere). 
• 
The evidence still suggests an increase of 
atmospheric water vapour in the tropics, at least since 
1973, as noted in IPCC (1992). 
• 
In general, cloud amount has increased over the 
ocean in recent decades, with increases in convecrive 
and middle and high-level clouds. Over many land 
areas, cloud increased at least up to the 1970s. IPCC 
(1990) and (1992) also reported cloud increases. 
Has the atmospheric/oceanic circulation changed? 
rainfall over the subtropical land areas in the last two 
decades) are related to this behaviour in the El Nino-
Southern Oscillarion, which has also affected the 
pattern and magnitude of surface temperatures. 
Has the climate become more variable or extreme? 
• 
The data on climate extremes and variability are 
inadequate to say anything about global changes, but 
in some regions, where data are available, there have 
been decreases or increases in extreme weather 
events and variability. 
• 
Other than the few areas with longer term trends to 
lower rainfall (e.g., the Sahel), little evidence is 
available of changes in drought frequency or intensity. 
• 
There have been few studies of variations in extreme 
rainfall events and flood frequency. In some areas 
with available data there is evidence of increases in 
the intensity of extreme rainfall events, but no clear, 
large-scale pattern has emerged. 
• 
There is some evidence of recent (since 1988) 
increases in extreme extra-tropical cyclones over the 
North AUantic. Intense tropical cyclone activity in 
the Atiantic has decreased over the past few decades 
although the 1995 season was more active than 
recent years. Elsewhere, changes in observing 
systems and analysis methods confound the detection 
of trends in the intensity or frequency of extreme 
synoptic systems. 
• 
There has been a clear trend to fewer extremely low 
minimum temperatures in several widely separated 
areas in recent decades. Widespread significant 
changes in extreme high temperature events have not 
been observed. 
• 
There have been decreases in daily temperature 
• 
The behaviour of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
variability in recent decades, in the Northern 
(ENSO), which causes droughts or floods in many 
Hemisphere mid-latitudes, 
parts of the world, has been unusual since the mid-
1970s and especially since 1989. Since the mid-
i m n 
/ С 1 
XT ~ Ч 
-
A
U 
u 
, 
Is the 20th century warmmg unusual? 
1970s, warm (El Nmo) episodes have been relatively 
more frequent or persistent than the opposite phase 
(La Niña) of the phenomenon. Recent variations in 
• 
Northern Hemisphere summer temperatures in recent 
precipitation over the tropical Pacific and the 
decades appear to be the warmest since at least about 
surrounding land areas (e.g., the relatively low 
1400 AD, based on a variety of proxy records. The 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
139 
warming over the past century began during one of 
the colder periods of the last 600 years. Data prior to 
1400 are too sparse to allow the reliable estimation of 
global mean temperature. However, ice core data 
from several sites around the world suggest that 20th 
century temperatures are at least as warm as any 
century since at least about 1400, and at some sites 
the 20th century appears to have been warmer than 
any century for some thousands of years. 
• 
Large and rapid climatic changes affecting the 
atmospheric and oceanic circulation and temperature, 
and the hydrologie cycle, occurred during the last ice 
age and during the transition towards the present 
Holocene period. Changes of about 5°C occurred on 
time-scales of a few decades, at least in Greenland 
and the North Atlantic. 
• 
Temperatures have been far less variable during the 
last 10,000 years (the Holocene), relative to the 
previous 100,000 years. Based on the incomplete 
observational and palaeoclimatic evidence available, 
it seems unlikely that global mean temperatures have 
increased by 1°C or more in a century at any time 
during the last 10,000 years. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
141 
3.1 Introduction 
Observed climate change and variability are considered in 
this chapter by addressing six commonly asked questions 
related to the detection of climate change and sensitivity of 
the climate to anthropogenic activity. The questions are: 
Has the climate warmed? 
Has the climate become wetter? 
Has the atmospheric/oceanic circulation changed? 
Has the climate become more variable or extreme ? 
Is the 20th century warming unusual? 
Are the observed trends internally consistent? 
The conclusions from observations depend critically on 
the availability of accurate, complete, consistent series of 
observations. That conclusions regarding trends cannot 
always be drawn does not necessarily imply that trends are 
absent. It could reflect the inadequacy of the data, or the 
incomplete analysis of data. Karl et al. (1995a) 
demonstrate that, for many of the climate variables 
important in documenting, detecting, and attributing 
climate change, the data are not at present good enough for 
rigorous conclusions to be reached. This especially applies 
to global trends of variables with large regional variations, 
such as precipitation. The final section of this chapter 
attempts to indicate our confidence in the various trends 
observed in the less than complete data available. 
3.2 Has the Climate Warmed? 
3.2.1 Background 
IPCC (1990) concluded that, on a global average, surface 
air and sea temperature had risen by between 0.3°C and 
0.6°C since the mid-19th century. IPCC (1992) confirmed 
this. The recent warming is re-examined here, using 
updated and improved data, including the diurnal 
asymmetry of the warming, and the geographical and 
vertical structure of the warming. Conventional 
temperature observations are supplemented by indirect 
evidence and by satellite-based data. 
Temperatures in this chapter are expressed relative to the 
1961-90 averages, rather than the 1951-80 period used in 
IPCC (1990) and (1992). The new reference period has 
been used because it contains more sea surface temperature 
data, more data from currently operating land stations, and 
because it is the official reference period used by the World 
Meteorological Organisation and member states. Where 
series from IPCC (1992) are reproduced here they are 
expressed relative to the 1961 to 1990 mean, not the 1951 
to 1980 mean used in IPCC (1992). 
3.2.2 Surface Temperature 
3.2.2.1 Land-surface air temperature 
The land-surface air temperature data base developed by 
Jones et al. (1986a,b) and Jones (1988), and used by IPCC 
(1990) and IPCC (1992), has been substantially expanded 
and reanalysed (Jones, 1994a). Coverage in recent decades 
has benefited most from this expansion. The resulting 
global anomaly time-series are very similar, on decadal 
time-scales, to those in the previous (IPCC, 1990, 1992) 
analyses (Figure 3.1a). The small differences in the time-
series are mainly due to the addition of a few extra 
Australian stations which resulted in warmer late 19th 
century temperatures, relative to the earlier time-series. 
The 19th century Australian temperatures may be biased 
warm relative to modern recordings, because of different 
methods of exposure (Nicholls et ai, 1996). Figure 3.1b 
shows time-series of global land temperatures updated 
from Hansen and Lebedeff (1988) and Vinnikov et al. 
(1990), for comparison with the Jones (1994a) time-series. 
{<=) 
t.or— 
I 
' I 
I 
1870 
1890 
1910 
1930 
1950 
1970 
1990 
Yecr 
Figure 3.1: (a) Annual global average surface air temperature 
anomalies (°C) for land areas, 1861 to 1994, relative to 1961 to 
1990. Bars and solid curve from Jones (1994a); dashed curve 
from Jones (1988). The smoothed curves were created using a 21-
point binomial filter, (b) As (a) but updated from Hansen and 
Lebedeff (1988) - dashed line; Vinnikov et al. (1990) - thin line. 
Thick solid line is from Jones (1994a), as in (a). 
142 
Observed CUmate VariabUity and Cliange 
IPCC (1992) cited results of Jones et al. (1990) which 
indicated that urbanisation influences have yielded, on 
average, a warming of less than 0.05°C during the 20th 
century in their data over the global land. In specific 
regions, however, urbanisation influences may be 
significant. Portman (1993) found that the average 
warming of 0.22°C between 1954 and 1983 over northern 
China in the gridded data of Jones et al. (1986a) was nearly 
as large as the 0.25°C warming in this period averaged 
over seven uncorrected large urban stations; Portman's 
adjustments using rural stations, however, suggested that 
there was in fact a regional cooling of about 0.05°C. The 
urbanisation warming trends were greatest in spring. 
Differences from Jones et al. (1990) and 'Wang et al. 
(1990), who found a smaller or no urbanisation warming 
trend in eastern China, may have resulted from the 
different, though overlapping, region covered. Hulme et al. 
(1994) note that urbanisation cannot fully account for the 
significant warming trends over eastern Asia. Christy and 
Goodridge (1994) found that the five longest term 
Californian stations used by Hansen and Lebedeff (1988) 
all had more positive temperature trends in 1910-89 than 
the median of 112 Californian stations. Moberg and 
Alexandersson (1995) found evidence of urban warming 
affecting apparent trends in Sweden. On the other hand. 
Barros and Camilloni (1994) note that the urbanisation 
effect in Buenos Aires relative to the surrounding rural 
environment has decreased since the 1950s. Remote 
sensing techniques hold promise for the eventual 
worldwide estimation of urban temperature bias (Johnson 
etal., 1994). 
Concerns about a possible link between climate change 
and desertification indicate the need for monitoring of arid 
region temperatures. An analysis of the Jones (1994a) 
gridded temperature anomalies for dryland areas of the 
world (UNEP, 1992) yielded a significanfly greater trend 
for 1901-1993 (0.62°C) than for the land areas as a whole 
(0.44°C). Trends for dry lands were greatest in Central and 
North America (nearly 0.8°C) and least in South America 
(a little over 0.3°C). They were also significantly greater in 
the least arid subclass (nearly 0.8°C) than in the most arid 
subclass (around 0.3°C). The total arid area is only about 
14% of the land surface. Even if all the greater warming in 
these areas was due to desertification, this would only have 
contributed a few hundredths of a degree to the observed 
global warming. 
3.2.2.2 Sea surface temperature 
A combined physical-empirical method (Folland and 
Parker, 1995) has been used to estimate improved 
adjustments to ships' sea surface temperature (SST) data 
obtained up to 1941, to compensate for heat losses from 
uninsulated (mainly canvas) or partly-insulated (mainly 
wooden) buckets. The time-series of global SST anomalies 
is very similar to that in IPCC (1992) (Figure 3.2). The 
differences compared with IPCC (1992) mainly result from 
an improved formulation of the heat transfers affecting 
wooden buckets and an improved climatology in 
the Southern Ocean. This climatology incorporates, for 
1982 onwards, satellite-based data, using a Laplacian 
blending technique (Reynolds, 1988) to remove overall 
biases relaflve to the in situ data (Parker et al., 1995). 
In addition, following Folland and Parker (1995), 
slightly fewer wooden buckets are assumed than was 
the case in IPCC (1992), and the SST data in the analysis 
of Jones and Briffa (1992) are no longer incorporated. 
The data used to construct the night-time marine air 
temperature (NMAT) series in Figure 3.2 largely avoid 
daytime heating of ships' decks and were corrected 
independently of SST from the mid-1890s onwards 
(Bottomley et al., 1990; Folland and Parker, 1995). The 
N M A T data confirm the trends in SST. 
Many historical in situ data remain to be digitised and 
incorporated into the data base, to improve coverage and 
reduce the uncertainties in our estimates of marine climatic 
variations. Annual hemispheric and global SST anomalies 
since 1950 appear to be insensitive to the spatial averaging 
technique used, to within about 0.02°C (Parker, 1994a). 
"fm 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
2Ü00 
Year 
Figure 3.2: Annual global sea surface temperature anomalies 
(SST. bars and solid curve) and night marine air temperature 
(NMAT, dotted curve), 1861 to 1994, reladve to 1961 to 1990 
(°C). The smoothed curves were created using a 21-point 
binomial filter. The dashed curve is sea surface temperature from 
IPCC ( 1992), adjusted to be reladve to 1961 to 1990. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
143 
But hemispheric and global trends of SSTs calculated over 
a decade or so are subject to large biases and sampling 
eiTors owing to incomplete data coverage, especially in the 
19th century and during the period of the World Wars 
(Karl et al., 1994). The spatial coherence and temporal 
persistence of seasonal 5° area SST anomalies have been 
used to estimate the random and sampling errors of decadal 
SST anomalies (Parker et al, 1994). At the beginning of 
the century, the estimated combined random and sampling 
standard errors were generally less than 0.1 °C in those 5' 
areas with sufficient data to perform an analysis (about 
60% of the world's oceans). 
3.2.2.3 Land and sea combined 
Comparisons of island air temperatures with SSTs (e.g., 
Folland and Salinger, 1996) have demonstrated that the 
two independent fields exhibit similar decadal- and 
century-scale variations. Figures 3.3a to с show annual 
time-series of anomalies of combined land-surface air 
temperature and SST for the hemispheres and globe since 
1861. These series, shown as bars and soUd curves, differ 
slightly from those presented by IPCC (1992) which are 
summarised by the dashed curves, because of the above-
mentioned improvements in both land and sea 
temperatures. Thus, the new curves are typically up to 
0.05°C warmer before 1900, but differences are smaller 
thereafter. 
In accord with IPCC (1990), global average land-surface 
air temperature anomalies exceeded SSTs by around 0.1 °C 
in the 1920s and up to 0.2°C in recent years, but were up to 
0.3°C lower in the 1880s (Figure 3.3d). Real atmospheric 
circulation changes, as well as some instrumental 
uncertainties, are likely to be the cause of this variation 
(Parker ei a/., 1994). 
A variety of tests (Parker et al, 1994) suggests that the 
sampling uncertainty on the smoothed curves in Figure 3.3 
is possibly within 0.05°C since the 1880s. However, these 
findings take no account of unsampled regions so a trend 
uncertainty of 0.1 °C/century may be more realistic (Karl et 
al, 1994). The instrumental bias uncertainty is assessed by 
Parker et al (1994) as less than О.ГС for land, around 
0.1°C for SST, and less than 0.15°C for the combination, 
since the 1880s, consistent with preliminary estimates in 
IPCC (1992). In addition, an urbanisation uncertainty of 
less than 0.05°C is estimated (Section 3.2.2.1). The overall 
uncertainty remains about 0.15°C and leads to an estimate 
of 0.3 to 0.6°C for global near-surface warming since the 
late 19th century, unchanged from the estimates of IPCC 
(1990, 1992). 
(a) 
Northern Hemisphere, 1861 to 1994 
0.61 
' 
• 
' 
• 
•— 
1 
' 
, 
.n.sl 
, 
 
IS'O 
1880 
1900^ " 
1920 
1940 
I960 
1981) 
21100 
Year 
(b) 
Southern Hemisphere, 1861 to 1994 
0.6! 
' 
' 
' 
' 
• 
• 
' 
I860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Year 
(d) 
Land surface air and sea surface temperatures, 1861 to 1994 
0.6 I 
- 
\ 
' 
1 
• 
! 
' 
¡ 
' 
i 
• 
' 
0.4 L 
•0.S i 
, 
\ 
, 
' 
L 
I 
I 
1860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
2000 
Year 
Figure 3.3: Combined annual land-surface air and sea surface 
temperature anomalies (°C) 1861 to 1994, relative to 1961 to 
1990 (bars and solid smoothed curves): (a) Northern Hemisphere; 
(b) Southern Hemisphere; (c) Globe. The dashed smoothed curves 
are corresponding results from IPCC (1992), adjusted to be 
relative to 1961 to 1990. (d) Global land-surface air temperature 
(solid line) and SST (broken line). 
144 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Figure 3.4 shows the change of surface temperature, for 
the four seasons as well as for the annual averages, from 
the period 1955-1974 to the period 1975-1994. This 
second period has seen unusual ENSO activity (Section 
3.4.2). Note, in accord with the results in IPCC (1990) and 
IPCC (1992), the recent warming over the mid-latitude 
Northern Hemisphere continents in winter and spring, and 
year-round cooling in the north-west North Atlantic and 
mid-latitudes over the North Pacific. 
Zonal mean anomalies of combined land-surface air 
temperature (from Jones, 1994a) and SST (from Parker et 
al, 1995), shown in Figure 3.5, confirm that the recent 
warmth is greatest in mid-latitudes of the Northern 
Hemisphere. This can be compared with the warm period 
of the mid-20th century, where the greatest warmth was in 
the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. The 
recent warm period also exhibits higher temperatures in the 
Southern Hemisphere. It should be noted that the 
anomalies in Figure 3.5 are less reliable in data sparse 
areas and periods, e.g., before 1900, during the World 
Wars, and in the Southern Ocean. 
Figure 3.4 shows that maximum recent warming has 
been in winter over the high mid-latitudes of the Northern 
Hemisphere continents. Tropospheric data show no 
statistically significant Arctic-wide temperature trends for 
the 1958-86 period or during the 1950-90 period over the 
Arctic Ocean (Kahl et al, I993a,b). Significant warming 
since the 1950s along the west coast of the Antarctic 
Peninsula is not representative of continental Antarctica 
(Raper et al, 1984; King, 1994), where weaker warming 
has been observed. However, expeditionary records (Jones, 
1990) and ice temperature profiles (Nicholls and Paren, 
1993) suggest 20th century warming for various parts of 
Antarctica, and Jones (1995a) reported an Antarctic 
warming trend from 1957 to 1994, although temperatures 
were low in 1993 and 1994. All of this warming occurred 
before the early 1970s. 
3.2.2.4 Changes in the diurnal temperature range 
An analysis of worldwide quality-selected station monthly 
average 
maximum (day) and minimum (night) 
temperatures (Horton, 1995) now covers about 41% of land 
areas. It confirms the report of IPCC (1992) and the 
findings of Karl et al (1993a) that worldwide increases in 
minimum land-surface air temperature since 1950 have 
been about twice those in the maximum (Figure 3.6). 
90N 
60N 
30N 
A n n u a l 
120W 
120Б 
-2 
-1.5 
-1 
-0.5 
0.5 
1.5 
Figure 3.4: Change in surface temperature (°C), from 1955-1974 to 1975-1994: (a) annual; (b) December to February; (c) March to 
May; (d) June to August; (e) September to November. Sea surface temperatures are from Parker et al (1995) and land-surface air 
temperatures are from Jones (1994a). 
146 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
1995b). The decrease of the DTR has mostly bm not 
always been due to the faster rise of the night temperahires 
The general increases in minimum (overnight) temperature 
occurred in rural areas as well as ciries, and could not 
therefore simply reflect an increasing urban heat island 
effect. In the south-western part of the former Soviet 
Union, DTR has decreased because of depressed daily 
maxima (Razuvaev et al, 1995). 
Some coastal and island areas (Horton, 1995; Salinger ei 
al, 1993, 1995b), India (Rupa Kumar et al, 1994), and 
alpine stations (Weber et al, 1994) have shown no long-
term decrease in annual average DTR. No systematic 
changes of minima or maxima and no general warming has 
been observed in the Arctic over the last 50 years or so 
(Kahl et al, I993a,b; Michaels et al, 1995; Ye et al, 
1995), though regions with reduced DTR in recent decades 
dp include Alaska and central Siberia (Figure 3.6). 
3.2.3 Tropospheric and Lower Stratospheric 
Temperatures 
Climate monitoring has focused on measurements at the 
Earth's surface; only in the past few decades has the 
atmosphere above the surface been regulariy measured. 
Regular upper-air measurements by balloon ascents in 
scattered locations began in the 1940s and observations 
from satellites generally only began in the 1970s. 
-1.5 
-1 
-0.5 
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
Figure 3.6: Diurnal temperature range 1981 to 1990 relative to 1951 to 1980 (°C). 
1890 
1905 
ШО^ 
1950 
WsS 1980 
1995 
Decade ending 
Figure 3.5: Zonal mean combined land-surface ak and sea surface 
temperature anomalies (°C), 1881 to 1994, relative to 1961 to 
1990. Values are 10-year running means. Data are updates of 
Parker et al (1995) for SST and Jones (1994a) for land. 
Additional areas with decreasing diurnal temperature range 
(DTR) have been identified (e.g., Jones, 1995b). The 
decrease of the D T R in several areas has been most 
pronounced in the Northern Hemisphere autumn (Kari et 
al, 1993a; Kukla and Karl, 1993; Horton, 1995). The 
observed decreases in the DTR have been found to relate to 
increases of cloud cover (Plantico et al, 1990; Henderson-
Sellers, 1992; Dessens and Bûcher, 1995; Jones, 1995b; 
Kaas and Frich, 1995; Plummer et al, 1995; Salinger et al. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
147 
3.2.3.1 Data reliability 
IPCC (1992) presented radiosonde data since 1964, 
whereas here data from 1958 are presented. There are 
doubts, however, about the earlier data. Although the 
radiosonde coverage was adequate from 1958 in the 
Northern Hemisphere, it has only been adequate in the 
Southern Hemisphere since 1964. '"Global" values from 
radiosondes from before 1964 are, therefore, somewhat 
suspect, because of the reduced geographical coverage. 
Compilations for monitoring long-term changes of 
temperature aloft using radiosondes have been made by 
Angelí (1988 and updates) and by Oort and Liu (1993). 
However, the sensors which measure temperature and 
humidity in radiosondes have undergone many changes in the 
past 40 years, and these changes have had significant effects 
on estimates of long-term trends (Gaffen, 1994; Parker and 
Cox, 1995). Humidity is important both on its own account 
(Section 3.3.7) and because it affects air density, which is 
often used as a surrogate for temperature. Elliott et al. (1994) 
calculate that spurious "drying" of the mid-troposphere (850-
300 hPa) due to improved radiosonde sensors has led to a 
spurious cooling since 1958 of 0.05 to 0.1°C/decade. This 
spurious coohng is primarily related to sensor changes in the 
1970s. An additional aspect of uncertainty is related to the 
non-uniform geographic distribution of stations since vast 
areas over the oceans, particularly in the Southern 
Hemisphere, are not monitored at all (Trenberth and Olson 
1991), and coverage has declined over the oceans and parts of 
the tropics (Parker and Cox, 1995). 
While information on changes in radiosonde sensors is 
rarely complete, Gaffen (1994) reported on the effects of 
documented changes in the temperature sensors and found 
that at least 43% of the stations used by Angelí have clear 
heterogeneities. Oort and Liu's data will also have been 
affected. The net effect of these heterogeneities was to 
impose a spurious cooling trend (in addition to that from 
the humidity sensors noted above) on the time-series since 
1958. The magnitude of the tropospheric impact appears to 
be small. However, the lower stratospheric time-series was 
found to have been significantiy affected, particularly in 
the tropics and Southern Hemisphere, so as to bias the 
trend calculation to be cooler than actual. In addition 
Parker and Cox (1995) suggest that early radiosonde 
balloons were more likely to burst in cold conditions, 
biasing the incomplete data towards warmth, and giving a 
spurious cooling trend in the lower stratosphere as balloons 
were strengthened. Angell's global lower-stratospheric 
1 NOAA 11 and N O A A 12 are USA weather satellites, 
launched in September 1988 and May 1991 respectively. 
radiosonde time-series cooled since 1979 at about 
0.6°C/decade relative to global satellite (Microwave 
Sounding Units (MSUs) on polar orbiting satellites) data. 
The relative cooling is less if only M S U data collocated 
with the radiosondes (rather than global M S U data) are 
used in the comparison, and trends in the Oort and Liu data 
(using more stations than Angelí, but available only up to 
1989) are more similar to those in the MSU, so the greater 
cooling in Angell's data appears to be due to 
undersampling of the global atmosphere (Christy, 1995), as 
well as to radiosonde inhomogeneities. 
The M S U data, available since 1979, have exhibited 
high precision and global coverage for the temperature of 
deep layers in the troposphere and stratosphere (Spencer 
and Christy, 1992b, 1993). Biases because of water vapour 
and cloud changes have been shown to be minimal 
(Spencer et al., 1990), although some uncertainty remains 
(Prabhakara et al., 1995). In addition. Spencer and Christy 
(1992a,b; 1993), Christy and Drouilhet (1994), and Christy 
and Goodridge (1995) used comparisons between satellites 
and with radiosondes to show that instrumental drift was 
insignificant until late 1991. 
There has, however, been a spurious warming of 
0.04°C/yr in N O A A l l ' tropospheric data since 1990, 
owing to a drift in orbit times. An estimate of this bias, 
along with biases affecting the dynamic range of N O A A 12 
M S U temperatures, has been removed from results shown 
here (Christy etal., 1995). 
3.2.3.2 Tropospheric trends 
Figure 3.7a shows time-series of tropospheric temperature 
anomalies calculated from M S U data and radiosondes, and 
the global surface temperature for comparison. The global 
M S U tropospheric trend from 1979 to May 1995 was 
-0.06°C/decade, and that for the seasonal radiosonde data 
for the same period was -0.07°C/decade. However, if the 
transient effects of volcanoes and the E l Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (which can bias trends calculated from short 
periods of data) are removed from the various time-series, 
positive trends become evident (e.g., 0.09°C/decade for 
MSU), in closer accord with surface data (Christy and 
McNider, 1994). Jones (1994b) calculated residual global 
trends (after removal of volcanic and ENSO transients) for 
the 1979-93 period of 0.09°C/decade from M S U data, 
0.10°C from 850-300 hPa radiosonde temperature updated 
from Angelí (1988), and 0.17°C from combined land-
surface air temperature and SST data. The differences 
between these trends were about half the differences 
between trends in the raw data (i.e., without the removal of 
the transient El Nino-Southern Oscillation and volcanic 
148 
Obsetyed CUmate Variability and Change 
(a) Seasonal anomalies of tropospheric temperature 
-•^1 
' 
I . 
I 
. 
I 
I . 
I 
. 
I 
I . 
. 
. 
i 
I 
. 
. 
. 
I 
. 
. 
. 
. 
I 
. 
. 
. 
. 
I 
. 
. 
. 
. 
I 1 
1958 1960 
1965 
1970 
1975 
1980 
1985 
1990 
1995 
Year 
Figure 3.7: (a) Seasonal global temperature anomalies (°C), relative to 1979-1994 average, for the 850-300 hPa layer from radiosondes 
(Angelí, 1988 and updates, Ught solid Une) and for the ttoposphere from IVISU 2R (Spencer and Christy, 1992b and updates, heavy soHd line). 
Dashed line (inset) is MSU 2R minus radiosondes. Surface temperatures (shaded line) have been added for comparison with the tropospheric 
temperatores. (b) As in (a), but for the 100-50 hPa layer from radiosondes (Angelí, 1988 and updates, light solid Hue) and for the lower 
stratosphere from IVISU 4 (Spencer and Christy, 1993 and updates, heavy solid line). Dashed line (inset) is M S U 4 minus radiosonde. 
(Note: MSU 2R and MSU 4 are channels of the M S U instrument designed to sample the lower troposphere and stratosphere respectively.) 
effects). So, apparent differences between surface and 
tropospheric trends for 1979-1993 appear to be partly a 
result of the greater influence of volcanic eruptions and 
ENSO on tropospheric temperatures. Hansen et al. (1995) 
also demonstrate that natural variability can account for 
some of the apparent differences between surface and 
lower tropospheric data. 
For the longer period 1958 to 1993, Jones (1994b) 
found that the unadjusted and adjusted global trends 
from radiosonde and surface data were all between 
0.08°C and 0.11°C/decade, reflecting the fact that 
longer-term trends are less likely to be biased by 
transient volcanic and ENSO influences. The unadjusted 
radiosonde trend to May 1995 was 0.09°C/decade. The 
similarity of the trends since the late 1950s in the 
tropospheric and surface temperatures is evident in 
Figure 3.7a. 
3.2.3.3 Lower stratospheric trends 
Lower stratospheric temperatures (17-22 km or 100-50 hPa) 
have demonstrated marked changes over the past few 
decades (Figure 3.7b). Sudden warmings were caused by 
infrared-absorbing aerosols from volcanoes (Nyamuragira 
1981 with El Chichón 1982, and Mt. Pinatubo 1991). From 
1979 through May 1995, the M S U global trend was 
-0.34°C/decade. The greater cooling in the radiosonde data 
is at least partly due to changes in the radiosondes and 
undersampling of the global atmosphere, for the reasons 
outlined in Section 3.2.3.1. A similar rate of cooling 
(-0.36°C/decade) has probably occurred since 1964, based 
on radiosonde data (Christy, 1995). Labitzke and van Loon 
(1994) examined daily historical analyses of the Northern 
Hemisphere lower stratosphere and concluded that the 
cooling was greatest at a height of 18-20 km at all latitudes 
in summer, and in the polar regions also in early winter. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
149 
Lower stratospheric trends are discussed in more detail in 
IPCC (1994) and the 1994 Ozone Assessment (WMO, 
1994). The current (1994) global stratospheric temperatures 
are the coolest since the start of the instrumental record in 
both the satellite and radiosonde data. 
3.2.4 Subsurface Ocean Temperatures 
The deep ocean has a much lower noise level of 
temperature variability than at the surface, and hence long-
term changes are more readily identified. Recent studies 
(e.g., Bindoff and Church, 1992: Bindoff and McDougall, 
1994) have demonstrated that changes in water mass 
properties (salinity/temperature relationships) are even 
easier to detect. 
Studies are beginning to indicate large-scale and 
coherent changes in subsurface conditions that appear to be 
related to changes, at the surface, in the formation regions 
of the relevant water masses. These lead to large, coherent 
regions of overlying layers of warming and cooling in the 
water column. The geographical variations in recent 
surface temperature changes (Figure 3.4) are linked to the 
subsurface changes. The surface changes can mix and 
advect downward with a strong component moving along 
surfaces of constant density. 
In the Southern Hemisphere, Salinger et al. (1995b) 
report a basin-wide, depth-averaged warming of 0.3°C 
between 100 m and 800 m over the entire width of the 
Indian Ocean at 30°S over the past 20 years. Below this 
there was a depth-averaged cooling of up to 0.1 °C. Bindoff 
and Church (1992) found warming in the upper 800 m at 
43°S in the south-west Pacific between 1967 and 1989. 
Bindoff and McDougall (1994) inferred that the change 
between 300 m and 700 m resulted from warming at the 
surface where the water masses were formed during 
contact with the atmosphere. It appears that the upper 
ocean warming of these two basins is a reflection of the 
surface warming at the surface at latitudes of 40-50°S. The 
cooling at greater depth in the Indian Ocean appears to be a 
reflection of surface cooling at higher latitudes where there 
is poor surface coverage. 
Recent transocean sections in the North Pacific are also 
beginning to reveal changes in subsurface temperatures 
reflecting surface temperature changes. Off California (a 
region of surface warming), subsurface temperatures have 
increased uniformly by 0.8°C in the upper 100 m in the 
past 42 years, and have risen significantly down to 300 m. 
Cooling of the surface of the central and western North 
Pacific is seen to depths of several hundred metres 
(Antonov, 1993). 
In the North Adantic, warming has occurred at 24°N in the 
subtropical gyre, with warming of up to 0.15°C between 800 
m and 2500 m between 1957 and 1981 (Roemmich and 
Wunsch, 1984). A similar warming ensued between 1981 and 
1992 (Parrilla et ai, 1994). The overall warming between 
1957 and 1992 was very uniform across the Atlantic, 
averaging just over 0.3°C at 1100 m. Warming of 0.2°C has 
been observed since the late 1950s in the subtropical gyre at 
1750 m near Bermuda (Levitus et al. 1995). 
Strong cooling at the surface of the subpolar North 
Atlantic connects with the subsurface ocean in the Labrador 
Sea, where a 0.9°C cooling of Labrador Sea Water has 
occurred between 1970 and 1995. This water mass is 
currently colder, fresher, and larger than ever before 
recorded, in observations extending back to the 1930s (Read 
and Gould, 1992; Lazier, 1995; Rhines and Lazier, 1995). 
These subsurface variations are consistent with 
circulation and surface temperature variations. 
3.2.5 Indirect Measures 
A variety of indirect measures can provide supporting 
evidence of changes and variations in temperature. In 
general, however, these measures are affected by other 
factors as well as temperature, so care needs to be taken in 
determining the extent to which they provide supporting 
evidence of changes deduced from direct measurements of 
temperature. 
3.2.5.1 Retreat of glaciers 
Mountain glaciers provide integrated climatic evidence 
which is complementary to instrumental meteorological 
measurements (Haeberli, 1995). Measurements of glacier 
length extend back to the 19th century in many regions, 
and even to 1600 A D in Europe. Length reduction of 
mountain glaciers provides easily detectable evidence from 
cold regions that fast and worldwide climatic change has 
taken place over the past century (Haeberli et ai. 1989). 
The factors affecting glaciers, and a description of 
observed changes over the past century, are discussed in 
Chapter 7. The 20th century glacier retreat is consistent 
with a warming in alpine regions of 0.6-1.0°C (Schwitter 
and Raymond, 1993; Oerlemans, 1994). 
3.2.5.2 Borehole temperatures 
Underground temperatures, from boreholes in otherwise 
undisturbed locations, have been used to derive ground 
surface temperature (GST) histories which are found to be 
in accord with instrumental or proxy surface air 
temperature data. Low-frequency surface temperature 
variations occurring in the past 300 years can be detected 
in a borehole over 600 metres deep. 
150 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Warmmg has been observed in most boreholes in New 
England (Pollack and Chapman. 1993) and Canada 
(Beltrami and Mareschal, 1992; Wang et al., 1992; Wang 
et al., 1994), and the increase in GST suggested for the last 
century is very similar to the observed change in regional 
air temperatures during the same period (e.g., Beltrami and 
Mareschal, 1991). In temperate western North America (up 
to 62°N in the Yukon), however, the GST has remained 
relatively constant over the last century (e.g., Lewis and 
Wang, 1993) even though most glaciers have retreated. 
Further north, GSTs have increased over the last century on 
the Alaskan north slope (Judge et ai, 1983; Lachenbruch 
and Marshall, 1986) and in Canada's north-eastern Arctic 
Islands (Taylor, 1991), and there has been a retreat of the 
permafrost (Kwong and Gan, 1994). There are indications 
of increasing GSTs in the northern USA prairies (Gosnold 
etal., 1992) and the Canadian prairies (Majorowicz, 1993). 
Cermak et al. (1992) have reported climatic warming in 
Cuba of 2-3°C over the last 200-300 years. Some borehole 
sites have indicated no recent change or cooling, e.g.. in 
Utah (Chapman et al, 1992). Deming (1995) assessed all 
the North American studies and concluded that all averages 
inferred from groups of boreholes revealed warming 
(ranging between 0.3 and 4.0°C) since the 19th century. 
The warming appears to have started in the middle of the 
19th century in the eastern half of North America, whereas 
the warming in the west appears to have started near the 
beginning of the 20th century or even later. 
In France, Mai-eschal and Vasseur (1992) made independent 
analyses of two boreholes and derived similar GST histories 
with peak warmth around 1000 AD, cooling to a minimum at 
1700 AD, and warming starting at 1800 A D (see Section 
3.6.2). Borehole temperatures also indicate increasing GST 
over the last century or two in Australia (Hyndman et al, 
1969) and the Ukrainian Shield (Diment, 1965), but an 
influence of deforestation was suspected. Where no ice was 
present in western Siberia, analyses indicate the most recent 
warming started 400 years ago in the south, and much earlier in 
the north (Duchkov and Devyatkin, 1992). Borehole 
measurements in New Zealand (Whiteford, 1993; Whiteford et 
al, 1994) indicate cooling to a minimum around 1800 AD, 
followed by wanning averaging 0.9°C over the past century. 
Borehole temperature studies have also been conducted 
on ice sheets, and, especially those in Arctic regions, 
cleariy show a warming since a cool period in the 1800s 
(e.g.,Cuffeyeia/., 1994). 
3.2.5.3 Sea ice extent and mass 
Neither hemisphere has exhibited significant trends in 
seaice extent since 1973 when satellite measurements began 
Northern Hemisphere 
•9-С 
'974 1376 
' g i g 1980 1382 '984 1986 1388 
1990 1932 1994 -996 
(b) 
Southern Hemisphere 
1970 1972 -974 1376 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 
Figure 3.8: Sea ice extent anomalies relative to 1973-1994 for 
(a) the Northern Hemisphere and (b) the Southern Hemisphere. 
Data from NOAA (USA). Smooth lines generated from a 128-
point binomial filter applied to the monthly anomalies. Heavy 
bars represent December-February in the Northern Hemisphere 
or June-August in the Southern Hemisphere. 
(Figure 3.8). There has been below average extent in the 
Northern Hemisphere in the early 1990s, except for the 
second half of 1992 when the atmosphere was cooler. 
Coverage in the Southern Hemisphere has remained close 
to average. Jones (1995a) noted that the lack of sea ice 
variations around Antarctica seems unconnected to 
regional temperatures. For instance, sea ice did not increase 
during 1993 and 1994, despite low temperatures. 
Sea ice total mass may be a more sensitive indicator of 
climate change than extent alone. Limited data on Arctic 
ice thickness, from upward sonar profiling from 
submarines and from moored subsurface sonar instruments, 
show large interannual variability but no trends from 1979 
to 1990 (McLaren etal, 1992). 
3.2.5.4 Coral bleaching 
Bleaching of coral reefs may result from high temperatures 
Observed Climate Variabiliry and Change 
151 
or from other environmental stresses, e.g., pollution 
episodes. IPCC (1992) found the increased incidence of 
bleaching to be consistent with oceanic warming. Goreau 
and Hayes (1994) have shown that coral bleaching events 
since 1979 have been closely associated with warm-season 
sea surface temperature anomalies of 1°C or more. 
Bleaching events were, as a consequence, more prevalent 
in 1983, 1987 and 1991 in association with El Niño 
warming events, and scarce in 1992 following the eruption 
of Mt. Pinatubo and the subsequent cooling. Published 
records of coral reef bleaching from 1870 to the present 
suggest that the scale of bleaching since 1979 has not been 
observed previously (Glynn, 1993). 
3.2.6 Mt. Pinatubo in the Temperature Record 
Following the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in June 1991, clear-
sky solar radiation incident at the Earth's surface was reduced 
by about 3% for several months because of aerosol scattering 
(Dutton and Cliiisty, 1992). Global tropospheric temperature 
anomalies cooled until August 1992 and then warmed in an 
irregular fashion (Figure 3.7a; see also Section 5.3.1.2). In the 
16-year M S U lower troposphere time-series the coolest 
seasonal anomalies of the entire record occurred for the 
Northern Hemisphere in summer 1992 and for the Southern 
Hemisphere in summer 1992-3. Temperatures have increased 
since then, to levels similar to those prior to the erupdon. 
Seasonal series of land-surface air temperatures indicate 
that the coohng in 1992, which probably resulted from the 
Mt. Pinatubo eruption, was particularly mai'ked in summer 
and autumn in the Northern Hemisphere. Robock and Mao 
(1995) found that this maximum cooling pattern, in the 
Northern Hemisphere summer of the year after the eruption, 
agrees with that after the five other largest volcanic eruptions 
since 1883. The winter wanning pattern over the Northern 
Hemisphere continents in 1991-92 appears to be an indirect, 
dynamical response to the tropical stratospheric warming 
after the eruption (Graf et al, 1993). 
The rapid fall of globally averaged lower stratospheric 
temperature, as the aerosols dispersed, from the Mt. 
Pinatubo-induced peak in September 1991 to the minimum 
in late November 1993, represents a temperature change of 
about 2°C in just 28 months, with a 1.5°C cooling of 
seasonal averages (Figure 3.7b). 
3.2.7 Possible Shift of Phase of the Annual Temperature 
Cycle 
An analysis of monthly mean Central England Temperatures 
(CET) over the period 1659-1990 by Thomson (1995) 
indicated that there has been an observable phase shift in the 
mean annual cycle, implying, for example, a shift of peak 
summer temperature from about 20 July to about 25 July. In 
addition, the rate of this phase shift appeared to have 
increased after 1940. Thomson also found such a shift in 
some, but not all. Northern Hemisphere stations with long 
records. Emslie and Christy (1995), however, could not 
confirm the apparent change in tite phase trend in the CET. 
In addition, Kari et al (1995b) concluded that the vagaries 
of weather could produce the phase shifts found by Thomson 
(1995) over century-scale periods. 
3.2.8 Summary of Section 3.2 
Global surface temperatures have warmed by 0.3-0.6°C since 
the late 19th century, with the greatest warming over the 
continents between 40°N and 70°N. A general, but not global, 
tendency to reduced diurnal range has been confirmed. 
Minimum temperamres have, in general, increased faster than 
maximum temperatures. As predicted in IPCC (1992) 
relatively cool suiface and tropospheric temperatures, and a 
relatively warmer lower stratosphere, were obsei-ved in 1992 
and 1993, following the 1991 eruprion of Mt. Pinatubo. 
Warmer temperatures reappeared in 1994, with the global 
surface temperature for the year being in the warmest 5% of 
years since 1860, about 0.27°C higher than the 1961-90 mean. 
Long-term variations in tropospheric temperatures, 
measured by radiosondes, have been similar to those in the 
surface record since the 1950s. More work has been done 
in comparing recent radiosonde and Microwave Sounding 
Unit observations of tropospheric temperature with surface 
temperatures, since IPCC (1992). Radiosonde and 
Microwave Sounding Unit observations of tropospheric 
temperature show slight overall cooling since 1979, 
whereas global surface temperature has warmed slightly 
over this period. After adjustment for the transient effects 
of volcanic activity and ENSO (which can bias trends 
calculated from short periods of record), both tropospheric 
and surface data show slight warming since 1979. 
Indirect measures of temperature, such as borehole 
temperatures and glacier data, are in substantial agreement 
with the direct indicators of recent warmth. Sea ice extent 
does not show noticeable trends over the 22 years of 
available satellite data, although Northern Hemisphere sea 
ice has been below average in the early 1990s. Subsurface 
ocean measurements appear to be consistent with the 
geographical pattern of surface temperature changes. 
3.3 Has the Climate Become Wetter? 
3.3.1 Background 
An enhanced greenhouse effect may lead to changes in the 
hydrologie cycle such as increased evaporation, drought. 
152 
Observed Climate Variability 
and Change 
and precipitation. Unfortunately, our ability to determine 
tbe current state of the global hydrological cycle, let alone 
changes in it, is hampered by inadequate spatial coverage, 
inhomogeneities in climate records, poor data quality, and 
short record lengths. Nonetheless, some new aspects of 
changes and variations of the hydrological cycle have 
begun to emerge. 
3.3.2 Precipitation 
3.3.2.1 Land 
IPCC (1990) concluded that precipitation over land was 
generally increasing in the extra-tropical areas, with a 
(a) 
tendency for rainfall declines in the subtropics. It was noted 
in IPCC (1992) that precipitation over land is generally 
underestimated, typically by 10 to 15%, and that progressive 
improvements in instrumentation have introduced artificial, 
systematic increases in estimates of precipitation, 
particularly where snow is common. Nonetheless, the most 
reliable and useful measurements of multi-decadal 
precipitation variations are still these station data. 
Figure 3.9a shows the change in precipitation from 
1955-1974 to 1975-1994, expressed as a percentage of the 
1955 to 1974 precipitation. The recent low rainfall in the 
Sahel is evident. Longer term trends in precipitation are 
Percent 
¿.. » 
Change 
(-) 
( 
40-N 
20*N 
(b) 
Figure 3.9: Precipitation changes based on the mean change from two data sets: "Hulme" (Hulme 1991; Hulme et al., 1994) and the 
"Global Historical Climate Network-GHCN" (Vose et al, 1992; Eischeid et ai, 1995). (a) Change in precipitation over land from 
1955-1974 to 1975-1994, for 5° latitude by 5° longitude grid cells. Change expressed as percentage of 1955 to 1974 mean, (b) Trend in 
precipitation over land from 1900 to 1994. Average of trends from Hulme et ai (1994) and Eischeid et al. (1991) data sets. Trend 
(%/decade) expressed as percentage of the 1961 to 1990 mean from Hulme and 1951 to 1980 mean from GHCN. Magnitudes of the 
trends are depicted by the areas of the circles; shaded circles show increases; solid circles show decreases. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
153 
shown in Figure 3.9b. The 20th century rise in precipitation 
at high latitudes is clear, along with the decreases over the 
northern tropics of Africa. These trends are supported by 
regional and country studies, some of which have taken 
into account time-varying biases of precipitation 
measurements. 
Groisman et al. (1991) evaluated information on the 
history of gauges and observational procedures over the 
former Soviet Union. Using this information they adjusted 
the measured precipitation for changes in instrumentation. 
Their adjusted data still show substantial increases of 
annual precipitation (~10%/100yr). The increase has been 
larger during winter than in summer. Much of the increase 
has been due to increases in the first half of the 20th 
century with a tendency for reduced precipitation in some 
areas since the middle of the century. 
In North America annual precipitation has increased 
(Karl et al, 1993b; Groisman and Easterling, 1994). The 
increase in the contiguous USA is most apparent after 1950 
and is in large part due to increases during the autumn 
(September to November). Positive trends are apparent 
throughout much of northern Canada and Alaska during the 
past 40 years (Groisman and Easterling, 1994). Twentieth 
century station data over southern Canada and the northern 
USA (45-55°N) indicate increases of precipitation of 
10-15%, with increases of about 5% averaged across the 
contiguous USA. Increases are more prevalent in the 
eastern two-thirds of North America (Findlay et al, 1994; 
Lettenmaier et al, 1994). 
Precipitation changes in Europe (not including the 
former Soviet Union European countries) during the past 
century are latitudinally dependent. Time-varying 
measurement biases have been addressed in several 
countries (Hanssen-Bauer and F0rland, 1994), where they 
are likely to be most serious (Karl et al, 1993b). Overall, 
the data suggest an increase of precipitation in northern 
Europe and a decrease in southern Europe during the 20th 
century. In northern Europe (north of 55°N) Hanssen-
Bauer et al (1990) and Jónsson (1994) report an increase 
of precipitation since the 1960s for the Norwegian Arctic 
islands and Iceland while increasing precipitation has also 
been observed over the Faroe Islands (Frich, 1994). 
Denmark has had similar changes (Brázdil, 1992). West of 
the Scandinavian mountains increases have been reported 
(Frich, 1994; Hanssen-Bauer and F0rland, 1994), but not in 
Finland (Heino, 1994). There is strong seasonality 
associated with the increases as they are in large part due to 
the changes during the autumn. In central Europe no 
significant positive trends have been observed over the past 
century (Brázdil, 1992). In southern Europe decreases tend 
to dominate (e.g., Palmieri et al, 1991; Dahlstrôm, 1994), 
but with some evidence for increased autumn precipitation 
over the maritime portions of south-western Europe 
(Mondes, 1994). 
A long (1757-1992) record of areal 
average 
precipitation over Scotland has been analysed (Smith, 
1995). This data set is believed to be consistent back to at 
least 
1869. Annual precipitation has 
increased 
significantly, especially since the late 1970s, although 
summer rainfall has decreased. The recent increased 
precipitation is the largest sustained anomaly in the record. 
Time-varying precipitation biases in the tropics and 
subtropics are not as severe as those in the mid- and high 
latitudes where higher wind speeds, smaller droplet size, 
and frozen precipitation all contribute to higher biases. The 
20th century increase in precipitation in high latitudes is 
not matched by increases through the continental tropical 
and subtropical climates. Precipitation decreases, 
especially since mid-century, dominate large regions of the 
tropics and subtropics from North Africa east to Southeast 
Asia and Indonesia (Figures 3.9 and 3.10). Many of these 
areas with recent decreases are areas where droughts 
usually accompany El Niño episodes. So the decreases 
probably reflect the influence of the recent relatively 
frequent El Niño episodes (Section 3.4.2). 
Consistent continental-scale trends of precipitation are 
not apparent through Central and South America. In part, 
this is due to the ENSO phenomenon, the influence of 
which varies across the continent. The relatively frequent 
El Niño episodes during the past few decades has led to 
decadal-scale precipitation variations in some areas. For 
example, precipitation has decreased over the western 
slopes of Central America, where the influence of ENSO is 
clearly evident, but March-May rainfall in the Parana-
Paraguay River Basin of south-central South America has 
increased. 
Australian and New Zealand precipitation is also heavily 
influenced by ENSO, and is characterised by large inter-
annual fluctuadons. There is evidence of an increase of 
summer rainfall (Nicholls and Lavery, 1992) in much of 
eastern Australia after the 1940s (with clusters of wet years 
in the 1950s and 1970s), although the north-east has 
suffered from frequent droughts in the last decade, 
associated with the relatively frequent El Niño events. The 
last four decades have seen a decrease in eastern Australian 
annual rainfall. There has been a long-term sustained 
decrease of winter rainfall in the far south-west, which has 
been linked to regional circulation changes (Allan and 
Haylock, 1993; see Section 3.4.4) and perhaps exacerbated 
by local changes in vegetation (Lyons et al, 1993). Many 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
155 
areas in tiie nortii and east of New Zealand have been drier 
since the mid-1970s, with areas in the south and west 
wetter (Salinger et al, 1992). 
One of the most complex and important precipitation 
systems in the Northern Hemisphere is the Asian summer 
monsoon. There has been a notable absence of very heavy 
monsoon onset (May-June) rains along the Yangtze River 
Valley of China ('"Chen et al, 1992) since about 1970, 
although total warm season rainfall has changed little. 
Indian summer monsoon rainfall reveals high interannual 
and decadal variability (Sontakke et al, 1992, 1993; 
Parthasarathy et al, 1992, 1994). The data indicate two wet 
periods of about 30 years (-1871-1900 and 1931-60) and 
two drier 30-year periods (1901-30 and 1961-90). Figure 
3.10 indicates low rainfall through much of south and 
south-east Asia in the last few decades. At least some of 
this decrease reflects the influence of the recent 
frequent/intense El Niño episodes. 
Throughout Africa marked variations in rainfall are 
evident (Figures 3.9 and 3.10). Rainfall in Sahelian West 
Africa from the late 1960s to 1993 was well below the 
amounts received earlier in the century, and over the last 
few decades has been about half that of the wet 1950s. 
Similar dry periods occurred during the historical and 
recent geologic past (Nicholson, 1994a,b; see Section 
3.6.2). The recent period exhibits some differences in 
character from previous dry periods, namely a tendency 
towards continental-scale dryness (Nicholson, 1995). In 
recent years precipitation in eastern Northern Africa and 
the Arabian Peninsula has returned to levels more typical 
of the first-half of the century. Sahel rainfall in 1994 was 
greater than in any year- since the 1960s. 
Concerns about a possible link between climate change 
and desertification indicate the need for monitoring of arid 
region precipitation. The only large arid region with a 
strong trend to lower rainfall during the 20th century is 
Northern Africa, where rainfall has been low over the last 
few decades (Figure 3.10). 
There have been several attempts to construct long-term 
instrumental worldwide precipitation time-series for 
hemispheric and global land areas (Bradley et al, 1987; 
Diaz, et al., 1989; Eischeid et al, 1991; Hulme, 1991; 
Hulme et al, 1994). Figure 3.11 shows zonal average 
annual precipitation over land, in large latitudinal bands. 
There has been a substantial decrease of precipitation over 
the Northern Heinisphere subtropics primarily over the last 
three decades. Increases have occurred in the mid- and high 
latitudes. Since bias corrections have not yet been applied 
to the North American data in either the Eischeid et al. 
(1995) or the Hulme (1991) data sets these trends are likely 
mm 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 3.11: Annual and smoothed precipitation anomalies and 
smoothed temperature anomaUes from 1961 to 1990 mean. 
Smooth curves were created using nine-point binomial filters of 
annual precipitation (blue - Hulme; black - GHCN; the green line 
in the top panel is the average of Hulme and GHCN), and 
temperature (red - Jones, 1994a). Annua! bars are the average of 
Hulme and GHCN. Top panel is for the band SS^S to 85°N. 
Values in parentheses in upper right corner of each panel are the 
trend (%/century) of precipitation for GHCN (based on 1951 to 
1980 means) and Hulme (1961 to 1990 means), respectively. 
756 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
to be exaggerated. Based on the regional and country-wide 
studies where adjustments have been made however, the 
sign of the mid- to high latitude trend is not in doubt. 
Precipitation trends over land in the tropics and Southern 
Hemisphere are not statistically significant, although they 
indicate decreased precipitation in recent years. 
In summary, the best evidence available suggests there 
has been a small positive (1%) global trend in precipitation 
over land during the 20th century, although precipitation 
has been relatively low since the late 1970s (Figure 3.11). 
3.3.2.2 
Ocean 
Measurement of changes of precipitation over the oceans 
presents extreme difficulties (IPCC, 1990, 1992). Multi-
decadal surface-based observations from gauges are limited 
to very small atolls. Space-based observations, although 
providing more or less continuous coverage, have several 
limitations, not least of which is that measurements to 
directly estimate precipitation are not available until 1979, 
with the operation of the Micro-Wave Sounding Unit 
(MSU) aboard NOAA polar orbiting satellites. As a result, 
researchers have had to resort to the use of data such as 
real-time cloud imaging, atmospheric temperature 
profiling, etc. to infer changes of precipitation. 
Three methods (Garcia, 1981; Arkin and Ardanuy, 1989; 
Spencer, 1993) have been used to infer decadal variability 
of precipitation over the oceans from space-based 
instruments. These are: idenrifying Highly Reflective 
Clouds (HRC); measuring cloud top temperatures from 
Outgoing Long-wave Radiation (OLR); and the use of the 
Microwave Sounding Unit (MSU). The H R C data is 
limited by poor resolution of the diurnal cycle, the 
subjective nature of the technique, variations from satellite 
to satellite, and spatial sampling primarily confined to the 
tropics and subtropics. The OLR data are limited to those 
areas where precipitation is dominated by cold cloud top i 
temperatures, again principally the tropics and subtropics. 
Additionally, they are based on observations from a 
number of instruments on successive satellites, and 
temporal inhomogeneities associated with satellite drift and 
instrument calibrations have affected the data set. 
Therefore, any estimate of precipitation change based on 
the HRC and O L R data sets is embedded with internal 
inhomogeneities. Being a more direct measure of rainfall, 
the M S U data avoid some of the limitations of the HRC 
and OLR. Nonetheless, these measurements are spatially 
limited, restricted to unfrozen ocean areas, liquid 
precipitation, and suffer from the low spatial resolution of 
the instrument, as well as diurnal sampling inadequacies 
(Negri etal, 1994). 
In IPCC (1990) evidence was presented to suggest that 
the O L R data analysed by Nitta and Yamada (1989) 
indicated an increase of tropical precipitation. A re-
examination of the biases inherent in these data led 
Chelliah and Arkin (1992) and IPCC (1992) to conclude 
that a substantial portion of the increase of precipitation 
since 1974 was not climate-induced because of OLR biases 
due to changes in equatorial crossing time and uncertainties 
in sensor calibration (Gadgil et al, 1992). However, new 
analyses by Graham (1995) using satellite data, a coarse 
Tropical Pacific Ocean island data set, and model-derived 
moisture flux convergence based on observed SSTs 
suggest an increase of tropical Pacific precipitation 
between two six-year periods before and after 1976, the 
time of the commencement of a decadal-scale fluctuation 
in the atmospheric circulation over the Pacific Ocean 
(Trenberth and Hurrell, 1994; see Section 3.4.3). Salinger 
et al. (1995a) analysed trends of precipitation from tropical 
Pacific atolls and islands. Central and eastern equatorial 
Pacific rainfall increased in the mid-1970s, concomitant 
with the change to increased frequency of El Niño episodes 
and the observed decreased precipitation in the south-west 
Pacific and in some land areas affected by ENSO (Figure 
3.10). 
3.3.3 Concomitant Changes of Precipitation and 
Temperature 
Strong low-frequency relationships exist between 
temperature and land-based precipitation, on regional 
space-scales. Figure 3.11 indicates that the relationship 
between multi-decadal fluctuations of precipitation and 
temperature is latitudinally dependent. For the mid- to high 
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere simultaneous 
increases of temperature and precipitation have been 
observed, but for the tropics, subtropics, and mid-latitudes 
of the Southern Hemisphere warmer temperatures have 
been associated with decreases of precipitation. This latter 
characteristic is a dominant feature of the recent increase of 
global temperature beginning in the mid-1970s. 
3.3.4 Snow Cover, Snowfall, and Snow Depth 
The lack of long-term homogeneous data is the major 
obstacle to evaluation of decadal-scale changes in land-
surface cryospheric variables. Recent analyses however, 
have made some progress toward improving our 
understanding of changes in these variables. 
Northern Hemisphere land-surface snow cover extent 
has decreased in recent years (1988-1994) of the 21-year 
period-of-record of satellite data (Robinson et al, 1993; 
Groisman et al, 1994a). The deficit of snow has been 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
157 
particularly apparent in spring (Figure 3.12). The snow 
cover of summer and autumn of these recent years has also 
been low, while winter snow cover exhibits less apparent 
decadal changes. The annual mean extent of snow cover 
has decreased by about 10% during the past 21 years over 
the Northern Hemisphere. Percentage decreases have been 
similar over North America and Asia (Groisman et ai, 
1994b). The decrease in snow cover extent is closely 
coupled to an increase in temperature (Figure 3.12). The 
warming has been strong in spring over the northern land 
areas (Chapman and Walsh, 1993; Parker et ai, 1994). 
This is also reflected in earlier lake ice melting as reported 
by Skinner (1993), earlier snowmelt related floods on 
rivers in west-central Canada (Burn, 1994) and California 
(Dettinger and Cayan, 1995), and reduced duration of river 
ice over the former Soviet Union (Ginsburg, et al. 1992; 
Soldatova, 1993). Groisman et al. (1994a,b) have shown 
that snow-radiation feedback can account for up to 50% of 
the springtime April-May warming over the Northern 
Hemisphere land areas since the early 1970s. These results 
help explain why the increase of surface air temperatures 
over the Northern Hemisphere land areas has been more 
significant in spring than in other seasons. 
While satellite remote sensing is being explored as a 
source of data on snow depth water equivalent, station data 
provide the only information on snowfall and snow depth 
over periods longer than about two decades. Station 
measurements indicate that annual snowfall has increased 
over the period 1950-90 by -20% over northern Canada 
(north of 55°N) and by -11% over Alaska (Groisman and 
Easterling, 1994). Total precipitation has increased in all 
these regions (Section 3.3.2.1); in southern Canada and the 
northern USA however, the increase of precipitation has 
been accompanied by higher ratios of liquid to solid 
precipitation as the temperatures have also increased. A 
small decrease of snowfall has been observed in the 
45-55°N latitudinal belt. Decadal summaries of snowfall 
measurements in China have been compiled by Li (1987), 
who found a decrease of snowfall over China during the 
1950s followed by an increase during the 1960s and 1970s. 
There have been several analyses of changes in snow 
depth over Europe and Asia. Snow depth responds to both 
changes of precipitation and temperature. A synthesis of 
20th century station snow depth measurements for the 
former Soviet Union (Meshcherskaya et al., 1995) 
indicates decreases (-14%) of snow depth during February 
over the European portion of the former Soviet Union with 
a smaller decrease over the Asian sectors of the former 
Soviet Union where snow depth has actually increased 
since the 1960s. 
-0.5 
0.6 
Jun-Sep 
- L O - i - r 
Figure 3.12: Seasonal and annual variations of Northern Hemisphere 
land-surface snow cover extent (Greenland excluded) and the 
surface temperature over regions of transient snow cover. Yearly 
anomalies (shown as bars) are given for snow cover extent. 
Smooth curves were created using nine-point binomial filters for 
yearly snow cover (thick) or temperature anomalies (thin) with 
scale reversed, "r" indicates correlation between annual values. 
Note bottom panel is for "snow year" (October-September). 
158 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
3.3.5 Land-surface and Subsurface Water 
Changes of precipitation and/or evaporation may lead to 
changes in runoff or soil moisture storage. Thus changes in 
streamflow, lake levels, levels of inland seas, and soil 
moisture may provide information about changes in the 
hydrological cycle. Data on many of these aspects of the 
hydrological cycle are suspect because of human 
influences, such as building of dams to regulate 
streamflow, so it is important to develop an internally 
consistent scenario of change. 
3.3.5.1 Streamflow 
Historical records of 142 rivers throughout the world with 
more than 50 years of historical data and drainage areas 
larger than 1000 km^ were analysed for trends by Chiew 
and McMahon (1993, 1995). Although statistically 
significant trends and changes in means were detected at 
several locations, they were not always consistent within 
regions. No clear evidence of wide-spread change in the 
annual streamflow and peak discharges of rivers in the 
world was found. 
Analyses from a number of streamflow gauging stations 
on major drainage basins across South America do not 
reveal general increases or decreases of streamflow. There 
are however, a number of drainage basins that depict 
important decadal-scale climate variations (Marengo, 
1995). Reduced streamflow beginning in the 1970s in 
Colombia is consistent with similar behaviour in Pacific 
Central America. The Chicama and Chira River Basins in 
north-west Peru also reflect large interdecadal variations. 
Streamflow of the Rio Negro at Manaus is closely related 
to rainfall in north-west Amazonia (Marengo, 1992, 1995). 
Consistent trends are absent from the record, although 
there appears to be a recent (since 1973) minor short-term 
Lake Erie level anomalies 
(b) 
(c) 
-0.8 ^|iiiiiiiM|iiijiiiii|iiiiiiiii|iiimin| 
iiii|iiiiimi|NNiim| 
|i |IMI' 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 1980 
Year 
Great Slave Lake level anomalies 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
CO 
E 
0 
о 
с я -0.1 
ф 
Ф -0.2 
-0.3 
-0.4 
wn 
11 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
Year 
1980 
as 
E о 
с со 
0) 
0.4 
0.2 
О 
-0.2 
-0.4 
-0.6 
Lake Superior level anomalies 
U 
Jiiiiiiii|imiiiii|iiiiiiiii|ii 
1900 
1920 
iiiiii[iiiiiNii|iiiiiiiii|miimi|iiiiiijii|iiimiii(m 
1940 
1960 1980 
(d) 
CO 
E о 
с со 
1 
О) 
Year 
Great Salt Lake level anomalies 
Figure 3.13: Variations in lake level for some major lakes across North America. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
159 
increase of streamflow, probably related to an increase in 
rainfall associated with increased convection over 
Amazonia as reported by Chu et al., (1994) who also found 
little change in convective activity over areas of 
deforestation in south-western Amazonia. Generally, for 
South America, no clear unidirectional trend of streamflow 
is evident for the records analysed to date. A strong signal 
of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation is evident in several 
regions. These variations often dominate decadal-scale 
variability of streamflow. The lack of an overall trend is 
consistent with the precipitation variations. 
In North America, the autumn increase of precipitation 
in the contiguous USA is also reflected in an increase in 
streamflow. Lins and Michaels (1994) found statistically 
significant increases in natural streamflow during the 
autumn and winter in nearly all regions of the contiguous 
USA (1948-88). The most significant (statistically) 
increases were generally found from the Rocky Mountains 
eastward to the Atlantic. 
3.3.5.2 Lake levels 
Large lakes and inland seas can serve as useful indicators 
of climate variability and change. With large surface areas 
and limited outflow capacity, these natural reservoirs filter 
out short-term variability and respond to longer term 
variations in the hydrologie cycle. However, local effects 
often confound the use of lake levels to monitor climate 
variations. 
The historically small variations of levels of the North 
American Great Lakes are mainly due to natural changes in 
lake levels (Magnuson et al, 1995). The lakes have been in 
a regime of high water levels since the late 1960s 
culminaflng in record high levels in 1986 (Changnon, 
1987). A major drop occurred in response to an intense 
drought in 1988, but lake levels continue to remain above 
the long-term mean for Lakes Michigan, Huron, and Erie. 
Lake Superior has been slightly below its long-term 
average since 1988 (Figure 3.13). Levels of the Great Salt 
Lake in Utah are somewhat similar to those in the Great 
Lakes, but the Lake has recently been regulated with the 
introduction of pumps to relieve the historic peak water 
levels of 1986-87. The Great Slave Lake, located in the 
Northwest Territories of Canada has also continued to be at 
above average levels for the past several years compared to 
the relatively low levels observed during the 1940s. 
Although there has been regulation on one of the rivers 
flowing into the Great Slave Lake since 1968, comparison 
of the water levels of the Great Slave and Great Bear Lakes 
suggests it has had limited influence on annual or decadal 
fluctuations. 
1830 
1850 
1870 
1890 
1910 
1930 
1950 
1970 
1990 
2010 
Year 
Figure 3.14: Annual mean sea level of the Caspian Sea as observed 
(solid line) and as calculated without local anthropogenic changes 
in land-use (dashed line) (updated after Shiklomanov, 1976). 
The Caspian Sea is the largest closed water body in the 
world. Its sea level has been measured since 1837 (Figure 
3.14) and has fluctuated by nearly 4 m. Sea level was quite 
stable until the 1930s when it fell 1.6 m in six years. The 
level abruptly began to rise in 1977, from record low 
values, perhaps the lowest values since the 14th century. 
The main contribution to the rapid decrease of sea level in 
the 1930s was reduced runoff into the Sea, but the most 
recent increase is attributed to a combination of reduced 
evaporation (Section 3.3.6.1; Figure 3.15), increases in 
runoff, and an engineered blockage of sea water into the 
Kara Bogaz Gol (which has since been reopened; Golitsyn 
etal, 1990; Golitsyn, 1995). 
Since 1965 lake levels in Northern Hemisphere Africa 
have declined sharply (Grove, 1995). The early 1960s were 
relatively wet, but the low Sahel/Sudan precipitation since 
then (Figure 3.10) led to Lake Chad shrinking from its 
highest level and extent in the 1960s to about one tenth of 
the area by the 1980s. This decline was due to decreased 
rainfall, and not the result of excessive extraction of water 
for iiTigation. 
3.3.5.3 Soil moisture 
There are few long-term data sets of soil moisture 
measurements. One example is the so-called "water-
balance" network within the former Soviet Union, at some 
places for more than 30 years (Robock et al., 1995; 
Vinnikov et al, 1995). In this network, total soil moisture 
measurements have been made over natural vegetation soil 
using a thermostat-weighing technique (Vinnikov and 
Yeserkepova, 1991). The data from the European part of 
the former Soviet Union exhibit a general increase in soil 
moisture from the 1970s to the 1980s, consistent with the 
increase of precipitation observed over the European 
portion of the former Soviet Union, and a reduction of 
evaporation (Section 3.3.6.1). 
160 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
3.3.6 Evaporation 
Systematic long-term measurements of surface evaporation 
have been carried out over many continental areas, but few 
analyses of their trends have been completed. Changes in 
evaporation over the ocean have proven to be particularly 
difficult to monitor, and are prone to time-varying biases. 
3.3.6.1 Land 
Estimates of evaporation over land have been obtained 
from pan evaporimeters. Although these measurements can 
neither be considered as evaporation from lakes or 
reservoirs, nor as evaporation from ground, they can be 
used as a composite index that characterises the annual and 
seasonal water and heat balance between the water surface 
of the evaporimeter and the atmosphere. Trends in such an 
evaporation index from the former Soviet Union have 
recently been analysed (Golubev and Zmeikova, 1991) for 
a network of 190 stations. Although some measurements 
date back to the late 19th century, changes in 
instrumentation, observational procedures, and data 
management practices make the data inhomogeneous prior 
to 1951. The analysis indicates a reduction of evaporation 
since 1951 during the warm season (the freeze-free period) 
over the European and Siberian (north of 55°N) portions of 
the former Soviet Union (Figure 3.15), with little change in 
central Asia and Kazakhstan. The rapid decrease in 
evaporation in the European sector in 1976 corresponds 
with the timing of the decrease in the diurnal temperature 
range (Section 3.2.2.4 and Karl et al, 1993a; Peterson et 
ai, 1995) over the former Soviet Union. In the USA, where 
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
Former Soviet Union 
20° E 
40° 
60° 
80° 
1000 
120° 
140° 
1945 
1955 1965 
1975 
1985 
1995 
1945 
1955 
1965 
1975 
1985 
1995 
Figure 3.15: Area-averaged standardised anomalies of evaporation derived from pan evaporimeters for sectors in the former Soviet 
Union in the warm period of the year (updated from Golubev and Zmeikova, 1991), and for the USA (Peterson et al, 1995). The dashed 
lines represent interannual variations and the smoothed curves suppress variations on time-scales of a decade or less. 
Observed CUmate VariabUity and Change 
161 
data from a network of over 300 stations are available but 
have yet to be thoroughly inspected for inhomogeneities, 
an overall decrease in evaporation is also observed (Figure 
3.15; Peterson et al., 1995) that closely resembles the 
decrease in the diurnal temperature range. 
3.3.6.2 Ocean 
The oceans provide a source of moisture for the 
atmosphere and subsequent precipitation over land. 
Estimating long-term changes of oceanic evaporation is 
very difficult, and all estimates must be viewed with 
considerable caution due to time varying biases in the data. 
Bulk aerodynamic parametrizations are the only practical 
means of comprehensively calculating evaporation over 
regions as large as ocean basins and over multi-decadal 
time-scales. Routine marine weather observations of wind, 
temperature, and humidity, among other elements, are 
available over broad sectors of the oceans for the past four 
decades. These observations allow estimation of 
evaporation based on the sea surface saturation specific 
humidity, the specific humidity of the overlying air, and 
the near-surface wind speed. 
Marine weather observation procedures were not 
designed to provide long-term homogeneous climate data, 
and several problems exist that can obscure climate-
induced changes. Marine data show an increase of wind 
speed (Cardone et al, 1990) over the four decades since 
World War II, believed to be largely artificial, involving 
changes from Beaufort scale sea state estimates of wind 
speed to anemometer observations (Ramage, 1987). 
Posmentier et al. (1989) argued an increase in wind is 
inconsistent with observed trends in tropical sea level and 
sea surface temperature, which in the eastern tropical 
Pacific have increased rather than decreased as would be 
expected under an increasing trade wind regime. The 
notion of no global increase in wind speed is consistent 
with the calculations of Ward (1992, 1994) who used sea 
level pressure gradients to estimate changes in wind speed. 
Even after removing the apparent wind bias however, 
evaporation was estimated to have increased by more than 
0.5 mm/day over the tropical oceans (10°S to 14°N) during 
the last four decades (Flohn et al, 1992). Graham (1995) 
used model calculations to suggest that increases of 
evaporation should also have occurred in the tropical 
Pacific, even without any increase of wind speed. 
Weare (1984) and Gayan (1992) indicate that anomalous 
evaporation is influenced about equally by fluctuations in 
wind speed and fluctuations in vertical moisture gradients. 
Furthermore, the calculations of evaporation trends over 
much of the Atlantic indicate that evaporation has 
increased both because of vertical moisture gradients and 
increases in wind speed. That is, evaporation trends would 
still be positive even without any change in wind speed. 
Increases in evaporation are found in both winter and 
summer. 
Other areas of the oceans are known to exhibit multi-
decadal changes in evaporation. For example, there was a 
transition from warm to coo) conditions in the western and 
central North Pacific associated with a cluster of winters 
with deep Aleutian Lows beginning in the winter of 
1976-77 (Douglas et al, 1982; Venrick et al, 1987; 
Trenberth, 1990; Miller et al, 1994; Trenberth and Hurrell, 
1994). Since such transitions involve a redistribution of the 
paths of storms across the Pacific basin there are large-
scale changes in the wind, temperature, and humidity with 
concomitant changes of evaporation. The magnitude of 
these changes over the North Pacific basin is estimated to 
be between 0.2 and 0.4 mm/day, with evaporation 
increasing over the western North Pacific, but decreasing 
over the Gulf of Alaska. 
3.3.7 Water Vapour 
Water vapour is the most abundant greenhouse gas and 
makes the largest contribution to the natural greenhouse 
effect. Half of all the moisture in the atmosphere is 
between sea level and 850 hPa and less than 10% is above 
500 hPa. The amount in the stratosphere is probably less 
than 1% of the total. Despite the small amount of water 
vapour in the stratosphere, changes there may lead to 
significant changes in the radiative forcing of climate 
(Oltmans and Hofmann, 1995). 
Monitoring atmospheric moisture presents many 
difficulties. Because the residence time of water vapour in 
the atmosphere is short, about 10 days, its distribution is 
horizontally, as well as vertically, heterogeneous. 
Therefore observations at many places and levels are 
necessary for adequate representation of climatically 
important changes. Measurement problems also make 
detecting trends of water vapour difficult. Most of the 
information about tropospheric water vapour conies from 
radiosonde measurements taken for daily weather 
forecasts. Unfortunately, this instrumentation is not capable 
of accurate measurements at the low temperatures and very 
low moisture conditions of the upper troposphere, 
stratosphere, and polar regions of the planet. Another 
serious problem with radiosonde data stems from the 
changes of instruments and reporting practices that have 
occurred through the period of record. About a dozen 
different manufacturers supply radiosondes to the world's 
weather services, some with quite different sensor designs. 
162 
Observed CUmate Variabdit}' and Change 
These factors make it difficult to separate climate changes 
from changes in measurement programs (Elliott and 
Gaffen, 1991). Our inability to account for these 
inhomogeneities limits assessments of the change in 
atmospheric moisture to the last 20 years, thereby making 
it difficult to disringuish between transient phenomena, 
such as ENSO, and long-term change. Nevertheless, with 
careful attention to these problems, some estimates of 
tropospheric water vapour can be obtained. 
Elliott et al. (1995) found increases in precipitable water 
from 1973 to 1993 over all of North America except 
northern and eastern Canada, where it decreased slightly. 
The positive trends tended to increase with decreasing 
latitude, with maximum values of about 3 mm/decade. The 
increases as a percentage of the annual mean also tended to 
be greater at lower latitudes, approaching a maximum of 
8%/decade. The regions of moisture increase were generally 
also regions with rising temperatures over the same period 
and the regions of moisture decrease were generally regions 
with decreasing temperatures. There was a strong (but not 
universal) tendency for the moisture increases to be 
accompanied by increases in relative humidity. 
There have been several analyses of changes in water 
vapour over the tropical oceans using radiosonde data. 
Hense et al. (1988) report an upward trend of moisture in 
the 700-500 hPa layer in the western Pacific from 1965 to 
1986, but the data prior to 1973 are not necessarily 
homogeneous because of a change in instrumentation in 
1973 (Elliott and Gaffen, 1991). Elliott et al., (1991) 
document a moisture increase in the equatorial Pacific from 
1973-86 and Gaffen et al. (1991) using more stations also 
found an increase of specific humidity on the order of 10% 
from 1973 to 1986, but the scatter of data is such that this 
value is only a rough estimate of the order-of-magnitude of 
the change. Much of the change occurred during a 
relatively brief interval, beginning about 1977 (see Section 
3.4.3). An increase in tropical western Pacific moisture was 
also found by Gutzler (1992) at four tropical island 
stations. There were increases in humidity throughout the 
troposphere with the largest increases near the surface. The 
study indicates an increase in water vapour of about 
6%/decade for the period 1973-1988. 
Gaffen et al. (1992) computed trends of water vapour for 
some 35 radiosonde stations. Most of these stations, 
especially in the western tropical Pacific, showed an increase 
in precipitable water during the period 1973-90. The largest 
and most statistically significant trends were at tropical 
stations, where increases as large as 13%/decade were found. 
Oltmans and Hofmann (1995) analysed stratospheric and 
upper tropospheric water vapour measurements (10-26 
km) over Boulder, Colorado during the period 1981-94. 
Over this short period they found positive trends of water 
vapour in the stratosphere, but statistically significant 
increases, of between 0.5 and 1%/yr, were confined to the 
layers between 16 and 24 km. Data from other locations 
must be analysed and over longer time intervals however, 
before these results can be generalised. 
3.3.8 Clouds 
In addition to providing evidence of an enhanced 
hydrological cycle, changes of cloud distribution can have 
very important climatic feedbacks. Changes in clouds 
modify both incoming and outgoing radiation depending 
on their level, amount, vertical extent, and composition. 
3.3.8.1 Land 
There have not been any major new analyses of large-scale 
changes in land-based observations of cloud cover 
published since the IPCC (1990) report. Henderson-Sellers 
(1992) has, however, summarised her analyses of changes 
in cloud cover over Australia, Europe, India and North 
America. Added confidence has been attached to these 
analyses because the diurnal temperature range, which is 
quite sensitive to changes of cloud cover (Karl et al., 
1993a), has decreased in many of the regions with a 
reported increase in cloud cover. Moreover, Karl et al. 
(1995e) report a step-like increase in cloud amount over 
the former Soviet Union around 1976 consistent with the 
step-like decreases of evaporation (in the European sector 
of the former Soviet Union, Figure 3.15) and of the diurnal 
temperature range. In addition, analyses by Environment 
Canada (1995) generally support an increase in cloud 
amount throughout Canada since 1953, in particular over 
the lower Great Lakes region during autumn. There have 
been increases of cloud cover over Australia and the USA 
since at least the mid-20th century. In at least some areas 
(e.g., Australia), however, cloud cover over land may have 
decreased since about 1980 (Henderson-Sellers, 1992). 
3.3.8.2 Ocean 
Marine weather observations of clouds have been analysed. 
Satellite observations have also been used, but owing to 
instrumental changes and the shortness of their record, 
cannot be used with any degree of confidence to assess 
multi-year- trends or changes. 
Fifty million routine weather observations from ships 
were analysed by Warren et al. (1988), who computed 
average total cloud cover and the amounts of six cloud 
types for each of the four seasons for the 30 year period 
1952 to 1981. During the 1952 to 1981 period London et 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
163 
al. (1991) reported a global ocean average increase of 
cloud cover of 0.7%. This increase was concentrated at low 
latitudes (20°N-20°S), and the cloud types contributing 
most to the increase were cumulonimbus and cirrus. The 
increase in cumulonimbus was nearly 3% and in cirrus 
about 1%, at the expense of cumulus clouds which 
decreased by about 1%. This data set has recently been 
updated through 1991, and indicates that cloud cover over 
the oceans has continued to increase. 
Interannual 
variations of marine stratus and 
stratocumulus in the subtropics and mid-latitudes are 
inversely correlated with SST (Norris and Leovy, 1994). 
The 30-year trends of marine stratus and stratocumulus 
exhibit the same geographical patterns as do SSTs (cf. 
Parker et al., 1994): increases in cloud amount over areas 
with decreasing temperatures in the northern mid-latitude 
oceans, and decreases with warming off the west coast of 
North America. Analysis of changes in cloud types 
(Parungo et ai, 1994) suggests an increase in altostratus 
and altocumulus cloud amount centred in the Northern 
Hemisphere mid-latitudes (30°N-50°N). Over the 30-year 
period 1952 to 1981 these mid-level clouds increased in 
frequency from 20 to 26%. This large apparent increase 
requires investigation of possible time-varying biases. 
3.3.9 Summary of Section 3,3. 
Precipitation has increased over land in high latitudes of 
the Northern Hemisphere, especially during the autumn. A 
decrease of precipitation occun'ed after the 1960s over the 
subtropics and tropics from Africa to Indonesia, as 
temperatures increased. Many of the changes in 
precipitation over land are consistent with changes in 
streamflow, lake levels, and soil moisture. There is 
evidence to suggest increased precipitation over the 
equatorial Pacific Ocean (near the dateline) in recent 
decades, with decreases to the north and south. Based on 
the available data, there has been a small positive (1%) 
global trend in precipitation over land during the 20th 
century, although precipitation has been low since about 
1980. 
Evaporation potential has decreased (since 1951) over 
much of the former Soviet Union (and possibly also in the 
USA). Evaporation appears to have increased over the 
tropical oceans (although not everywhere). There is 
evidence suggesting an increase of atmospheric water 
vapour in the tropics, at least since 1973. In general, cloud 
amount has increased both over land (at least up to the end 
of the 1970s) and the ocean. Over the ocean increases in 
both convective and middle and high level clouds have 
been reported. 
3.4 Has the Atmospheric/Oceanic Circulation Changed? 
3.4.1 Background 
The atmospheric circulation is the main control behind 
regional changes in wind, temperature, precipitation, soil 
moisture and other climatic variables. Variations in many 
of these variables are strongly related through large-scale 
features of the atmospheric circulation, as well as through 
interactions involving the land and ocean surfaces (IPCC, 
1990). Two well-known examples of such large-scale 
features are the El Nino-Southern Oscillation and the North 
Atlantic Oscillation, both of which are closely related to 
climatic fluctuations in many areas. Evidence of associated 
changes or variations in the atmospheric circulation may 
enhance confidence in the reality of observed changes and 
variations in the climate variables in these areas. 
Comprehensive, long-term monitoring of changes and 
variations in the El Nino-Southern Oscillation and North 
Atiantic Oscillation, and the atmospheric circulation in 
general, requires the analysis of meteorological and 
oceanic fields on a routine basis. Analyses of such fields 
are performed every day by national meteorological 
services. However, the analysis schemes, 
their 
observational basis, and even the theoretical meteorology 
underlying the analysis have all changed dramatically over 
the decades (Trenberth, 1996). Thus, these analyses are of 
only limited use for analysis of variations and changes in 
circulation over extended periods. Where such analyses are 
used, their results need to be confirmed by analysis based 
solely upon high-quality station data. The lack of 
homogeneity in the atmospheric analyses restricted the 
variety of atmospheric circulation features IPCC (1990) 
decided could be examined with confidence. The same 
problem occurred in IPCC (1992), and again here only a 
small number of the more reliable circulation features are 
examined, namely the El Nino-Southern Oscillation and 
the North Atlantic Oscillation. The discussion of a possible 
recent increase in the intensity of the winter atmospheric 
circulation over the extra-tropical Pacific and Atlantic 
(IPCC, 1990) is also updated. 
Ocean circulation variations and change can also be 
important determinants of climate variations, so their routine 
monitoring is also necessary. However, little information is 
available, as yet, on variations and change in ocean 
circulation on the time-scales of relevance to this chapter. 
3.4.2 El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon is 
the primary mode of climate variability in the 2-5 year 
time band. Release of latent heat associated with ENSO 
164 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
episodes affects global temperature (Pan and Oort, 1990; 
Graham, 1995), and associated changes in oceanic 
upwelling influence atmospheric COj levels (Keeling et 
al., 1989). It is important to assess the stability of the 
ENSO, i.e., to determine how long it has been operating, 
and whether it exhibits longer-term variations in its 
influence. 
As instrumental records for the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation extend back only to the late 19th century, it is 
necessary to use various proxy approaches to derive the 
history of El Nino-Southern Oscillation events. In addition 
to analyses of historical records (Quinn, 1992), corals, tree 
rings, tropical ice cores, and varve sediments have also 
been employed to derive temporal histories of ENSO 
variability (Diaz and Markgraf, 1992; Cole et al, 1993; 
Diaz and Pulwarty, 1994). Whetton et al. (1995) 
demonstrate that proxy records of ENSO from different 
regions do not always correspond with each other. One 
coral record (Dunbar et al, 1994) is from the Galapagos 
Islands, where a time-series of oxygen isotope 
measurements indicates significant variations in the El 
Nino-Southern Oscillation. Tree ring and other records also 
indicate temporal variations in some of the ENSO periods 
(Diaz and Markgraf, 1992). 
Instrumental records have also been examined to search 
for possible changes in the El Nino-Southern Oscillation. 
The Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), a simple index of 
the E l Nino-Southern Oscillation based on surface 
atmospheric pressures at Darwin and Tabid, is plotted in 
Figure 3.16. El Niño (or warm) events are associated with 
large negative excursions of the SOI and warmer than 
normal temperatures in the central and east equatorial 
Pacific. La Niña episodes (or cold events, when the east 
equatorial Pacific is cool) are associated with positive 
values of the SOI. The dominance of time-scales of 2-5 
years in the El Nino-Southern Oscillation is apparent in 
this figure. The periodicity of El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
has varied since 1950. Between 1950 and 1965 the 
phenomenon exhibited a period of about five years. Since 
1965 the period has shortened somewhat, closer to four 
years. A similar pattern of change in frequency was evident 
in a central equatorial Pacific coral record of the El Nino-
Southern Oscillation (Cole et al, 1993). El Niño events 
occurred more often around the start of the 20th century 
than during the 1960s and 1970s (Anderson, 1992). 
Allan (1993) and Karoly et al (1996) have documented 
decadal-scale variations in the E l Nino-Southern 
Oscillation and its teleconnections over the last century. 
X 
CD 
-a 
Ç 
с о 
Ü 
(Л 
О 
£ 
3 
о 
СЛ 
40 
30 
20 
10 
О 
- 1 0 
- 2 0 
- 3 0 
- 4 0 
i ' i i i i n i | m i i m i | m m i n | 
11 ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' Ч ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' M ' ' ' ' ' ' ' Ч ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' M ' ' ' ' ' ' ' Ч ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' Ч ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' Ч I ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 
IIIIIIHllimilllIlllliiiiil 
iilim 
Il 
h 
Iiiiiiiiiil 
Iiiii 
Il 
In 
I 
I 
1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 
Year 
Figure 3.16: Seasonal values of the Troup Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), March-May 1876 through March-May 1995. SOI only 
plotted when both Darwin and Tahiti data available. 
Obsei-ved Climate Variability and Change 
165 
The most robust and coherent signals were evident in the 
late 19th century, and since the 1940s. ENSO activity was 
weaker and more fragmented in the intervening period. 
Wang (1995) found that the characteristics of the onset of 
the Pacific-wide warming associated with an El Niño 
changed after the mid-1970s. 
Indeed, there appears to have been a rather distinct 
change in ENSO in 1976/77 (Eigure 3.16). Since then, 
there have been relatively more frequent El Niño episodes, 
with only rare excursions into the other extreme (La Niña 
episodes) of the phenomenon (Trenberth and Hurrell, 
1994), and the SOI has tended to be negative for extended 
periods. During this period sea surface temperatures in the 
central and equatorial Pacific have tended to remain 
anomalously high, relative to previous decades. As well, 
precipitation over land in many areas where dry conditions 
usually accompany E l Niño episodes (e.g., Indonesia, 
north-east Australia) has been low. 
The recent E N S O behaviour, and especially the 
consistent negative SOI since 1989, appears to be unusual 
in the context of the last 120 years (the instrumental 
record). However, some data for Tahiti is missing from 
before 1935, so it is difficult to compare the length of the 
post-1989 period of negative SOI with earlier periods. It 
may be, for instance, that the period of negative SOI values 
starting around 1911 was comparable with the recent 
period. Trenberth and Hoar (1996) examined the recent El 
Nino-Southern Oscillation behaviour using Darwin data 
only. The Darwin data are continuous and therefore allow a 
strict comparison of the post-1989 behaviour with that of 
earlier periods, although by themselves they may not 
provide a complete representation of the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation. The Trenberth and Hoar analysis indicates that 
the post-1989 behaviour is very unusual. From the Darwin 
data, there has been no period in the last 120 years with 
such an extended period of negative SOI. Trenberth and 
Hoar fitted statistical models to the 1882 to 1981 Darwin 
data, to determine how unusual the recent behaviour has 
been. They concluded that the 1990 to 1995 behaviour had 
a probability of natural оссштепсе of about once in 2,000 
years. Allan and D'Arrigo (1996), however, present 
evidence that episodes with simdlarly persistent ENSO 
characteristics have occurred prior to the period of 
instrumental data. 
3.4.3 Northern Hemisphere Circulation 
In the past few years considerable work has been done to 
document decadal and longer time-scale variability 
regionally in several parts of the globe, especially the 
North Pacific (IPCC, 1990; Trenberth and Hurrell, 1994; 
2.5 ^ ^ ^ . Ц - Ь - Ц " ' I 
^ 
1 
m l 
2.0 ^ 
•^4 
I ' ' I ' ' ' ' Ч ' 
T i l 
I ' M 
) I I I I 
I I I I I I I т - р г т 
1930 
1940 
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
Year 
Figure 3.17: Time-series of mean North Pacific sea level 
pressures averaged over 30-65°N, 160°E to 140''W for the months 
November to March beginning in 1925 and smooüied with a low 
pass filter (thick line). Updated from Trenberth and Huirell ( 1994). 
Hurrell, 1995). Substantial changes in the North Pacific 
atmosphere and ocean began about 1976. This is illustrated 
in Figure 3.17 which shows a time-series of mean sea level 
pressures for the five winter months November to March, 
averaged over most of the extra-tropical North Pacific 
(updated from Trenberth and Hurrell, 1994). This index is 
closely related to changes in the intensity of the Aleutian 
low pressure centre, and to a pattern of atmospheric 
circulation variability known as the Pacific-North 
American (PNA) pattern (Wallace and Gutzler, 1981). The 
abrupt shift in pressure after 1976 is evident. Observed 
significant changes in the atmospheric circulation 
involving the PNA teleconnection pattern were described 
in IPCC (1990). Associated changes occurred in surface 
winds. The storm tracks and associated synoptic eddy 
activity shifted southward. This regime appears to have 
ended about 1989. 
The Pacific decadal time-scale variations have been 
linked to recent changes in the frequency and intensity of 
El Niño versus La Niña events and it has been 
hypothesised that the decadal variation has its origin in the 
tropics (Trenberth and Hun-ell, 1994). While some analyses 
of observations (Deser and Blackmon, 1995; Zhang et ai, 
1995) show that this link is not linear, observational studies 
by Kawamura (1994), and Lau and Nath (1994) have 
shown that the decadal variation in the extratropics of the 
Pacific is closely tied to tropical sea surface temperatures 
(SSTs) in the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Several aspects of 
the decadal-scale fluctuation beginning around 1976 have 
been simulated with atmospheric models using specified 
SSTs (Kitoh, 1991; +Chen et ai, 1992; Miller et ai, 1994; 
Kawamura et ai, 1995). These studies also suggest that the 
766 
Observed CUmate VariabiUty and Change 
changes over the North Pacific are substantially controlled 
by the anomalous SST forcing from the tropics, Yamagata 
and Masumoto (1992) have suggested that the decadal 
time-scale variations may also involve the Asian monsoon 
system. 
The North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) is of interest 
because of its relationship to regional precipitation and 
temperature variations. The N A O is a large-scale 
alternation of atmospheric pressure between the North 
Atlantic regions of subtropical high pressure (centred near 
the Azores) and subpolar low surface pressure (extending 
south and east of Greenland). The state of the N A O 
determines the strength and orientation of the poleward 
pressure gradient over the North Atlantic, and hence the 
speed and direction of the mid-latitude westerlies across 
that ocean. These, in turn, affect the tracks of European-
sector low-pressure storm systems (Lamb and Peppier, 
1991). One extreme of the N A O coincides with strong 
westerlies across the North Atlantic, cold winters in 
western Greenland and warm ones in northern Europe, 
while the other N A O extreme is associated with the 
opposite pattern. In addition, precipitation over Europe is 
related to the N A O (Hurrell, 1995). The recent decade-long 
winter dry conditions over southern Europe and the 
Mediterranean, and the wet anomalies from Iceland 
eastward to Scandinavia, are related to the recent persistent 
positive phase of the NAO (Hurrell, 1995). 
IPCC (1990) used the smoothed standardised difference 
of December-February atmospheric pressure between 
Ponta Delgada, Azores, and Stykkisholmur, Iceland, to 
describe the variations in the westerly flow in the North 
Atlantic, and thus the NAO. Figure 3.18 updates IPCC 
(1990) and reveals strong westerlies since 1989. It also 
highlights an apparent near century time-scale variation in 
the westerly flow with peaks around 1910 and at the 
present. The amplitude of this variation is as large as one 
standard deviation of the interannual variations. Flohn et 
al. (1992), using meteorological analyses, reported a 
deepening of quasi-starionary cyclones in the Northern 
Atlantic and in the Northern Pacific leading to an 
intensification of the extra-tropical circulation, most 
pronounced during winter, supporting the suggestions of 
intensification in Figures 3.17 and 3.18. 
In the North Atlantic, decad¿ti period fluctuations are 
superposed on a longer time-scale variation (Deser and 
Blackmon, 1993; Kushnir, 1994; Schlesinger and 
Ramankutty, 1994), which is reflected in the global mean 
temperature variations. The short-period mode, i.e., 
irregular fluctuations averaging about 9 years in length 
before about 1945 and about 12 years thereafter, is 
•g 
td 
Figure 3.18: Standardised difference of December to February 
atmospheric pressure between Ponta Delgada, Azores, and 
Stykkisholmur, Iceland, 1867 to 1995. Smooth curve was created 
using a 21-point binomial filter. Updated from IPCC (1990). 
characterised by a dipole pattern in SSTs and surface air 
temperatures, with anomalies of opposite polarity east of 
Newfoundland and off the south-east coast of the USA. 
Distinctive sea level pressure and wind patterns have been 
identified with this short-period mode and it seems that the 
SSTs result largely from the winds, with cooler-than-
normal SSTs accompanied by stronger-than-normal winds. 
The lower frequency mode is identified as a temperature 
fluctuation with largest amplitude in the North Atlantic and 
surrounding continents where the period appears to vary 
regionally from 50 to 88 years. Relative to the record from 
1850 on, it corresponds to a much colder period from the 
late 1800s to about 1920, much warmer than normal from 
about 1930 to 1960, and another cooler period in the 1970s 
and 1980s (Kushnir, 1994; Schlesinger and Ramankutty, 
1994). The sea level pressures and surface winds 
associated with this pattern have been explored by Deser 
and Blackmon (1993) and Kushnir (1994) who find an 
anomalous cyclonic circulation during the warmer years 
and anticyclonic during the cooler years, centred in the 
mid-Atlantic near 40°N. 
It seems likely that relationshiiss among the atmosphere 
and ocean variables include the patterns of dynamical 
coupling between the atmosphere and ocean, which may 
extend outside the Atiantic domain! It is likely that there 
are changes in the ocean thermohaline circulation such as 
those seen in models with tipie-scales of roughly 50 years 
(Delworth et al, 1993). The thermohaline circulation is 
greatiy influenced by density fluctuations at high latitudes 
which apparently arise mainly in the fresh water 
availability which alters salinity, and originates from 
changes in precipitation, runoff, and evaporation. These 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
167 
kinds of fluctuations may also be related to the abrupt 
climate changes seen in recent Greenland ice core analyses 
(Section 3.6.3). 
Some reported variations in temperature and precipitation 
have been related to observed regional variations in 
atmospheric circulation. Analysis of trends in 700 hPa 
heights (O'Lenic, 1995) provides some evidence unking the 
regional circulation anomalies to the trends in surface 
temperature over the past 40 years, e.g., negative trend in 
the North Pacific and positive over western Canada. Ward 
(1992, 1994) demonstrated that the recent low rainfalls in 
the Sahel are also related to circulation anomalies. IPCC 
(1990) pointed out that changes in SSTs on a global scale 
played a major role in the reduction of Sahel precipitation. 
Lare and Nicholson (1994) have again reiterated the 
potential role of land-surface changes in the prolonged dry 
period in the Sahel, but Shinoda and Kawamura (1994a) 
suggest that changes in the SSTs of the Indian Ocean and 
the tropical North and South Atlantic modulate different 
aspects of the Sahel rainfall. Specifically, the contrasting 
anomalies of North and South Atlantic SSTs play a major 
role in the year-to-year latitudinal displacement of the 
rainbelt and the strong warming trend of the SSTs in the 
Indian Ocean (Figure 3.4) is associated with large-scale 
subsidence over the rainbelt. A new analysis of the 
interannual and decadal variations of the summer rains over 
the Sahel (Shinoda and Kawamura, 1994b) however, 
suggests that the decreased rainfall from the 1950s to the 
1980s primarily resulted from weakened convection over 
the entire monsoonal rainbelt, rather than a systematic 
displacement of its central position. 
One aspect of atmospheric circulation variations 
considered recently is the possible impact of volcanic 
eruptions. The eruption of Mt. Pinatubo (Section 3.2.6) led 
to studies which suggested, based on geographical 
variations in temperature after major eruptions, that heating 
of the tropical stratosphere resulting from volcanic aerosols 
drives an enhanced zonal wind (Groisman, 1992; Robock 
and Mao, 1992; Graf et al., 1993). This stronger wind 
advects warmer maritime air over the continents, leading to 
warming, in the Northern Hemisphere winter, in higher 
latitudes. Such variations are limited to a year or two after 
a major eruption. So, only a protracted change in the level 
of volcanic activity could be expected to lead to a long-
term atmospheric circulation change. 
3.4.4 Southern Hemisphere Circulation 
Over the Southern Hemisphere, analysis of decadal 
variability is difficult because of the paucity of data. 
Nevertheless careful analysis of station data together with 
the available analyses has revealed real decadal-scale 
climate changes (van Loon et al., 1993; Hurrell and van 
Loon, 1994). A change in the atmospheric circulation is 
evident in the late 1970s with sea level pressures in the 
circumpolar trough generally lower in the 1980s than in the 
1970s and with the changes most pronounced in the second 
half of the year, so that the tropospheric polar vortex 
remained strong into November. This was associated with 
a delayed breakdown in the stratospheric polar vortex and 
the ozone deficit in the Antarctic spring. 
A near-global atmospheric pressure data set (Allan, 
1993) and other data have been used to examine longer 
term variations in circulation in the Indian Ocean, since 
late last century (Allan et al., 1995; Salinger et ai. 1995b). 
Circulation patterns in the periods 1870 to 1900 and 1950 
to 1990 were more similar to each other than to those in the 
1900 to 1950 period. These variations were most apparent 
in the mid- to high latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere. A 
more meridional long-wave pattern occurred in the early 
and late periods, and a more zonal flow regime occuiTcd in 
the 1900 to 1950 period. This research suggests that the 
vigour of the atmospheric circulation has increased since 
the 1950s, particularly around the anticyclones in the 
southern Indian Ocean during summer, and Australia in 
winter. These high pressure features were found to wax and 
wane, but show no distinct displacements in the latitude of 
central pressure. 
Coherent changes in the amplitude of the long-wave 
troughs to the south-west of Australia and in the Tasman 
Sea/New Zealand region have occurred during spring and 
summer (Salinger et ai, 1995b). On a decadal time-scale 
the troughs in the two regions have varied out of phase 
during winter. Most of the longer term trends are 
associated with the Tasman Sea/New Zealand trough 
during summer and autumn. Pressure in the south-west 
Australian winter trough has increased since the 1960s, and 
this has led to a decrease in the winter rainfall in the far 
south-west (Nicholls and Lavery, 1992; Allan and 
Haylock, 1993). 
3.4.5 Summary of Section 3.4 
Evidence that the El Nino-Southern Oscillarion has varied 
in period, recurrence interval, and area and strength of 
impact is found in historical instrumental data and in 
palaeoclimatic data. The cause of these variations is not 
known. The rather abrupt change in the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation, and atmospheric circulation, around 1976/77, 
noted in IPCC (1990), has continued. Since then, there 
have been relatively more frequent El Niño episodes, with 
only rare excursions into the other extreme (La Niña 
168 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
episodes) of the phenomenon. This ENSO behaviour, and 
especially its behaviour since 1989, is unusual in the 
context of the last 120 years (the instrumental record). At 
least some of the recent fluctuations in rainfall in the 
tropics and subtropics (Figure 3.10) appear to be related to 
this unusual ENSO behaviour. 
Anomalous atmospheric circulaflon regimes persisted 
over the North Paciflc from 1976 to about 1988, and in the 
North Atlantic since 1989. Many long-lived temperature 
and precipitation anomalies are now known to be 
associated with regional anomalous atmospheric 
circulation features. 
There remain problems with the monitoring of changes 
and variations in atmospheric circulation, because of 
doubts about the long-term consistency of analysis 
techniques, observations, and even the meteorological 
theories underlying analysis techniques. Such doubts 
restrict the number of fields which can be examined 
confidently for evidence of real change and variation. 
3.5 Has the Climate Become More Variable or 
Extreme? 
3.5.1 Background 
Concerns are often expressed that the climate may be more 
variable (i.e., more droughts and extended wet periods) or 
extreme (i.e., more frequent severe weather events) now 
than in the past. A possible source of confusion in any 
discussion of variability is that variability of the climate 
can be defined and calculated in several ways. Apparentiy 
contradictory conclusions may be reached from the 
different definitions. For instance, using the standard 
deviation or a similar measure to determine variability will, 
in certain circumstances, result in different conclusions 
from the use of interperiod differences (e.g., first 
differences of annual means) as a measure of variability. 
Care needs to be taken in the comparison of variabilities 
calculated and defined in different ways. Analysis of how 
the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events 
(e.g., tornadoes) have varied over time is also difficult, 
because of inhomogeneities in the data. Comparisons over 
longer periods, such as comparing late 20th century 
extremes with those of the late 19th century, are especially 
problematic because of changes in instrumentation and 
analysis methods, as well as site and exposure changes. 
3.5.2 Climate Variability 
3.5.2.1 Temperature 
Parker et al. (1992) show plots of the low-pass filtered 
variances of the daily central England temperature series 
since the mid-18th century. There is no clear evidence of 
trends in the variance over this very long record. Although 
there are interdecadal differences in variability, no 
tendency to higher variance is evident in recent decades. 
Karl et al. (1995c) searched for evidence of changes in 
temperature variability in the USA, the former Soviet 
Union, China and Australia. They defined temperature 
variability as the absolute difference in temperature 
between two adjacent periods of time (1-day to annual). In 
the Northern Hemisphere their results indicate a tendency 
towards decreased temperature variability on intraseasonal 
(1-day to 5-day) time-scales. The decrease is strongest in 
the U S A and China. The decreased variability at short 
time-scales could reflect a decrease in baroclinicity or the 
frequency of air mass change, suggesting that the Northern 
Hemisphere circulation may have become less variable 
through the 20th century. The interannual variability 
changes showed no consistent pattern across the three 
Northern Hemisphere areas. There was little consistency in 
patterns of change in temperature variability for Australia 
since 1961, apart from statistically significant decreases in 
interannual variability in September-November, for 
minimum, maximum, and average temperature, especially 
in temperate regions. 
Parker et al. (1994) calculated the interannual variability 
of seasonal surface temperature anomalies for the 20-year 
period 1974 to 1993 for each calendar season separately, 
and compared it with the period 1954 to 1973. There was 
evidence of only a small global increase of variability in 
the later period. The spatially averaged ratios of the 
variances between the two 20-year periods, for the four 
seasons, were between 1.04 and 1.11. This suggests surface 
temperature variability increased slightly over the period of 
analysis. The analysis did reveal regions with strongly 
enhanced variability in the later period. Variance was 
enhanced over central North America between December 
and August. The El Niño events of 1982/3, 1986/7, and 
1991/2 produced enhanced variance in the eastern tropical 
Pacific in 1978 to 1992 relative to 1951 to 1980. 
In summary, temperature shows no consistent, global 
pattern of change in variability. Regional changes have 
occurred, but even these differ with the time-scale 
considered. 
3.5.2.2 Precipitation and related moisture indices 
Means and standard deviations of Indian summer monsoon 
rainfall, calculated using a 31-year moving window, over 
the period 1871 to 1993, were examined by Sontakke et al. 
(1992). No trend was apparent in variability over the entire 
period. However, higher variability is generally associated 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
169 
with drier periods, such as that observed since about 1970. 
Droughts have increased in frequency in Sub-Saharan 
Africa over the past few decades. This partly reflects the 
downward trend in mean rainfall (Section 3.3.2.1), but 
there were also changes in variability. Hulme (1992) 
examined changes in relative variability over Africa 
between 1931 to 1960 and 1961 to 1990 and found that 
areas of increased variability outweighed areas of reduced 
variability. The Sahel showed increased rainfall variability, 
especially in the east where increases were over 5% and in 
some places over 15%. 
Changes in variability of the diurnal temperature range 
may provide some suggestive information regarding 
changes of variability of precipitation or cloudiness, since 
increased cloud cover can lead to warmer overnight 
temperatures, and lower daytime temperatures, in some 
regions. Karl et al. (1995c) examined changes in the 
variability of the diumal range of temperature in the USA, 
the former Soviet Union, and China. They found decreases 
in the variability of the diurnal range, especially in the 
former Soviet Union. Since the diurnal range of 
temperature is related to cloud cover and humidity, decadal 
decreases in the variability of the diurnal range may reflect 
a decrease in variability of cloud cover, soil moisture, 
humidity, or wind. 
Droughts have been relatively frequent since the late 
1970s in some of the areas where drought usually 
accompanies El Niño events (e.g., north-east Australia). 
This presumably reflects the relatively frequent El Niño 
events during this period (see Section 3.4.2). Few analyses 
of the frequency of floods have been conducted. A study of 
floods in Sweden (Lindstrom, 1993) found no convincing 
evidence of trends through the 20th century, although the 
1980s had larger floods than usual and the 1970s had few 
high floods. Wigley and Jones (1987) reported a higher 
than usual frequency of extreme dry summers and wet 
springs over England and Wales in 1976 to 1985. Gregory 
et al. (1991) updated the Wigley and Jones data to 1989 
and found no evidence of a continuation of this tendency. 
3.5.2.3 Atmospheric 
circulation 
Born (1995) and Born and Flohn (1995) investigated 
atmospheric circulation variability using interdiurnal (i.e., 
day-to day) changes of surface pressure and geopotential in 
the Atlantic sector. Since 1970 there appears to have been a 
trend to increased variability on this time-scale. They also 
investigated maritime winds in the Atiantic between 60°N 
and 30°S, by examining trends in constancy (the resultant 
wind speed as a percentage of scalar wind speed). The 
trend at most latitudes from 1949 to 1989 was negative. 
indicating increasing variability. A trend towards lower 
variability (increasing constancy) was found only in winter 
between 45°N and 60°N. Doubts remain about the long-
term consistency of the analyses from which these results 
were derived. Trenberth (1996) notes some of the changes 
in the systems used to analyse atmospheric circulation. 
The results of Karl et al. (1995c) suggest that these 
findings cannot be extrapolated to infer increases in 
atmospheric circulation variability over the USA or much 
of Asia. Karl et al. found evidence of decreased variability 
of temperature at the interdiurnal time-scale in the USA, 
former Soviet Union and China. Since the variability of the 
atmospheric cii"culation provides the dominant forcing of 
interdiurnal temperatures in these regions, it seems unlikely 
that the interdiurnal variability of atmospheric circulation 
has increased there. 
Changes in the mean atmospheric circulation over the 
North Pacific (Section 3.4.3) in the late 1970s were 
accompanied by a southward shift in storm tracks and the 
associated synoptic eddy activity (Trenberth and Hunell, 
1994). The incidence of cold outbreaks increased across 
the plains of North America at this time. Such shifts could 
be interpreted as changes in atmospheric circulation 
variability, at least on a regional scale. 
The variability of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation has 
been examined by Wang and Ropelewski (1995) who 
noted a general rise in the level of variability from the 
eartiest records to the 1910s, followed by a period of 20 to 
40 years of no change, with a suggestion of increased 
variability over recent decades. ENSO variability was 
greater when the sea surface temperature was generally 
higher. However, the results were sensitive to the sea 
surface temperature analysis technique. Nonetheless, their 
conclusion was consistent with that of Rasmusson et al. 
(1994), who found a relative minimum in surface pressure 
variance and precipitation variability during the periods of 
relatively low mean sea surface temperature. 
3.5.3 Extreme Weather Events 
3.5.3.1 Tropical 
cyclones 
Atlantic hurricane (tropical cyclone) activity over the 
period 1970 to 1987 was less than half that in the period 
1947 to 1969 (Gray, 1990). A similar quiet period occurred 
at the same time in the western North Pacific, suggestive of 
a decrease in the number of very intense tropical cyclones. 
Bouchard (1990) and Black (1992), however, demonstrated 
that this apparent change in intensity in the western North 
Pacific was an artefact, due to a change around 1970 in the 
method used to derive wind estimates from pressure 
estimates. When a consistent method for determining wind 
770 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
estimates was used throughout the period of record, the 
pre-1970 data were statistically indistinguishable from the 
post-1970 data. Landsea (1993) suggested that the Atlantic 
hurricane intensity record was probably also biased. Winds 
were 5 kt higher before 1970, compared with hurricanes 
with the same minimum pressure after 1970. After 
adjusting for this bias a substantial downward trend in 
intense hurricane activity is still apparent. There remains a 
possibility that not all the bias in the Atlantic records has 
been removed, because of the remarkable drop in apparent 
intensity from 1970, the same year the artificial drop in 
frequency of intense typhoons appeared in the north-west 
Pacific. However, this step decrease was also observed in 
the frequency of storms hitting the USA. These storms 
were categorised by using minimum sea level pressure 
recorded at landfall. Such observations should not be as 
suspect as observations over the ocean. Also, the decrease 
in hurricanes appears to reflect a relationship between 
hurricane activity and Sahel rainfall (Landsea and Gray, 
1992; Goldenberg and Shapiro, 1996). Finally, hurricane 
activity is also weaker during E l Niño episodes. The 
relatively more frequent El Niño episodes since the mid-
1970s (see Section 3.4.2) would, therefore, have led to a 
tendency for weak hurricane activity. There are strong 
grounds, therefore, for concluding that the decrease in 
Atiantic intense hurricane activity is real (Landsea et al, 
1996). However, Kari et al (1995d) found no trend in the 
numbers of hurricanes crossing the USA coast since 1900, 
although numbers were higher during the middle decades 
of the century. The 1995 Atlantic hurricane season was 
more active than recent years. 
In the north-east and south-west Pacific the number of 
cyclones appears to have increased (Thompson et al, 1992; 
Landsea and Gray, 1995), although doubts must be 
expressed about the consistency of the observation systems 
over this period. In the south-east Pacific, where tropical 
cyclone activity is usually associated with El Niño events, 
the frequency of occurrence appears to have increased in 
recent decades. Again, the quality of the long-term cyclone 
data base in this region is suspect. In the AustraUan region 
much of the apparent long-term variations in cyclone activity 
appear to be the result of changes in observing systems or 
analysis techniques (Nicholls, 1992). Raper (1993) noted 
that littie confidence could be placed in apparent long-tenn 
trends (except perhaps in the North Atiantic) because of 
doubts about the consistency of the data. 
Doubts about the quality and consistency of the data on 
maximum wind speeds in most cyclone basins preclude 
convincing analysis of how peak cyclone intensity might 
have changed in recent decades. Only in the Atiantic do the 
"
T 
I 
1 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1940 
1960 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
Year 
Figure 3.19: Time-series of mean annual maximum sustained 
wind speed attained in Atlantic hunicanes (Landsea et al., 1996). 
Linear trend shown as dashed line. 
data seem of sufficient quality to allow such an analysis. 
Figure 3.19 shows the mean maximum sustained wind 
speed attained each year in Atiantic humcanes (Landsea et 
al, 1996). Mean maximum wind speed appears to have 
decreased. However, the peak intensity reached by the 
strongest hurricane each year has shown no trend in the 
five-decade period. 
3.5.3.2 Extra-tropical storminess 
There is some evidence of recent increased storminess 
around the North Atlantic, although there are doubts about 
the consistency of the meteorological analyses from which 
this increase has been derived. Hand-drawn analyses of 
Atlantic surface pressure patterns, produced since 1956 by 
Seewetteramt, Hamburg, have been used to analyse the 
annual occun-ence of extra-tropical cyclones (also known 
as low pressure systems or depressions) with minimum 
pressures below 950 hPa (Dronia, 1991). Littie trend was 
found, except for an abrupt increase in frequency since 
1988. Stein and Hense (1994), using daily grid-point 
pressure data, deduced that the North Atlantic winters since 
1988/89 had been affected by a higher frequency of 
extreme low pressure systems than at any time since 1880. 
Schinke (1993) used once-daily'analyses (USA analyses 
1939 to 1964; thereafter German analyses) to count the 
number of storms with pressures below certain thresholds. 
This study revealed a substantial increase in the number of 
severe storms in the North Atlantic area, in the early 1970s. 
The mean central pressure showed a decreasing trend. 
Stein and Hense (1994) also deduced an increase in the 
numbers of extreme lows in the eariy 1970s, but concluded 
that this increase does not appear to be significant, when 
considered in the context of the observed interannual 
variability. 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
171 
Schmidt and von Storch (1993) suggest that local studies 
with homogenous data bases may provide more definite 
answers, at least for specific regions, than the use of 
analyses with time-varying biases (Section 3.4.1). They 
used daily air pressure observations at three stations in the 
south-east North Sea to calculate the annual distributions of 
daily geostrophic wind speeds and concluded that the 
frequency of extreme storms in this area has not changed in 
the past 100 years. Von Storch et al. (1993) analysed a 
long time-series of "severe storm days" on Iceland, based 
on local wind observations, and found little trend in the 
number of severe storm days, (apart from an artificial 
change in storm frequency around 1949, because of 
changes in observing practices). Numbers of storms were 
quite low during the 1980s. Von Storch et al. (1993) also 
examined high water levels at Hoek van Holland, after 
removing the effects of tides and sea level changes. The 
resultant time-series should reveal storm-related surge 
heights. No trend was found in the frequency of extreme 
surge heights. 
Bardin (1994) reported an abrupt increase in the 
frequency of extra-tropical depressions in the central North 
Pacific, in the late 1970s. For the Northern Hemisphere as 
a whole, Bardin found a decrease in cyclone frequency 
beginning in the second half of the 1980s, after a period of 
about a decade with higher numbers of cyclones. The size 
and intensity of cyclones were approximately constant until 
1980, and had increased since then. Serreze et al. (1993) 
found increasing numbers of cyclones and anticyclones 
over the Arctic between 1952 and 1989. 
Agee (1991) combined data from three previous studies 
of cyclone and anticyclone frequency around North 
America to examine trends. He found evidence of increases 
in extra-tropical cyclone numbers between 1905 and 1940 
and decreasing numbers of both cyclones and anticyclones 
between about 1950 and 1980. Agee found some evidence 
of an increase in cyclone numbers between 1980 and 1985, 
but his data did not extend into more recent years. 
Temporal variations in winter storm disasters (Changnon 
and Changnon, 1992) closely matched the trends in 
cyclone numbers for North America. Davis and Dolan 
(1993) found a similar variation in the occurrences of mid-
latitude cyclones over eastern North America. Cyclones 
were less frequent between the mid-1960s and the mid-
1970s, relative to the period from 1942. Since the mid-
1970s the yearly number has increased but has not 
consistently reached pre-1965 levels. The prevalence of the 
most destructive storms has been erratic, but has increased 
overall. Seven of the eight most intense storms that have 
developed in the past 50 years occurred in the last 25 years. 
One Southern Hemisphere region where atmospheric 
depressions appear to have increased in number in recent 
decades is along the east coast of Australia. Hopkins and 
Holland (1995) determined the numbers of east coast 
cyclones with an objective method of specification based 
on a consistent set of observing stations spread along the 
coast. They found an upward trend in the numbers of 
cyclones between 1958 and 1992. 
In summary, the evidence on changes in extra-tropical 
synoptic systems is inconclusive. There is no clear 
evidence of any uniform increase. Evidence from some 
areas suggests no change during the 20th century; in some 
other areas there is some evidence of change. 
3.5.3.3 Intense rainfalls 
Long-term rainfall observing sites can be used to examine 
changes in the frequency of intense 24-hour rainfall totals. 
Iwashima and Yamamoto (1993) did this, for 55 stations in 
Japan and for 14 stations in the contiguous U S A , by 
determining the decades in which the three highest daily 
rainfall totals were recorded. A trend towards higher 
frequencies of extreme rainfalls in recent decades was 
evident. Such a trend was also found by KaiJ et al. (1995c) 
who analysed the trends in the percentage of total seasonal 
and annual precipitation occurring in heavy daily rainfall 
events (days with rainfalls exceeding 50.8 mm) over the 
USA (1911 to 1992), the former Soviet Union (1935 to 
1989), and China (1952 to 1989). A significant trend to 
increased percentages of rainfall falling in heavy events is 
evident in the USA, largely due to a strong increase in 
extreme rainfall events during the warm season. A similar 
trend is also apparent in heavy rainfall events calculated from 
3-day total rainfalls. Trends to more extreme rainfall events 
were not apparent in the other regions. A trend to increased 
annual rainfall around the periphery of the North Atlantic, 
since early this century, also appears to reflect an increase in 
the number of heavy rainfall events (Frich, 1994). 
Rakhecha and Soman (1994) examined annual extreme 
rainfalls in the time-scale of 1-3 days at 316 stations well-
distributed across India, for the period 1901 to 1980. Most 
annual extreme rainfall records were free of trend or 
autocorrelation. The extreme rainfall series over the west 
coast north of 12°N and at some stations to the east of the 
Western Ghats over the central parts of the Peninsula 
showed a statistically significant increasing trend. Stations 
over the southern Peninsula and over the lower Ganga 
valley exhibited a decreasing trend. 
In Australia, the relationship between trends in mean 
rainfall and trends in intensity of rain events is complex 
(e.g., Nicholls and Kariko, 1993; Yu and Neil, 1991, 1993), 
172 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
except in the tropical regions (Lough, 1993; Suppiah and 
Hennessey, 1996). Lough (1993) found no evidence of a 
trend to more intense rainfall, or for greater numbers of 
heavy rain days between 1921 and 1987, in general over 
north-east Australia. Suppiah and Hennessey (1995), 
however, reported an increase in the frequency of extreme 
rainfall events at a majority of stations in northern 
Australian summers since 1910. Few of the increases were 
statistically significant. 
Few studies have reported changes in occurrence of hail. 
Dessens (1994) reported a substantial increase in hail fall 
severity in France during summer. This increase was 
related to an increase in the summer mean ininimum 
temperature which is significantly correlated with hail 
occurrence in France. 
3.5.3.4 Extreme 
temperatures 
One extreme that might be anticipated to change in 
frequency if mean temperatures increased is the frequency 
of frosts or freezes. Decreases over the past few decades in 
the frequency of extreme low minimum temperatures or the 
length of the frost season have been reported for several 
widely separated locations (Salinger et al, 1990; Karl et al, 
1991; Watkins, 1991; Bootsma, 1994; Palecki, 1994; Cooter 
and LeDuc, 1995; Stone et al, 1996). Cooter and LeDuc, 
for instance found that the frost-free season in the north-
eastern USA now begins 11 days earlier than 30 years ago. 
However, not all the stations and regions examined in these 
studies exhibited a decrease in frost occurrence. 
Changes in frequency of extreme maximum (daytime) 
temperatures were less consistent than was the case for 
minimum temperatures. Across the U S A a spatially 
complicated pattern of variations in extreme maximum 
temperatures is evident, with no evidence of a country-
wide increase in extremes (Karl et al, 1991; Balling and 
Idso, 1990; DeGaetano et al, 1994; Henderson et al, 
1994). Karl et al. found evidence of increases in extreme 
seasonal minimum temperatures in the contiguous U S A 
and the former Soviet Union, but little or no change in 
extreme seasonal maximum temperatures. Plummer (1996) 
found that, in Australia, extreme minimum temperatures 
have been increasing at a similar rate to average 
temperatures but that trends in the extreme maximum 
temperatures were smaller. 
In some areas there is evidence of decadal variations in 
the frequency of occurrence of regional cold outbreaks. For 
instance, changes in Pacific Ocean storm tracks since about 
1976 (Trenberth and Hurrell, 1994) have been implicated 
in higher incidences of regional cold outbreaks, from the 
late 1970s to the mid-1980s, across the plains of North 
America, ultimately leading to an increased frequency of 
major freezes affecting Florida (Rogers and Rohli, 1991; 
Downton and Miller, 1993). 
3.5.3.5 Tornadoes, thunderstorms, dust storms, and fire 
weather 
The final type of extreme weather event considered here 
consists of events normally subject to visual reports. 
Identification of trends in such data is likely to be 
problematic, because of doubts about consistency of 
observer behaviour. There is little or no evidence of 
consistent increases in such events. For example, Ostby 
(1993) found no evidence of increased occurrence of strong 
or violent tornadoes in the USA, although the numbers of 
reports of less severe tornadoes appears to have increased, 
perhaps due to increased population, eagerness in reporting, 
or improved reporting procedures. Grazulis (1993) reported 
a drop in damaging tornadoes in the 1980s over the USA. 
There is some evidence of an increase in thunderstorms 
in the global tropics, from observations of trends in 
cloudiness (London et al, 
1991). The amount of 
cumulonimbus 
clouds, 
often 
associated 
with 
thunderstorms, increased over the tropical oceans between 
1952 and 1981 partly at the expense of cumulus clouds 
(Section 3.3.8.2). This suggests an increase in 
thunderstorm activity in the tropics. Increases in summer 
extreme rainfall events in the USA reported by Karl et al 
(1995c), and in tropical Australia during summer (Suppiah 
and Hennessey, 1995) also may reflect an increase in 
thunderstorm activity. Overall, however, land based 
tropical rainfall has declined in the last few decades (see 
Figure 3.11). A large percentage of rainfall is associated 
with thunderstorm activity, so the decrease in rainfall 
might reflect a drop in thunderstorm activity, at least over 
tropical land areas. Karl et al. (1995c) did not find 
increases in summer extreme rainfall events in China or the 
former Soviet Union. 
Goudie and Middleton (1992) examined time-series of 
dust storms for many parts of the world. They found no 
global pattern of dust stormifrequency trend, and 
concluded that, in the absence of regional-scale human 
activities (e.g., changes in agricultural practices), the major 
factor affecting numbers of dust storms is rainfall. So a 
change in rainfall might be expected to lead to changes in 
the frequency of dust storms. 
Balling et al. (1992) examined variations in wildfire data 
in the Yellowstone National Park between 1895 and 1990. 
The area burnt is positively related to summer temperature 
and negatively related to summer and antecedent 
precipitation. Summer temperatures have been increasing 
Observed CUmate VariabUity and Change 
173 
in tliis area tiirough the 20th century, while antecedent 
precipitation has been decreasing. Balling et al. concluded 
that there has been a significant trend to a set of climatic 
conditions favouring the outbreak of wildfires. 
3.5.4 Summary of Section 3.5 
There has been no consistent trend in interannual 
temperature variability in recent decades. In some areas 
variability on shorter time-scales has decreased. Few 
regions have been examined for evidence of changes in 
interannual variability of rainfall. The areas examined have 
not exhibited a consistent pattern. Trends in intense 
rainfalls are not globally consistent, although in some areas 
(Japan, the USA, tropical Australia) there is some evidence 
of increases in the intensity or frequency of extreme events. 
There has been a clear trend to fewer low temperatures and 
frosts in several widely-separated areas in recent decades. 
Widespread significant changes in extreme high 
temperature events have not been observed, even in areas 
where the mean temperatures have increased. 
There are grounds for believing that intense tropical 
cyclone activity has decreased in the North Atlantic, the 
one tropical cyclone region with apparently consistent data 
over a long period. Elsewhere, apparent trends in tropical 
cyclone activity are most likely due to inconsistent analysis 
and observing systems. Doubts in the consistency of 
meteorological analyses also confound the estimation of 
trends in extra-tropical cyclones. In some regions (e.g., 
over the USA, the east coast of Australia, the North 
Atlantic) there is some evidence suggestive of recent 
increases. However some other highly reliable records in 
particular regions (e.g., the German Bight) do not exhibit 
any trends to increased storminess. 
Overall, there is no evidence that extreme weather events, 
or climate variability, has increased, in a global sense, 
through the 20th century, although data and analyses are 
poor and not comprehensive. On regional scales there is clear 
evidence of changes in some extremes and climate variability 
indicators. Some of these changes have been toward greater 
variability; some have been toward lower variability. 
3.6 Is the 20th Century Warming Unusual? 
3.6.1 Background 
To understand recent and future climatic change, it is 
necessary to document how climates have varied in the 
past, i.e., the space- and rime-scales of natural climate 
variability. Such information is necessary, for instance, to 
determine whether the changes and variations documented 
earlier in this chapter are likely to reflect natural (rather 
than human-induced) climate variability. Some measure of 
this natural variability can be deduced from instrumental 
observations, but these are restricted, for the most part, to 
less than 150 years. Longer records of climate variations 
are required to provide a more complete picture of natural 
climate variability against which anthropogenic influences 
in the observed climate record can be assessed. Changes in 
the thermohaline circulation are one example of internal 
(natural) variability in the climate system affecting 
temperature trends. Evidence of such changes has been 
found in some ice-age records, although the evidence is 
more muted for fluctuations of the last 10,000 years. 
IPCC (1990) provided a broad overview of the climates 
of the past 5,000,000 years, and a more detailed 
presentation of three periods suggested as possible 
analogues of a greenhouse-enhanced world. IPCC (1992) 
concentrated on the climate of the past 1000 years, a topic 
which this chapter also examines, because of the recent 
increase in data for this period, and because of its relevance 
to the current climate. The data from the last 1000 years are 
the most useful for determining the scales of natural 
climate variability. Rapid natural climate changes also 
provide information on the sensirivity/stability of the 
climate system of relevance in projecrions of climate 
change. Recent evidence of such changes over the last 
150,000 years is also assessed here. 
Climates from before the recent instrumental era must be 
deduced from palaeoclimatic records. These include tree 
rings, pollen series, faunal and floral abundances in deep-
sea cores, isotope analysis from coral and ice cores, and 
diaries and other documentary evidence. The difficulty of 
determining past climates can be illustrated by the case of 
tropical sea surface temperatures (SSTs) around the time of 
the last glacial maximum (around 22,000-18,000 years 
ago). The lack of consensus on this topic provides an 
indication of the problems of using proxy data. The topic is 
important partly because of the possible use of glacial data 
in validating climate models, and relating past climates to 
radiative forcings (Crowley, 1994). The relationship 
between modern and past terrestrial and sea surface 
temperatures is still one of the major uncertainties involved 
in understanding the climate during the last ice age. 
Terrestrial surface temperature estimates from snow line 
and pollen data (e.g., Webster and Streten, 1978; Seltzer, 
1992), SSTs from coral (e.g.. Beck et ai, 1992; Aharon et 
al, 1994; Guilderson et al., 1994), and from ice cores in 
the Andes (Thompson et ai, 1995) do not concur with 
estimates from other sources such as oxygen isotope, 
planktonic foraminiferal and pollen records and the 
temperature dependent saturation of long-chain alkenones 
174 
Observed Climate Variability 
and Change 
from algae (e.g., Ohkouchi et al., 1994; Sikes and Keigwin, 
1994; Thunnell et al, 1994). The land-based data (and 
some estimates from coral) suggest that ice age SSTs in the 
tropics were about 5°C lower than present, while the other 
sources suggest about 1-2°C. These inconsistencies cause 
problems in the use of palaeoclimatic data to validate 
climate models, and need to be resolved. 
3.6.2 Climate of the Past 1000 Years 
Various methods based on historical, ice core, tree-ring, 
lake level and coral data have been used to reconstruct the 
climate of the last millennium (Cook, 1995). For example, 
a significant number of annually resolved, precisely dated 
temperature histories from tree rings are available. 
However, these records are still too sparse to provide a 
complete global analysis, and must, in general be 
inteфreted in a regional context. In addition, they usually 
only reflect changes in warm-season (growing season) 
temperatures. Tree-ring records frequently represent 
interannual and decadal time-scale climate variability with 
good fidelity, as indicated by comparison with recent 
instrumental records. However, the extent to which multi-
decadal, century, and longer time-scale variability is 
expressed can vary, depending on the length of individual 
ring-width or ring-density series that make up the 
chronologies, and the way in which these series have been 
processed to remove non-climatic trends. In addition, the 
possible confounding effects of carbon dioxide fertilisation 
needs to be taken into account when calibrating tree-ring 
data against climate variations. Coral records are available 
from regions not represented by tree rings and usually have 
annual resolution. However, none extends back more than 
a few hundred years. The inteфretation of ice core records 
from polar ice sheets and tropical glaciers may be in some 
cases limited by the noise inherent to snow depositional 
processes, especially during this period when climate 
changes were rather small (by comparison, for instance, 
with the large rapid changes discussed in the next section). 
On the other hand, they can give an unambiguous record of 
accumulation change, on an annual basis. All these forms 
of data can and have been used to provide information 
regai'ding climate variations of the past 1000 years. 
There are, for this last millennium, two periods which 
have received special attention, the Medieval Warm Period 
and the Little Ice Age. These have been interpreted, at 
times, as periods of global warmth and coolness, 
respectively. Recent studies have re-evaluated the interval 
commonly known as the Medieval Warm Period to assess 
the magnitude and geographical extent of any prolonged 
warm interval between the 9th and 14th centuries (Hughes 
and Diaz, 1994). The available evidence is limited 
(geographically) and is equivocal. A number of records do 
indeed show evidence for warmer conditions at some time 
during this interval, especially in the U t h and 12th 
centuries in parts of Europe, as pointed out by Lamb (1965, 
1988). There are also indications of changes in 
precipitation patterns and associated droughts both in 
California and Patagonia during medieval flme (Stine, 
1994). However other records show no such evidence, or 
indicate that warmer conditions prevailed, but at different 
times. This rather incoherent picture may be due to an 
inadequate number of records or a bias in the geographical 
and seasonal representation in the available data (Briffa 
and Jones, 1993; Jones and Briffa, 1996), and a clearer 
picture may emerge as more and better calibrated proxy 
records are produced. However, at this point, it is not yet 
possible to say whether, on a hemispheric scale, 
temperatures declined from the 11-12th to the 16-17th 
century. Nor, therefore, is it possible to conclude that 
global temperatures in the Medieval Warm Period were 
comparable to the warm decades of the late 20th century. 
The term Little Ice Age is often used to describe a 400-
500 year long, globally synchronous cold interval, but 
studies now show that the climate of the last few centuries 
was more spatially and temporally complex than this 
simple concept implies (Jones and Bradley, 1992). It was a 
period of both warm and cold climatic anomalies that 
varied in importance geographically. For the Northern 
Hemisphere as a whole, the coldest intervals of summer 
temperature were from 1570 to 1730 (especially 1600 to 
1609) and during most of the 19th century, though 
individual records show variations in this basic pattern. 
Warmer conditions were more common in the early 16th 
century and in most of the 18th century, though for the 
entire hemisphere, conditions comparable to the decades 
from 1920 onward (the time when instrumental records 
become more reliable and widely available) have not been 
experienced for at least several hundred years. 
Temperatures from boreholes (Section 3.2.5.2) also suggest 
that the present temperatures in parts of North America and 
perhaps elsewhere may be warmer than the last few 
hundred years. Regional temperatures do not all, of course, 
conform to this pattern. For instance, spring temperatures 
during the period 1720 to 1770 appeared to be warmer than 
the 20th century in parts of China (Hameed and Gong, 
1994). However, despite the spatial and temporal 
complexity, it does appear that much of the world was 
cooler in the few centuries prior to the present century. 
Bradley and Jones (1993, 1995) developed a Northern 
Hemisphere summer temperature reconstruction since 1400 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
175 
from 16 palaeoclimatic records (Figure 3.20). Recent 
decades (the recent instrumental record is also plotted on 
this figure) appear to be warmer than any extended period 
since 1400, and the warming since the late 19th century is 
unprecedented in this record. Regionally, however, the 
recent warming is not always exceptional. For instance, in 
the Swedish Tornetrask tree-ring series, the 20th century 
warming appears as a relatively minor event (Briffa et al, 
1990; 1992). In this region, in both the 1400s and, 
especially, the 900-1100 interval, summer conditions 
appear to have been warmer than today. Tree-ring width 
series from the northern Urals (Graybill and Shiyatov, 
1992) indicate that in this area 20th century summers have 
been somewhat warmer than average. A recent analysis, 
using tree-ring density data, has attempted to reproduce 
more of the century time-scale temperature variability in 
this region (Briffa et al, 1995). This shows that the 20th 
century was clearly the warmest in the last 1000 years in 
this region, though shorter warmer periods occurred, for 
example, in the 13th and 14th centuries. The Californian 
Cirque Peak ring-width cool-season temperature history 
(Graybill and Funkhouser, 1994) indicates unusual warmth 
during most of the 20th century, but with recent cooling 
(contrary to instrumental observations in this area). The 
nearby Campito Mountain ring-width warm-season 
temperature history (LaMarche, 1974) agrees well with the 
Cirque Peak record, e.g., the 20th century appears to have 
been unusually warm, while the 17th century was generally 
cool. North-west Alaska has been unusually warm during 
the 20th century (Jacoby et al, 1996). 
In the Southern Hemisphere, the records from 
Australasia show evidence of recent unusual warmth, 
especially since 1960, but some from South America do 
not. Thus the Northern Patagonia and Rio Alerce ring-
width records from Argentina (Villalba, 1990; Boninsegna, 
1992) and the Chilean Lenca ring-width temperature 
history (Lara and Villalba, 1993) show no clear indication 
of 20th century warming, in accord with local instrumental 
records (Villalba, 1990). Recently analysed ice cores from 
the north-central Andes (Thompson et al, 1995) indicate 
that temperatures were cool in the 200-500 years before 
the present. Strong warming has dominated the last two 
centuries in this region. Temperatures in the last two 
centuries appear higher than for some thousands of years in 
this area. New Zealand tree rings reproduce the warming 
observed instrumentally since about 1950, although there is 
also a suggestion of warmer periods early in the 18th and 
19th centuries (Salinger et al, 1994), near a time of 
maximum mountain glacier ice volumes in the Southern 
Alps of the country. The Tasmanian Lake Johnston history 
о 
E 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
-0.2 
0.4 
-0.6 
-0.8 
-1.0 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
 
-J—I—I—1 
I 
I 
L_ 
1500 
1600 
1700 
1800 
1900 
Year 
Figure 3.20: Decadal summer temperature index for the Northern 
Hemisphere, from Bradley and Jones (1993), up to 1970-1979. 
The record is based on the average of 16 proxy summer 
temperature records from North America, Europe and east Asia. 
The smooth Une was created using an approximately 50-year 
Gaussian filter. Recent instrumental data for Northern Hemisphere 
summer temperature anomalies (over land and ocean) are also 
plotted (thick linej. The instrumental record is probably biased 
high in the mid-19th century, because of exposures differing 
from current techniques (e.g., Parker, 1994b). 
(Cook et al., 1991) shows recent anomalous warming, 
especially since 1960 (Cook et al, 1992). 
Temperature records derived from coral supplement the 
records from tree rings. A Galapagos Islands coral 
temperature record for 1607 to 1982 has been derived by 
Dunbar et al. (1994) who found a very high correlation 
witii direcüy measured local annual SST for 1961 to 1982. 
Coral-estimated SSTs have fallen significantly throughout 
the 20th century in this location and may now be at their 
lowest since 1650. This is in broad agreement with the lack 
of recent warming in the South American tree-ring studies. 
However, there has not been a general cooling in the 
eastern tropical Pacific this century (Bottomley et al, 
1990), so the Galapagos cooling may be a local 
phenomenon. Australian Great Barrier Reef temperature 
histories since 1583 have been derived from corals 
distributed along the reef from 10-30°S (Lough et al, 
1996). These coral-based SSTs have been relatively warm 
for most of the 20th century. This warm period was 
preceded by below-average SSTs in the 1850 to 1900 
period. An earlier warm period is indicated around 1830 to 
1840, but with less certainty. The pre-1800 period was 
probably a time of conspicuously below-average SSTs. 
Similar results were obtained from the Abraham Reef 
record (Druffel and Griffin, 1993), on the south-western tip 
of the Great Barrier Reef. 
776 
Just as important as temperature are variations in the 
hydrological cycle during the last millennium. Global-scale 
records do not exist, but useful information has been 
derived for several continents. Especially relevant, because 
of the recent low rainfall in the Sahel (Section 3.3.2.1), is 
the evidence from Africa. From the 10th to 13th centuries 
the evidence suggests a much wetter climate over much of 
North Africa (Nicholson, 1978). After a drier regime 
during the 14th and 15th centuries, resembling the 20th 
century climate. North Africa again reverted to relatively 
wet conditions during the 16th to the late 18th centuries. 
Interspersed in this moderately wet era were extreme 
droughts in the Sahel in the 1680s and the 1740s to 1750s. 
Continental-scale dryness began in the 1790s and climaxed 
in a severe drought in the 1820s and 1830s. These two 
decades were likely drier than current conditions 
throughout the continent, except in the Sahel where cuirent 
conditions are similar to those in the 1820 to 1830 period. 
The late 19th century again saw a rise in African rainfall 
that subsided around 1900. Rainfall increased during the 
1950s and 1960s in North and Equatorial Africa, followed 
by a shaф decrease in the Sahel. The conditions during the 
last 100 years have been, for the most part, substantially 
drier than the rest of the last millennium. Of particular note 
are the dry conditions in the Sahel between 1968 and 1993. 
Nicholson (1989) has documented several previous dry 
regimes also lasting on the scale of a decade or two, 
particulady the 1680s, 1740s and 1750s, and 1820s and 
Í830s, that mirrored the recent period in the Sahel. So, the 
recent past has exhibited periods of comparable dryness to 
the last few decades. 
The climate of the past 1000 years provides 
opportunities to determine the spatial and temporal scales 
of natural climate variabitity required for detection of 
climate change, and the causes of the natural climate 
variations. A relatively small number of records from key 
regions could help discriminate the relative importance of 
different phenomena (Crowley and Kim, 1993), in the 
creation of decadal-century tiine-scale variability. For 
instance, volcanism would influence land more than ocean. 
North Atiantic thermohaline processes may have unique 
climate signatures, records from the equatorial Pacific 
could be used to monitor decadal-scale variations in that 
region (e.g., variations in the El Nino-Southern Oscillation 
- see Section 3.4.2). Some of the palaeoclimatic records 
already exist. Figure 3.21 (after Thompson et al., 1993) 
shows temperature estimates from ice cores in several 
widespread locations. These show warming this century, 
but the warming appears to be more significant in some 
locations than others. As noted above, geographical 
( С ti 
Obsen'ed Climate Variability and Change 
S 5 T 
Year (A.D.) 
Figure 3.21: Decadal averages of the B'^O records from ice cores 
in several widespread locations (after Thompson et al., 1993). 
The shaded areas represent isotopicaily more negative (cooler) 
periods relative to the individual record means. 
differences also exist in the warming estiinated from tree-
ring chronologies. The development and combination of 
more high-quality records such as those in Figure 3.21 are 
needed, if a more complete understanding of the scales and 
causes of natural climate variability is to be gained. 
Overall, however, it appears that the 2,0th century has been 
at least as warm as any century since at least 1400 AD. In 
at least some areas, the recent period appears to be warmer 
than has been the case for a thousand or more years (e.g.. 
Briffa et al., 1995; Thompson etal., 1995). Alpine glacier 
advance and retreat chronologies (Wigley and Kelly, 1990) 
suggest that in at least alpine areas, global 20th century 
temperatures may be warmer than any century since 1000 
AD, and perhaps as warm as during any extended period 
(of several centuries) in the past 10,000 years. Crowley and 
K i m (1995) estimate the variability of global mean 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
177 
140 
Heinrich 
Layers 
North Atlantic 
Ocean— 
HL5 
HL4 HL3 HL2 HL1 
I 
I 
I I I 
Antarctica 
120 
100 
80 
60 
40 
" 5 " 
I ~5"C 
f 
Figure 3.22: Reconstructed climate records showing rapid changes in the North Atlantic and in Greenland; the corresponding events 
(indicated by thin dashed vertical lines) are damped in the Antarctic record. Temperature changes are estimated from the isotopic 
content of ice (Greenland and Antarctica) and from faunal counts (North Atlantic). HLI to HL5 indicate sedimentary "Heinrich" layers. 
Figure adapted from Jouzel et al. (1994). 
temperature on century time-scales, over the past 
millennium, as less than ±0.5°C. 
3.6.3 Rapid Cimate Changes in the Last 150,000 Years 
The warming of the late 20th century appears to be rapid, 
when viewed in the context of the last millennium (see 
above, and Figures 3.20, 3.21). But have similar, rapid 
changes occurred in the past? That is, are such changes a 
part of the natural climate variability? Large and rapid 
climatic changes did occur during the last ice age and 
during the transition towards the present Holocene period 
which started about 10,000 years ago (Figure 3.22). Those 
changes may have occurred on the time-scale of a human 
life or less, at least in the North Atlantic where they are 
best documented. Many climate variables were affected: 
atmospheric temperature and circulation, precipitation 
patterns and hydrological cycle, temperature and 
circulation of the ocean. 
Much information about rapid climatic changes has 
recently been obtained either from a refined inteфretation 
of existing records or from new ice, ocean and continental 
records from various parts of the world. Of particular 
significance are those concerning the North Atlantic and 
adjacent continents such as the GRIP (Dansgaard et al., 
1993) and GISP 2 (Grootes et al, 1993) central Greenland 
ice cores, numerous deep-sea core records from the North 
Atiantic, and continental records (lake sediments, pollen 
series, etc.) from Western Europe and North America. 
These records provide descriptions of the last glacial period 
and the following déglaciation. The observed rapid changes 
are often large in magnitude, and thus there is considerable 
confidence in their reality. 
178 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
There is evidence from these records of rapid warming 
-11,500 calendar years ago. Central Greenland 
temperatures increased by ~7°C in a few decades 
(Dansgaard et al, 1989; Johnsen et al, 1992; Grootes et 
al, 1993). There are indications of an even more rapid 
change in the precipitation pattern (Alley et al, 1993) and 
of rapid reorganisations in the atmospheric circulation 
(Taylor et al, 1993a; Mayewski et al, 1993). Changes in 
SST, associated with sudden changes in oceanic 
circulation, also occurred in a few decades, at least in the 
Norwegian Sea (~5°C in fewer than 40 years; Lehman and 
Keigwin, 1992). During the last 20,000 years surface water 
salinity and temperature have exhibited parallel changes 
that resulted in reduced oceanic convection in the North 
Atlantic and in reduced strength of the global conveyor belt 
ocean circulation (Duplessy et al, 1992). There was also a 
hiatus in the warming in the Southern Hemisphere during 
the last déglaciation. The subsequent warming was much 
less abrupt than in the Northern Hemisphere (Jouzel et al, 
1995). Similar behaviour occurred in New Zealand 
(Suggate, 1990; Denton and Hendy, 1994; Salinger, 1994). 
There is also firm evidence of rapid warm-cold 
oscillations during the last glacial (Dansgaard-Oeschger 
events) in the central Greenland records (Johnsen et al, 
1992). Rapid warmings of ~5-7°C in a few decades were 
followed by periods of slower cooling and then a generally 
rapid return to glacial conditions. About 20 such intervals 
(interstadials) lasting between 500 and 2000 years occurred 
during the last glacial period (Dansgaard et al, 1993). 
Their general progression was similar to the rapid changes 
in North Atlantic deep-sea core records. The most 
prominent of these interstadials may be associated with the 
sedimentary "Heinrich" layers interpreted as reflecting 
massive iceberg discharge from Northern Hemisphere ice 
sheets (Bond et al, 1993; Mayewski et al, 1994; Bond and 
Lotti; 1995), see Figure 3.22. These discharges occurred at 
the end of the cooling cycles and were followed by abrupt 
shifts to warmer SSTs. 
During the last glacial period, rapid changes were also 
felt over at least parts of the continents as suggested by 
recently obtained records for Western Europe, North 
America, and China (Grimm et a/., 1993; Guiot et al, 
1993; Porter and An, 1995). Moreover, a significant 
increase in methane concentration is associated with the 
warm interstadials (Chappellaz et al, 1993) that may be 
due to variations in the hydrological cycle at low latitudes. 
This suggests that the interstadials were at least 
hemispheric in their extent. Moreover, Greenland 
interstadials lasting more than 2000 years have weaker and 
smoother counterparts in Antarctica (Bender et al, 1994; 
Jouzel etal, 1994). Keigwin etal. (1994) and McManus et 
al. (1994) found that Aflantic deep-water circulation and 
surface temperatures exhibited high variability through 
much of the last glacial, and that these variations were 
closely related to fluctuations in the Greenland ice cores. 
Keigwin et al. (1994) also report evidence from terrestrial 
palaeoclimate data suggesting that the short duration events 
since about 100,000 years ago were at least hemispheric, 
possibly global in extent. 
The GRIP central Greenland ice core suggests that 
climate instability may also have been present during the 
last interglacial (Eemian). This period (-115,000-130,000 
years ago) was locally warmer in Greenland than the 
present climate by up to 4°C but may have been interrupted 
by a series of changes that began extremely rapidly and 
lasted from decades to centuries. Questions about the 
validity of interpretation of the GRIP Eemian changes arise 
because there are significant differences between the GRIP 
and the GISP 2 records for the Eemian whereas the two 
cores, only 28 km apart, are in excellent agreement 
throughout the Holocene and the last glacial period. The 
bottom 10% of each core contains deformational features 
that are likely to have disturbed their stratigraphy (Taylor 
et al, 1993b; Alley et al, 1995). Comparison of the 
composition of entrapped air with the undisturbed 
Antarctic air composition record shows that mixing of ice 
of different origin has affected the bottom part of the GISP 
2 core (Bender et al, 1994). Until such an approach has 
been exploited for GRIP the possibility that disturbances 
simply change the apparent timing of events within the 
Eemian cannot be excluded for this core. 
Evidence from other sources does little, at this stage, to 
determine whether or not these apparent Eemian rapid 
climate changes are real. Keigwin et al. (1994) and 
McManus et al. (1994) find littie evidence of variability 
during the Eemian. Thouveny et al (1994) and Field et al 
(1994), however, report that pollen and rock magnetism 
data from western Europe show somewhat similar changes 
to the GRIP ice core record although the abrupt change 
found by Field et al, may be a statistical artefact (Aaby 
and Tauber, 1995). Cortijo et al (1992) also found rapid 
cooling in the ocean record during the Eemian. This may 
suggest that climate changes during the Eemian were 
fundamentally different in scale and area of influence, 
compared to more recent events. 
These rapid events are relevant to understanding current 
climate because they affect on the human time-scales 
important climatic variables on a large geographical scale. 
However, at least some of these abrupt changes have been 
attributed to the instability of an ice sheet which does not 
Observed CUmate VariabiUty and Change 
179 
exist in today's world. The relevance of past abrupt events 
to present and future climate would be more convincing if 
the suggested high climate variability in the Eemian was 
confirmed. 
Abrupt regional events also occurred in the past 10,000 
years (e.g.. Berger and Labeyrie, 1987). These changes, 
however, have been smaller and smoother than those 
during the previous glacial period. Such events are perhaps 
more relevant to the estimation of the possible speed of 
natural climate variations in the current climate, because of 
the closer similarity of boundary conditions (e.g., 
continental positions and ice sheets) to the current 
situation. It seems unlikely, given the smaller regional 
changes, that global mean temperatures have varied by 1 °C 
or more in a century at any time during the last 10,000 
years (e.g., Wigley and Kelly, 1990). 
3.6.4 Summary of 3.6 
Palaeoclimatic data are needed to better estimate natural 
climate variability to help resolve the climate change 
detection issue (Chapter 8), and are useful for the 
evaluation of climate models (Chapter 5). 
Large and rapid climatic changes occurred during the 
last ice age and during the transition towards the present 
Holocene period. Some of those changes may have 
occurred on time-scales of a few decades, at least in the 
North Atlantic where they are best documented. They 
affected atmospheric and oceanic circulation and 
temperature, and the hydrologie cycle. There are 
suggestions that similar rapid changes may have also 
occurred during the last interglacial (the Eemian) period, 
but this requires confirmation. The recent (20th century) 
warming needs to be considered in the light of evidence 
that rapid climatic changes can occur naturally in the 
climate. However, temperatures have been far less variable 
during the last 10,000 years (i.e., during the Holocene). 
Recent studies have demonstrated that the two periods 
commonly known as the Medieval Warm Period and the 
Little Ice Age were geographically more complex than 
previously beheved. It is not yet possible to say whether, 
on a hemispheric scale, temperatures declined from the 
ll-12th to the 16-17th century. However, it is clear that 
the period of instrumental record began during one of the 
cooler periods of the past millennium. 
Two views of the temperature record of the last century 
are possible if this record is viewed with the longer 
perspective provided by the palaeoclimatic data (Figure 
3.20). On the one hand, the long-term change of 
temperature could be interpreted as showing a gradual 
increase from the late 16th century, interrupted by cooler 
conditions in the 19th century. Alternatively, one could 
argue that temperatures fluctuated around a mean 
somewhat lower than the 1860 to 1959 average (punctuated 
by cooler intervals in the late 16th, 17th and 19th centuries) 
and then underwent pronounced, and unprecedented (since 
1400) warming in the early 20th century. Whichever view 
is considered, mid-late 20th century surface temperatures 
appear to have been warmer than any similar period of at 
least the last 600 years (Figures 3.20, 3.21). In at least 
some regions 20th century temperatures have been warmer 
than any other century for some thousands of years. 
3.7 Are the Observed Trends Internally Consistent? 
Estimates of changes in some important climatic variables 
examined earlier in this chapter, for the instrumental period 
are provided in Figure 3.23. The periods over which the 
changes have been estimated differ for the different 
variables, reflecting the availability of credible data. The 
information in the figure is meant to provide only a gross 
picture of climate variations during the instrumental record. 
In particular, it should not be interpreted as implying that 
any changes in the climate during the instrumental period 
have been linear or even necessarily monotonie. 
Examination of the earlier parts of this chapter will reveal 
more information, including the general absence of simple, 
linear trends over extended periods, for all the variables 
included in Figure 3.23. 
Not all the climatic variables exhibiting substantial 
variations are represented in Figure 3.23, for simplicity. 
For example, changes in extreme events are not indicated 
on the schematic. There has been a clear trend to fewer 
frosts and low temperatures in several widely separated 
areas in recent decades. One recent circulation change is 
well-documented: the rather abrupt change in ENSO and 
atmospheric circulation, around 1976/77, noted in IPCC 
(1990). El Niño episodes have been relarively frequent 
since that time, with only rare excursions into La Niña 
episodes (e.g., 1988/89). There have been substantial 
prolonged precipitation and circulation anomalies 
associated with this extended period. 
The pattern of change represented in Figure 3.23 is 
internally consistent. All the forms of data used to examine 
climate change and variability suffer from problems of 
quality and consistency, so conclusions reached on the 
basis of just one form of data must always be somewhat 
suspect. However, the internal consistency shown in Figure 
3.23, of a warm late-20th century worid, accompanied by 
some changes in the hydrologie cycle, confirms the validity 
of the messages from the individual forms of data. So, the 
180 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
(a) 
Temperature indicators 
O C E A N 
LAND 
O C E A N 
* " stratosphere 
(0.6 °C decrease 1979-94) 
troposphere 
•* 0.3 °C increase 1958-94 
* " little change 1979-94 
*** N.H. Spring snow cover 
(10% decrease 1973-94) 
*** near surface air 
(0.3 to 0.6 °C increase since late 19th century) 
л 
Ч
А
Л
А
Л
Л
Л
Л 
Л A  
*'*near surface 
(0 3-0.6'Clho 
latelSth 
' nnountain glaciers 
(general retreat ttiis century) 
, 
* " land night-time air 
! temperatures rising faster 
' ttian daytime temperatures 
(1951-90) 
* ground temperatures 
(mostly warming) 
(b) Hydrological indicators 
O C E A N 
* high clouds 
(increase 1951-81) 
L A N D 
O C E A N 
* mid-level clouds 
(Increase N.H. mid-latitude 1951-81) 
convective clouds 
(increase 1951-81) 
** mid- to high-latitude clouds 
(Increasing 1900-1980's) 
** mid- to high-latitude precipitation 
(increasing since 1900) 
* N.H. sub-tropical precipitation 
(10% decrease since 1970) 
fair w/eather cumulus 
(decrease 1951-81) 
* water vapour 
(increase 1973-88) 
A 
A . A A A • 
• "evaporitioifini 
(increase 1 
* evaporation in FSU & USA 
(decreasing since 1950) 
* soil moisture in FSU 
(increasing last 20-25 years) 
** run-off consistent with 
precipitation changes 
Asterisk indicates confidence level (i.e., assessment): *** high, '* medium, * low 
Figure 3.23: (a) Schematic of observed variations of temperature, (b) Schematic of observed variations of the hydrologie cycle. 
observed warming cannot be attributed to urbanisation 
since it is also found in ocean temperatures and reflected in 
indirect temperature measurements. The increased 
40-70°N precipitation is reflected in increased streamflow. 
Despite this consistency, it should be clear from the 
earlier parts of this chapter that current data and systems 
are inadequate for the complete description of climate 
change. Virtually every monitoring system and data set 
requires better data quality and continuity. New monitoring 
systems, as well as improvements on current systems and 
studies to reduce quality problems from historical data, are 
required. Such improvements are essential, if we are to 
answer conclusively the questions posed in this chapter. 
Enormous amounts of meteorological data have been 
collected and archived over the past century. Even greater 
amounts will be collected, using new observing systems, in 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
181 
the future. The old and new observations will need to be 
combined carefully, and comprehensive efforts made to 
reduce the influence of time-varying biases in all the data, 
and to protect the integrity of long-established, high-quality 
observing systems and sites, if we are to obtain more 
accurate and complete estimates of observed climate 
change and variability. 
Conventional meteorological data, both now and in the 
past, were collected for weather predicflon and for the 
description of the current climate. They require 
considerable work to ensure that they are useful for 
monitoring climate variability and change. Studies are 
required to ensure that adequate corrections can be made 
for changes in instrumentation, exposure, etc. The 
reduction of such problems in the future, as well as the 
past, will require the protection of high-quality climate 
observing sites. 
Probably no single climate element has been studied 
more than near-surface 
temperature over land. 
Unfortunately, the present rate of decline of global data 
acquisition 
and 
exchange 
across 
the 
Global 
Telecommunications System threatens estimates of near-
surface global temperature change (Karl et al, 1995a). 
Historical temperature data are plagued by inhomogeneities 
from changes in instrumentation, exposure, site-changes, 
and time-of-observation bias. Many of these problems can 
be overcome by thorough comparisons between stations 
and with the help of metadata (documentation regarding 
site and instrumentaflon changes etc.). Few countries, 
however, provide adequate support for such activities. 
Changes in instrumentation in recent times continue to 
pose problems. Karl et al. (1995a) note, for instance, that 
the introduction of a new maximum-minimum thermistor 
in the USA co-operative observing network has introduced 
a systematic bias. Océanographie data suffer from a lack of 
continuity. Conclusive detection and attribution of global 
climate change will require an ongoing homogenous, 
globally representative climate record. This needs to be 
given high priority in the design and maintenance of 
meteorological and océanographie monitoring systems. 
References 
Aaby, B. and H . Tauber, 1995: Eemian climate and pollen. 
Nature, 376, 27-28. 
Agee, E.M., 1991: Trends in cyclone and anticyclone frequency 
and comparison with periods of warming and cooling over the 
Northern Hemisphere. J. Climate, 4, 263-267. 
Aharon, P., C.W. Wheeler. J.M.A. Chappell and A . L , Bloom, 
1994: Oxygen isotopes and Sr/Ca coral records from core 
Huon-l in New Guinea document a strong Younger Dryas 
resonance in the western tropical Pacific. EOS, Abstracts 1994 
Spring Meeting, pp 205. 
Allan, R.J., 1993: Historical fluctuations in E N S O and 
teleconnection structure since 1879: Near-global patterns. 
Quaternary Australasia, 11, \1-21. 
Allan, R.J. and R . D . D'Arrigo, 1996: 'Persistent' 
E N S O 
sequences: How unusual was the recent El Niño? Holocene, 
(submitted). 
Allan, R.J. and M . R . Haylock, 1993: Circulation features 
associated with the winter rainfall decrease in southwestern 
Australia. / Climate, 6, 1356-1367. 
Allan, R.J., J.A. Lindesay and C.J.C. Reason, 1995: Multidecadal 
variability in the climate system over the Indian Ocean region 
during the austral summer. J. Climate, 8, 1853-1873. 
Alley, R.B., D.A. Meese, C.A. Shuman, A.J. Gow, K.C. Taylor, 
P.M. Grootes, J.W. C. White, M . Ram, E.D. Waddington, P.A. 
Mayewski and G . A . Zielinski, 1993: Abrupt increase in 
Greenland snow accumulation at the end of the Younger Dryas 
event. Nature, 362, 527-529. 
Alley, R.B., A.J. Gow, S.J. Johnson, K. Kiefstuhl, D.A. Meese 
and Th. Thorsteinsson, 1995: Comparison of deep ice cores. 
Nature, 373, 393-394. 
Anderson, R.Y., 1992: Long-term changes in the frequency of 
occurrence of E l Niño events. In.' El Niño: Historical and 
Paleoclimatic Aspects of the Southern Oscillation, H.E. Diaz 
and V . Markgraf (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, pp 193-200. 
Angelí, J.К., 1988: Variations and trends in tropospheric and 
stratospheric global temperatures, 1958-87. J. Climate, 1, 
1296-1313. 
Antonov, J.L, 1993: Linear trends of temperature at intermediate 
and deep layers of the North Atlantic and the North Pacific 
Oceans: 1957-1981. J. Climate, 6. 1928-1942. 
Arkin, P.A. and P.E. Ardanuy, 1989: Estimating chmatic-scale 
precipitation from space: A review. J. Climate, 2, 1229-1238. 
Balling, R.C. and S.E.I dso, 1990: Effects of greenhouse warming 
on maximum summer temperatures. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology, 53, 143-147. 
Balling, R . C , G.A. Meyer and S.G. Wells, 1992: Climate change 
in Yellowstone National Park: Is the drought-related risk of 
wildfires increasing? Clim. Change, 22, 35-45. 
Bardin, M.Yu., 1994: Parameters of cyclonicity at 500 mb in the 
Northern Hemisphere extratropics. In: Proc. XVllI 
Climate 
Diagnostics 
Workshop, Boulder, Co., NTIS, US Dept. of 
Commerce, Sills Building, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, 
V A 22161, U.S.A., pp 397. 
Barros, V. and I. Camilloni, 1994: Urban-biased trends in 
Buenos Aires' mean temperature. Clim. Res., 4, 33^5. 
Beck, J.W., R.L. Edwards, E. Ito, F.W. Taylor, J. Recy, F. Rougerie, 
P. Joannot and C. Henin, 1992: Sea surface temperature from 
coral skeletal strontium/calcium ratios. Science, 257, 644-647. 
Beltrami, H. and J.-C. Mareschal, 1991: Recent warmings in 
eastern Canada inferred from geothermal measurements. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, 18, 605-608. 
182 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Beltrami, H. and J.-C. Mareschal, 1992: Ground temperamre 
histories for central and eastern Canada from geothermal 
measurements; little ice age signature. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19, 
689-692. 
Bender, M . , T. Sowers, M.L. Dickson, J. Orchards, P. Grootes, 
P.A. Mayewski and M.A. Meese, 1994: Climate connection 
between Greenland and Antarctica during the last 100,000 
years. Nature, 372, 663-666. 
Berger, W.H.,and L.D. Labeyrie (eds.), 1987: Abrupt Climatic 
Change: Evidence and Implications. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp. 425. 
Bindoff. N.L. and J.A. Church, 1992: Warming of the water 
column in the southwest Pacific Ocean. Nature, 357, 59-62. 
Bindoff, N.L. and T.J. McDougall, 1994: Diagnosing climate 
change and ocean ventilation using hydrographie data../. Phys. 
Oceanog,24. 1137-1152. 
Black, P.G., 1992: Evolution of maximum wind estimates in 
typhoons. ICSU/WMO International Symposium on Tropical 
Cyclone Disasters, October 12-16, 1992, Beijing. 
Bond, G.C. and R. Lotti, 1995; Iceberg discharges into the North 
Atlantic on millennial time scales during the last glaciation. 
Science, 267, 1005-1010. 
Bond, G., W.S. Broecker, S.J. Johnsen, J. Mc Manus, L . D . 
Labeyrie, J.Jouzel and G. Bonani, 1993; Correlations between 
climate records from North Atlantic sediments and Greenland 
ice. Nature, 365, 143-147. 
Boninsegna, J.A., 1992; South American dendroclimatological 
records. In; Climate Since AD 1500, R.S. Bradley and P.D. 
Jones (eds.), Routledge, London, pp 446-462. 
Bootsma, A . , 1994; Long term (100 yr) climatic trends for 
agriculture at selected locations in Canada. Clim. Change, 26. 
65-88. 
Born, K., 1995; Tropospheric warming and changes in weather 
variability over the Northern Hemisphere during the period 
1967-1991. Meteorology 
and Atmospheric 
Physics, 
(submitted). 
Born, K. and H . Flohn, 1995; The detection of changes in 
baroclinicity and synoptic activity on the Northern Hemisphere 
for the period 1967-91 using two data sets. Meteorologische 
Zeitschrift, (submitted). 
Bottomley, M . , C.K. Folland, J. Hsiung, R.E. Newell and D.E. 
Parker, 1990; Global Ocean Surface Temperature 
Atlas 
(GOSTA). Joint Meteorological Office/Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology Project. Project supported by US Dept of 
Energy, US National Science Foundation and US Office of 
Naval Research. Publication funded by U K Depts of Energy 
and Environment, HMSO, London. 20 + iv pp and 313 Plates. 
Bouchard, R.H., 1990; A climatology of very intense typhoons; 
or where have all the super typhoons gone? In; 1990 Annual 
Tropical Cyclone Report, Joint Typhoon Warning Center, 
Guam, pp 266-269. 
Bradley, R.S. and P.D. Jones, 1993; Little Ice Age summer 
temperature variations; their nature and relevance to recent 
global warming trends. The Holocene, 3, 367-376. 
Bradley, R.S. and P.D. Jones., 1995: Recent developments in 
studies of climate since A D 1500. In: Climate Since AD 1500 
(second edition), R.S. Bradley and P.D. Jones (eds.), 
Routledge, London, pp. 666-679. 
Bradley, R.S., H.F. Diaz, J.K. Eischeid, P.D. Jones, P.M. Kelly 
and C M . Goodess, 1987; Precipitation fluctuations over 
northern hemisphere land areas since the mid-19th Century. 
Science, 237, 171-275. 
Brázdil, R., 1992; Fluctuation of atmospheric precipitation in 
Europe. GeoJournal 27, 275-291, 
Briffa, K.R. and P.D. Jones. 1993; Global surface air temperature 
variations during the twentieth century; Part 2, implications for 
large-scale high frequency paleoclimatic studies. Holocene, 3, 
77-88. 
Briffa, K.R., T.S. Bartholin, D. Eckstein, P.D. Jones, W. Karien, 
F.H. Schweingruber and P. Zetterberg, 1990: A 1,400-year 
tree-ring record of summer temperatures in Fennoscandia, 
Nature, 346, 434-439. 
Briffa, K.R., P.D. Jones, T.S. Bartholin, D. Eckstein, F.H. 
Schweingruber ,W. Karien, P. Zetterberg, and M . Fronen, 
1992: Fennoscandian suminers from A D 500; Temperature 
changes on short and long timescales. Clim. Dyn., 1, 111-119. 
Briffa, K.R., P.D. Jones, F.H, Schweigruber, S.G. Shiyatov and 
E.R. Cook, 1995; Unusual twentieth-century summer warmth 
in a 1,000-year temperature record from Siberia. Nature, Ъ16, 
156-159. 
Burn, D.H. 1994; Hydrologie effects of climate change in west-
central Canada. J. Hydro!, 160, 53-70. 
Cardone, V.J., J.G. Greenwood and M.A. Cane, 1990: On trends 
in historical marine data. J. Clim.ate, 3, 113-127. 
Cayan, D.R.. 1992; Latent and sensible heat flux anomalies over 
the northern oceans; The connection to monthly atmospheric 
circulation. J. Climate, 5, 354-369. 
Cermak, V . , L. Bodri and J. Safanda, 1992: Underground 
temperature fields and changing climate: evidence from Cuba. 
Global and Planetaiy Change, 97, 325-337. 
Changnon, S. 1987: Climatic fluctuation and record-high levels 
of Lake Michigan. Bull Am. Met. Soc, 68, 1394-1402. 
Changnon, S.A. and J . M . Changnon, 1992; Temporal 
fluctuations in weather disasters: 1950-1989. Clim. Change, 
22, 191-208. 
Chapman, D.S., T.J. Chisholm, and R . N . Harris, 1992; 
Combining borehole temperature and meteorological data to 
constrain past climate change. Global and Planetary Change, 
6,269-281. 
Chapman, W.L. and J.E. Walsh, 1993; Recent variations of sea 
ice and air temperature in high latitudes. Bull Am. Met .Soc, 
74, 33-47. 
Chappellaz, J., T. Blunier, D. Raynaud, J . M . Barnola, J. 
Schwander and B. Stauffer, 1993; Synchronous changes in 
atmospheric CH^ and Greenland climate between 40 and 8 kyr 
BP. Nature, 366, 443^45. 
Chelliah, M . and P. Arkin, 1992; Large-scale interannual 
variability of monthly outgoing long wave radiation anomalies 
over the global tropics. /. Clinuite, 5, 371-389. 
Obseiyed Climate Variability and 
Change 
183 
+Chen. L-X., M . Dong and Y.-N. Shao, 1992: The characteristics 
of interannual variations of the East Asian monsoon. /. Met. 
Soc. Japan, 70, 397-421. 
+Chen, Т.е., H . van Loon, K . D . Wu and M . C . Yen, 1992: 
Changes in the atmospheric circulation over the North Pacific-
North Ainerica area since 1950. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 
70, 
1137-1146. 
Chiew, F.H.S. and T.A. McMahon, 1993: Detection of trend or 
change in annual flow in Australian rivers. Int. J. Climatology, 
13, 643-653. 
Chiew, F.H.S. and T.A. McMahon, 1995: Trends and changes in 
historical annual streamflow volumes and peak discharges of 
rivers in the world. Proc. Int. Congress on Modelling and 
Simulation, November 1995, Newcastle, Australia (in press). 
Christy, J.R., 1995: Temperature above the surface layer. Clim. 
Change, (in press). 
Christy, J.R. and S.J. Drouilhet, 1994: Variability in daily, zonal 
mean lower-stratospheric temperatures. J. CUmate, 7, 106-120. 
Christy, J.R, and J.D. Goodndge, 1995: Precision global 
temperatures from satellites and urban warming in non-satellite 
data. Atmos. Env., 29, 1957-1961. 
Christy, J.R. and R.T. McNider, 1994: Satellite greenhouse 
warming. Nature, 367, 325. 
Christy, J.R., R.W. Spencer and R.T. McNider, 1995: Reducing 
noise in the M S U daily lower tropospheric global temperature 
data set. J. Climate, 8, 888-896. 
Chu, P-S., Z.-P. Yu and S. Hastenrath, 1994: Detecting chmate 
change concurrent with deforestation in the Amazon basin: 
Which way has it gone? Bull. Am .Met .Soc. 75, 579-583. 
Cole, J.E., R . G . Fairbanks and G.T. Shen. 1993: Recent 
variability in the Southern Osciiiation: Isotopic results from a 
Tarawa Atoll coral. Science, 260, 1790-1793. 
Cook, E.R., 1995: Temperature histories from tree rings and 
corals. Clim. Dyn., 11, 211-222. 
Cook, E.R., T. Bird, M . Peterson, M . Barbetti, B. Buckley, R. 
D'Arrigo, R. Francey and P.Tans, 1991: Climatic change in 
Tasmania inferred from a 1089-year tree-ring chronology of 
Huon pine. Science, 253, 1266-1268. 
Cook, E.R., T. Bird, M . Peterson, M . Barbetti, B. Buckley, R. 
D'Arrigo and R. Francey, 1992: Climatic change over the last 
millennium in Tasmania reconstructed from tree-rings. 
Holocene, 2, 205-217. 
Cooter, E.J. and S.K. LeDuc, 1995: Recent frost date trends 
in the northeastern United States. Int. J. Climatology. 
IS, 
65-75. 
Cortijo, е., J.C. Duplessy, L. Lubeyrie, H . Leclaire, J. Duprat, 
and T.C.E. Van Weering, 1992: Eemian cooling in the 
Norwegian Sea and North Atlantic Ocean preceding ice-sheet 
growth. Nature, 372, 446-449. 
Crowley, T.J., 1994: Pleistocene temperature changes. Nature, 
371, 664. 
Crowley, T.J. and K - Y . K i m , 1993; Towards development of 
strategy for determining the origin of decadal-centennial scale 
climate variability. Quat. Sci. Rev., 12. 375-385. 
Crowley, T.J. and K - Y . K i m , 1995: Comparison of longterm 
greenhouse projections with the geologic record. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 22, 932,^936. 
Cuffey, K . M . , R.B. Alley, P.M. Grootes, J.F. Bolzan and S. 
Anandakrishnan, 1994: Calibradon of the 5'«0 isotopic 
paleothermometer for central Greenland, using borehole 
temperatures. /. Glaciology, 40, 341-349. 
Dahlstrom, B. 1994: Short term fluctuations of temperature and 
precipitarion in Western Europe. In: Climate Variations in 
Europe, R.Heino (ed.). Academy of Finland, Publication 3/94, 
pp 30-38. 
Dansgaard, W., J.W.C. White and S.J. Johnsen, 1989: The abrupt 
termination of the Younger Dryas. Nature, 339, 532-534. 
Dansgaard, W., S. J. Johnsen, H.B. Clausen, D. Dahl-Jensen, 
N.S. Gunderstrup, C . U . Hammer, C S . Hvidberg, J.P. 
Steffensen, A. Sveinbjornsdottir, J. Jouzel and G. Bond, 1993: 
Evidence for general instability of past climate from a 250-kyr 
ice-core record. Nature, 364, 218-220. 
Davis, R.E. and R. Dolan, 1993: Nor'easters. American Scientist, 
81, 428-439. 
DeGaetano, A.T., K . L . Eggleston and W.W. Knapp, 1994: 
Trends in extreme temperature events in the northeastern 
United States. In: Preprints, Sixth Conference on Climate 
Variations, 
January 23-28, 1994, Nashville, Tennessee, 
American Meteorological Society, pp. 136-139. 
Delworth, T.. S. Manabe and R.J. Stouffer, 1993: Interdecadal 
variations of the thermohaline circulation in a coupled ocean-
atmosphere model. J. Climate, 6, 1993-2011. 
Deniing, D., 1995: Climatic warming in North America: Analysis 
of borehole temperatures. Science, 268, 1576-1577. 
Denton, G . H , and C H . Hendy, 1994: Younger Dryas age 
advance of Franz Josef glacier in the southern alps of New 
Zealand. Science, 264. 1434-1437. 
Deser, C. and M.L. Blackmon, 1993: Surface climate variations 
over the North Aflantic ocean during winter: 1900-1989. /. 
Climate, 6, 1743-1753. 
Deser, C. and M.L. Blackmon, 1995: On the relationship between 
tropical and North Pacific sea surface temperature variations. J. 
Climate, 8, 1677-1680. 
Dessens, J., 1994: Climatic response to a differential change in 
minimum and maximum temperatures. In: Abstracts. 
AGU 
Western Pacific Geophysics Meeting, EOS, June 21, 1994. 
Dessens, J. and A. Bûcher, 1995: Changes in minimum and 
maximum temperatures at the Pic du Midi in relation with 
humidity and cloudiness, 1882-1984. Atmos. Res., 37, 147-162. 
Dettinger, M.D. and D.R. Cayan, 1995: Large-scale atmospheric 
forcing of recent trends toward early snowmelt runoff in 
California. J. Climate, 8, 606-623. 
Diaz, H.E. and V . Markgraf, 1992: El Niño: Historical 
and 
Paleoclimatic Aspects of the Southern Oscillation, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp 476. 
Diaz, H.F. and R.S. Pulwarty, 1994: An analysis of the time 
scales of variability in centuries-long ENSO-sensittve records 
in the last 1000 years. Clim. Change, 26, 317-342. 
184 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Diaz, H.F., R.S. Bradley and J.K. Eischeid, 1989: Precipitation 
fluctuation over global land areas since the late 1800s. J. 
Geophys. Res., 94, 1195-1240. 
Diment, W.H., 1965: Comments on paper by E.A. Lubimova, 
'Heat flow in the Ukrainian Shelf in relation to recent tectonic 
movement'. J. Geophys. Res., 70, 2466-2467. 
Douglas, A.v., D.R. Cayan and J.Namias, 1982: Large-scale 
changes in Noith Pacific and North American weather patterns 
in recent decades. Month. Wea. Rev., 110, 1851-1862. 
Downton, M.W. and K.A. IVIiller, 1993: The freeze risk to Florida 
citrus. Pt II: Temperature variability and circulation patterns. J. 
Climate, 6, 364-372. 
Dronia, H., 1991: On the accumulation of excessive low pressure 
systems over the North Atlantic during the winter seasons 
(November to March) 1988/89 to 1990/91. Die Witterung im 
ilbersee, 39, 27. 
Druffel, E.R.M and S. Griffin, 1993: Large variations of surface 
ocean radiocarbon: evidence of circulation changes in the 
southwestern Pacific. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 20249-20259. 
Duchkov, A.D. and V.N. Devyatidn, 1992: Reduced geothermal 
gradients in the shallow West-Siberian Platform. Global and 
Planetary Change, 6, 245-250. 
Dunbar, R.B., G . M . Wellington, M.Colgan and P.W.Glynn, 
1994: Eastern Pacific sea surface temperature variability since 
1600 AD: The ô'^O record of climatic variability in Galapagos 
corals. Paleoceanography, 9. 291-315. 
Duplessy, J.C., L. Labeyrie, M . Arnold, M . Paterne, J. Duprat and 
T.C.E. Van Weering, 1992: North AUantic sea surface salinity 
and abrupt climatic changes. Nature, 358, 485-488. 
Dutton, E.G. and J.R. Christy, 1992: Solar radiative forcing at 
selected locations and evidence for global lower tropospheric 
cooling following the eruptions of El Chichón and Pinatubo. 
Geophys. Re.s. Lett., 19, 2313-2316. 
Eischeid, J.K., H.F. Diaz, R.S. Bradley and P.D. Jones, 1991: A 
comprehensive precipitation data set for globed land areas. 
U.S. Department of Energy Report No. DOE/ER-69017T-H1, 
Washington, DC, 81 pp. 
Eischeid, J.K., C.B. Baker, T.R. Kari and H.F. Diaz. 1995: The 
quality control of long-term climatological data using objective 
data analysis. J. Appl Meteor, 34, 2787-2795. 
Elliott, W.P. and D.J. Gaffen, 1991: On the utility of radiosonde 
humidity archives for climate studies. Bull Am . Met. Soc, 11, 
1507-1520. 
Elliott, W.P., M.E. Smith and J.K. Angelí, 1991: On monitoring 
tropospheric water vapor changes using radiosonde data. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic 
Change: A 
Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, M.E. Schlesinger 
(ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 311-328. 
Elliott, W.P., D.J. Gaffen, J.D.W. Kahl and J.K. Angelí, 1994: 
The effect of moisture on layer thicknesses used to monitor 
global temperatures. /. Climate, 1, 304-308. 
Elliott, W.P., R.J. Ross and D.J. Gaffen, 1995: Water vapor 
trends over North America. Sixth Symposium on Global 
Change Studies, Amer. Meteor. Soc, Preprints, pp 185-186. 
Emslie, A.G. and J.R. Christy, 1995: The role of astronomical 
influences in driving long-term trends in terrestrial temperature, 
Geophys. Res. Lett., (submitted). 
Environment Canada, 1995: The state of Canada's 
climate: 
monitoring variability and change. State of Environment Rep. 
No. 95-1, Minister of Supply and Services, Canada, 52 pp. 
Field, M.H., B. Huntley and H. M/ller, 1994: Eemian climate 
fluctuations observed in a European pollen record. Nature, 371, 
779-783. 
Findlay, B.F., D.W. GuUett, L . Malone, J. Reycraft, W.R. 
Skinner, L. Vincent and R. Whitewood, 1994: Canadian 
national and regional standardized annual precipitation 
departures. In: Trends '93: A Compendium of Data on Global 
Change, T.A. Boden. D.P. Kaiser, R.J. Sepanski and F.W. 
Stoss (eds.), ORNL/CDIAC-65, Carbon Dioxide Information 
Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 
U.S.A., pp. 800-828. 
Flohn, H., A. Kapala, H.R. Knoche, and H. Machel, 1992: Water 
vapour as an amplifier of the greenhouse effect: new aspects. 
Meteorol Zeitschrift N.F., 1, 122-138. 
Folland. C.K. and D.E. Parker, 1995; Conection of instrumental 
biases in historical sea surface temperature data. Quart. J. R. 
Met. Soc, 121,319-367. 
Folland, C . K . and M.J. Salinger, 1996; Surface temperature 
trends and variations in New Zealand and the surrounding 
ocean, 1871-1993. Int. J. Climatology, 15, 1195-1218. 
Frich, P., 1994; Precipitation trends in the North Atlantic 
European region. In: Climate Variations in Europe, R.Heino 
(ed.). Academy of Finland, Publication 3/94, pp 196-200. 
Gadgil, S., A. Guruprasad and J. Srinivasan, 1992: Systematic 
bias in the N O A A outgoing longwave radiation dataset? J. 
Climate, 5, 867-875. 
Gaffen, D.J., 1994; Temporal inhomogeneities in radiosonde 
temperature records. /. Geophys. Res., 99, 3667-3676. 
Gaffen, D.J., T.P. Barnett and W.P. Elliott, 1991; Space and time 
scales of global tropospheric moisture, J. Climate, 
4, 
989-1008. 
Gaffen, D.L, W.P. Elliott and A. Robock, 1992; Relationships 
between tropospheric water vapor and surface temperature as 
observed by radiosondes. Geophys. Res. Let., 19, 1839-1842. 
Garcia, O., 1981; A comparison of two satelhte rainfall estimates 
for GATE. J. Appl Meteor., 20, 430-438. 
Ginsburg, B . M . , C . N . Polyakova and I.I. Saldatova. 1992: 
Centennial variations of the iCe appearance dates on river and 
their relation to climate changes. Meteorología i gidrologia, 12, 
71-79. 
Glynn, P.W., 1993; Coral reef bleaching; Ecological 
perspectives. Coral Reefs, 12, 1-17. 
Goldenberg, S.B. and L.J. Shapiro, 1996; Physical mechanisms 
for the relationships between El Niño, West African rainfall, 
and North Atlantic major hurricanes. J. Climate, (in press). 
Golitsyn, G.S., 1995; The Caspian sea level as a problem of 
diagnosis and prognosis of the regional climate change. Isvestia 
- Atmospheric and Oceanic Physics, 31, 385-391. 
Observed Climate Variability and 
Change 
185 
Golitsyn, G.S., A.V. Dzuba, A.G. Osipov and G.N. Panin, 1990: 
Regional climate changes and their impacts on the Caspian Sea 
level rise. Doklady USSR Acad Sci., 313, 5, 1224-1227. 
Golubev, V.S. and I.C. Zmeikova, 1991: Long-term changes of 
evaporation conditions in the Aral area. In: Environmental 
Monitoring 
in the Aral Sea Basin..Yu.A. 
Izrael and Yu.A. 
Anokhin (eds.), Gidrometeoizdat, Saint-Petersburg, 80-86. 
Goreau, T.J. and R.L. Hayes, 1994: Coral bleaching and ocean 
"hot spots". Amino, 73, 176-180. 
Gosnold, W . D . , A . M . Farrow and H.J. Pollack, 1992: 
Microclimate effects on the climate record in the geothermal 
gradient, EOS, 1992 Fall Meeting Supplement, 70. 
Goudie, A.S. and N.J. Middleton, 1992: The changing frequency 
of dust storms through time. Clim. Change, 20, 197-225. 
Graham, N.E., 1995: Simulation of recent global temperature 
trends. Science, 267, 666-671. 
Graf, H.-F., 1. KJrchner, A. Robock and I. Schult, 1993: Pinatubo 
eruption winter climate effects: model versus observations. 
Clim. Dyn. 9, 81-93. 
Graybill, D . A . and S.G. Shiyatov, 1992: Dendroclimatic 
evidence from the northern Soviet Union. In: Climate Since AD 
1500, R.S. Bradley and P.D. Jones (eds.), Rouüedge, London, 
pp 393^14. 
Graybill, D . A . and G. Funkhouser, 1994: Dendroclimatic 
reconstructions during the past millennium in the southern 
Sierra Nevada and Owens Valley, California. In: Southern 
California 
Climate: the last 2000 Years, M . Rose and P. 
Wigand (eds.). Natural History Museum of Los Angeles 
County, Los Angeles (in press). 
Gray, W . M . , 1990: Strong association between West African 
rainfall and U.S. landfall of intense hurricanes. Science, 249, 
1251-1256. 
Grazulis, T.P., 1993: A 110-year perspective of significant 
tornadoes. In: The Tornado: 
Its Sructure, 
Dynamics, 
Prediction, and Hazards, C. Church, D. Burgess, C. Doswell, 
and R. Davies-Jones (eds.), American Geophysical Union, pp 
467^74. 
Gregory, J.M., P.D. Jones, and T.M. Wigley, 1991: Precipitation 
in Britain: An analysis of area-averaged data updated to 1989. 
Int. .1. Climatology, 11, 331-345. 
Grimm, E.G., G.L. Jacobson, W.A. Watts, B.C.S. Hansen and 
K . A . Maasch, 1993: A 50000-year record of climate 
oscillations from Florida and its temporal coirelation with the 
Heinrich Events. Science, 261, 198-200. 
Groisman, P.Ya, 1992: Possible regional climate consequences 
of the Pinatubo eruption. Geophys. Res. Lett, 19, 1603-1606. 
Groisman, P.Ya and D.R. Easterhng, 1994: Variability and 
trends of precipitation and snowfall over the United States and 
Canada. J. Climate,!, 
184-205. 
Groisman, P.Ya, V . V . Koknaeva, T.A. Belokrylova and T.R. 
Karl, 1991: Overcoming biases of precipitation measurement: 
A history of the USSR experience. Bull Am. Met. Soc, 72, 
1725-1733. 
Groisman, P.Ya, T.R. Karl, R.W. Knight and G.L. Stenchikov, 
1994a: Changes of snow cover, temperature, and the radiative 
heat balance over the Northern Hemisphere. / Climate, 1, 
1633-1656. 
Groisman, P.Ya, T.R. Karl, and R.W. Knight, 1994b: Observed 
impact of snow cover on the heat balance and the rise of 
continental spring temperatures. Science, 263, 198-200. 
Grootes, P.M., M . Stuiver, J.W.C. White, S. Johnsen and J. 
Jouzel, 1993: Comparison of oxygen isotope records from the 
GISP2 and GRIP Greenland ice cores. Nature, 366, 552-554. 
Grove, A.T., 1995: African river discharge and lake levels in the 
twentieth century. In: The Limnology, 
Climatology 
and 
Paleoclimatology of the East African Lakes, T.C. Johnson and 
E.Odada (eds.), Gordon and Breach, London (in press). 
Guilderson, T.P., R.G. Fairbanks, and J.L. Rubenstone, 1994: 
Tropical temperature variations since 20,000 years ago: 
Modulating interhemispheric climate change. Science, 263, 
663-665. 
Guiot, J., J.L. de Beaulieu. R. Cheddad, F. David, P. Ponel and 
M . Reille, 1993: The climate in western Europe during the last 
glacial interglacial cycle derived from pollen and insect 
remains. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, 103, 73-93. 
Gutzler, D., 1992: Climatic variability of temperature and 
humidity over the tropical western Pacific. Geophys. Res. Lett, 
19, 1595-1598. 
Haeberli, W., 1995: Glacier fluctuations and climate change 
detection - operational elements of a worldwide monitoring 
strategy. Bulletin World Meteorological Organization, 44, 23-31. 
Haeberli, W., P. Müller, P. Alean and H. Bosch, 1989: Glacier 
changes following the Little Ice Age: a survey of the 
international data basis and its perspectives. In: Glacier 
Fluctuations and Climatic Change, J. Oerlemans (ed.), Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 77-101. 
Hameed, S. and G. Gong, 1994: Variation of spring climate in 
lower-middle Yangtse River valley and its relation with solar-
cycle length. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2693-2696. 
Hansen, J. and S. Lebedeff, 1988: Global surface temperatures: 
update through 1987. Geophys. Res. Lett., 15, 323-326. 
Hansen, J., H . Wilson, M , Sato, R. Ruedy, K . Shah and E. 
Hansen, 1995: Satellite and surface temperature data at odds? 
Clim. Change, 30, 103-117. 
Hanssen-Bauer, I. and E. Fprland, 1994: Homogenizing of long 
Norwegian precipitation series. /. Climate, 7, 1001-1013. 
Hanssen-Bauer, I., M.K. Soles and E.L. Steffensen, 1990: The 
Climate of Spitsbergen. DNMI-Rapport 39/90 K L I M A , 40pp. 
Heino, R., 1994: Climate in Finland During the Period of 
Meteorological Observations. Finnish Meteorological Institute 
Contributions. No. 12. 209pp. 
Henderson, K.G., G.E. Faiers, J.M. Grymes and R.A. Muller, 
1994: Temporal variation in temperature and dew point in the 
Southern Region, In: Preprints, Sixth Conference on Climate 
Variations, 
January 23-28, 1994, Nashville, Tennessee, 
American Meteorological Society, pp. 146-147. 
Henderson-Sellers, A., 1992: Continental cloudiness changes 
this century. GeoJournal, 27.3, 255-262. 
186 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Hense, A., P. Krahe and H. Flohn, 1988: Recent fluctuations of 
tropospheric temperature and water vapor content in the 
tropics. Meteorol. Almos. Phys., 38, 215-227. 
Hopkins, L.C. and G.J. Holland, 1995: Australian east-coast 
cyclones and heavy rain days: 1958-1992. /. 
Climate, 
(submiued). 
Horton, E.B., 1995: Geographical distribution of changes in 
maximum and minimum temperatures. Atmos. Res., 37, 
102-117. 
Hughes, M . and H.F. Diaz, 1994: Was there a Medieval Warm 
Period, and if so. where and when? Clim. Change, 26, 109-142. 
Hulme, M . , 1991: An intercomparison of model and observed 
global precipitation climatologies. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 
1715-1718. 
Hulme, M . , 1992: Rainfafl changes in Africa: 1931-1960 to 
1961-1990. Int. J. Climatology, 12, 685-690. 
Hulme, M., Z-C. Zhao and T. Jiang, 1994: Recent and future 
climate change in East Asia. Int. J. Climatology, 14, 637-658. 
Hurrell, J .W., 1995: Decadal trends in the North Aflantic 
Oscillation and relationships to regional temperature and 
precipitation. Science, 269, 676-679. 
Hurrell, J.W. and H . van Loon, 1994: A modulation of the 
atmospheric annual cycle in the Southern Hemisphere. Tellus, 
46A, 325-338. 
Hyndman, R., J. Jaeger, and J. Sass, 1969: Heat flow 
measurements on the southeast coast of Australia. Earth 
Planet. Sci. Lett., 7, 12-16. 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change, The IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change, ¡992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B . A . 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 198 pp. 
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994. Radiative Forcing of Cimate 
Change and an Evaluation 
of the IPCC IS92 
Emissions 
Scenarios. J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. UK, 339 pp. 
Iwashima, T. and R. Yamamoto, 1993: A statistical analysis of 
the extreme events: Long-term trend of heavy daily 
precipitation. /. Met. Soc. Japan, 71, 637-640. 
Jacoby, G . C , R. D'Arrigo and B. Luckman, 1996: In: Climatic 
Variations and Forcing Mechanisms of the Last 2000 Years, 
P.D. Jones, R.S. Bradley and J. Jouzel (eds.). Springer Verlag, 
Heidelburg (in press). 
Johnsen, S.J., H . Clausen, W. Dansgard, K . Fuhrer, N.S. 
Gunderstrup, C.U. Hammer, P. Iverssen, J. Jouzel, B. Stauffer 
and J.P. Steffensen, 1992: Irregular glacial interstadials 
recorded in a new Greenland ice core. Nature, 359, 311-313. 
Johnson, G.L., J.M. Davis, T.R. Kari, A.L. McNab, K.P. Gallo, 
J.D. Tarpley and P. Bloomfield, 1994: Estimating urban 
temperature bias using polar-orbiting satellite data. J. Appl. 
Met., 33,35^-369. 
Jones, P.D., 1988: Hemispheric surface air temperature variations: 
recent trends and an update to 1987. J. Climate, 1, 654-660. 
Jones, P.D., 1990: Antarctic temperatures over the present 
century - a study of the early expedition record. J. Climate, 3, 
1193-1203. 
Jones, P.D., 1994a: Hemispheric surface air temperature 
variations: a reanalysis and an update to 1993. J. Climate, 7, 
1794-1802. 
Jones, P.D., 1994b: Recent warming in global temperature series. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 1149-1152. 
Jones. P.D., 1995a: Recent variations in mean temperature and 
the diurnal temperature range in the Antarctic. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 22, 1345-1348. 
Jones, P.D., 1995b: Maximum and minimum temperature trends 
in Ireland, Italy, Thailand, Turkey and Bangladesh. Atmos. 
Res., 37, 67-78. 
Jones, P.D. and R.S. Bradley, 1992: Chmatic variations over the 
last 500 years. In: Climate Since AD 1500, R.S. Bradley and 
P.D. Jones (eds.), Routiedge, London, pp 649-665. 
Jones, P.D. and K.R. Briffa, 1992: Global surface air temperature 
variations during the twentieth century. Holocene, 2, 165-179. 
Jones, P.D. and K.R. Briffa, 1996: What can the instrumental 
record tell us about longer timescale paleoclimatic 
reconstructions? In: Climatic 
variations 
and 
forcing 
mechanisms of the last 2000 years, P.D. Jones, R.S. Bradley, 
and J. Jouzel (eds.). Springer Verlag, Heidelburg (in press). 
Jones, P.D., S.C.B. Raper, R.S. Bradley, H.F. Diaz, P.M. Kelly 
and T.M.L. Wigley, 1986a: Northern Hemisphere surface air 
temperture variations, 1851-1984. J. Climate Appl. Met., 25, 
161-179. 
Jones, P.D., S.C.B. Raper, R.S. Bradley, H.F. Diaz, P.M. Kelly 
and T.M.L. Wigley, 1986b: Southern Hemisphere surface air 
temperature variations, 1851-1984. J. Climate Appl Met., 25, 
1213-1230. 
Jones, P.D., P.Ya. Groisman, M . Coughlan, N . Plummer, W.-C. 
Wang and T.R. Karl, 1990: Assessment of urbanization effects 
in time series of surface air temperature over land. Nature, 347, 
169-172. 
Jónsson, T., 1994: Precipitation in Iceland 1857-1992. In: 
Climate Variations in Europe , R. Heino (ed.). Academy of 
Finland, Publication 3/94, pp. 183-188. 
Jouzel, J., C. Lorius, S.J. Johnsen and P. Grootes, 1994: Climate 
instabilities: Greenland and Antarctic records. C.R. Acad. Sci, 
Paris, 319, Serie II, 65-77. 
' 
Jouzel, J., R. Vaikmae, J.R. Petit, M . Martin, Y . Duelos, M . 
Stíevenard, С. Lorius, M . Toots, M.A. Melieres, L.H. Burckie, 
N.I. Barkov and V . M . Kotyakov, 1995: The two-step shape and 
timing of the last déglaciation in Antarctica. Clim. Dyn. 11, 
151-161. 
Judge, A.S., G. Cheng, Т.Е. Osterkamp, M . Smith and J. Gray, 
1983: Climate change and geothermal regime. In: Permafrost: 
Fourth International Conference-Final Proceedings, 137-159. 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Kaas, E. and P. Frich, 1995: Diurnal temperature range and cloud 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
187 
cover in the Nordic countries: observed trends and estimates 
for the future. Atmos. Res., 37, 211-228. 
Kahl, J.D.W., M.C. Serreze, R.S. Stone, S. Shiotani, M . Kisley 
and R.C. Schell, 1993a: Tropospheric temperature trends in the 
Arctic: 1958-1986. / Geophys. Res., 98, 12825-12838. 
Kahl, J.D., D.J. Charlevoix, N.A. Zaitseva, R.C. Schnell and 
M.C. Serreze, 1993b: Absence of evidence for greenhouse 
warming over the Arctic Ocean in the past 40 years. Nature, 
361, 335-337. 
Karl. T.R., G. Kukla, V . N . Razuvayev, M.J. Changery, R.G. 
Quayle, R.R. Heim, D.R. Easterling and Cong Bin Eu, 1991: 
Global warming: evidence for asymmetric diurnal temperature 
change. Geophys. Re.4. Lett., 18, 2253-2256. 
Karl, T.R., P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight, G, Kukla, N . Plummer, V. 
Razuvayev, K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay. R.J. Charlson and T.C. 
Peterson, 1993a: A new perspective on recent global warming: 
Asymmetric trends of daily maximum and minimum 
temperature. Bull Am. Met Soc., 74, 1007-1023. 
Karl, T.R., P.Y. Groisman, R.W. Knight and R.R. Heim, Jr., 
1993b: Recent variations of snow cover and snowfall in North 
America and their relation to precipitation and temperature 
variations./. Climate, 6, 1327-1344. 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight and J.R. Christy, 1994: Global and 
hemispheric temperature trends: Uncertainties related to 
inadequate spatial sampling, J. Climate, 7, 1144-1163. 
Karl, T.R., V.E. Derr. D.R. Easterhng, C, Folland, D.J. Hofmann, 
S. Levitus, N . Nicholls, D. Parker and G.W. Withee, 1995a: 
Critical issues for long-term climate monitoring. Clim. Change, 
31. 185-221. 
Karl, T.R., P.D. Jones, and R.W. Knight, 1995b: Testing for bias 
in the climate record. Science, (in press). 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight and N. Plummer, 1995c: Trends in high-
frequency climate variability in the twentieth century. Nature, 
377, 217-220. 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight, D.R. Easterling and R.G. Quayle, 
1995d. Trends in U.S. climate during the twentieth century. 
Consequences, 1, 3-12. 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight, G. Kukla and J. Gavin, 1995e: Evidence 
for radiative effects of anthropogenic aerosols in the observed 
climate record. In: Aerosol Forcings of Cimate, R.J. Charlson 
and J. Heintzenberg (eds.), John Wiley and Sons Ltd., 
Chichester. 
Karoly, D.J., P. Hope and P.D. Jones, 1996: Decadal variations 
of the Southern Hemisphere circulation. Int. J. Climatology, (in 
press). 
Kawamura, R., 1994: A rotated EOF analysis of global sea 
surface temperature variability with interannual and 
interdecadal scales. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 24, 707-715. 
Kawamura, R., M . Sugi and N . Sato, 1995: Interdecadal and 
interannual variability in the northern extratropical circulation 
simulated with the JMA global model. / Climate, (in press). 
Keeling, C D . , R.B. Bascastow, A.F, Carter, S.C. Piper, T.P. 
Wholf, M . Heimann, W.G.Mook and H. Roeloffzen, 1989: A 
three-dimensional model of atmospheric COj transport based 
on observed winds: Analysis of observational data. In: Aspects 
of Cimate Variability in the Pacific and the Western Americas, 
D.H.Peterson (ed.), Geophys. Mono., 55, 165-236, A G U , 
Washington DC. 
Keigvfin, L.D., W.B. Curry, S.J. Lehman and S. Johnsen, 1994: 
The role of the deep ocean in North Atlantic climate change 
between 70 and 130 kyr ago. Nature, 371, 323-326. 
King, J.C, 1994: Recent climate variability in the vicinity of the 
Antarctic Peninsula. Int. J. Climatolology, 14, 357-369. 
Kitoh, A., 1991: Interannual variations in an atmospheric G C M 
forced by the 1970-1989 SST. PtII: Low frequency variability 
of the wintertime Northern Hemisphere extratropics. J. Met. 
Soc. Japan, 69, 271-291. 
Kukla. G and T.R. Kari, 1993: Nighttime warming and the 
greenhouse effect. Environmental Science and Technology, 27, 
1468-1474. 
Kushnir, Y., 1994: Interdecadal variations in North Atlantic sea 
surface temperature and associated atmospheric conditions. J. 
Climate, 7, 141-157. 
Kwong, Y.T.J, and T.Y. Gan, 1994: Northward migration of 
permafrost along the Mackenzie Highway and climatic 
warming. Clim. Change, 26, 399-419. 
Labitzke, K. and H.van Loon, 1994: Trends of temperature and 
geopotential height between 100 and 10 hPa on the Northern 
Hemisphere. / Met Soc. Japan, 72, 643-652. 
Lachenbruch, A.H. and B.V. Marshall, 1986: Changing climate; 
geothermal evidence from permafrost in the Alaskan Arctic. 
Science, 234, 689-696. 
LaMarche, V . C , Jr., 1974: PaleochmaUc inferences from long 
tree-ring records. Science, 183, 1043-1048. 
Lamb, H.H., 1965: The medieval warm epoch and its sequel. 
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 1, 13-37. 
Lamb. H.H., 1988. Climate and life during the Middle Ages, 
studied especially in the mountains of Europe. In: Weather, 
Climate and Human Affairs, H.H. Lamb, Routledge, London, 
pp.40-74. 
Lamb, P.J. and R . A . Peppier. 1991: West Africa. In: 
Teleconnections Linking Worldwide Climate Anomalies, M.H. 
Glantz, R.W. Katz, and N . Nicholls (eds.), Cambridge Univ. 
Press, Cambridge, UK, 535 pp. 
Landsea, C.W., 1993: A climatology of intense (or major) 
Atlantic hurricanes. Mon. Weath. Rev., 121, 1703-1713. 
Landsea, C.W. and W . M . Gray, 1992: The strong association 
between Western Sahelian monsoon rainfall and intense 
Atlantic hurricanes. / Climate, 5, 435-453. 
Landsea, C.W. and W . M . Gray, 1996: Northern hemispheric 
surface temperature and tropical cyclone activity associations. 
Int. J. Climatology (in press). 
Landsea, C.W., N . Nicholls, W.M. Gray, and L.A. Avila, 1996: 
Quiet early 1990s continues trend of fewer intense Atlantic 
hurricanes. Geophys. Res. Lett., (submitted). 
Lara, A. and R.Villalba, 1993: A 3620-year temperature record 
from Fitzroya cupressoides tree rings in southern South 
America. Science, 260, 1104-1106. 
188 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Lare, A.R. and S.E. Nicholson, 1994: Contrasting conditions of 
surface water balance in wet and dry years as a possible land 
surface-atmosphere feedback mechanism in the West African 
Sahel. /. Climate, 7, 653-668. 
Lau, N.-C. and M.J. Nath, 1994: A modeling study of the relative 
roles of tropical and extratropical SST anomalies in the 
variability of the global atmosphere-ocean system. J. Climate, 
7, 1184-1207. 
Lazier, J.R.N., 1995: The salinity decrease in the Labrador Sea 
over the past thirty years. In Natural Climate Variability on 
Decade to Century Time Scales, D.G. Martinson et al. (eds.). 
National Research Council, National Academy Press, 
Washington DC, (in press). 
Lehman, S.J. and L.D. Keigwin, 1992: Sudden changes in North 
Atlantic circulation during the last déglaciation. Nature, 356, 
757-762. 
Lettenmaier, D„ E.E. Wood and J.R. Wallis, 1994: Hydro-
climatological trends in the continental United States, 1948-88. 
J. Climate, 7, 586-607. 
Levitus, S., J. Antonov, X . Zhou, H. Dooley, K. Selemenov and 
V. Tereschenkov, 1995: Decadal-scale variability of the North 
Atlantic Ocean. In: Natural Climate Variability on Decade to 
Century Time Scales, D.G. Martinson et al. (eds.). National 
Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington DC, 
(in press). 
Lewis, T.J. and K. Wang, 1993: Different patterns of climatic 
change in eastern and western Canada: Evidence in borehole 
temperature measurements. EOS, 1993 Fall 
Meeting 
Supplement, 103. 
Li, P., 1987: Seasonal snow resources and their fluctuations in 
China. In: Large-Scale Effects of Seasonal Snow Cover, B.E. 
Goodison, R . G . Barry and J. Dozier (eds.), l A H S Press, 
WalUngford, UK, 93-104. 
LindstrOm, G , , 1993: Floods 
in Sweden - Trends and 
Occurrence. SMHI R H No. 6, May 1993, 83 pp. 
Lins, H.F. and P.J. Michaels, 1994: Increasing streamflow in the 
United States. EOS', 75, 281-286. 
London, J., S.G. Warren and C.J. Hahn, 1991: Thirty-year trend 
of observed greenhouse clouds over the tropical oceans. Adv. 
Space Res., 11(3), 45^9. 
Lough, J . M . , 1993: Variations of some seasonal rainfall 
characteristics in Queensland, Australia: 1921-1987. Int. J. 
Climatology, 13, 391-409. 
Lough, J.M., D.J. Barnes and R.B. Taylor, 1996: The potential of 
massive corals for the study of high-resolution climate 
variations in the past millenium. In: Climatic Variations and 
Forcing 
Mechanisms 
of the last 2000 Years, P.D.Jones, 
R.S.Bradley, and J.Jouzel (eds.). Springer Verlag, Heidelburg 
(in press). 
Lyons, T.J., P. Schwerdtfeger, J.M. Hacker, I.J. Foster, R.C.G. 
Smith and H. Xinmei, 1993: Land-atmosphere interaction in a 
semiarid region: the bunny fence experiment. Bull. Amer Met. 
Soc, 74, 1327-1334. 
Magnuson, J.J, R.A. Assel, C.J. Bowser, B.T. DeStasio, P.J. 
Dillon, J.R. Eaton, E.J. Fee, L . M . Mortsch, F.H. Quinn, N.T. 
Roulet, and D.W. Schindler, 1995: Regional assessment of 
freshwater ecosystems and climate change in North America, 
Laurentian Great Lakes and precambrian Shield. J. Hydrologie 
Processes, (in press). 
Majorowicz, J.A., 1993: Climate change inferred from analysis 
of borehole temperatures: first results from Alberta Basin, 
Canada. Pageopk, 140, 655-666. 
Marengo, J .A., 1992: Interannual variability of surface climate 
in the Amazon basin. Int. J. Climatology, 12, 853-863. 
Marengo, J., 1995: Variations and change in South American 
streamflow. Clim. Change, 31, 99-117. 
Mareschal, J.-C. and G. Vasseur, 1992: Ground temperature 
history from two deep boreholes in central France. Global and 
Planetary Change, 6, 185-192. 
Mayewski, P.A., L.D. Meeker, S. Whitlow, M.S. Twicker, M.C. 
Morrison, R.B. Alley, P. Bloomfield and K. Taylor, 1993: The 
atmosphere during the Younger Dryas. Science, 262, 195-197. 
Mayewski, P.A., L.D. Meeker, S. Whitiow, M.S. Twicker, M.C. 
Morrison, P.M. Grootes, G.C. Bond, R.B. Alley, D.A. Meese, 
A . J . Gow. K . C . Taylor, M . Ram and M . Wunkes, 1994: 
Changes in atmospheric circulation and ocean ice cover over 
the North Atlantic during the last 41,000 years. Science, 263, 
1747-1751. 
McLaren, A.S., J.E. Walsh, R.H. Bourke, R.L. Weaver and W. 
Wittman, 1992: Variability in sea ice thickness over the North 
Pole from 1979 to 1990. Nature, 358, 224-226. 
McManus, J.F., G.C. Bond, W.S. Broecker, S.J. Johnsen, L. 
Labeyrie and S. Higgins, 1994: High-resolution climate records 
from the North Atlantic during the last interglacial. Nature, 
371, 326-329. 
Mendes, J . C , 1994: Climatic variability of precipitation in 
Portugal. In: Climate Variations in Europe. R.Heino (ed.). 
Academy of Finland, Publication 3/94, pp 189-195. 
Meshcherskaya, A.V., I.G. Belyankina and M.P. Golod, 1995: 
Monitoring of the snow depth over the main grain-growing 
zone of the former Soviet Union during the instrumental 
period. Izvestiya of the Russ. Acad, of Sci., Geog. Series, 4, 
101-111. 
Michaels, P.J., P.C. Knappenberger and D . A . Gay, 1995: 
Predicted and observed long night and day temperature trends. 
Atmos. Res., 37, 257-266. 
Miller, A.J., D.R. Cayan, T.P. Bárnett, N.E. Graham and J.M. 
Oberhuber, 1994: Interdecadal variability of the Pacific Ocean: 
Model response to observed heat flux and wind stress 
anomalies. Clim. Dyn., 9, 287-301. 
Moberg, A. and H. Alexandersson, 1995: Urban bias trend in the 
Swedish part of gridded temperature data. Int. J. Climatology, 
(submitted). 
Negri, A.J., R.E. Adler, E.J. Nelkin and G.J. Huffman, 1994: 
Regional rainfall climatologies derived from special sensor 
microwave Imager (SSM/I) data. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 
75, 
1165-1182. 
Nicholls, K.W. and J.G. Paren, 1993: Extending the Antarctic 
Observed Climate Variability and 
Change 
189 
meteorological record using ice-sheet temperature profiles. J. 
Climate, 6, 141-150. 
Nicholls, N . , 1992: Recent performance of a method for 
forecasting Australian seasonal tropical cyclone activity. Aust 
Met. Mag, 40, 105-110. 
Nicholls, N . and B. Lavery, 1992; Australian rainfall trends 
during the twentieth century. Int. J. Climatology. 12, 153-163. 
Nicholls, N . and A. Kariko, 1993: East Australian rainfall events: 
Interannual variations, trends, and relationships with the 
Southern Oscillation. /. Climate, 6, 1141-1152. 
Nicholls, N . , R. Tapp, K . Burrows and D. Richards, 1996: 
Historical thermometer exposures in Australia, Int. J. 
Climatology, (in press). 
Nicholson, S.E., 1978: Climatic variations in the Sahel and other 
African regions during the past five centuries. /. Arid. Environ., 
1, 3-24. 
Nicholson, S.E., 1989: Long-term changes in African rainfall. 
Weather, 44, 46-56. 
Nicholson, S.E., 1994a: A review of climate dynamics and 
climate variability in eastern Africa. The 
Limnology, 
Climatology and Paleoclimatology of the East African Lakes, 
Т.е. Johnson and E. Odada (eds.) Gordon and Breach, London, 
in press. 
Nicholson, S.E., 1994b: Recent rainfall fluctuations in Africa and 
their relationship to past conditions. Holocene, 4, 121-131. 
Nicholson, S.E., 1995: Variability of African rainfall on 
interannual and decadal time scales. In Natural 
Climate 
Variability on Decade-to-Century Time Scales, D. Martinson, 
K. Bryan., M . Ghil, T. Kari, E. Sarachik, S. Sorooshian, and L. 
Talley (eds.), USA National Academy Press, in press. 
Nitta, T. and S. Yamamada, 1989: Recent warming of the tropical 
sea surface and its relationship to the Northern Hemisphere 
circulation. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 67, 375-383. 
Norris, J.R. and C.B. Leovy, 1994: Interannual variability in 
stratiform cloudiness and sea suiface temperature. / 
Climate, 
1, 1915. 
O'Lenic, E., 1995: The relationship between low-and high-
frequency variability of Northern Hemisphere 700-hPa height. 
J. Climate, (in press). 
Oerlemans, J., 1994: Quantifying global warming from the 
retreat of glaciers. Science, 264, 243-245. 
Ohkouchi, N., K. Kawamura, T. Nakamura and A. Taira, 1994: 
Small changes in the sea surface temperature during the last 
20,000 years: Molecular evidence from the western tropical 
Pacific. Geophys. Res. Lett, 21, 2207-2210. 
Oltmans, S.J. and D.J. Hofmann, 1995: Increase in lower-
stratospheric water vapour at a mid-latitude Northern 
hemisphere site from 1981 to 1994. Nature, 374, 146-149. 
Oort, A.H. and H. Liu, 1993: Upper-air temperature trends over 
the globe, 1958-1989. J. Climate, 6, 292-307. 
Ostby, P.P., 1993: The changing nature of tornado climatology. 
In: Preprints, 
17th Conference 
on Severe Local Storms, 
October 4-8, 1993, St Louis, Missouri, pp. 1-5. 
Palecki, M.A., 1994: The onset of spring in the eastern United 
States during the 20th century. Preprints, Sixth Conference on 
Climate 
Variations, 
January 
23-28, 1994, 
Nashville, 
Tennessee, American Meteorological Society, pp. 108-109. 
Palmieri, S., A . M . Siani and A . D . Agostina, 1991: Climate 
fluctuations and trends in Italy within the last 100 years. Ann. 
Geophysicae, 9, 769-776. 
Pan, Y . H . and A.H. Oort, 1990: Correlation analyses between sea 
surface temperature anomalies in the eastern equatorial Pacific 
and the world ocean. Clim. Dyn., 4, 191-205. 
Parker, D . E . , 1994a: Long term changes in sea surface 
temperatures. Proc. Air and Waste Management Assoc. Conf. 
on Global Climate Change, Phoenix, Arizona, 5-8 April 1994, 
C.V. Mathar and G. Steislaed (eds.), pp 102-113. 
Parker, D . E . , 1994b: Effects of changing exposures of 
thermometers at land stations. Int. J. Climatology, 14, 1-31. 
Parker, D.E. and D.I. Cox, 1995: Towards a consistent global 
climatological rawinsonde data-base. Int. J. Climatolology, 15, 
473-496. 
Parker, D.E., T.P. Legg and C.K. Folland, 1992: A new daily 
central England temperature series. Int. J. Climatology, 
12, 
317-342. 
Parker, D.E., P.D. Jones, C.K. Folland and A . Bevan, 1994: 
Interdecadal changes of surface temperatures since the late 19th 
century. / Geophy. Res., 99, 14373-14399. 
Parker, D.E., C . K . Folland and M . Jackson, 1995: Marine 
surface 
temperature: observed 
variations and data 
requirements. Clim. Change, 31, 559-600. 
Parrilla, G., A . Lavin, H. Bryden, M . Garcia and R. Millard, 
1994: Rising temperatures in the subtropical North AUantic 
Ocean over the past 35 years. Nature, 369, 48-51. 
Parthasarathy, В., К. Rupa Kumar and D.R. Kothawale, 1992: 
Indian summer monsoon rainfall indices: 1871-1990. Meteorol. 
Magaz., 121, 174-186. 
Parthasarathy, В., A.A. Munot and D.R. Kothawale, 1994: All-
India monthly and seasonal rainfall series: 1871-1993. Theor 
Appl ClimatoL, 49, 217-224. 
Parungo, F., I.E. Boatman, H. Sievering, S. Wilkison and B.B. 
Hicks, 1994: Trends in global marine cloudiness and 
anthropogenic sulfur. J. Climate, 7, 434^40. 
Peterson, T.C., V . S . Golubev and P.Ya. Groisman, 1995: 
Evaporation losing its strength. Nature, 377, 687-688. 
Plantico, M.S., T.R. Kari., G. Kukla and J. Gavin, 1990: Is recent 
climate change across the United States related to rising levels 
of anthropogenic greenhouse gases? J. Geophys. Res., 95, 
16617-16637. 
Plummer, N . , 1996: Temperature variability and extremes over 
Australia: Part 1 - Recent observed changes, Aust Meteorol 
Mag., (submitted). 
Plummer, N., Z. Lin and S. Torok, 1995: Recent changes in the 
diurnal temperature range over Australia. Atmos. Res., 37, 
79-86. 
Pollack, H.N. and D.S. Chapman, 1993: Underground records of 
changing climate. Scientific American, 268, 44-50. 
Porter, S.C. and An Zhisheng, 1995: Correlation between climate 
790 
Observed Climate VariabiUty and Change 
events in the North Atlantic and China during the last 
glaciation. Nature, 375, 305-308. 
Portman, D.A., 1993: Identifying and correcting urban bias in 
regional time series: surface temperature in China's northern 
plains. / Climate, 6, 2298-2308. 
Posmentier, E.S., M.A. Cane and S.E. Zebiali, 1989: Tropical 
Pacific trends since 1960. /. Climate, 2, 731-736. 
Prabhakara, C , J.C. Nucciarone and J . M . Yoo, 1995: 
Examination of global atmospheric temperature monitoring 
with satellite microwave measurements: 1) Theoretical 
considerations. Clim. Change, 30, 349-366. 
Quinn, W.H., 1992: A study of Southern Oscillation - related 
climatic activity for A D 622-1900 incorporating Nile River 
flood data. In: El Niño: Historical and Paleoclimatic aspects of 
the Southern Oscillation, H.F. Diaz and V. Markgraf (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U K 476pp. 
Rakhecha, P.R. and M.K. Soman, 1994: Trends in the annual 
extreme rainfall events of 1 to 3 days duration over India. 
Theor Appl Climatol, 48, 227-237. 
Ramage, C.S. 1987: Secular change in reported surface wind 
speeds over the ocean. /. Clim. Appl Meteorol, 26, 525-528. 
Raper, S.C.B., 1993: Observational data on the relationships 
between climatic change and the frequency and magnitude of 
severe tropical storms. In: Climate and Sea Level Change: 
Observations, 
Projections and Implications, 
R.A. Warrick, 
E.M. BaiTow, and T.M.L. Wigley (eds.), Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK, pp 192-212. 
Raper, S.C.B., T.M.L. Wigley, P.R. Mayes. P.D. Jones and M.J. 
Salinger, 1984: Variations in surface air temperatures, part 3: 
The Antarctic, 1957-1982. Month. Weath. Review, 
112, 
1341-1353. 
Rasmusson, E . M . , X . L . Wang and C F . Ropelewski, 1994: 
Secular variability of the ENSO cycle. In: Natural CUmate 
Variability on Decade to Century Time Scales, D.G. Martinson 
et al. (eds.). National Research Council, National Academy 
Press, Washington DC, in press. 
Razuvaev,V.N., E . G . Apasova, O . N . Bulygina and R . A . 
Martuganov, 1995: Variations in the diurnal temperature range 
in the European region of the former USSR during the cold 
season. Atmos. Res., 37, 45-51. 
Read, J .F. and W.J. Gould. 1992: Cooling and freshening of the 
subpolar North Atlantic Ocean since the 1960s. Nature, 360, 
55-57. 
Reynolds, R . W . , 1988: A real-time global sea surface 
temperature analysis. J. Climate, 1, 75-86. 
Rhines, P.B. and J.R.N. Lazier, 1995: Deep convection and 
climate change in the Labrador Sea. Nature, (submitted). 
Robinson, D.A., K.E. Dewey and R.R. Heim, Jr., 1993: Global 
snow cover monitoring: An update. Bull. Am. Mel. Soc, 74. 
1689-1696. 
Robock, A. and Jianping Mao, 1992: Winter warming from large 
volcanic eruptions. Geophys. Res. Lett., 12, 2405-2408. 
Robock, A.and Jianping Mao, 1995: The volcanic signal in 
surface temperature observations. J. Climate, 8, (in press). 
Robock, A., K.Ya. Vinnikov, C A . Schlosser, N.A. Speranskaya 
and Y . Xue, 1995: Use of midlatitude soil moisture and 
meteorological observations to validate soil moisture 
simulations with biosphere and bucket models. J. Climate, 8, 
15-35. 
Roemmich, D. and С Wunsch, 1984: Apparent changes in the 
climatic state of the deep North AUantic Ocean. Nature, 307, 
447-450. 
Rogers, J.C. and R.V. Rohli, 1991: Florida citrus freezes and 
polar anticyclones in the Great Plains. J. Climate. 
4, 
1103-1113. 
Rupa Kumar, K., K. Krishna Kumar and G.B. Pant, 1994: 
Diurnal asymmetry of surface temperature trends over India. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 677-680. 
Salinger, M.J., 1994: New Zealand climate in the last 25000 
years. In: Paleoclimates and Cimate Modelling. Proceedings of 
the National Science Strategy Committee for Climate Change 
Workshop, Royal Society of New Zealand Miscellaneous Series 
29, 15-16. 
Salinger, M.J., A . B . Mullan, A.S. Porteous, S.J. Reid, C.S. 
Thompson, L.A. Coutts and E. Fouhy, 1990: Л^и-' Zealand Cimate 
Extremes: Recent Trends. New Zealand Meteorological Service 
Report to new Zealand Ministry for the Environment, 33 pp. 
Salinger, M.J., R. McGann, L. CouUs, B. CoUen and E. Fouhy, 
1992: Rainfall Trends in New Zealand and Outlying Islands, 
1920-1990. South Pacific Historical Climate Network, National 
Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Report, 33 pp. 
Salinger, M.J., J. Hay. R. McGann and B. Fitzharris, 1993; 
Southwest Pacific temperatures; diurnal and seasonal trends. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 935-938. 
Salinger, M.J., J.G. Palmer, P.D. Jones and K.R. Briffa, 1994; 
Reconstruction of New Zealand climate indices back to AD 
1731 using dendroclimatic techniques; Some preliminary 
results. Int. J. Climatology, 14, 1135-1149. 
Salinger, M.J., R.E. Basher, B.B. Fitzharris, J.E. Hay, P.D. Jones, 
J.P. MacVeigh and I. Schmidely-Leleu, 1995a; Climate trends 
in the southwest Pacific. Int. J. Climatology, 15, 285-302. 
Salinger, M.J., R. Allan, N. Bindoff J. Hannah, B. Lavery, L. 
Leieu, Z. Lin, J. Lindesay, J.P. MacVeigh, N . Nicholls, N . 
Plummer and S. Torok, 1995b; Observed variability and 
change in climate and sea level in Oceania. In Proc. 
GREENHOUSE 
'94, (in press). 
Schinke, H., 1993; On the occurrence of deep cyclones over 
Europe and the North Atiantic in the period 1930-1991. Beitr. 
Phys. Atmosph, 66, 223-237.' 
Schlesinger, M.E. and N . Ramankutty, 1994: An oscillation in 
the global climate system of period 65-70 years. Nature, 367, 
723-726. 
Schmidt, H., and H. von Storch, 1993: German Bight storms 
analysed. Nature, 365, 791. 
Schwitter, M.P.^and C F . Raymond, 1993; Changes in the 
longitudinal profiles of glaciers during advance and retreat. J. 
Glaciology, 39, 582-590. 
Seltzer, G.O., 1992; Late Quaternary glaciation of the Cordifera 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Real, Bolivia. / Quat. Sci., 7, 87-98. 
Serreze, M . C , J.E, Box, R.G. Barry and J.E. Walsh, 1993: 
Characteristics of Arctic synoptic activity, 1952-1989. 
Meteorol. Atmos. Phys., 51, 147-164. 
Shiklomanov, 1.А., 1976: Hydrological Problems Related to the 
Caspian Sea Problems. Gidrometeoizdat, Leningrad, 78pp., in 
Russian. 
Shinoda, M . and R. Kawamura, 1994a: Tropical rainbelt 
circulation, and sea surface temperatures associated with the 
Sahalian rainfall trend. / Met. Soc. Japan, 72, 341-359. 
Shinoda, M . and R. Kawamura, 1994b: Tropical African rainbelt 
and global sea surface temperatures: Interhemispheric 
comparison. In: Prac. Intl. Conf. on Monsoon Variability and 
Prediction. Trieste, Italy, 9-13 May 1994, 288-295. 
Sikes, E.L. and L.D. Keigwin, 1994: Equatorial Atlantic sea 
surface temperature for the last 30 kyr: a comparison of U37', 
dl80, and foraminiferal assemblage temperature estimates. 
Paleoceanography, 9. 31-45. 
Skinner, W.R., 1993: Lake ice conditions as a cryospheric 
indicator for detecting climate variability in Canada. In: Snow 
Watch '92, Detection Strategiess for Snow and Ice, Proc. Int'l 
Workshop on Snow and Ice Cover and the Climate System, 
Barry, R.G., B.E. Goodison, and E.E. LeDrew (eds.). World 
Data Center A for Glaciology, Boulder, Co, 204-240. 
Smith, K., 1995: Precipitation over Scotland 1757-1992: Some 
aspects of temporal variability. Int. J. Climatology, 
15, 
543-556. 
Soldatova, I .1, 1993: Secular variations in river "break-up" data 
and their relationship with climate variation. Meteorología 
i 
gidrologia, 9, 89-96. 
Sontakke, N.A., G.B. Pant and N. Singh, 1992: Construction and 
analysis of All-India summer monsoon rainfall series for the 
longest instrumental period: 1813-1991. Research Report No. 
053, IITM, Pune, India, 18 pp. 
Sontakke, N.A., G.B. Pant and N . Singh, 1993: Construction of 
All-India summer monsoon rainfall series for the period 1844-
1991.7. Climate, 6, 1807-1811. 
Spencer, R.W., 1993: Global oceanic precipitation from the M S U 
during 1979-91 and comparisons to other climatologies. /. 
Climate, 6, 1301-1326. 
Spencer, R.W. and J.R. Christy, 1992a: Precision and radiosonde 
validation of satellite gridpoint temperature anomalies. Part I: 
MSU channel 2. /. Climate, 5, 847-857. 
Spencer, R.W. and J.R. Christy, 1992b: Precision and radiosonde 
validation of satellite gridpoint temperature anomalies. Part II: 
A tropospheric retrieval and trends during 1979-90. /. Climate, 
5, 858-866. 
Spencer, R . W . and J.R. Christy, 1993: Precision lower 
stratospheric temperature monitoring with the MSU: Validation 
and results 1979-91. / Climate, 6, 1194-1204. 
Spencer, R.W. J.R. Christy and N.C. Grody, 1990: Global 
atmospheric temperature monitoring with satellite microwave 
measurements: method and results 1979-84. /. Climate, 3, 
1111-1128. 
191 
Stein, O. and A. Hense, 1994: A reconstructed time series of the 
number of extreme low pressure events since 1880. Meteorol 
Zeitschrift, N.F. 3, 43^6. 
Stine, S., 1994: Extreme and persistent drought in California and 
Patagonia during medieval times. Nature, 369, 546-549. 
Stone, R., N . Nicholls and G. Hammer, 1996: Erost in N E 
Australia: Trends and influence of phases of the Southern 
Oscillation. / Climate, (in press) 
Suggate, R.P., 1990: Late Pliocene and Quaternary glaciations of 
New Zealand. Quaternary Science Reviews, 9, 175-197. 
Suppiah, R. and K.J. Hennessy, 1996: Trends in the intensity and 
frequency of heavy rainfall in tropical Australia and links with 
the Southern Oscillation, Aust Meteorol Mag., (in press), 
Taylor, A,E., 1991: Holocene paleoenvironmental reconstruction 
from deep ground temperatures: a comparison with 
paleoclimate derived from the S'^O record in an ice core from 
the Agassiz Ice Cap, Canadian Arctic Archipelago. J. 
Glaciology, У1, 209-219. 
Taylor, K . C , G.W. Lamorey, G.A. Doyle, R.B. Alley, P . M . 
Grootes, P.A. Mayewski, J.W.C. White and L . K . Barlow, 
1993a: The "flickering switch" of late Pleistocene climate 
change. Nature, 361, 432^36. 
Taylor, K . C , C.U. Hammer, R.B. Alley, H.B. Clausen, D. Dahl-
Jensen, A.J. Gow, N.S. Gundestrup, J. Kipfstuhl, J.C. Moore 
and E . D . Waddington, 1993b: Electrical conductivity 
measurements from the GISP2 and GRIP Greenland ice cores. 
Nature, 366, 549-552. 
Thompson, C , S. Ready and X. Zheng, 1992: Tropical Cyclones in 
the South West Pacific: November 1979 to May 1989. National 
Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research Report. 35 pp. 
Thompson, L.G,, E. Mosley-Thompson, M , Davis, P.N. Lin, T. 
Yao, M . Dyergerov and J. Dai, 1993: Recent warming: ice core 
evidence from tropical ice cores with emphasis on central Asia. 
Global and Planetary Change, 7, 145-156. 
Thompson, E.G., E. Mosley-Thompson, M.E, Davis, P,-N. Lin, 
K.A. Henderson, J. Cole-Dai, J.F. Bolzan and K.-B. Liu, 1995: 
Late glacial stage and holocene tropical ice core records from 
Huascarçn, Peru. Science, 269, 46-50. 
Thomson, D.J., 1995: The seasons, global temperature, and 
precession. Science, 268, 59-68. 
Thouveny, N., J-L. de Beaulieu, E. Bonifay, K . M . Creer, J. Guiot, 
M . Icole, S. Johnsen, J. Jouzel, M . Reille, T. Williams and D. 
Williamson, 1994: Climate variations in Europe over the past 
140 kyr deduced from rock magnetism. Nature, 371, 503-506. 
Thunnell, R., D. Anderson, D, Cellar and Qingmin Miao, 1994: 
Sea-surface temperature estimates for the tropical western 
Pacific during the last glaciation and their implications for the 
Pacific warm pool. Quat. Res., 41, 255-264. 
Trenberth, K., 1990: Recent observed interdecadal climate changes 
in the Northern Hemisphere. Bull Am. Met Soc, 71, 988-993. 
Trenberth, K.E., 1996: Atmospheric circulation climate changes. 
Clim. Change, (in press). 
Trenberth, K.E. and J.G. Olson, 1991: Representativeness of a 
63-station network for depicting climate changes. In: 
192 
Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic 
Change: A 
Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, M.E. Schlesinger 
(ed.). Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 249-259. 
Trenberth, K.E. and J.W. Hurrell, 1994: Decadal atmosphere-
ocean variations in the Pacific. Clim. Dyn. 9, 303-319. 
Trenberth, K.E.and T.J. Hoar, 1996: The 1990-1995 El Nino-
Southern Oscillation Event: Longest on record. Geophys. Res. 
Lett. 23,57. 
UNEP, 1992: World Atlas of Desertification. Edward Arnold, 
London. 
Van Loon, H., J.W. Kidson and A.B. Mullan, 1993: Decadal 
variation of the annual cycle in the Australian dataset. J. 
Climate, 6, 1227-1231. 
Venrick, E.L., J.A. McGowan, R.D. Cayan and T. Hayward, 
1987: Climate and chlorophyll a: Long term trends in the 
central North Pacific Ocean. Science, 238,10-11. 
Vilialba, R., 1990: Climatic fluctuations in northern Patagonia 
during the last 1000 years as infeired from tree-ring records. 
Quaternary Research, 34, 346-360. 
Vinnikov, K. Ya. and L B . Yeserkepova, 1991: Soil moisture: 
empirical data and model results. /. Climate, 4, 66-79. 
Vinnikov, K . Y a . , P.Ya. Groisman and K . M . Lugina, 1990: 
Empirical data on contemporary global climate changes 
(teinperature and precipitation). / Climate, 3, 662-677. 
Vinnikov, K . Y a . , A . Robock, N . A . Speranskaya and C . A . 
Schlosser, 1995: Scales of temporal and spatial variability of 
midlatitude soil moisture. J. Geophy. Res. (in press). 
Von Storch, H., J. Guddak, K.A. Iden. T. Jùnson, J. Perlwitz, M . 
Reistad, J. de Ronde, H. Schmidt and E. Zorita, 1993: Changing 
Statistics of Storms in the North Atlantic?, Report No. 116, 
Max-Planck-Institut fur Météorologie, Hamburg, 18 pp. 
Vose, R.S., R.L. Schmoyer, P.M. Steurer, T.C. Peterson, R. Heim, 
T.R. Kari and J.Eischeid, 1992: The Global Historical Climatology 
Network: Long-tenn monthly temperature, precipitation, sea level 
pressure, and station pressure data. Report ORNL/CDlAC-53, 
NDP-041 (Available from Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis 
Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee.) 
Wallace, J.M. and D.S. Gutzler, 1981: Teleconnections in the 
geopotential height field during the Northern hemisphere 
winter. Mon. Weath. Rev., 109, 784-811. 
Wang, В., 1995: Interdecadal changes in El Niño onset in the last 
four decades. / Climate, 8, 267-285. 
Wang, K., T.J. Lewis and A . M . Jessop, 1992: Climatic changes 
in central and eastern Canada inferred from deep borehole 
temperature data. Global and Planetary Change, 6, 129-141. 
Wang, K . , T.J. Lewis, D.S. Belton.and P - Y . Shen, 1994: 
Differences in recent ground surface warming in eastern and 
western Canada: Evidence from borehole temperatures. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 2689-2692. 
Wang, W . C , Z. Zeng and T.R. Kari, 1990: Urban heat islands in 
China. Geophys. Res. Lett, 17, 2377-2380. 
Wang, X . L . and C F . Ropelewski, 1995: An assessment of 
ENSO-scale secular variability. J. Climate, 8, 1584-1599. 
Ward, M.N., 1992: Provisionally corrected surface wind data. 
worldwide ocean-atmosphere surface fields and Sahelian 
rainfall variability. J. Climate, 5, 454-475. 
Ward, M . N . , 1994: Tropical North African rainfall and 
worldwide monthly to multi-decadal climate variations. Ph.D. 
thesis, Reading University, UK. 
Warren, S.G., C.J. Hahn, J. London, R . M . Chervin, and R.L. 
Jenne, 1988: Global Distribution of Total Cloud Cover and 
Cloud Type Amounts over the Ocean. N C A R Technical Note 
TN-317+STR, 42 pp -i- 170 maps. 
Watkins, C , 1991: The annual period of freezing teinperatures in 
central England: 1850-1989. Int. J. Climatology, 11, 889-896. 
Weare, B.C., 1984: Interannual moisture variations near the surface 
of the ttopical Pacific Ocean. Quart. J. R. Met Soc, 110,489-504. 
Weber, R.O., P. Talkner and G. Stefanicki, 1994: Asymmetric 
diumal temperature change in the Alpine region, Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 21, 673-676. 
Webster, P.J.and N.A. Streten, 1978: Late Quaternary ice age 
climates of tropical Australasia: Interpretations and 
reconstructions. Quat Res., 10, 279-309. 
Whetton, P., R. Allan and I. Rutherford, 1995: Historical ENSO 
teleconnections in the eastern hemisphere: Comparison with 
latest El Niño series of Quinn, Clim.Change (in press). 
Whiteford, P., 1993: Evaluation of past climate using borehole 
temperature measurements. Weather and Climate, 13, 3-8. 
Whiteford, P.C., R.G. Allisand R.H. Funnel, 1994: Past climate 
from borehole temperature measurements. In: Paleoclimates 
and Climate Modelling. Proceedings of the National Science 
Strategy Committee for Climate Change Workshop, Royal 
Society of New Zealand Miscellaneous Series, 29, 37-38. 
Wigley, T . M . L . and P.D. Jones, 1987: England and Wales 
precipitation: A discussion of recent changes in variability and 
an update to 1985. J. Climatology, 1, 231-246. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and P.M. Kelly, 1990: Holocene chmatic change, 
'''C wiggles and variations in solar irradiance, Phil. Trans. R. 
5oc. Lewd., A 330, 547-560. 
WMO^NEP, 1995: Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion: 
1994. Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project Report 
No. 37. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva. 
Yamagata, T. and Y. Masumoto, 1992: Interdecadal natural 
climate variability in the western Pacific and its implication in 
global warming. J. Met. Soc. Japan., 70, 167-175. 
Ye, H., L.S. Kalkstein and J.S, Greene, 1995: The detection of 
climate change in the Arctic: An updated report. Atmos. Res., 
37, 163-173. 
Yu, B. and D.T. Neil, 1991: Global warming and regional 
rainfall: the difference between average and high intensity 
rainfalls. Int. J Climatology, 11, 653-661. 
Yu, B. and D.T, Neil, 1993: Long-term variations in regional 
rainfall in the south-west of Western Australia and the 
difference between average and high intensity rainfalls. Int J. 
Climatology, 13, 77-88. 
Zhang, Y., J . M . Wallace and N . Iwasaka, 1995: Is climate 
variability over the North Pacific a linear response to ENSO? J 
Climate (in press). 
4 
Climate Processes 
R.E. DICKINSON, V. MELESHKO, D. RANDALL, E. SARACHIK, R SILVA-DIAS, 
A. SLINGO 
Contributors: 
A. Barros, О. Boucher, R. Cess, T. Charlock, L. DUmenil, A. Del Genio, 
R. Fu, P. Gleckler, J. Hansen, R. Lindzen, K. McNaughton, J. McWilliams, 
E. Maier-Reimer, G. Meehl, M. Miller, D. Neelin, E. Olaguer, T. Palmer, 
C. Penland, R. Pinker, D. Rind, V. Ramaswamy, A. Robock, M. Salby 
C. Senior, M. Schlesinger, H.P Schmid, Q.Q. Shao, K. Shine, H. Sundqvist, 
A. Vogelmann, A.J. Weaver 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
197 
4.1 Introduction to Climate Processes 
199 
4.2 Atmospheric Processes 
200 
4.2.1 Water Vapour Amounts 
201 
4.2.2 Cloud Amounts 
201 
4.2.3 Cloud Water Content 
204 
4.2.4 Cloud Particle Size 
205 
4.2.5 Model Feedback Intercomparisons 
205 
4.2.6 Coupling of Clouds with the Surface 
207 
4.2.7 Precipitation and Cumulus Convection 
209 
4.2.8 Assessment of the Status of Moist Processes 
in Climate Models 
209 
4.3 Oceanic Processes 
210 
4.3.1 Surface Fluxes 
211 
4.3.2 Processes of the Surface Mixed Layer 
212 
4.3.3 Wind Driven and Thermohaline Ocean 
Circulation 
212 
4.3.4 Ocean Convection 
213 
4.3.5 Interior Ocean Mixing 
214 
4.3.6 Seaice 
214 
4.3.7 The El Nino-Southern Oscillation as a Climate 
Process 
215 
4.3.8 Assessment of the Status of Ocean Processes 
in Climate Models 
216 
4.4 Land-surface processes 
217 
4.4.1 SoU-Vegetation-Atmosphere Transfer Schemes 
217 
4.4.2 Questions of Spatial Heterogeneity 
219 
4.4.3 Sensitivity to Land-use Changes 
220 
4.4.4 Assessment of the Current Status of Land 
Processes in Climate Change Simulations 
221 
References 
221 
SUMMARY 
This chapter assesses the processes in the climate system 
that are believed to contribute the most to the uncertainties 
in current projections of greenhouse warming. Many of 
these processes involve the coupling of the atmosphere, 
ocean, and land through the hydrological cycle. Continued 
progress in climate modelling will depend on the 
development of comprehensive data sets and their 
application to improving important parametrizations. The 
large-scale dynamical and thermodynamical processes in 
atmospheric and oceanic models are well treated and are 
one of the strengths of the modelling approach. As 
previously indicated in IPCC (1990, 1992), the radiative 
effects of clouds and their linkages to the hydrological 
cycle remain a major uncertainty for climate modelling. 
The present report, however, goes into much more detail 
than the past reports in summarising the many facets of this 
question, recent progress in understanding different 
feedbacks, and in the development of climate model 
parametrization treating these processes. This is now a very 
active research area with much that has been accomplished 
since IPCC (1990). 
Current climate models are highly sensitive to cloud 
parametrizations, and there are not yet satisfactory means 
for evaluating the correctness of such treatments. Progress 
will require improved understanding, observational data 
sets, sub-grid scale parametrization, and improved 
modelling of the distribution of atmospheric water in its 
vapour, liquid, and solid forms, and will not be achieved 
quickly. Sub-grid scale parametrizations are especially 
difficult to improve. The determination of cloud-dependent 
surface radiative and precipitation fluxes is a significant 
source of uncertainty for both land-surface and ocean 
climate modelling, making attempts to assess regional 
climate change problematic. 
Clear-sky feedbacks involving changes in water vapour 
distribution and lapse rates are also uncertain but their 
global sum varies little between models. The processes 
determining the distribution of upper tropospheric water 
vapour are still poorly understood. Water vapour feedback 
in the lower troposphere is undoubtedly positive, and the 
preponderance of evidence also points to it being positive 
in the upper troposphere. 
A large-scale dynamical framework for treating the ocean 
component of climate models is now being used for climate 
change projections. Sub-grid scale parametrizations in these 
models are important for surface energy exchange and the 
thermohaline circulation. A new parametrization for interior 
mixing appears promising in providing an improved 
simulation of the global thermocline. Both high latitude and 
tropical elements of ocean climate models involve important 
and srill inadequately represented processes. In high 
latitudes, coupling to sea ice models and deep convection are 
especially important. In the tropics, ocean models need to 
simulate the large-scale sea surface temperature variability 
of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation systems. 
Climate model treatments of land processes have 
advanced rapidly since the last assessment. However, there 
are lags in the validation of these models, in the 
development of required data sets, in an adequate 
assessment of how sub-grid scale processes should be 
represented, and in their implementation in models for 
climate 
change 
projection. None of the 
land 
parametrizations include a physically based and globally 
validated treatment of runoff. 
Climate 
Processes 
199 
4.1 Introduction to Climate Processes 
Climate processes are all the individual physical processes 
that separately contribute to the overall behaviour of the 
climate system. They are also the interactions and feedbacks 
among the individual processes that determine the response 
of the climate system to external forcing, including the 
response to global anthropogenic forcing. There are a myriad 
of such climate processes. This report is focused by the 
present community experience with numerical modelling. 
The success of numerical simulations of future climate 
change hinges on the adequate inclusion of all the climate 
processes that are responsible for detennining the behaviour 
of the system. A triage approach is used here; processes are 
treated lighüy that are already included adequately in 
numerical models or those for which there is little or no 
evidence supporring their importance. The present report 
emphasises those processes 
known to contribute 
substantially to the uncertainties of current numerical 
simulations of long-term climate response. These all are 
physical processes. Chemical and biological components are 
treated in Chapters 2, 9 and 10 respectively, and at present 
would be de-emphasised by the triage approach for lack of 
substantial effort to include them in climate models. 
A globally averaged temperature increase is the response 
most easily related to global greenhouse forcing. Current 
climate models project global temperature increases that 
vary by over a factor of two to three for a given forcing 
scenario. These differences are directly attributable to the 
treatment of cloud processes, their links to the hydrological 
cycle and their interaction with radiation in the models. 
Indeed, individual models can give this range of answers, 
depending on changes only in the cloud parametrizarion 
(Senior and Mitchell, 1993). Thus, all the likely 
contributors to the ultimate representations of cloud 
processes in climate models need emphasis, as do other 
aspects of the hydrological cycle and model dynamics that 
interact with cloud evolution and properties. 
Another current focus for climate process studies is the 
evolving interpretarion of the past climate record. Most 
notable is that of the observed warming of about half a 
degree over the last century. This is about a factor of two 
smaller than conventional esrimates according to models 
including only trace gas increases but is consistent with the 
inclusion of the expected effects of sulphate aerosols. 
Observations over continental surfaces show that the 
warming has been more pronounced at night than during 
the day (с/. Chapter 3). Hansen et al. (1995) have 
hypothesised from a large number of numerical simulations 
with a simple sector General Circulation Model (GCM) 
that the observed global trends and continental 
predominance of night-time warming can be explained if 
clouds and aerosol have increased over continental surfaces 
with a global average radiative cooling of about half that of 
the warming by greenhouse gases increase. For the same 
direct radiative effects, a cloud increase would have a 
larger impact on diurnal range than would dry aerosols, 
since clouds not only cool during daytime but warm the 
surface at night. G C M calcularions by Mitchell et al. 
(1995) indicate that the direct radiaüve effect of aerosols 
alone can only partially explain the observed decrease in 
diurnal range. Further progress will require understanding 
the time history and distribution of anthropogenic aerosol 
as well as its effects on cloud properties and its consequent 
direct and indirect radiative effects. 
As mentioned above, ocean surface temperatures, and 
hence much of climate variability and change are strongly 
influenced by net energy exchanges between the oceans and 
the atmosphere. In high latitudes, sea ice is of major 
significance for modifying these energy exchanges. The 
possible rapid variations of the thermohaline circulation, first 
suggested by Bryan (1986), indicate that rean-angements of 
heat in the ocean can occur relatively quickly so that surface 
temperatures can respond rapidly to changes in the 
thermohaline circulation. Further, the thermohaline 
circulation is particularly sensitive to changes in the high 
latitude temperature and hydrology; variability on decadal-
to-millennial time-scales can arise. On somewhat shorter 
time-scales, coupled atmosphere-ocean processes in the 
tropics are a major source of interannual climate variability. 
Therefore, dynamically active oceans are included in 
coupled models for a comprehensive evaluation of the 
response to increases in the radiatively active gases. 
Land-surface processes are also now highlighted for 
several reasons. The land surface is readily modified on the 
large-scale by human activities. Such modifications may 
have important regional consequences; historical land 
modiñcations may have had larger regional climate impacts 
up to now than has had greenhouse gas warming. Land-
surface processes probably are of lesser importance for the 
future globally averaged temperature response to greenhouse 
wanning than are cloud processes, but how climate changes 
over land is of the greatest practical importance to humans 
and depends substantially on land-surface processes. 
Furthermore, land-surface processes strongly affect the 
overlying atmospheric hydrological cycle including clouds, 
so they arguably will be of major importance as feedbacks 
for determining changes in regional climate patterns. 
This chapter identifies and assesses important processes 
for 1псофога11оп into climate models for projecting climate 
200 
Climate Processes 
change and highhghts major gaps in our understanding of 
these processes. These processes occur in the atmosphere, 
ocean and land surface and involve their coupling through 
the hydrological cycle. 
4.2 Atmospheric Processes 
The processes of large-scale dynamics, thermodynamics 
and mass balance in the atmospheric and oceanic 
components of the climate models are now included in 
models with considerable confidence. This is not to imply 
that the modelling of large-scale circulation and 
temperature structure can be viewed as completely 
successful, since it depends not only on the relatively 
robust components but also on weak elements. Diagnostic 
comparisons with observations of potential vorticity 
transport and mixing could help improve confidence in the 
treatments of large-scale dynamics. Stable dynamical 
modes in which the coupled atmosphere-ocean system may 
respond as part of climate change are inadequately 
understood (e.g.. Palmer, 1993). The hydrological cycle 
and radiation budget are so intimately coupled that they 
should not be treated separately. Therefore, wherever 
possible in the following sections, these two aspects are 
discussed together. Clear-sky water vapour feedback is first 
examined, then the various feedbacks attributed to clouds 
that affect the Earth-atmosphere radiative balance, then the 
additional issues of surface radiative fluxes, and then 
coupling to precipitation processes. The intention here is 
not to describe all the physical processes operating in the 
atmosphere, as that would be far too broad an approach, 
but rather to focus on those processes that are especially 
relevant to the various feedbacks, as identified in studies of 
global warming with climate models. 
4.2.1 Water Vapour Amounts 
A positive water vapour feedback was hypothesised in the 
earliest simulations of global warming with simple 
radiative-convective models (Manabe and Wetherald, 
1967). It arises for water vapour near the surface from the 
strong dependence of the saturation vapour pressure on 
temperature, as given by the Clausius-Clapeyron equation. 
Increases in temperature are thus expected to lead to 
increases in the atmospheric water vapour mixing ratio. 
Since water vapour is the most important greenhouse gas, 
such increases in water vapour enhance the greenhouse 
effect; that is, they reduce the thermal infrared (long-wave) 
flux leaving the atmosphere-surface system, providing a 
positive feedback amplifying the initial warming. This 
feedback operates in all the climate models used in global 
warming and other studies. However, intuitive arguments 
for it to apply to water vapour in the upper troposphere are 
weak; observational analyses and process studies are 
needed to establish its existence and strength there. 
Changes in the vertical decrease of temperature with 
altitude change surface temperature for a given radiative 
balance and are known as "lapse rate feedback". Changes 
in lapse rate act as an additional feedback that can also be 
substantial and that generally oppose the water vapour 
feedback. The sum of the water vapour and lapse rate 
feedbacks comprise the clear-sky feedback. Cess et al. 
(1990) show that the magnitude of the clear-sky feedback 
is very similar in a wide range of models. However, the 
partitioning between lapse rate and water vapour feedback 
may vary substantially between models (Zhang et al., 
1994) depending on how convection is parametrized and 
may depend on the time-scale of the climate change or 
chmate fluctuations considered (Bony et al., 1995). 
The consensus view that water vapour provides a strong 
positive feedback has been challenged by Lindzen (1990), 
who emphasised the sensitivity of the water vapour 
feedback to poorly understood processes, such as the 
profile of cumulus detraininent and the related distribution 
of water vapour in the upper troposphere. Water vapour is 
physically most closely controlled by temperature in the 
lower troposphere, and by transport processes in the upper 
troposphere. Both regions contribute comparably to the 
water vapour greenhouse effect. 
How upper tropospheric water vapour is distributed and 
varies with other climate parameter variations is best 
studied with satellite data (e.g., Soden and Bretherton, 
1994). Soden and Fu (1995) relate climatic variations of 
upper tropospheric water vapour to clear-sky long-wave 
radiation and to moist convection indicated by the 
International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP), 
over a five-year period. These are shown to be highly 
correlated in the tropical half of the world but uncorrected 
outside the tropics. Thus, these data support the 
conventional view that in the tropics, water vapour is 
supplied to the upper troposphere primarily by moist 
convection. They find that this result is maintained, even 
averaging over the whole tropical belt of 30°S-30°N, and 
so conclude that the net effect of convection is moistening 
even allowing for compensating regions of subsidence. 
Chou (1995) in a case study with two months of data 
(April 1985 and 1987) over 100°W-100°E infers a 
somewhat contradictory conclusion that increased 
convection in the tropics leads to a net reduction in the 
atmospheric clear-sky greenhouse effect and hence a net 
drying. 
Climate 
Processes 
201 
Soden and Fu show that occurrence of tropical 
convection in the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
(GFDL) G C M has a very similar correlation with upper 
tropospheric water vapour as observed, suggesting that the 
model captures the essential upward transport processes of 
water in the tropics. Sun and Held (1995), on the other 
hand, show that for specific humidities averaged over the 
tropics, the correlation with surface values declines with 
height to much smaller values for observed data than in the 
same model. As they discuss, lack of radiosonde coverage 
over the eastern and central Pacific may throw into 
question their observational analyses. 
Detailed process studies of cumulus detrainment and of 
the water budget in mesoscale cumulus convection are also 
being made through field experiments, to provide a more 
solid physical basis for testing the G C M treatments of 
water vapour. Lau et al. (1993) used the Goddard Cumulus 
Ensemble model (GCEM) to investigate the water budget 
of tropical cumulus convection. Their results on changes in 
temperature and water vapour induced by surface warming 
are in agreement with those from GCMs which use only 
crude cumulus parametrizations. 
The details of water vapour feedback in the extra-
tropical upper troposphere are also poorly characterised 
observationally. In the extra-tropics, the relative 
contributions to upper tropospheric water vapour of lateral 
transport from the tropics, versus upward transport by 
large-scale motions or by moist convection are poorly 
known. Lacis and Sato (1993) showed, in the Goddard 
Institute for Space Science (GISS) G C M , that the water 
vapour feedback was almost as strong at middle and high 
latitudes as it was at low latitudes. Pieirehumbert and Yang 
(1993) have emphasised the potential small-scale 
complexity of latitudinal exchanges of water vapour by 
large-scale eddies at high latitudes, and Kelly et al. (1991) 
have shown some observational evidence for temperature-
dependent large-scale high latitude exchanges of water 
vapour creating a hemispheric asymmetry in upper 
tropospheric water vapour at these latitudes. Del Genio et 
al. (1994) find, for the GISS model, that large-scale eddies 
dominate the seasonal variation of upper troposphere water 
vapour outside the tropical rainbelt. 
Feedback from the redistribution of water vapour remains 
a substantial uncertainty in climate models. That from the 
lower troposphere seems least controversial. Much of the 
current debate has been addressing feedback from the 
tropical upper troposphere, where the feedback appears 
likely to be positive. However, this is not yet convincingly 
established; much further evaluation of climate models with 
regard to observed processes is needed. 
Somewhat independent of feedbacks affecting top of the 
atmosphere long-wave fluxes, water vapour in the lower 
troposphere affects the long-wave contribution to surface 
radiation. This feedback has lately been emphasised as 
contributing somewhat to a reduction in diurnal 
temperature range with increasing water vapour 
concentrations from global warming (Mitchell et ai, 1995). 
4.2.2 Cloud Amounts 
The first cloud feedback to be studied in detail in global 
models involves changes in cloud amounts. These can be 
extremely complicated because of the many different types 
of clouds, whose properties and coverage are controlled by 
many different physical processes, and which affect the 
radiation budget in many different ways. In the global and 
annual mean, clouds have a cooling effect on the present 
climate (the surface and atmosphere), as evaluated from the 
Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) and other 
satellite measurements. That is, the 31 Wm"^ enhancement 
of the thermal greenhouse effect is exceeded by a 48 Wm"^ 
increase in the reflection of short-wave radiation to space 
(Ramanathan et al, 1989). But there are large variations in 
the net cloud forcing with geography and cloud type; 
indeed some clouds contribute a net warming. For low 
clouds, the reflected short-wave dominates so that an 
increase in amount would cool the climate and be a 
negative feedback on global warming. But thin tropical 
cirrus clouds are much colder than the underlying surface 
and act more to enhance the greenhouse effect, so an 
increase in the amount of this cloud type would be a 
positive feedback. 
Climate model simulations of global warming have 
found the tropical troposphere to become higher and, in 
most models, the amounts of high cloud to increase. This 
increase (which depends on the somewhat uncertain 
changes of water vapour and relative humidity) enhances 
the greenhouse effect and produces a positive feedback 
(e.g., Wetherald and Manabe, 1988; Mitchell and Ingram, 
1992). However, its importance relative to other changes in 
cloud amounts and the detailed changes in the three 
dimensional cloud distribution, varies significantly 
between models. 
Until recently, climate models have used cloud 
prediction schemes based largely on presumed relationships 
between cloud amount and relative humidity and giving 
cloud amount as the only parameter. Such schemes 
introduce or remove condensed water instantaneously in 
amounts that are prescribed or depend only on temperature. 
Many modelling groups are now moving to prognostic 
cloud water variables that explicitly determine the amount 
202 
Climate 
Processes 
of liquid water in each grid cell (e.g., Sundqvist, 1978; Le 
Treut and Li, 1988; Sundqvist et al, 1989; Roeckner et al, 
1990; Smith, 1990; Ose, 1993; Tiedtke, 1993; Del Genio et 
al, 1995; Fowler et al, 1996). The predicted cloud water 
may vary more smoothly, persisting for hours after the 
agencies that formed it have ceased (as is especially true for 
ciiTus); it can be used to determine interactively the optical 
properties of the clouds, as well as the precipitation rate. A 
prognostic cloud water variable thus improves a model's 
physical basis, but not without considerable difficulties, 
including proper representation of mixed-phase clouds (e.g.. 
Senior and Mitchell 1993) and various numerical issues. 
Some features of this new approach for predicting clouds 
are: 
• 
Prediction of the condensed water and its partitioning 
between liquid and ice (Sundqvist, 1978; L i and Le 
Treut, 1992). Separate treatment of the Uquid and ice 
cloud particles is important, because they undergo 
significantly 
different 
microphysical and 
thermodynamical processes and have different 
optical properties. The transition of water to ice is a 
critical process and empirically dealt with in some of 
the latest models. 
• 
Action of cumulus clouds as liquid and/or ice sources 
for the stratiform clouds in some models (e.g.. Ose, 
1993; Tiedtke, 1993; Del Genio et al, 1995; Fowler 
et al, 1996). This important physical link between 
two types of cloud systems and its explicit 
incorporation into GCMs may mark a significant step 
forward in cloud parametrization. 
Detrainment from 
cumulus clouds 
Water 
vapour 
Cloud 
water 
Cloud 
ice 
Rain 
Snow 
Precipitation at the 
Earth's surface 
Figure 4.1: Diagram illustrating prognostic variables in a cloud 
microphysics scheme, and the processes that affect them. 
• 
Physically based parametrization of the various cloud 
microphysical processes, such as the evaporation of 
cloud water and ice to water vapour in subsaturated 
air, conversion of cloud water and ice to rain and 
snow in supersaturated air, and parametrization of 
cloud droplets and ice crystals depending on cloud 
condensation nuclei (CCN) and ice nuclei. Figure 4.1 
schematically illustrates some of these processes. For 
example, cumulus detrainment can produce small ice 
crystals that combine to make larger falling 
snowflakes. The snow falling through a warm lower 
atmosphere will melt to become rain, although ice 
and liquid tnay coexist in a range of temperatures 
whose width is somewhat uncertain. The efficiency 
of the so-called Bergeron-Findeisen mechanism in 
this range of coexistence has a decisive impact on 
how effective the release of precipitation is in the 
cloud. As a consequence, this mechanism strongly 
influences the resulting amount of cloud water, and 
indirectly the optical properties of the cloud. 
• 
Physically based parametrization of the cloud optical 
properties and fractional cloud amount. It is far from 
obvious how to determine the cloudy fraction of a 
G C M grid-box; this cloud fraction depends on the 
sub-grid scale distribution of the water and ice 
contents (e.g., KJristjánsson, 1991; Kvamst0, 1991). 
The dependence of cloud optical properties on sub-
grid scale spatial heterogeneity and mixed phases 
remains an important problem. 
The new generation of cloud parametrization has led to 
some improvements in simulations of the Earth's radiation 
budget (e.g.. Senior and Mitchell, 1993; Del Genio et al, 
1995; Fowler and Randall, 1996). Comparisons of the 
global distribution of. simulated cloud water and ice 
concentrations against observations are problematic. 
Although satellite observations of the macroscopic 
distribution of total-column liquid water content are 
available over the oceans (Njoku and Swanson, 1983; 
Prabhakara et al, 1983; Greenwald et al, 1993), these 
show substantial differences, possibly a result of different 
algorithms (Lin and Rossow, 1994). Also, observations of 
macroscopic ice water content are lacking. Field data for 
local cloud ice measurements have been obtained in 
regional experiments such as the First ISCCP Regional 
Experiment (FIRE) (Heymsfleld and Donner 1990) and the 
International Cirrus Experiment (ICE) (Raschke et al., 
1990), but these are very difficult to convert into 
macroscopic averages. 
Climate Processes 
203 
High clouds 
High clouds are very effective in trapping outgoing long-
wave radiation, and so tend to warm the Earth. The net 
radiative effect on climate of anvils and cirrus clouds 
associated with deep convection in the tropics is near zero 
(e.g., Ramanathan et al., 1989) because short-wave cooling 
and long-wave warming nearly cancel each other. The 
solar cooUng acts mainly at the Earth's surface; however, 
how much is absorbed rather than reflected by clouds is 
currenfly controversial, as discussed in Section 4.2.6. 
Long-wave warming by anvils and cirrus clouds associated 
with deep convection in the tropics acts mainly on the 
atmosphere and can influence the general circulation of the 
atmosphere (Slingo and SUngo, 1988; Harshvardhan et ai, 
1989). 
Recent work has led to simple ice crystal scattering 
parametrizations for climate models (Ebert and Curry, 
1992; Fu and Liou, 1993). Improvements may be needed to 
account for ice crystal size and shape effects, especially as 
climate models develop the capability to compute crystal 
sizes and realistic distributions of the ice water path. 
Comparison of cirrus properties from ISCCP with those 
generated by G C M parametrization using observed large-
scale dynamic and thermodynamic fields from operational 
analyses shows encouraging agreement in the spatial 
patterns of the cirrus optical depths (Soden and Donner, 
1994). However, determining cirrus modification of net 
radiative fluxes to the accuracies desirable for climate 
models may require accuracies in measurement of cirrus 
cloud temperature, ice water content and/or scattering 
properties that, in some cases, are beyond current 
observational and computational abilities (Vogelmann and 
Ackerman, 1996), suggesting that improved accuracies in 
these will be needed for climate studies. 
Middle clouds 
Frontal cloud systems are major sources of precipitation 
and cloud cover in the mid-latitudes. Climate models are 
incapable of explicitly resolving frontal circulations, 
although they do resolve "large-scale" cloud cover and rain 
associated with these systems. However there is a dearth of 
observations over the ocean and generally in the Southern 
Hemisphere to validate the microphysical parametrizations 
used to calculate the radiative and precipitation processes 
with these mid-level clouds (Ryan, 1996). 
Low clouds 
The marine stratocumulus clouds that commonly occur on 
the eastern sides of the subtropical oceans (e.g., Hanson, 
1991) are important for their solar reflection (e.g., Slingo, 
1990), and are, at present, under-predicted by many 
atmospheric GCMs. Similar clouds occur in the Arctic in 
summer (e.g., Herman and Goody, 1976), as well as over 
the mid-latitude oceans (Klein and Hartmann, 1993). They 
must be simulated successfully in order to obtain realistic 
sea surface temperature (SST) distributions in coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models (e.g., Robertson et al., 1995). 
Low clouds, such as marine stratocumulus, are favoured 
by strong capping temperature inversions (e.g., Lilly, 1968; 
Randall, 1980; Klein and Hartmann, 1993) as, for example, 
when a subsidence inversion associated with a subtropical 
high pressure cell confines moisture evaporated from the 
ocean within a thin, cool marine layer. At the same time, 
the radiative cooling associated with the clouds helps to 
maintain such inversions by lowering the temperature of 
the cloudy air. Turbulent entrainment, driven in part by 
radiative déstabilisation, also maintains the inversion. 
Under suitable conditions, an external perturbation that 
reduces the SST favours a change in cloudiness that further 
reduces the SST (e.g., Hanson, 1991). 
The positive feedback maintaining low clouds may be 
suppressed by various dynamical processes. Mesoscale 
circulations are forced in the marine boundary layer by the 
strong cloud-top radiative cooling that, in turn, breaks 
stratiform clouds into mesoscale cloud patches (Shao and 
Randall, 1996). Such broken clouds allow more solar 
radiation to warm the sea surface. 
Furthermore, 
temperature, moisture, and the subsidence rate of the 
subsiding air above the inversion may be changed to 
weaken the inversion (Siems et al, 1990), thus increasing 
the likelihood of the stratiform clouds breaking up 
(Deardorff, 1980; Randall, 1980). Still controversial are 
details of the criteria and relative importance of other 
mechanisms, such as drizzle, absorbed sunlight, and 
entrainment decoupling that might detach planetary 
boundary layer (PBL) clouds from the surface (Kuo and 
Schubert, 1988; MacVean and Mason, 1990; Siems et al, 
1990). 
Since subsiding air in the subtropics is connected to the 
sinking branch of a Hadley cell, subtropical boundary layer 
cloud properties may be partly determined by remote 
processes. A model with inadequate dynamical coupling to 
other regions may exaggerate the strength of the low cloud 
feedback and have a tendency to produce excessive low-
level cloudiness. Coupled atmosphere-ocean models may 
be particularly susceptible because they have the ability to 
produce negative SST anomalies in response to increases in 
low-level cloudiness. On the other hand, over-emphasis of 
coupling to other regions may lead the feedback to another 
positive loop. Miller and Del Genio (1994) found in a 
204 
Climate 
Processes 
version of the GISS G C M that the reduced low cloud 
amount led to stronger surface solar radiation, therefore a 
warming of the subtropical sea surface, and a further 
reduction in low cloud amount. The initial reduction of low 
cloud amount was due to the temperature changes at 
remote grid points, apparently weakening the inversion. 
They found this mechanism to give oscillations with 
periods on the order of a few decades. They are 
appropriately cautious about concluding that the feedbacks 
in the GISS model also operate in the real climate system, 
but suggest that positive cloud feedback could enhance 
variability. 
Arctic 
clouds 
Clouds are the dominant modulators of the Arctic radiation 
climate, affecting sea ice characteristics such as 
temperature, albedo and ice volume, (Curry and Ebert 
1990, 1992), and so indirectly possibly altering the rate of 
sea ice transport to the North Atlantic. Sea ice and related 
high latitude physical processes including Arctic cloud 
formation are incorporated into current models with many 
unverified assumptions, so that the reliability of the 
simulated Arctic climate change scenarios is not high and 
the model-to-model differences are not surprising. 
Ingram et al. (1989) used the U K Meteorological Office 
climate model to investigate the .sea ice feedback on 
greenhouse warming. They performed sensitivity tests with 
prescribed, fixed sea ice distributions and compared their 
results with those of a simulation in which the sea ice 
distribution was permitted to change in response to climate 
change. They found that cloud-ice feedbacks were very 
important; the clouds obscure surface albedo exchanges, 
thus minimising their effects. 
4.2.3 Cloud Water Content 
As already noted, the climate models used for the first 
studies of global warming ignored the possibility of 
changes in cloud-water content, but are now beginning to 
include cloud formulations which explicitiy predict the 
liquid- and ice-water content. The distinction between 
liquid-water and ice is important, not only for 
thermodynamic reasons but also because of differing 
radiative properties. The need to include formulations of 
cloud water and ice comes in part from the strong 
dependence of the short-wave, and for high clouds, long-
wave radiative properties on water content and the 
possibility that the latter will change during global 
warming. Renno et al. (1994) suggest that climate is 
sensitive to cloud microphysical processes and in 
particular, precipitation efficiencies. 
Liquid water feedback might be substantially negative, 
as was emphasised by the simple radiative-convective 
model study carried out by Somerville and Remer (1984). 
Subsequently, a different sign for this feedback was 
inferred in a G C M by Roeckner et al. (1987) through a 
large increase in the long-wave greenhouse effect from thin 
cirrus clouds. The complexity of such cloud feedbacks is 
further illustrated by the studies of L i and Le Treut (1992) 
and Taylor and Ghan (1992). 
In climate change studies with the U K Meteorological 
Office (UKMO) GCM, Senior and Mitchell (1993) found 
that in a warmer atmosphere, water clouds (lasting longer 
because of slower fall rates) replace ice clouds in the mixed 
phase region and hence cloud amount, especially at low 
and mid-levels, is increased. This "change of phase" 
feedback led to larger cloud amounts and to an increased 
short-wave cloud cooling with a warming climate. 
Consequently climate sensitivity was reduced with a 2.8°C 
warming in response to a doubling of COj, in comparison 
with an older relative humidity dependent cloud scheme 
where the global mean warming was 5.4°C. The inclusion 
of interactive cloud radiative properties further reduced the 
global mean warming to I.9°C. In regions where cloud 
amount increased, the optical depth also increased. The net 
cloud feedback in this experiment was negative. 
Changes in the long-wave cloud feedback depend on the 
representation of clouds in the model (Senior and Mitchell, 
1995). A sensitivity experiment, in which the assumed 
statistical distribution of cloud water in a grid box is 
changed, produced a slightly improved validation of 
radiative fluxes against ERBE data (Barkstrom, 1984), but 
increased the climate sensitivity of the model from 3.4°C to 
5.5°C (Senior and Mitchell, 1995). The effect of the change 
was to reduce high cloud amount for a given cloud water 
content. The reduced high cloud amount led to a much 
smaller "change of phase" feedback and so a higher 
climate sensitivity. 
Several of the 
G C M s incorporate new 
cloud 
microphysics parametrizations for stratiform clouds and 
consequentiy produce weak negative cloud feedbacks in 
the climate sensitivity experiments reported by Cess et al. 
(1996). For example, the new version of the GISS G C M 
(Del Genio et al., 1995) contains a prognostic cloud water 
parametrization and incorporates interactive cloud optical 
properties. When subjected to globally uniform increases 
and decreases of SST, the new model's climate sensitivity 
is only about half that of the earlier GISS model, and its 
cloud feedback is slightly negative as opposed to the 
substantial positive cloud feedback in the earlier model. 
This change in the cloud feedback is largely a result of a 
Climate Processes 
205 
dramatic increase in both the cloud cover and cloud water 
content of tropical cirrus anvil clouds in the warmer 
climate. This result is sensitive to the type of climate 
experiment conducted. Tests with an SST perturbation that 
reduces the tropical Pacific SST gradient and weakens the 
Walker circulation give a higher climate sensitivity (Del 
Genio etal, 1995). 
The crude nature of current parametrization of 
detrainment of cumulus ice and the sensitivity to this term as 
discussed above, suggest that this may be an important area 
for future work in cloud parametrization. Low-level clouds 
may not produce the large negative feedback that is 
characteristic of models with only temperature-dependent 
cloud water because increasing cloud water content in a 
warmer climate could be offset by a decreasing geometric 
thickness of these clouds. This is consistent with the 
behaviour of satellite-derived optical thickness in tire ISCCP 
data set (Tselioudis et al., 1992). Thus the sign of the cloud 
liquid-water feedback in the real climate system is still 
unknown. Further study will be needed to reach the goal to 
determine the overall sign and magnitude of the real world's 
cloud feedback, as cloud feedback varies considerably with 
cloud type and geography and presumably with rime. 
Nevertheless, the results from the new models provide 
valuable new insight into the physical issues that must be 
confronted before this goal can be achieved. 
4.2.4 Cloud Particle Size 
Studies of the effects of possible changes in cloud particle 
size on global warming integrations are at an early stage, 
but mechanisms by which changes might occur have been 
suggested. Cloud drops are formed by condensation on 
submicron diameter hygroscopic aerosol particles, which 
are present throughout the troposphere. The concentrations 
of C C N are highly variable and are influenced by air 
pollution as well as by natural processes as addressed in 
Chapters 3 and 4 of IPCC (1994) and Sections 2.3 and 2.4 
of this report. The number of nuclei available has a strong 
effect on the number of cloud particles formed, and this in 
turn affects both the cloud optical properties and the 
likelihood of precipitation. Changes in the C C N 
concentration might alter the number of cloud drops that 
can grow, and hence alter the mean radius for a given 
liquid-water path. Some parametrization are attempting to 
represent the effects of nuclei availability on cloud particle 
number density and cloud particle size. 
Twomey et al. (1984) noted that pollution produced by 
burning fossil fuels consists not only of carbon dioxide 
(COj) but also sulphur dioxide (SOj), the gaseous 
precursor of sulphate aerosols, and that cloud drop sizes 
may be sensitive to changes in sulphate aerosol 
concentrations. Increased pollution could therefore increase 
the number of these CCN, increase the number of cloud 
drops, and hence reduce the mean particle size (provided 
that the water content does not change). This would 
increase the cloud optical thickness and hence the cloud 
albedos, leading to a cooling influence on climate. Efforts 
to include effects of sulphate aerosols from pollution in 
climate model cloud parametrization have been reported by 
Ghan et al. (1993, 1995), Jones et al. (1994), Boucher et al. 
(1995) and Boucher and Lohmann (1995). Kiehl (1994) 
argues that the difference between continental and oceanic 
cloud droplet sizes needs to be accounted for in 
determining climate model cloud albedos. 
Charlson et al. (1987) suggested that the primary source 
of sulphate aerosol and hence CCNs over the ocean 
involves biological organisms, so that much of the sulphate 
aerosol over the remote oceans comes not from pollution 
but from dimethylsulphide (DMS), excreted by marine 
phytoplankton (discussed further in Section 10.3.4). 
Charlson et al. discussed the possibility of a regulation of 
the climate system by such marine organisms. Attempts to 
estabUsh the details of processes by which this regulation 
might occur have not been successful, and there is no 
observational evidence that DMS sources would change 
with climate change. 
Relatively shallow clouds may develop drizzle. This 
drizzle production depends on cloud depth, cloud liquid-
water content and C C N distribution, as well as on cloud 
dynamics and lifetime. Drizzle depletes the cloud liquid-
water, and reduces the cloud reflectivity. Below the cloud 
the drizzle may evaporate and cool the air, thus possibly 
leading to a decoupling of the cloud from the air below. If 
future anthropogenic emissions of S O 2 increase, thus 
leading to more C C N , then cloud droplets may become 
more numerous and smaller. This will likely impede drizzle 
production and possibly lead to longer cloud Hfetimes. 
4.2.5 Model Feedback Intercomparisons 
The intercomparison reported by Cess et al. (1990) of 
climate models' response to changing the SST by ±2°C 
provided a snapshot of the feedbacks operating in GCMs at 
that time. The models agreed in the magnitudes of the clear-
sky feedbacks, as noted earlier, but cloud feedbacks varied 
considerably and were responsible for a threefold variation 
in the overall climate sensitivity between the participating 
models. This exercise has recently been repeated by Cess et 
al. (1996), who find that the disparity between the models 
has been reduced significantly (Figure 4.2). The most 
notable change is the removal of the largest (positive) values 
206 
Climate 
Processes 
of cloud feedback. A detailed analysis of the reasons for this 
convergence has not yet been made. A small, overall cloud 
feedback can result from a cancellation of much larger 
feedbacks of opposite signs in the long-wave and short-wave 
regions of the spectrum. These components of the overall 
feedback vary considerably between the models. In addition, 
several modelling centres have produced a wide range of 
cloud 
feedbacks 
from 
slightly 
different 
cloud 
parametrizations in the same model. Hence, the convergence 
found by Cess et al. (1996) may not represent a reduction in 
the uncertainty of the magnitude of the cloud feedback. The 
idealised SST perturbation applied in these comparisons is 
very different from the more complex patterns obtained in 
coupled model simulations of global warming, and 
consequently the cloud feedback produced by a model 
forced by the ±2°C SST perturbation might be completely 
different from that found in global warming simulations 
(Senior and Mitchell, 1993). These intercomparisons may 
provide only limited guidance as to the cloud feedback to be 
expected during greenhouse warming. 
(a) 
Figure 4.2: (a) The cloud feedback parameter, ACRF/G, as 
produced by the 19 atmospheric GCMs used in the Cess et al. 
(1990) study, where ACRF is the Wm'^ due to cloud changes and 
G is the overall Wm"^ change, both as a result of the prescribed 
SST change, (b) The same as (a) but for the Cess et al. (1996) 
study. 
A further intercomparison that gives insights into the 
impact of differences between cloud simulations in models 
is provided by Gleckler et al. (1995). They analysed the 
ocean energy transports implied by the ensemble of GCMs 
participating in the Atmospheric Model Intercomparison 
Project (AMIP) (Gates, 1992). The models were run for ten 
simulated years, using prescribed seasonally and 
interannually varying SST and sea ice distributions, as 
observed for the years 1979 to 1988. The models calculated 
the net radiation at the top of the atmosphere and the net 
energy flux across the Earth's surface. 
The pattern of ten-year-averaged net radiation at the top 
of the atmosphere implies a pattern of total energy 
transport inside the system, since there is a net energy input 
in some parts of the world, and a net energy output in other 
parts, giving a global total very close to zero. This energy 
transport is accomplished by the circulation of the 
atmosphere and of the oceans. A pattern of ocean 
meridional energy transports is implied by the ten-year 
averages of the net ocean surface energy flux for each 
atmospheric G C M . 
The implied ocean energy transports TQ are represented 
by the thin lines in the upper panel of Figure 4.3. The grey 
stippling shows the range of observationally derived upper 
and lower bounds of TQ {cf. Trenberth and Solomon, 1994, 
for the most recent observational study). Most of the 
simulations imply ocean energy transports that differ 
markedly from those inferred from observations, 
particularly in the Southern Hemisphere, where the implied 
TQ for many of the models is towards the equator. 
Gleckler et al. (1995) determined the total meridional 
energy transport by the atmosphere and ocean combined, 
denoted by T^^g, from the simulated ten-year averages of 
the top-of-the-atmosphere net radiation for each model. 
They then determined the simulated atmospheric energy 
transport, Гд by subtracting the ocean transport from the 
sum of the ocean and atmosphere transport. Finally, they 
computed a "hybrid" value of TQ, denoted by TQ hybrid' 
subtracting each model's simulated 7д from the ERBE-
observed Гд^д . This "hybrid" combines the simulated Гд 
with the observed T^^Q . The results for TQ 
are shown 
in the lower panel of Figure 4.3. On the whole, the various 
curves for TQ 
bear a much closer resemblance to the 
observations than do the model curves, indicating that the 
simulated atmospheric meridional energy transports are 
relatively realistic in most cases. Evidently, improved 
cloudiness parametrization and improved simulations of 
the effects of clouds on the radiation budget are needed to 
improve oceanic forcing in coupled atmosphere-ocean 
models. 
Climate Processes 
207 
(a) 
Latnude 
Figure 4.3: Ocean meridional energy transport from models and 
observations (a) model results from a range of atmosphere GCMs, 
derived from the ten-year averages of their implied net surface 
energy flux (thin lines); bounds on observed ocean transport 
(shaded area); model resuhs from Semtner and Chervin (1992) in 
a numerical simulation of the general circulation of the oceans, 
forced with the observed atmospheric climate (dashed line), (b) 
As in (a), except that the thin lines show the "hybrid"ocean 
transport (see text). 
4.2.6 Coupling of Clouds with the Surface 
The effects of clouds on net solar radiation at the top of the 
atmosphere are largely mirrored in the effects of clouds on 
surface solar radiative fluxes. The uncertainties-in the input 
of solar radiation to ocean and land models are a major 
source of uncertainties in determining the regional and 
global response to increasing greenhouse gases. Long-
wave radiation would appear to be a smaller source of 
error, except in high latitudes, because of the atmosphere's 
large opacity to long-wave, even without clouds. In any 
case, the surface solar fluxes are more easily estimated 
from remote sensing since long-wave fluxes depend on 
cloud bases which are not easily seen from space. 
Clouds are sensitive to the changes of both atmospheric 
circulation and the surface boundary conditions. Small 
changes in the surface boundary layer can cause substantial 
differences in convective clouds over the tropical oceans 
(e.g., Fu et al, 1994). However, a change of large-scale 
circulation can modify atmospheric conditional instability 
and thus clouds, even without a change at the surface (Lau 
et al, 1994; Fu et al, 1996). Because the prediction of 
future cloud changes depends on the correctness of these 
responses in G C M cloud schemes, more stringent tests, 
using satellite and in situ observations, are needed to 
ensure that the observed sensitivities of clouds to the 
changes of atmospheric circulation and surface conditions 
are adequately simulated in GCMs. 
Consideration of ocean surface-atmosphere interactions 
have led to a controversial hypothesis. Figure 4.4 
schematically illustrates what is known as the Thermostat 
Hypothesis (Ramanathan and Collins, 1991). If a positive 
SST perturbation leads to an increase in surface 
evaporation and moisture convergence (Lindzen and 
Nigam, 1987) then the increased moisture supply induces 
more convection, which leads to the formation of more 
high, bright clouds, which reflect more solar energy back 
to space. The resulting reduction in the solar radiation 
absorbed at the sea surface thus acts to dampen the 
postulated positive SST perturbation. The initial 
perturbation might be the climatological differences 
between east and west Pacific, or warming of the east 
Pacific associated with El Niño, or overall SST increases 
associated with greenhouse warming. Similar mechanisms 
would not necessarily apply to all these situations. 
To support their idea, Ramanathan and Collins presented 
observational evidence that SST fluctuations associated 
with El Niño are accompanied by changes in the solar 
cloud radiative forcing (CRE) that would tend to dampen 
the SST fluctuations regionally. Where the ocean warms, 
the solar radiation reaching the sea surface diminishes, and 
where the ocean cools, the increased .solar radiation tends 
to warm it. Ramanathan and Collins argued that convection 
and high bright clouds increase when the SST increases to 
about 30°C. They suggested that the increased solar cloud 
forcing associated with deep convection might act to 
prevent much higher SSTs. 
Although Ramanathan and Collins explicifly discussed 
only regional climatological effects, their paper has been 
widely interpreted as suggesting that the global surface 
temperature of the Earth may also be limited in this way. 
208 
Climate Processes 
Surface 
evaporation 
+ 
Convection 
+ 
+ 
0 
SST 
Bright, 
high clouds 
Figure 4.4: The "Thermostat Hypothesis" of Ramanathan and 
Collins (1991). An external perturbation leads to an increase in 
the SST, either locally or globally. The signs in the diagram are 
"+" for amplification of the next term in the loop and " - " for 
reduction. Increased SST promotes stronger evaporation and 
moisture convergence, which then lead to more vigorous 
convection. The convection generates high, bright clouds, which 
reduce the insolation of the ocean, thus counteracting the external 
perturbation. This is, therefore, a negative feedback and indicated 
by the circled "—". 
This Thermostat Hypothesis has been very controversial 
and remains an active research topic. It has been criticised 
by Wallace (1992), Hartmann and Michaelson (1993) and 
Lau et al. (1994) for failure to recognise the importance of 
regional effects associated with large-scale dynamics, and 
also for under-emphasising the tendency of surface 
evaporation to cool the oceans. Several critical papers have 
emphasised a more conventional view of the tropical 
energy balance (e.g., Pierrehumbert, 1995). Fu et al. (1992) 
have argued on the basis of satellite data that the strong 
regional cloud radiative forcing anomalies associated with 
El Niño average to near zero over the tropics as a whole. 
The reality of locally negative short-wave cloud radiative 
forcing anomalies in response to local positive SST 
anomalies in the central tropical Pacific is apparent, but the 
importance of such short-wave cloud radiative forcing 
anomalies relative to other processes, and also their 
importance for the globally averaged surface temperature, 
are still in dispute. 
Miller and Del Genio (1994) found, with their version of 
the GISS G C M , that a negative tropical evaporation 
anomaly resulted in a warming of the SST, leading to 
enhanced convection and rainfall. This convection 
decreased the solar radiation incident on the sea surface, 
and, not unlike the Thermostat Effect envisioned by 
Ramanathan and Collins (1991), dampened the initial 
warming of the sea surface. Spectral analysis of the model 
results showed that this mechanism led to oscillations with 
periods on the order of years up to a decade. 
Three recent papers argue that clouds absorb much more 
solar radiation than current physical understanding and 
radiation codes would allow. Suggestions that some clouds 
absorb more short-wave radiation than can be accounted 
for on the basis of the known radiative properties of water 
and ice have appeared at various times in the literature over 
several decades (see the review by Stephens and Tsay, 
1990). This possibility has been invoked by Ramanathan et 
al. (1995), in the context of the West Pacific warm pool. 
According to their results, the effect of clouds on short-
wave radiation at the surface needs to be 50% more than 
that at the top of the atmosphere, whereas current radiation 
schemes predict an enhancement of less than 20%. The 
implication is that the clouds are absorbing several times 
more short-wave radiation than previously believed. 
Ramanathan et al. do accept that, by making "extreme (but 
plausible)" changes to their numbers, it is possible to close 
the heat budget without recourse to anomalous absorption. 
However, the companion paper by Cess et al. (1995) 
claims that the anomalous absorption is a global 
phenomenon, showing evidence from a wide variety of 
locations to support the 50% enhancement required by 
Ramanathan et al. This enhancement was also obtained by 
Pilewskie and Valero (1995) in an analysis of observations 
from research aircraft in the tropics. 
A global enhancement of the magnitude proposed by 
Rainanathan is in conflict with many other documented 
studies with research aircraft where the measured 
absorption was not substantially different from the 
theoretically predicted value (Stephens and Tsay, 1990). 
Additionally, a critical examination of the anomalous 
absorption papers has revealed major flaws in the analysis 
methods which appear to invalidate the conclusions 
(Stephens, 1995). Hayasaka et al. (1995) have concluded 
"that the anomalous absorption pointed out by aircraft 
observations in previous studies does not exist". An 
extensive survey of surface and satellite data (Li et al., 
1995a; Whitlock et al, 1995) suggests that short-wave 
budgets are unlikely to be in error by more than 15 Wm"^. 
L i et al. (1995b) carried out extensive analyses of data 
"following the same methodologies" as Cess et al. and 
Ramanathan et al. They do not find anomalous absorption 
except possibly in the tropics where the data are most 
uncertain. The disagreement with Cess et al. is attributed to 
the use of different data sets, not due to different 
methodologies. Thus, at present, the evidence is weak for 
the claim that clouds absorb substantially more short-wave 
radiation than is predicted by models. 
Climate 
Processes 
209 
4.2.7 Precipitation and Cumulus Convection 
Cumulus convection provides very rapid mass, energy, and 
momentum exchanges between the lower and upper 
troposphere. Much of the precipitation that falls to Earth is 
produced during this convective overturning, and a 
substantial fraction of the cloudiness in the tropics is 
produced by cumulus convection, either directly in the 
cumulus clouds themselves, or indirectly in the cirrus and 
other debris that cumuli generate. The proper treatment of 
these processes in climate models is still far from 
established. Errors in treating momentum exchange may 
seriously affect surface winds in the tropics and hence 
coupling to ocean models. 
Cumulus convection is a manifestation of a buoyancy-
driven instability that occurs when the vertical decrease of 
temperature is sufficiently rapid (i.e., when the "lapse rate" 
of temperature is sufficiently strong) and, at the same time, 
sufficient moisture is available. Because of the latter 
condition, cumulus instability is often called "conditional 
instability". The degree to which buoyancy forces can 
drive cumulus convection thus depends on both the lapse 
rate and the humidity. The time-scale for convective 
release is on the order of an hour - very short, compared to 
the multi-day time-scale of large-scale weather systems. 
This disparity of time-scales implies that ensembles of 
cumulus clouds must stay nearly in balance with large-
scale weather systems. If a large-scale motion system or 
surface heating tries to promote cumulus instability, 
convection releases the instability restoring the system to a 
near-neutral state almost as rapidly as the instability is 
generated. 
"Large-scale precipitation" refers to a somewhat old-
fashioned but still widely used parametrization forming 
stratiform clouds such as cirrus or stratus and the 
accompanying precipitation that occurs when the mean 
state relative humidity reaches or tries to exceed a 
threshold value, such as 100%. Although generally larger 
than cumulus clouds, these systems are still typically sub-
grid scale in climate models. Some such schemes 
accordingly include a sub-grid scale distribution of 
humidities, so that precipitation occurs with mean state 
relative humidities <100%. Relative humidities exceeding 
the threshold can be produced, for example, by large-scale 
rising motion which leads to adiabatic cooling and a 
decrease of the saturation mixing ratio. The excess 
humidity is typically assumed to condense and fall out as 
precipitation. In prognostic schemes, it may also be stored 
as liquid water. In many models, the falling precipitation is 
permitted to evaporate or partially evaporate on the way 
down. 
Precipitation and convection are coupled to atmospheric 
radiative cooling in several ways. Slingo and Slingo (1988) 
discuss a positive feedback between the horizontal 
gradients of atmospheric radiative warming/cooling 
associated with localised high clouds produced by deep 
convection and the large-scale rising motion associated 
with the convection. In convectively active regions, long-
wave radiation is trapped by anvils and cirrus produced by 
convective detrainment, and so the long-wave radiative 
cooling of the atmospheric column is reduced, and may 
even be transformed into a heating. The convectively 
active column is consequentiy radiatively warmed relative 
to the surrounding, convectively inactive regions, 
reinforcing the latent heating. The combination of these 
two heatings, together with the radiative cooling in the 
surrounding radiatively inactive regions, amplifies, on the 
average, the rising motion in the convectively active 
column. 
Evidently, the strengths of the cloud feedbacks on 
precipitation must be further quantified. They do not occur 
in isolation, but coexist not only with each other, but also 
with many other powerful processes that can affect weather 
and climate. Idealised numerical experiments with GCMs 
can be designed to focus on such feedbacks in relative 
isolation, and so are particularly well suited to 
investigating their relative strengths. 
The distribution of modelled precipitation and its 
changes with climate change needs more extensive 
validation as it is a major coupling link to both the land 
hydrological cycle and oceanic buoyancy forcing of the 
thermohaline circulation. High latitude precipitation is 
especially important for the latter. 
4.2.8 Assessment of the Status of Moist Processes in 
Climate Models 
In the previous IPCC report the radiative feedbacks of 
clouds were identified as a major source of uncertainty for 
modelling future climate change. Considerable research 
efforts have addressed this issue since the last assessment 
and have further reinforced this conclusion. They have also 
added considerably to our understanding of the complexity 
of this issue. Some conclusions from these studies are: 
• 
Different cloud parametrizations in current GCMs 
give a wide range of radiative feedbacks, affecting 
global and regional energy balances and the 
occurrence 
and intensities 
of 
atmospheric 
precipitation. These are derived from plausible 
physical assumptions and parametrizations, but the 
issue is extremely complex and many assumptions or 
210 
Climate Processes 
approximations are made. Models including only 
cloud amount feedbacks have indicated that these 
could amplify global warming. Feedbacks involving 
cloud liquid-water and phase could also have major 
impacts on the global energy balance. At present, it is 
not possible to judge even the sign of the sum of all 
cloud process feedbacks as they affect greenhouse 
warming, but it is assessed that they are unlikely 
either to be very negative or to lead to much more 
than a doubling of the response that would occur in 
their absence. Improved treatments are vigorously 
being pursued. 
• 
The cloud feedback processes are intimately linked 
to the atmospheric hydrological cycle, and can only 
be 
simulated 
satisfactorily if there 
is a 
comprehensive treatment of water in all its phases -
vapour, liquid and ice. Many of these cloud and 
linked hydrological processes occur on scales not 
resolved by current G C M s . The sub-grid scale 
parametrizations treating these processes should be 
physically based and carefully evaluated with 
observational data. 
• 
Inadequate simulation of cloud amounts and optical 
properties in GCMs contributes major errors to the 
simulation of surface net radiation, and thereby 
introduces errors in simulation of regional ocean and 
land temperatures. Uncertainties in the simulation of 
changes in these properties with climate change have 
a major impact on confidence in projections of future 
regional climate change. 
• 
There is an important, but poorly understood, linkage 
of cloud optical properties to the C C N distribution. 
Inclusion of this linkage for models of climate 
change will require an improved description of the 
time and spatially varying distribution of global 
sulphate and other aerosols, as well as detailed 
microphysical treatments of cloud droplet size 
distributions. 
• 
There is a consensus among different GCMs as to the 
sign and magnitude of clear-sky feedbacks but not 
for water vapour feedbacks alone. With these clear-
sky feedbacks but with fixed cloud properties these 
GCMs would all report climate sensitivities in the 
range г-З^С. There is no compelling evidence that 
the water vapour feedback is anything but the 
positive feedback indicated by the models. However, 
the partitioning between water vapour and lapse rate 
feedback is not well established, and the processes 
maintaining water vapour in the upper troposphere 
are poorly understood. 
4.3 Oceanic Processes 
The ocean covers about 70% of the surface area of the 
Earth, has most of the thermal inertia of the atmosphere-
ocean-land-ice system, is a major contributor to total 
planetary heat transport, and is the major source of 
atmospheric water vapour. Its interaction with the 
atmosphere through its surface quantities occurs through: 
SST, sea ice extent and thickness, surface albedo over ice-
covered and ice-free regions, sea surface salinity and the 
partial pressure of CO^ at the surface {pCOf}. It is a major 
component of the climate system in determining the mean 
(annually averaged) climate, the annual variations of 
climate, and climate variations on time-scales as long as 
millennia. While it is only through ocean surface variations 
that the atmosphere and land can be affected, these surface 
variations, in turn, depend on the thermal and saline 
coupling between the deeper ocean and the surface. Thus, 
the thermal and saline structure and variations in the deeper 
ocean must be simulated in order to determine surface 
variations on long time-scales. In general (except in those 
few regions of deep convection and other water mass 
transformation regions), the longer the time-scale of 
interest, the greater the depth of ocean that communicates 
with the surface. In turn, the ocean is driven by fluxes from 
the atmosphere of heat, momentum, and fresh water at the 
surface of the ocean, so that the only consistent way of 
simulating the evolution of the climate is through coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models. 
The first atmosphere-ocean coupled models studying 
greenhouse warming concentrated on the sensitivity and 
response of climate to sudden and transient changes of 
radiatively active gases by using well-mixed (slab) oceans 
of fixed depth with no (or specified) transport of thermal 
energy. While such simplifications are useful for 
understanding atmospheric responses and for qualitative 
estimates of certain ocean responses, work over the last 
few years has indicated that the ocean circulation itself is 
sensitive to changes in forcing at the surface. Thus as the 
radiatively active gases increase, the ocean circulation may 
change and these chanèes may affect the mean climate and 
its variability. These changes may be significant, so that 
only coupled models that include the relevant parts of the 
ocean circulation are capable of simulating the entire range 
of possible climatic responses. 
Climate Processes 
211 
The ocean, like the atmosphere, has complex internal 
processes that must be parametrized. It has its own unique 
properties of boundaries and a density (buoyancy) strocture 
that is affected by salt as well as temperature. Although 
venting of heat from fissures in the deep ocean may 
contribute to its circulation (Riser, 1995), to a good first 
approximation the ocean is driven entirely at the surface by 
the input of heat, fresh water and momentum fluxes from 
the atmosphere. 
4.3.1 Surface Fluxes 
Because the inertia (mechanical, thermal, and chemical) of 
the ocean is large compared to that of the atmosphere, 
changes in ocean surface properties for the most part occur 
relatively slowly. These slow changes depend on the 
surface fluxes of heat, momentum, fresh water, and C O , 
from the atmosphere. Models of the mean circulation of the 
ocean are sensitive to changes in heat flux (Maier-Reimer 
et al, 1993) and fresh water flux (Mikolajewicz and Maier-
Reimer, 1990; Weàvsr et al., 1993). 
The momentum input at the surface of the ocean, as 
wind stress, depends mostly on the winds near the surface 
and on the wave response. The heat input to the ocean 
surface consists of latent and sensible heat exchange 
between the ocean and the atmosphere, (depending on near-
surface winds, air temperature, and humidity), state of the 
sea, and radiative inputs (which depend on the overlying 
atmospheric column). The fresh water input to the surface 
of the ocean is composed of the difference between 
precipitation and evaporation, of runoff from land, and of 
the difference between the melting and freezing of ice 
(Schmitt, 1994). The carbon dioxide flux into the ocean 
depends on pCOj, the concentration of C O , in the 
atmosphere, and on the near-surface winds. The pCO^ is in 
turn controlled by oceanic transport 
processes, 
geochemical processes, and upper ocean bioflc processes. 
The possibility of large errors in incident solar flux and 
latent heat flux are especially of concern for climate 
modelling; such eiTors may account for much of the flux 
adjustment needed for many models. 
4.3.2 Processes of the Surface Mixed Layer 
The near surface ocean is usually well-mixed by sub-grid 
scale processes involving stirring by the wind and by its 
convection. Therefore, quantities at the surface are 
determined by their mixed-layer values. The mixed-layer 
temperature is determined by heat fluxes at the surface, by 
mixing and advection of temperature horizontally, by the 
depth of the mixed layer, and by the entrainment heat flux 
at the bottom of the mixed layer (the interface between the 
near-surface turbulence and the relatively non-turbulent 
ocean interior). Skin effects at the atmospheric interface 
may give departures from mixed-layer values, especially 
under low winds. The interior ocean affects the surface 
NH Ice sheet 
Figure 4.5: Diagram of an Atlantic meridional cross-section from North Pole (NP) to South Pole (SP), showing mechanisms likely to 
affect the thermohaline circulation on various time-scales. The change in hydrologie cycle, expressed in terms of water fluxes, P^^^^ — 
^evaporation' 
осбап and Water fluxes, P^„^,^ - Р^ькйоп' f""" t*^^ ^"^"^ ^'^'^ i*^^' 
^ changes in ocean temperature. Deep-water 
fomiation in the North Atlantic Subpolar Sea (North Atiantic Deep Water: NADW) is affected by changes in ice volume and extent (V), 
and regulates the intensity of the thermohahne circulation (C); changes in Antarctic Bottom Water (AABW) formation are neglected in this 
approximation. The thermohaline circulation affects the system's temperature (T) and is also affected by it (Ghil and McWilliams, 1994). 
212 
Climate Processes 
2.5 
-80 
-60 
-40 
-20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Latitude 
Figure 4.6: The poleward ocean heat transports in each ocean basin and summed over all oceans as calculated indirectly from energy 
balance requirements using ERBE for top of the atmosphere radiative fluxes and ECMWE data for atmospheric energy fluxes (from 
Trenberth and Solomon, 1994). 
ocean only through this entrainment at the bottom of the 
mixed layer. Entrainment depends on the strength of the 
mixed-layer turbulence, on the motion of the bottom of the 
mixed layer itself, and on upwelling in the interior through 
the bottom of the mixed layer. Sterl and Kattenberg (1994) 
examine the effects on an ocean model of a mixed-layer 
parametrization and suggest that wind-stirring has 
important consequences not captured in the present ocean 
GCMs. 
the salinity of adjacent unfrozen water. At low 
temperatures and relatively high salinity, cold dense waters 
sink convectively and spread throughout the oceanic 
depths, thereby 
maintaining the stable vertical 
stratification. Warmer surface waters flow toward these 
sinking regions and are cooled along their journey by heat 
fluxes from the ocean to the atmosphere. The sinking 
regions are highly restricted in area: "deep waters" are 
formed only in the North Aflantic Greenland, Norwegian, 
Iceland, and Labrador seas. The worid's "bottom waters" 
4.3.3 Wind Driven and Thermohaline Ocean Circulation 
are formed only in restricted regions of the Southern 
The wind driven circulation is that direcfly driven by the 
Oceans near the coast of Antarctica in the Weddell and 
wind stress: because it is slow and large-scale in the 
interior of the ocean, it can convenienfly be expressed by 
the conservation of vorticity (the so-called Sverdrup 
balance) which says that the vertically integrated 
meridional flow, where not affected by lateral boundaries 
and bottom topography, is given direcfly by the curl of the 
wind stress. This is an absolute constraint that would exist 
whatever the internal stratification of the ocean. 
The thermohaline circulation is driven by changes in sea 
water density arising from changes in temperature versus 
salinity. Its functioning in the Atiantic Ocean is illustrated 
schematically in Figure 4.5. Formation of sea ice increases 
Ross Seas. Waters from these sinking regions spread at 
depth to fill the world's entire basin and thereby help 
maintain the vertical stratification even in oceans where no 
deep sinking exists. These processes and the thermohaline 
circulation may change on various time-scales. 
In the North Atiantic the combination of warm surface 
water flowing northward and cold water flowing southward 
at depth gives a net northward heat transport which has 
been estimated by direct measurements to be about 1 PW at 
24°N (see Bryden, 1993 and references therein) and 
verified by indirect methods to be about the same (Figure 
4.6, from Trenberth and Solomon, 1994). Deep cold waters 
Climate 
Processes 
213 
flow southward across the equator from the North Aflantic 
and thereby imply a northward heat flux even in the South 
AÜanüc. The Pacific is less saline than the Aflandc, is 
bounded further south by Alaska, and has no deep water 
formation. Its transport is more nearly symmetrical about 
the equator and similarly has a magnitude at 24°N of about 
1 PW (Bryden et al., 1991 and Figure 4.6). The properties 
of the Atlantic and Pacific rapidly interact through the 
Antarctic Circumpolar CuiTcnt. 
A coupled simulation (Manabe and Stouffer, 1988) has 
shown that during periods of no thermohaline circulation, 
the high northern Atlantic would be ice-covered to south of 
Iceland and be much colder than now. Palaeo-records 
indicate that oscillations in the thermohaline circulation 
leading to warming and cooling at high latitudes prevailed 
during the last glacial interval (Bond et al., 1993). If the 
thermohaline circulation were to weaken with the expected 
larger inputs of fresh water to high latitudes during global 
warming, the net effect would be to either weaken the 
warming in high latitudes and amplify it in lower latitudes, 
and/or to make the thermohaline circulation and, hence 
latitudinal temperature gradients, more variable as 
discussed in Section 4.3.9. 
Ocean only models are useful for isolating the ocean 
processes that may be present in more comprehensive 
coupled models of the climate although such may be 
considerably altered when coupled to the atmosphere. The 
idea that the stability and variability of the thermohaline 
circulation depends on the relative strength of high latitude 
thermal to fresh water forcing was introduced in coarse 
resolution ocean GCMs by Weaver et al. (1991, 1993). A 
steady thermohaline circulation can only exist if the fresh 
water input by high latitude precipitation, runoff, and ice 
melt is balanced by the fresh water export by that same 
thermohaline circulation. As the high latitude fresh water 
flux is increased, the ability of the thermohaline circulation 
to remove the fresh water is limited and the thermohaline 
circulation may have multiple equilibrium solutions 
(Stommel, 1961; Bryan 1986; Marotzke, 1988) and large 
variability. Such variability on decadal (Weaver and 
Sarachik, 1991) to millennial (Winton and Sarachik, 1993, 
Winton, 1993) time-scales has been demonstrated in ocean 
models with relatively large fresh water stochastic forcing. 
While the imposed boundary conditions on temperature 
have come into question, the mechanism is physically 
plausible and may survive the transition to a responsive 
atmosphere. If so, the implications are considerable: in a 
warmer world with warmer high latitudes and a stronger 
hydrologie cycle the thermohaline circulation could 
become less stable and more variable. 
Recent simulations of the coupled fransient response to 
increases of radiatively active gases that reach twice the 
pre-industrial concentration of COj (Manabe and Stouffer, 
1994) have indicated that the thermohaline circulation first 
weakens and then returns. The experiments that reach four 
times the pre-industrial concentration of COj (in 140 years) 
have the thermohaline circulation weaken and stay weak 
for up to 500 years. While this model has a severe flux 
correction which stabilises the thermohaline circulation, it 
raises the important question of the response of the 
thermohaline circulation to changes in the greenhouse 
forcing and the subsequent effects of this response on 
climate. 
Very high resolution models are being used to explicifly 
examine small-scale orographic, topographic and eddy 
processes in the ocean (e.g., Semtner and Chervin 1988, 
1992). These models are useful for studying relatively 
short-lived phenomena and have given impressive 
simulations of the wind driven annual variation of heat 
transports in the Atiantic (Bonning and Herrmann, 1994) 
but, because of the huge computational overhead, can only 
be run for relatively short periods of model time. Thus, 
they cannot yet be coupled to model atmospheres for use in 
climate simulations nor to examine the thermohaline 
circulation. Such simulations must still use coarser-
resolution models with parametrized eddies. 
4.3.4 Ocean Convection 
Given the surface fluxes and a formulation of mixed-layer 
processes near the surface, ocean general circulation 
models have to solve the advective equations for 
temperature and salt in the presence of convective 
overturning and stable ocean mixing. Convection arises 
when the density stratification becomes unstable and when 
relatively salty water is cooled to low temperature and 
becomes so dense that a water column becomes unstable. 
Convection homogenises the column and allows 
overturning to occur (see KUworth (1983) for a complete 
review). 
Convection occurs over scales of a few km and is 
therefore hard to observe (but see M E D O C , 1970). 
Detailed simulations of individual convective elements in 
neutral stratification show the process to be complex and 
rife with small-scale features (Jones and Marshall, 1993; 
Legg and Marshall, 1993). Nevertheless, it is important to 
represent this process in ocean models with resolution 
coarser than the scales on which convection is known to 
occur. Simple convective adjustment parametrization (e.g.. 
Cox, 1984) has long been used with improvement 
developed over time (e.g., Y i n and Sarachik, 1994). 
214 
Climate Processes 
Parametrization of deep convection based on the detailed 
simulations of convective elements cited above are under 
development but it is not yet known how this will affect the 
simulation of the thermohaline circulation. 
4.3.5 Interior Ocean Mixing 
Parametrization of the mixing of stably stratified water in 
the interior of the ocean is crucial for the simulation of ocean 
circularion. Tradirionally, eddy mixing coefficients have 
been used with values of order Icvcrls for vertical diffusion 
and viscosity and order lO^cm^/s for horizontal diffusion. 
These diffusion values are sometimes derived from tracer 
experiments, but more often they are selected to ensure 
numerical stability of the simulation. Parcels tend to stay and 
move on surfaces of constant density, which are 
predominantly horizontal in the interior ocean, and only 
small values of cross-density diffusion are expected. A tracer 
experiment (Ledwell et al, 1993) has recently indicated that 
the correct verrical diffusion coefficient for the ocean 
interior is closer to 0.1 cm^/s, an order of magnitude smaller 
than often used. Vertical mixing in the regions of lateral 
boundary currents or perhaps sea mounts is likely to be 
larger. Large et al. (1995) review a new scheme for mixed-
layer dynamics and for ocean vertical mixing. 
Further insights into turbulent diffusion in the ocean 
depend on a detailed knowledge of the precise mechanisms 
of that mixing. Mesoscale eddies, for example, are plentiful 
in the ocean and their finer scales would imply enhanced 
mixing through the production of frontal type gradients in 
temperature and tracers. A recent parametrization (Gent 
and McWilliams, 1990; Danabasoglu et al, 1994) of these 
eddies follows an approach pioneered in stratospheric 
tracer modelling; that is, the mixing is primarily 
accomplished by advection by the "residual circulation" 
induced by the eddies rather than by the direct effects of 
the 
eddies 
themselves. 
Experiments 
with 
this 
parametrization show striking improvements in simulation 
of the depth and shaфness of the global thermocline and of 
the meridional heat transport. 
4.3.6 Seaice 
In high latitudes, sea ice is a major modulator of energy 
exchange between ocean and atmosphere. It is an 
insulating and highly reflecting surface. In the Arctic, 
much of the ice lasts permanenfly through the summer so 
that it has a substantially larger impact on surface albedos 
per unit area than do continental snow surfaces. 
In winter, sea ice controls the transfer of heat from the 
relatively warm ocean to the cold atmosphere. The sea ice-
cover is normally not complete. Even in the Central Arctic, 
1-2% of open water permanently exists in the winter and a 
larger fraction in summer. Observation and model 
simulations indicate that surface sensible heat fluxes from 
the open water are one to two orders of magnitude larger 
than from the surface of the pack ice in the Arctic Basin 
(e.g., Meleshko et al, 1991). Albedo of the sea ice-covered 
region also depends on sea ice concentration. Given the 
significant low-frequency variability of sea ice-cover and 
the persistence of its anomalies, its variable control of heat 
fluxes may significantly affect the atmospheric circulation 
and climate of the mid-latitude regions. 
In the Northern Hemisphere, sea ice reaches its minimum 
extent in September when it covers 8.5 X 10''km^. It attains 
a maximum extent of 15 X 10'' km^ in March. Its 
interannual variability varies from 1.1 X 10^ km' in winter 
to 1.8 X 10^ km^ in summer, mainly in the marginal zones, 
and depending on atmospheric circulation and oceanic 
currents (Pai-kinson and Cavalieri, 1989). 
Many GCMs and other climate models still treat the sea 
ice-cover as a single slab and do not take into account the 
always present but randomly distributed open waters 
("leads"). Climate simulations with GCMs that incorporate 
sea ice inhomogeneities in a single grid box (sea ice 
concentration), show additional and substantial heating of the 
atmosphere in winter (Kattsov et al, 1993; Groetzner et al, 
1994). This heating amounts to 10 Wm"^ over the polar cap 
of 60°N-90°N, increasing surface air temperature by 3.2°C 
over the same region. The wanning is confined to the lower 
troposphere by the high stability of the polar atmosphere. 
The leads have a comparable heating effect to that produced 
by the observed sea ice anomalies (Kattsov et al, 1993). 
The largest surface air temperature increase with 
greenhouse warming is expected in the high latitudes of the 
Northern Hemisphere, because of the large atmospheric 
stability and the positive feedbacks between sea ice albedo 
and the surface temperature of the mixed ocean layer. 
These feedbacks are inadequately characterised, in part 
because of uncertain cloud feedbacks at the ice margins. 
Climate models that do not account for open waters over 
the ice-covered ocean probably overestimate the effect of 
the sea ice albedo in summer and underestimate the ocean 
cooling in winter. Changing snow cover may also feed 
back on ice thickness (Ledley, 1993). 
The distribution of leads and thickness of sea ice is 
complex, of small scale and depends substantially on the 
dynamics of the ice as forced by wind and water drag. The 
required drag from the atmospheric model is, furthermore, 
not always of the correct strength and direction. Flato and 
Hibler (1992) have proposed a practical method for sea ice 
dynamics that is now being used in several GCMs. 
Climate Processes 
215 
4.3.7 The El Nino-Southern Oscillation as a Climate 
Process 
The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is the coupled 
atmosphere-ocean phenomenon (Figure 4.7) wherein the 
normally cool, dry, eastern and central tropical Pacific 
becomes warmer, wetter, and with a lower sea level 
pressure every few years. The entire global tropics warm 
by about 1 °C, and, by virtue of the large fraction of global 
area covered by the tropics, affect the globally averaged 
surface temperature on seasonal-to-interannual time-scales 
(e.g., Yulaeva and Wallace, 1994). The ENSO cycle affects 
the distribution and concentration of global COj (e.g., 
Feely et al., 1987 and Chapter 10). Major progress in 
understanding, simulating, and predicting ENSO has been 
made in the last 10 years (e.g., Battisti and Sarachik, 1995). 
A number of recent papers have shown that: 
• 
The recent land temperature record over the last few 
decades can be modelled by an atmospheric G C M 
forced by the observed record of global SST (Kumar 
et al, 1994; Graham, 1995), and, 
• 
These results are dominated by tropical rather than 
mid-latitude SST (Graham et ai. 1994; Lau and 
Nath, 1994; Smith, 1994). 
Figure 4.7: Schematic illustration of the differences in tropical climate between norm!,! 
ci M - 
A-,- 
U , 
thermocline becomes less tilted, SSTs increase in the eastern Pacific and regions in Г 
Г 
" 
„„„ ^„,.„„ 
legions m the central and eastern Pacific see increased 
convection. 
216 
Climate 
Processes 
These studies indicate that the unusual warmth of the 
tropical SST since the mid 1970s, during the warm phase 
of ENSO, has imprinted an unusual warmth on the entire 
global circulation. ENSO is evidently a major contributor 
to the natural variability of SST in the tropics, and 
arguably, also globally. 
Warm phases of ENSO coincide with a warming of the 
tropical troposphere of close to 1°C. The net effect of 
ENSO is to warm the surface waters of the eastern Pacific. 
Ocean models that try to simulate the tropical Pacific SST 
in response to a repeating annual cycle of surface fluxes 
tend to simulate too cold an eastern Pacific. The simulation 
where the ocean is forced by long records of observed 
fluxes is more difficult and has not yet been done, though it 
is likely that such more realistic forcing would ameliorate 
the cold eastern Pacific problem. 
Interestingly, all coupled model simulations (Mechoso et 
al., 1995) of eastern Pacific SST show a result which 
contrasts with the ocean-only simulations: an eastern 
Pacific that is too warm, a feature attributed to the 
inadequacy of stratus cloud simulations in the atmospheric 
component of the coupled model (Koberle and Philander, 
1994). To the extent that tropical Pacific temperatures 
matter for global climate and to the extent that ENSO 
variabitity dominates SST and land temperatures in the 
tropics (Wallace, 1995), it is clear that ENSO must be 
considered a vital part of the global climate system and 
should be accurately simulated. In order to correctly 
simulate ENSO, the meridional resolution at the equator 
must be a fraction of a degree in order to simulate wave 
processes and the meridional extent of the upwelling, both 
crucial. To date, no coupled model used for projecting the 
response to greenhouse warming has such resolution. 
There is one final and intriguing possibility that the 
above cited papers imply: the possibility that global warming 
not only affects ENSO by affecting the background state 
(Graham et al, 1995; and a contrary view by Knutson and 
Manabe, 1994, in a coarse resolution GCM) but that indeed 
much of the effects of greenhouse warming might be 
modulated through changes in the magnitude and regularity 
of the warm and cold phases of ENSO. 
4.3.8 Assessment of the Status of Ocean Processes in 
Climate Models 
• 
Comprehensive ocean G C M s , coupled to the 
atmosphere through fluxes of energy, momentum, 
and fresh water, are required for assessment of the 
rate, magnitude and regional distribution of climate 
change. 
• 
The large-scale dynamics of current ocean models 
seem reasonably realistic, but are not completely 
validated, in part because of a dearth of appropriate 
observations. An outstanding question to be resolved 
is the response of the thermohaline circulation in 
coupled models to increased high latitude inputs of 
fresh water. This question needs to be answered to 
assess how latitudinal gradients of SST may respond 
to global warming. Current suggestions point to 
either a large increase in or a highly variable 
latitudinal temperature gradient as possible 
responses. 
• 
Eluxes at the ocean-atmosphere interface in coupled 
models have not yet been fully examined. In some 
cases there may be serious errors - for example, 
surface radiative fluxes depending on inadequately 
parametrized cloud processes, and high latitude inputs 
of fresh water depending on poorly characterised 
changes in the atmosphere-hydrological cycle. 
• 
Oceanic models 
still use relatively 
crude 
parametrizations of sub-grid scale processes for near 
surface and interior mixing and for deep convection. 
New parametrizations for interior mixing associated 
with mesoscale eddies are likely to improve the 
simulated depth and sharpness of the global 
thermocline. 
• 
Details of sea ice treatments in G C M s are still 
questionable, although some improvements are being 
examined. The role of sea ice in climate change is 
especially uncertain because of poorly known 
interface feedbacks; that is, overlying clouds 
modifying radiation, surface wind stress, ocean 
currents and changes in oceanic heat transport 
underneath the sea ice. 
• 
ENSO processes have major effects on the tropical 
climate system, with a strong impact on hydrological 
processes and surface temperatures on interannual 
time-scales. Some coupled atmosphere-ocean models 
appear to give reasonable simulations of this system 
and show promise for providing useful predictions. 
However, the current generation of models used for 
projection of greenhouse gas response do not 
satisfactorily simulate ENSO processes, in part 
because the spatial resolution required to do so is not 
computationally feasible for century-long climate 
simulations. 
Climate Processes 
217 
4.4 Land-surface processes 
Fluxes of heat and moisture between land and the 
atmosphere are central to the role of land processes in the 
climate system. These fluxes determine the overlying 
distributions of atmospheric temperature, water vapour, 
precipitation, and cloud properties. Atmospheric inputs of 
precipitation and net radiative heating are crucial for 
determining land-surface climate (climate over land is of 
greatest practical importance) and in turn are modified by 
land process feedbacks. Solar fluxes at the surface are 
currently highlighted as being significantly in error 
compared to observations, in some and perhaps most 
climate models due to the inadequate treatments of clouds 
(e.g., Garratt, 1994; Ward, 1995). These comparisons are 
being made possible by the recent availability of satellite-
derived surface solar fluxes (e.g.. Pinker et al, 1995; 
Whitlockeía/., 1995). 
Compared to the ocean, the land's relatively low heat 
capacity and limited capacity for water storage lead to 
strong diurnal variations in surface conditions and direct 
local responses to radiative and precipitation inputs. These 
limited storage capacities combined with the heterogeneous 
nature of the underlying soils, vegetation, and slope (e.g.. 
Figure 4.8) imply potentially large heterogeneities in 
sensible and latent fluxes which may drive mesoscale 
atmospheric effects. 
4.4.1 Soil-Vegetation-Atmosphere Transfer Schemes 
Sensitivity studies with G C M s have shown that the 
treatment of land in climate models has major effects on 
the model climate and especially near the land surface 
(e.g., Koster and Suarez, 1994). The schemes to represent 
land in climate models are called soil-vegetation-
atmosphere transfer schemes (SVATs). Important elements 
I -100 
V) -300 
« -400 
Й -500 
£ -700 
О 
w A 
\ \ 
1 \ 
Д Д 
- — Pasture 
/ V у - \ 
— Forest 
J 
' 
i 
л Л / 
' 
^ 
\ _ 
r v - / 
1 
\ 
v 'v 
' 
^ \ 
\ 
\ 
Í 
\ 
/ 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
Day number from 1 January 1991 
Figure 4.8: The seasonal variation in soil moisture storage for a 
tropical forest in Rondonia, Brazil (dashed line), compared to an 
adjacent pasture (solid line) (Institute of Hydrology, 1994). 
of these schemes are their storage reservoirs and their 
mechanisms for the exchange with the atmosphere of water 
and thermal energy. Water storage occurs in soil reservoirs 
and in some models also as fast time-scale canopy or 
surface terms. The water intercepted by the canopy may be 
stored or evaporated. This store generally holds about 1 
mm of water. The soil store, usually in the range of 50 to 
500 mm of water, depends on soil porosity, wilting point 
for vegetation, soil drainage rates and especially the depth 
from which water can be extracted from the soil. This 
depth is associated with the rooting depth of vegetation and 
the root distribution. 
Canopy transpiration is a physiological process 
depending on water transfer from the soil through roots, 
stems and leaves. The canopy resistance measures the 
effectiveness of this moisture transfer. It is primarily the 
integrated stomatal resistances. The transpiration, as 
mediated by the stomates, is limited by the supply of water 
from the roots and atmospheric conditions of demand. 
Neglect of this canopy resistance, now included in the 
SVAT models, has perhaps been the largest source of error 
in the older "bucket" models. The importance of canopy 
resistance is illustrated by two independent studies with 
G C M simulations of the effect of doubling stomatal 
resistance within the model SVATs (Henderson-Sellers et 
al, 1995; Pollard and Thompson, 1995). The computed 
effects are largest for forests, and hence the largest areas 
affected are the boreal and tropical forests. In the boreal 
forests, summertime évapotranspiration (ET) is reduced by 
at least 20%, and surface air temperature increased by up to 
several degrees. 
Surface roughness is the basis for determining the 
aerodynamic drag coefficient, C¿, , for a surface. In the 
early GCMs, Cj^ for land was specified as 0.003, a typical 
value for short vegetation and for conditions of neutral 
stability. To achieve adequate accuracy, it is necessary to 
represent drag coefficients in terms of surface similarity 
theory, where transfer coefficients for momentum, heat and 
moisture are determined from a roughness length, ZQ and 
the thermal stability of the near surface air. It may be 
necessary to distinguish between coefficients for 
momentum, heat and moisture. In particular, all sub-grid 
scale roughness elements and topography may contribute 
to momentum transfer but it is hkely that only those on the 
scale of individual vegetation elements contribute to heat 
and moisture transfer. Schmid and Biinzli (1995) suggest a 
new approach for scaling roughness elements to model 
resolution and emphasise the importance of surface texture. 
The largest departures in newer models from the earlier 
ones are over forests, where 
can readily exceed 0.01. 
218 
Climate Processes 
Leaf laminar 
Figure 4.9; Schematic illustration of a leaf cross-section showing links between stomatal gas exchange (COj, HjO) and photosynthesis. 
The stomatal conductance is related to the ai-ea-averaged value of the stomatal pore width which is of the order of 10 pm. The stomatal 
pores are under active physiological control and appear to act so as to maximise the influx of COj for photosynthesis for a minimum 
loss of leaf water. Thus photosynthesis and transpiration are dependent on PAR flux, atmospheric CO^ concentration, humidity, 
temperature, and soil moisture (Sellers et al., 1992). e*(Ts) is the saturation vapour pressure at the leaf surface. 
Parametrization of vegetation properties related to 
canopy architecture determines significant features of the 
treatment of vegetation for évapotranspiration. The total 
surface of photosynthesising leaves and stem surfaces 
influences canopy resistance and transfer of heat and 
moisture from the canopy to the atinosphere. The flux of 
photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) normal to leaf 
surfaces, as required for stomatal parametrization, depends 
on canopy and leaf architecture. Furthermore, the net 
radiative loading over the surface of a given canopy 
element depends on these properties. Because of the large 
effect that canopy resistance has on SVAT models, they are 
sensitive to such details. 
Recently, some canopy and soil schemes have included 
the uptake, storage and release of carbon through carbon 
dioxide exchanges with the atmosphere as illustrated in 
Figure 4.9. These sub-schemes will be increasingly 
important 
as 
physical 
models are coupled to 
biogeochemical models (cf. Chapters 2 and 9). 
Vegetation cover and properties are now, for the most 
part, included in climate models as prescribed from 
inadequate observations. However, interactions between 
vegetation and climate may have significant effects. On 
seasonal time-scales, such interaction includes the effects 
of drought on vegetation cover, and on longer time-scales, 
possible changes in structure, e.g., transition between forest 
and grassland. 
Canopy albedo determines the fraction of incident solar 
radiation that is absorbed. Current model parametrizations 
of surface albedo are largely inferred from some limited 
surface measurements for various kinds of vegetation 
canopies. Satellites are, in principle, the only means of 
globally establishing surface albedos. Because albedo can 
change substantially with vegetation cover it has been a 
major parameter in studies of the response of regional 
climate to land-use change (Section 4.4.3). 
Runoff depends on soil moisture, properties of the 
incident precipitation, and characteristics of soils and 
topography. A theoretical foundation exists for the local 
vertical infiltration of water in soil, given soil hydraulic 
properties. In reality, runoff rarely results from 
precipitation exceeding maximum infiltration. Rather, 
much more often lateral down-slope flows carry soil water 
to low regions where the water table reaches the surface 
and into streams. However, there are intrinsic difficulties in 
parametrizing slope effects to determine runoff in a climate 
model. Furthermore, soil properties are 
highly 
heterogeneous both horizontally and vertically so that 
specifying them as constants over a model grid square or in 
a soil column is questionable. Changes of soil hydraulic 
Climate 
Processes 
219 
properties witli deptti may strongly affect runoff. The 
recent intercomparisons through the Project for the 
Intercomparison of Land-surface Parametrization Schemes 
(PILPS) (Shao et al., 1995) indicate a wide range of runoff 
rates between different land models, leading to substantial 
differences in annual average évapotranspiration. The 
current lack of a physically based and adequately validated 
treatment for runoff may be the biggest single obstacle to 
achieving an SVAT adequate for climate modelling. 
In cold regions and seasons, processes involving snow 
cover and soil freezing become important for surface 
energy and water balances. Depending on its depth, snow 
masks some part of the underlying surface (e.g., Robinson 
and Kukla, 1985 and Baker et al., 1991). Atmospheric 
models provide snow to the surface in liquid water 
equivalent, depending on criteria for transition between 
rain and snow. The surface model must determine the 
snow's density, temperature, 
albedo, and spatial 
heterogeneities. Long-term data records of snow cover and 
other surface conditions allow validation of the 
parametrization of snow processes in climate models (e.g., 
Foster et al., 1996; Yang et al., 1996). New treatments of 
snow processes in climate models have been proposed by 
Loth etal. (1993) and Lynch-Stieglitz (1995). 
Although our understanding of how to model land 
processes has advanced considerably, there has been a 
substantial lag in implementing this understanding in 
models of greenhouse gas response. Some models with 
detailed land process treatments are now being used for 
such studies, but it is not yet possible to assess how future 
climate projections are influenced by these treatments. 
Current intercomparisons of off-line models by PILPS 
indicate a considerable divergence of results between 
different land-surface models for the same prescribed 
forcing. Improved criteria for accuracy and validation will 
be needed before the current conceptual improvements of 
land-surface models can be translated into increased 
confidence in climate change projection. 
4.4.2 Questions of Spatial Heterogeneity 
One of the common criticisms of present treatments of land 
processes in climate models is their failure to include many 
of the essential aspects of sub-grid scale heterogeneity. 
Heterogeneity is manifested in the precipitation and radiative 
inputs and in modelling the land processes themselves. The 
issue of precipitation heterogeneity (Milly and Eagleson, 
1988) has been addressed through a simple statistical model 
in several GCMs, as reviewed by Thomas and Henderson-
Sellers (1991). In this approach, precipitation is assumed to 
occur over some fraction of a model grid square, within 
which the precipitation is assumed to have an exponential 
distribution of intensities. Simple runoff models having a 
non-linear dependence on precipitation are integrated across 
the distribution of precipitation intensities to provide a grid-
square runoff. This approach has been generalised to 
interception (Shuttleworth, 1988). Pitman et al. (1990) have 
demonstrated, for prescribed atmospheric forcing, that the 
partitioning between ET and runoff in a land model can be 
very sensitive to the fractional area of precipitation. On the 
other hand. Dolman and Gregory (1992), who aUow for 
atmospheric feedbacks with a 1-D model, find very little 
sensitivity of average ET to assumptions about the rainfall 
distribution, but that the partitioning between interception 
versus evaporation and hence short time-scale rates of ET, 
can vary widely with assumptions about the precipitation 
distribution. 
A l l of the above approaches assume variability of 
precipitation but retain a homogeneous water storage. 
However spatial variability of storage can also have a 
substantial effect (Wood et al., 1992). Entekhabi and 
Eagleson (1989) have developed separate statistical models 
for precipitation and soil moisture that have been tested in 
the GISS G C M (Johnson et al., 1993). They find a large 
variation in ET and runoff depending on the assumed 
model. Eltahir and Bras (1993) have generalised 
Shuttleworth's approach to a statistical description of 
interception. In particular, they assume a statistical 
distribution of leaf water stores and find, for prescribed 
atmospheric forcing, that interception changes substantially 
but that little change from homogeneous conditions would 
be realised if the leaf water stores were assumed uniform. 
Another issue is the inclusion of heterogeneities in land-
surface cover (Avissar and Pielke, 1989; Seth et ai, 1994) 
and hence inferred parameters such as roughness. At least 
three scales need to be considered. On a very fine scale, 
canopy air interacts between different surfaces, and surface 
roughness lengths cannot be associated with individual 
surfaces. Koster and Suarez (1992) refer to this scale of 
heterogeneity as "mixture" and for a given roughness give 
a simple model for deriving a total canopy temperature and 
water vapour from individual elements. This type of 
hetei-ogeneity needs to be provided as part of the overall 
land cover description. 
On a somewhat coarser scale, surfaces independentiy 
interact with an overlying homogeneous atmosphere. 
Koster and Suarez (1992) refer to this as "mosaic", and 
Shuttieworth (1988) as "disordered" heterogeneity. This is 
the scale, for example, of typical agricultural fields or 
small stands of forest. Finally, at scales of at least a few 
tens of kilometres and certainly at the scales of G C M 
220 
Climate 
Processes 
resolution, each surface has a different PBL overlaying it. 
Shuttleworth (1988) refers to these as "ordered" 
heterogeneity. Mesoscale circulations on this scale may 
substantially add to boundary layer fluxes (e.g., Pielke et 
al., 1991). They may also modify processes of clouds and 
convection in ways not accounted for by grid box-mean 
information. 
Another issue of heterogeneity is in the distribution of 
incident radiation. Sub-grid scale clouds, perhaps 
associated with precipitation, may be important. For 
example, if precipitation occurs over some fraction of a 
grid square and spatial variation of surface wetness is 
included, but radiation is assumed homogeneous, the 
estimated evaporation from the wet surfaces will be 
excessive. Besides clouds, surface slope can be a major 
cause of heterogeneity in the amounts of absorbed surface 
solar radiation (Avissar and Pielke, 1989), as well as 
determining further heterogeneities in clouds and 
precipitation. Barros and Lettenmaier (1994) review the 
role of orography in triggering clouds and precipitation. 
Some aspects of heterogeneity can be treated with 
relatively straightforward approaches including how to 
determine an average over a wide range of surface types 
with different characteristics. Raupach and Finnigan (1995) 
have considered energetic constraints on areally averaged 
energy balances in heterogeneous regions. In some cases, 
particularly if surface characteristics do not differ strongly, 
surface parameters can be aggregated (Claussen, 1990; 
Blyth et al., 1993). For instance, albedo can simply be 
linearly averaged, (when the underlying surface is 
otherwise fairly homogeneous) whereas for roughness 
length a more complex aggregation is necessary (Taylor, 
1987; Mason, 1988; Claussen, 1990). 
The calculation of regional surface fluxes is made 
difficult by the non-linear dependence between fluxes and 
driving mean gradients. For example, where parts of the 
area are snow-covered with surface temperatures held at 
the freezing point, the mean vertical temperature structure 
over the area may imply a downward heat flux but, because 
the transfer coefficients are larger in the snowfree, 
statically unstable part of the area, the actual mean heat 
flux can be upward. Moreover, if surface types strongly 
differ, "parameter aggregation" becomes unfeasible. For 
example, definirion of an aggregated soil temperature 
diffusivity does not make sense if parts of the area consist 
of bare soil, where heat conduction is diffusive, and of 
open water, where heat can be advected horizontally as 
well as vertically. In these more complex landscapes, "flux 
aggregation" is preferred (Avissar and Pielke, 1989; 
Claussen, 1991). Flux aggregation implies the computation 
of surface fluxes for each type in a grid box separately. 
Consequently, a regional surface flux is obtained by a 
linear average. Flux and parameter aggregation may be 
combined or use can be made of the intermediate approach 
of averaging exchange coefficients (Mahrt, 1987). The 
various aggregarion methods require specification of a 
"blending height" where the aggregated informarion is 
matched to the overlying G C M grid squares (Claussen, 
1990, 1991; Wood and Mason, 1991; Dolman, 1992; Blyth 
et al., 1993). For ordered heterogeneity, this concept is less 
useful since the blending height would be above the 
surface layer. Practical application of these averaging 
procedures to global models will require high resolution 
global data sets on vegetation properties from future 
satellite sensors. 
The aggregation or averaging methods may effectively 
treat the prescribed distribution of surface heterogeneities, 
but are not readily generalised to the dynamic interactions 
with sub-grid scale atmospheric inputs of water and 
radiation. Alternatively, a model grid box can be 
subdivided into sub-elements with both distinct surface 
characteristics and distinct atmospheric inputs. The "tile" 
or "mosaic" scheme by Koster and Suarez (1992) 
emphasises representation of the land heterogeneity. 
Different approaches may be needed to efficiently treat the 
heterogeneous distribution of atmospheric inputs; these 
atmospheric inputs may provide the largest overall 
departure in results from that inferred for homogeneous 
conditions. The possible importance of mesoscale 
circulation effects as a function of the spatial scale of 
individual homogeneous element on surface and boundary 
layer fluxes still needs to be assessed, although some 
preliminary work has been done (e.g., Zeng and Pielke, 
1995) to parametrize mesoscale and turbulent fluxes in the 
boundary layer over inhomogeneous surfaces. 
4.4.3 Sensitivity to Land-use Changes 
Processes at the land surface influence the atmosphere 
through fluxes of heat and moisture into the PBL. These in 
turn affect atmospheric stability and the occurrence of 
precipitation and cloud radiative effects. Belts et al. (1993, 
1994) have shown a close coupling between errors in a 
model's surface parametrization and its PBL, clouds, and 
moist convection. Sensitivity studies with GCMs have 
looked at the question of the possible effect of land cover 
modifications. These studies have indicated major surface 
influences on the atmospheric hydrological processes. This 
should pe'rhaps not be too surprising since variations in 
ocean surface latent heat fluxes driven by small changes in 
oceanic surface temperatures have long been known to 
Climate Processes 
221 
have large regional climate effects. However, the 
feedbacks of land-surface processes to the atmosphere are 
more complex and still far from understood. 
Recent studies of the sensitivity of the Amazon Basin 
climate to a change from forest to grassland have been 
published, e.g., by Nobre et al. (1991), Henderson-Sellers 
et al. (1993) and Lean and Rowntree (1993). The response 
of climate to deforestation in the Amazon has been found 
to be sensitive to the specification of surface properties 
such as albedo (Dirmeyer and Shukla, 1994) and surface 
roughness (Sud et al, 1995). A contrasting question is the 
effect of changing a semi-arid grassland such as the Sahel 
in Africa to a desert (e.g., Xue and Shukla, 1993). 
Reductions in absorbed solar energy due to higher surface 
albedos reduce ET but it is not clear how the change in 
precipitation should be related to change in ET. Many of 
the simulations have shown precipitation to reduce 
substantially more than ET, which implies a reduction in 
the convergence of moisture from the ocean. 
The sum of various regional climate changes from land-
use may contribute an overall effect on global climate. 
Estimates of global radiative forcing depending on albedo 
change are usually small compared to energy flux change 
from greenhouse gases. However, effects of changing land 
surface on the ratio of sensible to latent fluxes and on 
precipitation are not accounted for in such estimates and 
may be significant not only regionally but globally. 
4.4.4 Assessment of the Current Status of Land 
Processes in Climate Change Simulations 
* 
Land processes, driven by incoming solar radiation 
and precipitation, play an important role in the 
determination of near-surface climate, surface 
temperature, soil moisture, etc., and hence regional 
climates. Biases and uncertainties in the surface 
energy balance, and radiation and water budgets, are 
a significant source of error in simulations of 
regional climate. 
• 
Detailed treatments of land processes are now 
available, replacing the previously used bucket 
models, and are being incorporated into numerous 
climate models. These treatments are substantial 
conceptual improvements, but it is premature to 
judge how they will modify or improve our 
confidence in climate change simulations. A number 
of issues must be resolved before their inclusion in 
climate models may be viewed as satisfactory. These 
include: the reasons for the current divergences in 
answers between conceptually similar models in the 
PILPS model intercomparisons; the relative 
importance of various sub-grid scale processes, their 
interaction, and how to represent those that are 
important in the model; what level of observational 
detail is needed to prescribe the land properties 
needed by the models; and how these observations 
will be made available. 
• 
Modelling of runoff has large uncertainty in global 
models, there are no convincing treatments of the 
scaling of the responsible processes over the many 
orders of magnitude involved, and in high latitudes 
of the effects of frozen soils. Global data on soils, 
topography, and water holding capacities at the 
relevant scales will be urgently needed to make 
progress on this issue. 
• 
The question of the averaging of heterogeneous land 
surfaces has been clarified and 
reasonable 
approaches proposed. 
• 
Future models should begin to address the issue of 
how land-surface characteristics might change with 
climate and COj change and how important that is as 
a feedback. Sensitivity studies of the impact of 
doubling stomatal resistance indicates some climatic 
effects over forest regions comparable to those 
anticipated from global warming over the next 
century. How the integrated stomatal resistance for 
global vegetation might change with changing 
climate and COj concentrations is largely unknown. 
References 
Avissar, R. and R . A . Pielke, 1989: A parametrization of 
heterogeneous land surfaces for atmospheric numerical models 
and its impact on regional meteorology. Mon. Wea. Rev., 117, 
2113-2136. 
Baker, D.G., R.H. Skaggs and D.L. Ruschy, 1991: Snow depth 
required to mask the underlying surface. J. Appl. Met.. 30, 
387-392. 
Barkstrom, B.R., 1984: The Earth Radiation Budget Experiment 
(ERBE). Bull. Am. Met Soc., 65, 1170-1185. 
Barros, A.P. and D.P. Lettenmaier, 1994: Dynamic modeling of 
orographically induced precipitation. Rev. Geophys., 
32, 
265-284, 
Battisti, D.S. and E.S. Sarachik, 1995: Understanding and 
Predicting ENSO. U.S. National Report to International Union 
of Geodesy and Geophysics 1991-1994, Reviews 
of 
Geophysics, Supplement, 1367-1376. 
222 
Climate Processes 
Belts, A.K., J.H. Ball and A . C . M . Belijaars, 1993: Comparison 
between the land surface response of the E C M W F model and 
the FIFE-1987 data. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 199, 975-1001. 
Betts, A . K . , J.H. Ball, A . C . M . Beljaars, M . J . Miller and P. 
Viterbo, 1994: Coupling between land-surface, boundary-layer 
parametrizations and rainfall on local and regional scales; 
lessons from the wet summer of 1993. Fifth Conference on 
Global Change Studies, Nashville, T N , Jan. 23-28, 1994, 
American Meteorological Society, Boston, M A . 
Blyth, E . M . , A . J . Dolman and N . Wood, 1993: Effective 
resistance to sensible and latent heat flux in heterogeneous 
terrain. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 119, 423-442. 
Bond, G., W. Broecker, S. Johnsen, J. McManus, L. Labeyrie, J. 
Jouzel and G. Bonani, 1993: Correlations between climate 
records from North Atlantic sediments and Greenland ice. 
Nature, 365, 143-147. 
Bonning, C.W.and P. Herrmann, 1994: Annual cycle of poleward 
heat transport in the ocean: Results from high-resolution 
modeling of the north and equatorial Atlantic. /. Phys. 
Oceanogr.,24,9l-W7. 
Bony, S., J.P. Duvel and H . Le Treut, 1995: Observed 
dependence of the water vapor and clear sky greenhouse effect 
on sea surface temperature. Comparison with Climate Warming 
Experiments. Clim. Dyn. 11 (5), 307-320. 
Boucher, O. and U . Lohmann, 1995: The sulfate-CCN-cloud 
albedo effect: A sensitivity study with two general circulation 
models. Tellus., 47B, 281-300. 
Boucher, O., H. Le Treut, and M.B. Baker, 1995: Precipitation 
and radiation modelling in a G C M : Introduction of cloud 
microphysical processes. J. Geophys. Res., 100, 16395-16414. 
Bryan, F., 1986: High latitude 
salinity effects 
and 
interhemispheric thermohaline circulations. Nature, 
305, 
301-304. 
Bryden, H.L., 1993: Ocean heat transport across 24N latitude. In: 
Interactions between global climate subsystems: the legacy of 
Hann. Geophysical Monograph #75, American Geophysical 
Union, 65-75. 
Bryden, H.L., D.H. Roemmich and J.A. Church, 1991: Ocean 
heat transport across 24N in the Pacific. Deep Sea Res., 38, 
297-324. 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, J.P. Blanchet, G.J. Boer, A.D. Del Genio, 
M . Deque, V. Dymnikov, V. Galin, W.L. Gates, S.J. Ghan, J.T. 
Kiehl, A . Lacis, H . Le Treut, Z . - X . L i , X . - Z . Liang, B.J. 
McAvaney, V.P. Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. Morcrette, 
D.A. Randall, L. Rikus, E. Roeckner, J.F. Royer, U . Schlese, 
D.A. Sheinin, A . Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W . M . 
Washington, R.T. Wetherald, I. Yagai and M.-H. Zhang, 1990: 
Intercomparison and interpretation of climate feedback 
processes in 19 atmospheric general circulation models. /. 
Geophys. Res., 95, 16601-16615. 
Cess, R.D., M . H . Zhang, P. Minnis, L. Corsetti, E.G. Dutton, 
B . W . Forgan, D.P. Gather, W . L . Gates, J.J. Hack, E.F. 
Harrison, X . Jing, J.T. Kiehl, C.N. Long, J.-J. Morcrette, G.L. 
Potter, V . Ramanathan, B. Subasilar, C H . Whitlock, D.F. 
Young and Y . Zhou, 1995: Absorption of solar radiation by 
clouds: Observations versus models. Science, 267, 496-498. 
Cess, R.D., M . H . Zhang, G. L. Potter, V . Alekseev, H . W. 
Barker, E. Cohen-Solal, R. A. Colman, D. A. Dazlich, A. D. 
Del Genio, M . R. Dix, V. Dymnikov, M . Esch, L. D. Fowler, J. 
R. Fraser, V. Gahn, W. L. Gates, J. J. Hack, W. J. Ingram, J. T. 
Kiehl, H. Le Treut, K. K.-W. Lo, B. J. McAvaney, V. P. 
Meleshko, J.-J. Morcrette, D. A. Randall, E. Roeckner, J.-F. 
Royer, M . E. Schlesinger, P. V. Sporyshev, B. Timbal, E. M . 
Volodin, K. E. Taylor, W. Wang and R. T. Wetherald, 1996: 
Cloud feedback in atmospheric general circulation models: An 
update. Submitted to J. Geophys. Res. 
Charlson, R.J., J.E. Lovelock, M.O. Andreae and S.G. Warren, 
1987: Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulphur, cloud 
albedo and climate. Nature, 326, 655-661. 
Chou, M.-D., 1995: Coolness in the tropical Pacific during an El 
Niño episode. /. Clim.. 7, 1684-1692. 
Claussen, M . , 1990: Area averaging of surface fluxes in a 
neutrally stratified, horizontally inhomogeneous atmospheric 
boundary layer. Atmos. Env., 24a, 1349-1360. 
Claussen, M . , 1991: Estimation of areally-averaged surface 
fluxes. Boundary-layer Meteor., 54, 387^10. 
Cox, M . , 1984: A primitive equation three-dimensional model of 
the ocean. GFDL Ocean Group Tech. Rept. No. 1., GFDL. 
Curry, J.A. and E. Ebert, 1990: Sensitivity of the thickness of 
Arctic sea ice to the optical properties of clouds. Ann. Glaciol., 
14, 43^6. 
Curry, J.A. and E. Ebert, 1992: Annual cycle of radiative fluxes 
over Шс Arctic Ocean: Sensitivity to cloud optica] properties. J. 
Climate, 5, 1267-1280. 
Danabasoglu, G., J.C. McWiUiams and P.R. Gent, 1994: The 
role of mesoscale tracer transports in the global ocean 
circulation. Science, 264, 1123-1126. 
Deardorff, J.W., 1980: Cloud-top entrainment instability. /. 
Atmos. Sci., Ъ1, 131-141. 
Del Genio, A.D., W. Kovari Jr. and M.-S. Yao, 1994: Climatic 
implications of the seasonal variation of upper troposhere water 
vapor. Geophys. Res. Lett. 21, 2701-2704. 
Del Genio, A.D., M.-S. Yao, W. Kovari and K.K.-W. Lo, 1995: 
A prognostic cloud water parameterization for global climate 
models. J. Climate, in press. 
Dirmeyer, P.A. and J. Shukla, 1994: Albedo as a modulator of 
climate response to tropical deforestation. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 
20863-20877. 
Dolman, A.J., 1992: A note on areally-averaged evaporation and 
the value of the effective surface conductance. J. Hydrology, 
138, 583-589. 
Dolman, A.J. and D. Gregory, 1992: The parametrization of 
rainfall interception in GCMs. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 
188, 
455-467. 
Ebert, E.E.and J.A. Curry, 1992: A parameterization of ice cloud 
optical properties for climate models. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 
3831-3836. 
Eltahir, E.A.B. and R.L. Bras, 1993: A description of rainfall 
Climate 
Processes 
223 
interception over large areas. J. Climate, 6, 1002-1008. 
Entekhabi, D. and P.S. Eagleson, 1989: Land-surface hydrology 
parametrization for atmospheric general circulation models 
including subgrid-scale spatial variability. /. Climate, 2, 
816-831. 
Feely, R . A . , R . H . Gammon, B . A . Taft, P.E. PuUen, L . S . 
Waterman, T. J. Conway, J.F. Gendron and D.P. Wisegarver, 
1987: Distribution of chemical tracers in the eastern equatorial 
Pacific during and after the 1982-1983 E l Niño/Southern 
Oscillation event. J. Geophys. Res., 92, 6545-6558. 
Flato, G.M. and W.D. Hibler III, 1992: Modeling pack ice as a 
cavitating fluid. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 22, 626-651. 
Foster, J., G. Liston, R. Koster, R. Essery, H. Behr, L. DUmenil, 
D. Verseghy, S. Thompson, D. Pollard and J. Cohen, 1996: 
Snow cover and snow mass intercomparisons from general 
circulation models and remotely-sensed data sets. /. Climate, in 
press. 
Fowler, L . D . and D.A. Randall, 1996: Liquid and ice cloud 
microphysics in the C S U general circulation model. Part 2: 
Simulation of the Earth's radiation budget. J. Climate, in press. 
Fowler, L.D., D.A. Randall and S.A. Rutledge, 1996: Liquid and 
ice cloud microphysics in the CSU general circulation model. 
Part 1: Model description and simulated microphysical 
processes. /. Climate, in press. 
Fu, Q. and K . N . Liou, 1993: Parameterization of the radiative 
properties of cirrus clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 2008-2025. 
Fu, R., A . D . Del Geitio, W.B. Rossow and W.T. Liu, 1992: 
Cirrus-cloud thermostat for tropical sea surface temperatures 
tested using satellite data. Nature, 358, 394-397. 
Fu, R., A. D. Del Genio and W. B. Rossow, 1994: Influence of 
ocean 
surface 
conditions 
on 
atmospheric 
vertical 
thermodynamic structure and deep convection. J. Climate, 7, 
1092-1108. 
Fu, R., W.T. Liu and R.E. Dickinson, 1996: Response of tropical 
clouds to the interannual variation of sea surface temperature. 
J. Climate, in press. 
Garratt, J.R., 1994: Incoming shortwave fluxes at the surface - a 
comparison of G C M results with observations. /. Climate, 7, 
72-80. 
Gates, W . L . , 1992: A M I P : 
The Atmospheric 
Model 
Intercomparison Project. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 73, 1962-1970. 
Gent, P.R. and J.C. McWilliams, 1990: Isopycnal mixing in 
ocean circulation models. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 20, 150-155. 
Ghan, S.J., C . C . Chuang and J.E. Penner, 
1993: A 
parametrization of cloud droplet nucleation. Part I: Single 
aerosol type. Atmos. Res., 30, 198-221. 
Ghan, S.J., C.C. Chuang, R.C. Easter and J.E. Penner, 1995: A 
parametrization of cloud droplet nucleation. Part II: Multiple 
aerosol types. Atmos. Res., 36, 39-54. 
Ghil, M . and J. McWilliams, 1994: Workshop tackles oceanic 
thermohaline circulation. EOS, Transactions, 
American 
Geophysical Union, 75, 42, 493^98. 
Gleckler, P.J., D.A. Randall, G. Boer. R. Colman, M , Dix, V . 
Galin, M . Helfand, J. Kiehl, A. Kitoh, W. Lau, X.-Z. Liang, V. 
Lykossov, B. McAvaney, K. Miyakoda, S. Planton and W. 
Stern, 1995: Inteipretation of ocean energy transports implied 
by atmospheric general circulation models. Geophy. Res. Lett, 
22, 791-794. 
Graham, N.E., 1995: Siimilation of recent global temperature 
trends. Science, 267, 666-671. 
Graham, N.E., T.P. Barnett, R. Wilde, M . Ponater and S. 
Shubert, 1994: On the roles of tropical and midlatitude SST in 
forcing interannual to interdecadal variability in the winter 
Northern Hemisphere circulation. J. Climate, 1, 1416-1441. 
Graham, N.E., T.P. Barnett, M.A. Cane and S.E. Zebiak, 1995: 
Greenhouse warming and its possible effect on E l Niño. 
Geophys.Res. Lett., submitted. 
Greenwald, T.J., G.L. Stephens, Т.Н. Vender Haar and D.L. 
Jackson, 1993: A physical retrieval of cloud liquid water over 
the global oceans using Special Sensor Microwave/Imager 
(SSM/1) observations. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 18471-18488. 
Groetzner, A., R. Sausen and M . Claussen, 1994: The impact of 
sub-grid inhomogeneities on the performance of the 
atmospheric general circulation model E C H A M . Clim.Dyn. in 
press. 
Hansen, J., M . Sato and R. Ruedy, 1995: Long-term changes of 
the diurnal temperature cycle: Implications about mechanisms 
of global climate change. Atmos. Res., 37, 175-209. 
Hanson, H.P., 1991: Marine stratocumulus climatologies. Int. J. 
ClimatoL, II, 
Ы7-Ш. 
Harshvardhan, D.A. Randall, T.G. Corsetti and D.A. Dazlich, 
1989: Earth radiation budget and cloudiness simulations with a 
general circulation model. J. Almos. Sci., 46, 1922-1942. 
Hartmann, D.L. and M.L. Michaelson, 1993: Large-scale effects 
on the regulation of tropical sea surface temperature. J. 
Climate, 6, 2049-2062. 
Hayasaka, T., N . Kikuchi and M . Tanaka, 1995: Absorption of 
solar radiation by stratocumulus clouds: Aircraft measurements 
and theoretical calculations. J. Appl. Met., 34, 1047-1055. 
Henderson-Sellers, A., R.E. Dickinson, T.B. Durbidge, P.J. 
Kennedy, K . McGufrie and A . J . Pitman, 1993: Tropical 
deforestation: Modeling local- to regional-scale climate 
change. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 7289-7315. 
Henderson-Sellers, A . , K. McGuffie and C. Gross, 1995: 
Sensitivity of global chmate model simulations to increased 
stomatal resistance and C O ^ increases. J.Climate, 
8, 
1738-1756. 
Herman, G. and R. Goody, 1976: Formation and persistence of 
summertime arctic stratus clouds. J. Atmos. Sci., 
33, 
1537-1553. 
Heymsfield, A . J . and L . J . Donner, 1990: A scheme for 
parameterizing ice-cloud water content in general circulation 
models. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 1865-1877. 
Ingram, W.J., C.A. Wilson and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1989: Modeling 
climate change: An assessment of sea ice and surface albedo 
feedbacks. J. Geophys. Res., 94, 8609-8622. 
Institute of Hydrology, 1994: Results of Project ABRACOS, an 
18-page booklet. 
224 
Climate 
Processes 
IPCC, (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) 1990: 
CUmate Change: The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B . A . 
Callander and S.K. Vamey (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of 
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC 1993 Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B. A. Callander, E. Haites. N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Johnson, K.D., D. Entekhabi and P.S. Eagleson, 1993: The 
implementation and validation of improved land-surface 
hydrology in an atmospheric General Circulation Model. 
J.Climate, 6, 1009-1026. 
Jones, A., D.L. Roberts and A. Slingo, 1994: A chmate model 
study of indirect radiative forcing by anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols. Nature, 370, 450-453. 
Jones, H. and J. Marshall, 1993; Convection with rotation in a 
neutral ocean; a study of open-ocean deep convection. / Phys. 
Oceanogr., 23, 1009-1039. 
Kattsov, V . M . , V . P . Meleshko, A . P . Sokolov and V . A . 
Lubanskaya, 1993; Role of sea ice in maintenance of thermal 
regime and atmospheric circulation of the Northern 
Hemisphere. Meteor Gidrologia, 12, 5-24. 
Kelly, K . K . , A . F , Tuck and T. Davies, 1991; Wintertime 
asymmetry of upper tropospheric water between the Northern 
and Southern Hemispheres. Nature, 353, 244-247. 
Kiehl, J.T.. 1994: Sensitivity of a G C M climate simulation to 
differences in continental versus maritime cloud drop size. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 23107-23116. 
Killworth, P.D., 1983: Deep convection in the world ocean. Revs. 
Geophys. 21, 1-26. 
Klein, S.A. and D.L. Hartmann, 1993: The seasonal cycle of low 
stratifonn clouds. J. Climate, 6, 1587-1606. 
Knutson, T.R. and S. Manabe, 1994; impact of increased C O , on 
simulated ENSO-like phenomena. Geophys. Res. Lett, 21, 
2295-2298. 
Koberle, C. and S.G.H. Philander, 1994; On the processes that 
control seasonal variations of sea surface temperature in the 
tropical Pacific Ocean. Tellus, 46A, 481-496. 
Koster, R.D. and M.J. Suarez, 1992; Modelling the land surface 
boundary in climate models as a composite of independent 
vegetation stands. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 2697-2715. 
Koster, R.D. and M.J. Suarez, 1994; The components of a 
' S V A T ' scheme and their effects on a GCM's hydrological 
cycle. Advan. Water Res., 17, 61-78. 
Kristjánsson, I.E., 1991; Cloud parameterization at different 
horizontal resolutions. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 117, 1255-1280. 
Kumar, A . , A . Leetmaa and M . Ji, 1994: Simulation of 
atmospheric variability induced by sea surface temperatures 
and implications for global warming. Science, 266, 632-634. 
Kuo, H. and W.H. Schubert, 1988: Stability of cloud-topped 
boundary layers. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 114, 887-916. 
Kvamst0, N.G., 1991: An investigation of relations between 
stratiform fractional cloud cover and other meteorological 
parameters in numerical weather prediction models. /. 
ApplMet.,30, 200-216. 
Lacis, A.A. and M . Sato, 1993: G C M feedback assessment with a 
2-D radiative-convective-dynamic equilibrium model. 
Preprints, 4th Symposium on Global Change Studies, Ainerican 
Meteorological Society, Anaheim, C A 198-202. 
Large, W.G., J.C. McWilHams and S.C. Doney, 1995; Oceanic 
veHical mixing: A review and a model with nonlocal boundary 
layer parameterizations. Revs. Geophys., 32, 363-403. 
Lau, K . M . , C H . Sui and W.K. Tau, 1993; A prehminary study of 
the tropical water cycle and its sensitivity to surface warming. 
Bull Am. Met. Soc, 74, 1313-1321. 
Lau, K M . , C.-H. Sui, M.-D. Chou and W.K. Tao, 1994; An 
inquiry into the cinus-cloud thermostat effect for tropical sea 
surface temperature. Geophys: Res. Lett., 21, 12, 1157-1160. 
Lau, N.C. and M.J. Nath, 1994; A modeling study of the relative 
roles of tropical and extratropical SST in the variability of the 
global atmosphere-ocean system. J. Clitnate, 1, 1184-1207. 
Le Treut, H. and Z.-X. Li, 1988: Using Meteosat data to validate a 
prognostic cloud generation scheme. Atmos. Res., 21, 273-292. 
Lean, J. and P.R. Rowntree, 1993: A G C M simulation of the 
impact of Amazonian deforestation on climate using an 
improved canopy representation. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 199, 
509-530. 
Ledley, T.S., 1993; Variations in snow on sea ice; A mechanism 
for producing climate variations. /. Geophys. Res., 98, 
10401-10410. 
Ledwell, J.R., A.J. Watson and C.S. Law, 1993: Evidence for 
slow mixing across the pycnocline from an open-ocean tracer-
release experiment. Nature, 364, 701-703. 
Legg, S. and J. Marshall, 1993; A heton model of the spreading 
phase of open-ocean deep convection. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 23, 
1040-1056. 
Li, Z.-X. and H. Le Treut, 1992; Cloud-radiation feedbacks in a 
general circulation model and their dependence on cloud 
modelling assumptions. Clim. Dyn., 7, 133-139. 
Li, Z., C H . Whitiock and T.P. Chariock, 1995a; Assessment of ' 
the global monthly mean surface insolation estimated from 
satellite measurements using Global Energy Balance Archive 
data. J. Climate, 8, 315-328. 
Li, Z., H.W. Barker and L. Moreau, 1995b; The variable effect of 
clouds on atmospheric absorption of solar radiation. Nature, 
376, 486^90. 
Lilly, D.K., 1968; Models of cloud-topped mixed layers under a 
strong inversion. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 94, 292-309. 
Lin, B. and W.B. Rossow, 1994; Observations of cloud liquid 
water path over oceans: Optical and microwave remote sensing 
methods. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 20909-20927. 
Lindzen, R.S., 1990: Some coolness concerning global wanning. 
Bull Am. Met. Soc, 71, 288-299. 
Climate 
Processes 
225 
Lindzen, R.S. and S. Nigara, 1987: On the role of sea surface 
temperature gradients in forcing low-level winds and 
convergence in the tropics. / Atmos. Sci., 44, 2418-2436. 
Loth, В., H.-F. Graf and J.M. Oberhuber, 1993: Snow cover 
model for global climate simulations. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 
10451-10464. 
Lynch-Stieglitz, M . , 1995: The development and validation of a 
simple snow model for the GISS GCM. J. Climate, 7, 1842-1855. 
MacVean, M.K. and P.J. Mason, 1990: Cloud-top entrainment 
instability through small-scale mixing and its parametrization 
in numerical models. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 1012-1030. 
Mahrt, L., 1987: Grid-averaged surface fluxes. Mon. Wea. Rev., 
115, 1550-1560. 
Maier-Reimer, E., U . Mikolajewicz and K. Hasselmann, 1993: 
Mean circulation of the Hamburg L S G O G C M and its 
sensitivity to the thermohaline surface forcing. /. Phys. 
Oceanogr., 23, 731-757. 
Manabe, S. and R.T. Wetherald, 1967: Thermal equilibrium of 
the atmosphere with a given disü-ibution of relative humidity. J. 
Atmos. Sci., 24, 241-259. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1988: Two stable equilibria of a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model. /. Climate, 1, 841-866. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1994: Muhiple century response of 
a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to an increase of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. /. Climate, 7, 5-23. 
Marotzke, J., 1988: Instabilities and multiple steady states of the 
thermohaline circulation. In: Oceanic Circulation 
Models: 
Combining Data and Dynamics, 
D.L.T. Anderson and I. 
Willebrand (eds.), NATO ASI Series, Kluwer, 501-511. 
Mason, P.J., 1988: The formation of areally-averaged roughness 
lengths. Quart J. R Met. Soc, 114, 399-420. 
Mechoso, C.R., & 19 authors, 1995: The seasonal cycle over the 
tropical Pacific in coupled ocean-atmosphere general 
circulation models. Mon. Wea. Rev. 123, 2825-2838. 
MEDOC Group, 1970: Observations of formation of deep water 
in the Mediterranean Sea. Nature, 221, 1037-1040. 
Meleshko, V.P., B.E.Sneerov, A.R.Sokolov and V.M.Kattsov, 
1991: Sea ice anomaly impact on surface heat fluxes and 
atmospheric circulation as evaluated by the M G O G C M . 
Report of the Workshop on Polar Radiation Fluxes and Sea-Ice 
Modeling, 
Bremerhaven, Germany, November 1990, 
WMO/TD No. 442. 
Mikolajewicz, U . and E. Maier-Reimer, 1990: Internal secular 
variability in an ocean general circulation model. Clim. Dyn., 4, 
145-156. 
Miller, R.L. and A.D. Del Genio, 1994: Tropical cloud feedbacks 
and natural variability of climate. J. CUmate, 7. 1388-1402. 
Milly, P.C.D. and P.S. Eagleson, 1988: Effect of storm scale on 
surface runoff volume. Water Resour. Res., 24, 620-624. 
Mitchell, J.F.B. and W.J. Ingram, 1992: Carbon dioxide and 
climate: Mechanisms of changes in cloud. J. Climate, 5, 5-21. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram and C.A. Senior, 1995: 
On surface temperature, greenhouse gases and aerosols: models 
and observations. J. CUmate, 8, 2364-2386. 
Njoku, E.G. and L. Swanson, 1983: Global measurements of sea 
surface temperature, wind speed, and atmospheric water 
content from satellite microwave radiometry. Mon. Wea. Rev., 
Ill, 1977-1987. 
Nobre, C . A . , P.J. Sellers and J. Shukla, 1991: Amazon 
deforestation and regional climate change. J. Climate, 4, 
957-988. 
Ose, T., 1993: An examination of the effects of explicit cloud 
water in the U C L A G C M . J. Meteor Soc. Japan, 71, 93-109. 
Palmer, T., 1993: A nonlinear dynamical perspective on climate 
change. Weather, 48, 314-325. 
Parkinson, C. and Cavalieri, 1989: Arctic sea ice 1973-1997: 
Seasonal, regional and interannual variability. / Geophys. Res., 
94, CIO, 14499-14523. 
Pielke, R.A., G.A. Dalu, J.S. Snook, T.J. Lee and T.G.F. Kittel, 
1991: Nonlinear influence of mesoscale land use on weather 
and climate. / Climate, 4, 1053-1069. 
Pierrehumbert, R.T., 1995. Thermostats, radiator fins and the 
local runaway greenhouse. / Atmos. Sci., 52, 1784-1806. 
Pierrehumbert, R.T. and H. Yang, 1993: Global chaotic mixing 
on isentropic surfaces. J.Atmos. Sci., 50, 2462-2480. 
Pilewski, P. and F.P.J. Valero, 1995: Direct observations of 
excess solar absorption by clouds. Science, 267, 1626-1629. 
Pinker, R.T., R. Frouin and A. Li, 1995: A review of satellite 
methods to derive surface shortwave irradiance. Remote Sens. 
Env., 51, 108-124. 
Pitman, A.J., A . Henderson-Sellers and Z.-L.Yang, 1990: 
Sensitivity of regional climates to localized precipitation in 
global models. Nature, 346, 734-737. 
Pollard, D. and S.L. Thompson, 1995: The effect of doubting 
stomatal resistance in a global climate model. Global Planet. 
Change, 10, 1-4. 
Prabhakara, C , I. Wang, A.T.C. Chang and P. Gloersen, 1983: 
A statistical examination of Nimbus-7 S M M R data and remote 
sensing of sea surface temperature, liquid water content in the 
atmosphere and surface wind speed. J. Clim. Appl. Meteor., 22, 
2023-2037. 
Ramanathan, V . and W. Collins, 1991: Thermodynamic 
regulation of ocean warming by cirrus clouds deduced from 
observations of the 1987 El Niño. Nature, 351, 27-32. 
Ramanathan, V., R.D. Cess, E.F. Harrison, P. Minnis, B.R. 
Barkstrom, E. Ahmad and D. Hartmann, 1989: Cloud-radiative 
forcing and climate: Results from the Earth Radiation Budget 
Experiment. Science, 243, 57-63. 
Ramanathan, V., B. Subasilar, G.J. Zhang, W. Conant, R.D. 
Cess, J.T. Kiehl, H, Grassl and L. Shi, 1995: Warm pool heat 
budget and shortwave cloud forcing: A missing physics? 
Science, 267, 499-502. 
Randall, D.A., 1980: Conditional instability of the first kind, 
upside-down. J. Atmos. Sci., 37, 125-130. 
Raschke, E., J. Schmetz, J. Heitzenberg, R. Kandel and R. 
Saunders, 1990: The International Cirrus Experiment (ICE). A 
joint European effort. ESA Journal, 14, 193-199. 
Raupach, M . and Finnigan, 1995: Scale issues in boundary-layer 
226 
Climate 
Processes 
meteorology: Surface energy balances in heterogeneous terrain. 
Hydrol. Processes, in press. 
Riser, S.C, 1995: Geothermal heating and the large scale ocean 
circulation. Submitted to Rev. Geophys. 
Rennó, N.O., K.A. Emmanuel and P.H. Stone, 1994: Radiative-
convective model with an explicit hydrologie cycle 1. 
Formulation and sensitivity to model parameters. J. Geophys. 
Re.s.,99, 14429-14441. 
Robertson, A.W., C.-CMa, C.R. IVlechoso and M . Ghil, 1995: 
Simulation of the tropical-Pacific climate with a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere general circulation model. Part I: The 
seasonal cycle. J. Climate, 8, 1178-1198. 
Robinson, D.A. and G. Kukla, 1985: Maximum surface albedo of 
seasonally snow-covered lands in the Northern Hemisphere. J. 
Climate, 24,402-^11. 
Roeckner, E., U . Schlese, J. Biercamp and P. Loewe, 1987: 
Cloud optical depth feedbacks and climate modelling. Nature, 
329, 138-140. 
Roeckner, E., M . Rieland and E. Keup, 1990: Modelling of 
clouds and radiation in the E C H A M model. Proceedings of 
ECMWF/WCRP 
Workshop on Clouds, Radiation, and the 
Hydrologie Cycle, ECMWE, Reading, UK, pp. 199-222. 
Ryan, B.F., 1996: On global variations of precipitadng layer 
clouds. Bull. Amer. Met. Soc, in press. 
Schmid, H.P. and B. Bünzli, 1995: The influence of surface 
texture on the effective roughness length. Quart J. R. Met. Soc. 
121, 1-22. 
Schmitt, R.W., 1994: The ocean freshwater cycle. JSC Ocean 
Observing System Development Panel Background 
Report 
Number 4, Texas A & M University, College Station, 40pp. 
Sellers, P.J., E.G. Hall, G.Asrar, D.E. Strebel and R.E. Murphy, 
1992: An overview of the First International Satellite Land 
Surface Climatology Project (ISLSCP) Field Experiment 
(FIFE). /. Geophys. Res., 97, 18345-18371. 
Semtner, A.J. Jr. and R.M. Chervin, 1988: A simulation of the 
global ocean circulation with resolved eddies. /. Phys. 
Oceanogr., 6, 379-389. 
Semtner, A . J . Jr. and R . M . Chervin, 1992: Ocean general 
circulation from a global eddy-resolving simulation. J. 
Geophys. Res., 97, 5493-5550. 
Senior, C A . and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1993: Carbon dioxide and 
climate: The impact of cloud parametrization. /. Climate, 6, 
393 -418. 
Senior, C A . and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1995; Cloud feedbacks in the 
U K M O unified model. In; Climate Sensitivity to Radiative 
Perturbations, Le Treut (ed.) NATO I 34, Springer-Verlag. 
Seth, A., F. Giorgi and R.E. Dickinson, 1994; Simulating fluxes 
from heterogeneous land surfaces; ExpUcit subgrid method 
employing the biosphere-atmosphere transfer scheme (BATS). 
/. Geophys. Res., 99, D9, 18651-18667. 
Shao, Q. and D.A. Randall, 1996: Closed mesoscale cellular 
convection driven by cloud-top radiaüve cooling. J. Atmos. Sci. 
(In press) 
Shao, Y . , R.D. Anne, A . Henderson-Sellers, P. Irannejad, P. 
Thornton, X. Liang, T.-H. Chen, С Ciret, С Desborough, O. 
Balachova, A. Haxeltine and A. Ducharne, 1995: Sod Moisture 
Simulation. 
A report of the R I C E and PILPS workshop. 
Climatic Impacts Centre, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia, November 1994. 
Shuttleworth, W.J., 1988; Evaporation from Amazonian rain 
forest. Proc Roy. Soc London, B233, 321-346. 
Siems, S.T., C.S. Bretherton, M . B . Baker. S. Shy and R.T. 
Breidenthal, 1990; Buoyancy reversal and cloudtop 
entrainment instability. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 116, 705-739. 
Slingo, A., 1990; Sensitivity of the Earth's radiadon budget to 
changes in low clouds. Nature, 343, 49-51. 
Slingo, A . and J.M. Slingo, 1988; The response of a general 
circulation model to cloud longwave radiative forcing. I; 
Introduction and initial experiments. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 
114, 1027 - 1062. 
Smith, I.N., 1994; A G C M simulation of global climate trends; 
1950-1988. J. Climate, 7, 732-744. 
Smith, R.N.B., 1990; A scheme for predicting layer clouds and 
their water content in a general circulation model. Quart. J. R. 
Met. Soc, 116, 435-1-60. 
Soden, B.J. and F.P. Bretherton, 1994; Evaluation of water 
vapour distribution in general circulation models using satellite 
observations. / Geophys. Res., 99, 1187-1210. 
Soden, B.J. and L.J. Donner, 1994; Evaluation of a G C M cinus 
parameterization using satellite observations. J. Geophys. Res., 
99, 14401-14413. 
Soden, B.J. and R. Fu, 1995; A satellite analysis of deep 
convection, upper-tropospheric humidity, and the greenhouse 
effect. J Climate, 8, 2333-2351. 
Somerville, R.C.J, and L . A . Remer, 1984; Cloud optical 
thickness feedbacks in the COj climate problem. J. Geophys. 
Res., 89, 9668-9672. 
Stephens, G.L., 1995: How much solar radiation do clouds 
absorb? Science, in press. 
Stephens, G.L. and S.-C. Tsay, 1990: On the cloud absorption 
anomaly. Quart J. R. Met. Soc 116, 671-704. 
Sterl, A. and A. Kattenberg, 1994; Embedding a ntixed layer 
model into an ocean general circulation model of the AUantic: 
The importance of surface mixing for heat flux and 
temperature. / Geophys. Res., 99, 14139-14157. 
Stommel, H., 1961; Thermohaline convection with two stable 
regimes of flow. Tellus, 13, 224-230. 
Sud, Y . C , G.K. Walker, J.-H. Kim, G.E. Liston, P.J. Sellers and 
W.K.-M. Lau, 1995: A simulation study fo the importance of 
surface roughness in tropical deforestation. Special Volume on 
TROPMET-94, Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune, 
India, in press. 
Sun, D.-Z. and I. Held, 1995: A comparison of modeled and 
observed relationships between interannual variations of water 
vapor and temperature. J. Climate, in press. 
Sundqvist, H . , 1978; A parametrization scheme for non-
convective condensation including prediction of cloud water 
content. Quart. J R. Met. Soc, 104, 677-690. 
Climate Processes 
227 
Sundqvist, H . , E. Berge and J.E. Kristjánsson, 
1989: 
Condensation and cloud parameterization studies with a 
mesoscale numerical weather prediction model. Mon. Wea. 
Rev., 117, 1641-1657. 
Taylor, K.E. and S.J. Ghan, 1992: An analysis of cloud liquid 
water feedback and global climate sensitivity in a general 
circulation model. J. Climate, 5, 907-919. 
Taylor, Р.А., 1987: Comments and further analysis on effective 
roughness lengths for use in numerical three-dimensional 
models. Boundary-Layer Meteor., 39, 403-418. 
Thomas, G. and A. Henderson-Sellers, 1991: An evaluation of 
proposed representations of subgrid hydrologie processes in 
climate models. J. Climate, 4, 898-910. 
Tiedtke, M . , 1993: Representation of clouds in large-scale 
models. Mon. Wea. Rev., 121, 3040-3061. 
Trenberth, K.E. and A. Solomon, 1994: The global heat balance: 
heat transports in the atmosphere and ocean. Clim. Dyn., 10, 
107-134, 
Tselioudis, G., W.B. Rossow and D. Rind, 1992: Global patterns 
of cloud optical thickness variation with temperature. J. 
Climate, 5, 1484-1495. 
Twomey, S.A., M . Piepgrass and Т.Е. Wolfe, 1984: A n 
assessment of the impact of pollution on global cloud albedo. 
Tellus, 36B. 356-366. 
Vogelmann, A . M . and T.P. Ackermann, 1996: Relating cirrus 
cloud properties to observed fluxes - a critical assessment. J. 
Atmos. Sci., in press. 
Wallace, J.M., 1992: Effect of deep convection on the regulation 
of tropical sea surface temperature. Nature, 357. 230-231, 
Wallace, J.M., 1995: Natural and forced variability in the climate 
record. In The Natural Variability of the Climate System on 
Decade-to-Centuty Time Scales, D.G. Martinson, K. Biyan, M . 
Ghil, M.M. Hall, T.R. Karl, E.S. Sarachik, S. Sorooshian and L.D. 
Talley (eds.). National Academy Press, Washington DC, in press. 
Ward, D.M., 1995: Comparison of the surface solar radiation 
budget derived from satellite data with that simulated by the 
N C A R CCM2. /. Climate, 8, 2824-2842. 
Weaver, A.J. and E.S. Sarachik, 1991: Evidence for decadal 
variability in an ocean general circulation model: An advective 
vaechanvirci. Atmosphere-Ocean, 29, 197-231. 
Weaver, A.J., E.S. Sarachik and J. Marotzke, 1991: Freshwater 
flux forcing of decadal/interdecadal oceanic variability. Nature, 
353, 836-838. 
Weaver, A.J., J. Marotzke, P.E. Cummins and E.S. Sarachik, 
1993: Stability and variability of the thermohaline circulation. 
J. Phys. Oceanogr., 23, 39-60. 
Wetherald, R.T. and S. Manabe, 1988. Cloud feedback processes 
in a general circulation model. J. Atmos. Sci., 45, 1397-1415. 
Whitlock, C H . , T.P. Charlock, W.F. Staylor, R.T. Pinker, I. 
Laszlo, A . Ohmura, H . Gilgen, T. Konzelmann, R . C . 
DiPasquale, C D . Moats, S.R. LeCroy and N.A. Ritchey, 1995: 
First global WCRP shortwave surface radiation budget data set. 
Bull. Am. Met Soc, 76, 905-922. 
Winton. M . , 1993: Deep decouphng oscillations of the oceanic 
thermohaline circulation. In: Ice in the Climate System, W.R. 
Peltier (ed.), NATO ASI Series, I 12, Springer-Verlag. 
Winton, M . and E.S. Sarachik, 1993: Thermohaline oscillations 
of an oceanic general circulation model induced by strong 
steady salinity forcing. /. Phys. Oceanogr., 23, 1389-1410. 
Wood, E.F., D.P. Lettenmaier and V.G. Zartarian, 1992: A land-
surface hydrology parametrization with subgrid variability for 
general circulation models. /. Geophys. Res., 97, 2717-2728. 
Wood, N. and P.J. Mason, 1991: The influence of static stability 
on the effective roughness lengths for momentum and heat 
transfer. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 117, 1025-1056. 
Xue, Y . and J. Shukla, 1993: The influence of land-surface 
properties on Sahel climate. Part I: Desertification. J. Climate, 
6, 2232-2245. 
Yang, Z.-L., R.E. Dickinson, A . Robock and K . Y . Vinnikov, 
1996: On validation of the snow sub-model of the Biosphere-
Atmosphere Transfer Scheme with Russian snow cover and 
meteorological observational data. J. Climate, In press. 
Yin, F.L. and E.S. Sarachik, 1994: A new convective scheme for 
ocean general circulation models. /. Phys. Oceanogr., 
24, 
1425-1430. 
Yulaeva, E. and J.M. Wallace, 1994: The signature of ENSO in 
global temperature and precipitation fields derived from the 
Microwave Sounding Unit. /. Climate, 1, 1719-1736. 
Zeng, X . and R.A. Pielke. 1995: Landscape-induced atmospheric 
flow and its parameterization in large-scale numerical models. 
J. Climate, 8, 1156-1177. 
Zhang, M . H . , J.J. Hack, J.T. Kiehl and R.D. Cess, 1994: 
Diagnostic study of climate feedback processes in atmospheric 
general circulation models. /. Geophys. Res.. 99, 5525-5537. 
5 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
W.L. GATES, A. HENDERSON-SELLERS, G.J. BOER, 
C.K. FOLLAND, A. KITOH, B.J. McAVANEY, E SEMAZZI, 
N. SMITH, A.J. WEAVER and Q.-C. ZENG 
Contributors: 
J.S. Boyle, R.D. Cess, Т.Н. Chen, J Christy, C.C. Covey, T.J Crowley, U. Cubasch, 
J. Davies, M. Fiorino, G. Flato, С. Fredericksen, F Giorgi, P.J. Gleckler, J. Hack, 
J. Hansen, G. Hegerl, R.X. Huang, P Irannejad, TC. Johns, J Kiehl, H. Koide, 
R.D. Koster, J. Kutzbach, S.J Lambert, M. Latif, N.-C. Lau, P Lemke, R.E. Livezey, 
PK. Love, N. McFarlane, K. McGujfie, G.A. Meehl, L Mokhov, B.L. Otto-Bliesner, 
T.N. Palmer, TJ. Phillips, A.J. Pitman, J. Polcher, G.L. Potter, S.B. Power, D. Randall, 
P Rasch, A. Robock, B.D. Santer, E. Sarachik, N. Sato, A.J. Semtner, J. Slingo, 
L Smith, R. Stoujfer, K.R. Sperber, J. Syktus, M. Sugi, K.E. Taylor, S.F.B. Tett, 
S. Tibaldi, W.-C. Wang, W.M. Washington, B.C. Weare, D.L. Williamson, 
T. Yamagata, Z.-L. Yang, M.H. Zhang, R.H. Zhang, F.W. Zwiers 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
233 
5.1 What is Model Evaluation and Why is it Important? 235 
5.2 How Well Do Coupled Models Reproduce Current 
Climate? 
235 
5.2.1 Introduction 
235 
5.2.2 Spin-up and Flux Adjustment 
235 
5.2.3 Simulation of Mean Seasonal Climate of the 
Coupled System 
238 
5.2.3.1 Surface air temperature 
238 
5.2.3.2 Precipitation rate 
240 
5.2.3.3 Mean sea level pressure 
240 
5.2.3.4 Snow and sea ice cover 
240 
5.2.3.5 Ocean surface heat flux and 
thermohaline circulation 
244 
5.2.4 Simulation of the Variability of the Coupled 
System 
244 
5.2.4.1 Monthly and seasonal variability 
244 
5.2.4.2 Interannual and ENSO time-scale 
variability 
244 
5.2.4.3 Decadal and longer-term vaiiability 
248 
5.2.5 Simulation of Regional Climate 
248 
5.2.6 Summary 
• 
249 
5.3 How Well Do the Component Atmosphere, 
Land-surface, Ocean and Sea Ice Models 
Reproduce Current Climate? 
249 
5.3.1 Atmospheric General Circulation Models 
249 
5.3.1.1 Simulation of mean seasonal climate 
249 
5.3.1.1.1 Introduction 
249 
5.3.1.1.2 Surface air temperature over land, 
precipitation and mean sea level 
pressure 
249 
5.3.1.1.3 Tropospheric temperature and 
circulation 
250 
5.3.1.1.4 Cloudiness 
250 
5.3.1.1.5 Outgoing long-wave radiation and 
cloud radiative forcing 
251 
5.3.1.1.6 Multivariate statistics 
252 
5.3.1.1.7 Summary 
252 
5.3.1.2 Simulation of variability and trends 
253 
5.3.1.2.1 Diurnal and seasonal ranges 
253 
5.3.1.2.2 Synoptic variability 
253 
5.3.1.2.3 Interannual variability 
253 
5.3.1.2.4 Recent trends 
257 
5.3.2 Simulation of Land-surface Processes 
258 
5.3.2.1 Why consider the land surface? 
258 
5.3.2.2 Land-surface 
fluxes 
259 
5.3.2.3 Soil moisture simulation 
260 
5.3.2.4 Summary 
261 
5.3.3 Oceanic General Circulation Models 
261 
5.3.3.1 Introduction 
261 
5.3.3.2 Evaluation against present ocean chmate 
261 
5.3.3.2.1 Coarse resolution models 
261 
5.3.3.2.2 Eddy-resolving models 
263 
5.3.3.3 Evaluation of temporal variability 
264 
5.3.3.3.1 Seasonal to interannual 
variability 
266 
5.3.3.3.2 Decadal and longer variability 
266 
5.3.3.4 Issues in ocean model evaluation 
266 
5.3.3.4.1 Evaluating model processes 
266 
5.3.3.4.2 Boundary forcing 
266 
5.3.3.4.3 Observations 
267 
5.3.3.5 Summary 
267 
5.3.4 Sea Ice Models 
267 
5.4 How Well Do Models Perform Under Other 
Conditions? 
269 
5.4.1 Weather Analysis and Prediction 
269 
5.4.2 Palaeoclimate Simulation 
270 
5.5 How Well Do We Understand Model Sensitivity? 
271 
5.5.1 Sensitivity to Representation of Water Vapour 
271 
5.5.2 Sensitivity to Resolution 
271 
5.5.3 Sensitivity to Convection and Clouds 
273 
5.5.4 Sensitivity to Land-surface Processes 
273 
5.5.5 Sensitivity to Initial Conditions and Surface 
Boundary Conditions 
273 
5.5.6 Summary 
274 
5.6 How Can Our Confidence in Models be Increased? 
274 
Supplementary Table: Institutions Involved in the 
Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project 
275 
References 
276 
SUMMARY 
Coupled climate models 
• 
The most powerful tools available with which to 
assess future climate are coupled climate models, 
which include three-dimensional representations of 
the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and land surface. 
Coupled climate modelling has developed rapidly 
since 1990, and current models are now able to 
simulate many aspects of the observed climate with a 
useful level of skill. Coupled model simulations are 
most accurate at large space scales (e.g., hemispheric 
or continental); at regional scales skill is lower. The 
extent to which differences among coupled models 
may result in differences in their simulations of 
climate change is, however, not yet fully understood. 
More detailed and accurate simulations are expected 
as models are further developed and improved. 
• 
The evaluation of coupled climate models is a 
challenging task for which a suitable formalism is 
only now being developed. Considerable progress 
has been made in evaluating the performance of the 
component atmospheric, oceanic, land-surface and 
sea ice models and their interactions. 
• 
Flux adjustment and spin-up methodologies commonly 
used in coupled models affect the simulation of surface 
temperature, sea ice cover and the strength of the 
thermohaline circulation. The need for flux adjustment 
is expected to diminish as the component atmospheric, 
oceanic, land-surface and sea ice models are improved. 
Component models of the atmosphere, land surface, 
ocean and sea ice 
• 
The ability of current atmospheric models to simulate 
the observed climate varies with scale and variable, 
with the radiative effects of clouds remaining an area 
of difficulty. Given the correct sea surface 
temperature, most models simulate the observed 
large-scale climate with skill, and give a useful 
indication of some of the observed regional 
interannual climate variations or trends. 
• 
Land-surface processes can be modelled more 
realistically than in 1990, although there continues to 
be wide disparity among current schemes. The 
evaluation of surface parametrizations such as soil 
moisture continues to be hindered by the lack of 
observations. 
• 
Ocean and sea ice models portray the observed large-
scale distribution of temperature, salinity and sea ice 
more accurately than in 1990. High resolution ocean 
models simulate mesoscale ocean eddies with 
striking realism, but their computational cost is 
presently prohibitive for coupled climate simulations. 
The performance of climate models under other conditions 
• 
Weather forecasting and palaeoclimate simulation 
continue to provide important tests of the realism of 
components of climate models under different initial 
and external conditions. Atmospheric forecast 
models show increased skill since 1990 due to 
improvements in parametrization, resolution and data 
assimilation schemes. 
How can confidence in climate models be increased? 
• 
The major areas of uncertainty in climate models 
concern clouds and their radiative effects, the 
hydrological balance over land surfaces and the heat 
flux at the ocean surface. 
• 
The comprehensive diagnosis and evaluation of both 
component and coupled models are essential parts of 
model development, 
although the 
lack of 
observations and data sets is a limiting factor. 
• 
In addition to data rescue and re-analysis efforts, a 
comprehensive global climate observing system is 
urgentiy needed. 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
235 
5.1 What is Model Evaluation and Why is it 
Important? 
In the evaluation of coupled models there is no single 
"figure of merit" that adequately represents the validity of a 
model's simulations or predictions, and a variety of 
performance measures are required. The evaluations 
reported in this chapter are of three types: evaluation of 
selected aspects of coupled models (Section 5.2), evaluation 
of the atmospheric, oceanic, land-surface and sea ice model 
components (Sections 5.3 and 5.4), and evaluation of the 
sensitivity of the links between these coinponents (Section 
5.5). There has been significant progress in all three types 
of model evaluation since IPCC (1990). 
The concept of evaluation used here corresponds to the 
ideas of Oreskes et al. (1994) in that we are trying to 
demonstrate the degree of correspondence between models 
and the real world they seek to represent. We will therefore 
avoid use of the word "validation", although this term is 
commonly used in the sense of evaluation in the climate 
modelling community. The intent of this chapter is to 
summarise the performance of models as used for the 
simulation of the current observed climate, and to point out 
deficiencies and uncertainties with a view to further model 
improvement. The models' behaviour near the surface is 
stressed since surface and neai'-surface variables arc those 
of greatest human interest and socio-economic importance. 
The use of coupled climate models for the simulation of 
climate change is considered in Chapter 6. 
In recent years the systematic evaluation and 
intercomparison of climate models and their components has 
been a useful and popular mechanism for identifying 
common model problems. For example, Boer et al. (1992) 
identified a cold polar upper tropospheric bias of the then 
current atmospheric general circulation models, and 
Stockdale et al. (1993) showed that the then current ocean 
general circulation models produced sea suiface temperatures 
(SSTs) that are too warm in the western tropical Pacific and 
too cold along the equator in the east-central Pacific. Neelin 
et al. (1992) found a wide variation in the ability of the then 
current coupled models to simulate interannual variability in 
the upper layers of the tropical Pacific, while Gates et al. 
(1993) reported significant differences in the extended 
control runs of four early coupled models. The evaluation of 
land-surface schemes in progress under the auspices of the 
Project for Intercomparison of Land surface Parametrization 
Schemes (PILPS) (Henderson-Sellers et a/., 1995) has 
identified important differences in energy and water 
partitioning at the surface. Comprehensive analysis and 
intercomparison of virtually all current global atmospheric 
models is being undertaken by the international Atmospheric 
Model Intercomparison Project (AMIP) (Gates, 1992). A 
comprehensive and systematic evaluation of coupled models 
based on global observational data is a goal yet to be 
achieved. 
5.2 How Well Do Coupled Models Reproduce Current 
Climate? 
5.2.1 Introduction 
As discussed in Chapter 1, the coupled climate system 
comprises the atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and land 
surface, and the models we consider here are "full" models 
in that they include the three-dimensional representation 
and interaction of these components on a global time-
dependent basis. Such coupled models, in which other 
aspects of the climate system such as the chemical 
composition of the atmosphere and the surface vegetation 
are specified, provide the current scientific basis for 
understanding and simulating the climate system and its 
future changes. We note that none of the control 
simulations considered in this section include the direct 
effects of aerosols (see Chapter 6). 
Simulations of the coupled system require integrations 
over 100-1000 simulated years (Cubasch et al, 1992; 
Stouffer et al, 1994), and computational cost restricts the 
model complexity and resolution that is currently possible. 
Table 5.1 lists the coupled model integrations that have 
been completed or are currentiy underway, together with 
some of their characteristics. The "model number" links 
our discussion of the simulation of current climate with 
that of climate change in Chapter 6. The first published 
intercomparison of the simulation of the current climate 
with coupled models was that of Gates et al (1993), in 
which a number of basic parameters were examined in four 
models. Only one of these (MPI-LSG) appears in Table 5.1 
and in Chapter 6. The remaining entries in the table 
represent new coupled models or new versions of previous 
models. Information from eleven of these coupled model 
integrations (BMRC, CCC, COLA, CSIRO, GFDL, GISSl, 
MPI-LSG, MPI-OPYC, M R I , N C A R and U K M O ) ' is 
given its first comparative analysis in this chapter. 
5.2.2 Spin-up and Flux Adjustment 
Time-scales for the atmosphere are on the order of weeks, 
those for the land surface and upper ocean extend to 
seasons, while those for the deep ocean are hundreds to 
' See the Supplementary Table at the end of this chapter for 
definitions of these acronyms. 
I 
-S 
"3 
î 
S 
2 
I 
I 
и I 
о á 
и Ô 
< ей 
в s 
и 
I 
о. § 
и 
ш ш w 
ш 
w 
< 
о о а. 
2; 
ш 
w 
а 
S 
ш 
M 
_ 
о 
й 
и 
i 
5 
w 
m r a ï a u u p a u u f f l f f l c Q U 
ю р а щ и 
i 5 
( N 
ON 
to 
°0O 
X X 
S S ¿ 
^ 
^ 
^ 
<N cn 
X 
X 
X ° 
— 
го 
c-, 
>o 
о 
о 
3 3 
( N 
u n 
l O 
( N 
X 
X X 
bJ J 
J 
— 
( N 
M 
( N 
CO ^a-
ON 
ON 
— 
J 
J 
J 
ON 
ON fN 
J 
J 
_1 
u-, in in 
— 
ON 
to 
°oo 
X X 
to 
°oo 
I T ) 
( N 
Ы 
ON 
O v 
О 
IN m 
^ 
fN 
« 
H 
H 
O! 
P¿ СЙ 
3 
< 
( Л 
< 
X 
X X 
H 
H 
с 
I Í 6 
P. 
•a -a Z 
T 3 
W 
î l 
с 
с 
^ 
с 
с 
гс 
D 
^ 
9 
H 
H 
H 
c4 
I 
es 
и 
со 
8 
И 
CJ 
о 
о 
о 
Q 
Q 
и 
о 
( N 
J 
0 0 
X X 
— 
— 
c j 
3 
ON 
СЮ 
J 
о 
ON 
m J 
1л 
X 
s < < ^ 
>5 s D p 
о 
" 
< 
J 
^ I z в 
о 
g, 
I 
1 
с о 
с 
8 
о, 
3 о 
si 
Й 
3 
t 
и 
1 
1 
5 | 
R 
(U -S 
С 
« 
NO 
I 
I 
3 
ъ 
•a с 
o< '-S 
^ 
то 
О 
u 
E 
S 
ce 
с 
•a -S 
1 ^ 
E о 
4J 
О 
I 
S; 
3 
с 
U 
25 
с 
•о 
ë 
§ I 
•a с 
я 
с 
•л 
3 
ce 
5 
u 
3 XI 
3 о 
ü 
« 
•s 
о 
Ё 
3 
3 
S" 
w 
1 
U 
- 
S 
2 
о 
^ 
_g 
^ 
0 
Ë 
II 
1 I 
.s 
E 
§ 
a. 
ce 
ë о о 6 с 
3 
с 
3 
1 á 
i l 
^ 
2 
H 
ï : 
03 
J3 
л 
te 
E 
ce 
cj 
о 
Ой .s 
тЗ 
с л 
С 
се 
о 
о ft 
_3 
"о 
X 
tù 
- С 
СЛ 
2 -а 1 I 
•а 
I 
s' 
и 
< 
и w 
< 
1) 
о 
ей 
ш 
-а 
с 
се 
M 
C N J 
0 0 
G 
•a 
3 
'o 
ce 
Й -S 
S 
^ 
•S 
X 
o, 
te 
S 
ce 
% 
X) 
о 
J2 
•S S 
.2 
с 
u о 
a 
•s 
<u 
•s 
с 
I 
Ë 
С 
О 
Vi 
ей 
s 
a. 
О 
-о 
J 
T3 
g 
ï 
Ë 
1 ^ 
1 :1 
ta a 
О 
2 
î 
I -
g. Й 
о 
о 
СЛ 
NO 
1/^ 
X 
СЛ 
ce 
X 
X 
X 
t N 
8 
С 
7. 
—• 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
237 
thousands of years. A coupled model integration could start 
from the observed three-dimensional distribution of 
atmosphere-ocean-land-surface variables, but this approach 
is not currently possible due to data limitations. A n 
alternative is to integrate the coupled model from arbitrary 
initial conditions to a climatic (statistical) equilibrium 
under seasonally-varying forcing. Computational costs and 
long oceanic time-scales usually preclude this, and the 
typical experimental strategy is to "spin-up" separately the 
component atmosphere and ocean models before coupling. 
Such "initialisation" of the coupled system, however, can 
have a long-term effect on the simulated climate. 
An atmospheric model requires the sea surface 
temperature (SST) as a lower boundary condition, while an 
ocean model requires the surface fluxes of energy, fresh 
water and momentum (or wind stress) as upper boundary 
conditions. After the ocean and atmosphere models are 
separately "spun up" with boundary conditions representing 
present-day conditions and are joined (possibly using flux 
adjustment), the coupled model may be integrated for a 
further spin-up or adjustment period. The state of the 
coupled system after such adjustment is then used to initiate 
both the control runs examined here and the climate change 
experiments examined in Chapter 6. 
Ocean models present special spin-up problems since, when 
forced with specified fluxes, they typically arrive at an 
unreaUstic state because atmosphere-ocean feedbacks are absent 
in this case. Feedback is usually introduced by adding a 
"relaxation" to observationally based reference upper ocean 
temperature and salinity fields. Three approaches are used 
among the coupled models in Table 5.1. They are: (1) integrate 
the ocean model for the several thousand years required for 
Flux Adjustment: - A Modelling Dilemma 
The atmosphere and ocean interact via fluxes of heat, momentum and fresh water. Local values of the heat tlux are of 
order hundreds of Wm " and to first order the ocean is warmed in summer and cooled in winter, with the fluxes largely 
cancelling on the annual average. The relatively small residual heat flux, together with the fresh water flux, control the 
ocean's thermohaline circulation and the associated poleward ocean transports of heat and salt. 
The coupling of ocean and atmosphere models can highlight discrepancies in the surface fluxes that may lead to a 
drift away from the observed climate. A systematic error of ±5 Wm~^ in heat flux, which is smaller than the local 
observational error, could lead to a relatively large error in the annual average poleward oceanic heat transport. 
Modellers were made especially aware of this from the study by Gl.eckler et al. (1994) which showed that the surface 
fluxes in many uncoupled atmospheric models would imply a northward oceanic heat transport in the Southern 
Hemisphere in contrast with observational estimates there. This is a result of errors in the cloud radiative forcing in the 
models which allows excessive solar radiation to reach the surface. 
Climate drift may be ameliorated by flux adjustment whereby the heat and fresh water fluxes (and possibly the 
surface stresses) are modified before being imposed on the ocean by the addition of a "correction" or "adjustment." 
The term "flux adjustmenf ' is not meant to imply a knowledge of the "right" answer for the fluxes, since they are only 
imprecisely known. The flux adjustment terms are calculated from the difference between the modelled surface fluxes 
and those required to keep the model close to current climate. After running the model for a period suitable for the 
calculation of average flux adjustments, these terms are applied throughout the control and anomaly experiments. The 
alternative approach of not making any flux adjustments and accepting the resultant climate drift has been chosen by 
some modellers. 
Kerr (1994) has highlighted this dilemma between the pragmatic need to conduct long runs with imperfect coupled 
models and the continuing desire to develop the best possible models on purely physical grounds. Some modellers 
have drawn an analogy with the early development of numerical weather prediction when ad hoc corrections were 
used to improve forecasts. Later improvements in model formulation and initialisation techniques made such 
con-ections unnecessary. 
This conflict between the use of a fully physically based model and the use of a non-physical flux adjustment is 
reduced if the response of the model to a perturbation is not seriously altered. The main purpose of the tlux adjustment 
is to ensure that any perturbation, such as that due to increased CO2, is applied about a realistic reference climate so 
that distortion of the major climate feedback processes is minimised (see Section 6.2.6). The need for flux adjustment 
in coupled climate models will decrease as models are further improved. 
238 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
equilibrium under surface forcing, possibly using "acceleration" 
techniques (e.g., MPI, CCC, GTOL, BMRC, CSIRO, GISS2, 
MRI); (2) integi'ate the coupled model for a shorter period until 
the upper ocean is in quasi-equilibrium (e.g., UICMO); or (3) 
initialise the ocean model with the aid of three-dimensional 
ocean data (e.g., GISS I). In the absence of a climate 
equilibrium, an adjustment or drift of the simulated climate wiU 
almost always occur. The magnitude of this drift is generally 
least for the first spin-up approach and greatest for the last. 
Inconsistencies between the surface fluxes developed in 
atmosphere and ocean models during spin-up, as a result of 
imperfections in either (or both) components, typically result 
in a drift away from a realistic current climate when the 
models are coupled. This is often ameliorated by flux 
adjustment (see Box on flux adjustment) (Manabe and 
Stouffer, 1988; Sausen et al, 1988). Here, for example, the 
surface heat flux is modified for the ocean model by the 
addition of a "flux adjustment" that depends on the mean 
fluxes typically calculated by the separate ocean and 
atmospheric models in the spin-up phase. A similar 
adjustment may be made for the fresh water flux and surface 
wind stress. It is also possible to adjust the surface temperature 
of the ocean as seen by the atmospheric GCM, although this is 
less common. The types of flux adjustments used in current 
coupled model simulations are indicated in Table 5.1. 
Flux adjustment is strictly justified only when the 
corrections are relatively small, and in fact the flux 
adjustments in some coupled models are comparatively large 
(Figure 5.5). The alternative is to avoid flux adjustment and to 
accept the resulting climate drift, a choice that is made in 
several of the models usted in Table 5.1. However, confidence 
in a coupled model's simulation of transient cUmate change is 
not improved if the climate drift is large and/or if the 
feedbacks are seriously distorted by flux adjustment. 
5.2.3 Simulation of Mean Seasonal Climate of the 
Coupled System 
Here we intercompare and evaluate the control runs for 
eleven of the coupled models of Table 5.1, some of which 
are used for the transient climate change simulations 
discussed in Chapter 6. We concentrate mainly on surface 
parameters that are particularly important for climate 
change and which reflect the "coupled" nature of the 
simulation. We consider December to February (DJF) and 
June to August (JJA) results in comparison with 
climatological observations in order to demonstrate the 
models' ability to simulate the change of the seasons. For 
each season we show both the average and the standard 
deviation of the models' simulations, the latter providing a 
measure of the models' scatter or disagreement. 
5.2.3.1 Surface air temperature 
Figures 5.1a and d give the DJF and JJA distributions of 
the average of the coupled models' simulated surface air 
temperature. Overall, the models successfully simulate the 
large-scale seasonal distribution of this important variable, 
so much so that the observed fields are not presented since 
they are very similar to the averaged model results. 
Figures 5.1b and e show the differences between the 
model average and the "observed" surface air temperature. 
The differences are largest over the land, especially over 
mountains, reflecting uncertainties in both the observed 
and modelled values. (It should be recalled that these 
simulations do not include the direct effects of aerosols 
which could change the differences in some areas.) By 
contrast, differences over the ocean are rather small, with 
largest differences found in the Southern Ocean. This is 
particularly evident in the zonally averaged differences 
shown in Figures 5.1 g and h, which indicates that some 
models have large climate drifts in this region. 
The bottom panels. Figures 5.1c and f, show the 
disagreement or scatter among the models in terms of the 
standard deviation of the simulated values. Once again the 
largest values are over land and over the high latitude 
oceans. Table 5.2 shows that, on the global average the 
Table 5.2: Coupled model simulations of global average 
temperature and precipitation. 
Surface air temperature 
Precipitation 
(°C) 
(mm/day) 
DJF 
JJA 
DJF 
JJA 
B M R C * 
12.7 
16.7 
2.79 
2.92 
CCC 
12.0 
15.7 
2.72 
2.86 
C O L A * 
12.6 
15.5 
2.64 
2.67 
CSIRO 
12.1 
15.3 
2.73 
2.82 
GFDL 
9.6 
14.0 
2.39 
2.50 
GISS (1)* 
13.0 
15.6 
3.14 
3.13 
MPI (LSG) 
11.0 
15.2 
MPI (OPYC) 
11.2 
14.8 
2.64 
2.73 
MRI 
13.4 
17.4 
2.89 
3.03 
NCAR* 
15.5 
19.6 
3.78 
3.74 
U K M O 
12.0 
15.0 
3.02 
3.09 
Observed 
12.4 
15.9 
2.74 
2.90 
* Models without flux adjustment. 
Here the observed surface air temperature is from Jenne (1975) 
and the observed precipitation from Jaeger (1976). 
(a) 
Model average surface air temperature 
DJF 
(d) 
Model average surface air temperature 
JJA 
(c) 
Intermodel standard deviation of surface air temperature 
(f) 
Intermodel standard deviation of surface air temperature 
(g) 
December - February 
(h) 
June-August 
LATITUDE 
LATITUDE 
Figure 5.1: (a) The average surface air temperature simulated by nine coupled models, (b) the difference of the model average from the 
observed data of Jenne (1975) and (c) the intermodel standard deviation for DJF. (d-f) As in (a-c) but for JJA. (g) The zonally averaged 
difference of eleven coupled models' surface air temperature from observations for DJF. (h) As in (g) but for JJA. Units °C. 
240 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
mean model surface air temperature agrees well with 
observations, but that individual models span a range of 
about 5°C. Three of the four warmest models are from 
simulations without flux adjustment, with the flux-adjusted 
models generally having a better simulation of surface air 
temperature over the oceans. 
5.2.3.2 Precipitation rate 
The precipitation rate is a measure of the intensity of the 
hydrological cycle and also influences the ocean 
thermohaline circulaflon through the fresh water flux. 
Figures 5.2a-c and d-f show the global distribution of the 
observed precipitation rate, the coupled models' average, 
and the intermodel standard deviation during DJF and JJA, 
respectively. The coupled models are generally successful 
in simulaflng the broad-scale structure of the observed 
precipitation, although some features of the actual 
precipitation are not well observed. The scatter among the 
models is comparatively large in the tropics where the 
precipitation rates are themselves largest, as seen in Figure 
5.2g and h in terms of zonal averages. The globally 
averaged precipitation rate is given in Table 5.2, where we 
note that warmer mean temperatures are associated with 
larger precipitation rates as might be expected. 
5.2.3.3 Mean sea level pressure 
The seasonal average mean sea level pressure, displayed in 
Figure 5.3, is a measure of both dynamical and 
thermodynamical surface features and is linked to the 
surface wind stress that drives the ocean. Current coupled 
models succeed in representing the observed large-scale 
geographical distribution of this field rather well as shown 
in Figures 5.3a-f. The scatter among the models seen here 
and in Figures 5.3g and h may be partiy due to differences 
in reduction to sea level, although the scatter at polar 
latitudes is a characteristic difficulty also seen in uncoupled 
atmospheric models (Boer etal, 1992). 
5.2.3.4 Snow and sea ice cover 
The extent of snow and sea ice cover summarised in Tables 
5.3 and 5.4 is a measure of coupled models' ability to 
simulate some aspects of the seasonal variation of the 
cryosphere (although the extreme values of these fields 
occur near the ends of the DJF and JJA periods). These 
data show that some models have an apparent excess of 
winter snow cover which tends to persist into summer. The 
ratio of summer to winter snow cover and the simulated sea 
ice cover vary greatiy among the models, with some of the 
models without flux adjustment losing their sea ice in the 
Arctic summer and almost all their sea ice in the Southern 
Hemisphere in both summer and winter. The apparent 
difficulties the models have in simulating the seasonal 
snow and ice cover could have consequences for the 
"albedo feedback" and the soil moisture and runoff in the 
climate change simulations of Chapter 6. 
Table 5.3: Coupled model simulations of Northern 
Hemisphere snow cover ( 10^ km^). 
DJF 
JJA 
(winter) 
(summer) 
B M R C * 
62.0 
28.4 
CCC 
42.9 
11.5 
C O L A * 
53.4 
12.1 
CSIRO 
37.5 
11.6 
GFDL 
64.4 
10.0 
GISS (1)* 
41.2 
2.5 
MPI (LSG) 
51.4 
5.8 
MPI (OPYC) 
54.6 
16.7 
MRI 
34.3 
2.9 
NCAR* 
41.4 
2.1 
U K M O 
35.3 
5.1 
Observed (Matson et al, 1986) 
44.7 
7.8 
* Models without flux adjustment, 
Table 5.4: Coupled model simulations of sea ice cover 
(10^ km^). 
Northern 
Southern 
Hemisphere 
Hemisphere 
DJF 
JJA 
JJA 
DJF 
(winter) (summer) 
(winter) (summer) 
B M R C * 
18.9 
16.7 
<1.0 
<1.0 
CCC 
9.7 
7.1 
12.2 
7.5 
C O L A * 
9.3 
1.6 
4.0 
3.7 
CSIRO 
16.6 
14.5 
21.1 
18.9 
GFDL 
16.0 
12.7 
24.7 
16.0 
GISS (1)* 
11.0 
8.3 
12.4 
6.4 
MRI 
19.1 
11.5 
11.6 
3.1 
NCAR* 
13.6 
<1.0 
5.3 
<1.0 
U K M O 
10.2 
5.3 
18.0 
5.9 
Observed (Gloersen 
14.5 
11.5 
16.0 
7.0 
etal, 1992) 
(Ropelewski, 1989) 
15.0 
9.8 
16.7 
5.3 
Models without flux adjustment 
LATITUDE 
LATITUDE 
Figure 5.2: (a) The observed precipitation rate as estimated by Jaeger (1976), (b) the average of nine coupled models' simulations and 
(c) the intermodel standard deviation for DJF. (d-f) As in (a-c) but for JJA. (g) The zonally averaged precipitation rate from eleven 
coupled models and that from observations according to Jaeger (1976) for DJF (soUd line), (h) As in (g) but for JJA. Units mm/day. 
(See Figure 5.1 (g) for model identification.) 
(a) 
Observed mean sea level pressure 
Observed mean sea level pressure 
(c) 
Intennodel standard deviation mean sea level pressure 
(f) 
Intermodel standard deviation mean sea level pressure 
December - February 
(h) 
June - August 
Figure 5.3: (a) The mean sea level pressure from N M C operational analyses during 1978 tol988, (b) the average of nine coupled 
models' simulations, and (c) the intermodel standard deviation for DJF.(d-f) Units hPa. (d-f) As in (a-c) but for JJA. (g) The zonally 
averaged mean sea level pressure from eleven coupled models and that from observations (soUd line) for DJF. (h) As in (g) but for JJA. 
Units hPa. (See Figure 5.1(g) for model identification.) 
(a) 
Observation-based surface heat flux 
DJF 
(d) 
Observation-based surface heat flux 
JJA 
(c) 
Intermodel standard deviation of surface heat flux 
(f) 
Intermodel standard deviation of surface heat flux 
LATITUDE 
LATITUDE 
Figure 5.4: (a) The suiface heat flux from observations (Esbensen and Kushnir, 1981), (b) the average of nine coupled models' 
simulations, and (c) the intermodel standard deviation for DJF. (d-f) As in (a-c) but for JJA. (g) The zonally averaged surface heat flux 
from nine coupled models and that from observations (solid line), (h) As in (g) but for JJA. Units Wm^^ (ggg pigure 5.1(g) for model 
identification.) 
244 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
5.2.3.5 Ocean surface heat flux and thermohaline circulation 
The surface heat flux measures the energetic interaction of 
the atmosphere and ocean, and together with the surface 
fresh water flux, governs the strength of the ocean's 
thermohaline circulation. Figure 5.4 shows the coupled 
models' net surface heat flux, while Figure 5.5 shows the 
average heat flux adjustment in the models that use one. 
All the coupled models portray the ocean's absorption of 
heat in summer and its release in winter (Figures 5.4a-f), 
although there is a tendency for the modelled fluxes to 
exceed the observationally based estimates on the zonal 
average (Figure 5.4g and h). The heat flux adjustment, 
however, is seen to vary widely among the models that use 
it (Figure 5.5b and d; see also Table 5.1). 
The thermohaline circulation in the oceans is important 
for the poleward heat transport in the climate system. Table 
5.5 shows that only 4 of the 10 models considered have 
Atlantic thermohaline circulations with maxima in the 
"accepted" range of 13-18 Sv (Ю*» m^ s~') near 50°N 
(Schmitz and McCartney, 1993). These results suggest that 
flux adjustment and an equilibrium ocean model spin-up 
may be necessary (but not sufficient) conditions for 
thermohaline circulations in this range. No model without 
flux adjustment attains the accepted range, and of the four 
thermohaline circulations that are weak, only one is for a 
flux-adjusted model. 
Table 5.5: Coupled model simulations of the strength of the 
North Atlantic thermohaline circulation^. 
Strength (Sv) 
(10« щЗ s-i) 
State 
Flux 
correction 
E 
BMRC* 
6 
weak 
no 
yes 
CCC 
14 
moderate 
yes 
yes 
CSIRO 
18 
moderate 
yes 
yes 
GFDL 
17+ 
moderate 
yes 
yes 
GISS (1)" 
2 
weak 
no 
no 
GISS (2)* 
26 
stiong 
no 
yes 
MPI (LSG) 
26t 
strong 
yes 
yes 
MRI 
2 
weak 
yes 
yes 
NCAR* 
V 
weak 
no 
no 
U K M O 
16 
moderate 
yes 
yes 
§ This table is intended to represent the strength of the 
meridional mass flux maximum near 50°N. 
t 
Values taken from Gates et al. (1993). 
E Indicates whether the model spin-up is to a long-term 
equilibrium state. 
* 
Models without flux adjustment. 
5.2.4 Simulation of the Variability of the Coupled System 
While much attention has been focused on the mean 
climate simulated by coupled models, the simulation of 
variability is at least as important in many considerations, 
including the detection of climate change (see Chapter 8). 
5.2.4.1 Monthly and seasonal variability 
The evaluation of coupled model variability on monthly to 
seasonal time-scales is illustrated by the work of Meehl et 
al. (1994), who calculated a measure of intermonthly 
standard deviation of lower tropospheric temperature from 
their coupled model and compared it with observations 
from the microwave sounding unit (MSU) at "periods 
greater than one month but less than twelve months". The 
simulated values were generally larger than those observed 
in the tropics and smaller in southern high latitudes. The 
model successfully simulated some of the features of the 
observed intermonthly variation, including a representation 
of the Madden-Julian Oscillation in the tropics and blocking 
events in the extratropics (see also Section 5.3.1.2). 
5.2.4.2 Interannual and ENSO time-scale variability 
Figure 5.6 displays the standard deviation of the annual 
mean surface air temperature from observations and from 
three coupled model simulations. There is qualitative 
agreement in that the models reproduce the larger 
variability observed over the continents and at high 
latitudes. The E l Nino-Southern Oscillation-related 
variability in the eastern tropical Pacific, however, is 
generally underestimated in the models. The largest 
differences among these models is found over the tropical 
oceans where values differ by as much as a factor of 2. 
The El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) represents 
one of the coupled system's dominant interannual 
variations. ENSO is thought to involve modes of variability 
that produce coupled anomalies in the eastern Pacific, and 
modes that involve internal ocean dynamics and wave 
reflection from boundaries requiring high resolution for 
their simulation (Schopf and Suarez, 1988; Neelin, 1991; 
Jin and Neelin, 1993a, b; Neelin and Jin, 1993). 
Multi-decadal integrations with coarse-resolution global 
coupled models display interannual variability in the 
tropical Pacific that resembles some aspects of the 
observed variability associated with ENSO, although 
typically of lesser amplitude (Sperber et al., 1987; Meehl, 
1990; Lau et al, 1992; Sperber and Hameed, 1991; Nagai 
et al, 1992; Meehl et ai, 1993). Changes in such features 
as the mean thermocline depth, however, can produce 
different manifestations of interannual variability (Nagai et 
al., 1992; Moore, 1995; Tett, 1995). Higher resolution but 
248 
limited domain coupled models have also been used 
successfully in ENSO forecast studies (Latif et al, 1994), 
and global ENSO forecast models are under development 
(Ji et al, 1994). A class of model that combines a global 
atmospheric model and a limited domain high-resolution 
ocean (usually over the tropical Pacific) has been used to 
study ENSO-type interannual variability over longer time 
periods (Philander et al, 1992; Gent and Tribbia, 1993; 
Latif et al, 1993), as well as to demonstrate linkages 
between the Indian monsoon and ENSO (Barnett et al, 
1989). These studies give some credibility to the simulated 
changes of interannual variability on ENSO time-scales 
associated with greenhouse gas increases (see Chapter 6). 
Improved simulations of ENSO variability are expected 
from coupled global models that better resolve equatorial 
ocean dynamics. 
5.2.4.3 Decadal and longer-tenn variabiUty 
The extended coupled model integrations now becoming 
available allow investigation of longer time-scale 
variability. Although the surface air temperature has 
perhaps the "best" observed long time-series record (100-
150 years), there are problems in comparing this record, 
which includes the effects of both internally generated and 
externally forced variability, with model simulations which 
include only the internally generated component (Santer et 
al, 
1995b; Hegerl et al, 1996; Chapter 8). Such a 
comparison is also hindered by the effects of sparse 
observations during the early part of the record and at high 
latitudes (Karl et al, 1993; Jones, 1994), and difficulties in 
correcting the systematic errors due to urbanisation and 
changes in measurement methods. 
The standard deviation of decadal mean surface 
temperature is shown in Figure 5.7. This measure of long 
time-scale variability indicates that coupled models are 
capable of simulating the observed increase of interdecadal 
variability with latitude. The variability of decadal means 
associated with the ice edge can also be seen in some 
models. There are substantial unexplained differences 
among the models, however, and this must be kept in mind 
when interpreting the results of long-term transient 
experiments (see Chapter 6). 
Long time-series of the global mean surface air 
temperature anomalies from the MPI/LSG and G F D L 
coupled models are shown in Figure 5.8, and similar 
records are available from other shorter simulations. The 
MPI model exhibits a large fluctuation in the first 250 
years of the integration (which is related to sea ice 
fluctuations), while other models (e.g., BMRC and GISSl) 
show a slow climate drift over the first century. Coupled 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
a 
^•0.6 
Ü 
-0.8 i 
• 
• 
, 
. 
I 
0.0 
200.0 
400.0 
eoo.o 
Model year number 
Figure 5.8: The globally averaged annual mean surface air 
temperamre time-series from the GFDL and MPI coupled model 
simulations. Units °C, expressed as anomalies from the time mean. 
models are able to simulate a range of natural or internal 
variability, whose con'ect simulation is important for the 
detection of climate change (see Chapter 8). 
5.2.5 Simulation of Regional Climate 
The key factors that affect the regional performance of 
global coupled models are their horizontal resolution and 
their physical parametrizations. Coarse resolution 
atmospheric models are unable to realistically portray the 
extent and height of mountains, with consequent distortions 
in their simulation of orographic precipitation on regional 
scales, while coarse resolution ocean models suffer similar 
distortions in their simulation of boundary currents. A 
GCM's resolution may also introduce systematic errors in 
the depiction of coastlines, with consequent effects on the 
simulation of regional circulation and temperature. With 
their present horizontal resolution of several hundred km 
(Table 5.1), the largest eiTors of coupled models' simulation 
of the observed seasonal temperature generally occur on the 
smaller resolved scales over the continents (Figure 5.1). 
Differences between models also tend to be greater at the 
regional scale (Figure 5.1). See Chapter 6 (Section 6.6.1 and 
Figure 6.32) where the regional simulations of precipitation 
and surface temperature by five coupled ocean-atmosphere 
models are compared with observations. 
As the resolution of models increases, the parametrization 
of subgrid-scale physical processes such as convection, 
mixing, and surface fluxes may need to be reformulated to 
more adequately represent their interaction with the newly 
resolved scales of motion. The accurate portrayal of 
regional climate is also limited by the general increase of 
variability found on smaller scales (see Section 5.2.5). 
CUmate Models - Evaluation 
249 
Regional-scale climate can also be simulated by using a 
higher-resolution model over a limited area of the world 
(e.g., Giorgi et al, 1994, as discussed further in Chapter 6). 
With adequate boundary conditions (or lateral forcing) 
provided either by observations or by a global inodel, and 
with careful placement of the boundaries of the area, such 
models can portray the climate at regional and local scales 
with more accuracy than that given by global climate models 
of conventional resolution. This indicates that when it is 
possible to use higher resolution in coupled global models, a 
general increase in accuracy may be expected, especially 
near mountains and coasts and in regions of high variability. 
5.2.6 Summary 
Coupled modelling is rapidly accelerating, and the present 
state may be summarised as follows: 
(1) 
The large-scale features of the current climate are 
well simulated on average by current coupled models; 
(2) 
Different coupled models simulate the current 
climate with various degrees of success, and this 
affects the confidence that can be placed in their 
simulations of climate change; 
(3) 
Flux adjustments are relatively large in the models 
that use them, but their absence affects the realism of 
the control climate and the associated feedback 
processes; 
(4) 
The analysis of variability is providing new 
opportunities for model evaluation. 
5.3 How Well Do the Component Atmosphere, Land-
surface, Ocean and Sea Ice Models Reproduce 
Current Climate? 
5.3.1 Atmospheric General Circulation Models 
5.3.1.1 Simulation of mean seasonal climate 
5.3.1.1.1 Introduction 
Atmospheric general circulation models (GCMs) have 
undergone many refinements in formulation and 
parametrization during more than four decades of continuous 
development and use for weather prediction and climate 
simulation. Evaluation of individual atmospheric GCMs used 
for climate simulation are widely available in the literature, 
although attempts to intercompare them under standard 
conditions have been undertaken only relatively recently. In 
general, there has been a progressive increase in the accuracy 
of atmospheric chmate models' simulation of the observed 
average large-scale distribution of pressure, temperature and 
circulation, and of elements of the heat and hydrologie 
balances such as radiative fluxes and precipitation. There 
have also been progressive improvements in atmospheric 
models' portrayal of regional mean climate (Chapter 6, 
Section 6.6) and of atmospheric variability on a variety of 
time-scales (Section 5.3.1.2). 
Here we present a new assessment of the ability of current 
atmospheric GCMs to simulate the observed mean seasonal 
climate. For this purpose we use the emerging results of the 
international Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project 
(AMIP) (Gates, 1992). Virtually all global atmospheric 
modelling groups' are participating in this project, which calls 
for a ten-year simulation under agreed conditions. The AMIP 
boundary conditions used by all participating atmospheric 
GCMs consist of the 1979 to 1988 sequence of observed 
monthly averaged distributions of sea surface temperamre and 
sea ice, an atmosphere CO, concentration of 345 ppmv and a 
value of 1365 Wnr^ for the solar constant. We focus here on 
the AMIP models' simulation of selected variables that were 
not considered in the section on coupled models (Section 5.2). 
The actual climate is given by observational estimates that are 
beheved to be the most representative of the AMIP decade, 
although in some cases other data are also used to provide 
global coverage. For this purpose both the models' results and 
the observed data were regridded to a common 4° latitude and 
5° longitude grid, which is representative of the AMIP 
models' horizontal resolution. 
5.3.1.1.2 Surface air temperature over land, precipitation 
and mean sea level pressure 
In general, the AMIP models' simulation of these variables 
is similar to that shown for coupled models in Section 5.2. 
Although the prescription of sea surface temperature 
effectively determines the surface air temperature over the 
oceans, the A M I P models' performance provides 
reassuring evaluation of their ability to portray the summer 
and winter temperatures (not shown) over the continents. 
There are, however, relatively large regional discrepancies 
over continental interiors and over Antarctica. Current 
models' overall simulation of the surface air temperature is 
superior to that of previous generations of atmospheric 
GCMs. 
The overall geographical distribution of the AMIP models' 
precipitation (not shown) resembles that observed, but there 
are notable deficiencies. The simulation of tropical 
precipitation shows a slight improvement over that given by 
Boer et al (1992) for models of comparable resolution. Much 
of this increase in accuracy is thought to be due to 
improvements in the parametrization of penetrating cumulus 
convection, on which the low-latitude precipitation is 
' See the Supplementary Table at the end of this chapter for a 
detailed list of institutions involved. 
250 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
critically dependent. The seasonal sea level pressure 
distribution (not shown) reveals a slight improvement over 
that seen in Boer et al. (1992), and is a marked improvement 
over that of the earlier generation of models (Gates, 1987). At 
least part of this increase in accuracy may be due to increases 
in model resolution. 
5.3.1.1.3 Tropospheric 
temperature and 
circulation 
The three-dimensional temperature distribution (not 
shown) simulated by the A M I P models bears a close 
resemblance to that observed in both summer and winter. 
The most prominent discrepancies are a tendency for the 
models to be systematically too cold at lower levels in the 
tropics and in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere 
in higher latitudes, and too warm in the tropical lower 
stratosphere. Similar but more pronounced errors were 
reported by Boer et al. (1992). The circulation 
accompanying the temperature distribution is shown in 
Figure 5.9 in terms of the zonally averaged zonal wind at 
200 hPa. These data show that while the AMIP models 
generally simulate the zonal winds with considerable 
Zoata wind speed 
SJF 
"'ION 
eoN 
Ш 
£0 
30S 
m 
m 
Figure 5.9: The zonally-averaged zonal wind (ms"') at 200 hPa 
as observed (black Une) and as simulated by the AMIP models for 
(a) DJF and (b) JJA. The mean of the models' results is given by 
the full white line, and the 10, 20, 30, 70, 80 and 90 percentiles 
are given by the shading surrounding the model mean. The 
observed data are from Schubert et al. (1992). 
(a) 
Total oloudlaen 
DJF 
"SON 
m 
30Ñ 
Éû 
¡oí 
60S 
sis 
Figure 5.10: As in Figure 5.9 except for total cloudiness (%). The 
observational estimates are from ISCCP data for 1983 to 1990 
(Rossow and Schiffer, 1991). 
accuracy, there is a tendency to overestimate the strength 
of the Southern Hemisphere zonal winds near the 
tropopause, a feature that may be related to the models' 
limited vertical resolution. In general, the AMIP models' 
winds in the troposphere closely resemble those observed. 
5.3.1.1.4 
Cloudiness 
Clouds exert a significant influence on the atmospheric heat 
budget through their reflection and absorption of radiation 
(Chapter 4, Section 4.2), and the treatment of cloud type, 
amount, height, optical properties and water content differ 
widely in current atmospheric GCMs. Figure 5.10 shows 
the distribution of the AMIP models' simulation for the 
zonally averaged total cloudiness during DJF and JJA, 
together with an estimate of the zonal average of the 
observed cloudiness. These data show that current models 
portray the large-scale latitudinal structure and seasonal 
change of the observed total cloud cover with only fair 
accuracy, and there is an apparent systematic underestimate 
of the cloudiness in low and middle latitudes in both winter 
and summer. In the higher latitudes the models appear to 
overestimate the observed cloudiness, especially over 
Antarctica, although here the difficulties in the satellite 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
251 
observing system's discrimination between cloud cover 
and a snow- or ice-covered surface should be kept in mind. 
The simulated total cloudiness may also reflect adjustments 
or tuning of the models' cloud properties made in most of 
the AMIP models. 
5.3.1.1.5 Outgoing long-wave radiation and cloud 
radiative 
forcing 
The long-wave radiation leaving the top of the atmosphere 
is the heat sink for the Earth-atmosphere system (Chapter 
1, Section 1.2.1), and the comparison of its simulation with 
direct satellite measurements is an important evaluation of 
atmospheric models. Figure 5.11 shows the distribution of 
the AMIP models' simulation for the zonally averaged 
outgoing long-wave radiation (OLR) during DJF and JJA, 
along with the zonal average of the observed O L R . 
Assuming that the 
satellite 
measurements 
are 
representative of the AMIP decade, these data show that 
the mean of the model simulations is in good agreement 
with the observed estimate at all latitudes in both summer 
and winter. Since the minimum OLR in low latitudes is due 
to the presence of high and therefore cold convective 
(Q| 
OatgoisiE 1о1цргшп) rediation 
СЛ* 
90fí 
SOU 
Ш 
Ea 
30S 
Ш 
90s 
Figure 5.11: As in Figure 5.9 except for outgoing long-wave 
radiation (Wm"^). The observational estimates are from Hurrell 
and Campbell's ( 1992) summary of N O A A polar orbiter data for 
the period 1979 to 1988. 
(^) 
Net cloud radlatira forcing 
OJT 
Figure 5.12: As in Figure 5.9 except for net cloud radiative 
forcing (Wm^^). The observational estimates are from ERBE data 
for 1985-88 (Hairison etal, 1990). 
clouds, these results constitute an evaluation of the ability 
of current atmospheric G C M s to simulate tropical 
convection while maintaining a realistic overall thermal 
radiation budget. 
Another important measure of the effects of clouds on 
the atmospheric radiation budget is the cloud radiative 
forcing, which is defined as the difference in the radiative 
flux at the top of the atmosphere when clouds are present 
and when they are absent. Since the effect of clouds 
(compared to clear sky) is to trap long-wave (or infrared) 
radiation in the Earth-atmosphere system, long-wave cloud 
radiative forcing is generally positive while short-wave 
cloud forcing is nearly always negative since clouds tend to 
reflect short-wave (or solar) radiation. The net radiative 
effect of clouds may therefore be either positive or 
negative. Figure 5.12 shows the distribution of the AMIP 
models' zonally averaged net cloud radiative forcing 
during DJF and JJA, together with the zonal average of the 
observational estimates from ERBE for the years 1985 to 
1988. These data show that while the models have 
successfully reproduced the general large-scale structure of 
the observed cloud radiative forcing, there are a number of 
discrepancies. Perhaps the most obvious is the models' 
252 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
systematic underestimate of the negative cloud radiative 
forcing between about 30°N and 30°S in both summer and 
winter, and their corresponding overestimate of the 
maximum negative forcing near 60° latitude in the summer 
hemisphere. These apparent errors are likely related to the 
models' treatment of cloud radiative processes, although 
the differences in how the modelled and observed cloud 
radiative forcing are calculated should be kept in mind. 
5.3.1.1.6 Multivariate 
statistics 
More insight into the nature of model differences is 
provided by multivariate statistics that measure the errors 
in the time mean and temporal variability relative to 
observations, as illustrated in Figure 5.13 for the mean sea 
level pressure in the Northern Hemisphere. These results 
show that in comparison to the models' natural variability 
(given by an ensemble of runs made with perturbed initial 
conditions, whose results (M vs M) all lie near the origin), 
the AMIP models have relatively large errors in their 
estimates of the temporal mean and variability (D vs M). 
The models' errors in simulating the time mean and 
temporal variability of sea level pressure are also 
somewhat larger than the observational uncertainties as 
given by the D vs D results. Such statistics permit an 
assessment of the differences among models' errors 
without addressing formal questions of statistical 
significance (Katz, 1992), and emphasise the need for use 
of a variety of measures to adequately characterise model 
performance. 
5.3.1.1.7 
Summary 
The AMIP results confirm that cuixent atmospheric models 
generally provide a realistic portrayal of the phase and 
amplitude of the seasonal march of the large-scale 
distribution of pressure, temperature and circulation. In 
general, the models' largest discrepancies in the seasonal 
cycle of sea level pressure and surface air temperature 
occur in the higher latitudes, while the largest 
discrepancies in the seasonal cycle of precipitation are 
found in the tropics. Overall, atmospheric models have 
shown some improvement since 1990, and are markedly 
superior to the models in use in the 1970s and early 1980s. 
The area-mean root-mean-square (RMS) difference 
between a simulated variable and an estimate of its 
observed value provides a useful measure of overall model 
performance. Table 5.6 shows the average RMS error of 
75 
60 
J3 
CO 
ro 
> 45 
2 
I 
30 
о 
Ш 
15 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
. ' 
14 
*13 
' " 8 
. 2 5 
_ 
•б 
-
P I * * ' ' 
. 4 
1 6 » ^2.26 
^20 
_ 3 0 . . ^ * 9 * ^ 
. 2 2 
•5 
^23 
•i l 
•^2_ 
P I * * ' ' 
. 4 
1 6 » ^2.26 
^20 
_ 3 0 . . ^ * 9 * ^ 
. 2 2 
. 
*24 
~ 
. 
28 
19 
~Â 
F
i
l
i
l
í 
1 
1 
0.0 
0.3 
0.6 
0.9 
Normalised error in time-mean 
1.2 
1.5 
Dvslvl 
M vs tVl 
bmrc 
1 
ecmwfl 2 
+ 
ccc 
2 
ecmwfl 3 
+ 
cnrm 
3 
ecmwfl 4 
+ 
cola 
4 
ecmwfl 5 
+ 
csiro 
5 
ecmwfl 6 
+ 
csu 
6 
sungen12 
0 
derf 
7 
sungen13 
О 
dnm 
8 
sungen14 
о 
ecmwfl 
9 
sungenIS 
о 
ecmwf2 10 
sungenIS 
gfdl 
11 
giss 
12 
gla 
13 
gsfc 
14 
Dvs D 
lap 
15 
cru V ecan 
X 
jma 
16 
ecan V cru 
X 
Imd 
17 
70-78 v 79-87 
д 
mgo 
18 
60-68 V 79-87 
д 
mpi 
19 
50-58 v 79-87 
д 
mri 
20 
40-48 v 79-87 д 
near 
21 
nmc 
22 
nrl 
23 
rpn 
24 
sungen 25 
sunya 
26 
ucia 
27 
ugamp 
28 
uiuc 
29 
ukmo 
30 
yonu 
31 
Figure 5.13: Statistical evaluation of the simulated mean sea level pressure in the Northern Hemisphere in terms of a measure of the 
error in temporal variability (ordinate) and a measure of the error in time means (abscissa). D vs M (data vs. model) refers to the results 
of the AMIP models (see Supplementary Table for model identification), M vs M (model vs. model) refers to the resuhs of model 
ensembles with different initial conditions, and D vs D (data vs. data) refers to the results of intercomparisons of the C R U data (Jones, 
1987) and E C M W F analyses. For details of the co-ordinates' statistics and data, see Santer and Wigley (1990), Wigley and Santer 
(1990) and Santer et al. (1995a). 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
253 
the AMIP simulations for a number of common climate 
variables for both summer and winter in each hemisphere. 
Of particular note are the relatively large RMS deviations 
of the cloud radiative forcing (CRF) and of the net ocean 
surface heat flux in the summer hemisphere, which are 
illustraflve of the need for flux adjustment in coupled 
climate models. We also note the relaflvely large RMS 
differences in the surface air temperature over land in the 
winter hemisphere, which emphasise the need for improved 
parametrization of the surface heat fluxes and land-surface 
processes. The simulation of clouds and their seasonal 
variation remains a major source of uncertainty in 
atmospheric models. 
5.3.1.2 Simulation of variability and trends 
Here we consider atmospheric G C M s ' simulation of 
variability on a variety of time-scales and their portrayal of 
recent trends, as a supplement to the discussion of the 
mean seasonal climate given in Section 5.3.1.1. 
Table 5.6: Hemispheric mean seasonal root-mean-square 
differences between observations and the mean of the 
AMIP models. 
DJF 
JJA 
Variable 
NH 
SH 
NH 
SH 
Mean sea level pressure (hPa) 
1.4 
1.4 
1.3 
2.4 
Surface air temperature (°C) 
2.4 
1.6 
1.3 
2.0 
(over land) 
Zonal wind (ms-i) (at 200 hPa) 
2.4 
1.8 
1.8 
2.4 
Precipitation (mm /day) 
0.80 
0.71 
0.62 
0.77 
Cloudiness (%) 
10 
21 
14 
16 
Outgoing long-wave radiation 
2.8 
3.2 
2.9 
5.5 
(OLR) (Wm-2) 
Cloud radiative forcing (Wm"^) 
9.1 
20.5 
16.2 
6.5 
Surface heat flux (Wm^^) 
22.5 
27.3 
30.5 
17.2 
(over ocean) 
See Supplementary Table for identification of the AMIP models. 
Observed data used ai'e ECMWF analyses for mean sea level 
pressure (Trenberth, 1992) for 1979 to 1988, diagnoses of 
Schemm et al (1992) and Schubert et al. (1993) for surface air 
temperature and precipitation over land for 1979 to 1988, M S U 
data of Spencer (1993) for precipitation over die oceans for 
1979-1988, COADS data of Da Silva et al (1994) for net surface 
heat flux over the ocean, and ECMWF TOGA analyses as 
summarised by Schubert et al (1992) for the 200 hPa zonal wind 
for 1985 to 1991. Tlie observed data sources for cloudiness, 
outgoing long-wave radiation and cloud radiative forcing are as 
in Figures 5.10, 5.11 and 5.12. 
5.3.1.2.1 Diurnal and seasonal ranges 
Recent observations have shown a reduction in the diurnal 
range of surface air temperature (nominally at 1.5 m) over 
the continents (Karl et al, 1993; Horton, 1994; see also 
Chapter 3.3.2.4) and have suggested a reduction of the 
diumal range of surface air temperature as carbon dioxide 
increases (Cao et al, 1992; Mitchell et al, 1995b). In 
general, the patterns of observed and modelled diurnal 
range are similar, though modelled values exceed those 
observed in high northern latitudes in January and over 
northern continents and deserts in July (e.g., Hansen et al, 
1994). The observed and modelled seasonal range of 
surface air temperature is shown in Figure 5.14 from the 
AMIP models, in which there is an overestimate of the 
seasonal amplitude of surface air temperature in the drier 
regions of the continents. There are, however, considerable 
differences among the models in higher latitudes. 
5.3.1.2.2 Synoptic variability 
Figure 5.15 shows the climatology of observed and 
modelled synoptic variability in DJF and JJA, as measured 
by the standard deviation of daily mean sea level pressure 
(MSLP) about each constituent monthly mean. Simulated 
values are from the AMIP models, while observations are 
derived from the Climate Analysis Center Diagnostic Data 
Base for 1979 to 1988. The models on average capture tiie 
broad pattern of the observed synoptic variability quite 
well, although the models' estimates are less than those 
observed in regions of maximum storminess. There is, 
however, considerable disagreement among the observed 
data themselves, and there are marked differences among 
the models away from the tropics (Hay et al, 1992; Hulme 
etal, 1993). 
The Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO) (Slingo and 
Madden, 1991) is a major feature of tropical variability on 
time-scales of about 30-60 days. Since the physical causes 
of the MJO are not fully understood (Rui and Wang, 1990), 
it is not suфrising that analyses of near-equatorial winds at 
200 hPa in the AMIP runs (Slingo et al, 1995) show only a 
modest skill in reproducing the observed MJO magnitude 
and frequency. 
5.3.1.2.3 Interannual variability 
The ability of models to reproduce the observed mean 
interannual variability of climate is an important aspect of 
their performance, but in examining the ability of models 
to reproduce specific time sequences of interannual 
variability it must be borne in mind that not all interannual 
variations are forced (e.g., by SST) and that a fraction of 
this variability, often large in the extratropics, is internal to 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
(a) 
Interonnuol rms variotion of surface oír temperature ['C] and 
the difference from observations DJF 
'l80 
120W 
60W 
0 
60E 
120E 
180 
Figure 5.16: Mean of the interannual RMS variabiHty of surface air temperature simulated by the AMIP models during (a) DJF and (b) 
JJA of 1979 to 1988, and the difference (shaded in colour) of the modelled mean from the observed RMS variability from the data of 
Schemm et al. (1992) and Schubert et al. (1993). 
the atmosphere. Figure 5.16a shows the interannual 
standard deviation of mean surface air temperature for the 
AMIP models in DJF, forced with the observed monthly 
mean SST and sea ice extent, along with the differences 
from an observed data set for 1979 to 1988. Observations 
over land are from Schemm et al. (1992) and oceanic 
observations from a version of the COADS marine data set 
(Willmott and Legates, 1993). The broad pattern of 
observed interannual variability is portrayed well, with a 
maximum over the winter continental interiors. The 
oceanic maximum over the tropical eastern Pacific is 
forced by the imposed SST variations, and the differences 
from observations in Figure 5.16 over the oceans are 
generally small for this reason. Over high latitude 
continental interiors the modelled variability is typically 
too low. In JJA the modelled variability is also generally 
too low over the North African desert, and in both seasons 
considerable variation exists among the models (Figure 
5.16b). The blocking simulated in atmospheric models also 
generally shows too littie interannual variability (Sausen et 
al, 1993), as shown by the typical example given in Figure 
5.17. 
Figure 5.18 shows the ability of atmospheric models to 
reproduce the interannual variability of rainfall in north-
east Brazil where the wet season rainfall is strongly 
influenced by tropical SST (Hastenrath, 1990; Wai'd and 
Folland, 1991; Sperber and Hameed, 1993). Figure 5.18b 
shows simulations of the north-east Brazil February-May 
rainfall anomalies by 22 A M I P models that correcfly 
represent the observed teleconnection patterns with 
worldwide SST, while Figure 5.18a shows results from 
four models forced with observed SST for 1949 to 1993, 
256 
Climate Models ~ Evaluation 
some being ensemble averages. These results, together 
with an ensemble of integrations using the ECMWF model 
for 1979 to 1988 (not shown), indicate that current 
atmospheric models have the ability to simulate observed 
interannual rainfall variations in north-east Brazil 
reasonably well. 
Another measure of the ability of atmospheric models to 
respond realistically to large-scale SST patterns is the 
Southern Oscillation Index (SOI), which measures 
variations in the coupled ocean-atmosphere system that 
include El Niño warming and La Niña cooling events in the 
tropical Pacific. Figure 5.19b shows the modelled and 
(a) 
(b) 
40 
m 
•a 
g» 20 
8 
J3 
-90 
_J_ 
\ 
90 
Longitude 
180 
270 
40 
и >, 
Ш 
"a 
g- 20 
S. 
a о 
xj 
-90 
r - • 
0 
90 
Longitude 
180 
270 
Figure 5.17: The observed mean (thick dashed line) and observed interannual standard deviation (thin dashed lines) of the Tibaldi and 
Molteni (1990) 500 hPa blocking index for DJF of 1960 to 1990 in the Northern Hemisphere (a), and that calculated from 6 runs of the 
U K M O atmospheric model forced by the GISST data set (Parker ex al., 1994) (b). 
(a) 
(b) 
' ' • ' ' ' ' t I 
' I " ' ' ' ' • I I ' I • ' ' ' I J-JLi. t I . I I I I I I I I t . t I I 1,1 
- 4 
1 1 1 1 : 1 1 1 : 1 1 1 : 1 I I : 111 ' 11 
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
1980 1984 1988 
YEAR 
YEAR 
Figure 5.18: The observed iVIarch to May rainfall anomaly in north-east Brazil (approximately 4°S-10°S, 42.5°W-35°W) compared 
with that from (a) simulations during February to May of 1949 to 1993 by 4 models and (b) 22 selected AMIP models. Anomalies are 
relative to the 1979 to 1988 average. The observed data are from Hulme (1995). 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
257 
Î950 
Î960 
1970 
1980 
Î990 
1980 1984 1988 
YEAR 
YEAR 
Figure 5.19: The observed Tahiti minus Darwin Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) compared with that from (a) the averages from 7 
atmospheric model simulations for 1949 to 1993 and (b) 7 AMIP models. Anomalies are relative to the 1979 to 1988 average. 
observed SOI indices for 1979 to 1988 from seven AMIP 
models, all of which capture the main features of the SOI 
variations. Simulated SOI indices forced by observed SST 
over several recent decades from versions of the 
atmospheric components of seven of the coupled models 
considered in Chapter 6 are shown in Figure 5.19a (Folland 
and Rowell, 1995). These results indicate that current 
atmospheric models respond to large-scale, large-amplitude 
tropical SST patterns in the Pacific with considerable skill 
(Smith, 1995). 
A major fluctuation in global temperature occurred 
between 1991 and 1995 following the eruption of Mt. 
Pinatubo in the Philippine Islands in June 1991. Recent 
estimates indicate that net global radiative forcing at the 
top of the atmosphere peaked at about —3.5 Wm^^ a few 
months after the eruption, and then declined to small values 
by late 1994 (Parker et ai, 1996). Figure 5.20 shows the 
observed M S U temperature changes in the lower 
troposphere after the eruption as running seasonal averages 
(Parker ei ai, 1996). Two predictions are also shown 
starting from different initial conditions made by Hansen et 
al. (1992) using a version of the GISS model with a simple 
diffusive ocean. The model captured the phase and 
magnitude of the overall changes in temperature rather 
well. In another study Graf et al. (1993) used the ECHAM2 
model to successfully simulate the patterns of the 
atmospheric circulation and surface air temperature 
anomalies that were observed in the Northern Hemisphere 
during the winter of 1991 to 1992 immediately following 
the Pinatubo eruption. These results indicate that models 
can respond realistically to a sudden but short-lived 
radiative forcing that is comparable to that following an 
instantaneous doubling of CO2, and raise our confidence in 
atmospheric models' ability to portray longer-term climate 
changes. It should be noted, however, that the response of 
the deeper ocean has not been considered here. 
5.3.1.2.4 Recent trends 
Figure 5.21 shows the observed and modelled surface air 
temperature over the global land surface for the past 
several decades. The results from the U K M O model, a 
version of the CSIRO model (Smith, 1994), and three other 
models have been filtered to highlight trends on decadal 
time-scales, and were forced with observed SST and sea 
ice extent during 1949 to 1993, mostly by the GISST data 
set (Parker et al, 
1994). Although the shape of the 
observed warming trend is moderately well simulated, 
when a fixed CO2 concentration is used only about half the 
observed amplitude of warming is reproduced (Folland and 
Rowell, 1995). When changing, СОт is included in the 
U K M O model the warming increases, and when a 
representation of tropospheric aerosols is also included as 
258 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
0.4 
ü 
0.2 
05 
g 0.0 
< 
E 
2-0.2 
_>, 
со 
о - 0 . 4 
с= 
< 
' ' ' Ч ' ' ' ' Ч 
I 
I I I I I 
Observed land surface air temperature 
and night marine air temperature 
(relative to April-June 1991) 
Model predictions 
-0.6 
AMJ 90 AMJ 91 AMJ 92 AMJ 93 AMJ 94 AMJ 95 AMJ 96 AMJ 97 
Year 
Figure S.20: The predicted and observed changes in global land 
and ocean surface air temperature after the eruption of Mount 
Pinatubo, in terms of three-month running averages from April to 
June 1991 to March to May 1995 (Hansen etal., 1992). 
1950 
1960 
1970 
YEAR 
1980 
1990 
Figure 5.22: The observed and modelled standardised July to 
September rainfall for 1949 to 1993 in the Sahel from 7 models. 
Standardisation is done separately for each model for the common 
period 1955 to 1988. 
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
Figure 5.21: The observed global annual 1.5m land air temperature 
for 1949 to 1993 from the Jones (1994) data set (shaded) and the 
corresponding modelled 1.5 m air temperature deviations from the 
1950 to 1959 average for: (i) the average of 4 simulations viiith the 
U K M O model without progressive changes in radiative forcing, (ii) 
the average of 4 simulations with changing CO,, (iii) tlie average of 
4 models with a representation of tropospheric aerosols, and (iv) 
the averages from 4 other models with no changes in radiative 
forcing. 
in Mitchell et al. (1995a) the warming trend is reduced but 
the spatial pattern of the warming is more consistent with 
observations (Chapter 8). 
Widespread attention has been given to summer rainfall 
trends in sub-Saharan Africa, where wet conditions in the 
1950s gave way to droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. These 
changes are now thought to have been influenced by 
changes in SST patterns (Lamb, 1978; Folland et al., 1986; 
Wolter, 1989; Folland et al., 1991; Shinoda and 
Kawamura, 1994; Smith, 1994; Rowefl et al., 1995), 
though land-surface processes such as desertification may 
also be important (Xue and Shukla, 1993). Figure 5.22 
shows the observed and modelled Sahel rainfall for the wet 
season July-September. All seven models (six of which are 
atmospheric components of coupled models) show 
decreasing trends in Sahel rainfall, though modelled (rends 
are generally smaller than those observed. South of the Sahel 
the results are less consistent, suggesting that the models 
respond in different ways to decadally varying SST patterns 
in this region (the Soudan). This evidence and that discussed 
above indicates that current atmospheric general circulation 
models simulate some regional interannual climate vaiiations 
and trends with useful skill, given the observed SST forcing. 
5.3.2 Simulation of Land-surface Processes 
The suiface climate over land is important for many aspects 
of human well-being. The land-surface components of 
coupled climate models range from rather simple schemes to 
complex representations of soil and vegetation. Increased 
realism in land-surface parametrizations has been shown to 
improve the representation of surface cUmates, but has also 
led to different sensitivities to attnospheric forcing, 
particularly in terms of precipitation and net surface radiation. 
The dearth of appropiiate observations hinders land-surface 
parametrization improvement and model evaluation. 
5.3.2.7 Why consider the land 
surface? 
Models indicate that changes in the state of the continental 
surface affect other components of the climate system. 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
259 
including precipitation, and indirectly, sea ice distributions 
and ocean surface temperatures (Mintz, 1984; Bonan et al, 
1992). Soil moisture anomalies may also have far-reaching 
effects (Manabe and Delworth, 1990; Beljaars et al, 1993; 
Koster and Saurez, 1996). In general, the simulated 
changes in the continental surface climate depend on the 
land-surface scheme employed as well as on the 
meteorological forcing from the atmosphere (Garratt et al, 
1993; Milly and Dunne, 1994; Shao etal, 1995). 
Land-surface processes partition the precipitation among 
evaporation, runofL and temporary stores such as snow and 
soil moisture, and partition the net incident radiant energy 
between latent (evaporation) and sensible heat loss. The 
land surface also alters radiative fluxes through the albedo 
and surface temperature. Momentum exchange between the 
atmosphere and the land surface is determined by the 
representation of surface drag. The parametrization of these 
processes affects short-period meteorological behaviour 
(Walker and Rowntree, 1977; Rowntree and Bolton, 1983; 
Beljaars et al., 1993) and the longer-term climate 
(Dickinson and Henderson-Sellers, 1988; Manabe and 
Delworth, 1990; Xue and Shukla, 1993; Milly and Dunne, 
1994; McGuffie et al, 1995). 
In the 1970s and early 1980s, the representation of land-
surface processes used prescribed albedos and roughness 
lengths and a simple "bucket" hydrology (precipitaflon 
filled the "bucket", evaporation emptied it, and runoff 
occurred when the "bucket" overflowed; Manabe, 1969). 
More recent land-surface parametrizations include 
representations of leaves, roots, multiple soil types and 
layers, an interception store, the dependence of albedo, 
roughness and stomatal conductance on the type of 
vegetation and its canopy geometry, and carbon uptake and 
respiration (Sellers, 1992; Dickinson et al, 1993; Koster 
and Saurez, 1994). These land-surface schemes generally 
reduce the overestimation of land-surface evaporation given 
by "bucket" schemes in the tropics (Sellers, 1992; Scott et 
al, 1996), and improve the simulation of the diumal cycles 
of evaporative and other surface fluxes (Dickinson and 
Henderson-Sellers, 1988). The divergence among current 
land-surface parametrization schemes (Pitman et al, 1993; 
Henderson-Sellers et al, 1995), when combined with the 
different forcing supplied by different atmospheric models 
(Shuttieworth and Dickinson, 1989; Garratt, 1993), results 
in a wider range of land-surface hydroclimates than was 
reported in IPCC (1990). Although determining soil 
moisture or river discharge off-line in an impact model can 
produce different results from those detennined in a G C M , 
it is difficult to discern the better schemes because adequate 
evaluation data are generally lacking. 
5.3.2.2 Land-surface 
fluxes 
Fluxes between the atmosphere and land may be poorly 
simulated because of inadequacies in the atmospheric and 
land-surface models themselves. For example, the bucket 
model is known to exaggerate daytime evaporation when 
energy and soil water are available (Dickinson and 
Henderson-Sellers, 1988), with a consequent distortion of 
the diumal temperature range. Shuttleworth and Dickinson 
(a) 
0 
Ч " 5 
с 
Ф 
MOSAIC 
U G A M P 2 
• 
• BATS 
SWAP* 
. UKMO 
_SSI8,VIC* 
jWAB^ 
• GLASS 
CAPSLLNL 
• 
.CSIR09 
CABAUW (obs) 
«PLACE 
N M C * CAPS 
40 
4 5 
5 0 
Latent heat flux (Wm~2) 
(b) 
E C H A * 
U G A M P 2 
S W A P * 
G I S S 
S E C H I B A 2 * 
U K M O 
I S B A ^ S E W A B 
'c 
CSIflOS (784) 
CLAS3*\BASE 
CABAUW (obsfCSIROg^^ 
ИИ1'1П 
C A P ? ' ' , ^ ^ ^ ! 
• PILPS (776) 
* AMIP (precipitation) 
300 
4 0 0 
5 0 0 
6 0 0 
700 
8 0 0 
Evapotranspiration (mm) 
Figure 5.23: (a) The annually averaged latent and sensible heat 
fluxes predicted by the PILPS land-surface scliemes. A single 
year's observations from Cabauw, the Netherlands, were used for 
as many annual cycles as was required for each land-surface 
scheme to conserve energy (<3 Wnr-^) and water (<3 mm/yr). (b) 
As in (a) but for the annual totals of evaporation and runoff plus 
drainage. The AMIP/PÍLPS models' 10-year mean values are the 
weighted average for the closest G C M grid point and as many of 
the suiTounding eight grid points that are designated as land. (The 
AMIP precipitation totals are given in parentheses and differ from 
those prescribed for the off-Hne forcing.) 
260 
CUmate Models - Evaluation 
(1989) also showed that use of the Biosphere-Atmosphere 
Transfer Scheme (BATS) can lead to erroneous results 
when the incident surface solar radiation provided by the 
atmospheric G C M is poor (Garratt, 1993). 
The Project for Intercomparison of Land-surface 
Parametrization Schemes (PILPS) (Henderson-Sellers et 
ai, 1993, 1995) is evaluating land-surface simulations. 
Figure 5.23a shows the uncoupled annually averaged 
partition of net incident radiant energy into sensible and 
latent heat with prescribed atmospheric fluxes at Cabauw, 
the Netherlands. The scatter in the energy partition is due 
to different calculations of the surface temperature and, to a 
lesser extent, to the differences in winter surface albedos; 
the range (from upper left to lower right) is the result of the 
use of different land-surface parametrizations. The land 
surface also interacts with the ocean through fresh water 
runoff, which has recently been improved in some models 
(Johnson et al, 1993; Beljaars et al, 1993; Viterbo and 
Beljaars, 1995; Polcher et al, 1996) for the major humid 
river basins, but in other basins the models' poor 
precipitation (and perhaps evaporation) can overwhelm the 
improvement in the land-surface scheme (Miller et al. 
1994). Uncoupled simulations, in which the variation due 
to differences in atmospheric forcing is removed, also 
exhibit a wide variation in the partition of precipitation into 
runoff (Figure 5.23b); for example, E C H A M puts less than 
50% of the precipitation into runoff, while a budget scheme 
such as B U C K (Robock et al, 1995) puts more than 90% 
into runoff. 
5.3.2.3 Soil moisture simulation 
IPCC (1990) noted that "the representation (and validation) 
of soil moisture in current climate models is still relatively 
crude". Robock et al (1995) find that both a "bucket" 
scheme and the simplified SiB (Simple Biosphere) scheme 
have serious deficiencies in their simulations of soil 
moisture in mid-latitudes. Figure 5.24 shows the annual 
cycle of soil moisture simulated in PILPS for the HAPEX-
M O B I L H Y site in France (Shao and Henderson-Sellers, 
1996). The range among the simulations is about 100 mm 
at the end of an equilibrated year, and is greatest in the 
summer when most schemes underestimate soil moisture. 
The differences in the simulation of soil moisture result in 
part from different runoff and drainage parametrizations 
* 
• BATS 
• 
• BIOME2 
^ 
* EGG 
CENTURY 
* 
ISBA 
» 
" CSIR09 
^
^ 
PLACE 
^ 
+ SSIB 
*
* 
BUCKET 
^ VIC 
« ° 
BEST 
^ 
SECHIBA2 
^ CLASS 
• — • 
HAPEX 
360 
Day number from start of experiment 
Figure 5.24: The annual cycle of soil moisture in a 1.6 m column simulated by the land-surface schemes in the PILPS intercomparison 
for the HAPEX-MOBILHY site in southern France (Shao et al, 1995; Shao and Henderson-Sellers, 1996). 
CUmate Models - Evaluation 
261 
(see Figure 5.23b), and the bucket scheme with no stomatal 
resistance evaporates more than other schemes. Mitchell et 
al. (1990) also noted a proportionality between the 
seasonal variation of soil moisture in the control climate 
simulation and the soil moisture decrease in increased 
experiments. These results emphasise the need for 
improved treatments of soil moisture and runoff, especially 
in view of the summer drying found over the mid-latitude 
continents in some greenhouse wanning experiments with 
coupled models (see Chapter 6). 
5.3.2.4 Summary 
In summary, the general agreement found a¡nong the 
results of relatively simple land-surface schemes in 1990 
has been reduced by the introduction of more complex 
parametrizations. While models can be tuned for particular 
locations, regional distributions depend upon the adequacy 
of the forcing meteorology and the antecedent conditions, 
both of which are difficult to establish. Use of site-specific 
parameters improves the simulation in more realistic 
models, but the lack of suitable observations is inhibiting 
the development and evaluation of universal land-surface 
schemes. 
5.3.3 Oceanic General Circulation Models 
5.3.3.1 Introduction 
The oceanic components of present coupled models range 
in spatial resolution from around 1 to 4 horizontally and 
from 6 to 30 vertical levels. Current "high-resolution" 
ocean models have many more vertical levels (up to 60) 
and have resolutions as fine as Ve°. The counterpart to 
meteorological weather occurs in the ocean in the form of 
eddies at scales of less than Va". The high resolution 
models mentioned above explicitly resolve much of the 
mixing due to eddies but at great computational expense, 
while the lower resolution models typically used in climate 
simulations must use parametric representations of the 
mixing. Here the former class of model is referred to as 
eddy-resolving, and the latter as coarse resolution or non-
eddy-resolving. 
Many of the deficiencies in coarse resolution models 
noted by Gates et al. (1992) are only starting to be 
effectively addressed. These problems include: (i) the 
representation of geometry and bathymetry; (ii) the 
parametrization of sub-grid scale processes such as 
convection, mixing and mesoscale eddies; (iii) errors in 
surface forcing for ocean-alone simulations; (iv) a 
thermocline that is often too deep and too diffuse; (v) weak 
poleward heat transport; (vi) distortion of upper ocean and 
deep boundary currents; and (vii) temperature and salinity 
errors in the deep waters. W O C E (World Ocean 
Circulation Experiment) (1993, 1994) and the recent 
studies of Covey (1995) and Weaver (pers. comm.) suggest 
that higher horizontal resolution, but not necessarily eddy-
resolving, may redress some of these deficiencies. 
5.3.3.2 Evaluation against present ocean climate 
5.3.3.2.1 Coarse resolution models 
The ocean stores heat and various chemical constituents at 
one place and transports them over large distances for 
release at some later time, perhaps many centuries later. 
England (1993) and England et al. (1993) have found that 
the GFDL ocean model can reproduce the observed major 
Surface Ekman transport (• » 30Sv) 
• 
• 
• 
- 
- 
•<— 
- 
—>• 
~ 
— 
^ 
• 
• 
(a) Observed 
90°N 
60">N 
30°N 
EQ 
30°S 
60°S 
90°S 
(b) Modelled 
0 
90°N 
60°N 
30°N 
EQ 
Latitude 
30°S 
60°S 
90°S 
Figure 5.25: The zonally averaged latitude-depth sections of 
salinity (psu) in the World Ocean as observed (a) (Levitas et al., 
1994b) and as simulated (b). Contour interval is 0.25. Vectors at 
the top indicate the zonally integrated strength of the surface 
Ekman transport in Sverdrup (England et al, 1993). 
262 
Climate Models ~ Evaluation 
a) Observations 
b) HOR 
eO^S 
-ICS 
2D°S 
0^ 
eO^S 
40^3 
20^S 
0° 
LATITUDE 
LATITUDE 
Figure 5.26: Latitude-depth sections of dissolved CFC-11 (pmol kg-') along the prime meridian during late 1983 (Warner and Weiss, 
1992; Robitaille and Weaver, 1995; England, 1995) as given by (a) observations; (b) a control experiment with mixing in a Cartesian 
reference frame (HOR); (c) an experiment with mixing predominantly parallel to surfaces of constant density (ISO), and (d) an 
experiment with mixing configured according to the parametrization of Gent and McWilUams (1990) (GM). 
features of the water masses of the worid ocean (Figure 
5.25). Such results increase our confidence that the time-
scales and volumes of water involved in the conversion 
processes for heat and water (salinity) in climate change 
experiments are realistic. 
Coarse resolution ocean models have also been widely 
used in the study of COj uptake (Orr, 1993; Siegenthaler 
and Sarmiento, 1993), and Wallace (1995) has noted that a 
variety of box-diffusion ocean models converge on similar 
values for the net uptake of COj. For ocean GCMs, where 
the ocean carbon data are used primarily for evaluation, the 
consistency with simpler models increases confidence that 
the vertical and horizontal transport mechanisms of non-
eddy-resolving models are reasonable in lower and middle 
latitudes. Results such as those shown in Figure 5.26b and 
с indicate that ocean models still have difficulty in 
simulating observed tracer distributions, especially in 
regions where deep convection occurs. England (1995) and 
Robitaille and Weaver (1995) suggested that the model 
estimates of the CFC-11 uptake in the Southern Ocean 
were too large if the usual mixing schemes (Figure 5.26b 
and c) were employed, and that the role of the Southern 
Ocean in moderating climate change may be over­
estimated. Improvements in the parametrization of eddy 
mixing have alleviated some of this problem as shown in 
Figure 5.26d, but errors still exist in the thermocline 
region. 
Data assimilation experiments have also been conducted 
in recent years with coarse resolution ocean models similar 
to those used in climate simulation. Such methods provide 
an ideal environment for model evaluation since they yield 
not only an estimate of the distribution of oceanic variables 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
263 
based on data and model physics, but also quantify the 
expected errors in these estimates (Wunsch 1989; Bennett 
1992; Tziperman and Bryan, 1993). For example, 
Marotzke and Wunsch (1993) found that it was not 
possible to make a steady meridional overturning in the 
North Atlantic consistent with both the model and 
observations, indicating a weakness in the model 
formulation and/or errors in the data. 
5.3.3.2.2 Eddy-resolving 
models 
It is presently not possible to incorporate an eddy-resolving 
ocean component in a coupled climate model because of 
the lack of computational resources. While such models 
provide an important means for testing processes and 
parametrizations, they are subject to the effects of spin-up 
in response to initial conditions and forcing to at least as 
great an extent as are coarse-resolution ocean models. The 
near-eddy-resolving global model of Semtner and Chervin 
(1988, 1992) has been integrated at ' / 4 ° resolution at 
N C A R and at Vb" at L A N L (Los Alamos National 
Laboratory), while the W O C E Community Modelling 
Effort includes a high-resolution GFDL ocean G C M for the 
North Atlantic (Bryan and Holland 1989; Boning et ai, 
1991) with resolution of 10-15 km and a high-resolution 
model on constant density surfaces (Campos and Bleck, 
1992) . The model developed for studies of the Antarctic 
SALINITY 
JANUARY 
0-50m 
1986 
Figure 5.27: The instantaneous sea surface salinity field in January 1986 as simulated by the NCAR/Los Alamos eddy-resolving model 
(Semtner, 1994). 
264 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
Circumpolar Current (FRAM Group, 1991) is being tested 
at comparable resolution in the U K Ocean Circulation and 
Climate Advanced Modelling (OCCAM) project. 
Semtner (1994) finds that many of the known features of 
the global ocean circulation are reproduced by the sixth-
degree global simulation at Los Alamos. In particular, this 
model provides support for the hypothesised routes of low-
salinity warm water from the western Pacific to the North 
Atlantic via the Indonesian throughflow (Figure 5.27), 
which is a critical element of North Atlantic overturning. 
This result suggests that non-eddy-resolving ocean models 
without such a route may not realistically account for this 
overturning. Figure 5.28 shows analyses of the horizontal 
wavenumber spectra (representing the potential energy as a 
function of scale) at 400 m and 800 m at 24°N in the 
western Pacific Ocean, based on observations and on the 
N C A R and Los Alamos model integrations. The N C A R 
model matches the observed variability at 800 m but shows 
too little variability at 400 m, even at scales which are well 
resolved by the model. The finer-resolution Los Alamos 
model matches the observed temperature variability at both 
depths except at the shortest wavelengths. From these and 
other comparisons between observed and modelled spatial 
variability, it has been suggested that V]_2° resolution will 
be needed in ocean models before the modelled variability 
converges to the observed spectra. 
The TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite mission is producing 
data on the global sea surface elevation with an accuracy of 
±4 cm. Such measurements provide a unique source of data 
for evaluating ocean circulation on small scales. Figure 
5.29 shows the standard deviation of sea surface height 
from the Vg" simulation at L A N L and from T O P E X 
altimetry data. The agreement between the observed and 
modelled distributions increases confidence in the realism 
of the model's simulations. 
Convection and meridional circulation in the vicinity of 
the Antarctic have been identified as key processes for 
moderating the warming effect of enhanced greenhouse gas 
concentrations. In this context, the results of Doos (1994), 
and Doos and 'Webb (1994) are particularly important. Using 
the Fine Resolution Antarctic Model (FRAM Group, 1991) 
they showed that the wind-driven cell found around the 
latitude of the Drake Passage in coarse resolution models 
(the so-called Deacon Cell) is associated with changes in the 
depth of the density surfaces between South America and the 
interior of the ocean, and involves littie transport through 
density surfaces. However, these resuhs and those of Klinck 
(1994) from the C M E model (Bryan and Holland, 1989) 
suggest that eddy-resolving models need to be integrated 
over the millennial periods characteristic of the ocean's 
(a) 
Temperature spectra at 400 m depth 
10' 
E 
< 
1 
c - 
1 
r
-
r
-
10-6 I 
, 
I 
. ^ . 
J 
. 
I 
10-" 
10-3 
10-2 
10-' 
Wavenumber (cycles per km) 
(b) 
Temperature spectra at 800 m depth 
•г 10° 
'(Л 
1 10"^ 
-
-T 
1 
1—г—n j Ч 
1 
I I 
-
/ 
\ 
к 
-
К 
-
\- , 
\ / | 
'i 
1 
10-" 
10-3 
1Q-2 
10-1 
Wavenumber (cycles per km) 
Figure 5.28: The temperature spectra as a function of zonal 
wavenumber at 24°N in the Pacific for (a) 400 m depth and 
(b) 800 m depth. The observed structure is shown as a solid line, 
and the results from the N C A R model are shown as a dotted line 
for Va" by Vs" resolution and as a dashed line for Ve° resolution 
(Semtner, 1994). 
thermal adjustment time before actual water mass 
conversion processes are accurately represented. 
5.3.3.3 Evaluation of temporal 
variability 
One of the characteristics of ocean circulation is that it 
appears to have significant energy on many time-scales; 
some of the variability is clearly externally forced (e.g., 
seasonal variations), some appears to be the result of 
atmosphere-ocean coupling (e.g.. E l Nino-Southern 
Oscillation), and some is due to internal ocean variability 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
265 
(a) 
Modelled surface height variability 
30 
во 
ISO 
ISO 
1B0 
Я 0 
?4o 
г/л 
300 
япо 
(b) 
Observed (TOPEX) surface height variability 
(cm) 
Figure 5.29: Tlie standard deviation of sea surface height from (a) the %° by '/4° eddy-resolving simulation conducted at L A N L 
(averaged over 1985 to 1994), and (b) TOPEX altimetty data averaged from Oct. 1992 to Oct. 1994 (Wunsch, 1994). 
266 
Climate Models - Evaluation 
(e.g., eddies and internal fluctuations of the thermohaline 
circulation). Evaluation of the longer time-scales is 
difficult due to the lack of data, and even at interannual 
time-scales the available data are barely adequate. 
5.3.3.3.1 Seasonal to interannual variability 
The seasonal cycle in surface temperature and surface heat 
and moisture fluxes is accompanied by seasonal cycling in 
the upper ocean stratification (i.e., deep mixing in winter 
and a shallow thermocline in summer). Very few ocean 
models used in coupled simulations have adequate 
representation of these processes, and evaluation is difficult 
because of the paucity of suitable global data sets (see 
Levitus and Boyer, 1994). 
GlobaLocean-only models have simulated realistic 
modes of interannual variability (Jacobs et al, 1994; Zhang 
and Endoh, 1994), although it is clear that the model must 
possess adequate resolution in the tropical region in order 
to avoid distortion of the important equatorial Kelvin and 
Rossby waves. Philander et al. (1992) have noted that low-
resolution ocean models may not be capable of 
representing the important mechanisms of ENSO, though 
in coupled systems they do possess ENSO-like oscillations 
(see Section 5.2.4.2). 
5.3.3.3.2 Decadal and longer variability 
While there has been considerable progress in the study of 
ocean variability at decadal and longer time-scales with 
stand-alone ocean models (Weaver and Hughes, 1992), the 
lack of suitable verifying data in the deep ocean has 
inhibited model evaluation. Long SST data sets have 
enabled extended atmospheric model integrations under 
realistic boundary conditions (Bottomley et ai, 1990; 
Parker et al, 1994), but similar integrations for the ocean 
will require, at a minimum, an extended record of global 
wind stress and estimates of fresh water forcing, 
particularly at high latitudes. Nevertheless, decadal 
variability has been found in ocean models in basins where 
deep water formation occurs (Weaver and Sarachik, 1991a; 
Greatbatch and Zhang, 1994; Weaver et al, 1994; Weisse 
et al, 1994), and further analysis of such results might help 
to inteфret some of the causes of decadal variability found 
in coupled models such as those of Delworth et al (1993) 
(see Secflon 5.2.4.3). The latter authors have idenufied 
irregular oscillations of the North Aflantic thermohaline 
circulation in a long coupled model simulation, in which 
the circulation anomalies are driven by out-of-phase 
density anomalies in the sinking and rising regions. The 
spatial patterns of the associated sea surface temperature 
anomalies resemble an interdecadal pattern identified in 
observations by Kushnir (1994). Another class of decadal 
variability, however, exists in mid-latitudes that arises from 
unstable ocean-atmosphere innteractions, as shown by 
Latif and Barnett (1994). 
A fundamental period for ocean model variability also 
occurs on the century time-scale (Mikolajewicz and Maier-
Reimer, 1990; Weaver et al, 1993; Winton and Sarachik, 
1993). That such modes exist in some climate models is 
not in dispute, although the lack of observaflonal data 
leaves open the questions whether these unstable modes 
have counterparts in reality (Bond et al, 1993) or whether 
counterparts exist in coupled climate models. A similar 
caveat applies to modelled variations of the thermohaline 
circulation on millennial time-scales (Marotzke, 1989; 
Weaver and Sarachik, 1991b; Wright and Stocker, 1991). 
5.3.3.4 Issues in ocean model evaluation 
5.3.3.4.1 Evaluating model processes 
Observationalists have for some time recognised the 
importance of bathymetry in shaping the global exchange 
and conversion of water masses. Doscher et al. (1994) 
incorporated a detailed representation of the sills which 
control deep water flow in the North Atlantic, and showed 
that this improved the simulation of the circulation and 
heat transport. Recent studies of the mixing associated with 
mesoscale eddies (Gent and McWilliams, 1990; Gent et al., 
1995) and that associated with convection (Send and 
Marshall, 1996) are motivated in part by recognised 
discrepancies between ocean climate models and 
observations. Danabasoglu et al. (1994) have shown 
promising results from experiments using a parametrization 
for mesoscale eddy-induced mixing. When such 
parametrization was used in an oceanic general circulation 
model, the thermocline became sharper, the deep ocean 
became colder, and the meridional transport of heat and 
salt increased (Figure 5.30). Robitaille and Weaver (1995) 
and England (1995) have also shown that this 
parametrization improves the ability of a global ocean 
model to reproduce observed CFC distributions (see Figure 
5.26). A l l these features are improvements on the results 
obtained using traditional mixing schemes, and address 
some of the recognised weaknesses of ocean models used 
for climate studies. 
5.3.3.4.2 Boundary forcing 
The evaluation of ocean surface boundary conditions is 
critical, since the surface forcing ultimately determines 
the large-scale ocean circulation. There have been 
considerable improvements in the determination of the 
surface wind stress and surface heat and moisture fluxes 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
267 
(a) 1.5 
-2,0 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
90°S 
45°S 
0° 
45°N 
90°^ 
(b) 1.0 
-0.2 I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
90°S 
45°S 
0° 
45°N 
90°^ 
Latitude 
Figure 5.30: Ttie mean northward heat transport in (a) all oceans 
and (b) in the Atlantic for experiments conducted with a global 
model using the Gent and McWilliams (1990) parametrization for 
sub-grid scale mixing (solid line) and the traditional lateral/vertical 
mixing scheme (dashed line) (Danabasoglu et al, 1994). 
(OOSDP, 1995), and atmospheric reanalysis projects 
should lead to further improvements. 
5.3.3.4.3 
Obset^ations 
In general, the ocean is so poorly observed and the 
instrumental record so incomplete that there are regions of 
the ocean for which no observations exist. While over one 
hundred years of instrumental data are available for the 
surface of the ocean in COADS (Slutz et al, 1985), the 
situation for internal ocean data is much more restricted. A 
recent effort at "data archaeology" (Levitus and Boyer, 
1994; Levitus et al, 1994a,b) has expanded the total data 
record and should allow a better benchmark of the ability 
of ocean models to simulate the mean state of the ocean 
(WOCE, 1994). 
A future ocean observing system designed specifically 
for climate purposes is being considered by the Global 
Climate Observing System (GCOS) and the Global Ocean 
Observing System (GOOS). Since there are now no 
continuous long-term measurement sites in the deep ocean, 
the establishment of such a system is important for the 
evaluation of climate models and for the measurement of 
the natural variability that is necessary for the 
unambiguous detection of a climate response to 
anthropogenic forcing (see Chapter 8). 
5.3.3.5 Summary 
The observational data sets on which the evaluation of 
ocean models rests have significant spatial and temporal 
shortcomings, with many regions of the global ocean not 
sampled and many others having only short sampling 
records. This means it is difficult to form a reliable 
estimate of the ocean climate and its variability. Evaluation 
of ocean models in the coastal region is critical for regional 
interpretation of projected changes in sea level, and the 
interactions between the open ocean and coastal regions are 
affected by the fresh water input to ocean models from 
continental runoff (Section 5.3.2). The need for flux 
adjustment is an explicit recognition of the inadequacies of 
the components of coupled climate models (Section 5.2.2), 
and evaluation of (and better parametrizations for) air-sea 
exchanges are necessary for the sustained improvement of 
ocean models. 
In summary, evaluation of the climate simulation 
capability of ocean GCMs shows that they realistically 
portray the large-scale structure of the oceanic gyres and 
the gross features of the thermohaline circularion. The 
models' major deficiencies are the representation of mixing 
processes, the structure and strength of the western 
boundary currents, the simulation of the meridional heat 
transport, and the portrayal of convection and subduction. 
Some of these shortcomings may be related to the 
relatively coarse resolution of the ocean components of 
current coupled models. 
5.3.4 Sea Ice Models 
Although sea ice occupies only a small portion of the ocean 
surface, it has an important role in climate variation 
through its effects on the surface energy and moisture 
exchanges. The simplest sea ice model consists of a 
motionless uniform layer of ice whose thickness is 
governed by thermodynamics. More realistic models 
incorporate snow on the ice, fractional ice coverage, multi-
layer ice, the effects of salinity, and, most importantiy, sea 
ice dynamics. Because of the sea ice motion, melting may 
occur in places far away from the formation area. Averaged 
268 
(b) 
Observed 
Figure 5.32: (a) Simulated and (b) observed sea ice concentrations (in %) in the Weddell Sea for September 1987 (Fischer and Lemke, 1994). 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
269 
over a seasonal cycle, the net freezing rate in a particular 
area is rarely zero due to the divergence or convergence of 
the sea ice flow. The net freezing rates represent surface 
buoyancy fluxes, which in turn affect the density structure 
and baroclinic flow in the ocean. The characteristics of the 
sea ice motion depend strongly on the rheological 
characteristics of the sea ice as a plastic material, and also 
on the geometry of the coastlines and the atmospheric 
forcing fields, especially the wind. 
Recent experiments with sea ice models with different 
internal ice stress parametrizations (Ip et al., 1991; Flato and 
Hibler, 1992) have shown that dynamic/ thermodynamic 
models can describe the observed seasonal cycle of ice 
extent (Figure 5.31) and the location of the ice edge (Figure 
5.32, opposite) quite realisrically (Fischer and Lemke, 1994; 
Harder and Lemke, 1995). Comparison of observed and 
modelled buoy trajectories also indicates that the large-scale 
structure as well as the small-scale excursions of the sea ice 
flow are represented well. A proper description of the sea ice 
motion is especially important to obtain the correct 
buoyancy flux forcing for the ocean. 
Evaluation of sea ice in the current generation of models 
is usually limited to comparison of the modelled and 
observed ice edge position (as available from satellites, 
e.g., Gloersen et al., 1992). A common problem in coarse-
resolution coupled climate models is an ice edge that is too 
far equatorward in the North Atlantic but not far enough 
equatorward in the Southern Ocean (Washington and 
Meehl, 1989; Henderson-Sellers and Hansen, 1995). Under 
these circumstances it is difficuh to achieve an adequate 
simulation of the surface fresh water fluxes that are crucial 
to sea ice formation. Flux adjustment may be undertaken 
for ice-covered areas, although it is not as straightforward 
as over the open ocean because of strong feedback effects. 
(For instance, if the flux adjustment is negative the result 
may be an unstable growth of ice when the ice advances 
over a cooling ocean.) Observations of sea ice thickness are 
needed for evaluating the model treatment of 
thermodynamic growth and melting, ice dynamics, and the 
effects of ocean and atmospheric circulation on ice 
deformation; only a tentative climatology is available for 
the Arctic based on sparse submarine sonar observations 
(Bourke and Garreti, 1987) and drill-hole observations in 
the thinner ice of the Antarctic. Satellite-based ice 
concentration and some ice velocity fields from Arctic 
buoys are also available. 
In summary, evidence indicates that incorporating sea 
ice dynamics reduces the modelled climate sensitivity 
(Hibler, 1984; Pollard and Thompson, 1994; Ramsden 
and Fleming, 1995), which underlines the need for 
Q I — I — I — I — I — I — I — •— I — I — I 
I—I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
i _ J 
• 
I 
• 
I 
I 
Ü 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 
Month number 
Figure 5.31: The observed (dashed line) and simulated (solid 
line) sea ice extent in the Weddell Sea for 1986 and 1987 (Fischer 
andLeinke, 1994). 
increased attention to the sea ice in coupled climate 
models. In addition to verification data, accurate 
atmospheric forcing fields are necessary to obtain realistic 
ice simulations. Although dynamic/thermodynamic sea 
ice models are less sensitive to variations of atmospheric 
and oceanic boundary 
conditions than 
purely 
thermodynamic models, their accuracy requirements are 
nevertheless quite high. 
5.4 How Well Do Models Perform Under Other 
Conditions? 
Numerical weather analysis and prediction and 
palaeoclimate simulations provide opportunities for model 
evaluation under conditions that are different from those in 
the simulation of the current climate, and constitute an 
important additional source of confidence in models. 
5.4.1 Weather Analysis and Prediction 
There has been a progressive increase in the overall 
accuracy of operational (atmospheric) numerical weather 
prediction (NWP) models as measured in their daily 
forecasts, as illustrated in Figure 5.33. The sea level 
pressure forecast scores show a similar increase in 
accuracy in the 1980s, although the improvement has 
slowed in the 1990s. Some of this improvement is due to 
increased resolution and some to improvements in physical 
parametrizations and data assimilation schemes. The 
evaluation of NWP models can lead to the identification of 
deficiencies in the generally similar atmospheric models 
used in coupled climate simulations (Hollingsworth, 1993). 
The reanalysis projects in progress at several operational 
centres with "frozen" state-of-the-art atmospheric models 
and advanced data assimilation systems will provide a 
multi-year data set of reasonable homogeniety that is 
suitable for climate model evaluation. Using data produced 
270 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
by operational N W P models, the intercomparison of 
modelled surface stress and precipitation has shown good 
agreement over the ocean, although there are significant 
intermodel differences in the estimated solar radiation and 
sensible/latent heat fluxes (CAS/JSC, 1994). It is 
anticipated that atmospheric water budgets, surface fluxes 
and oceanic heat transport esflmates will be substantially 
improved from the results of reanalyses. 
Evidence of the skill in predicting the onset and decay of 
atmospheric blocking has also been accumulating in the 
context of short- and medium-range weather prediction 
(Tibaldi and Molteni, 1990; Tibaldi et al, 1994) and 
dynamical extended-range forecasting (Tracton et al, 1989; 
Miyakoda and Sirutis, 1990; Tracton, 1990; Anderson, 
1993) (See Figure 5.17). The prediction of blocking onset is 
on average very poor beyond a few days into a forecast. 
This appears to be related to the fact that blocking is 
associated with subtleties in the dynamical balances that 
maintain it, which make it critically dependent upon the 
accuracy of the initial conditions, model resolution and 
model parametrizations (Palmer et al, 1990; Anderson, 
1993; Ferranti et al, 1994; Tibaldi et al, 1994). 
The simulation of tropical cyclones may be considered an 
indicator of a model's ability to portray extreme events. In 
an intercomparison of tropical cyclone track forecasts in the 
north-western Pacific by operational N W P models 
(CAS/JSC, 1994; Muroi and Sato, 1994) it was found that 
tropical cyclones tend to dissipate earlier in the models than 
in the real atmosphere. Attempts to infer tropical cyclones 
in climate models have had some success (Broccoli and 
Manabe, 1990; Haarsma et al, 1993), although the limited 
resolution of earlier models demands caution in any 
"prediction" of tropical cyclone changes in a warmer 
climate (Lighthill et al, 1994). More recent studies with 
models of higher resolution appear to simulate tropical 
cyclone climatology more realistically (Bengtsson, 1994). 
5.4.2 Palaeoclimate Simulation 
Knowledge of the climate's response to the long-term 
changes in external forcing and in the configuration of the 
Earth's surface over geological time-scales provides a 
unique opportunity to increase our confidence in climate 
models. The relative scarcity of palaeoclimatic data, 
however, restricts their use in model evaluation to a 
portrayal of general climatic regimes rather than the 
detailed evaluation of models and processes afforded by 
modern observations. 
The changes of the Earth's climate during the Holocene 
and since the last glacial maximum are large and 
comparatively well-documented, and data are available for 
most continents; the time control (based upon radiocarbon 
dating) 
is reasonable, 
and proxy estimates of 
25 L 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
Year 
87 
89 
90 
91 
92 
Figure 5.33: Evolution of the root-mean-square error of 72-hr forecasts of the 500 hPa height over the period 1979 to 1992 at operational 
NWP centres in France, UK, ECMWF, Japan, USA, Canada and Germany (DWD) (CAS/JSC, 1994). 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
271 
palaeoclimatic conditions can be obtained from a variety of 
environmental records (see Chapter 3, Section 3.6). Using 
such data, atmospheric models have been used to simulate 
the climate of the last glacial maximum (IPCC, 1990; 
Joussaume, 1993). The glacial boundary conditions consist 
of the ice sheets' topography and sea ice, CO2 levels, ocean 
surface temperature, and land albedo. Changes in the ice 
sheets themselves or in vegetation, however, are not 
simulated (see Chapters 7 and 9). The earlier ice age SST 
data sets (IPCC, 1990; Wright et ai, 1993) are now being 
expanded and revised for use in the newly organized 
Palaeoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project (PMIP), 
which is focusing on simulations for the last glacial 
maximum and for 6000 years BP using atmospheric 
models with both fixed SST and mixed-layer oceans. 
The widespread warmth and enhanced northern summer 
monsoon circulations of the mid-Holocene have also 
recently been simulated by applying appropriate changes in 
the orbital parameters (Mitchell, 1993; Phillips and Held, 
1994). Modelling studies of pre-Pleistocene climates (i.e., 
those prior to about 1.8 million years ago) have concentrated 
on how to achieve warm, ice-free conditions year-round at 
high latitudes, especially over continental areas, and on the 
conditions necessary for the initiation, maintenance and 
demise of land ice (Rind and Chandler, 1991; Sloan and 
Barron, 1992; Barron et al, 1993; Kutzbach and Ziegler, 
1993). Some data, however, indicate that the tropical SST 
has remained relatively stable during times when CO2 levels 
were probably higher (Crowley, 1993), while climate 
models predict increasing tropical SST with higher COj 
(e.g., Cubasch et al, 1992) (see Chapter 3). 
5.5 How Well Do We Understand Model Sensitivity? 
Issues relating to the equilibrium and transient response of 
models to changes in forcing due to increasing C O , and 
aerosols over the period of the observational record are 
discussed in Chapter 6. Although such sensitivity 
experiments are an important source of model evaluation, 
they are more appropriately considered in the context of 
model projections of climate change than in connection 
with the evaluation of the models' control or reference 
simulations. Therefore, only model sensitivity to changes 
in their formulation, boundary conditions and/or 
parametrizations are discussed here. 
In general, any model sensitivity indicates an area of 
uncertainty where further research is needed, while a 
model's response to changes in external forcing indicates 
its potential for climate change. Some sensitivity 
experiments indicate that a particular formulation or 
parameter value gives a better evaluation of the model, but 
the required observations are often not available. In other 
sensitivity experiments with idealised changes in forcing, 
such as those of Cess et al (1990, 1991, 1993) and Randall 
et al (1994), no systematic evaluation against observed 
data is generally possible, although such experiments 
highlight the importance of particular processes and 
illustrate the wide differences that can exist among models. 
While a given parametrization scheme may perform well 
in "off-line" tests, interactions with other parametrizations 
and with dynamics may not result in an improved 
simulation in a coupled model. A particular scheme may 
also perform well in one model but perform poorly when 
used in a different model. The development of 
parametrizations that can be easily moved from one model 
to another would help to understand this behaviour, and 
would facilitate more systematic model evaluation 
(Roeckner ei a/., 1995). 
5.5.7 Sensitivity to Representation of Water Vapour 
The distribution of moisture is characterised by large 
values near the surface and by low values in high latitudes 
and in the upper troposphere. This can lead to a number of 
computational difficulties, of which the appearance of non-
physical "overshoots" and "undershoots" of moisture are 
the most severe (Rasch and WilUamson, 1990). This has 
led some modelling groups to use semi-Lagrangian 
methods for moisture transport (Williamson and Rasch, 
1993), in which the moisture is tracked by individual air 
parcels rather than being carried on a fixed numerical grid. 
Hogan and Rosmond (1991), Thuburn (1993), Navarra et 
al (1994) and Boer (1995) have also reduced errors in the 
modelled moisture distribution by using special numerical 
techniques. 
5.5.2 Sensitivity to Resolution 
Debate continues over the most appropriate horizontal and 
vertical resolurion to use in climate models. Kiehl and 
Williamson (1991), Boyle (1993) and Williamson et al 
(1995) find noticeable differences in the quality of 
atmospheric simulations made with low horizontal 
resolution spectral models (such as R15 or T21) and those 
made with medium resolution (such as T42). While some 
cUmate statistics converge as the resolution is increased 
still further, others do not, especially when considered on a 
regional basis. The strong (and often implicit) dependence 
of a model's parametrizations on resolution makes it 
difficult to separate the purely dynamical and physical 
effects of resolution changes, and the climate of lower 
resolution models is particularly sensitive to the 
I 
73 
15 
22.5 
ЪО 
57.5 
L 
5 2 . ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 5 
HZ 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
î 
Q 
5 
Figure 5.34: The square root of the total variance-of the outgoing long-wave radiation (Wm-^) for a perpetual January simulation with 
the U G A M P atmospheric G C M using the convection schemes of (a) Kuo (1974) and (b) Betts-Miller. (c) As in (a) and (b) but for the 
ensemble mean for December-February from N O A A A V H R R data during 1979 to 1991. (Betts and Miller, 1993). 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
273 
formulation and strength of the sub-grid scale damping 
(Held and Phillipps, 1993). Studies on the impact of 
vertical resolution have also been conducted, and indicate 
that higher resolution near the surface and near the 
tropopause generally improves the simulations (Bushell 
and Gregory, 1994). 
The sensitivity of ocean models to horizontal resolution 
is also an important issue in climate simulation with 
coupled models. Covey (1995) has shown that there is a 
resolution sensitivity of the annual mean meridional heat 
transport simulated with a global eddy-resolving model 
(Semtner and Chervin, 1992), while Washington et al. 
(1994) have demonstrated that a moderate-resolution (1 
and 20 vertical levels) ocean model is capable of 
simulating many features of the corresponding eddy-
resolving version (see Section 5.3.3.2.2). The effect of 
resolution on heat transport has also been recently 
considered by Fanning and Weaver (1995). 
Atmospheric and ocean models are sometimes 
formulated with spatially variable horizontal resolution in 
order to provide more detail in areas of particular interest 
or importance, such as regions where there are generally 
large gradients of precipitation or circulation. This 
technique allows improved simulation in selected regions 
while permitting full interaction with the larger-scale 
climate, and is an alternative to the use of imbedded fine-
mesh mesoscale models discussed in Chapter 6 (see also 
Section 5.2.5). 
5.5.3 Sensitivity to Convection and Clouds 
The sensitivity of atmospheric models to the convective 
parametrization has been investigated by several groups 
(Slingo et ai, 1994; Zhang and McFarlane, 1995). The use 
of alternative convective parametrizations is found to have 
a marked influence on a model's transient behaviour in the 
tropics as shown in Figure 5.34. In the U G A M P model, the 
Kuo scheme significantly underestimates the observed 
variability of the outgoing long-wave radiation, wiiile there 
is a tendency for the Betts-Miller scheme to overestimate 
it. Recent studies by Wang and Schlesinger (1995) suggest, 
however, that with some adjustment of parameters (e.g., 
the threshold relative humidity) currently used convection 
schemes can be made to produce realistic intraseasonal 
oscillations. 
The sensitivity of the simulated tropical precipitation to 
the choice of convective parametrization has also been 
studied by Numaguti (1993), Colman and McAvaney 
(1996) and McAvaney et al. (1995), among others. In 
general, the Kuo moisture convergence scheme is found to 
produce maxima of precipitation on both sides of the 
equator in contrast to other convective parametrizations. 
Cess et al. (1995) have diagnosed a systematic error in the 
seasonal variation of the cloud radiative forcing in models 
that use a moisture convergence closure in their convective 
parametrization (see also Figure 5.12). 
Climate models are also known to be sensitive to details 
of the parametrization of cloud microphysical processes. In 
particular. Fowler and Randall (1996) have found 
significant differences in the proportions of cloud Uquid 
water and cloud ice in the CSU model depending upon the 
temperature range in which they are allowed to coexist, 
although the inclusion of cloud microphysics in the CSU 
model generally improves the simulation of cloud radiative 
forcing. Other studies show a marked sensitivity to the 
choice of cloud parametrizations (Mitchell et ai, 1989; Le 
Treut and Li, 1991; Boer, 1993; Senior and Mitchell, 1993; 
Washington and Meehl, 1993; Meehl and Washington, 
1995; Kiehl, 1996), and a consensus on which 
parametrizations are the most appropriate has not yet been 
reached. 
5.5.4 Sensitivity to Land-surface Processes 
The sensitivity of the surface climate to the parametrization 
of the land surface has been considered in Section 5.3.2. In 
anticipation of their importance to climate change studies 
(see Chapter 6), here we note that recent studies by 
Thompson and Pollard (1996) show that the Land Surface 
Transfer (LSX) scheme produces smaller variations of soil 
moisture in a greenhouse simulation than does a bucket 
scheme. Henderson-Sellers et al. (1995) have also found 
that a doubling of stomatal resistance in the Biosphere-
Atmosphere Transfer Scheme (BATS) significantly 
reduces the evaporative flux over the northern mid-latitude 
continents in summer. These results demonstrate the urgent 
need for further studies of the climate's sensitivity to land-
surface processes in order to determine which schemes are 
the more realistic. 
5.5.5 Sensitivity to Initial Conditions and Surface 
Boundary Conditions 
It is well-known that numerical weather forecasts cannot be 
made with useful accuracy beyond a few weeks ahead, 
after which the solutions bear no resemblance to the actual 
sequence of events. This limit on forecasting skill is due to 
the inevitable growth of errors too small to detect in the 
initial and/or boundary conditions. Such sensitivity is 
termed "chaos", and is also present in the GCMs used for 
climate simulation. In the case of climate, however, since 
we are primarily interested only in the statistics of the 
models' simulation and not the sequence of individual 
274 
CUmate Models - Evaluation 
solutions, a model's chaotic behaviour may be effectively 
removed by considering an ensemble of simulations made 
with different initial conditions. This technique is 
especially useful when considering interannual variability 
(see Section 5.3.1.2.3) or the transient response of a model 
to external forcing as in Chapter 6. 
The sensitivity of the thermohaline circulation to the 
surface boundary conditions in coarse resolution ocean 
models has been explored by Birchfield (1989), Power and 
Kleeman (1993, 1994), Zhang et al (1993), Mikolajewicz 
and Maier-Reimer (1994), Power et al (1994, 1995) and 
Rahmstorf and Willebrand (1996), although 
the 
corresponding studies with eddy-resolving models have not 
yet been made. These studies indicate that more realistic 
formulations of the surface fluxes in ocean models generally 
increase the stability of the thermohaline circulation and 
generally improve the realism of the solutions. 
5.5.6 Summary 
Clouds, the hydrological cycle and the treatment of the 
land surface remain the largest areas of uncertainty in 
climate models, and are generally the cause of the largest 
intermodel differences in both control and sensitivity 
experiments. Although a large number of sensitivity studies 
have been conducted, it is still difficult to identify the best 
overall formulations and parametrizations to be used in 
climate models. Recent experience suggests that a higher 
horizontal resolution than that achieved in most earlier 
studies is needed in atmospheric models, although the 
minimum resolution requirements for ocean models remain 
to be determined. 
Sensitivity studies have also suggested that a model's 
response to changes in external forcing may usefully be 
viewed as systematic changes in the amplitude and 
frequency of the model's characteristic or internal 
circulation regimes (or EOFs). This aspect is further 
discussed in Chapter 6 in connection with future climate 
projections. 
5.6 How Can Our Confidence in Models be Increased? 
Confidence in climate models depends partly upon their 
ability to simulate the current climate and recent climate 
changes, and parfly upon the realistic representation of the 
physical processes that are important to the climate system. 
Current models of tire atmosphere, ocean, land surface and 
sea ice may be rated as good to very good on these 
grounds, while coupled models may be rated as fair to 
good. This seeming discrepancy is due to the fact that most 
coupled climate models do not yet include the newer 
parametrizations and/or higher resolution used in the 
component models. 
The development of more complete, more efficient, and 
more accurate coupled models has long been the aim of the 
climate modelling community, since it is generally 
believed that it is only through such models that we can 
gain a scientific understanding (and hence a reliable 
predictive capability) of climate and climate change. 
Although some modeUing innovations at times appear 
to give puzzling results, and model evaluation has not 
always been carried out as systematically as it should be, 
the 
progressive 
development 
of more 
realistic 
parametrizations, the improvement of numerical techniques 
and resolution, and the inclusion of previously missing 
processes has in general led to better climate models. This 
faith in the fundamental soundness of the modelling 
approach does not deny the presence of significant errors in 
current models nor the utility of models known to be 
incomplete, but does provide confidence that these errors 
can and will be reduced through continuing modelling 
research. 
As discussed more fully in Chapter 6, the successful 
simulation of some of the climate changes that have taken 
place during the past century has provided increased 
confidence in using coupled models for projections of 
future climate change. In particular, the recent coupled 
climate simulations of Mitchell et al. (1995a) and 
Hasselmann et al (1995) have included the direct effect of 
sulphate aerosols along with changing levels of carbon 
dioxide concentration. While there are many uncertainties 
associated with both the implied radiative forcing due to 
aerosols and the climate sensitivity of the models used (and 
other important forcings such as those due to volcanic and 
other aerosols, solar variation, ozone and other greenhouse 
gases are yet to be included), a clear improvement is 
evident in the simulation of the observed change in the 
global surface air temperature and the zonal average of the 
vertical distribution of temperature over the last few 
decades (see Chapter 8). 
Model evaluation needs to be carried out with an emphasis 
on those aspects and processes that are critical to model 
performance, such as cloud radiative effects and ocean 
surface fluxes. Co-ordinated model intercomparisons such as 
AMIP (Gates, 1992) or PILPS (Henderson-Sellers and 
Dickinson, 1992) are useful in this regard, since they serve to 
identify common errors and to document model performance 
and improvement. The evaluation and intercomparison of 
coupled models in particular needs to be intensified and 
broadened, and increased recognition needs to be given to 
coinprehensive evaluation as an essential part of modelling. 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
275 
The acquisition of new observational data for the 
evaluation of both model parametrizations and overall model 
performance must go hand-in-hand with model development. 
The long-term observational data sets that are being 
assembled by GEWEX from in-situ and satellite sources for 
the global distribution of radiation, cloudiness, water vapour, 
precipitation and land-surface properties provide unique 
opportunities for the evaluation of atmospheric models. 
Similarly, the data being assembled by TOGA, WOCE and 
other focused observational programs, including the 
emerging C L I V A R programme (CLIVAR, 1995) and the 
Global Climate Observing System (GCOS), should provide 
research-quality data that will be critical to the evaluation and 
further development of coupled cUmate models. 
Supplementary Table: Institutions Involved in the Atmospheric 
Model Intercomparison 
Project. 
The atmospheric general circulation models with which the AMIP simulations were made are from the institutions listed below. A 
documentation of the dynamical, physical and numerical properties of these models is given by Phillips (1994). 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre (BMRC, Melbourne, Australia) 
Canadian Centre for Climate (CCC, Victoria, Canada) 
Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques (CNRM, Toulouse, France) 
Center for Ocean, Land and Atmosphere (COLA, Calverton, USA) 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia) 
Colorado State University (CSU, Ft. Collins, USA) 
Dynamic Extended Range Forecast Group at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (DERF, Princeton, USA) 
Department of Numerical Mathematics of the Russian Academy of Sciences (DNM, Moscow, Russia) 
European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF, Reading, UK) 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL, Princeton, USA) 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS, New York, USA) 
Goddard Laboratory for Atmospheres (GLA, Greenbelt, USA) 
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC, Greenbelt, USA) 
Institute for Atmospheric Physics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (lAP, Beijing, China) 
Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA, Tokyo, Japan) 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique (LMD, Paris, France) 
Main Geophysical Observatory (MGO, St. Petersburg, Russia) 
Max Planck Institute for Meteorology (MPI, Hamburg, Germany) 
Meteorological Research Institute (MRI, Tsukuba, Japan) 
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR, Boulder, USA) 
National Meteorological Center (NMC, Washington DC, USA) 
Naval Research Laboratory (NRL, Monterey, USA) 
"Recherche en Prévision Numérique" group of Environment Canada (RPN, Quebec, Canada) 
State University of New York at Albany (SUNYA, Albany, USA) "Genesis" model that is joindy administered by S U N Y A and 
NCAR, the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA, Los Angeles, USA) 
University Global Atmospheric Modelling Project (UGAMP, Reading, UK) 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC, Urbana-Champaign, USA) 
United Kingdom Meteorological Office (UKMO, Bracknell, UK) 
Yonsei University (YONU, Seoul. Korea) 
276 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
References 
Anderson, J.L., 1993: The climatology of blocking in a 
numerical forecast model. J. Climate, 6, 1041-1056. 
Barnett, T.P., L. Dumenil, U . Schlese, E. Roeckner and M . Latif, 
1989: The effect of Eurasian snow cover on regional and global 
climate variations. /. Atmos. Set, 46, 661-685. 
Barron, E.J., P.J. Fawcett, W.W. Peterson, D. Pollard and S. 
Thompson, 1993-. Model simulations of Cretaceous cliinates: 
The role of geography and carbon dioxide. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
Land., Series B, 341, 307-316. 
Beljaars, A.C.M., P. Viterbo, M.J. Miller, A.K. Betts and J.H. 
Ball, 1993: A new surface boundary layer formulation at 
E C M W F and experimental continental precipitation forecasts. 
CEWEXNews, 3(3), 1,5-8. 
Bengtsson, L . , 1994: Hurricane-type vortices in a general 
circulation model. Part I. Max-Planck-lnstitute 
fur 
Météorologie, Hamburg, Report No. 123, 42 pp. 
Bennett, A.F., 1992; Inverse Methods in Physical Oceanography. 
Cambridge monographs 
on Mechanics and 
Applied 
Mathematics, Cambridge University Press, New York, 346 pp. 
Betts, A.K., and M.J. Miller, 1993: The Betts-Miller scheme. In: 
The Representation 
of Cumulus Convection 
in 
Numerical 
Models of the Atmosphere, K.A. Emanuel and D.J. Raymond, 
(eds.). American Meteorological Society, Boston. 
Birehfield, G.E., 1989: A coupled ocean-atmosphere climate 
model: Temperature versus salinity effects on the thermohaline 
circulation. СШп. Dyn. 4, 57-71. 
Boer, G.J., 1993; Climate change and the régulation of the 
surface moisture and energy budgets. Clim. Dyn., 8, 225-239. 
Boer, G.J., 1995: A hybrid moisture variable suitable for spectral 
GCMs. Research Activities 
in Atmospheric 
and 
Oceanic 
Modelling. 
Report No. 21, W M O / T D - No. 665, Worid 
Meteorological Organization, Geneva. 
Boer, G.J., K. Афе, M . Blackburn, M . Deque, W.L. Gates, T.L. 
Hart, H. Le Treut, E. Roeckner, D.A. Sheinin, I. Simmonds, 
R.N.B. Smith, T. Tokioka, R.T. Wetherald and D. Williamson, 
1992; Some results from an intercomparison of the climates 
simulated by 14 atmospheric general circulation models. / 
Geophys. Res.,91, 
12771-12786. 
Bonan, G.B., D. Pollard and S.L. Thompson, 1992; Effects of 
boreal forest vegetation on global chínate. Nature, 359, 716-718. 
Bond, G., W. Broecker, S. Johnsen, J. McManus, L. Labeyrie, J. 
Jouzel and G. Bonani, 1993: Correlations between climate 
records from North Atiantic sediments and Greenland ice. 
Nature, 365, 143-147. 
Boning, C.W., R. Doscher and R.G. Budich, 1991: Seasonal 
transport variations in the western subtropical North Atlantic; 
Experiments with an eddy-resolving model. J. Phys. 
Oceanogr.,21, 1271-1289. 
Bottomley, M . , C.K. Folland, J. Hsiung, R.E. Newell and D.E. 
Parker, 1990: Global Ocean Surface Temperature 
Atlas 
"GOSTA". HMSO, London, 20 pp.+ iv, 313 plates. 
Bourke, R . H . and R.P. Garrett, 1987; Sea-ice thickness 
distribution in the Arctic Ocean. Cold Reg. Sci. and Tech., 13, 
259-280. 
Boyle, J.S., 1993; Sensitivity of dynamical quantities to 
horizontal resolution for a climate simulation using the 
E C M W F (Cycle 33) Model. J. Climate, 6, 796-815. 
Broccoli, A.J. and S. Manabe, 1990: Can existing climate change 
models be used to study anthropogenic changes in tropical 
cyclone climate? Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 1917-1920. 
Bryan, F.O. and W . R . Holland, 1989: A high-resolution 
simulation of the wind- and thermohaline-driven circulation in 
the North Atlantic Ocean. In: Proceedings of the Aha Huliko'a 
Hawaiian Winter Workshop on Parameterization 
of Small 
Scale Processes, P Muller and D. Henderson (eds.), Hawati 
Institute of Geophysics, Honolulu, pp 99-116. (Available from 
Hawaii Institute of Geophysics.) 
Bushell, A . C . and D. Gregory, 1994: Sensitivity to vertical 
resolution in a chmate model simulation of South West African 
marine stratocumulus. In; Research Activities in Atmospheric 
and Oceanic Modelling, Report No. 19, G.J. Boer (ed.), 
WMO/TD - No. 592, Geneva, 4.13-4.14. 
Campos, J.D. and R. Bleck, 1992; A numerical study of the 
tropical Atlantic Ocean circulation with an isopycnic-
coordinate circulation model - preliminary results. Trans. 
Amer. Geophys. Union, 73 (suppl.), 292. 
Cao, H-X., J.F.B Mitchell and J.R Lavery, 1992; Simulated 
diurnal range and variability of surface temperature in a global 
climate model for present and doubled C O j climates. J 
Climate, 5, 920-943. 
CAS/JSC, 1994: Report of ninth session of the CAS/JSC Working 
Group on Numerical Experimentation, 
WMO/TD-No. 
607, 
WMO, Geneva. 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, J.P. Blanchet, G.J. Boer, A.D. Del Genio, 
M . Deque, V. Dymnikov, V. Galin, W.L. Gates, S.J. Ghan, J.T. 
Kiehl, A . A . Lacis, H. Le Treut, Z.-X. L i , X.-Z. Liang, B.J. 
McAvaney, V.P. Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. Morcrette, 
D.A. Randall, L.J. Rikus, E. Roeckner, J.F. Royer, U . Schlese, 
D.A. Sheinin, A . Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W . M . 
Washington, R.T. Wetherald, I. Yagai and M.-H. Zhang, 1990: 
Intercomparison and interpretation of cloud-climate feedback 
processes in nineteen atmospheric general circulation models. 
J. Geophys. Res., 95, 16601-16615. 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, J.P. Blanchet, G.J. Boer, R. Colman, S.J. 
Ghan, J. Hansen, J.T. Kiehl, H . Le Treut, Z.-X. L i , X.-Z. Liang, 
B.J. McAvaney, V . P . Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. 
Morcrette, D.A. Randall, L.J. Rikus, E. Roeckner, U . Schlese, 
D.A. Sheinin, A . Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W . M . 
Washington, 
R.T. Wetherald 
and 
I. 
Yagai, 
1991: 
Intercomparison and interpretation of snow-climate feedback 
processes in seventeen atmospheric general circulation models. 
Science, 253, 888-892. 
Cess, R.D., M.-H. Zhang, G.L. Potter, H. Barker, R.A. Colman, 
D.A. Dazlich, A.D., Del Genio, M . Esch, J.R. Fraser, V. Galin, 
W.L. Gates, J.J. Hack, J.T. Kiehl, A.A. Lacis, X.-Z. Liang, J.-
F. Mahfouf, B.J. McAvaney, V.P. Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
277 
J.-J. Morcrette, D.A. Randall, E. Roeckner, J.-E. Royer, D.A. 
Sheinin, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W.-C. Wang and R.T. 
Wetherald, 1993: Uncertainties in carbon dioxide radiative 
forcing in atmospheric general circulation models. Science, 
262, 1252-1255. 
Cess, R.D., M . H . Zhang, P. Minnis, L. Corsetti, E.G. Dutton, 
B.W. Forgan, D.P. Garber, W . L . Gates. J.J. Hack, E.F. 
Harrison, X. Jing, J.T. Kiehl, C.N. Long, J.-J. Morcrette, G.L. 
Potter, V . Ramanathan, B. Subasilar, C H . Whitlock, D.E. 
Young and Y . Zhou, 1995; Absorption of solar radiation by 
clouds: Observations versus models. Science, 267, 496-499. 
CLIVAR, 1995: A study of climate variability and predictability, 
Initial Science Plan. World Climate Research Programme, 
Geneva, 187pp. 
Colman, R.A. and B.J. McAvaney, 1996: The sensitivity of the 
climate response of an atmospheric general circulation model 
to changes in convective parameterization and horizontal 
resolution. / Geophys. Res. (in press). 
Covey, C , 1995: Global ocean circulation and equator-pole heat 
transport as a function of ocean G C M resolution. Clim. Dyn., 
И, 425^37, 
Crowley, T.J., 1993: Geological assessment of the greenhouse 
effect. Bull. Amer Meteor Soc, 74, 2363-2373. 
Cubasch, U . , K. Hasselmann, H. Hock, E. Maier-Reimer, U . 
Mikolajewicz, B . D . Santer and R. Sausen, 1992: Time-
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 9, 55-69. 
Danabasoglu, G., J.C. McWilliams and P.R. Gent, 1994: The 
role of mesoscale tracer transports in the global ocean 
circulation. Science, 264, 1123-1126. 
Da Silva, A. M . , C.C. Young and S. Levitus, 1994: Atlas of 
Surface Marine Data 1994. Vol. 1: Algorithms and Procedures. 
N O A A Atlas NESDIS 6, US Dept. Commerce, Washington, 
DC, 83 pp. 
Delworth, T., S. Manabe and R.J. Stouffer, 1993: Interdecadal 
variations of the thermohaline circulation in a coupled ocean-
atmosphere model. /. Climate, 6, 1993-2011. 
Dickinson, R.E., and A . Henderson-Sellers, 1988: Modelling 
tropical deforestation: a study of G C M land-surface 
parameterizations. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 114(B), 439-462. 
Dickinson, R.E., A. Henderson-Sellers and P.J. Kennedy, 1993: 
Biosphere-Atmosphere Transfer Scheme (BATS) Version le as 
coupled to the NCAR Community Climate Model. NCAR/TN-
387+STR, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, 
CO, 80 pp. 
Doos, K., 1994: Semianalytical simulation of the meridional cells 
in the Southern Ocean. /. Phys. Oceanogr, 24, 1281-1293. 
Doos, K. and D.J. Webb, 1994: The Deacon cell and the other 
meridional cells in the Southern Ocean. /. Phys. Oceanogr. 24, 
429-442. 
Doscher, R., C.W. Boning and P. Henmann, 1994: Response of 
circulation and heat transport in the North Atlantic to changes 
in thermohaline forcing in northern latitudes: A model study. /. 
Phys. Oceanogr, 24, 2306-2320. 
England, M . H . , 1993: Representing the global-scale water 
masses in ocean general circulation models. / . Phys. 
Oceanogr, 2Ъ, 1523-1552. 
England, M.H., 1995: Using chlorofluorcarbons to assess ocean 
climate models. Geophys. Res. Lett. 22, 3051-3054. 
England, M.H., J.S. Godfrey, A.C. Hirst and M . Tomczak 1993: 
The mechanism for Antarctic intermediate water renewal in a 
world ocean model. / Phys. Oceanogr, 23, 1553-1560. 
Esbensen, S.K. and Y . Kushnir, 1981: The heat budget of the 
global ocean: An atlas based on estimates from surface marine 
observations. Rep. No. 29, Climatic Research Institute, Oregon 
State University, Corvallis, 244 pp. 
Ferranti, L., F. Molteni, C. Brankovic and T.N. Palmer, 1994; 
Diagnosis of extratropical variability in seasonal integrations of 
the E C M W F model. /. Climate, 7, 849-868. 
Fischer, H. and P. Lemke, 1994; On the required accuracy of 
atmospheric forcing fields for driving dynamic-thermodynamic 
sea-ice models. In: The Polar Oceans and Their Role in 
Shaping the Global Environment, 
O . M . Johannessen, R.D. 
Muench, and J.E. Overland (eds.). Geophysical Monograph 85, 
American Geophysical Union, Washington, pp. 373-381. 
Flato, G . M . and W.D. Hibler, 1992: Modelling sea-ice as a 
cavitating fluid. /. Phys. Oceanogr., 22, 626-651. 
Folland, C . K . and D.P. Rowell (eds.), 1995; Workshop on 
simulations of the climate of the twentieth century using 
GISST (28-30 November 1994). Hadley Centre CRTN 56, 
Bracknell, UK, 111 pp. 
Folland, C.K., J, Owen, M . N . Ward and A . Colman, 1991: 
Prediction of seasonal rainfall in the Sahel region using 
empirical and dynamical methods. J. Forecasting, 10, 21-56. 
Folland, C.K., D.E. Parker and T.N. Palmer, 1986; Sahel rainfall 
and worldwide sea temperatures 1901-85. Nature, 320, 
602-607. 
Fowler, L . D . and D.A. Randall, 1996: Liquid and ice cloud 
microphysics in the C S U general circulation model. Part 3: 
Model sensitivity tests. J. Climate (in press). 
FRAM Group (Webb, D.J., and collaborators), 1991: A n eddy-
resolving model of the Southern Ocean. EOS, 72(15) 169, 
174-175. 
Garratt, J.R., 1993: Sensitivity of climate simulations to land-
surface and atmospheric boundary-layer treatments - a review. 
J. CUmate, 6, 419-449. 
Garratt, J.R., P.B. Krummel and E.A. Kowalczyk, 1993; The 
surface energy balance at local and regional scales -
comparison of general circulation model results with 
observations. J. Climate. 6, 1090-1109. 
Gates, W.L., 1987: Problems and prospects in climate modeling. 
In: Toward Understanding Climate Change, Westview Press, 
Boulder, CO, 5-33. 
Gates, W . L . , 1992: A M I P : The Atmospheric 
Model 
Intercomparison Project. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc, 73, 
1962-1970. 
Gates, W.L., J.F.B. Mitchell, G.J. Boer, U . Cubasch and V.P. 
Meleshko, 1992: CUmate modelling, climate prediction and 
278 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
model validation. In; CUmate Change, The Supplementary 
Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, U K , 97-134. 
Gates, W.L., U . Cubasch, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell and R.J. 
Stouffer, 1993; An intercomparison of selected features of the 
control climates simulated by coupled ocean-atmosphere 
general circulation models. Worid Climate 
Research 
Programme 
WCRP-82, 
WMO/TD 
No. 
574, 
World 
Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 46 pp. 
Gent, P.R. and J.C. McWilliams, 1990; Isopycnal mixing in 
ocean circulation models. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 20, 150-155. 
Gent, P.R. and J.J. Tribbia, 1993; Simulation and predictability in 
a coupled TOGA model. J. CUmate, 6, 1843-1858. 
Gent, P.R., J. Willebrand, T.J. McDougall and J.C. McWiUiams. 
1995; Parameterizing eddy-induced tracer transports in ocean 
circulation models. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 25, 463-474. 
Giorgi, F., C.S. Brodeur and G.T. Bates, 1994; Regional climate 
change scenarios over the United States produced with a nested 
regional climate model. J. CUmate, 7, 375-399. 
Gleckler, P.J., D.A. Randall, G. Boer, R. Colman, M . Dix, V. 
Galin, M . Helfand, J. Kiehl, A. Kitoh, W. Lau, X.-Z. Liang, V. 
Lykossov, B. McAvaney, K. Miyakoda and S. Planton, 1994; 
Cloud-radiative effects on implied oceanic energy transports as 
simulated by atmospheric general circulation models. Report 
No. 15, PCMDI, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 
Livermore, CA, 13 pp. 
Gloersen, P., W.J. Campbell, D.J. Cavalieri, J.C. Comiso, C.L. 
Parkinson and H.J. Zwally, 1992; Arctic and Antarctic sea-ice, 
1978-1987; Satellite passive-microwave observations and 
analysis. NASA SP-5II, 290 pp. 
Graf, H.-F., I. Kirchner, A . Robock and I. Schuh, 1993; Pinatubo 
eruption winter climate effects; Model versus observations. 
CHm. Dyn., 9, 81-93. 
Greatbatch, R.J. and S. Zhang, 1994; An interdecadal oscillation 
in an idealized ocean basin forced by constant heat flux. J. 
C/imaie, 8, 81-91. 
Haarsma, R.J., J.F.B. Mitchell and C A . Senior, 1993; Tropical 
disturbances in a G C M . Clim. Dyn., 8, 247-257. 
Hansen, J., A . Lacis, R. Ruedy and M . Sato, 1992; Potential 
climate impact of Mount Pinatubo eruption. Geophys. Res. 
Left., 19, 215-218. 
Hansen, J., M . Sato and R. Ruedy, 1994; Long-term changes of 
the diurnal teinperature cycle: Implications about mechanisms 
of global climate change. Atmos. Res., 32, 1-25. 
Harder, M . and P. Lemke, 1995: Modelling the extent of sea-ice 
ridging in the Weddell Sea. Nansen Centennial Volume, A G U , 
(in press). 
Harrison, E.F., P. Minnis, B.R. Barkstrom, V . Ramanathan, R.D. 
Cess and G.G. Gibson, 1990; Seasonal variation of cloud 
radiative forcing derived from the Earth Radiation Budget 
Experiment. J. Geophys. Res. 95, 18687-18703. 
Hasselmann, K., L . Bengtsson, U . Cubasch, G.C.Hegerl, H, 
Rodhe, E. Roeckner, H.v. Storch, R. Voss and J. Waskewitz, 
1995: Detection of anthropogenic climate change using a 
fingerprint method. Max-Planck Institute for 
Meteorology, 
Report No. 168, Hamburg, 20pp. 
Hastenrath, S., 1990; Prediction of north-east Brazil rainfall 
anomaUes. J. Climate, 3, 893-904. 
Hay, L.E., G.J. McCabe, D.M. Wolock and M.A. Ayres, 1992: 
Use of weather types to disaggregate general circulation model 
predictions. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 2781-2790. 
Hegerl, G . C , H.V. Storch, K . Hasselmann. B . D . Santer, U . 
Cubasch and P.D. Jones, 1996. Detecting anthropogenic 
climate change with an optimal fingerprint method. J. Climate 
(in press). 
Held, I.M. and P.J. PhiUipps, 1993: Sensitivity of the eddy 
momentum flux to meridional resolution in atmospheric 
GCMs. J. Climate, 6, 499-507. 
Henderson-Sellers, 
A . and 
R . E . Dickinson, 
1992: 
Intercomparison of land-surface parameterizations launched. 
EOS, 73(17), 195-196. 
Henderson-Sellers, A. and A . - M . Hansen, 1995; Climate Change 
Atlas, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 159pp. 
Henderson-Sellers, A., Z.-L. Yang and R.E. Dickinson, 1993; 
The 
Project 
for 
Intercomparison 
of 
Land-surface 
Parameterization Schemes (PILPS). Bull. Amer. Meteor 
Soc, 
74(7), 1335-1349. 
Henderson-Sellers, A., A.J. Pitman, P.K. Love, P. Irannejad and 
Т.Н. Chen, 1995; The Project for Intercomparison of Land 
Surface Parameterization Schemes (PILPS); Phases 2 and 3. 
BidL Amer Meteor Soc, 76, 489-503. 
Hibler, W . D . , III., 1984: The role of sea-ice dynamics in 
modeling C O , increases. In; Climate Processes and Climate 
Sensitivity, Geophysical Monograph 29, American Geophysical 
Union, pp. 238-253. 
Hogan, T.R. and Т.Е. Rosmond, 1991; The description of the 
Navy operational global atmospheric prediction system's 
spectral forecast model. Mon. Wea. Rev., 119, 1786-1815. 
Hollingsworth, A . , 1993; Validation and diagnostics of 
atmospheric models. In Proceedings of Validation of Models 
over Europe, Volume I, 7-11 September 1992, E C M W F , 
Reading, UK. 
Horton, E.B., 1994: The geographical distribution of changes in 
maximum and minimum temperature. Proc NOAA USDOE 
MINIMAX 
Workshop, G. Kukla et ai, (eds.) College Park, 
USDOE Conf Proc. 25, pp. 179-198. 
Hulme, M . , 1995; Validation of large-scale precipitation fields in 
general circulation models. In; Global Precipitation 
and 
Climate Change, M . Dubois and F Desalmand, D Reidel (eds.), 
Dordrecht (in press). 
Hulme, M . . K.R. Briffa, P.D. Jones and C A . Senior, 1993; 
Validation of G C M control simulations using indices of daily 
airflow types over the British Isles. Clim. Dyn., 9, 95-105. 
Hurrell, J.W. and G.G. Campbell 1992: Monthly mean global 
satellite data sets available in C C M history tape format, NCAR 
Tech. Note NCAR/TN-371+STR, 94 pp. 
Ip, C F . , W.D. Hibler and G.M. Flato, 1991: On the effect of 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
279 
liieology on seasonal sea-ice simulations. Ann. Glacial., 15, 
17-25. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Climate Change: 
The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Jacobs, G.A., H.E, Hurlburt, J.C. Kindle. E.J. Metzger, J.L. 
Mitchell, W.J. League and A.J. Wallcraft, 1994: Decade-scale 
trans-Pacific propagation and warming effects of an El Niño 
anomaly. Nature, 370, 360-363. 
Jaeger, L., 1976: Monatskarten des Niederschlags fur die ganze 
Erde. Ber. Deutschen Wetterdienstes, Nr. 139, 38 pp. 
Jenne, R.L., 1975: Data sets for meteorological reseai-ch. NCAR 
Technical Nate, NCAR-TN/IA-111, NCAR, Boulder, 194 pp. 
Ji, M . , A. Kumar and A. Leetmaa, 1994: A multiseason climate 
forecast system at the National Meteorological Center. Bull. 
Amer Meteor Soc, 75, 569-577. 
Jin, F.-F. and J.D. Neelin, 1993a: Model of interannual tropical 
ocean-atmosphere interaction - a unified view. Part I: 
Numerical results. /. Atmos. ScL, 50, 3477-3503. 
Jin, F.-F.,and J.D. Neelin, 1993b; Modes of interannual tropical 
ocean-atmosphere interaction - a unified view. Part III: 
Analytical resuhs in fully coupled cases. J. Almos. Sci., 50, 
3524-3540. 
Johnson, K.D., D. Entekhabi and P.S. Eagleson, 1993: The 
implementation and validation of improved land surface 
hydrology in an atmospheric general circulation model. /. 
Climate, 6, 1009-1026. 
Jones, P.D., 1987: The early twentieth centui^ Arctic high-fact or 
fiction? Clim. Dyn., 1, 63-75. 
Jones, P.D., 1994: Hemispheric surface air temperature 
variations: a reanalysis and an update to 1993. J. Climate, 7, 
1794-1802. 
Jones, P.D., T.M.L. Wigley and G. Farmer, 1991: Marine and 
land temperature data sets: A comparison and a look at recent 
trends. In; Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic Change: A 
Critical Appraisal of Simulations 
and Observations, M . E . 
Schlesinger (ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 153-172. 
Joussaume, S., 1993; Paleoclimatic tracers: An investigation 
using an atmospheric general circulation model under ice age 
conditions 1. Desert dust. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 2767-2805. 
Karl, T.R., P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight, G. Kukla, N. Plummer, V. 
Rasuvayev, K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay, R.J, Charlson and T.C. 
Peterson, 1993; A new perspective on recent global warming; 
Asymmetric trends of daily maximum and minimum 
temperature. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc, 74, 1007-1023. 
Katz, R.W., 1992: Role of statistics in the validation of general 
circulation models. Clim. Res., 2, 35^5. 
Kerr, R.A., 1994: Climate modeling's fudge factor under fire. 
Science, 265, 1528. 
Kiehl, J.T., 1996; Sensitivity of a G C M Climate simulation to 
differences in continental versus maritime cloud drop size. /. 
Geophys. Res. (in press). 
Kiehl, J.T. and D.L. Williamson, 1991: Dependence of cloud 
amount on horizontal resolution in the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research Community Climate Model. J. 
Geophys. Res., 96, 10955-10980. 
Klinck, J.M., 1994: Thermohaline structure of the CME. WOCE 
Notes, 6(2), 4-8. 
Koster, R.D. and M.J. Suarez, 1994: The components of a SVAT 
scheme and their effects on a GCM's hydrological cycle. Adv. 
Water Resources, 17. 61-78. 
Koster, R.D. and M.J. Suarez, 1996: The relative contributions of 
land and ocean processes to precipitation variability. /. 
Geophys. Res. (in press), 
Kuo, H.L., 1974; Further studies of the parameterization of the 
influence of cumulus convection on large-scale tlow. J. Atmos. 
&(.,31, 1232-1240. 
Kushnir, Y., 1994; Interdecadal variations in North Atlantic sea 
surface temperature and associated atmospheric conditions. J. 
Climate, 7, 141-157. 
Kutzbach, I.E., and A . M . Ziegler, 1993; Simulation of Late 
Permian climate and biomes with an atmosphere-ocean model; 
Comparisons with observations. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Land., 
Series B, 341, 327-340. 
Lamb, P.J., 1978; Large-scale tropical Atlantic surface 
circulation patterns associated with Subsaharan weather 
anomalies. Tellus, 30, 240-251. 
Latif, M . and T.P. Barnett, 1994: Causes of decadal climate 
variability over the North Pacific and North America. Science, 
266, 634-637. 
Latif, M . , A. Steri, E. Maier-Reimer and M . M , Junge, 1993: 
Climate variability in a coupled G C M . Part 1; The tropical 
Pacific. J. Climate, 6, 5-21. 
Latif, M . , T.P. Barnett, M.A. Cane, M . Fluegel, N.E, Graham, H. 
von Storch, J.-S. Xu and S.E. Zebiak, 1994; A review of ENSO 
prediction studies. Clim. Dyn., 9, 167-179. 
Lau, N.-C, S.G.H. Philander and M.J. Nath, 1992: Simulation of 
ENSO-like phenomena with a low-resolution coupled G C M of 
the global ocean and atmosphere. J. Climate, 5. 284-307. 
Le Treut, H., and Z,-X. Li, 1991: Sensitivity of an atmospheric 
general circulation model to prescribed SST changes: Feedback 
effects associated with the simulation of cloud optical 
properties. Clim. Dyn., 5, 175-187. 
Levitus, S., and T.P. Boyer, 1994: World Ocean Adas 1994, 
Volume 
4: 
Temperature. 
N O A A / N E S D I S 
E / 0 C 2 1 , 
Washington, DC, 117 pp. 
Levitus, S., J. Antanov and T.P. Boyer, 1994a; Interannual 
variability of temperature at 125 m depth in the North Atlantic 
Ocean. Science, 266, 96-99. 
Levitus, S., R. Burgett, and T.P. Boyer, 1994b; World Ocean 
Atlas 1994, Volume 3: Salinity. NOAA/NESDIS E/0C21, 
Washington DC, 99pp. 
Lighthill, J., G, Holland, W. Gray, C. Landsea, G. Craig, J. 
Evans, Y. Kurihara and C. Guard, 1994: Global climate change 
and tropical cyclones. Bull. Amer. Meteor. 
Soc, 
IS, 
2147-2157. 
Manabe, S., 1969: Climate and the ocean circulation: I, the 
280 
CUmate Models - 
Evaluation 
atmospheric circulation and the hydrology of the Earth's 
surface. Mon. Wea. Rev., 7, 739-774. 
Manabe, S., and R. Stouffer, 1988: Two stable equilibria of a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model. J. Climate, I, 841-866. 
Manabe, S., and T. Delworth, 1990: The teinporal variability of 
soil wetness and its impact on climate. Climatic Change, 16, 
185-192. 
Marotzke, J., 1989: Instabilities and multiple steady states of the 
thermohaline circulation. In: Oceanic Circulation 
Models: 
Combining Data and Dynamics, 
D.L.T. Anderson and J. 
Willebrand, eds., N A T O ASI series, Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp. 
501-511. 
Marotzke, J. and C. Wunsch, 1993: Finding the steady state of a 
general circulation model through data assimilation: 
Application to the Noith Atlantic ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 98 
(СП), 20149-20167. 
Matson, M . , C F . Ropelewski and M.S. Varnadore, 1986: An 
atlas of satellite-derived northern hemispheric snow cover 
frequency. NOAA Atlas. U.S. Department of Commerce. 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Admini.stration, 
Washington, DC. 75 pp. 
McAvaney, B.J., R.R. Dahni, R.A. Colman and JR. Fraser, 1995: 
The dependence of the climate senditivity on convective 
parametrization: Statistical evaluation. Global and Planetary 
Change, 10, 181-200. 
McGuffie, K., A. Henderson-Sellers, H. Zhang, T.B. Durbidge 
and A.J. Pitman, 1995: Global climate sensitivity to tropical 
deforestation. Global and Planetary Change, 10, 97-128. 
Meehl, G.A., 1990: Seasonal cycle forcing of El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation in a global coupled ocean-atmosphere G C M . J. 
Climate, 3, 72-98. 
Meehl, G . A . and W . M . Washington, 1995: Cloud albedo 
feedback and the super greenhouse effect in a global coupled 
G C M . Clim. Dyn., 11, 399-411. 
Meehl, G.A., G.W. Branstator and W . M . Washington, 1993: 
Tropical Pacific interannual variability and CO-, climate 
change. J. Chmate, 6, 42-63. 
Meehl, G.A., M . Wheeler and W. M . Washington, 1994: Low-
frequency variability and C O , climate change. /. Climate. 6, 
42-63. 
Mikolajewicz, U . and E. Maier-Reimer, 1990: Internal secular 
variability in an ocean general circulation model, dim. Dyn., 4, 
145-156. 
Mikolajewicz, U. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994: Mixed boundary 
conditions in ocean general circulation models and their 
influence on the stability of the model's conveyor belt. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 22633-22644. 
Miller, J.R., G.L. Russell and G. Caliri, 1994: Continental-scale 
river flow in climate models. J. Climate, 7, 914-928. 
Milly, P.C.D. and K.A. Dunne, 1994: Sensitivity of the global 
water cycle to the water-holding capacity of land. J. Climate, 
7(4), 506-526. 
Mintz, Y . , 1984: The sensitivity of numerically simulated 
climates to land-surface boundary conditions. In: The Global 
Climate, J. Houghton (ed.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 79-105. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., 1993: Modelling of palaeoclimates: Examples 
from the recent past. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond, 341(1297), 
267-275. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., C A . Senior and W.J. Ingram, 1989; CO-, and 
chmate: A missing feedback? Nature, 341, 132-134. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., S. Manabe, T. Tokioka and V. Meleshko, 1990; 
Equilibrium climate change - and its implications for the 
future. In: Climate Change, The IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 131-172. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., Т.е. Johns, J . M . Gregory and S.F.B. Tett, 
1995a: Climate response to increasing levels of greenhouse 
gases and sulphate aerosols. Nature, 376. 501-504. 
Mitchell, J.F.B, R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram and C A . Senior, 
1995b; On surface temperature, greenhouse gases and aerosols; 
Models and observations. / Climate, 8, 2364-2386. 
Miyakoda, K., and J. Sirutis, 1990; Subgrid scale physics in 1-
month forecast. Pait II: Systematic error and blocking forecast. 
Mon. Wea. Rev, 118, 1065-1081. 
Moore, A . M . , 1995; Tropical interannual variability in a global 
coupled G C M ; Sensitivity to mean cUmate state. /. Climate, 8, 
807-828. 
Muroi, С and N . Sato, 1994; Intercomparison of tropical cyclone 
track forecast by E C M W F , U K M O and J M A operational 
global models. JMA/NPD Tech. Rep., No 31, JMA, Tokyo. 
Nagai, T., T. Tokioka, M . Endoh and Y . Kitamura, 1992; El 
Nino-Southern Oscillation simulated in an MRI atmosphere-
ocean coupled general circulation model. J. Climate, 
5, 
1202-1233. 
Navarra, A., W.F. Stern and K. Miyakoda, 1994: Reduction of 
the Gibbs oscillation in spectral model simulations. / Climate, 
7, 1169-1183. 
Neelin, J.D., 1991; The slow sea surface temperature mode and 
the fast-wave limit; Analytic theory for tropical interannual 
oscillations and experiments in a hybrid coupled model. J. 
Atmos. Sci., 48, 584-606. 
Neelin, J.D., and F.-F. Jin, 1993; Modes of interannual tropical 
ocean-atmosphere interaction - a unified view. Part U; Analytical 
results in the weak-coupling limit. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 3504-3522. 
Neelin, J.D., M . Latif, M.A.F. Allaart, M.A. Cane, U. Cubasch, 
W.L. Gates, P.R. Gent, M . Ghil, С Gordon, N.C. Lau, C.R. 
Mechoso, G.A. Meehl, J.M. Oberhuber, S.G., H. Philander, 
P.S. Schopf, K.R. Sperber, A. Steri, T. Tokioka, J. Tribbia and 
S.E. Zebiak, 1992: Tropical air-sea interaction in general 
circulation models. Clim. Dyn., 7, 73-104. 
Numaguti, A., 1993; Dynamics and energy balance of the Hadley 
circulation and the tropical precipitation zones; Significance of 
the distribution of evaporation. J. Amos. Sci., 50, 1874-1887. 
OOSDP (Ocean Observing System Development Panel), 1995; 
Scientific design for the common module of the Global Ocean 
Observing System and the Global Climate Observing System. 
U.S. WOCE Office, Washington, DC, 228 pp. 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
281 
Oreskes, N . , K . Shrader-Frechette and K . Belitz, 1994: 
Verification, validation and confirmation of numerical models 
in the Earth sciences. Science, 263, 641-646. 
Orr, J.C, 1993: Accord between ocean models predicting uptake 
of ocean COj. Water, Air and Soil Pollution, 70, 465^81. 
Palmer, T.N., C. Brankovic, F. Molteni and S. Tibaidi, 1990; 
Extended-range predictions with E C M W F models: Interannual 
variability in operational model integrations. Quart. J. R. .Met. 
Soc, 116, 799-834. 
Parker, D.E., P.D. Jones, C.K. Folland and A.C. Bevan, 1994: 
Interdecadal changes of surface temperature since the late 
nineteenth century. / Geophys. Res., 99, 14373-14399. 
Parker, D.E., H. Wilson, P.D. Jones. J. Christy and C.K. Folland, 
1996: The impact of Mount Pinatubo on worldwide 
temperatures, ¡nt. J. ClimatoL (in press). 
Philander, S.G.H., R.C, Pacanowski, N.-C. Lau and M.J. Nath, 
1992; Simulation of ENSO with a global atmospheric G C M 
coupled to a high-resolution tropical Pacific Ocean G C M . J. 
Climate, 5, 308-329. 
Phillipps, P.J. and I.M. Held, 1994; The response to orbital 
perturbations in an atmospheric model coupled to a slab ocean. 
J. Climate, 7,1(Л~1Ш. 
Phillips, T.J., 1994; A summary documentation of the AMIP 
models. Report No. 18, PCMDl, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, Livermore, С A, UCRL-ID-l 16384, 343 pp. 
Pitman, A.J., A . Henderson-Sellers, F, Abramopoulos, R, 
Avissar, G. Bonan, A. Boone, J.G. Cogley, R.E, Dickinson, M, 
Ek, D. Entekhabi, J, Famiglietti, J,R. Garratt, M , Freeh, A. 
Hahmann, R. Koster, E. Kowalczyk, K. Laval, J. Lean, T.J. 
Lee, D. Lettenmaier, X. Liang, J.-F. Mahfouf, L, Mahrt, P.C.D. 
Miliy, K. Mitchell, N . de Noblet, J. Noilhan, H. Pan, R. Pielke, 
A. Robock, C. Rosenzweig, S.W. Running, C.A. Schlosser, R, 
Scott. M , Suarez. S. Thompson, D, Verseghy, P, Wetzel, E, 
Wood, Y, Xue, Z,-,L, Yang and L. Zhang, 1993; Project for 
Intercomparison of Land-Surface Parameterization Schemes 
(PILPS). G E W E X Report, IGPO Publication Series No. 7, 
Washington, DC, 47 pp. 
Polcher, J., K. Laval, L. Dumenil, J. Lean and P.R. Rowntree, 
1996: Comparing three land surface schemes used in GCMs. J. 
Hydrol. (submitted). 
Pollard, D, and S,L. Thompson, 1994; Sea-ice dynamics and CO, 
sensitivity in a global climate model. Atmosphere-Ocean, 32, 
449-467, 
Power, S.B. and R, Kleeman, 1993: Multiple equilibria in a 
global ocean general circulation model. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 23, 
1670-1681. 
Power, S.B. and R. Kleeman, 1994: Surface heat flux 
parameterization and the response of ocean general circulation 
models to high-latitude freshening. Tellus, 46A, 86-95. 
Power, S.B., A. Moore, D.A. Post, N.R. Smith and R. Kleeman, 
1994: Stability of North Atlantic deep water formation in a 
global ocean general circulation model. / Phys. Oceanogr, 24, 
904-916. 
Power, S.B., R. Kleeman, R.A. Colman and B.J. McAvaney, 
1995: Modelling the heat tlux response to long-lived SST 
anomalies in the North Atlantic. / Climate, 8, 2161-2180. 
Rahmstorf, S. and J. Willebrand, 1996; The role of temperature 
feedback in stabilising the thermohaline circulation. /. Phys. 
Oceanogr. (in press). 
Ramsden, D., and G. Fleming, 1995; Use of a coupled ice-ocean 
model to investigate the sensitivity of the Arctic ice cover to 
doubling atmospheric CO^. /. Geophys. Res. 100, 6817-6828. 
Randall, D.A., R.D. Cess, J.P. Blanchet, S. Chalita, R. Colman, 
D.A. Dazlich. A.D. Del Genio, V. Dymnikov, V. Galin, D. 
JerreU, E. Keup. A.A. Lacis. H. Le Treut, X.-Z. Liang, B.J. 
McAvaney, J.F. Mahfouf, V.P. Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, J,-J. 
Morcrette, P.M. Noiris, G.L. Potter, L.J. Rikus, E. Roeckner. 
J.F. Royer, U . Schlese, D.A. Sheinin, A.P. Sokolov, K . E . 
Taylor, R.T. Wetherald, I. Yagai and M . - H . Zhang, 1994; 
Analysis of snow feedbacks in fourteen general circulation 
models. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 20757-20771. 
Rasch, P.J. and D.L. Williamson, 1990: Compuiaiional aspects of 
moisture transport in global models of the atmosphere. Quart. 
J. R. Met. Soc, 116, 1071-1090. 
Rind, D.,and M . Chandler, 1991; Increased ocean heat transports 
and warmer climate. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 7437-7461. 
Robitaille, D.Y. and A.J. Weaver, 1995; Validation of sub-grid 
scale mixing schemes using CFCs in a global ocean model. 
Geophys. Res. Let. 22, 2917-2920. 
Robock, A., K.Y. Vinnikov, C.A. Schlosser, N.A. Speranskaya 
and Y . Xue, 1995; Use of midlatitude soil moisture and 
meteorological observations to validate soil moisture 
simulations with biosphere and bucket models, /, Climate, 8, 
15-35. 
Roeckner, E., T. Siebert and J. Feichter, 1995: Climatic response 
to anthropogenic sulfate forcing simulated with a general 
circulation model. Proceedings of Dahlem workshop "Aerosol 
Forcing of Climate", Academic Press (in press). 
Ropelewski, C F . , 1989: Monitoring large-scale cryosphere/ 
atmosphere interactions. Adv. Space Res., 9, 213-218. 
Ro,ssow, W.B. and R.A. Schiffer, 1991; ISCCP cloud data 
products. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc, 72, 2-20. 
Rowell, D.P., C.K. Folland, K. Maskell and M.N. Ward, 1995; 
Variability of summer rainfall over Tropical North Africa 
(1906-1992): Observations and modelling. Quart. J. R Met. 
Soc, 121,669-704. 
Rowntree, P.R,and J.A. Bolton, 1983: Simulation of the 
atmospheric response to soil moisture anomalies over Europe. 
Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 109, 501-526. 
Rui, H . and В. Wang, 1990: Development characteristics and 
dynamic structure of tropical intraseasonal convection 
anomalies. J. Atmos. Sci., 47, 357-379. 
Santer, B.D. and T.M.L. Wigley, 1990: Regional validation of 
means, variances and spatial patterns in G C M control runs. /. 
Geophs. Res., 95, 829-850. 
Santer, B.D., K.E. Taylor and E.G. Corsetti, 1995a: Statistical 
evaluation of AMIP model performance. In Proc. First AMIP 
Sci. Conf., WCRP-92, W M O TD-No. 732, Geneva. 
282 
CUmate Models - Evaluation 
Santer, B.D., K.E. Taylor, T.M.L. Wigley, J.E. Penner, P.D. 
Jones and U . Cubasch, 1995b: Towards the detection and 
attribution of an anthropogenic effect on climate. Clim. Dyn. 
12, 77-100. 
Sausen, R., K. Barthel and K. Hasselmann, 1988: Coupled ocean-
atmosphere models with flux corrections. Clim. Dyn., 2, 
154-163. 
Sausen, R., W. Koenig and F. Sielmann, 1993: Analysis of 
blocliing events from observations and E C H A M model 
simulations. Max-Planck-Institut fur Météorologie 
Rep. 11, 
Hamburg. 
Schemm, J.-K., S. Schubert, J. Terry and S. Bloom, 1992: 
Estimates of monthly mean soil moisture for 1979-1989. NASA 
Tech. Memo. 104571, Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, 
MD, 260 pp. 
Schmitz, W.J. and M.S. McCaitney, 1993: On the North Atlantic 
circulation. Rev. Geophys., 31, 29^9. 
Schopf, P.S.,and M.J. Suarez, 1988: Vacillations in a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. /. Atmos. Sci., 45, 549-566. 
Schubert, S.D., C.-Y. Wu, J. Zero, J.-K. Schemm, C.-K. Park and 
M . Suarez, 1992: Monthly means of selected climate variables 
from 1985 to 1989. NASA Tech Memo 104565, Goddard Space 
Flight Center, Greenbelt, MD, 376 pp. 
Schubert, S.D., R . B . Rood and J. Pfaendtner, 1993: A n 
assimilated dataset for earth science applications. Bull. Amer. 
Meteor. Soc, 74, 2331-2342. 
Scott, R., R.D. Koster, D. Entekhabi and M.J. Suarez, 1996: 
Effect of a canopy interception reservoir on hydrological 
persistence in a general circulation model. /. Climate (in press). 
Sellers, P.J., 1992: Biophysical models of land surface processes. 
In: Climate System Modeling K.E. Trenberth (ed.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 451^90. 
Semtner, A.J., 1994: Sixth-degree global ocean model. U.S. 
WOCE Report 1994, U.S. W O C E Office, Texas A & M 
University, College Station, TX, 34-36. 
Semtner, A . J . and R . M . Chervin, 1988: A simulation of the 
global ocean circulation with resolved eddies. / Geophys. Res., 
93, 15502-15522. 
Semtner, A.J. and R.M. Chervin, 1992: Ocean general circulation 
from a global eddy-resolving model. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 
5493-5550. 
Send, U . and J. Marshall, 1996: Integral effects of deep 
convection. J. Phys. Oceanogr. (in press). 
Senior, C A . and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1993: CO2 and cUmate: The 
impact of cloud parameterization. /. Climate, 6, 393-418. 
Shao, Y . and A . Henderson-Sellers, 1996: Soil moisture 
simulation in land-surface parameterisation schemes. Global 
and Planetary Change (Special Issue) 13, 11-27. 
Shao, Y., R.D. Anne, A. Henderson-SeUers, P. Irannejad, С P. 
Thornton, X. Liang, O. Balachova, A. Haxeltine, A. Durcharne, 
Т.Н. Chen, С Ciret and С Desborough, 1995: Soil moisture 
simulation. A report of the RICE and PILPS 
Workshop, 
GEWEX/GAIM 
Report. IGPO Publication 
Series No. 14, 
179 pp. 
Shinoda, M . and R. Kawamura, 1994: Tropical rainbelt, 
circulation, and sea surface temperatures associated with 
Sahelian rainfall trend. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 72, 341-357. 
Shuttleworth, J.W. and R.E. Dickinson, 1989: Comments on 
"Modelling tropical deforestation: a study of G C M land-
surface parameterizations" by R . E . Dickinson and A . 
Henderson-Sellers. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 115, 1177-1179. 
Siegenthaler, U. and J.L. Sarmiento, 1993: Atmospheric carbon 
dioxide and the ocean. Nature, 365, 119-125. 
Slingo, J . M . and R . A . Madden 1991: Characteristics of the 
tropical intraseasonal oscillation in the N C A R community 
model. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc, 117, 1129-1169. 
Slingo, J., M . Blackburn, A. Betts, R. Brugge, K. Hodges, B. 
Hoskins, M . Miller, L. Steenman-Clark, and J. Thuburn, 1994: 
Mean cUmate and transience in the tropics of the U G A M P 
G C M : Sensitivity to convective parametrization. Quart J. R. 
Met. Soc, 120, 881-922. 
Slingo, J.M., K.R. Sperber, J.S. Boyle, J.-P. Ceron, M . Dix, В. 
Dugas, W. Ebisuzaki, J. Fyfe, D. Gregory, J.-F. Guerney, J. 
Hack, A. Harzallah, P. Inness, A. Kitoh, W . K . - M . Lau, B. 
McAvaney, R. Madden, A. Matthews, T.N. Palmer, C.-K. Park, 
D. Randall and N. Rennó, 1995: Intraseasonal oscillations in 15 
A G C M s (Results from an A M I P diagnostic subproject). 
WCRP-88, WMO/TD-No. 66T WMO, Geneva, 32 pp. 
Sloan, L . C , and E.J. Barron, 1992: A comparison of Eocene 
climate 
model results 
to quantified 
paleoclimatic 
interpretations. 
Paleogeography, 
Paleoclimatology, 
Paleoecology, 93, 183-202. 
Slutz, R.J., S.J. Lubker, J.D. Hiscos, S.D. Woodruff, R.L. Jenne, 
D . H . 
Joseph. 
P . M . Steurer 
and J.D. Elms, 
1985: 
Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set, Release 1, Univ. 
Colorado/NOAA CIRES, Boulder, 255pp. 
Smith, I.N., 1994: A G C M simulation of global climate trends, 
1950-1988. J. CUmate, 7, 732-744. 
Smith, I.N., 1995: A G C M simulation of global climate 
interannual variabiUty. / Climate, 8, 709-718. 
Spencer, R.W., 1993: Global oceanic precipitation from the MSU 
during 1979-91 and comparisons to other climatologies. / 
CUmate, 6, 1301-1326. 
Sperber, K.R., and S. Hameed, 1991: Southern Oscillation 
simulation in the OSU coupled upper ocean-atmosphere GCM. 
Clim. Dyn., 6, 83-97. 
Sperber, K.R. and S. Hameed, 1993: Phase locking of Nordeste 
Precipitation with sea surface temperatures. Geophys. Res. 
Lett., 20, 113-116. 
Sperber, K.R., S. Hameed, W.L. Gates and G.L. Potter, 1987: 
Southern Oscillation simulated in a global cUmate model. 
Nature, 329, 140-142. 
Stockdale, T., D. Anderson, M . Davey, P. Delecluse, A. 
Kattenberg, Y . Kitamura, M . Latif and T. Yamagata, 1993: 
Intercomparison of tropical ocean GCMs. World Climate 
Research Programme WCRP-79, WMO/TD No. 545, World 
Meteorological Organization, Geneva, 43 pp. 
Stouffer, R.J., S. Manabe and K. Ya. Vinnikov, 1994: Model 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
283 
assessment of the role of natural variability in recent global 
warming. Nature, 367, 634-636. 
Tett, S., 1995: Simulation of El Niño/Southern Oscillation-like 
variability in a global A O G C M and its response to C O j 
increase. / Climate, 8, 1473-1502. 
Thompson, S.L. and D. Pollard, 1996: A global climate model 
(GENESIS) with a land-surface-transfer scheme (LSX). Part 2: 
CO2 sensitivity. J. Climate (in press). 
Thuburn, J., 1993: Use of a flux-limited scheme for vertical 
advection in a G C M , Quart J. R. Met. Soc., 119, 469-487. 
Tibaidi, S. and E. Molteni, 1990: On the operational 
predictability of blocking. Tellus, 42X, 343-365. 
Tibaidi, S., E. Tosi, A. Navarra and L. PeduUi, 1994: Northern 
and Southern hemisphere seasonal variability of blocking 
frequency and predictability. Mon. 
Wea. Rev., 
122, 
1971-2003. 
Tracton, M.S., 1990: Predictability and its relationship to scale 
interaction processes in blocking. Mon. Wea. Rev., 
118, 
1666-1695. 
Tracton, M.S., K. Mo, W. Chen, E. Kalnay, R. Kisfler and G. 
White, 1989: Dynamical extended range forecasting (DERF) at 
the National Meteorological Center. Mon. Wea. Rev., 117, 
1606-1637. 
Trenberth, K.E., 1992: Global analyses from E C M W F and atlas 
of 1000 to 10 mb circulation statistics. NCAR Tech. Note 
NCAR/TN-373+STR, 191 pp. 
Tziperman, E., and K. Bryan, 1993: Estimating global air-sea 
fluxes from surface properties and from climatological flux 
data using an oceanic general circulation model. J. Geophys. 
Res., 98, 22629-22644. 
Viterbo, P. and A.C.M. Beljaars, 1995: An improved land surface 
parameterization scheme in the E C M W F model and its 
validation. J. Climate , 8, 2716-2748. 
Walker, J. and P.R. Rowntree, 1977: The effect of soil moisture 
on circulation and rainfall in a tropical model. Quart. J. R. Met. 
Soc, 103, 29-46. 
Wallace, D.W.R., 1995: An ocean observing system to monitor 
global ocean carbon inventories. OOSDP Background Report 
No. 4, US WOCE Office, Washington, DC, 59 pp. 
Wang, W. and M.E. Schlesinger, 1995: Simulation of tropical 
intraseasonal oscillations by the UIUC G C M . Proc First AMIP 
Sci. Conf., WCRP-92, W M O TD-No. 732, Geneva. 
Ward, M . N . and C.K. Folland, 1991: Prediction of seasonal 
rainfall in the north Nordeste of Brazil using eigenvectors of 
sea-surface temperature. Int. J. ClimatoL, 11, 711-743. 
Warner, M.J. and R.E. Weiss, 1992: Chlorofluorocarbons in 
South Atlantic Intermediate Water. Deep-Sea 
Res., 39, 
2053-2075. 
Washington, W . M . and G.A. Meehl, 1989: Climate sensitivity 
due to increased COj: Experiments with a coupled atmosphere 
and ocean general circulation model. Clim. Dyn., 4, 1-38. 
Washington, W.M.,and G . A . Meehl, 1993: Greenhouse 
sensitivity experiments with penetrative cumulus convection 
and tropical cirrus albedo effects. Clim. Dyn., 8, 211-223. 
Washington, W.M., G.A. Meehl, L. VerPlank and T. Bettge, 
1994: A world ocean model for greenhouse sensitivity studies: 
Resolution intercomparison and the role of diagnostic forcing. 
Clim. Dyn., 9, 321-344. 
Weaver, A.J. and E.S. Sarachik, 1991a: Evidence for decadal 
variability in an ocean general circulation model: An advective 
mechanism. Atmos.-Ocean., 29, 197-231. 
Weaver, A . J . and E.S. Sarachik, 1991b: The role of mixed 
boundary conditions in numerical models of the ocean's 
climate. /. Phys. Oceanogr, 21, 1470-1493. 
Weaver, A.J. and T.M.C. Hughes, 1992: Stability and variability 
of the thermohaline circulation and its link to climate. In: 
Trends in Physical Oceanography, 
Council of Scientific 
Research Integration, Trivandrum, India, 1, 15-70. 
Weaver, A.J., J. Marotzke, P.E. Cummins and E.S. Sarachik, 
1993: Stability and variability of the thermohaline circulation. 
/. Phys. Oceanogr., 23, 39-60. 
Weaver, A.J., S.M. Aura and P.G. Myers, 1994: Interdecadal 
variability in a coarse resolution North Atlantic model. /. 
Geophy.Í. Res., 99, 12423-12441. 
Weisse, R., U . Mikolajewicz and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994: 
Decadal variability of the North Atiantic in an ocean general 
circulation model. /. Geophys. Res., 99, 12411-12421. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and B.D. Santer, 1990: Statistical comparison of 
spatial fields in model validation, perturbation 
and 
predictability experiments. /. Geophys. Res., 95, 851-865. 
Williamson, D.J. and P.J. Rasch, 1993: Water vapor transport in 
the N C A R CCM2. Tellus, 46A, 34-51. 
Williamson, D.J., J.T. Kiehl and J.J. Hack, 1995: Climate 
sensitivity of the NCAR Community Climate Model (CCM2) 
to horizontal resolution. Clim. Dyn., 11, 377-397. 
Willmott, C.J. and R.D. Legates, 1993: A comparison of G C M -
simulated and observed mean January and July surface air 
temperature. J. Climate. 6, 274-291. 
Winton, M . and E.S. Sarachik, 1993: Thermohaline oscillations 
induced by strong steady salinity forcing of ocean general 
circulation models. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 23, 1389-1410. 
WOCE (Worid Ocean Circulation Experiment), 1993: Workshop 
on W O C E Data Assimilation. WOCE International 
Project 
Office, Report No. 102/93, Wormley, UK, 37 pp. 
WOCE (World Ocean Circulation Experiment), 1994: WOCE 
Strategy for Ocean Modelling. WOCE International 
Project 
Office, Report No. 112/94, Wormley, UK, 35 pp. 
Wolter, K . , 1989: Modes of tropical circulation. Southern 
Oscillation and Sahel rainfall anomalies. /. Climate, 
2, 
149-172. 
Wright, D.G. and T.F. Stocker, 1991: A zonally averaged ocean 
model for the thermohaline circulation. Part 1: Model 
development and flow dynamics. /. Phys. Oceanogr., 
21, 
1713-1724. 
Wright, H.E., J.E. Kutzbach, T. Webb, W.F. Ruddiman, E.A. 
Street-Perrott and P.J. Bartiein, eds., 1993: Global Climates 
Since the Last Glacial Maximum. University of Minnesota 
Press, Minneapohs, M N , 544 pp. 
284 
Climate Models - 
Evaluation 
Wunsch, С , 1989: Tracer inverse problems. In: Ocean 
Circulation Models: Combining Dynamics and Data, D.L.T. 
Anderson and J. Willebrand (eds.), Kluwer Academic, 
Hingham, M A , pp. 1-7. 
Wunsch, C , 1994: The T O P E X / P O S E I D O N data. AVISO 
Altimetry Newsletter No. 5, pp. 14-16. 
Xue, Y . and L Shukla, 1993: The influence of landsurface 
properties on Sahel climate. Part I: Desertification. J. Climate, 
6, 2232-2245. 
Zhang, G.J. and N.A. McFarlane, 1995: Sensitivity of climate 
simulations to the parametrization of cumulus convection in the 
Canadian Climate Centre general circulation model. 
Atmosphere-Ocean, 33, 407^46. 
Zhang, R.H. and M . Endoh, 1994: Simulation of the 1986-1987 
El Niiio and 1988 La Niña events with a free surface tropical 
Pacific Ocean general circulation model. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 
7743-7759. 
Zhang, S., R.J. Greatbatch and C.A. Lin, 1993: A re-examination 
of the polar halocline catastrophe and implications for coupled 
ocean-atmosphere modelling. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 23, 287-299. 
6 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
A. KATTENBERG, R GIORGI, H. GRASSL, G.A. MEEHL, J.F.B. MITCHELL, 
R.J. STOUFFER, T. TOKIOKA, A.J. WEAVER, T.M.L. WIGLEY 
Contributors: 
P.A. Barros, M. Beniston, G. Boer, T.A. Buishand, R. Colman, J. Copeland, P.M. Cox, 
A. Cress, J.H. Christensen, U. Cubasch, M. Deque, G. Flato, С. Fu, I. Fung, J. Garratt, 
S. Ghan, H. Gordon, J.M. Gregory, P. Guttorp, A. Henderson-Sellers, K.J. Hennessy, 
H. Hirakuchi, G.J. Holland, B. Horton, T. Johns, A. Jones, M. Kanamitsu, T. Karl, 
D. Karoly, A. Keen, T. Kittel, T. Knutson, T. Koide, G. Konnen, M. Lai, R. Laprise, 
R. Leung, A. Lupo, M. Lynch, С.-С. Ma, В. Machenhauer, E. Maier-Reimer, 
M.R. Marinucci, B. McAvaney, J. McGregor, L.O. Mearns, N.L. Miller, J. Murphy, 
A. Noda, M. Noguer, J. Oberhuber, S. Parey, H. Pleym, J. Raisanen, D. Randall, 
S.C.B. Raper, P. Rayner, J. Roads, E. Roeckner, G. Russell, H. Sasaki, F. Semazzi, 
C.A. Senior, S. V. Singh, С Skelly, К. Sperber, К. Taylor, S. Tett, H. von Storch, 
K. Walsh, P. Whetton, D. Wilks, F.L Woodward, F. Zwiers 
Modelling Contributors: see tables 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
289 
6.1 Introduction 
291 
6.2 Mean Ciianges in Climate Simulated by Three-
Dimensional Climate Models 
291 
6.2.1 Simulation of Changes in Climate Since the 
Late 19th Century 
291 
6.2.1.1 Estimates of the equilibrium response 
due to the change in radiative forcing 
from the late 19th cenmry 
292 
6.2.1.2 Estimates of the time dependent response 
to changes in radiative forcing since the 
late 19th century using three-dimensional 
climate models 
295 
6.2.2 Time-dependent Projections of Mean Climate 
Change Using Global Coupled Atmosphere-
Ocean Models 
297 
6.2.2.1 Annual mean rates of change 
297 
6.2.2.2 Patterns of annual mean temperature 
change 
301 
6.2.2.3 Seasonal changes in temperature, 
precipitation and soil moisture 
305 
6.2.3 The influence of flux adjustments 
310 
6.2.4 Interpretation of experiments 
311 
6.2.5 Summary and conclusions 
315 
6.3 Global Mean Temperature Changes for the 
IPCC (1992) Emission Scenarios 
316 
6.3.1 Introduction 
316 
6.3.2 Radiative Forcing 
318 
6.3.3 Temperature Projections 
322 
6.3.4 Longer Time-scale Projections 
324 
6.4 Simulated Changes of Variability Induced by 
Increased Greenhouse Gas Concentrations 
325 
6.4.1 Simulated Changes in Intermonthly Variability 
325 
6.4.2 Possible Changes in Interannual Variability 
327 
6.4.3 Decadal and Longer Time-scale Variability 
329 
6.4.4 Conclusions 
330 
6.5 Changes in Extreme Events 
330 
6.5.1 Introduction 
330 
6.5.2 Bacliground 
331 
6.5.3 Possible Changes in Daily Variability 
332 
6.5.4 Extreme Wind Events 
332 
6.5.4.1 Mid-latitude storms 
332 
6.5.4.2 Tropical cyclones 
334 
6.5.5 Extreme Temperature Events 
334 
6.5.6 Precipitation Extremes 
335 
6.5.7 Summary and Conclusions 
336 
6.6 Simulation of Regional Climate Change 
336 
6.6.1 Regional Simulations by GCMs 
337 
6.6.2 Simulations Using Statistical Downscaling 
and Regional Climate Modelling Systems 
339 
6.6.2.1 Statistical downscaling 
339 
6.6.2.2 Regional modelUng 
340 
6.6.3 Conclusions 
344 
6.7 Reducing Uncertainties, Future Model Capabilities 
and Improved Climate Change Estimates 
345 
6.7.1 Recent Progress and Anticipated Climate 
Model Improvements 
345 
6.7.1.1 Improvements in the modelling of 
clouds and associated radiative 
processes 
345 
6.7.1.2 Improvements in the ocean component 
of chmate models 
346 
6.7.1.3 Flux adjustment and climate models 
347 
6.7.1.4 Long-time integrations 
347 
6.7.1.5 Sea ice model improvements 
347 
6.7.1.6 Improvements in land-surface 
processes/modelling 
347 
6.7.1.7 Improvements in radiation computation 
348 
6.7.2 Global Carbon Cycle Models as Part of 
Climate Models 
348 
6.7.3 Climate Models Including Tropospheric 
Chemistry 
349 
References 
349 
SUMMARY 
General circulation models (GCMs), and in particular 
coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation models 
(AOGCMs), are the state-of-the-art tool for understanding 
the Earth's present climate, and for estimating the effects 
on past and future climate of various natural and human 
factors. This chapter focuses on the estimation of the 
effects on future climate of changes in atmospheric 
composition due to human activities. A n important 
development since IPCC(1990) is the improved 
quantification of some radiative effects of aerosols, and 
climate projections presented here include, in addition to 
the effects of increasing greenhouse gas concentrations, 
some potential effects of anthropogenic aerosols. 
Climate simulations using GCMs require substantial 
computer resources and it is not generally feasible to carry 
out separate simulations for a large number of forcing 
scenarios. In order to interpolate and extrapolate global 
mean projections from G C M s to a wider range of 
greenhouse gas and aerosol scenarios, simple upwelling 
diffusion-energy balance models are employed. These 
models are calibrated to give the same globally averaged 
temperature response as the global coupled GCMs. Since 
the amount of anthropogenic aerosols has most probably 
grown alongside the growth in fossil fuel use since pre-
industrial times, the estimated historical changes of 
radiative forcing up to 1990 used in this report for global 
mean temperature projections include a component due to 
aerosols. 
Projections of global mean temperature 
Using the IS92 emission scenarios, projected global mean 
temperature changes were calculated up to 2100 assuming 
low (1.5°C), "best estimate" (2.5°C) and high (4.5°C) 
values of the climate sensitivity (similar to IPCC (1990)). 
Taking account of increases of greenhouse 
gas 
concentrations alone (i.e., assuming aerosol concentrations 
remain constant at 1990 levels) the models project an 
increase in global mean temperature relative to the present 
of between 1 and 4.5°C by 2100 for the full range of 
IPCC scenarios. These projections are lower than the 
corresponding projections presented in IPCC (1990) partly 
because of the inclusion of aerosols in the pre-1990 
radiative forcing history and partly for other reasons, 
including revised understanding of the carbon cycle (see 
Chapter 2). Incorporating possible effects of future changes 
of anthropogenic aerosol concentrations implied by the 
IS92 scenarios leads to lower projections of temperature 
change of between Г С and 3.5°C by 2100. In all cases 
these projections would represent a substantial warming of 
climate. Uncertainty in the projections is introduced by 
uncertainty in the climate sensitivity and by uncertainty in 
the radiative forcing scenarios. 
Projections of continental scale climate change 
Spatial patterns of climate change in recent publications 
tend to confirm and extend the 1990 results. With 
increasing greenhouse gases, the warming of the land is 
generally more than that of the oceans, similar to 
equilibrium simulations. There is a minimum warming 
around Antarctica and in the northern North Atlantic which 
is associated with deep oceanic mixing in those areas. The 
maximum annual mean warming occurs in high northern 
latitudes associated with reduced sea ice cover. The 
warming here is largest in late autumn and winter, but 
becomes negligible for a short period in summer. There is 
littie seasonal variation of the warming in low latitudes or 
over the southern circumpolar ocean. The diurnal range of 
land temperature is reduced in most seasons and most 
regions. 
Including the effects of aerosols in simulations of future 
climate leads to a somewhat reduced warming in middle 
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere and the maximum 
winter warming in high northern latitudes is less extensive. 
A l l models produce an increase in global mean 
precipitation. If the direct effect of sulphate aerosol forcing 
is taken into account, the total increase in global 
precipitation is smaller, as would be expected with the 
smaller net warming. Precipitation increases in high 
latitudes in winter and in most cases the increases extend 
well into mid-latitudes. In the tropics, the patterns of 
290 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
change vary from model to model, with shifts or changes in 
intensity of the main rainfall maxima. In general, changes 
in the dry subtropics are small. Recent coupled models 
(with increased greenhouse gases only) agree with earlier 
model results that mean south Asian monsoon rainfall 
could increase. In contrast the limited number of 
simulations with aerosols included show a reduction in 
monsoon precipitation relative to the current climate. 
There is less confidence in simulated changes in soil 
moisture than in those of temperature. All models produce 
predominantly increased soil moisture in high northern 
latitudes in winter. Most models produce a drier surface in 
summer in northern mid-latitudes. This occurs most 
consistently over southern Europe and North America. 
Summer soil moisture in northern mid-ladtudes increases 
when aerosol effects are included (in contrast to the 
decrease found in greenhouse gas-only simulations). 
In response to increasing greenhouse gases, models 
show a decrease in the strength of the meridional 
circulation in the northern North Atlantic oceanic 
circulation, further reducing the strength of the warming 
around the North Atlantic. The increase in precipitation in 
high latitudes decreases surface salinity, inhibiting the 
sinking of water at high latitude which drives this 
circulation. 
Projections of regional scale climate change 
Recent estimates of regional climate changes, that did not 
take into account the effects of aerosols, for tht year 2030 
for five areas match the spread of the earlier results 
reported in IPCC (1990): temperature changes due to a 
doubling of CO2 concenti'ation varied between О.б'С and 
7°C and precipitation changes varied from -35% to +50% 
of control run values. Tropospheric aerosols arising from 
human activities, because of their uneven spatial 
distribution, are likely to greatly influence future regional 
climate change. 
Small changes in the mean climate or climate variability 
can produce relatively large changes in the frequency of 
extreme events (defined as events where a certain threshold 
is surpassed); a small change in the variability has a 
stronger effect than a similar change in the mean. 
A general warming would tend to lead to an increase in 
extremely high temperature events and a decrease in winter 
days with extremely low temperatures (e.g., frost days in 
some areas). With increasing greenhouse gas concentration, 
many models suggest an increase in the probability of 
intense precipitation. A number of simulations also show in 
some areas an increase in the probability of dry days and the 
length of dry spells (consecutive days without 
precipitation). Where mean precipitation decreases, the 
likelihood of drought increases. New results reinforce the 
view that variability associated with the enhanced 
hydrological cycle translates into prospects for more severe 
droughts and/or floods in some places and less severe 
droughts and/or floods in other places. 
In the few analyses available, there is littie agreement 
between models on changes in storminess that might occur 
in a warmer world. Conclusions regarding extreme storm 
events are obviously even more uncertain. The formation 
of tropical cyclones depends not only on sea surface 
temperature (SST), but also on a number of atmospheric 
factors. Although some models now represent tropical 
storms with some realism for present day climate, the state 
of the science does not allow assessment of future changes. 
Associated with the mean increase of tropical sea surface 
temperatures (SSTs) as a result of increased greenhouse 
gas concentrations, there could be enhanced precipitation 
variability associated with E l Nino-Southern Oscillation 
(ENSO) events, especially over the tropical continents. 
Several AOGCMs generate ENSO-like SST variability in 
their simulations of present-day climate, and continue to do 
so with increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. 
The consequences for global mean temperature of some 
scenarios leading to stabilisation of greenhouse gas 
concentrations have been analysed. In each case the 
climate shows considerable warming during the 21st 
century. Stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentration does 
not lead to an immediate stabilisation of global mean 
temperature, which continues to rise for hundreds of years 
afterwards due to the long time-scales of the oceanic 
response. 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
291 
6.1 Introduction 
This chapter on model projections of future climate change 
is central to this IPCC assessment. It presents estimates of 
the likely response of the climate system (described in 
Chapter 1) to scenarios of greenhouse gas and aerosol 
emissions (which are discussed in Chapter 2). The 
projections presented here rely heavily on results from 
general circulation models (GCMs); the underlying 
climatic processes and feedbacks that provide the greatest 
challenges to modellers are outlined in Chapter 4. Chapter 
5 (Model evaluation) gives an assessment of current 
models, and Chapter 3 outHnes recent observed trends. 
The projected magnitudes, rates and patterns of climate 
change from the present chapter (temperature, wind, 
precipitation, soil moisture, etc.) fom the basis of the sea 
level projections of Chapter 7 and link directly to the 
problems of the detection of climate change and its 
attribution to radiative forcing by greenhouse gases and 
aerosols (Chapter 8). Climate change projections form a 
cornerstone of the IPCC Working Group II report, where 
possible impacts of climate change are assessed. 
The chapter's sections are ordered according to scale, 
both in time and space, and hence in order of increased 
uncertainty. The methodology moves from G C M resuhs 
through energy balance to regional climate models and 
indirect methods like (statistical) downscaling. The final 
section, 6.7, looks to "Reducing Uncertainties, Future 
Model Capabilities and Improved Climate Change 
Estimates". 
Section 6.2, "Mean Changes in Climate Simulated by 
Three-dimensional Climate Models", assesses recent 
climate model projections for the next decades or century 
on the globally averaged and continental scales on which 
the models are most likely to be trustworthy (Figure 6.1). 
Most results are obtained using (equivalent) C02-only 
scenarios starting from present day conditions. Two studies 
start with mid-19th century conditions and also take into 
account the negative radiative forcing of sulphate aerosols 
(direct effect), though the results have not yet been fully 
analysed. These studies are a first step towards 
incorporating more realistic forcings into the models. 
Section 6,3, "Global Mean Temperature Changes for the 
IPCC (1992) Emission Scenarios", presents results of 
climate projections that explore the response of the climate 
system to different emission scenarios. Due to the 
computing costs, this type of calculation cannot be done 
directly with GCMs. The upwelling diffusion-energy 
balance (UD/EB) models employed in this section contain 
important simplifications, but have the advantage of 
computational efficiency and physical transparency. The 
UD/EB model employed in Section 6.3 has been calibrated 
to give a similar globally averaged response as global 
coupled climate models. 
Section 6.4, "Simulated Changes of Variability Induced 
by Increased Greenhouse Gas Concentrations", discusses 
results from coupled atmosphere-ocean GCMs in more 
detail. Possible changes in variability from monthly to 
decadal time-scales show little consistency between 
different simulations, and there is less confidence in this 
type of result than in the large-scale changes and patterns 
described in Sections 6.2 and 6.3. 
Sections 6.5 on "Changes in Extreme Events" and 6.6 on 
"Simulation of Regional Climate Change" assess climate 
model results for small time and spatial scales. Such results 
are potentially of great practical significance, but 
confidence in them is at present very low. 
6.2 Mean Changes in Climate Simulated by Three-
Dimensional Climate Models 
By the time of writing of the 1992 IPCC Supplementary 
Report (IPCC 1992), only four centres had completed 
extended transient coupled experiments. An additional 
seven centres have now completed such experiments 
(Table 6.3: details of many of the models are given in 
Table 5.1 of Chapter 5), and the original four centres have 
completed new simulations with higher resolution and/or 
different scenarios. Here we assess the results from 
transient simulations with a gradual increase in COj; these 
largely confirm the findings in IPCC (1992). As noted in 
Section 2.4, forcing from sulphate aerosols may have a 
marked effect on spatial patterns of climate change, even if 
their global mean forcing is small relative to that from 
greenhouse gases. We also consider new transient 
simulations which indicate the likely additional effect on 
the magnitude and patterns of climate change of increases 
in concentrations of sulphate aerosols. A wider range of 
emission scenarios using simpler energy balance models is 
considered in Secrion 6.3. Finally, additional technical 
matters which are nevertheless 
pertinent to the 
interpretation of model results are considered. 
6.2.7 Simulation of Changes in Climate Since the Late 
19th Century 
In Chapter 5, the ability of climate models to represent the 
current climate and its variability was assessed. Before 
considering predictions of future climate, we examine the 
ability of models to reproduce changes in climate over the 
period of the instrumental temperature record (from the 
latter half of the 19th century to present). 
292 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
(a) 
Temperature indicators 
O C E A N 
-
L A N D 
O C E A N 
stratosphere 
cools 
troposphere 
warms 
• 
y 
V 
X 
ч 
little change or 
near surface air 
slight decrease of 
temperature increase 
ENSO SST 
greater at N.H. latitudes 
variability 
in winter 
sea levels rise 
snow cover / 
\ . 
decreases 
/ 
near surface ocean 
tenfiperature increases 
but less In N. Atlantic 
and Southern OceatiS 
tropical E Pacific 
warms more tnan 
tropical W. Pac'tic 
land night-time air temperatures 
rise faster than daytime temperatures 
ground temperature адш^тз 
sea ice 
N.H. tielow average 
S K l V e r á a e o r 
alînhfh/ hMnw 
deep ocean warms slightly 
(b) 
Hydrological Indicators 
O C E A N 
evaporation in tropioe increases 
L A N D 
O C E A N 
tropical precipitation variability increases 
high latitude precipitation increases year round in N.H. 
mid to high latitude precipitation increases in winter in N.H. 
mid-latiiude soil moisture increases In winter, 
decreases in summer 
I 
— • 
•—i 
. 
I 
1 
Figure 6.1; A qualitative description of modelled anthropogenic climate change for some temperature (a), and hydrological indicators (b). 
6.2.7./ Estimates of the equilibrium 
response due to the 
change in radiative forcing from the late 19th 
century 
Because of the expense of running fully coupled 
atmosphere-ocean inodels, preliminary attempts to estimate 
the effect of past changes in radiative forcing have used 
atmospheric models coupled to a simple oceanic well 
mixed layer. This allows an estimate of the equilibrium 
response to be made with much less computing tiitie 
required than for a full climate model. However, these 
calculations neglect the thermal inertia of the deep ocean, 
and so give an exaggerated response, particularly in 
regions of deep mixing (see Section 6.2.2). Note that the 
equilibrium global mean temperature response of a model 
to doubling atmospheric COj is often referred to in this 
report as the model's "climate sensitivity". 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
293 
Table 6.1: Equilibrium 
global mean response to the increase in greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosol 
concentrations 
over the 20th century. The experimental designs in the four studies differ, so some of the entries are derived under specific 
assumptions defined below. 
Study 
Sensitivity to 
Doubling CO2 CC) 
51 
Roeckner ei a/. (1995) 
2.8 
52 
Taylor and Penner (1994) 
5.2* 
53 
Mitchell era/. (1995a) 
5.2 
54 
Le Treut ei a/. ( 1995) 
3.9 
Direct 
Aerosol 
Forcing 
(Wm-2) 
-0.7 
-0.9 
-0.6 
-0.3 (direct) 
-0.8 (indirect) 
Temperature 
response of 
equilibrium due 
to aerosols (°C) 
-0.9* 
-0.9 
-0.8 
-1.6« 
Temperature 
response of 
equilibrium to 
combined aerosol 
and CO2 forcing 
since 1900 (°C) 
0.5 
0.6+ 
1.6 
0.0* 
SI and S3 use the aerosol distribution of Langner and Rodhe (1991) and represent aerosols as an increase in surface albedo. S2 
derives the sulphate loading from a coupled atmosphere sulphur cycle model and includes an explicit radiative scattering treatment 
of aerosols. 
* Assuming 40% increase in COj gives 50% of the warming due to doubling, and subtracting this value from the combined forcing 
experiment in the final column. 
# Assuming 25% increase in COj gives 29% of the warming due to doubling. 
+ Using a 25% increase in COj, whereas SI and S3 use a 40% increase to allow for changes in all greenhouse gases. 
$ The forcing used includes both the estimated direct and indirect forcing. In the last column, COj was increased by 25%. 
Substantially higher sensitivities are found if a colder control simulation is used. Although the global mean temperature change 
in S4 is zero, the model gives a cooling in the Northern Hemisphere and a warming in the Southern Hemisphere. 
Radiative forcing 
IPCC (1990) estimated the changes in radiative forcing 
since pre-industrial times due to increases in well-mixed 
greenhouse gases. The change in radiative forcing since 
1900 is approximately equivalent to that given by a 40% 
increase in COj. The equilibrium response to the explicit 
trace gases and an equivalent increase in COj are broadly 
similar. Wang et al. (1992) did find some difference in the 
patterns of change when using changes in equivalent C O , 
instead of changes in the individual gases, but the 
difference is small compared v^iúx that between different 
models with identical forcing. The equilibrium distribution 
of warming due to increases in C O 2 was discussed 
extensively in the 1990 IPCC report. 
In the last few years, quantitative estimates have also 
been made of the direct effect of changes in sulphate 
aerosol concentrations on the Earth's radiation balance 
(Chapter 2). The equilibrium response to the scattering of 
radiation by sulphate aerosols has been estimated using 
atmospheric models coupled to a simple model of the 
oceanic mixed layer (Table 6.1). Distributions of current 
sulphate aerosol loading due to human activity were 
calculated off-line (Langner and Rodhe, 1991) or in the 
climate model (Taylor and Penner, 1994). The estimated 
global mean radiative forcing ranges from -0.6 Wm~^ to 
-0.9 Wm-2 fgj. scattering by sulphate aerosols (Table 6.1) 
compared with -0.8 to -0.2 Wm^^ (central value -0.4 
Wm~2) for the direct forcing estimated in Section 2.4.2.1. 
In studies SI and S3, the aerosol forcing is approximated 
by an increase in surface albedo, following Charlson et al. 
(1991), though Mitchell et al. (1995a) found a high spatial 
correlation between the resulting forcing and that 
calculated using an explicit scattering scheme with the 
same aerosol distribution. Note also that the simulations in 
Table 6.1 ignore other radiative forcing factors including 
the indirect effect of sulphate aerosols (not S4), volcanic 
aerosols, biogenic aerosols, soot, ozone and solar 
variations. In Chapter 2, the net effect of the direct effect 
and these other factors is estimated to be probably a stnall 
cooling though there is large uncertainty both in the net 
global mean forcing and its geographical distribution. 
Because of their short atmospheric lifetime, aerosol 
concentrations are largest near their source region. Hence, in 
contrast to the well-mixed greenhouse gases, they have the 
294 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
potential to produce strong regional changes in climate even 
if their global mean radiative forcing is relatively small. As a 
result, their relative importance is greater than might be 
deduced by considering only global mean quantities. 
Mean surface air temperature 
The direct sulphate aerosol forcing produces a cooling 
which is most pronounced over the northern mid-latitude 
continents and downwind oceanic regions. The cooling is 
also large in the vicinity of winter sea ice, even though the 
radiative forcing is zero at this time (the polar night). This 
is because the aerosol cooling is spread by the atmospheric 
circulation and amplified locally through temperature sea 
ice feedbacks as in COj only simulations (see for example, 
Ingram et al, 1989, Mitchell et al, 1995a). 
When combined with the increase in greenhouse gases 
since 1900, the aerosol effect is sufficient to produce areas 
of net cooling over regions of eastern North America, the 
Middle East and eastern China in two of the three 
experiments (SI, S2; see Table 6.1). In S2, it has been 
shown that the patterns correlate more closely with the 
observed changes than do simulations with increases in 
equivalent COj only (Santer et al, 1995; see also the 
section on transient simulations below and Chapter 8). 
In energy balance models it is usually assumed that the 
sensitivity of global mean surface temperature to global 
mean aerosol forcing (defined here as temperature 
response/unit forcing) is the same as to global mean 
greenhouse gas forcing. There is some evidence that the 
sensitivity to aerosol forcing is greater than to COj forcing, 
at least for small amounts of aerosol (Table 6.1). However, 
because of the large interdecadal variability of temperature 
and the small aerosol forcing generally used, longer 
experiments than those listed in Table 6.1 are required to 
demonstrate that the apparent difference is not an artefact of 
poor sampling. With a larger aerosol forcing, and hence a 
larger signal-to-noise ratio, Mitchell et al (1995a) found that 
sensitivity to aerosol and greenhouse gas forcing was similar. 
This result suggests that using the same global mean chmate 
sensitivity for greenhouse gases and direct sulphate aerosol 
forcing, as in Section 6.3, may not lead to serious error. 
The range of estimates of forcing due to factors other 
than well-mixed greenhouse gases in Section 2.4.2 
encompasses global mean forcings of up to -2 to -3 Wm^^. 
The large range of uncertainty makes it difficult to validate 
models against the observational record, and to estimate 
the radiative forcing of these factors in the future. Many of 
the factors considered (sulphate aerosols, soot, tropospheric 
ozone) are concentrated over the northern mid-latitude 
continents. It is possible that the larger estimates of 
negative radiative forcing would produce a temperature 
change in this region which is inconsistent with the 
observed record. For example, in S3, an additional 
sensitivity experiment with tripled aerosol forcing (giving a 
global mean forcing of -1.8 Wm"^) and adding the cuiTcnt 
greenhouse gas forcing gave an unrealistically large area of 
cooling over the northern continents when compared with 
the observed changes this century. Thus, it may be possible 
to use models in this type of experiment to provide an 
upper limit to the net radiative cooling due to factors other 
than well-mixed greenhouse gases. 
Diurnal range 
In recent decades, a widespread decrease in diurnal 
temperature range has been reported over the main 
continents (Chapter 3). In IPCC (1990), a few studies 
reported a small decrease in diumal range in equilibrium 2 X 
CO2 experiments, though at that stage no detailed analysis 
had been performed. More recent studies show that decreases 
are associated with increased evaporative cooling and other 
features accompanying climate warming (Cao et al, 1992, 
Hansen et al, 1995). The changes vary with location and 
season, and from model to model, though decreases are 
predominant (for example Cao et al, 1992; Cubasch et al, 
1995a; Hansen etal, 1995; Mearns etal, 1995b; Mitchell et 
al., 1995a). In general, increases in diurnal range are 
associated with reductions in cloud or soil moisture. 
The most obvious effect of aerosol forcing is a tendency 
to reduce diurnal range, since it reduces the amplitude of 
the diurnal cycle of insolation. However, simulations with 
aerosol forcing included indicate that other feedbacks can 
counteract this effect. Sulphate aerosols can cool climate 
leading to a reduction in evaporative cooling of the surface, 
and an increase in global mean diurnal range (Hansen et 
al, 1995; Mitchell et al., 1995a). In other words, the 
cooling reverses the processes that lead to a reduced 
diurnal range in COj only experiments. In these two 
studies, it is only in regions of maximum aerosol loading 
that the reduction in the diurnal amplitude of solar heating 
due to the presence of aerosol is sufficient to produce a net 
reduction in diurnal range due to aerosols. One 
consequence of this finding, if correct, is that the observed 
reduction in diurnal range cannot necessarily be attributed 
to increases in sulphate aerosols. 
The effect of CO2 and of aerosols on diurnal range is 
illustrated in Table 6.2 and Figure 6.2. In equilibrium 
simulations with a 40% increase in COj (which gives the 
increase in greenhouse gas forcing from 1990 to present) 
there is a widespread reduction in diurnal range (Figure 
6.2b). For comparison, the observed change in diurnal 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
295 
Table 6.2: Changes in diurnal range of L5 m temperature averaged over seasons and the annual cycle. The simulated and 
observed values are averaged over the regions where observations are available (see Figure 6.2a). The observed data are 
from Horton (1995) and the simidations from S3 ( see Table 6.1 ). The changes in greenhouse gas forcing ( represented by an 
equivalent increase in CO2) and direct sulphate aerosol forcing are those estimated to have occurred since 1900. Note that 
the observed changes are available only over the latter half of this period and are the difference between the mean for 1981 
to 1990 and the mean for 1951 to 1980. 
Source 
DJF* 
M A M * 
JJA* 
SON* 
YEAR 
Simulated, increase in equivalent CO2 since 1900 
-0.46 
-0.35 
-0.08 
-0.34 
-0.29 
Simulated, aerosol forcing and equivalent CO2 
-0.43 
-0.27 
-0.16 
-0.32 
-0.27 
increase since 1990 
Observations of recent change 
-0.28 
-0.17 
-0.19 
-0.36 
-0.19 
(1981 to 1990 mean less 1951 to 1980 mean) 
* DJF = December, January, February; M A M = March, April, May; JJA = June, July, August; SON = September, October, 
November. 
range from the mean for 1950 to 1980 to the mean for 1980 
to 1990 is shown in Figure 6.2a. (Observed data from the 
beginning of the century are unreliable, but the period 
corresponds to when most of the increase in radiative 
forcing occurred and so allows qualitative comparison). 
The addition of aerosol effects (S3, Figure 6.2c) leads to 
slightly larger reductions in diumal range in parts of mid-
latitudes. The seasonal variation of the changes in diurnal 
range is similar to that observed, with smaller reductions 
occuning in northern spring and summer (Table 6.2). The 
observed changes are discussed in Section 3.2.2.4. Flansen 
et al. (1995) find that increases in CO2 and aerosols alone 
are insufficient to explain the observed reduction in diumal 
range, which they can only explain by additionally 
increasing cloud. 
In summary, models in general produce decreases in 
diurnal range over much of the mid-latitude continents 
when forced with increases in aerosols, but the simulated 
magnitude varies from model to model, and the relative 
importance of different physical mechanisms leading to the 
observed diurnal range is uncertain. Additional 
uncertainties in radiative forcing (Chapter 2) and the 
observed changes (Chapter 3) mean that changes in diurnal 
range may be a poor diagnostic for model validation. 
6.2.1.2 Estimates of the time dependent response to 
changes in radiative forcing since the late 19th 
century using three-dimensioned climate models 
Since 1990, several new studies have attempted to 
reproduce the instrumental temperature record from the 
late 19th century to present, including two using fully 
coupled GCMs (Hasselmann et al, 1995; Mitchell et al, 
1995b (runs y and z respectively in Table 6.3)). As in the 
equilibrium simulations, the increases in greenhouse gases 
may be represented by an equivalent increase in CO2, and 
the evolution of greenhouse gas forcing has been taken 
from a variety of sources including IPCC (1990). 
When increases in greenhouse gases only are taken into 
account in simulating climate change over the last century, 
most GCMs (Hansen et al, 1993, Mitchell et al 1995b -
Figure 6.3;) and energy balance models (Wigley and 
Raper, 1992; Schlesinger et al, 1993; Murphy, 1995b) 
produce a greater warming than that observed to date, 
unless a lower climate sensitivity than that found in most 
GCMs is used (see Figure 8.4). 
As noted above, there is growing evidence that increases 
in sulphate aerosols are partially counteracting the radiative 
forcing due to increases in greenhouse gases (Chapter 2). 
The temporal evolution of sulphate aerosol concentrations 
can be estimated from sulphur emission inventories (for 
example, Dignon and Hameed, 1989), assuming a constant 
ratio between emissions and concentrations, or through an 
explicit sulphur cycle model. To generate spatial 
distributions of sulphate aerosol concentration for use in 
transient G C M simulations, Hasselmann et al (1995) used 
decadal means derived using the M O G U N T I A model 
(Langner and Rodhe, 1991), whereas Mitchell et al. 
(1995b) scaled the pattern given by Langner and Rodhe 
(1991) by the global mean emissions for each decade. Both 
the G C M experiments included only the direct effect of 
sulphate aerosols, represented by an appropriate increase in 
surface albedo (see Section 6.2.1.1). 
296 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
180 ISO-W 120-W 90'W 
вО-W SOTf 
0 
ЗО'Е 60-E 90*E 120-E lôO'E 180 
180 1501Г 120ТГ 90-W 
вОТГ 
30ТГ 
0 
30'E 60*E 
90*E 120*E ISQ-E 
180 ISO-W 120"W 901Г бОТГ 
ЗОТГ 
О 
ЗО'Е 60'Е 90'Е 120"Е 150'Е 
-1 
-0.5 
О 
Figure 6.2: Equilibrium changes in annual mean diurnal range of surface air temperature, (a) Observations (difference in 1980-1990 
and 1951-1980 means) (from Horton, 1995). Contours every 0.25X. (b) Simulated due to a 40% increase in CO^. Contours every 
0.5°C (from Mitchell et al, 1995a). (с) Simulated due to a 40% increase in COj and the direct effect of current industrial sulphate 
aerosols. Contours every 0.5°C (from Mitchell et al, 1995a). 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
297 
1.5 Е П I I I I I ' ' ' ' I ' ' I ' I I ' I I I I I I I I I I I I I ' I 
Q 
; 
Equivalent CO2 only 
; 
2.- 
: 
Equivalent CO2 and the direct effect of sulphate aerosol : 
2, 
- 
Observed 
^ 
? 1 . 0 r 
-
I : 
A 
§ 
; 
/ 
: 
-0 51' 
I 
I I I I I I I I l i 
1860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
Year 
Figure 6.3: Simulated global annual mean warming from 1860 to 
1990, allowing for increases in equivalent C O j only (dashed 
curve) and allowing for increases in equivalent COj and the direct 
effects of sulphates (flecked curve) (Mitchell et al., 1995a). The 
observed changes are from Parker et al. (1994). The anomalies 
are calculated relative to 1880-1920. 
When cooling due to aerosols is included in some form, 
then an improved agreement with the observational record 
of global mean surface temperature in the last few decades 
is found in almost all studies (for example Figures 6.3) 
using models with the level of climate sensitivity found in 
current A O G C M s . As in the equilibrium experiments 
described above, the aerosol forcing considerably reduces 
the surface warming in the northern extratropics, and even 
leads to cooling in some regions. The amplification of the 
surface warming in northern high latitudes is also reduced 
- for example in z the warming in the Arctic from period 
1880 to 1920 to the decade 1980 to 1990 is similar to the 
global mean warming. Mitchell et al. (1995b) found that 
the spatial correlation of simulated temperature change 
with that observed is also higher in the last few decades 
when aerosol effects are included (see also Figure 8.6). 
This indicates that the effect of sulphate aerosol and other 
forcings should be taken into account in attempts to detect 
or attribute climate change, as noted in Chapter 8. 
Three factors need to be considered in assessing these 
results. First, we do not know how well a perfect model 
driven with the correct radiative forcing would agree with 
the observational record, as we do not know the level of 
internal variability of climate on decadal and longer time-
scales. Second, it is possible in principle to get a similarly 
good fit to the observed global mean record if the climate 
sensitivity and aerosol forcing are both increased (or 
decreased). As there are large uncertainties in both 
radiative forcing (Chapter 2) and climate sensitivity, the 
ability of a model to reproduce the past record does not 
necessarily imply that its climate sensitivity or the assumed 
radiative forcing is correct. Note in particular that these 
preliminary G C M studies include only an estimate of the 
direct forcing due to sulphate aerosols and neglect other 
potentially large sources of natural and anthropogenic 
forcing. Finally, there are uncertainties in the observations, 
particularly in remote regions and in the early part of the 
observational record. 
6.2.2 Time-dependent Projections of Mean Climate 
Change Using Global Coupled Atmosphere-Ocean 
Models 
Experiments that study the time-dependent evolution of 
climate are called "transient" experiments. The various 
coupled atmosphere-ocean climate model experiments 
carried out to date span a wide range of forcing scenarios, 
climate sensitivities (the equilibrium or long-term global 
mean temperature response to doubling COj concentrations) 
and initial conditions (Table 6.3). The experiments are 
referenced by the letter assigned in Table 6.3, and the 
version of the model used by the number in Table 5.1. Fuller 
references to the experiments are given in Table 6.3. 
Most transient experiments with AOGCMs are based on 
certain simplifying assumptions. First, they represent the 
effect of increases in all greenhouse gases by increases in 
CO2 (Chapter 5). Second, apart from experiments x,y,w and 
z, they ignore the effects of the historical increases in 
forcing which leads to an underestimate of the initial rate 
of change (the "cold start", described in Section 6.2.4). 
Finally, they use simplified versions of the IPCC scenarios. 
A majority of the experiments assume a 1%/yr compound 
increase in COj which gives a doubling of COj after 70 
years (Table 6.3). With a 1%/yr increase in equivalent 
COj, the radiative forcing is generally about 20% greater 
than that under Scenario IS92a which gives a doubling of 
equivalent CO2 after about 95 years. For comparison, the 
actual increase in equivalent CO-, (i.e., allowing for 
increases in COj and other trace gases) over the last decade 
or so has been about 0.7%/yr which, if maintained, would 
lead to a doubling of equivalent CO2 in 100 years. 
6.2.2.1 Annual mean rates of change 
Simulations with increases in greenhouse gases only 
In experiments forced with a 1%/yr increase in CO2, the 
rate of warming at the time of doubled COj varies from 
about 0.17°C/decade to 0.5°C/decade (Figure 6.4). This 
spread is not surprising given that the estimated 
equilibrium warming for a doubling of COj for the models 
in Figure 6.4 varies from 2.1 to 4.6°C (Table 6.3). The 
00 
s 
I 
I 
-s: 
I I 
8 
I 
i g 
•S 
g. 
Si ? 
^ '2 
8 -s 
о 
I -s 
3 i 
Se 5b 
^8 
a 
Si 
E 
s 1 I 
I I 
« . S 
Í 
Ci 
i 
•g 
II 
О 
о 
о 
ON 
ON 
О 
Cl, 
e 
e 
о 
pa 
5^ 
о 
О 
о 
NO 
ON 
ON 
8 S ft. 
С 
0 0 
d ftj 
о 
1 
о 
45 
3 
о 
г -
о 
с 
<N 
( U 
f U 
( U 
(N 
ON 
^ 
^ 
O N 
S e I-
Ë 
Ë 
O N 
О 
О 
ON 
о 
о — 
# 
^ 
tí? # 
^ 
<u 
о 
ON 
ON 
Ë 
Ë 
о 
Ë 
Ë 
о о 
Ë 
Ë 
о 
s Й Й 
3 
о 
3 
s 
( Л 
3 
oí 
с 
ON 
ON 
3 
5^ 
ON 
С 
Ë 
N D 
O N 
ON 
ON 
3 
и 
— 
(
N
-
N
t
-
i
n
N
0 
4 0 
4
D
4
0
N
û 
Pû U 
U 
U 
Ü 
Й a, 
E 
3 ;i 
:§ 
NO 
n i 
С 
Q 
ON 
ON 
ë 
Ë 
Л" 
O N 
O N 
Ë 1 
CNl 
ON 
ON 
ON 
ON 
U 
N O 
4 D 
О 
N O 
( N 
I 
- i t 
О 
O N и и 
^ 
Ч О 
< ^ 
00 
О 
0 ^ 
ON 
ON 
ON 
ON 
O N 
ON 
О 
f2 I 
(D 
о 
G 
2i 
2; 
NO 
ON 
ON 
ON 
C<-) 
OO 
ON 
ON 
ON 
С 3 
ОИ 
s s I 
T 3 
с 
с 
ад 
с 
- О 
С 
I I 
CNI 
с 
at 
"о 
•s 
•с M 
£ .s 
'3 и 
О" 
ее 
Mi 
я "в 
^ 13 
о 
•с 
ее 
в 
Ы 
1 = 
в 
и 
r i 
-а с 
>N 
х ; 
& 
3 
" О 
ON 
ON 
>> 
& 
3 
0 0 
NO 
ci 
I N 
t t â I 
2} 
2 
0 ) 
i n 
ON 
ON 
NO 
"3 
•—1 
1 
ON 
2 ? S 
NO 
ON 
ON 
О 
NO 
ON 
ON 
ON 
ON NO 
ON 
ON 
i4 
NO 
ON 
ON 
С 
-§ 
X
Ï 
I T ) 
ON 
ON 
5 
S 5 
S 
о" 
о 
oo 
i I 
s I 
с 
I I 
s I 
s 
ад 
.S 
о 
i-^ 
••3 
о и 
S 
' 
E 
3 
z 
с 
3 
с и 
8 
о. 
J3 
СЛ 
С 
Й 
(D 
>N 
О 
ON 
о 
I H 
° kí 
-а 
с 
ад 
Ç 
Î 
-а 
о 
•о 
M 
3 
е 
1Л 
( N 
ON 
с 
о 
ON 
ад 
J3 
о 
с 
я 
J3 
"S 
о. 
3 
о 
и 
ад 
,3 
"о 
Р 
О . 
а 
f 
и 
с 
ON 
0 0 
С 
О 
о 
ON. 
ON 
g 
с 
a> 
ад 
-g 
3 
^ 
ад "о 
•S 
S 
I ^ 
11 
й -S 
ад 
> i 
О :2 
о i 
ON 
p 
ON 
h 
T 3 
3 <u 
u -s 
(D 2 
g .a 
E 
t 
'C 
>N 
II 
3 
с 
о 
III 
л 
fe, 
i 2 
Й -S 
с 
? 
••"M 
О 
О 
« 
и < 
- 1 - * < m и Q W 
p- о ГС 
•S 
E 
g 
1л 
с 
G 
300 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
О 
a> 
| 2 
CO 
x: Ü 
CD 
<s> 
9¬
E 
r ^ 
Ê 
о 
-1 
Coupled AOGCMs 
GISS(/c) 
CSIRO (d) 
= 
UKMO (f2) 
GFDLO) 
BMRC (a) 
UKMO(s) 
NCARW 
COLA(c) 
UD/EB models 
Section 6.3 
Section 7.5.3 
0 
20 
100 
40 
60 
80 
Year from start of experiment 
Figure 6.4: Comparison between several A O G C M simulations (climate sensitivities between 2.1 and 4.6°C), the UD/EB model of 
Section 6.3 (climate sensitivity 2.5°C) and the simple climate model of Section 7.5.3 (cUmate sensitivity of about 2.2°C). AU models 
were forced with 1%/yr (compound) increase of atmospheric CO^ concentration from equilibrium or near-equilibrium in 1990. 
results straddle the 0.3°C/decade estimated with a simpler 
UD/EB model for Scenario IS92a (IPCC, 1992) when an 
equilibrium sensitivity of 2.5°C to doubUng CO^ is 
assumed. Note that the initial rate of warming in the 
coupled model experiments is generally small because the 
historical build up of greenhouse gases has been neglected 
(see Sections 6.2.1.2 and 6.2.4). 
Two new experiments have been completed using the 
historical increase in greenhouse gas forcing from the end 
of the last century to the present, followed by CO^ 
increasing by either 1%/yr (w), or according to the older 
IPCC (1990) Scenario A (x) which is roughly equivalent to 
a 1.2%/yr increase in CO2. Hence the forcing is sUghtly 
larger than in IS92a, but cUmate sensitivity of both models 
is close to the IPCC (1990) "best estimate" value. The rate 
of warming in the early 21st century is close to 
0.3°C/decade, in reasonable agreement with the simpler 
UD/EB model results noted above. 
Simulations with greenhouse gas and aerosol forcing 
Since IPCC (1990), attempts have been made to include the 
effects of increases in sulphate aerosol concentrations in 
models, as these may have a strong influence on patterns of 
climate change (see Section 2.4, Section 6.2.1, Chapter 8). 
The two experiments above which included the historical 
increase in greenhouse gas forcing (x, and w) were 
repeated with the direct effect of increases in sulphate 
aerosol represented by an increase in surface albedo 
(Section 6.2.1.2). The distribution of sulphate aerosols 
concentrations from 1990 in each case was derived using 
the M O G U N T I A sulphur cycle model (Langner and 
Rodhe, 1991) and sulphur emission scenarios under IS92a 
(IPCC, 1992). In z, the global mean aerosol forcing 
increases from 0.6 Wm"^ in 1990 to about 1.3 Wm-2 jjj 
2050. IS92a assumes a doubUng of sulphur emissions by 
2050. Given the uncertainties in future sulphur emissions 
and in converting from sulphate concentrations to forcing. 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
301 
4 -
3 -
О 
г. 
Q) 
О ) 
С СО 
SZ 
Ü 2 [¬
i 
Е 
В 
5 
MPI (X) 
'I ! w J ' MPI (y) 
Control run for MPI (X) and (y) 
|t 
' î 
r 
Control run for UKMO (w) and (z)-
-1 
1850 
1900 
1950 
2000 
Year 
2050 
2100 
2150 
Figure 6.5: Simulated global annual mean warming from 1880 in two simulations with greenhouse gas forcing only, MPI (x) and UKMO(vv), 
and two simulations which include both greenhouse gas and direct sulphate aerosol forcing, MPI(y) and UKMO(z) (Hasselmann et al, 1995; 
Mitchell et al, 1995a). The control runs for each model are also shown. Experiment details are given in Table 6.3. 
and the neglect of other factors including indirect forcing 
by sulphates, these experiments should be regarded 
primarily as sensitivity studies which indicate the potential 
influence of sulphate aerosols. 
The rate of warming is 0.2°C/decade, as opposed to 
0.3°C/decade with increases in COj alone (Mitchell et al 
1995b, Hasselmann et al. 1995) (Figure 6.5), in good 
agreement with earlier calculations using an energy 
balance model (Wigley and Raper, 1992, Figure 8.4). The 
addirion of aerosol forcing leads to changes in the 
simulated patterns of change in northern mid-latitudes, as 
discussed below. 
6.2.2.2 Patterns of annual mean temperature change 
Simulations with increases in greenhouse gases only 
All models produce a greater warming over land than over 
the sea (e.g.. Figure 6.6). Although the greater thermal 
inertia of the oceans may contribute to this, a similar 
feature is evident in equilibrium simulations with a simple 
ocean (for example, IPCC 1990). Simulated feedbacks are 
generally stronger over the land than the ocean (for 
example, Murphy, 1995b). One reason is that in higher 
latitudes, the presence of snow produces a positive 
temperature albedo feedback which is absent over the 
ocean. The temperature response will also be enhanced 
over dry land relative to the ocean because evaporative 
cooling is restricted leaving more of the increased radiative 
heating to raise the surface temperature. 
These and other feedbacks may be enhanced or reduced 
by changes in cloudiness (for example, Wetherald and 
Manabe, 1995). The magnitude and even sign of the cloud 
feedback is uncertain (Chapter 4, Senior and Mitchell, 
1993), so the strength of the land sea contrast wifl vary 
from model to model. Nevertheless, the enhanced warming 
over land remains a robust feature of all models and is 
physically based. 
302 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
(a) BMRC AOGCM 
180° 
135°W 
90°W 
45°W 
0° 
45°E 
90°E 
135°E 
180° 
180° 
135°W 
90°W 
45°W 
0° 
45°E 
90°E 
135°E 
180° 
Figure 6.6: Annual mean temperature response of the B M R C and CSIRO AOGCMs (see Table 6.3) to a 1%/yr increase in CO^, 
averaged around the time of doubled CO2. (a) From model 1, experiment a (no flux adjustment); (b) from model 5, experiment d (with 
flux adjustment). 
There is a minimum warming (a,d,e,l,r,t,x,w), 
or even 
regions of cooling (k,q,m,s) in the high latitude southern 
ocean (for example, Figure 6.6). The minimum warming is 
associated with increases in the thermal inertia of the ocean 
due to deep convection and large-scale vertical motions 
which occur in the present climate (for example, Drijfhout 
et al., 1996). The simulated deep mixing in this region is 
supported by measurements of the penetration of inert 
tracers on decadal time-scales (for example, Warner and 
Weiss, 1992). Recent studies (England, 1995; Robitaille 
and Weaver, 1995, also Sections 5.3.3.2 and 5.3.3.4.1) 
suggest that current ocean models may produce excessive 
vertical mixing in this region. If this is confirmed, the 
degree to which the warming is retarded around the 
southern ocean may be exaggerated. 
The position and strength of this minimum varies from 
model to model. It is generally around 60°S, though in a it 
is closer to Antarctica (Figure 6.6a), whereas in d (Figure 
6.6b) and t,w it is further north. Note that in some models 
(for example, 7) there is very littie sea ice in the control. 
This considerably weakens the sea ice albedo feedback, but 
would not be expected to produce a minimum warming at 
304 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
these latitudes. In r, which has relatively weak vertical 
mixing in these latitudes, the warming around Antarctica is 
larger than in other models. 
Most models produce a region of minimum warming in 
the northern North Atlantic (Figure 6.6), another region of 
deep oceanic mixing (Weiss et al., 1985; Smethie, 1993). 
This feature is absent in p which produces a very feeble 
North Atlantic meridional circulation in the simulation of 
present climate (Table 5.5), perhaps indicative that deep 
mixing is weak or absent, and is muted in a, which also has 
weak meridional overturning in the North Atlantic. In 
contrast, к produces a cooling which extends into the 
Norwegian Sea. 
Many studies report a decrease in the strength of the 
North Atlantic thermohaline (meridional) circulation (a,d-
i,k,m,s,t,w). Note that in two models {a,k), the thermohaline 
circulation is weak or weakening throughout the control 
simulation and in p this circulation is almost non-existent 
(Chapter 5). The strength of the reduction varies from 
model to model, from around 30% at the time of doubling 
{g,s) to less than 10% (t). This change has been studied in 
more detail in only a few experiments (g,s,m). In the 
warmer climate, the decrease is associated with an increase 
in the moisture supply to the surface (precipitation in high 
latitudes increases more than evaporation) which reduces 
the salinity and thus the density of surface water, and 
inhibits the sinking of water at high latitudes (e.g., Manabe 
et al, 1991, Murphy and Mitchell, 1995). These authors 
also find a similar freshening of the upper layers in high 
southern latitudes. The greater penetration of heat in high 
latitudes may also reduce the meridional density gradient, 
further slowing the meridional circulation. The weakening 
of this circulation further inhibits warming, or may even 
produce local cooling (for example. Figure 6.7b), in 
regions of deep water formation. 
In one study (g), the thermohaline circulation stopped 
altogether when the concentration of COj was increased 
fourfold, and did not recover when the CO2 level was 
maintained at this level for several centuries (Manabe and 
Stouffer, 1994). However, when C O j was gradually 
doubled and then held fixed in the same model, the 
thermohahne circulation first weakened and then returned 
to its original strength. 
Several simulations show a differential mean warming 
of sea surface temperatures across the tropical Pacific with 
the eastern Pacific warming faster than the western Pacific 
(g,k,r). This is similar to the pattern of SST anomalies 
associated with ENSO events as well as the decadal time-
scale pattern of SST change in the tropical Pacific (Chapter 
3). In g (Knutson and Manabe, 1995), the difference 
between the warming in the east and west is relatively 
small in comparison to the mean tropical sea surface 
temperature warming (about 1°C compared to a 4-5 °C 
mean warming in a COj quadrupling experiment), and was 
not clearly evident until about a century of the integration 
was completed with COj increasing at 1%/yr. In к and r, 
the pattern of change becomes evident by the time of 
doubling (Meehl and Washington, 1996; Tett, 1995). 
Associated with the reduced zonal gradient in sea surface 
temperature in g,q is a. mean precipitation change that 
resembles in some respects the precipitation anomalies 
associated with present day ENSO events, i.e., relatively 
greater increases in precipitation occur in the mean over 
the central equatorial Pacific, with relatively small 
increases or some decreases elsewhere in the Inter Tropical 
Convergence Zone (ITCZ), the South Pacific Convergence 
Zone as well as in the far western Pacific over Indonesia 
and northern Australia. 
Finally, we consider changes in the diurnal range of 
temperature, since observations suggest this parameter has 
diminished in many regions in recent decades (Chapter 3). 
Some of the coupled models omit the diurnal cycle of 
insolation (f-j,q,r), and of those that do not, only a few 
(a,d,k,s,t,w,z) report changes in diurnal range. Most find 
small reductions in global annual mean diurnal range (e.g.. 
Figure 6.8). The local changes vary with location and 
season, and from model to model, though decreases are 
predominant in the extratropics (s,t,w,z), except in к which 
reports substantial areas of increase in mid-latitudes. The 
mechanisms of change in diurnal range are discussed in 
more detail in Section 6.2.1.1. 
2.4 
Ü 2 , 2 
CD 
2b 
1.8 h 
-a 
Ü 
^ ? 1 . 6 
о Ф 
E 1 4 
1.2 
Minimum 
temperature 
p- -o 
/ 
' ' Г > - - ' - ' 
1 
> г 
f '7 
a'---*, ; 
XL 
v;^--—/ 
i ^ ^ ^ l 
* Í / 
Y 
Maximum 
temperature 
— I — 1 — - J — 1 — 1 — 1 — I — 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 — [ _ 
60 
62 
64 
66 
68 
70 
72 
74 
76 
78 
Model years from start of experiment 
Figure 6.8: Changes in global mean diumal range of surface 
temperatures during years 60 to 79 of a simulation by the B M R C 
A O G C M (Model 1 - see Table 6.3) in which COj is increased by 
1%/yr (Colman et al, 1995). The linear trends in minimun and 
maximum temperature over the same period are also shown. 
Climate Models ~ Projections of Future 
Climate 
305 
Simulations with greenhouse gas and aerosol forcing 
Two simulations {x,w) were forced with the historical 
increase in equivalent COj, and then a 1%/yr increase in 
equivalent CO2. The patterns of change are qualitatively 
similar to those in the experiments above. In Section 
6.2.1.2 (see also Section 8.4.2.3), we saw that the inclusion 
of the direct sulphate aerosol forcing can improve the 
simulation of the patterns of temperature change over the 
last few decades. Here we consider the effect of combined 
greenhouse gas and direct sulphate aerosol forcing derived 
from IS92a on simulated patterns of temperature change to 
2050 and beyond {y,z). (The details of these two 
experiments have been given above in Section 6.2.2.1.) 
Increasing COj alone leads to positive radiative forcing 
everywhere, with the largest radiative heating in regions of 
clear skies and high temperatures (experiment w shown in 
Figure 6.7a). The surface temperature warms everywhere 
except in the northern north Atlantic (Figure 6.7b). In 
transient simulations to 2050, the inclusion of aerosols 
based on IS92a (y,z) reduces the global mean radiative 
forcing, and leads to negative radiative forcing over 
southern Asia, particularly in the east (experiment z shown 
in Figure 6.7c). This leads to a muted warming (Figure 
6.7d) or even small regions of cooling (y) in mid-latitudes. 
In z, China continues to warm (Figure 6.7d), albeit at a 
very reduced rate, even though the local net radiative 
forcing becomes increasingly negative (Figure 6.7c). The 
rate of warming over North America and western Europe, 
where the aerosol forcing weakens, remains below that in 
the simulation with greenhouse gases only {w). The cooling 
due to aerosols is amplified by sea ice feedbacks in the 
Arctic (Figure 6.7f). 
In assessing these results, one should bear in mind the 
possible 
exaggeration 
of the 
sulphate 
aerosol 
concentrations under this scenario, the uncertainties in 
representing the radiative effects of sulphate aerosols and 
the neglect of other factors including the indirect effect of 
sulphates. Nevertheless, these experiments suggest that the 
direct effect of sulphate aerosols could have strong 
influence on future temperature changes, particularly in 
northern mid-latitudes. 
6.2.2.3 Seasonal changes in temperature, 
precipitation 
and soil moisture 
IPCC (1990) reported some broad scale changes which 
were evident in most of the equilibrium 2 X C O j 
experiments which were then available. The detailed 
regional changes differed from model to model. In the 
transient experiments reported in IPCC (1992), it was 
found that the large-scale patterns of response at the time 
of doubling C O T were similar to the corresponding 
equilibrium experiments (IPCC 1990), except that there is 
a smaller warming in the vicinity of the northern North 
Atlantic and the southern ocean in transient experiments. 
Here we summarise the main features in the seasonal 
(December to February and June to August) patterns of 
change in temperature, precipitation and soil moisture in 
those experiments with a 1%/yr increase in CO2 for which 
data were available. The changes are assessed at the time 
of CO2 doubling (after 70 years). Further information on 
the subcontinental response in specified regions to 
increases in greenhouse gases only is given in Section 6.6 
and Figure 6.32, and part of Figure 6.9. In experiments w-z 
we also contrast the continental scale response under the 
IS92a Scenario with and without aerosol forcing at around 
2040. 
Temperature 
With increases in CO2, all models produce a maximum 
annual mean warming in high northern latitudes (Figures 
6.6 and 6.7b). The warming is largest in late autumn and 
winter, largely due to sea ice forming later in the warmer 
climate. In summer, the warming is small - if the sea ice is 
removed with increased COj, then the thermal inertia of 
the mixed-layer prevents substantial warming during the 
short summer season, otherwise melting sea ice is present 
in both control and anomaly simulations, and there is no 
change in surface temperature (see Ingram et al., 1989). 
The details of these changes 
are sensitive to 
parametrization of sea ice, and in particular, the 
specification of sea ice albedo (e.g., Meehl and 
Washington, 1995). In one simulation (k) there is a 
marked cooling over the north-eastern Atlantic throughout 
the year which leads to a cooling over part of north-west 
Europe in winter. There is littie seasonal variation of the 
warming in low latitudes or over the southern circumpolar 
ocean. 
When aerosol effects are included (y,z cf. x,w 
respectively), the maximum winter warming in high 
northern latitudes is less extensive. In mid-latitudes, there 
are some regions of cooling, for example, over China 
(Figure 6.10a, for 2040 to 2049 - the scenario is described 
in Section 6.2.2.1) and the mean warming in the tropics is 
greater than in mid-latitudes. In northern summer, there are 
again regions of cooling in mid-latitudes (Figure 6.10b) 
and the greatest warming now occurs over Antarctica. 
Again, including the direct forcing by sulphate aerosols has 
a strong effect on simulated regional temperature changes, 
though the reader should bear in mind the limitations of 
these experiments noted earlier. 
306 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
Winter, Temperature 
(b) 
(c) 
2.0 
CNA 
SEA SAH SEU AUS 
ReQJon 
Winter, Precipitation  
E 
E 
1.0 -
0.5 -
Ф 
O) 
с 
CO 
.c 
Ü 
с g 
со 
о. 
о 
Ф -0.5 -
Û. 
-1.0 
0.0 
о 
д  
о 
CNA 
SEA SAH SEU AUS 
Region 
(e) 
3.0 
[ 111 чу i\J U\A I \j 
E 2.0 
CD 
ra 1.0 
О 
СЛ -2.0 
-3.0 
CNA 
SEA SAH SEU AUS 
Region 
6.0 
Sumrner, Temperature 
9 
ra 4.0 -
« •g 
Ф 3.0 
ф 2.0 -
I 
H 
1.0 -
0.0 
(d) 
2.0 
5 
1-5 
E 
E 
ra I 0.5 
о 
о 
• Q . 
о 
Ф -0.5 
-1.0 
(f) 
3.0 
E 2.0 
О 
ф 
га 1.0 -
со 
€ 
Ф 0.0 
I 
'о -1.0 
о 
Ю -2.0 
-3.0 
CNA 
SEA SAH SEU AUS 
RsQÎon 
Su m гпбг, P rsci |Dit3ition 
CNA 
SEA SAH SEU AUS 
Region 
Summer, Soil moisture 
CNA 
SEA SAH SEU AUS 
Region 
дМР1(х) oUKMO(w) 
A M P I + A E R ( y ) .UKMO + AERiz) 
Figure 6.9: Simulated regional changes from 1880-1889 to 2040-2049 (experiments x, y) or from pre-industrial to 2030-2050 
(experiments w, z). Experiments x and w include greenhouse gas forcing only, whereas у and z also include direct sulphate aerosol effects 
(see Table 6.3). (a) Temperature (December to February); (b) Temperature (June to August); (c) Precipitation (December to February); (d) 
Precipitation (June to August); (e) Soil moisture (December to February); (f) Soil moisture (June to August). C N A = Central North 
America; SEA = South East Asia; SAH = Sahel; SEU = Southern Europe; AUS = Australia (the regions are defined in Section 6.6.1). 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
307 
60°N 
30°N -
0° -
30°S -
60°S -
180° 
60°N -
30°N -
0° -
30°S • 
60°S -
180° 
180° 
120°W 
60°W 
180° 
-1 
0 
1 
Figure 6.10: Seasonal change in surface temperature from 1880-1889 to 2040-2049 in simulations with aerosol effects included (from 
experiment y in Table 6.3, U . Cubasch, pers. comm.). Contours every 1°C . (a) December to February; (b) June to August. 
Precipitation 
On increasing COj, all models produce an increase in 
global mean precipitation. Precipitation increases in high 
latitudes in winter (except in к around the Norwegian Sea 
where there is cooling and a reduction in precipitation), and 
in most cases the increases extend well into mid-latitudes 
(for example. Figure 6.11a). The warming of the 
atmosphere leads to higher atmospheric water vapour 
content, enhanced polewai'd water vapour transport into the 
northern high latitudes and hence enhanced water vapour 
convergence and precipitation (for example, Manabe and 
Wetherald, 1975 ). In the tropics, the patterns of change 
Figure 6.11: Seasonal changes in precipitation at the time of doubling COj following a 1%/yr increase (from experiment a in Table 6.3, 
Colman et al, 1995). Contours at ±0.5, 1, 2 and 4 mm/day, negative contours are dashed and areas of increase areas stippled, (a) 
December, January and February; (b) June, July and August. 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
309 
vary from model to model, with shifts or changes in 
intensity of the main rainfall maxima. However, many 
produce more rainfall over India and/or south-east Asia 
(a,d,g,m,x,p,q,sj,w) 
(for example Figure 6.11b, see also 
Figures 6.9d and 6.32g). This is consistent with an increase 
in atmospheric water vapour concentration leading to 
enhanced low level moisture convergence associated with 
the strong mass convergence into the monsoon surface 
pressure low. All models considered apart from p and q 
produce a general reduction in precipitation over southern 
Europe (see also Figures 6.9d and 6.32g). In general, 
changes in the dry subtropics are small. 
With the inclusion of aerosol forcing (y,z), there is only a 
small increase in global mean precipitation. The patterns of 
change in precipitation in northern winter are broadly similar 
to that in a parallel simulation with greenhouse gases only 
(x,w respectively), but less intense. In northern summer there 
is a net reduction in precipitation over the Asian monsoon 
region (Figure 6.9), because the aerosol cooling reduces the 
land-sea contrast and the strength of the monsoon flow. 
Precipitation increases on average over southern Europe (it 
decreases when aerosol effects are omitted. Figure 6.9), and 
over North America, where changes were small with 
increases in greenhouse gases only. 
Soil moisture 
Soil moisture may be a more relevant quantity for assessing 
the impacts of changes in the hydrological cycle on 
vegetation than precipitation since it incorporates the 
integrated effects of changes in precipitation, evaporation 
and run-off thorough the year. However, simulated changes 
in soil moisture should be viewed with caution because of 
the simplicity of the land-surface parametrization schemes 
in cuirent models (e.g., experiments a,e-id,m,n,p,q and r use 
an unmodified "bucket" formulation - see Section 5.3.2). 
Most models produce a general increase in soil moisture 
in the mean in high northern latitudes in winter, though in 
some (a,k) there are also substantial areas of reduction (e.g., 
Figure 6.12a). The increases are due mainly to increased 
precipitation discussed above, and the increased fraction of 
precipitation falling as rain in the warmer climate. At the 
low winter temperatures, the absolute change in potential 
evaporation is small, as expected from the Clausius-
Clapyeron relation, so evaporation increases little even 
though temperature increases are a maximum in winter. 
Hence the increase in soil moisture in high altitudes in 
winter is consistent with physical reasoning and the broad 
scale changes are unlikely to be model dependent. However, 
it should be noted that in general, the models considered 
here do not represent the effects of freezing on ground water. 
Most models produce a drier surface in summer in 
northern mid-latitudes (for example. Figure 6.12b). This 
occurs consistently over southern Europe (except q which 
produces an excessively dry surface in winter in its control 
climate) and North America (except d, к and q). The main 
factor in the drying is enhanced evaporation in summer 
(see Wetherald and Manabe, 1995): the absolute rate of 
increase in potential evaporation increases exponentially 
with temperature if other factors (wind, stability and 
relative humidity) are unchanged. 
As noted in the IPCC (1990) the following factors 
appear to contribute to summer drying: 
(i) 
the soil in the control simulation is close to saturation 
in late winter or spring: this ensures that much of the 
extra precipitation in winter is not stored in the soil 
but lost as runoff; 
(ii) 
there is a substantial seasonal variation in soil 
moisture in the simulation of present climate; some 
of the simpler models may exaggerate the seasonal 
cycle of soil moisture (see Chapter 5) leading to an 
exaggerated response in the warmer climate; 
(in) in higher latitudes, earlier snowmelt leading to 
enhanced solar absorption and evaporation may 
contribute; 
(iv) 
changes in soil moisture may be amplified by cloud 
feedbacks in regions where evaporation is being 
limited by low soil moisture values (e.g., Wetherald 
and Manabe, 1995); 
(v) 
the drying is more pronounced in regions where 
precipitation is reduced in summer. 
Given the varying response of different land-surface 
schemes to the same prescribed forcing (Chapter 5), the 
consistency from model to model of reductions over 
southern Europe in summer might be regarded as 
surprising. All models submitted (except p,q) produced a 
reduction in summer precipitation over southern Europe: 
here changes in circulation and precipitation may be more 
important in determining soil moisture changes than the 
details of the land-surface scheme. Reductions over North 
America are less consistent, and there is a still wider model 
to model variation in the response over northern Europe 
and northern Asia. 
With aerosol forcing included {y,z), the patterns of soil 
moisture change in northern winter are similar but weaker 
310 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
(a) 
DJF 
Э 
0 
(b) 
60E 
1ZŒ 
ISO 
JJA 
120W 
60W 
90N 
Figure 6.12: Seasonal changes in soil moisture at the time of doubling CO^ following a 1%/yr increase. Contours at 0, ± 1, 2, 4, 8 cm 
(from experiment d in Table 6.3, Gordon and O'Farrell, (1996)). (a) December to February; (b) June to August. 
than with greenhouse gas forcing only (x,w). However, soil 
moisture increases over North America and southern Europe 
in summer when aerosol effects are included {y.z), 
presumably because of the reduced warming and its effect on 
evaporation, and because of increases in precipitation. The 
changes in the hydrological cycle are Hkely to be sensitive to 
the distribution of aerosol forcing and the coupled model 
used. However, it is clear that aerosol effects have a strong 
influence on simulated regional chmate change. 
6-2.3 The influence of flux adjustments 
As noted in Secflon 5.2, most of the coupled models 
considered in this assessment use flxed adjustments to the 
atmosphere-ocean surface fluxes to ensure a stable and 
realistic simulation of present cUmate. Shortcomings in 
model formulation lead to the need for these adjustments 
which are generally small averaged over the globe (for 
example, less than 0.5 Wm-2 in models 6 and 16) but reach 
over 200 Wm-2 locally in a few regions (see Chapter 5, 
Gates et al, 1993). In a strict sense, the use of such 
corrections can only be defended if they are small. 
Although the adjustments are not small locally in current 
models, this is not proof that the approach is invalid: it 
could be that model errors in the surface fluxes change 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
311 
negligibly witb perturbations as small as that occurring 
with a doubling of CO2. 
Here we address two issues: 
1. 
Does the use of flux adjustments per se distort the 
response of a model? 
2. 
Would correction of the deficiencies which give rise 
to the need for flux adjustment 
produce a 
substantially different model response? 
The broad response of models with flux adjustments and 
those without flux adjustments are qualitatively similar. 
The exceptions can be traced to shortcomings in the 
models' simulation of features in present day climate 
which have been shown to be important for the simulation 
of climate change (for example, the region of deep mixing 
in the northern North AUantic). Thus, there is no evidence 
from these simulations that the use of flux adjustments per 
se is substantially distorting the response to increases in 
greenhouse gases. However, the eixors which arise without 
flux adjustments (for example, lack of sea ice in the 
Southern Hemisphere) can distort the simulated response, 
as seen earlier. 
The flux adjustments compensate for inadequacies in the 
representation of physical processes in a model on present 
climate (Chapter 5). Running without flux adjustments 
(and accepting the subsequent degradation of simulation of 
current climate. Section 5.2) does not overcome the effect 
of these deficiencies on simulated climate change 
(Nakamura et al., 1994). Flux adjustments are an 
engineering rather than a scientific solution. 
It is more difficult to assess the likely effect of removing 
such deficiencies on the models' response. The largest heat 
flux corrections generally occur in regions of strong 
horizontal temperature gradient: others are associated with 
errors in cloud, in resolving local upwelling and in 
positioning the sea ice margins. As these errors vary from 
model to model, their effect on simulated climate change is 
also likely to be vary from model to model. It is not 
obvious that these errors have a dramatic effect on the 
large-scale response simulated by current models (though 
they could be important locally). For example, in j, flux 
adjustments were greatiy reduced from the model used in g 
by enhancing model resolution and improving the 
simulation of cloud, but the distribution of annual mean 
temperature change was essentially the same as in the 
earlier version of the model. Many of the features noted 
above including reduced warming in regions of deep 
mixing, the maximum warming in high northern latitudes 
in winter and the increased precipitation and soil moisture 
in high northern latitudes in winter have been linked to 
highly plausible physical mechanisms and hence are 
unlikely to be qualitatively sensitive to the removal of the 
errors which lead to the requirement of flux correction. 
Nevertheless, the reduction and removal of flux 
adjustments (without significantiy degrading the simulation 
of present day climate) remains a high priority in the 
development of coupled models. 
6.2.4 Interpretation 
of experiments 
In this sub-section, some technical issues relevant to the 
interpretation of model results are discussed. Ensemble 
experiments will help reduce and quantify the uncertainty 
in single experiments arising from the natural (unforced) 
variability of climate. Understanding of the "cold start" is 
essential for inteфretíng the idealised experiments which 
ignore the effect of increases in greenhouse gases to date. 
If projections of equilibrium change in models with a 
simple ocean and those with a full representation of the 
ocean are similar, estimates of long-term equilibria can be 
made more economically. 
Dependence on initial conditions and ensemble 
integrations 
Coupled atmosphere-ocean models produce considerable 
variability on interanual and interdecadal time-scales 
(Chapter 5), as in the real world (Chapter 3). Thus, in any 
single realisation, unforced variations will form a 
substantial part of the simulated response. Hence, the 
evolution of the patterns of change as the forcing increases 
will not be smooth, and experiments repeated from slightly 
different initial conditions will produce responses which 
differ in detail. A more representative estimate of the 
response to the forcing may be obtained by carrying out an 
ensemble of experiments starting from slightiy different 
initial conditions, and reducing the expected contribution 
from natural variability by averaging the results. Cubasch 
et al. (1994b) found that averaging over several 
simulations did lead to smoother patterns of change. It is 
possible to estimate the stability of features of the response 
by comparing different members of the ensemble. This is 
particularly important for prediction of regional climate 
change (Section 6.6), since the internal variability 
generally increases as the size of the averaging region is 
reduced (Eigure 1.5). The ensemble approach also allows 
one to estimate the statistical distribution of possible 
outcomes which arise through unpredictable internal 
variations. 
It is known that a coupled model can sustain very 
312 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
3.0 
2.0%/year 
/i.Qo/jyear 
100 
150 
200 
Year from start of experiment 
300 
Figure 6.13: Global annual mean temperatures for annual rates of increase of COj of 0.25%, 0.5%, 1%, 2% and 4%/yr from the GFDL 
A O G C M (solid lines) (experiments e-i, see Table 6.3) (R. Stouffer, pers. comm.) compared to results from an UD/EB model (dashed 
lines) with climate sensitivity of 3.7°C and the same rates of COj increase. The time of CO^ doubling is indicated by a dot. 
different solutions with the same external forcing started 
from appropriate initial conditions (Manabe and Stouffer, 
1988). However, evidence to date (Cubasch et al., 1995b; 
Keen, 1995) indicates that model solutions will converge to 
the same solution, despite differences in the initial state 
which may arise from internal variabihty or climate drift. 
In other words, current simulations are not sensitive to 
variations in the initial state which lie within the range of 
the model's natural variability. 
Dependence on rate of increase of CO^ 
The dependence of the annual mean warming rate on the 
rate of change of forcing has been evaluated in a set of 
experiments (e-i) in which rate of increase in COj/yr is 
increased by factors of 2 from 0.25% to 4.0% (Figure 
6.13). Increases of 0.25%, 1% and 4% /yr give a doubling 
of C O , in about 300, 70 and 18 years respectively. The 
warming at the time of doubling ranges from 2.6°C in the 
0.25% case to 1.5°C with a 4% increase/yr in a model with 
an equilibrium (long-term) response of 3.7°C to doubling 
CO2. The slower the rate of increase of COj, the longer the 
time to reach a given concentration of COj, and hence the 
longer the time the ocean has to absorb the extra radiative 
heating (R. Stouffer, pers. comm.). At the time of doubling, 
the model reaches 70% of the long-term response with the 
slowest rate of increase (0.25%/yr), and only 40% with the 
fastest (4%/yr) increase. 
This indicates that the response to a gradual increase in 
greenhouse gases depends not only on the climate 
sensitivity (the long-term or equilibrium response to 
doubling CO2) but also on the rate of increase of the 
greenhouse gases (see also Hansen et al., 1981). 
Nevertheless, a sixteenfold increase in the rate of COj 
increase gives only a factor of two difference in warming at 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
313 
the time of doubling of COj in these experiments. Hence 
the difference in model response to IPCC Scenario IS92a 
(equivalent to about a 0.7%/yr increase in COf) and the 
experiments using a 1%/yr increase in COj are likely to be 
small at the time of doubling. On the other hand, the 
response to the much smaller rates of increase of C O , 
observed earlier this century is likely to be substantially 
larger than in the 1%/yr increase experiments for the 
observed increase in equivalent COj concentration. Hence 
(a) 
1900 
1990 
(b) 
1900 
1990 
(C) 
1900 
1990 
Year 
Figure 6.14: Schematic diagrams of radiative forcing and 
temperature response, showing the effect of neglecting the effect 
of past forcing (the "cold start" problem), (a) Forcing due to 
increases in CO2, with a rate of increase rising gradually to 1990 
as observed, and maintained at 1%/yr thereafter (left curve) and 
from a 1%/yr increase starting abruptly in 1990, as in ideahsed 
experiments (right curve), (b) Temperature response to the forcing 
in (a). The upper curve, which is the response in the case with the 
gradual initial increase as observed, has been transposed vertically 
to zero at 1990 (dashed curve) to highlight the initial slow 
response in the case of an abrupt increase used in idealised 
experiments (lower curve). The difference between the two curves 
is known as "the cold start" and is an artefact of the experimental 
design, (c) The upper curve shows the net forcing (which allows 
for the increased loss of radiation to space as the model warms) in 
the case with a gradual start to the forcing. The lower curve shows 
the net forcing in the idealised case. Note the net heating at 1990 
which maintains the warming of the ocean in the upper curve in 
(b). To heat 300m depth of water by 0.3°C/decade (typical of the 
A O G C M experiments in Table 6.3) requires a net heating of 1.5 
Wm-2 (cf. 4 Wm-2 f^j. ¿gubUng of CO^) which takes several 
decades to build up with a 1 %/yr increase in CO2. 
The cold start 
This describes the anomalously low initial rate of 
warming in experiments which do not take into account 
the effect of increases in greenhouse gases to date. 
The gradual build up in gross radiative forcing due to 
the past increases in greenhouse gases is illustrated 
schematically by the curved line in Figure 6.14a. The 
temperature responds as in the left hand curve in Figure 
6.14b. However, because of the thermal inertia of the 
oceans, the temperature does not equilibrate 
immediately. Hence the increase in radiation to space 
which occurs as the surface warms is smaller than the 
gross heating due to greenhouse gases. This gives a net 
heat flux into the surface (Figure 6.14c) which serves to 
raise the temperature of the ocean. This net heating is 
considerable by the 1990s (Figure 6.14c, upper curve), 
whereas it is zero in simulations which neglect the 
history of the radiative forcing. 
In model simulations, it is found that in the global 
average, the effective heat capacity of the ocean is 
equivalent to that of a depth of a few hundred metres, so 
a heating rate of over 1 Wm-^ is required to maintain the 
0.3 °C/decade warming typical of current transient 
experiments. In the experiments which commence with 
a 1%/yr increase in COj, the gross forcing starts from 
zero (straight line in Figure 6.14a), and it takes almost 
two decades for the gross forcing to reach 1 Wm^^, Thus 
the warming starts slowly and then increases to a near 
steady rate (lower curve. Figure 6.14b). For comparison, 
the rate of warming taking into account past changes in 
radiative forcing, transposed to go through zero at 1990 
(dashed curve. Figure 6.14b) is substantially larger in the 
first few decades following 1990. The difference 
between the response with and without the history of the 
forcing taken into account is defined as the "cold start". 
In summary, to predict rates of climate change over 
the next few decades, we must allow for the net heating 
that has built up due to past changes in radiative forcing. 
314 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
the 1 %/yr increase experiments described above cannot be 
used directly to interpret the observational record. Another 
difficulty in using these experiments to interpret the recent 
temperature record is the '"cold start", described below. 
Dependence on past forcing on future climate 
change - the "cold start" 
Predictions of the rate of climate change over the next few 
decades are of particular importance, both for the detection 
and attribution of cUmate change, and for the estimation of 
climate impacts. Over the last two centuries, there has been 
a gradual build up of the gross radiative forcing due to 
increases in greenhouse gases (Chapter 2). Most 
experiments in Table 6.3 do not account for the past build 
up of gases. Hence they produce a small initial rate of 
warming over the first one or two decades, a phenomenon 
known as the cold start. This complication is removed in the 
most recent experiments {x,y,w,z) which start from the last 
century when the increases in greenhouse gases were small. 
Attempts to quantify the "cold start" bias have been 
made using simple models (Fichefet and Tricot, 1992), 
coupled models (Cubasch et al, 1994b; Keen, 1995) or 
fitting coupled model results to a simple analytical model 
(Hasselmann et al., 1993, Cubasch et al., 1994b). 
Hasselmann et al. (1993) estimated a cold start of 0.4°C 
after 50 years with IPCC (1990) Scenario A in their run 
(m) started from equilibrium at 1990. Keen (1995) found a 
0.2 to 0.3°C difference in long-term warming between 
experiments with C O j increasing by 1%/yr from 
equilibrium (?) and a parallel simulation with the historical 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Year number from start of experiment 
Figure 6.15: Global annual mean warming due to increasing CO^ 
by 1%/yr. The solid curve is the warming when the increase in 
radiative forcing due to past increases in greenhouse gases is 
taken into account. The other curves are three estimates of 
warming if historical increases in greenhouse gases are neglected. 
The differences between the solid curve and the other curves are 
estimates of the "cold start" (Keen, 1995). 
increase in equivalent CO2 from 1860 first taken into 
account (w) (Figure 6.15). 
Note that various factors including aerosols have 
probably reduced the heating due to increases in 
greenhouse gases over the last century (Chapter 2), so the 
net imbalance in heating and the consequent "cold start" 
will be smaller than that taking into account greenhouse 
gases alone. 
In the experiments for which the information is available 
{g,k,m,q,s,t) the rate of increase of sea level due to thermal 
expansion shows a pronounced "cold start". This is 
because the rate of thermal expansion is more directiy 
related to the integral of the net heating at the surface, 
which has time to build up from zero in experiments with a 
more gradual increase in COj, than to the instantaneous 
heating rate. 
Climate drift is another source of error in estimating 
initial rates of change in transient experiments. This can 
occur if the ocean and atmosphere are not brought to full 
equilibrium before starting an experiment, and results in a 
systematic trend in simulated present climate as the model 
"drifts" towards its long-term equilibrium state. This lack of 
initial equilibrium may affect the evolution of a perturbed 
climate differently from that of present day climate, and 
hence distort the estimates of rates of climate change. 
Long-term equilibrium of coupled models 
Estimates of the equilibrium response to increases in trace 
gases to date have been made using atmospheric models 
coupled to a simple oceanic mixed-layer models. These 
models are much cheaper to run to equilibrium than 
A O G C M s , but neglect the effect of changes in ocean 
circulation. 
In one study, (g), an A O G C M has been run to near 
equilibrium with doubled COj and compared with results 
from the same experiment using a mixed-layer model (R. 
Stouffer, pers. comm.). The global mean warming is 
similar, 3.9°C compared to 3.7°C in the mixed-layer model. 
The wafming patterns in the two models are similar, the 
main difference occurring over the tropics and the central 
Arctic, where the full model is slightiy warmer, and 
Antarctica, especially south of Australia, where it is colder 
(Figure 6.16). This suggests that the oceanic heat transport 
may be similar in equilibrium present day and 2 X CO2 
climate, at least in this model. If this proves to be generally 
true, one could estimate long-term effects using mixed-layer 
models which neglect changes in ocean heat transports but 
are easily run to equilibrium. However, there are local 
differences in the change in horizontal temperature gradient. 
It is possible, for example, that the larger reduction in 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future Climate 
j / 5 
Figure 6.16: Ratio of equilibrium response to doubling CO2 in an atmospheric model coupled to a full ocean model to that when 
coupled to a mixed-layer ocean. Contours every 0.2°C, light stippling where the deep ocean response is more than 20% smaller, heavy 
stippling where it is more than 20% greater (R. Stouffer, pers. comm.). 
meridional temperature gradient associated with the greater 
Arctic warming in the coupled model could produce 
noticeable differences in the response of the North Atiantic 
storm track. Hence the equivalence of mixed-layer and 
coupled model equilibria should be assessed further. 
When C O 2 concentrations were quadrupled in the 
A O G C M (Manabe and Stouffer, 1994), the thermohaline 
circulation collapsed (and failed to recover after three 
centuries), implying large changes in heat transport which 
cannot be represented in a static mixed-layer model. 
6.2.5 Summary and 
conclusions 
In 1990, preliminary results from only one transient COj 
doubling experiment were available. 10 transient 
simulations of the effect of a l%/yr(compound) increase in 
C O 2 have been considered in this assessment. The 
simulated rate of change of global mean surface air 
temperature ranges from just under 0.2°C/decade to 
0.5°C/decade at the time of doubling. These simulations 
ignore the effect of any previous increase in greenhouse 
gases: the initial rate of warming is smaller than would be 
the case if earlier greenhouse gas increases are taken into 
account. In two simulations with the history of greenhouse 
gas forcing taken into account, the projected rate of global 
mean warming over the next decade is typically 
0.3°C/decade, reduced to 0.2°C/decade in simulations 
allowing for the effects of sulphate aerosols, in agreement 
with earlier simulations using a simpler UD/EB model. In 
one of these experiments, it has been shown that the pattern 
correlations of the patterns of the simulated and observed 
temperature changes in the last two decades are higher 
when the direct effect of sulphate aerosols is taken into 
account along with increased COj. 
In experiments with a gradual increase in CO2, all 
models show the following features: 
• 
greater warming over the land than the sea; 
• 
reduced warming, or even cooling, in the high 
latitude southern ocean and part of the northern 
North Atiantic ocean; 
• 
a maximum warming in high northern latitudes in 
winter, and little warming over the Arctic in summer; 
• 
increased precipitation and soil moisture in high 
latitudes in winter; 
• 
an increase in mean precipitation in the region of the 
Asian summer monsoon. 
A l l these changes are associated with identifiable 
physical mechanisms. 
In addition, most simulations show a reduction in the 
strength of the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation, a 
widespread reduction in diurnal range of temperature (if 
the model includes the diurnal cycle) and reductions in 
summer soil moisture over southern Europe and, less 
consistently. North America. These features too can be 
explained in terms of physical mechanisms, but may be 
sensitive to a greater or lesser degree to the details of the 
316 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
parametrizations used. Nevertiieless, no model has 
produced a stronger thermohaline circulation, or a global 
mean increase in the diurnal range of temperature. 
Some models produce a reduction in the east to west 
temperature gradient in the tropical Pacific Ocean, 
reminiscent of the temperature pattern associated with El 
Niño events, though the reduction is small compared with 
the mean warming. 
When the direct effect of sulphate aerosols is represented 
the simulated patterns of change to date are more like those 
observed. The warming in northern mid-latitudes is reduced, 
with regions of cooUng as well as warming. The coiTelation 
with observations is also improved (see Chapter 8). 
Including the effects of aerosols as well as greenhouse 
gases (based on IS92a) in simulations of future climate 
leads to much reduced warming in mid-latitudes, not only 
in regions where the atmosphere burden of aerosols is 
increasing, but also in some regions where it is decreasing. 
There are also marked changes in the hydrological cycle, 
principally in the Northern Hemisphere in summer. In 
particular, there is net reduction of precipitation in the 
Asian summer monsoon, and the summer drying over 
Europe and North America is weakened or even reversed. 
These preliminary results should be used with caution: the 
results are based on two studies and are likely to be quite 
sensitive to the choice of scenario and the assumptions in 
deriving the radiative forcing due to aerosols, both of 
which are subject to considerable uncertainty. They also 
neglect the effect of other anthropogenic forcing including 
indirect sulphate effects, soot, tropospheric ozone and 
aerosol from biomass burning. 
The models with flux correction produce broadly similar 
results to those without flux correction: the main 
differences can be traced to shortcomings in parflcular 
features of the control simulation in the models with an 
anomalous response. Thus, there is no evidence from the 
current simulations that the use of flux adjustments is 
substantially distorting the response to increases in 
greenhouse gases. 
The need for flux adjustments arises from a variety of 
model shortcomings and it is not obvious if or how these 
shortcomings would alter qualitatively the main findings 
summarised above. Nor is it obvious whether they would 
enhance or diminish simulated changes. Thus, eliminating 
the need for flux adjustments remains a high priority. Other 
uncertainties associated with cloud feedback and aerosol 
forcing which have been demonstrated to have a profound 
effect on predictions of climate change are probably of 
greater concern (see Section 6.7). 
The models produce a high level of internal variability. 
as in the real world (Chapter 5), leading to a spread of 
possible outcomes for a given scenario, especially at the 
regional level. Ensemble experiments may prove useful in 
reducing the uncertainty in single realisations arising from 
internal variability. 
There is some evidence that the pattern of equilibrium 
response of temperature to doubling COj in atmospheric 
models coupled either to simple mixed-layer models, or to 
full dynamical ocean models may be similar. If this is 
generally true, it would allow economical estimates of the 
long-term equilibrium response of large-scale climate to 
moderate increases in greenhouse gas concentrations to be 
made using mixed-layer models. 
6.3 Global Mean Temperature Changes for the IPCC 
(1992) Emission Scenarios 
6.3.1 Introduction 
In this section we present projections of global mean 
temperature change for a range of emission scenarios, 
specifically the IPCC (1992) scenarios of Leggett et 
al.,(1992), 
and consider the uncertainties in these 
projections. These results update the only previous 
comprehensive assessment of the global mean temperature 
and sea level implications of these scenarios (Wigley and 
Raper, 1992). They are complemented by an analysis that 
parallels the present work given in Raper et al. (1996). 
We follow IPCC (1990) (Bretherton et al, 1990) and 
IPCC (1992) (Mitchefl and Gregory, 1992) in using a 
relatively simple upwelling diffusion-energy balance 
climate model (UD/EB) to make these projections. The 
specific model used (as in 1990 and 1992) is that of Wigley 
and Raper (1987, 1992). Although based on the original 
model of this type (Hoffert et al, 1980), this particular 
model differs from others in that it distinguishes between 
land and ocean and between the hemispheres (by treating 
them as separate "boxes", with energy flows between the 
"boxes"). Such differentiation is important in the present 
context because there are large radiative forcing 
differences between these different parts of the globe. 
Although much more sophisticated models are available 
( A O G C M s ) , which could in principle be used for 
producing a range of global mean temperature projections, 
this is not yet possible for a number of reasons. First, 
individual coupled atmosphere-ocean models have specific 
climate sensitivities, so they cannot be used to assess 
comprehensively uncertainties arising from uncertainties in 
this key climate parameter. Second, there are major 
uncertainties in both past and future radiative forcing. 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
317 
arising bothi from uncertainties in tiie forcing for given 
emissions (especially aerosol effects) 
and from 
uncertainties in the emissions themselves. A large number 
of model simulations are required to address these 
uncertainties, and the current computing requirements of 
A O G C M s precludes carrying out so many runs. By 
adjusting 
their structure 
and parameter 
values 
appropriately, UD/EB models can simulate well the results 
of AOGCMs at the global mean level. 
In the U D / E B model used here, the main model 
parameters are: the depth of the oceanic mixed layer (taken 
as 90 m); the vertical diffusivity used to characterise 
vertical mixing processes in the ocean (taken as 1 cm^/sec); 
the ratio of the temperature change for high latitude sinking 
water (which forms the polar branch of the model's 
thermohaline circulation) to the global mean temperature 
change (TT taken as 0.2); the upwelling rate (со), which 
measures the intensity of the thermohaline circulation; and 
the climate sensitivity ( A ^ j ^ , i-e., the equilibrium 
temperature change for a doubling of COj concentration). 
The above parameter values differ from those used in IPCC 
(1990) for reasons that are explained and justified in 
Wigley and Raper (1991). 
To accord with recent coupled atmosphere-ocean model 
results, two important changes have been made to the 
model's structure compared with its previous applications. 
First, evidence that indicates that the climate sensitivity 
differs between land and ocean: most models give a 
different equilibrium warming over these regions (see, e.g., 
Cubasch et al., 1992; Murphy, 1995b). It is important to 
simulate this differential warming, not least because of its 
potential effect on oceanic thermal expansion, an important 
component of sea level rise. (Thermal expansion results 
produced here are used in the sea level projections given in 
Chapter 7.) If warming over the oceans is less than over the 
land, the amount of thermal expansion will be less than 
might be estimated on the basis of global mean temperature 
alone. To account for this differential sensitivity the single 
parameter ДТ'зх 
replaced by two parameters, a global 
mean ДГз^ and an equilibrium land/ocean warming ratio 
for 2 X COj. For the latter, we use the value 1.3 based on 
coupled atmosphere-ocean model and equilibrium G C M 
results. For AT2X we use a range of values to capture the 
uncertainty in this parameter. 
The second major change is in the upwelling rate. Most 
current coupled atmosphere-ocean models show a 
pronounced slow-down of the thermohaline circulation as 
the globe warms. To account for this in the UD/EB model, 
ci) is assumed to be a linear function of ocean mixed-layer 
temperature with the form 
co = coo(l - 
^T/^T*) 
where ДГ* is a threshold temperature change at which the 
thermohaline circulation shuts down. The value of AT* 
used is 7.0°C, chosen to match results from Cubasch et al. 
(1992) and Manabe and Stouffer (1994), and со is further 
constrained not to drop below 0.1 m/yr, following Manabe 
and Stouffer (1994), although this limit is never 
approached in any of the simulations presented here. The 
initial value of со (COQ = 4 m/yr) is the standard value 
required to match the observed vertical ocean temperature 
profile under present-day conditions. 
A more extensive discussion of these changes in model 
structure, of the model parameter values, and of the 
behaviour of the model is given in Raper et al. (1996). 
To verify that the U D / E B model, when properly 
calibrated, is able to simulate accurately the behaviour of the 
AOGCMs of Chapter 5 and Section 6.2, intercomparison 
exercises were carried out using results from the GFDL 
A O G C M (R. Stouffer pers. comm.; Manabe and Stouffer, 
1994; model 6 in Table 6.1a). To ensure a valid comparison, 
the UD/EB model climate sensitivity was set at the GFDL 
model's value (3.7°C equilibrium global mean warming for 
2 X CO2). All other UD/EB model parameters were kept at 
values previously chosen (see Wigley and Raper, 1991), as 
specified above. The value of the land/ocean sensitivity 
differential (1.3), chosen on the basis of other G C M results 
(Raper et al.. 1996), is similar to that for the GFDL model. 
The thermohaline circulation varied with time as described 
above. These temporal changes correspond well with those 
obtained with the GFDL model (Manabe and Stouffer, 
1994). 
Figure 6.13 shows global mean temperature results 
where both models were forced with a range of fixed 
percentage increases per year (compound) of CO2 (the 
A O G C M simulations are fully discussed in Section 6.2). 
The UD/EB model only simulates the underlying signal in 
response to the external forcing, so it does not show the 
internally generated variability evident in the A O G C M 
results. Apart from this variability, both models are seen to 
agree well over a wide range of forcings. 
Figure 6.17 shows another comparison, in this case with 
the 2 X CO2 and 4 X C O j stabilisarion simulations of 
Manabe and Stouffer (1994). Figure 6.17a shows global 
mean temperature comparisons. For the 2 X CO2 case, the 
agreement is excellent. For the 4 X CO2 case, the UD/EB 
model begins to show a slightly reduced warming response 
when the C O , level becomes sufficiendy high. Note that 
none of the IS92 emission scenarios gives a forcing change 
as high as 4 X CO2; all cases are within the range for 
318 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
(a) Temperature 
1 9 i — T — ^ — ' — < — 
11-1—. 
1 
1 
, 
, 
> 
1 — , — , — , — , 
Г-
0 
80 
160 
240 
320 
400 
480 
Year from start of experiment 
(b) Oceanic thermal expansion 
2 4 0 1 — I — — — I — I — I — ' — I — I — 1 — г 
Year from start of experiment 
Figure. 6.17: Comparison between the 2 X CO2 and 4 X C O , 
stabilisation simulations of Manabe and Stouffer (1994) and the 
UD/EB model used in Section 6.3. (a) Global mean temperatures; 
(b) oceanic thermal expansion. 
which the UD/EB model/AOGCM agreement is good. 
Figure 6.17b shows a comparison of oceanic thermal 
expansion. Again, agreement is excellent for the 2 X CO2 
case, but less good for the 4 X COj case. The fact that the 
UD/EB model gives higher expansion and lower warming 
for the 4 X CO2 case implies that the model's flux of heat 
into the deeper layers of the ocean is greater than in the 
A O G C M . If this reflects a real deficiency in the UD/EB 
model (which is uncertain, because we do not know how 
well the A O G C M simulates real-world behaviour for such 
large forcing), then it is probably important only for 
situations and times outside the range to which the model is 
applied here. 
Other UD/EB model/AOGCM comparisons have been 
carried out by Raper and Cubasch (1995) using the MPI 
A O G C M version described in Cubasch et al. (1992). For 
temperature, the authors obtain reasonable agreement 
between the two models. For thermal expansion, the 
comparison is less good. However, these comparison 
results are less easy to interpret than the G F D L 
comparisons because the MPI model shows, in the first 
100-200 years of its control run, a century time-scale 
adjustment to small initial flux imbalances. This low-
frequency variation makes it difficult to determine 
precisely the climate response signal (as noted by the 
authors), and it produces non-linear changes in the 
A O G C M that cannot be adequately simulated in the 
UD/EB model. 
Figure 6.4 shows several A O G C M runs compared with 
the global mean warming results of the UD/EB model 
discussed here and those of the simple model used for 
alternative sea level rise calculations discussed in Section 
7.5.2.2. The UD/EB model has a sensitivity of 2.5°C, while 
the other simple model has a sensitivity of about 2.2°C. The 
sensitivities of the AOGCMs range between 2.1 and 4.6. All 
models in Figure 6.4 were forced with a 1%/year 
(compound) C O 2 increase beginning in an initial 
equilibrium or near-equilibrium state. Differences in 
response occur between models, even when they are forced 
in an identical way and their climate sensitivities are listed 
as identical. These differences arise because the effective 
thennal inertia of their ocean components can vary between 
models (e.g., due to different behaviour of the thermohahne 
circulation during warming), and because the procedures 
used to estimate their climate sensitivity may differ. 
6.3.2 Radiative Forcing 
In order to estimate future temperature and sea level 
changes, it is necessary to prescribe both past and future 
radiative forcing changes due to the various greenhouse 
gases and aerosols. This section describes how radiative 
forcing changes were specified. Important background 
information is given in Shine et al. (1990, 1995) and these 
details are not repeated here. Information is given 
sequentially below for CO2, methane (CH4), tropospheric 
ozone, halocarbons and stratospheric ozone, and aerosols. 
The primary emission scenarios used are the IS92 
Scenarios of IPCC (1992) (Leggett et al, 1992), but with 
some small, but important changes. The changes are (i) to 
adjust (i.e., offset by a constant amount) IS92 emissions for 
NjO and CH4 in order to be consistent with the inferred 
budgets for 1990 based on observed atmospheric 
abundance and growth;' (ii) to ignore possible changes in 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
319 
carbon monoxide (CO), active nitrogen oxides (N0^^) and 
VOC (volatile organic compounds) emissions; and (iii) to 
consider only a single halocarbon emissions case, 
consistent with the Montreal Protocol and its later 
Amendments. 
For COj, the past concentration history is the standard 
IPCC data set, an update of that derived for an IPCC inter-
model comparison exercise by I.G. Enting and T..M.L. 
Wigley (Enting et al., 1994). The revision only affects 
the most recent values, changed to give a 1980s 
mean atmospheric mass increase of 3.3 GtC/yr, the value 
given in Chapter 2 of the present report (an update from 
Schimel et ai, 1995). The precise mean is 3.28 GtC/yr. 
To calculate future forcing, we use the model of Wigley 
(1993). Elsewhere in this report we use the model of 
Siegenthaler and Joos (1992), but the differences between 
the results of these two models are negligible in terms of 
implied radiative forcing. Both models use the initialisation 
procedure devised for the IPCC inter-model comparison 
exercise described by Enting et al. (1994), updated to use a 
different 1980s mean carbon budget. The current budget 
has a 1980s mean net deforestation flux of 1.1 GtC/yr 
(Schimel et al., 1995) and the atmospheric mass increase 
stated above. The COj-ferfllisadon factor is adjusted to 
give a balanced 1980s mean budget, as described in Wigley 
(1993) and Enting et al. (1994). 
For methane, the concentration history is that used by 
Osborn and Wigley (1994), consistent with information 
given elsewhere in this report. Future projections are made 
using the Osborn-Wigley model with parameter values 
adjusted to match closely the concentration projections in 
Chapter 2. In terms of 1990 to 2100 radiative forcing, the 
differences arising from using the Osborn-Wigley model 
are negligible, ranging from 0.00 Wm^^ to 0.03 Wm^^ 
depending on emission scenario. In calculating future 
concentrations we assume that the emissions of CO, NO^^ 
and VOCs remain constant at 1990 levels. Although IPCC 
(1992) (Leggett et al., 1992) gives scenarios for the future 
emissions of these gases, these are not used because their 
influence on methane lifetime depends on the spatial 
details of the emissions, details that are not specified. 
In addition to direct methane forcing, we also include the 
indirect effects of methane-related 
increases in 
1 For both 
and CH^, 1990 emissions specified in the IS92 
scenarios do not accord with emission estimates based on 
observed concentration data and cuirent lifetime estimates (see, 
e.g., Wigley, 1994). We therefore use these latter values to ensure 
a balanced contemporary budget, and assume that the scenario 
values are a valid representation of the changes from 1990 rather 
than correctly specifying absolute emissions. 
stratospheric water vapour and tropospheric ozone. The 
former follows Shine et al. (1990), but with a scaling factor 
reduced from 0.30 to 0.05 following Shine et al. (1995). 
The latter assumes a global mean ozone increase of 4 ppbv 
since pre-industrial times due to methane increases and a 
radiative forcing sensitivity of 0.02 Wm^^/ppbv. 
A "direct" tropospheric ozone tem due to emissions other 
than methane is also included. This is assumed to contribute 
a global mean forcing to 1990 of 0.32 Wm'^, giving a total 
tropospheric ozone forcing of 0.4 Wm-^ (as estimated 
elsewhere in this report). The history of this ozone 
component is assumed to parallel fossil fuel emissions to 
1990. For the future, the forcing is assumed to be constant. 
The implied total tropospheric ozone forcing changes (i.e., 
including those arising from methane concentration changes) 
are consistent with the tropospheric ozone concentration 
increases given in Table 2.5c. The direct tropospheric ozone 
forcing component is assumed to occur only in the Northern 
Hemisphere, where it is split 9:1 between the land and ocean 
areas, cf. aerosol forcing - see below. 
For nitrous oxide (NjO), the history is based on ice core 
data and, more recently, observed data. The initial (pre-
industrial) value is taken as 270 ppbv based on 
Leuenberger and Siegenthaler (1992) and more recent 
unpublished results from D. Raynaud. Future concentration 
projections assume a lifetime of 120 years. 
For halocarbons, the suite of gases is that used by Wigley 
and Raper (1992). To account for the effects of stratospheric 
ozone depletion, we use the chlorine loading method devised 
by these authors, but with a non-linear exponent (the ozone 
term is proportional to (nCl)*'' rather than (nCl)'°) and a 
higher bromine weighting (Wigley, 1994). This gives a 1990 
direct halocarbon forcing of 0.28 Wm^^, offset by -0.17 
Wm""2 due to stratospheric ozone depletion; values in accord 
with the most recent IPCC report (Shine et al., 1995). 
Application of a linear model with a threshold for chlorine 
loading gives essentially the same results. 
The same halocarbon-related stratospheric ozone model 
is used for past and future changes. Only one emission 
scenario is used for halocarbons, that of IS92d and e. 
Emission reductions for CFC-11 and CFC-12 in this 
scenario are probably slower than should occur under the 
Protocol, but this has a negtigible effect on the forcing 
results. Halocarbon emissions under IS92d and e are 
generally larger than those used to calculate the 
concentrations shown in Table 2.5, which more closely 
reflect the effects of the 1992 Copenhagen Amendments to 
the Montreal Protocol (Section 2.2.4). 
The most complex and uncertain part of the radiative 
forcing is that due to aerosols from biomass burning and 
320 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
Table 6.4: Changes in radiative forcing (Wm~^) between 1990 and 2100 for the IS92 emission scenarios 
Aerosol assumption 
SCENARIO 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92c 
IS92d 
IS92e 
IS92f 
No aerosols 
5.76 
5.55 
2.55 
3.45 
7.90 
7.07 
Indirect sulphate = 0.0 Wm^^ 
5.47 
5.29 
2.63 
3.50 
7.28 
6.65 
Indirect sulphate = -0.4 Wm^^ 
5.29 
5.11 
2.71 
3.54 
6.95 
6.40 
Indirect sulphate = -0.8 Wm"^ 
5.10 
4.94 
2.79 
3.57 
6.62 
6.15 
Wigley and Raper (1992) 
5.44 
5.26 
2.98 
3.84 
6.74 
6.26 
from fossil fuel combustion. For the former, we assume a 
total forcing of -0.2 Wm^^ in 1990, with the history 
following that of gross deforestation (see Wigley, 1993, for 
more on the differences between gross and net 
deforestation). Results are insensitive to the assumed 
history. After 1990, this forcing value is kept constant. We 
also assume spatially uniform forcing for this component, 
although there is evidence to suggest that the forcing 
should be greater over land than ocean. For fossil fuel 
derived aerosols we assume a 1990 direct (clear-sky) effect 
of -0.3 Wm-2, a value that accounts for the offsetting 
effect of soot (see Chapter 2). This term is distributed 
between the hemispheres in the ratio NH:SH = 4:1, and 
between land and ocean in the ratio 9:1, based on a range 
of three-dimensional modelling results. 
The indirect forcing (through aerosol-induced changes in 
cloud albedo) is much more uncertain. Shine et al. (1995) 
give a range of possible global mean values of 0.0 to -1.5 
Wm-2. PQJ. ji^g present calculations, we use -0.8 Wm-2 
our primary value. Because of the extreme uncertainty in 
this component, we also include calculations in which all 
future changes in aerosol forcing after 1990 are ignored (by 
keeping sulphur dioxide (SO,) emissions at their 1990 
level) to show the sensitivity of the results to this forcing 
component. The spatial distribution of indirect forcing is 
assumed to be NH:SH = 2:1, and land to ocean = 9:1. 
A more detailed comparison of results for different 
aerosol forcings is given in Raper et al. (1996); these 
authors consider the above two cases together with two 
other cases where the aerosol forcings are the same as in 
our primary case, but with the indirect sulphate forcing in 
1990 set to 0.0 Wm-2 and -0.4 Wm-2 (instead of the -0.8 
Wm-2 ygg¿ here) Raper et al. find that, for an indirect 
forcing of -0.8 Wm-2, the modelled global mean warming 
over 1880 to 1990 is considerably less than observed 
(0.21-0.40°C for ДГ2Х = 1.5-4.5°C) and that there are 
noticeable differences between the warming amounts over 
land and ocean and in the two hemispheres due primarily to 
the aerosol-induced forcing differentials. They suggest, 
following Wigley (1989), that these spatial differences may 
place a constraint on the magnitude of the aerosol forcing, 
a point also noted by Mitchell et al. (1995b). 
For both past and future sulphate aerosol forcing, we use 
the forcing-emissions relationships employed by Wigley 
and Raper (1992). 
The total radiative forcing change over 1765 to 1990 
based on the above is 1.32 Wm-2, ^j. 2 . 5 2 Wm-2 ¡f 
aerosol forcing is ignored. These values should be 
compared with the value of 2.45 Wm-2 used in IPCC 
(1990) (Shine et al., 1990). Table 6.4 shows the future 
radiative forcing changes for the six IPCC (1992) 
emissions scenarios for a range of aerosol assumptions. 
The Table compares these resuhs with the earlier results of 
Wigley and Raper (1992). The differences are relatively 
small and attributable largely to how aerosol forcing is 
quantified. Other changes, viz. ignoring data on CO, N0^^ 
and V O C s emissions in calculating future C H ^ 
concentrations, the use of a single (Copenhagen-consistent) 
emissions scenario for halocarbons, and the adjustment of 
CH4 and N2O emissions to ensure a balanced contemporary 
budget, have a relatively minor effect. 
Figure 6.18 shows the full forcing history to 1990 
together with future projections for IS92a, modified as 
noted earlier, and the low (IS92c) and high (IS92e) forcing 
extremes out to 2100. Results are shown for both "with-
aerosol" (full lines) and "aerosols constant at 1990 levels" 
(dashed lines). The aerosol assumption has a significant 
effect on both past and future forcing. It can also be seen 
that forcing uncertainties associated with both future 
emissions and aerosol effects are large. The range of 
uncertainty can be characterised usefully in terms of 
equivalent COj concentration changes, defined by 
Cequ:v = 278exp(Ae/6.3) 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
321 
10 
E 
Ç 
о 
i > 4 
те 
CL 
2\-
—I 
1 
1 
1 
1— 
Including changes in aerosol 
Constant 1990 aerosol 
from 1990 to 2100 
- IS92e 
• IS92a 
y IS92C 
0 
1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 
Year 
Figure 6.18: Radiative forcing from 1765 allowing for changes 
(full lines) and no changes (dashed lines) in aerosol 
concentrations after 1990. Values to 1990 are based on observed 
concentration changes (or emissions changes for aerosols). From 
1990 to 2100 forcings are derived from the low (IS92c), mid 
(IS92a) and high (IS92e) emission scenarios. 
where AQ is the radiative forcing from pre-industrial times 
(see Shine et ai, 1990). The 1990 equivalent C O , level is 
between 343 ppmv (with aerosols) and 421 ppmv (if all 
aerosol forcing is ignored), while the 2100 values range 
between 514 ppmv (IS92c) and 1201ppmv (IS92e), with 
both cases using the best-guess (with-aerosol) forcing to 
1990 and constant aerosol concentrations after 1990. 
Figure. 6.19 shows the forcing breakdown by component 
for IS92a. The values shown are from 1765, so the starting 
points on the left side of the graph give the 1765 to 1990 
values. There are small differences in total halocarbon 
radiative forcing over 1990 to 2100 between Figure 6.19 and 
that based directly on the concentrations in Table 2.5, 
attributable to the effects of (modelled) stratospheric ozone 
changes, additional gases considered in the Figure 6.19 
calculations, and to the larger einissions in IS92d and e. The 
"Total" shown is the value that incorporates changes of 
aerosol concentration beyond 1990. For IS92a, the net effect 
of ПОП-СО2 greenhouse gases is approximately cancelled out 
at the global mean level by aerosol forcing. At the regional 
level, however, for all scenarios, there is no such cancellation: 
aerosol effects lead to large spatial variations in forcing that 
will alinost certainly have a major effect on the patterns of 
future climatic change. 
E 
С 
О 
о 
á 2 
ir 
1 
1 
1 
(a) 
1 — 1 — ' — 1 — - — 1 — 
-
-
— 1 — 1 — 1 — 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
^ 
Year 
2080 
2100 
•a 
-0.2 
^ 0 , 4 
....... 
^ ^ O ^ ^ , , 
I 
0 . 2 - ^ , - Ç ' / ^ r d i r e c t 
HFCs 
i 
Г ' I 
I 
I 
l__ 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 6.19: (a) Radiative forcing components resulting from the 
lS92a emission scenario for 1990 to 2100. The "Total non-COj 
trace gases" curve includes the radiative forcing froin methane 
(including methane related increases in stratospheric water 
vapour), nitrous oxide, tropospheric ozone and the halocarbons 
(including the negative forcing effect of stratospheric ozone 
depletion). Halocarbon emissions have been modified to take 
account of the Montreal Protocol and its Adjustments and 
Amendments. The three aerosol components are: direct sulphate 
(SO4 DIR), indirect sulphate (SO^ IND) and direct biomass 
burning (BIOAER). (b) Non-COj trace gas radiative forcing 
components. "CI/Br direcf is the direct radiative forcing resulting 
from the chlorine and bromine containing halocarbons; emissions 
are assumed to be controlled under the Montreal Protocol and its 
Adjustments and Amendments. The indirect forcing from these 
compounds (through stratospheric ozone depletion) is shown 
separately (Strat. O3). All other emissions follow the IS92a 
Scenario. The tropospheric ozone forcing (Trop. O^) takes 
account of concentration changes due only to the indirect effect of 
methane. 
322 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
As a final point, it should be noted that all of the IPCC 
(1992) scenarios are "existing policies" scenarios, in that 
none of them assume the implementation of any strong 
policies to reduce emissions. The emissions (and radiative 
forcing) values differ markedly, however, because of 
different assumptions regarding, for example, population 
growth, economic growth, per capita energy use and 
resource availability. 
6.3.3 Temperature Projections 
We consider first global mean temperature projections for 
the central IPCC (1992) emission scenario, IS92a. Figure 
6.20 shows temperature changes over 1990 to 2100 for 
climate sensitivities of ATj^ = 1-5, 2.5 and 4.5°C for the 
changing aerosol (full lines) and constant aerosol (dashed 
lines) cases. The central sensitivity value gives a warming 
of 2.0°C (changing aerosols) to 2.4°C (constant aerosols). 
The uncertainty due to ATjx uncertainties is large, and 
aerosol-related uncertainties are larger for larger A l j x -
These results are similar to those given by Wigley and 
Raper (1992) who gave a central estimate of 2.5°C 
warming over 1990 to 2100 for IS92a. The present values 
are slightly lower because of differences in the radiative 
forcing details (see Table 6.4), and because our present 
incorporation of a slow-down in the thermohaline 
circulation also slows down the rate of warming (although 
it increases the amount of oceanic thermal expansion). For 
a more detailed discussion of the effect of thermohaline 
circulation changes, see Raper et al. (1996). 
The relative importance of COj, other greenhouse gases, 
and aerosols is shown in Figure 6.21, which gives 
temperature projections for the central climate sensitivity 
value (АГ2Х = 2.5°C) for three different cases: 
(1) 
forcing the model after 1990 with COj concentration 
changes alone; 
(2) 
forcing the model with greenhouse gases and aerosols; 
(3) 
as for (2), but with aerosol amounts assumed to 
remain constant after 1990, i.e., no aerosol forcing 
changes after 1990. 
Results for cases (2) and (3) are also given in Figure 
6.20, as the central full (case 2) and dashed (case 3) lines. 
Case (3) corresponds to forcing by the full complement of 
greenhouse gases: the difference from case (1) represents 
the effect of non-COj greenhouse gases. That case (1) 
(CO2 alone) warms less than case (2) (all gases and 
aerosols) reflects the fact that in the second half of the 21st 
о 
I 
I 
1 
1 
! 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
Including changes in 
aerosol beyond 1990 
Constant 1990 aerosol 
/ ' 
ДГ2х=4.5''С 
2000 2020 
2040 2060 
Year 
2080 2100 
Figure 6.20: Global mean temperature changes from 1990 for 
IS92a for different climate sensitivities (ATj^ = 1.5, 2.5 and 
4.5°C), with aerosol concentrations changing (full lines) and 
constant (dashed lines) bevond 1990. 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 6.21: Global mean temperature changes from 1990 for 
IS92a for ДГ2Х = 2.5°C based on different assumptions regarding 
radiative forcing from 1990. "COj" shows results based on COj 
forcing alone; "AH" shows results for the full forcing complement 
(greenhouse gases and aerosols); "Aerosols constant" shows results 
where aerosol forcing changes after 1990 are ignored (i.e., as "AU", 
but with the assumption of constant SO2 emissions after 1990). 
century the negative aerosol forcing does not fuUy offset 
the positive forcing due to non-COj greenhouse gases (cf. 
Figure 6.19). 
Figures 6.22 and 6.23 show temperature projections with 
changing aerosol amounts (Figure 6.22) and with constant 
aerosols (Figure 6.23) for the full set of IS92 emission 
scenarios, using the central estimate for climate sensitivity 
(ДГ2Х = 2.5''C). The effect of uncertainties in emissions 
remains small for many decades: for the changing aerosol 
case, the full range of uncertainty in 2050 is only 0.2°C 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
323 
3.5 
3.0 
Ü 2.5 
Ф 
C) 
с œ 
о 2.0 
ф 
ф 
- 1 . 5 
Ф 
œ 
о 
(5 1 ° 
0.5 
-
~ т ~ — г — 1 
1 
1 
1 - , 
, 
M 
-
^ " " 
< ^ 1 
1 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 6.22: The effect of the IS92 emission scenarios on future 
global mean temperature changes. This is the full aerosol forcing 
case, with the climate sensitivity set to 2.5°C. 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 6.23: The effect of the IS92 emission scenarios on future 
global mean temperature changes, assuming constant aerosol 
concentrations beyond 1990. Results are for a climate sensitivity 
of 2.5°C. 
(1990 to 2100 wanning ranges from 0.8°C for IS92c to 
1.0°C for IS92f). The different emission cases, however, 
give rapidly diverging temperature projections in the 
second half of the 21st century: for the changing aerosol 
case, the range of values spans 1.2°C by the year 2100. 
This behaviour illustrates the long-term nature of the 
climate change problem. There are two areas where there 
are appreciable lags in the system; between emission 
changes and concentration changes for COj (and hence 
radiative forcing), and between radiative forcing changes 
and climate response. Inertia in both the carbon cycle and 
the climate system leads to a very long lag between COj 
emissions changes and their eventual effect on climate. 
Finally, Figure 6.24 shows an extreme range of possible 
warmings for the IS92 emission scenarios, together with 
results for the central case (IS92a) with and without 
changing aerosol forcing post-1990. To obtain a near-upper-
limit projection, we take IS92e with a constant (1990) 
aerosol contribution (which maximises the forcing over 1990 
to 2100) and use a climate sensitivity of tsJj^y^ - 4.5°C; 
while to give a near-lower-bound projection we use IS92c, 
also with no post-1990 aerosol contribution (which in this 
О 
Ф 
D) 
С 
^ 3 
о 
Ф 
r 
.Q 
О 
1 V 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 6.24: Extreme range of possible changes in global mean 
temperature. The topmost curve is for IS92e assuming constant 
aerosol concentrations beyond 1990 and a high climate sensitivity 
(Д72>^ = 4.5°C); the lowest curve is for IS92c, also assuming 
constant aerosol concentrations beyond 1990, but with a low 
climate sensitivity (ATj^ = 1.5°C). Results for IS92a are shown 
for comparison, both with and without changing aerosols. 
324 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
case minimises the forcing because of reductions in 
emissions later in the 21st century) and, in this case, АГ2Х ~ 
1.5°C. These results quantify the full range of uncertainty 
associated with both the emissions uncertainties for "existing 
poUcies" and the uncertainty in the climate sensitivity. 
There are, of course, additional uncertainties not 
accounted for in this analysis. For radiative forcing, the 
most important of these is that associated with the carbon 
cycle (see Wigley, 1994). We have used only central 
estimates of carbon cycle model parameters in obtaining 
future CO2 concentrations: within the range of parameter 
uncertainties the CO2 forcing to 2100 could be increased 
by a few tenths of a Wm-^, corresponding to an 
additionalwarming of 0.1-0.2°C. There are also important 
uncertainties associated with the climate model. For many 
of these, the effects are relatively small (see Wigley and 
Raper, 1993). However, if the thermohaline circulation 
were not to slow down as assumed here, there could be an 
additional warming over 1990 to 2100 of more than Г С 
(for constant upwelling rate, the upper limit value increases 
from 4.5°C to 5.7°C)i. (The effects of the above 
uncertainties on the lower bound value are small.) In 
assessing the significance of these extreme values, it 
should be noted that the probability of exceeding the 
bounds is likely to be small because they concatenate two 
possibilities that both have relatively low probability {viz., 
emissions outside the IS92c to IS92e range, and climate 
sensitivity outside the range А Г 2 Х = 1.5-4.5°C). 
The 1990-2100 warming for the central emissions 
scenario (IS92a) is approximately one third lower than the 
corresponding "best estimate" presented in 1990 (SA90): 
2.0°C compared with 3.3°C for a sensitivity of 2.5°C. This 
arises mainly because of the following: differences in the 
two emission scenarios (the lower emissions for COj and 
the halocarbons, in particular, lead to lower forcing and 
hence reduced wanning); improvements to the carbon cycle 
model used to make C O 2 concentration projections 
(inclusion of a terrestrial sink term has led to lower 
concentrations); the inclusion of the cooling effect of 
aerosols in the current projections; the lower historical 
forcing to 1990 (now 1.32 Wm'^ compared with 2.45 Wm"^ 
previously); changes in the UD/EB model parameters; and 
changes in the UD/EB model structure to account for 
land/ocean differences in the climate sensitivity and a slow­
down in the intensity of the thermohaline circulation. 
For sea-level, in this extreme case, the constant-upwelling result 
is actuaUy slighüy less than for variable upwelling. This is 
because thr former leads to lower oceanic thermal expansion, 
which more than offsets the increased ice-melt contribution. 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
2400 
2500 
Year 
Figure 6.25: Temperature changes for an extended version of the 
IS92a emission scenario in whicli anthropogenic emissions of 
COj, C H 4 NjO, the halocarbons and fossil fuel derived SOj are 
assumed to decline linearly to zero over 2100-2200. A climate 
sensitivity of ATjx = 2.5°C is assumed. 
6.3.4 Longer Time-scale Projections 
The IS92 emission scenarios give emissions only out to 
2100. In almost ail cases, projected values of global mean 
temperature are still rising rapidly at the end of the period. 
This raises the question of what might happen after 2100. 
As noted above, both the carbon cycle and the climate 
system have large inertia, so even if (for example) CO2 
emissions were to decline dramatically after 2100, 
temperature would continue to increase for sotne time. 
Figure 6.25 illustrates this. Here, anthropogenic emissions 
follow IS92a to 2100 and then are assumed to decline 
linearly to zero over 2100-2200 for CO2, CH^, Щ0, the 
halocarbons and SOj-derived aerosols. CO2 concentrations 
in this^cenario peak at around 850 ppmv in 2160, and 
decline to around 540 ppmv in 2500. Total radiative 
forcing also peaks around 2160, but temperatures continue 
to rise to 2200, decHning only slowly thereafter. 
While Figure 6.25 graphically illustrates the inertia of 
both the carbon cycle and the climate system, a more 
relevant set of long-term projections arises from the COj 
concentration stabilisation profiles given in Chapter 2. 
These illustrate, in an idealised way, possible future CO2 
concentration pathways and levels that might be achieved 
in response to Article 2 of the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change, which calls for eventual stabilisation of 
greenhouse gas concentrations at, as yet, unspecified 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
325 
3.5 
О 
Ш 
СЯ I 2.5 
Ü 
i 
' 
ф 
Q. 
E 1.5 
p 
со 
о 
1 h 
0.5 h 
—г 
650 ppmv 
450 ppmv 
1 
1 
1 
4.5 
/ 
2.5 
- 
/ 
^ 
^ 
4.5 
-
/ / 
_ 
" 
1.5-
/ •/ 
y'"""^ 
t _ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1.5.. 
1 
1 
1 
2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 2350 2400 2450 2500 
Year 
Figure 6.26: Temperature changes for different cUmate 
sensitivities (ATj^ - 1.5, 2.5 and 4.5°C) for COj concentration 
profiles stabilising at 450 ppmv (dashed lines) in 2100 and 650 
ppmv (full lines) in 2200. Stabilisation dates are indicated by the 
dots. Calculations assume the "observed" history of forcing to 
1990, including aerosol effects (see Figure 6.18) and then COj 
concentration increases only beyond 1990. From Raper et al. 
(1996). 
levels. Analyses of the climate and sea level implications 
of these stabilisation scenarios have been carried out by 
Raper et al. (1996), Wigley (1995) and Wigley et al. 
(1996). 
Here vi^e reproduce the results of Raper et al. for S450 
and S650 (CO2 stabilisation at 450 ppmv in 2100 and at 
650 ppmv in 2200): see Figure 6.26. The changes shown 
are those arising from CO2 increases alone. As noted by 
Raper et al., the effect of other anthropogenic forcing 
factors might amplify the warming to 2100, based on the 
IS92 scenarios (compare the COj-alone case with the full 
forcing case in Figure 6.21), but the subsequent effect of 
these other gases is impossible to estimate. Figure 6.26 
shows that global mean temperature continues to rise for 
centuries after the stabilisation dates (indicated by the dots 
on the figure), approaching an eventual asymptotic value 
(determined by the concentration stabilisation level) very 
slowly. 
6.4 Simulated Changes of Variability Induced by 
Increased Greenhouse Gas Concentrations 
Previous IPCC Reports (1990, 1992) were necessarily 
sparse in details concerning possible changes of variability 
of the climate system with an increase of COj and trace 
gases. The 1990 Assessment focused on changes in mean 
climate and relied mainly on results from atmospheric 
models coupled to non-dynamic slab oceans (so-called 
"mixed-layer models") that were not capable of simulating 
any variability associated with the E l Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO). Since a major source of global 
interannual variability is associated with ENSO, models 
that cannot simulate ENSO-like oscillations are seriously 
constrained when used to examine possible changes in 
variability. The 1992 Supplement contained results from 
four global A O G C M s that contained some aspects of 
ENSO-like variability (e.g., Meehl. 1990; Lau etal, 1992), 
but most of the reported results still involved changes in 
mean climate produced by those models. Even though 
ENSO-like variability is now represented in present global 
coupled models, caution must be exercised when 
interpreting the results since only some aspects of ENSO 
are simulated and the variability tends to be underestimated 
(see Chapter 5). Also in the earlier IPCC reports, there was 
a brief discussion of possible changes in variability, but 
most of those studies were in the early stages. 
Subsequently there has been additional work done to 
analyse how variability is represented in climate models 
(Chapter 5) as well as how changes in variability are 
simulated in climate models. More global A O G C M 
experiments have now been completed and there have been 
studies using mixed-layer and specified SST models to 
explore further the mechanisms of possible variability 
changes suggested by the global coupled models. 
The definition of variability in this section is the 
quantification of deviations from some mean value (e.g., 
standard deviation or variance on monthly or longer time-
scales). We will examine changes in these variability 
measures between simulated present-day and increased-
CO2 climates. These changes in variability are distinct 
from simple shifts in respective means between the two 
climate states. Section 6.5 will examine possible changes 
of extreme events on time-scales less than one month. This 
latter category is obviously related to changes in variability 
and is defined by specific meteorological occurrences that 
may be infrequent in time and space, and that affect society 
or an ecosystem at a certain location. 
6.4.1 Simulated Changes in Intermonthly Variability 
Model experiments with an early version of the global 
coarse-grid A O G C M at the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research ( N C A R ) indicated that the 
variability of lower tropospheric temperature in the control 
case compared favourably with that measured by the M S U 
326 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
Figure 6.27: The ratio of the interannual variances (i.e., lASD squared) of the weighted lower tropospheric temperature from 
equivalent periods in the 2 X CO2 and control of the N C A R global coupled model: (a) model years 31^4; (b) model years 44-57; (c) 
model years 52-65; (d) the entire period of model years 31-65. Sohd contours indicate greater interannual variability in the 2 X COj 
case. Light stippUng indicates a ratio greater than 1 (greater interannual variability in the 2 X CO^ case), dark shading indicates greater 
variability significant at the 5% level, and cross-hatching indicates less variability in the model significant at the 5% level. The zonal 
average of the ratio is shown to the right. From Meehl et al. (1994). 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
327 
satellite data (Meehl et al, 1994 - see Chapter 5). They 
also showed no consistent changes of zonal mean 
intermonthly lower tropospheric temperature variability in 
the tropics due to increased CO2, but decreases near 60°N 
(Meehl et al., 1994). In certain regions there were marginal 
increases in intermonthly variability (e.g., over the south 
Asian monsoon region). Increases of intermonthly (also 
termed intraseasonal) precipitation variability with 
increased COj (as evidenced by a shift from time-scales of 
days to time-scales of weeks) have also been reported for 
several other coupled models for the Indian monsoon 
region (Lai etal, 1994a). 
The NCAR study above contrasted the results from the 
coupled model to an earlier version with the same 
atmospheric model coupled to a non-dynamic slab ocean 
(mixed-layer model). In that experiment there were 
decreases of intermonthly variability between 20 and 60°N 
as well as at 60°S. These mixed-layer results were 
consistent with earUer mixed-layer studies. The difference 
in the tropics compared to the coupled model had to do 
partly with the inclusion of ENSO-type variability in the 
coupled model. Comparing the N C A R coupled model to 
the earlier mixed-layer model, Campbell et al (1995) noted 
that the qualitative differences in variability described by 
the first and second empirical orthogonal functions (EOFs) 
of 700 mb height were as large or larger than the 
differences in variability when C O , was doubled. These 
two studies clearly show the importance of including 
ENSO-related variability for studying such changes with 
increased COj, as well as the importance of improving the 
representations of ENSO in global coupled models. 
In experiments with the L M D model (Parey, 1994a) a 
decrease in intermonthly temperature variability with 
increased CO2 was noted. However in that experiment only 
the mean SST increases from the MPI (m) run were used, 
so there was no possibility that ENSO variability could 
play a role. Consistent with the decreased intermonthly 
temperature variability, Parey (1994a,b) also noted changes 
of persistent intermonthly circulation patterns, commonly 
referred to as "blocking" (see Section 5.4.1), in the 
Northern Hemisphere with increased C O , . In northern 
winter in particular there were decreases of blocking 
frequency over the Northern Hemisphere ocean regions. 
Lupo et al (1995) used an atmospheric model coupled to a 
simple mixed-layer ocean model with doubled C O j 
concentration to show that blocking events in the Northern 
Hemisphere were more persistent but weaker with 
increased COj with greater blocking activity particularly 
over the continents. Blocking frequency had been shown to 
decrease generally in the Southern Hemisphere in earlier 
mixed-layer model experiments (e.g.. Bates and Meehl, 
1986), but the centres of blocking activity shifted westward 
in the Northern Hemisphere. More consistent with the 
Parey (1994a, b) results, Meehl et al (1994) in their global 
coupled atmosphere-ocean model study suggest that the 
decreases in intermonthly variability seen in the global 
coupled model near 60°N are associated with decreases in 
blocking in the Northern Hemisphere mid-latitudes. 
In spite of the additional recent studies addressing 
changes involving persistent circulation patterns 
represented by blocking, there appears to be significant 
model-specific (and possibly blocking-definition-specific) 
aspects of changes in blocking activity with increased COj 
in the various studies. For example, blocking can be 
defined in terms of various pattern recognition schemes, or 
as a certain geopotential height anomaly that persists for a 
certain number of days, such that different threshold values 
give different impressions of blocking in different models. 
This makes it difficult to identify consistent changes in 
blocking activity. However, since blocking involves stable 
circulation patterns and leads to periods of greater weather 
forecast skill, possible changes in blocking have 
implications for future weather forecasting as well as 
extreme weather events associated with blocking (see next 
section). 
6.4.2 Possible Changes in Interannual Variability 
The specified COj increase and SST increase experiments 
with the L M D model described above also showed a 
general decrease of interannual temperature variability 
(Parey, 1994a). However, as noted in the previous section, 
since only mean SST increases are used, changes in 
variability due to ENSO are not included. Mearns (1993), 
Gordon and Hunt (1994) and Liang et al (1995) used 
mixed-layer models and confirmed some of the earlier 
mixed-layer model results that showed some areas of 
increased interannual temperature variability in the tropics 
and subtropics, with decreases at higher latitudes. The 
studies with the NCAR model noted above (Meehl et al, 
1994; Campbell et al, 1995) showed some decreases of 
zonal mean variability of lower tropospheric temperature 
between the zone 20-60°N and the zone near 60°S, but 
mainly increases of tropical interannual variability 
associated with the inclusion of ENSO-like phenomena in 
the coupled model (Eigure 6.27). 
One of the key questions to be addressed with coupled 
models is what changes there may be, if any, to interannual 
variability associated with ENSO from an increase of CO2, 
and how precipitation patterns in the Pacific region may be 
affected. 
328 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
Several model simulations with coarse-grid AOGCMs 
agree that ENSO-like events in those models continue to 
occur with an increase of COj in the model atmosphere 
with either similar amplitude SST variability in the tropical 
eastern Pacific or somewhat of a decrease (Meehl et al., 
1993a; Knutson and Manabe, 1994; Tett, 1995; Tokioka et 
al., 1995). However, those models show that there may be 
some alterations to effects associated with ENSO. Meehl et 
al. (1993a) showed that area-averaged SST variability over 
the eastern tropical Pacific is not appreciably changed for 
the relatively short time-series considered, but that area-
averaged precipitation anomalies associated with ENSO 
are enhanced over the tropical continents. That is, in their 
global coupled model with ENSO-like events in the 
increased CO2 climate, large-scale anomalously wet areas 
0.0 I 
• 
^ 
' 
L 
(b) 100-year Window 
Control 
„0.3- 
— 
2 x C 0 2 
Ü 
4 X CO2 
W 
. Ramp-up to 4 X CO2  
"l 
° ° 0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
Year number 
Figure 6.28: Temporal evolution of the standard deviation of 
ENSO-like variability in a GFDL global coupled A O G C M , and its 
dependence on COj concentration. Shown are standard deviations 
of overlapping segments of bandpass (2-7 year) filtered sea 
surface temperature anomalies (7°N-7°S, 173°E-120°W) in°C for 
(a) a 20-year moving window and (b) a 100-year moving window. 
The different lines are for separate 1000-year experiments in 
which CO2 is constant at 1 X COj (control) or increases to 4 X 
CO2 in the first 140 years and then remains at 4 X CO2. In (b) an 
experiment in which CO2 increases to 2 X COj in the first 70 
years and then remains constant at 2 X CO2 is also shown. 
become wetter, and dry areas drier. Meehl et al. (1993a) 
noted that, following the earlier suggestions of Rind et al. 
(1989), an increase of mean surface temperature could 
result in enhanced precipitation variability due to processes 
associated with the non-linear relationship between surface 
temperature and evaporation. Meehl et al. (1993a) also 
noted that the changed mean basic state of the extratropical 
circulation due to increased C O , (i.e., changes in zonal 
mean flow that affects the propagation of planetary waves) 
is associated with an alteration of the mid-latitude 
teleconnections involved with ENSO-like events in the 
tropical Pacific. However, for definitive statistical analyses 
to be made, longer time-series from more model 
realisations would be useful. 
Knutson and Manabe (1994) noted a decrease in the 
amplitude of ENSO-like variability over the equatorial 
Pacific with increased COj based on three 1000-year 
G F D L coupled model integrations (Figure 6.28b). They 
also noted a slight eastward shift of the ENSO-related 
precipitation variability in the central equatorial Pacific. 
Tett (1995) and Tokioka et al. (1995) showed that there are 
no significant alterations of SST variability over the central 
equatorial Pacific Ocean associated with ENSO-like 
events, but Tett (1995) suggested that there may be small 
enhancements of precipitation variability. A recent study 
with an atmospheric G C M with SSTs specified to simulate 
both an ENSO event and C O , warming suggests that 
signals associated with intensification of hydrological 
effects may be relatively small, even though that model 
was not producing those changes interactively (Smith et 
al, 1995). 
Variability in another regional circulation regime that is 
of interest for human and economic reasons is the south 
Asian or Indian monsoon. Recent results from global 
coupled models (e.g., Meehl and Washington 1993; Singh 
and von Storch, 1994; Bhaskaran et al, 1995; Teti, 1995) 
have shown an agreement with the results summarised 
from eariier model versions in the 1990 and 1992 IPCC 
reports in that mean monsoon precipitation over the south 
Asian or Indian monsoon regions intensifies with increased 
CO2 (Figure 6.29) due to the more rapid warming of the 
south Asian land area compared to the Indian Ocean. This 
produces an enhancement of the land-sea temperature 
contrast in that region, and in conjunction with an 
increased moisture source from the warmer ocean, 
intensifies the monsoon rainfall. If model simulations of 
the monsoon include sulphate aerosols, then mean south 
Asian monsoon precipitation decreases owing to decreased 
land-sea temperature contrast (Lai et al, 1995a). 
Concerning variability changes, in the N C A R coarse-
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
329 
(a) 
21 25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 60 
Model year from start of experiment 
65 
(b) 
9.0 
8.5 
^ 8.0 
E 7.5 
.1 7.0 
.§ 6.5 
Q. 
•g 6.0 
ûl 5.5 
5.0 
^ 2 X CO2 
1 
! 
0 = 0.65 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
21 25 
60 
65 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 55 
Model year from start of experiment 
Figure 6.29: Area-averaged June to August monsoon precipitation 
in soutli Asia (land points in the area 5°N^0°N, 6 0°E-100°E) in 
mm/day from (a) the control case with present CO2 concentration; 
and (b) the case for 2 X COj. Solid line is the 45 year mean; 
dashed Unes indicate one standard deviation; dots indicate weak 
and strong monsoons (from Meehl and Washington, 1993). 
grid A O G C M the interannual variability of the area-
averaged summer (JJA) south Asian or Indian monsoon is 
enhanced (Meehl and Washington, 1993). This follows 
from the earlier ENSO results in that an increase of mean 
surface temperature 
could be expected to make 
precipitation more variable in certain tropical regions, 
owing to the relationship between surface temperature and 
evaporation. Bhaskaran et al. (1995) also note a significant 
increase in monsoon interannual variability in the Hadley 
Centre ( U K M O ) A O G C M . A marginally higher range 
between strong and weak Indian monsoon precipitation 
was documented in the MPI coupled model with increased 
CO2 (Lai et al, 1994b). Consistent with this result, 
standard deviation of Indian monsoon precipitation was 
somewhat higher with increased CO2 in the CSIR09 
mixed-layer model (Chakraborty and Lai, 1994). The 
addition of sulphate aerosols appears to affect mean 
monsoon precipitation (noted above) but enhanced 
interannual monsoon variability still occurs as in the CO2-
only experiments (Lai et al, 1995a). 
6.4.3 Decadal and Longer Time-scale Variability 
So-called "inherent" low-frequency variability in the 
climate system on decadal and longer time-scales can. for 
example, be induced by external sources such as volcanic 
activity and perhaps solar activity, and from internal 
sources such as alterations of the thermohaline circulation. 
External sources of climate variability have not been 
included in AOGCMs, but such models do have inherent 
variability on long time-scales due to interaction between 
the components of the coupled system. Since there are as 
yet few multi-century A O G C M integrations, these studies 
have focused less on possible changes to that variability 
than on the consequences of long time-scale variability on 
the manifestation of COj climate change in the models. 
Clarifying these issues should be possible as more multi-
century coupled model runs are completed. 
Decadal variability makes it more difficult to identify the 
effects of increased COj in the models. For example, 
Cubasch et al. (1994b) showed that a series of transient 
climate change experiments started from different initial 
states in the control integration produced as a result of 
decadal-scale vaiiability somewhat different time evolutions 
of surface air temperature change. Tokioka et al (1995) 
showed that decadal scale variabihty of sea ice volume in the 
MRI (Japan) global A O G C M affected the rate of warming at 
high latitudes in their transient COj increase experiment. An 
increase of sea ice in the control run (and transient ran) due 
to inherent decadal variability delays warming due to ice 
albedo feedback in the transient CO2 increase experiment. 
However, ice albedo feedback effects can be influenced to a 
certain extent by the particular features of each sea ice 
formulation (e.g., Meehl and Washington, 1990). 
As noted by Meehl et al. (1993b) and Karoly et al 
(1994), climate models usually display a consistent zonal 
mean pattern of temperature change due to increased CO, 
with warming in the troposphere and cooling in the 
stratosphere. Karoly et al. (1995) attempted to sort out 
decadal variability associated with this zonal mean 
temperature signal from the G F D L and N C A R global 
AOGCMs. They conclude that the zonal mean pattern of 
C02-induced temperature change (warming in the 
troposphere and cooling in the stratosphere) does have 
inherent decadal-scale variability in the coupled models. 
Principal component analysis of zonal mean temperature 
shows some similarity of this pattern between the control 
runs from the models and the transient CO2 increase 
experiments. Models can exhibit natural modes of variation 
which are similar to the signal they simulate in response to 
increased CO2 (Santer e? a/., 1994). 
A set of experiments with one global coupled model 
330 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
have been ran long enough to address possible changes to 
ENSO amplitude occurring on multi-decadal to multi-
century time-scales. Knutson and Manabe (1994, 1995) 
note that for their 1000-year integrations with the GFDL 
global coarse-grid A O G C M , the amplitude of ENSO-like 
variability can fluctuate by a factor of two or more on 
roughly a 50-year time-scale (Figure 6.28a). These 
internally generated 
amplitude modulations are 
substantially larger than the 20% decrease in mean 
amplitude found for a quadrupling of CO, (Figure 6.28b) 
and are reminiscent of the fluctuations in the amplitude of 
the real ENSO observed in this century (Section 3.4.2). 
Even using a 100-year sampling window (Figure 6.28b) 
they found that the model's internally generated 
fluctuations of ENSO amplitude on a multi-century time-
scale can be comparable in magnitude to the long-term 
change due to increased COj. These studies point to the 
complications that arise due to inherent long-time-scale 
variability, and the difficulties that variability presents for 
analysing changes of the climate system on almost all time-
scales due to increased COj, as well as for detection of a 
COi-induced climate change signal (see Chapter 8). 
6.4.4 Conclusions 
Analyses of climate model results (including a greater 
number of global coupled atmosphere-ocean models) 
subsequent to IPCC (1992) provide us with some 
indications of possible changes of variability of the climate 
system due to an increase of CO2 in the context of the 
model limitations noted in Ch. 5: 
(i) 
Experiments with different model configurations 
indicate that zonal mean mid-latitude intermonthly 
temperature variability may be reduced, but there are 
no consistent results in regard to changes in 
persistent anomalies called "blocks", one of the 
contributors to intermonthly variability, since 
different definitions of blocking have been used and 
different models show different changes of 
geographical patterns of blocking. 
(ii) 
One study shows that intermonthly and interannual 
variability differences between GCMs with a simple 
mixed-layer and those coupled to a full ocean model 
are larger than changes in either type of model due to 
increased COj alone, pointing to the importance of 
using a model with some representaüon of ENSO-
like phenomena. 
(iii) 
ENSO-like variability in several AOGCMs continues 
with increased CO2 with either little change or 
somewhat of a decrease of SST variability in the 
eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. A global A O G C M 
that includes some aspects of ENSO-like variability 
suggests that interannual variability of zonal mean 
lower troposphere temperature in the tropics may 
increase mainly due to hydrological effects on the 
tropical continents. 
(iv) 
There could be enhanced precipitation variability 
associated with ENSO events in the increased CO2 
climate, especially over the tropical continents, 
associated with the mean increase of tropical SSTs. 
(v) 
Enhanced interannual variability of area-averaged 
summer south Asian monsoon rainfall is indicated by 
several models. 
(vi) 
Decadal and longer time-scale variability affect the 
realisation of climate change in a number of 
simulations in terms of the rates of global warming 
and patterns of zonal mean temperature change. 
Multi-century variability in ENSO phenomena was in 
one case as large as the mean change caused by CO2 
increase. This indicates that natural climate 
variability on long time-scales will continue to be 
problematic for COj climate change analysis and 
detection. 
6.5 Changes in Extreme Events 
6.5.1 Introduction 
The extreme events considered here are infrequent 
meteorological events that suфass a certain threshold. The 
perceived severity of the extreme depends on the 
vulnerability of the natural environment and human society 
to the event. This implies that the definition of an extreme 
event ca,n strongly depend on location. 
A common property of extremes is that they refer to the 
deviation of meteorological elements (or the combination of 
several elements) from the local normals. Several mecharüsms 
can be responsible for changes in local extremes: the 
appearance of large-scale meteorological phenomena (e.g., 
blocking or El Niño), an intensifying or weakening of either 
large-spale systems (e.g., stormtracks) or small-scale features 
such as convective storms, or a (relatively) small shift in 
location of weather systems possessing sharp gradients, like 
the inter-tropical convergence zone (ITCZ). Prediction of 
extremes originating from these three sources put different 
requirements on the quality of the G C M predictions. 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
331 
Predicting changes in extremes means predicting 
changes in probability distributions. For example, changes 
in mean temperature generally have substantial impacts on 
exceedance probabilities because of the rather short upper 
tail of the temperature distribution. Changes in variability 
such as those described in the previous section strongly 
affect the occurrence of extreme events. The possibility 
that a change in the variance can have a larger impact on 
the exceedance frequencies for monthly maxima than a 
change in the mean is demonstrated analytically in Katz 
and Brown (1992). Nevertheless, enhanced greenhouse 
simulations indicate that the effect of changes in mean 
temperature are usually much larger than the effect of 
changes in variance (Cao et al., 1992; Hennessey and 
Pittock, 1995). 
The state-of-the-art of modelling synoptic scale extremes 
is briefly described in the next sub-section (6.5.2), in order 
to provide a general background for the subsequent 
discussion. Possible changes in daily variability, which 
might give rise to changes in the occurrence of extreme 
events are discussed in Section 6.5.3. Several types of the 
most studied extreme events (wind-related, temperature 
related and precipitation related), are discussed in Sections 
6.5.4 to 6.5.6. 
6.5.2 Background 
Possible changes in extreme events were assessed by IPCC 
in IPCC (1990) (Mitchell et al, 1990) and IPCC (1992) 
(Gates et al, 1992). 
Many scientists (e.g., Hewitson and Crane, 1992a, b; 
von Storch, 1993; von Storch et al, 1993) consider the 
usefulness and realism of output from climate models as 
being scale-dependent. The success of the simulation of 
extreme events in GCMs depends on the scale of the event, 
and whether the events depend on regional properties (such 
as lake-related snow-fall in Ontario, Canada). 
To simulate a reasonable global scale atmospheric or 
oceanic circulation, relatively coarse resolution numerical 
models are sufficient. Obviously, these models must resolve 
the scales of the forcing functions. Much finer resolution is 
required to model adequately the non-linear flow of energy 
from the large scales to the small scales. Because of the 
finite resolution there is a spectral cut-off point where the 
flux of energy to smaller scales can no longer be maintained 
by the non-linear dynamics, but is usually parameterized by 
an artificial dissipation or damping mechanism (for 
instance, Roeckner and von Storch, 1980). 
For scales near the spatial cut-off scale, however, the 
dynamics are severely disrupted, and the skill of the 
simulation of these scales will in general be low. Further 
factors which make the model output less reliable for 
smaller scales are the lack of sub-grid scale features within 
a grid box, such as a coastline, the presence of a lake or of 
mountains, which might be relevant for the regional 
circulation. Also, the parametrizations of the various 
processes in atmospheric GCMs describe the overall effect 
of a process better for some variables or regions than 
others. 
Extreme weather events are rare and occur on the 
synoptic and even smaller scales (e.g., heavy showers, gusts 
and tornadoes). Long integrations of very high-resolution 
models are required to simulate them and even then there is 
little prospect that sub-synoptic scale events can be 
successfully resolved in GCMs. We present here some 
examples where general weather or wind patterns were 
analysed, from which conclusions concerning extremes may 
be inferred using down-scaling techniques. Hulme et al 
(1993) assessed the control simulations (10-year) of two 
G C M experiments (UKHI and E C H A M 1-coupled model 
11) in terms of their ability to reproduce realistic "real 
world" weather and observed mean monthly frequencies of 
gales over the British Isles. The seasonality of both 
anticyclonic and cyclonic types of weather is much too 
strong in E C H A M 1 and summer precipitation in this model 
is greatly underestimated. E C H A M 1 simulates the annual 
cycle of temperature well, while U K H I successfully 
reproduces the annual cycle of precipitation. Both models 
underestimate the number of gales by about 50%, 
E C H A M l more so than UKHI (see Figure 6.30). E C H A M l 
simulates the correct form of the annual cycle with a clear 
winter maximum. In December and January, UKHI greatly 
underestimates gale frequencies, leading to a bimodal 
frequency distribution of simulated gale frequencies. 
D 
J 
Month 
Figure 6.30: Observed and model-simulated mean monthly 
frequencies of gales over the British Isles. The range bars on the 
observed line represent the range in 10-year averages from the 
110-year observed record (from Hulme et al, 1993). 
332 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
Beersma (1994) compared storm activity over the North 
Sea and the Netherlands in two climate models (CCC and 
E C H A M 1-coupled) with observations. He observes that 
the models have difficulties with basic features of the 
large-scale circulation which affect the surface wind and 
concludes that the average wind speed and the frequency of 
gales over the North Sea are reproduced rather poorly in 
both models. 
ENSO affects tropical cyclone behaviour and the 
occurrence of floods, droughts, and heat waves in many 
extra tropical regions. Changes in ENSO behaviour related 
to climate change are possible but uncertain. This is an 
important source of uncertainty in the following discussion. 
6.5.3 Possible Changes in Daily Variability 
Only a few modelling studies to date have analysed 
changes in daily temperature and precipitation variability 
(defined as variability between days) due to increased COj. 
One study used the L M D atmospheric G C M run, with 
specified SSTs taken from a transient climate change 
experiment with an A O G C M . Two series of three 
experiments (control, doubled and tripled COj with two 
different model resolutions) showed a general decrease of 
daily temperature variability with increased COj in the 
model (Parey, 1994a) along with an increase in mean 
temperatures. A similar result for daily temperature 
variability over a limited area was obtained from two 
continuous 3.5 year-long climate simulations over 
continental USA, one for present-day conditions and one 
for conditions under doubled CO2 concentration. These 
were conducted with a regional climate model (RegCM), 
on a 60 km grid, nested in a global G C M . A moderate 
number of changes in daily temperature variability were 
statistically significant, and the majority of these were 
decreases. Clearest tendencies were decreases in the winter 
in the central and northern Great Plains, in late summer and 
late winter in the Great Lakes region, and in late winter in 
the south-east (Mearns et al, 1995b). Cao et al. (1992) 
analysed global changes in daily temperature variance in 
the U K M O low resolution G C M for a doubling of CO2. 
There is a reduction in variance in high latitudes in winter 
where sea ice is replaced by open water, and a generally 
insignificant reduction in middle latitudes over the oceans 
and North America in winter. Elsewhere changes in 
variance are small and of variable sign, though some 
increases over the northern continents in summer are 
statistically significant. 
The Model Evaluation Consortium for Climate 
Assessment (MECCA) Phase 1 simulations have been 
examined to assess the possibility of changes in daily 
variability in surface temperature and other quantities. The 
largest changes in variability in surface temperature 
occurred at the cryospheric margin. Although there are 
differences between control and enhanced greenhouse 
values of daily standard deviation of surface temperature, 
differences among the five models studied were much 
greater than between any one model's realisation of cumnt 
and future climatic variability (Henderson-Sellers et al, 
1995a). 
Concerning changes in daily precipitation variability, 
analysis of the RegCM integrations showed that there were 
fewer areas of significant change compared to daily 
temperature variability change, but that most of these were 
increases in daily precipitation variability for doubled COj 
conditions, particularly in winter on the north-west coast of 
North America. 
The relationship between these changes in daily 
temperature and precipitation variability seems to be 
dependent on the geographic area considered. For example, 
mid-continental temperature variability could be associated 
with changes in clouds or soil moisture, while changes in 
precipitation variability could be affected by altered storm 
activity. 
6.5.4 Extreme Wind Events 
6.5.4.1 Mid-latitude 
storms 
The main energy sources for mid-latitude depressions are 
the temperature contrast between the cold polar regions and 
the warmer sub-tropical conditions, and the release of 
latent heat as water vapour condenses in the warm, 
poleward moving, ascending air. Some G C M s shovii 
(IPCC, 1990) that in a CO2 enhanced atmosphere, the low-
level meridional temperature gradient will be reduced due 
to positive feedbacks at higher latitudes, although most 
coupled models simulate an increased temperature gradient 
in the Southern Hemisphere. Most models predict 
increased water vapour content in the wanner atmosphere. 
However, at upper levels the tropics warm relative to high 
latitudes due to the release of latent heat. It is difficult to 
predict the result of these competing effects. 
GCMs simulate the position of the observed storm tracks 
well (Figure 6.31a and b) but tend to slightly underestimate 
storm track strength (Hall et al, 1994; Murphy 1995a). 
G C M response to enhanced CO2 varies somewhat with 
different models and resolution (e.g.. Senior 1995) and 
different techniques are employed to study the storm 
tracks. Hall et al. (1994) found an intensification and 
poleward shift in both the Northern Hemisphere storm 
tracks in the high resolution U K M O slab model, with the 
most spectacular change occurring in the eastern Atiantic/ 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
333 
Figure 6.31: Comparison of observed and modelled mid-latitude storm tracks (as shown by the standard deviation of band-pass filtered 
500 mb height) in December, January and February, from 10-year simulations with the U K M O 2.5° X 3.75° resolution slab model. 
334 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
western Europe region (Figure 6.31c). Camell et al. (1996) 
found similar results from the U K M O A O G C M . In 
contrast, results from the CCC slab model (Lambert, 1995) 
suggest no obvious shift in the Northern Hemisphere storm 
tracks but a slight shortening of the Atlantic tracks 
suggesting a reduction in storm activity over Europe. The 
E C H A M l 
A O G C M (Konig et al, 
1993) shows a 
northward shift of North Atlantic cyclones and an eastward 
movement in the North Pacific. The most significant 
change is a poleward shift of Southern Hemisphere 
cyclones in autumn and winter. Clearly, there is little 
agreement between models on the changes in storminess 
that might occur in a warmer world. Conclusions regarding 
extreme storm events are obviously even more uncertain. 
6.5.4.2 Tropical 
cyclones 
The formation of tropical cyclones depends upon a number 
of factors, including sea surface temperatures (SSTs), the 
vertical lapse rate of the atmosphere, vertical wind shear, 
mid-tropospheric relative humidity, and the prior existence 
of a centre of low-level cyclonic vorticity (Gray, 1979) so 
predicting changes in a warming climate is not 
straightforward. Though climate models can simulate some 
of the aspects of tropical cyclone occurrence (Manabe and 
Broccoli, 1990; Haarsma et al, 1993), the state-of-the-
science remains poor because: 
(i) 
tropical cyclones cannot be adequately simulated in 
present GCMs, 
(ii) 
some aspects of ENSO are not simulated well in 
GCMs, 
(iii) 
other large-scale changes in the atmospheric general 
circulation which could affect tropical cyclones 
cannot yet be discounted, and 
(iv) 
natural variability of tropical storms is very large, so 
small trends are likely to be lost in the noise. 
A special study undertaken as part of the joint 
WMOACSU programme on Tropical Cyclone Disasters by 
Lighthill et al (1994) suggests that there are no compelling 
reasons for expecting a major change in global tropical 
cyclone frequency, although substantial regional changes 
may occur. Models, at present, are not adequate to predict 
the direction of such changes. A further study by Holland 
(1995) indicates that there is unlikely to be more intense 
tropical cyclones than the worst that are experienced under 
current climate conditions. There may be some potential, 
however, for changes of cyclone intensity in regions where 
SST is between 26 and 29 °C, 
Bengtsson et al (1994, 1995) ran a 5-year experiment 
for IPCC (1990)'s "Scenario A / year 2035" conditions 
with the T106 E C H A M model. Individual storms as well 
as their geographical and seasonal distribution in the 
control run agreed well with observations. For the 
enhanced greenhouse scenario, they found a decrease in 
the number of tropical cyclones, especially in the Southern 
Hemisphere while the geographical distribution appeared 
unchanged compared to the present climate. In this 
simulation the effect of warmer surface waters is 
counteracted by generally weaker surface winds with 
somewhat reduced evaporation and by changes of the 
vertical stability. Lai et al (1995b) found no significant 
changes in the number and intensity of monsoon 
depressions in the Indian Ocean in a warmer atmosphere 
in the ECHAM3-T106 experiment. 
In conclusion, it is not possible to say whether the 
frequency, area of occurrence, time of occurrence, mean 
intensity or maximum intensity of tropical cyclones will 
change. 
6.5.5 Extreme Temperature Events 
Zwiers (1994) made an extreme value analysis of simulated 
2-metre air temperature obtained from 20-year control and 
doubled COj simulations conducted with the Canadian 
Climate Centre second generation climate model 
(McFarlane et al, 1992). Changes in both the shape and 
location of the 2-metre temperature distributions occur in 
many places. Large changes (4-6°C) in the 10-year return 
values of daily maximum 2-metre temperature (7"мах,10^ 
occur over the continents (except Antarctica) as a 
consequence of a loss of soil moisture. Even larger changes 
(up to 10°C) in the 10-year return values of daily minimum 
2-metre temperature {T^^^^ JQ) over temperate northern 
latitudes are related to a loss of snow cover. Small changes 
in ^i^jij 
over land masses which do not receive snow in 
the control simulation can be traced to losses in soil 
moisture and corresponding reductions in cloud. Desert 
areas seem to experience roughly equal changes in T^j^ J Q 
andT^gj^ JO as do tropical and temperate oceans. Formerly 
ice-covered parts of the polar oceans sustain relatively 
large changes in Tj^ax.io ^^id very large changes in T^^^^^Q. 
Parts of the polar oceans which remain ice-covered 
experience small changes in Ty^^^ 
and large changes in 
the r^injo-
Small changes in the mean climate can produce 
relatively large changes in the frequency of extreme events. 
Hennessy and Pittock (1995) performed a scenario study 
for the year 2030 where observed temperatures were 
increased according to GCM-derived warming scenarios 
for south-eastern Australia which vary spatially and 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
335 
seasonally. It was assumed that (absolute) temperature 
variability remains constant. 
At each G C M grid-point over Victoria, Australia, the 
warming per degree of global warming simulated by each 
of five GCMs was ranked from highest (rank I) to lowest 
(rank 5). The rank 2 warming was defined as the "high 
case" and the rank 4 warming was defined as the "low 
case". Multiplying these scaled regional warmings by a 
range of global warming estimates for a given year 
(Whetton et al., 1993) gives an estimate of the regional 
warming for that year. 
The low warming scenario of about 0.5°C by 2030 gives 
at least 25% more days over 35°C in summer and spring, 
and at least 25% fewer winter days below 0°C. The high 
warming scenario of about 1.5°C produces 50 to 100% 
more extremely hot summer and spring days and 50-100% 
fewer extremely cold winter days. Larger percentage 
changes occur in regions where absolute changes are 
smaller. Similar results were found for these and other 
threshold temperatures at temperate sites in the eastern 
Australian state of New South Wales, and at tropical sites in 
the Northern Territory and Western Australia. 
The high warming scenario also gives a 20% increase in 
the probability of a run of at least 5 summer days over 
35°C in the northern half of Victoria, and the risk of a run 
of at least 5 winter days below 0°C is reduced by up to 
20% in western and coastal areas and by 25-40% in the 
north-east highlands. 
6.5.6 Precipitation Extremes 
There is now mounting evidence to suggest that a warmer 
climate will be one in which the hydrological cycle will in 
general be more intense (IPCC, 1992), leading to more 
heavy rain events (ibid., pp.119). It should be noted, 
however, that, as the G C M grid sizes are much larger than 
convective elements in the atmosphere, daily precipitation 
is poorly reproduced by GCMs. 
Noda and Tokioka (1989) noted in their 2 X CO2 
simulations an increase of cumulus type precipitation, 
which results in a decrease of precipitation area and an 
increase in precipitation intensity. Gordon et al. (1992) 
looked at changes in the frequency distribution of 
simulated daily rainfall. They found that return periods 
(between 3-month to 5-year in this study) for CSIR04 
GCM-simulated heavy rain events decreased by factors 
ranging from 2 to 5 under 2 X C O j conditions in the 
locations they examined (i.e., Australia, midwest USA, 
Europe and India). 
Similar results were found in analyses of daily rainfall 
simulated by the CSIR09 G C M (Whetton et al., 1993), and 
with the U K M O high resolution model (Fowler and 
Hennessy, 1995; Gregory and Mitchell 1995; Hennessy et 
ai, 1995). While mean rainfall intensity increased by 
10-30% at most latitudes for a doubling of CO2, increases 
in the frequency and intensity of 90th percentile rainfall 
events exceeded 50% in some regions. 
Henderson-Sellers et al. (1995a) have compared 
simulations of daily precipitation from five equilibrium 
simulations of doubled C O , . Overall they find shorter 
return periods for extreme events and increased intensity of 
rainfall. The largest changes occur in the tropics. This 
study also suggests a decrease in return period in the five 
regions highlighted in IPCC (1990). In addition, the 
M E C C A models exhibit an increase in intensity in most 
regions except South Asia. In South Asia, however, there is 
an increase in the number of rain days and in the number of 
wet spells. The number of raindays decreases in southern 
Europe. In general there is an increase in the mean and 
variability of precipitation, a decrease in return period of 
extreme events and an increase in intensity and the number 
of wet spells (consecutive days with precipitation). 
McGregor and Walsh (1994) present 2 X CO, results for 
a limited area model nested within the CSIR09 G C M at 
60-km resolution over Tasmania, Australia. Over 10 
successive years of July conditions, the total number of 
rain days decreases, but the number of events exceeding 16 
mm/day increases by 40% 
Analysis at NCAR of a RegCM embedded in a global 
G C M showed areas with significant changes (both increases 
and decreases) of precipitation frequency and intensity under 
2 X CO2 conditions (Mearns et al., 1995a). Precipitation 
variability increased significantiy. In the Central Plains of 
the USA, small changes in mean precipitation masked large 
increases in intensity combined with decreases in frequency. 
Analysis of daily rainfall frequency over land points in the 
Indian monsoon region in the Hadley Centre global coupled 
model showed that there could be more heavy rainfall days 
with increased CO2 (Bhaskaran et al., 1995). 
However, Parey (1994a), analysing the return period of 
heavy rainfall events from three 30-year simulations under 
1 X , 2 X and 3 X CO2 conditions with the L M D - G C M in 
seven, mainly extra-tropical land regions did not find a 
systematic increase in heavy rainfall classes as CO2 
increases. There was no significant change in daily rainfall 
annual distribution between the three simulations, so the 
return period for heavy rainfall events was not shorter in 
the enhanced CO2 simulations. In a parallel experiment 
with the ECHAM3 model Cubasch et al. (1995b) find an 
increase in rainfall intensity mainly over tropical land 
regions and the northern mid-latitudes. 
336 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
Various invesrigators (e.g., Cubasch et al., 1995b; 
Gregory and Mitchell, 1995; Gregory, pers. conun.) find that 
a shift in the distribution of daily precipitation amounts 
towards heavier events may in some areas be accompanied 
by an increase in the number of dry days. Dry days may also 
become more frequent where the mean precipitation 
decreases. For both reasons, there may be an increase in the 
length of dry spells (consecutive days without precipitation). 
For instance, Cubasch et al. (1995b) found from three 
30-year simulations under 1 X , 2 X and 3 X C O j 
conditions, respectively, with the E C H A M 3 model a 
generally longer dry spell length in all extratropical 
regions. In central North America, the probability of a 3-
month dry spell is 1% in the 1 X COj, twice that in the 3 X 
COj run. Gregory (pers. comm.) reports for experiment Í 
that the probability of a dry spell of at least 30 days in 
summer in southern Europe increases by a factor of 2-5 on 
doubling CO2, although the mean precipitation decreases 
by only 22%. This relatively small reduction also leads to a 
much increased incidence of low seasonal precipitation 
totals: the probability of a precipitation amount smaller 
than the driest decile of the control distribution of summer 
precipitation more than doubles. 
Reduced precipitation may also be associated with drier 
soil. In Whetton et al. (1993) drought occurrence in 
Australia is assessed using an off-line soil water balance 
model and scenarios based upon the results of a range of 
GCMs. Although large changes in drought frequency were 
possible due to the range of uncertainty in the scenarios, 
the direction of change in soil moisture was uncertain at 
most sites examined. They demonstrate that drying was 
more Ukely in the south of Australia. 
Gregory (pers. comm.) also finds higher probability of 
dry soil in summer in central North America and southern 
Europe in the Hadley Centre simulations. 
6.5.7 Summary and Conclusions 
Extreme weather events are important aspects of climate. 
They generally occur at synoptic scale and are of shorter 
duration than global climate change. Since possible 
changes in extremes may have large impacts on nature and 
human society, and relate to most people's direct 
experience, such changes will be more convincing than 
global changes averaged over time and space. Current 
climate models lack the accuracy at smaller scales and the 
integrations are often too short to permit analysis of local 
weather extremes. Except maybe for precipitation, there is 
little agreement between models on changes in extreme 
events. However, by reasoning from physical principles, or 
by using down-scaling techniques and looking at patterns 
such as mid-latitude storm tracks from which extremes can 
be inferred, or by making time-slice experiments with high 
resolution models some tentative assessments concerning 
extreme events may be made: 
(i) 
Small changes in the mean climate or climate 
variability can produce relatively large changes in the 
frequency of extreme events; a small change in the 
variability has a stronger effect than a similar change 
in the mean. 
(ii) 
A general warming tends to lead to an increase in 
extremely high temperatures and a decrease in winter 
days with extremely low temperatures. 
(iti) 
Model studies that addressed daily variability 
changes indicate a decrease of daily temperature 
variability with increased CO2 in certain regions, 
with some increased daily precipitation variability 
over a few areas such as north-west North America 
in winter. 
(iv) 
Several models suggest an increase in the 
precipitation intensity, suggesting a possibility for 
more extreme rainfall events. In some cases models 
also predict more frequent or severe drought periods 
in a warmer climate. 
6.6 Simulation of Regional Climate Change 
In IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992), very low confidence was 
placed on the climate change scenarios produced by G C M 
equilibrium experiments on the sub-continental, or 
regional, scale (order of 10^ - 10^ km^). This was mainly 
attributed to coarse model resolution, limitations in model 
physics representations, errors in model simulation of 
present day regional climate features, and wide inter-model 
range of simulated regional change scenarios. Since then, 
transient runs with AOGCMs have become available which 
allow 'a similar regional analysis. In addition, different 
régionalisation techniques have been developed and tested 
in recent years to improve the simulation of regional 
climate change. This section examines regional change 
scenarios produced by new coupled G C M runs (Section 
6.6.1) and progress in the appUcation of regionatisation 
techniques to the simulation of regional climate change 
(Section 6.6.2). Following the 1990 and 1992 reports, 
emphasis is placed on the simulation of seasonally 
averaged surface air temperature and precipitation, 
although the importance of higher order statistics and other 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
337 
surface climate variables for impact assessment is 
recognised (Kittel et ai, 1995; Meams et ai, 1995a, b). 
6.6.1 Regional Simulations by GCMs 
In IPCC (1990), five regions were identified for analysis of 
regional climate change simulation: Central North America 
(CNA, 35-50°N, 85-105°W), South East Asia (SEA, 
5-30°N, 70-105°E), Sahel (Africa) (SAH, 10-20°N, 
20°W-40°E), Southern Europe (SEU, 35-50°N, 10 
W-45°E) and Australia (AUS, 12-45°S, 110-155°E). 
Output from different coupled model inns with dynamical 
oceans for these regions was analysed by Cubasch et al. 
(1994a), Chakraborty et ai (1995a, b), Whetton et ai 
(1995) and Kittel et al. (1996), while analysis over the 
Australian region from equilibrium simulations with 
mixed-layer ocean models was performed by Whetton et 
al. (1994). Results over two additional regions were 
analysed by Raisanen (1995) for Northern Europe (NEU. 
land areas north of 50°N and west of 60°E) and L i et al 
(1994) for East Asia (EAS, 15-60°N, 70-140°E). To 
summarise the findings of these works, Figures. 6.32 (a-h) 
show differences between region-average values at the 
time of C O , doubling and for the control run, and 
differences between control run averages and observations 
(hereafter referred to as bias), for winter and summer 
surface air temperature and precipitation. The biases are 
presented as a reference for the interpretation of the 
scenarios, because it can be generally expected that the 
better the match between control run and observed climate, 
the higher the confidence in simulated change scenarios. 
The model runs are labelled d, g, m, x, p, q, r, s and t in 
Table 6.3 and the experiments do not include the effects of 
aerosols and human-induced changes in surface 
characteristics, which are likely to alter regional patterns of 
temperature and precipitation change (e.g., Copeland et al, 
1995; also see Section 6.2 of this report). The models 
employ different spatial resolutions and flux adjustments. 
Scenarios produced by these transient experiments 
varied widely among models and from region to region, 
both for temperature and precipitation. Except for a few 
outliers, individual values of projected surface warming 
varied mostly in the range of ~ Г С to ~5°C (Figure 6.32a, 
c), with the NCAR-r and MPI-x runs generally showing the 
greatest temperature sensitivity. NCAR-^ runs showed the 
least temperature sensitivity because, with a 1% linear 
increase in СО2/УГ (Table 6.3), C O , had increased only by 
a factor of 1.7 by the end of the 70-year simulation, 
compared to a doubling for the other model runs. For most 
regions, the inter-model range of simulated temperature 
increase was rather pronounced, about 3-5°C. With the 
exception of one or two outliers, the smallest inter-model 
range of simulated warming at the time of COj doubling 
was over Australia in summer and the Sahel in winter, 
where the scenarios differed among models by no more 
than 1.3°C. It should be noted, however, that for a region 
such as Australia, continental-scale agreement may come 
from cancelling differences at the sub-continental scale. 
The surface air temperature biases had positive and 
negative values both in winter and summer (Figures 6.32 b, 
d). However, biases were mostly negative in winter and 
positive in summer, an indication that the models tended to 
overestimate the seasonal temperature cycle. Most biases 
were in the range of -7°C to 10°C, but values as large as ~ 
15°C were found. The smallest biases were found over 
Australia and, with the exception of one or two models, 
South-East Asia and Southern Europe. Over most regions, 
the inter-model range of temperature bias was of the order 
of lO^C, i.e., it was greater than the inter-model range of 
regional temperature increase. The surface temperature 
biases as well as the simulated regional warming scenarios 
were in the same range as those reported in IPCC (1990) 
for a number of equilibrium runs. 
Regional precipitation biases spanned a wide range, with 
values as extreme as —90% or greater than +200% (Figure 
6.32f, h). The biases were generally larger in winter than in 
summer, and overall, regions with the smallest biases were 
Southern Europe, Northern Europe, and Central North 
America. Regions receiving low winter precipitation (e.g., 
Sahel, South East Asia) tended to have large positive or 
negative biases because small eiTors in control run values 
appear as large biases when reported in percentage terms. 
Simulated precipitation sensitivity to doubled COj was 
mostly in the range of -20% to +20% of the control value 
(Figure 6.32e, g). The most salient features of simulated 
regional precipitation changes are summarised as follows: 
(i) 
All models agreed in summer precipitation increases 
over East Asia and, except for one model. South East 
Asia, reflecting an enhancement of summer 
monsoonal flow (see Section 6.3). 
(ii) 
All models agreed in winter precipitation increases 
over Northern Europe, East Asia and, except for one 
model. Southern Europe. In the other cases, 
agreement was not found among models even on the 
sign of the simulated change. 
(iii) Regions with the smallest inter-model range of 
simulated precipitation change were Central North 
о 
•5. 
I 
ü . 
I—" в 
É s É s 
( p e A J S s q o jo %) uoiiBiidpeJd 
о 
I 
Q. 
О 
P 
0 
9 «Ж! a i 
-
с 
о 
ü 
• <ЙЙШ^ i 
1 
CM 
0 
* • 
f «-со 
1 
CM 
0 
о 
1 • 
0 
+ 
о 
а 
X -
а*+ • ,Цв <! 
i  
•9 
О) 
CD 
(lOJluoo io o/„) uo!iB;!dp9Jd 
Q. 
E 
CD 
В 
1 
О 
* 
i >Ш10« + 
• . l e e . 
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 . 
S г ? 
цр 
о 
(Оо) eOU8J9ií!P 9 j n i B J 9 d L U 9 i 
Ф 
3 
р 
Q. 
Е 
ф 
В с 
• 
< ш Х + О * 
• 
cm- 
ш-о 
<¡ 
• 
X •<«•!» « 
<| • «ж ож 
• 
охо -»* • 
• <í •
 *МО 
X 
• 
I I г I ' ^ ' ' I I I I I I I I I I ' ' 1 ' ! > I i I 
- 3 
< с 
=) - — 
i °-
S 
(Оо) Э б и В Ц О 9jniBJ9dLU91 
1 
's 
P 
E I 
л t. 
•ç +x 
» x o ^ < i + n . < -13 -ë, 
ce 
8 
g 8 S ° 
g 8 
g 
(p9AJ9SqO iO %) UO!lB)!d!09Jd ' 
с 
1 
£ 
P 
E 
E 
о 
с 
»-»«+ • 
о I 
»-»«+ • 
о I 
ü 
• * 
Х Ю « 
<1-
<1 it еж i •+( 
• 
-
. , . 1 1 .. 1 и 
5 СП 
2 
Я 
° 
° 
(lOJJUOO iO о/с) U0!}BHdp9Jd 
i 
3 
= 1 
° 
- Ш t3) 
p 
o. 
E 
Ф 
E 
- i 
E 
0 
СЛ 
O 
I 
• Q 
•£ 
o 
ü 
• 
• +4t Ю 
• 
-, 
•* 
•< +o)i 
F I I I I I I I I I I I I : I I I I I I 
i 
-I Ш 
o 
ce 
- i 
OJ 
•. -
S . 
(Oo) 90U9J9iJ!P 9jn}EJ9dLU91 
2 
3 
Ê 
ni 
p 
E 
Ê 
3 
СЛ 
1 
с о 
• 
+ X » <S(-0-« • 
о 1 
со 
• 
8 
<1а-
• ><э^ ^ 
• -
• 
<1 я -«f « * 
• 
л < к к * • -
+ 
« X •< • 
1 1 1 1 1 
1 1 1 I 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 г 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 
с о 
i " 
iÓ 
irí 
-é 
с6 
ci 
^ 
(Oo) eBuBqo 9jn}BJ9dLU9i 
ce 
< 
Ü 
Q. 
• 
g о 
ce 
СЛ 
о 
X 
"S) 
u. 
? 
g 
i
l
i 
I 
< 
2 X 
73 
• O 
q 
I 
U 
S -g 
i s 
tu 
1 - i 
i e II 
i 
< 
» S z 
a £ "^з 
i I .3 
1> 
•t i 
I 
с 
'$ 
2 -a 
e Й 
Ой <u 
?3 ex 
s 
^3 
Q 
i l 
l e 
i x l l l 
ад 
e 
3 
3 о 
•о 
X Я > 
S с « Il 
I I S I 
b i 
3 
О 
° 
и s 
u 
-o .s II 
S 
' Л 
S 
S P 
° 
3 g 
S 2 - g. 
a^ § 
•3 I 
=«2 
Й с Й e II 
с 
g 
2 ж 
u 
5 < 
^1 
s £ s 
4) о ^ 
(D 
i l l l l 
5 
с 
• 
late Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
339 
America, East Asia and Nortliern Europe in summer 
and Soutiiern Europe, Northern Europe, and East 
Asia in winter. 
Overall, the precipitation biases were greater than the 
simulated changes. A rigorous statistical analysis of 
the model results in Figure 6.32a-h has not been 
carried out. However it can be expected that, due to 
relatively high temporal and spatial variability in 
precipitation, temperature changes are more likely to 
be statistically significant than precipitation changes. 
1 summary, several instances occurred in which 
anal scenarios produced by all models agreed, at least 
ign. In fact, regardless of whether flux correction was 
1, the range of model sensitivity was less than the range 
liases (note that the scales in Figure 6.32 a-h are 
;rent for the sensitivities and the biases). However, the 
;e of simulated scenarios and the model regional biases 
î still large, so that confidence in the regional scenarios 
dated by AOGCMs remains low. It should be pointed 
that, while model agreement increases our confidence 
le veracity of model responses, it does not necessarily 
•antee their correctness because of possible systematic 
rs or deficiencies shared by all models. On the other 
I, in spite of these errors, models are useful tools to 
y climate sensitivity (see Chapter 5). Even though 
els cannot exacfly reproduce many details of today's 
late, key processes that we know to exist in the real 
late system are represented in these models (see 
pter 4). For example, the simulation of the seasonal 
e of winds, temperature, pressure and humidity in both 
horizontal and vertical provides us with a first order 
ification of the fidelity of the models' ability to capture 
e basic features of the Earth's climate. As another 
nple, AOGCMs exhibit the ability to simulate essential 
onses of the climate system to various forcings, e.g., 
e involving El Niño SST anomalies and aerosols from 
anic activity. This increases our confidence in the use 
L O G C M sensitivity experiments to evaluate potential 
iges in important climate processes. 
I Simulations Using Statistical Downscaling and 
Regional Climate Modelling Systems 
lough computing power has substantially increased 
ng the last years, the horizontal resolution of present 
sled atmosphere-ocean models is still too coarse to 
ure the effects of local and regional forcings in areas of 
plex surface physiography and to provide information 
ible for many impact assessment studies. Since IPCC 
(1992), significant progress has been achieved in the 
development and testing of statistical downscaling and 
regional modelling techniques for the generation of high 
resolution regional climate information from coarse 
resolution G C M simulations. 
6.6.2.1 Statistical 
downscaling 
Statistical downscaling is a two-step process basically 
consisting of (i) development of statistical relationships 
between local climate variables (e.g., surface air 
temperature and precipitation) and large-scale predictors; 
and (ii) application of such relationships to the output of 
G C M experiments to simulate local climate characteristics. 
A range of statistical downscaling models has been 
developed (Kari et al., 1990; Bardossy and Plate 1992; 
'Wilks 1992, Wilson et al, 1992, Von Storch et al, 1993; 
Gyalistras et al, 1994; Hughes and Guttorp 1994; Noguer 
1994; Matyasowszky et al., 1995; Zorita et al., 1995; 
Pleym and Karl 1996), mostly for USA, European and 
Japanese locations, where better data for model calibration 
are available. The main progress achieved in the last few 
years has been the extension of many downscaling models 
from monthly and seasonal to daily time-scales, which 
allows the production of data more suitable for a broader 
set of impact assessment models (e.g., agriculture or 
hydrologie models) (Bardossy and Plate 1992; Wilks 1992; 
Wilson et al., 1992; Matyasowszky et al., 1995; Pleym and 
Kari 1996). 
When optimally calibrated, statistical downscaling 
models have been quite successful in reproducing different 
statistics of local surface climatology (e.g., Wilks, 1992; 
Von Storch et al., 1993; Hughes and Guttorp, 1994; 
Noguer, 1994; Zorita et ai. 1995; Pleym and Karl, 1995). 
Climate change scenarios have been generated through the 
application of statistical downscaling models (Von Storch 
et ai, 1993; GyaHstras et al., 1994; Zorita et al., 1995; 
Pleym and Karl; 1996). Confirming an early study by 
Wigley et al. (1990), these new experiments showed that, 
in complex physiographic settings, local temperature and 
precipitation change scenarios 
generated 
using 
downscaling methods were significantly different from, 
and had a finer spatial scale structure than, those directly 
interpolated from the driving GCMs. As an example, 
Pleym and Karl (1996) indicated that the application of the 
Climatological Prediction by Model Statistics (CPMS) to 
output from a doubled C O j G C M equilibrium run 
produced a decrease in simulated warming of several 
degrees at different Norwegian locations compared to those 
produced by the driving G C M . 
A unique application of a statistical downscaling method 
340 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future CUmate 
50 
40 h 
-40 -
^QI" I I 
I 
I I 
I I 
I I 
I I I 
1900 
1940 
1980 
2020 
2060 
2100 
Year 
Figure 6.33: Example of downscaled sea level change at a 
Japanese tidal gauge site as derived from observed sea level 
pressure fields (solid line, from 1900 to 1988) and from simulated 
sea level pressure anomalies (dashed line, from "1935" to "2085"). 
Only the sea level component controlled by the anomalous large-
scale circulation is affected by the downscahng procedure. Units 
are mm. From Maochang etal., 1995. 
has been the attempt to compute coastal sea level change at 
a number of Japanese coastal locations via correlations 
with large-scale circulation patterns (Maochang et ai, 
1995, Figure 6.33). New techniques for the disaggregation 
of precipitation over mountainous terrain were proposed by 
Barros and Lettenmaier (1993), Miller (1994), Leung and 
Ghan (1995) and Goyette and Laprise (1995), in which 
dynamical and/or physical processes are calculated over a 
high resolution sub-grid of a G C M grid box without use of 
a full atmospheric limited area model. 
6.6.2.2 Regional 
modelling 
The (one-way) nested modelling technique has been 
increasingly applied to climate change studies in the last 
few years. This technique consists of using output from 
G C M simulations to provide initial and driving lateral 
meteorological boundary conditions for high resolution 
Regional Climate Model (RegCM) simulations, with no 
feedback from the RegCM to the driving G C M . Hence, a 
regional increase in resolution can be attained through the 
use of nested RegCMs to account for sub-GCM grid scale 
forcings. The most relevant advance in nested regional 
climate modelling activities was the production of 
continuous R e g C M multi-year climate simulations. 
Previous regional climate change scenarios were mostly 
produced using samples of month-long simulations (Giorgi 
et al, 1992; Marinucci and Giorgi 1992). The primary 
improvement represented by continuous long-term 
simulations consists of equilibration of model climate with 
surface hydrology and simulation of the full seasonal cycle 
for use in impact models. In addition, the capability of 
producing long-term runs facilitates the coupling of 
RegCMs to other regional process models, such as lake 
models (Hostetler et al., 1993, 1994), dynamical sea ice 
models (Lynch et al, 1995) and possibly regional ocean 
(or coastal) and ecosystem models (Pielke et al, 1992; 
Giorgi 1995). 
Continuous month- or season-long to multi-year 
experiments for present day conditions with RegCMs 
driven either by analyses of observations or by GCMs were 
generated by Giorgi et al (1993, 1994), Chen et al (1994), 
Copeland et al (1994, 1995), Bates et al (1995) and Leung 
and Ghan (1995) for North American regions, Kanamitsu 
and Juang (1994), Liu et al (1994), Hirakuchi and Giorgi 
(1995), Lal et al (1995c) and Sasaki et al (1995) for Asian 
regions. Cress et al (1994), Machenauer et al. (1994), 
Jones et al (1995), Marinucci et al (1995), Podzun et al 
(1995) and Luthi et al (1996) for Europe, McGregor and 
Walsh (1993, 1994) and Walsh and McGregor (1995) for 
Australia, and Semazzi et al (1994) for the Sahelian 
region. Fewer climate change experiments have been 
conducted to date. Equilibrium regional climate change 
scenarios due to doubled COj concentration were produced 
by Giorgi et al (1994) for the continental USA, McGregor 
and Walsh (1994) for Tasmania, Hirakuchi and Giorgi 
(1995) for Eastern Asia, and Jones et al (1996) for Europe. 
In the experiments mentioned above, the model 
horizontal grid point spacing varied in the range of 15 to 
125 km and the length of runs from one month to 10 years. 
In addition, different nesting techniques were used, from the 
standard lateral boundary relaxation procedure (e.g., Giorgi 
1990) to a newer spectral nesting procedure (Kida et al, 
1991) in which the G C M forces the low wavenumber 
component of the fields throughout the regional domain and 
the RegCM calculates the high wavenumber component. 
The main results of the validation and present day 
climate experiments with RegCMs can be summarised in 
the following points: 
(i) 
When driven by analyses of observations, RegCMs 
simulated realistic structure and evolution of synoptic 
events. Averaged over regions of the order of 10^ -
10^ km^ in size, temperature biases were mostly in 
the range of a few tenths of °C to a few °C and 
precipitation biases were mostly in the range of 
10%^0% of observed values. The biases generally 
increased as the size of the region decreased. 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
341 
(ii) 
The RegCM performance was critically affected by 
the quality of the driving large-scale fields, and 
tended to deteriorate when the models were driven by 
G C M output, mostly because of the poorer quality of 
the driving large-scale data compared to the analysis 
data (e.g., position and intensity of storm tracks). 
(iii) Compared to the driving GCMs, RegCMs generally 
produced more realistic regional detail of surface 
climate as forced by topography, large lake systems, 
or narrow land masses. Examples of the additional 
detailed produced by nested RegCMs in the 
simulation of precipitation spatial patterns is given in 
Figure 6.34a,b for the U S A at 60 km grid point 
spacing (Giorgi et al, 1994) and Figure 6.35a-c for 
Great Britain at 50 km grid point spacing (Jones et 
al, 1995). respectively. However, the validation 
experiments also showed that RegCMs can both 
improve and degrade aspects of regional climate 
compared to the driving G C M runs, especially when 
regionally-averaged (Table 6.5). 
(iv) 
Overall, the models performed better at mid-latitudes 
than in tropical regions. 
(v) 
The RegCM performance improved as the resolution 
of the driving G C M increased, mostly because the 
G C M simulation of large-scale circulation patterns 
improved with increasing resolution. 
(vi) 
Seasonal as well as diurnal temperature ranges were 
simulated reasonably well. 
(vii) An important problem in the validation of RegCMs 
has been the lack of adequately dense observational 
data, since RegCMs can capture the fine structure of 
climate patterns. This problem is especially relevant 
in mountainous areas, where often only a relatively 
small number of high elevation stations are available. 
As examples of results obtained from the application of 
nested RegCMs to climate change simulation. Table 6.5 
presents the average changes in temperature and 
Table 6.5: Change in surface air temperature over 4 regions, and precipitation over 5 regions, due to doubling of carbon 
dioxide concentration, and difference between control run and observed values (bias), as simulated with nested RegCM 
and driving GCM runs Pacific North-west (Gioirgi et al., 1994) - 60-km gridpoint spacing; Great Lakes (Giorgi et al, 
1994) - 60-km gridpoint spacing; Japan (Hirakuchi and Giorgi 1995) - 50-km gridpoint spacing; Europe (Jones et al, 
1996) - 50-km gridpoint spacing; Ta.^mania (McGregor and Walsh, 1994) - 60-km gridpoint .^pacing. 
The precipitation change is expressed as percentage of control value, the bias in percentage of obsen'ed value. 
TEMPERATURE (°C) 
Pacific North West 
Great Lakes 
Japan 
Europe 
winter 
summer 
winter 
summer 
winter 
summer 
winter 
summer 
RegCM 
Change 
4.7 
3.7 
5.6 
3.9 
6.5 
4.9 
4.6 
3.4 
Bias 
1.1 
-1.6 
6.2 
3.9 
-1.9 
-2.0 
-0.9 
-1.1 
G C M 
Change 
5.1 
3.8 
6.6 
4.0 
7.9 
5.4 
4.9 
3.9 
Bias 
1.6 
-1.5 
4.8 
3.8 
-3.0 
-2.5 
-1.7 
-0.9 
PRECIPITATION (%) 
Pacific North West 
Great Lakes 
Japan 
Europe 
Tasmania 
win 
sum 
win 
sum 
win 
sum 
win 
sum 
win 
sum 
RegCM 
Change 
25 
24 
5 
34 
37 
11.0 
16 
26 
22 
30 
Bias 
31 
21 
-55 
-31 
-9 
-34.4 
17 
6 
26 
70 
G C M 
Change 
33 
4 
19 
20 
12 
-1.3 
17 
6 
14 
-21 
Bias 
82 
152 
14 
38 
34 
-7.1 
-8 
-10 
-49 
-18 
342 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
(b) 
RegCM precipitation mesoscale signal 
1 --г.+М^^фггЛь< 
J 
Figure 6.34 : Winter precipitation mesoscale signal over continental USA. (a) Observed and (b) Nested RegCM 3.5-year present day 
run. The mesoscale signal, which is a measure of the effect of sub-GCM grid scale forcings, is defined as the full field minus the large-
scale component of the field, which is obtained through a spatial averaging procedure (see Giorgi et al., 1994). Units are mm/day. 
Shading indicates negative values. From Giorgi et al., 1994. 
(a) Observed 
(b) Nested Reg CM 
(c) Driving GCM 
1 
2 3 4 5 
Figure 6.35: Average winter precipitation over Great Britain, (a) Observed; (b) Nested RegCM 10-year present day run and (c) driving 
G C M 10-year present day run. Units are mm/day. From Jones et al.^ 1995. 
precipitation induced by doubling carbon dioxide 
concentration over 5 regions as simulated by the nested 
RegCM and corresponding driving G C M equilibrium runs 
of Giorgi et al. (1994) (north-western U S A and Great 
Lakes), McGregor and Walsh (1994) (Tasmania), 
Hirakuchi and Giorgi (1995) (Japan), and Jones et al. 
(1996) (western Europe). Also shown are the temperature 
and precipitation biases for the control runs calculated with 
respect to climatological observations. Each region is 
characterised by complex topography and/or the presence 
of narrow land masses and large lake systems which were 
captured by the nested R e g C M grids (50- to 60-km 
resolution) but lost at the G C M resolutions (-300- to 500-
km). 
It should be stressed that, since the nested modelling 
technique is still in its development and evaluation stages, 
the experiments of Table 6.5 were not intended to provide 
actual climate change projections, but rather to study the 
Climate Models ~ Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
343 
(a) 
Nested Reg Ш 
Figure 6.36: Difference between 2 X CO^ and present day 
average winter precipitation over continental USA, (a) Nested 
RegCIVl and (b) driving G C M . Units are mm/day. Shading 
indicates negative values. From Giorgi et al, 1994. 
effects of high resolution, sub-GCM grid scale forcings as 
simulated by the nested RegCMs. In addition, the data of 
Table 6.5 cannot readily be compared with those of Figure 
6.32 because they refer to equilibrium simulations under 2 
X CO2 forcing and not to transient simulations. 
For temperature, the differences between RegCM- and 
GCM-simulated region-averaged change scenarios were in 
the range of 0.1 to 1.4 °C. The largest differences occurred 
in winter over the Great Lakes and Japan, because the lakes 
and Japanese land masses were more finely resolved by the 
RegCM than the G C M grids. For precipitation, the 
differences between RegCM and G C M region-averaged 
scenarios were more pronounced than for temperature, in 
some instances by one order of magnitude or even in sign. 
This was the result of the combined contributions of the 
different resolution of surface forcing and atmospheric 
circulations and, in some instances, the different behaviour 
of model parametrizations designed for the fine and coarse 
resolution models. 
Examples of the regional detail included in RegCM 
scenarios are given in Figures 6.36a, b and 6.37a, b, for the 
experiments of Giorgi et al. (1994) and Jones et al. (1996), 
respecdvely. In both cases (winter results), the large-scale 
patterns of precipitation change were similar in the nested 
and driving models, as they were mostly determined by 
changes in large-scale circulations simulated by the GCM, 
but the sub-regional detail of the scenarios in the G C M and 
RegCM simulations was often quite different, not only in 
magnitude but also in sign. For exatnple, in the USA 
RegCM experiment, the simulated precipitation increase 
was largest in a relatively narrow region over the western 
USA coastal areas, whereas in the G C M the areas of 
pronounced precipitation increase extended farther inland. 
This was due to the precipitation shadowing effect of the 
coastal ranges which were represented by the high 
resolution RegCM grid but were missed by the G C M grid. 
Because of mountain shadowing, areas of negative change 
were found east of the Rockies in the RegCM over regions 
in which the driving G C M produced a positive change. A 
similar rain shadowing effect in the Alpine and Pyrenees 
regions was found in the experiment of Jones et al. (1996) 
(Figure 6.37a, b). Topographical enhancement of the 
precipitation change signal along the Italian Peninsula, the 
British Isles and the Carpathian region also occurred. 
In summer, differences between RegCM and G C M 
results were generally more marked than in winter due to 
the greater importance of local processes (Giorgi et al., 
1994, Jones et al, 1996). For example, Hirakuchi and 
Giorgi (1995) found that the representation of the Japanese 
Islands in the RegCM substantially affected the simulation 
of summer precipitation change over the region. 
Comparison of the biases and 2 X COj-induced 
tetnperature and precipitation changes (Table 6.5) showed 
that while the simulated temperature changes were 
generally larger than the corresponding biases, the 
precipitation changes were generally of the same order of, 
or smaller than, the precipitation biases. 
Of relevance for the simulation of regional climate 
change is the development of a variable resolution global 
model recently reported by Deque and Piedelievre (1995). 
They compared three 10-year long runs of different 
resolutions: T42 (equivalent resolution of -300 km), T106 
(equivalent resolution of -120 km), and variable resolution 
configuration centred over Europe (equivalent resolution of 
about 50 km over Europe and 500 km at the antipodes), 
with SSTs specified from observations for 1979 to 1988. 
They demonstrated that the climate simulation over the 
European region improved as the model resolution 
increased, and that the variable resolution model produced 
better results than the T106 model over Europe. When 
cotnpared to long-term climatology, in the variable 
344 
Cimate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
-1 
-0.5 
О 
0.5 
1 
-1 
-0.5 
О 
0.5 
1 
Figure 6.37: Difference between 2 X COj and present day average winter precipitation over Europe (a) Nested RegCM and (b) driving 
G C M , Units are mm/day. From Jones et al, 1996. 
resolution experiment, seasonal temperature biases were 
less than a few degrees and precipitation biases were in the 
range of —45% to +20% of observations over different 
European sub-regions. When averaged over the entire 
European region, seasonal and annual precipitation biases 
were only a few per cent of observed values. 
Although computationally very demanding, the variable 
resolution modelling approach can be used to produce 
climate change scenarios in "time slice" mode, i.e., 
performing snap-shot integrations several years in length 
with SSTs provided at times of different COj levels by a 
coarse resolution G C M simulation of transient climate 
change . Time slice integrations are also under way at MPI 
and L M D with spectral resolutions of up to T106. 
6.6.3 Conclusions 
Analysis of surface air temperature and precipitation 
results from regional climate change experiments carried 
out with AOGCMs indicates that the biases in present day 
simulations of regional climate change and the inter-model 
variability in the simulated regional changes are still too 
large to yield a high level of confidence in simulated 
change scenarios. The limited number of experiments 
available with statistical downscaling techniques and 
nested regional models has shown that complex 
topographical features, large lake systems, and narrow land 
masses not resolved at the resolution of current GCMs 
significantly affect the simulated regional and local change 
scenarios, both for precipitation and (to a lesser extent) 
temperature. This adds a further degree of uncertainty in 
the use of GCM-produced scenarios for impact 
assessments. In addition, most climate change experiments 
have not accounted for human-induced landscape changes 
and only recently has the effect of aerosols been 
investigated (see Section 6.2). Both these factors can 
further affect projections of regional climate change. 
Compared to the global scale changes due to doubled 
CO2 concentration discussed in Section 6.2 of this report, 
the changes at the lO'* - 10^ km^ scale derived from 
transient A O G C M nins and nested model runs are greater. 
Considering all models, at the lO"* - lO'' km^ scale, 
temperature changes due to CO2 doubUng varied between 
+0.6°C and -H7°C and precipitation changes varied between 
-35% and + 50% of conü'ol run values, with a marked inter-
regional variability. Thus the inherent predictability of 
climate diminishes with reduction in geographical scale. 
The greatest model agreement in the simulated precipitation 
change scenarios was found over the South East Asia 
(—1% to -1-30%), Northern Europe (~—9% to +16%), 
Central North America (—7% to +5%) and East Asia 
(~+0.1 to +16%) regions in summer and Southern Europe 
(—2% to +29%), Northern Europe (~+5% to +25%) and 
East Asia (~+0.5% to +18%) in winter. For temperature, the 
greatest model agreement in simulated warming occurred 
over Australia in summer (~+1.65°C to +2.5°C when 
excluding one outiier) and the Sahel in winter (~+1.8°C to 
+3.15°C when excluding one outlier). Regardless of 
whether flux correction was used, the range of model 
sensitivities was less than the range of biases, which 
suggests that models produce regional sensitivities that are 
more similar to each other than their biases. 
The latest regional model experiments indicate that high 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
345 
resolution information, of the order of a few tens of 
kilometres or less, may be necessary to achieve high 
accuracy in regional and local change scenarios in areas of 
complex physiography. In the last few years, substantial 
progress has been achieved in the development of tools for 
enhancing G C M information. Statistical methods were 
extended from the monthly/seasonal to the daily time-scale 
and nested model experiments were extended to the multi-
year time-scale. Also, variable resolution and high 
resolution global models have become available for use in 
time-slice mode. While RegCMs allow climate sensitivity 
experiments to be run at a higher regional resolution, 
variable and high resolution global models can be used to 
study possible feedbacks of mesoscale forcings on the 
general circulation. 
Regional modelling techniques, however, rely critically 
on the G C M performance in simulating large-scale 
circulation patterns at the regional scale, because these are 
a primary input to both empirical and physically based 
regional models. Although the regional performance of 
coarse resolution GCMs is still somewhat poor, there are 
indications that features such as positioning of storm track 
and jet stream core are better simulated as the model 
resolution increases (e.g., Hurrell et al., 1993). The latest 
nested G C M / R e g C M and variable resolution model 
experiments, which employed relatively high resolution 
GCMs and were run for long simulation times (up to 10 
years) show an improved level of accuracy. Therefore, as a 
new generation of higher resolution G C M simulations 
become available, it is expected that the quality of 
simulations with regional and local downscaling models 
will also rapidly improve. In addition, the movement 
towards coupling regional atmospheric models with 
appropriately scaled ecological, hydrological, and 
mesoscale ocean models will not only improve the 
simulation of climatic sensitivity, but also provide 
assessments of the joint response of the land surface, 
atmosphere and/or coastal systems to altered forcings. 
6.7 Reducing Uncertainties, Future Model Capabilities 
and Improved Climate Change Estimates 
6.7.1 Recent Progress and Anticipated Climate Model 
Improvements 
6.7.1.1 Improvements in the modelling of clouds and 
associated radiative 
processes 
The single largest uncertainty in determining the climate 
sensitivity to either natural or anthropogenic changes are 
clouds and their effects on radiation and their role in the 
hydrological cycle. Although there are many important 
unresolved issues relating to the basic physics of cloud-
radiation interactions and their parametrization in climate 
models, even perfect parametrizations of radiation and 
cloud optical properties cannot produce realistic radiative 
fluxes and heating rates unless they are provided with a 
realistic distribution of cloudiness. At the present time, 
weaknesses in the parametrization of cloud formation and 
dissipation are probably the main impediment to 
improvements in the simulation of cloud effects on climate. 
Efforts to overcome this problem have focused on the 
introduction of cloud microphysics into atmospheric GCMs 
(e.g., Sundqvist 1978; Le Treut and L i 1988; Smith, 1990; 
Ose 1993; Senior and Mitchell, 1993; Fowler et al, 1996). 
There are many difficulties. The basic microphysical 
processes themselves are imperfectly understood. In 
addition, the large spatial scale of G C M grid boxes means 
that microphysical processes occur primarily within sub-
grid regions, such as individual cloud cells, whose 
properties must be determined somehow. For example, 
according to some microphysics parametrizations, the 
conversion of small cloud droplets to raindrops occurs 
when the local small-drop concentration exceeds some 
threshold, but in a G C M the relevant local concentration is 
not known; only the generally much smaller grid-box-mean 
is available. 
The distinction between liquid and ice phases is also of 
great importance for the inclusion of the commonly 
observed feature of supercooled water, and hence 
coexistence of liquid and ice particles in clouds. The 
difference in saturation vapour pressure then makes the ice 
particles grow at the expense of the liquid ones (the 
Bergeron-Findeisen mechanism). This mechanism 
enhances not only the in situ rate of release of 
precipitation, but subsequently also that in layers beneath, 
due to an enhanced coalescence effect as well. 
Consequently, whether models consider the ice phase or 
not has a pronounced impact on the resulting water content 
throughout the cloud depth (Sundqvist, 1993), and hence 
on the optical quality of the cloud. 
Furthermore, the form (rain or snow) in which 
precipitation reaches the Earth's surface, is influenced by 
the ice and liquid microphysical processes that generate the 
precipitation. Hence, these processes affect the albedo of 
land areas. This may be an important factor in positioning 
and possibly moving the snow line (glacier borders). 
Consequently, there may be a delicate feedback from 
enhanced mid-latitude precipitation that is inferred to 
accompany a warming climate. 
The distribution of cloud parflcle sizes is important 
because it affects both microphysical processes (e.g.. 
346 
Climate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
precipitation and collection) and cloud optical properties, 
particularly in the solar part of the spectrum. In order to 
predict the particle size distribution, even crudely, it is 
necessary to have information about the availability of 
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). Recently there have 
been some attempts to predict the distribution of C C N in 
climate models (Ghan etal. 1993, 1995). 
Cloud-scale dynamical processes are also critically 
important to determine cloud formation and dissipation. 
The best-studied cloud dynamical processes are those 
associated with deep convection, for which there are 
several competing parametrizations. Recently there seems 
to be some convergence of these towards a "mass flux" 
formulation, although the relative merits of closures based 
on buoyancy and moisture convergence are still being 
actively debated (e.g., Tiedtke 1993). Convective clouds 
themselves have only modest impacts on radiation, but 
convective detrainment produces extensive stratiform 
clouds, including cirrus and anvils, which drastically affect 
the Earth's radiation budget (e.g., Randall 1989). 
There has also been considerable work on turbulence in 
stratiform clouds, particularly in the boundary layer (e.g., 
Lilly 1968; Bretherton, 1994), with some attempts to apply 
these ideas to parametrizations for climate models (e.g., 
Suarez ei a/., 1983). 
Cloud-scale dynamics are important not only for cloud 
formation and dissipation, but also for the geometrical 
shapes of the clouds, which matter for radiative transfer 
(e.g., Harshvardhan and Weinman 1982). 
In summary, we can anticipate improvements in the 
parametrization of cloud microphysics, including aerosol 
effects; cloud dynamics, particularly as it relates to the 
interactions of convective and stratiform clouds; and 
macroscopic cloud optical properties, particularly as they 
relate to sub-grid scale cloud morphology. However, these 
improvements will only slowly lead to a reduction in the 
range of climate sensitivity or need for flux adjustments. 
There is a great need for observations of cloud-scale 
dynamics and of the radiative properties of clouds, so that 
the parametrizations of the physical processes can improve. 
6.7.7.2 Improvements in the ocean component of climate 
models 
It is clear from this document that the term climate model 
has evolved from the mixed-layer ocean - atmosphere 
models of IPCC (1990) to fully coupled atmosphere-ocean 
models. In the future we should expect significant 
improvements in the oceanic component as the resolution 
increases, with increasing availability of computing 
resources, and as more and more sophisticated sub-grid 
scale parametrizations are developed and incorporated into 
these models. More rigorous validation of global models is 
becoming possible due to new sources of data such as 
W O C E 
hydrography, heat, salt and mass 
flux 
measurements over sills and through straits, tracer data, 
moored arrays, repeat sections and satellite-derived data 
such as sea level elevation. These new data sets and those 
which will be collected over the next few years will allow 
for better validation of both the mean cHmatic state of the 
ocean as well as the variability (e.g., ENSO, decadal 
variability) about this mean state. 
Most groups are currently planning to increase the 
resolution of their ocean models towards a I ° latitude-
longitude grid. This resolution is still not capable of 
resolving mesoscale eddies, but is able to better resolve 
straits, passages, land-sea contrasts and boundary currents 
which are known to be important in determining the 
oceans' role in climate (see Weaver and Hughes, 1992, for 
a review). Fully eddy-resolving climate models are still 
perhaps a decade or more away from being used to study 
climate change. Before they are ready, questions of spin-
up, initialisation and climate drift must also be addressed. 
Recent advances in sub-grid scale parametrizations of 
mixing associated with mesoscale eddies (Danabasoglu et 
ai, 1994; Gent et al, 1995), of convection (Send and 
Marshall, 1994), of topography-eddy stress interactions 
(HoUoway, 1992) and of flow over sills (Doscher et ai, 
1994) are making their way into ocean GCMs. Whether 
they survive the test of time or whether they are superseded 
by more realistic parametrizations is yet to be seen. In 
addition, alternative model formulations (e.g., isopycnal or 
sigma co-ordinates) and more sophisticated numerical 
techniques are becoming more frequently used in the ocean 
modelling community. The next few years should see 
significant advances in ocean modelling. 
The thermohaline circulation in the world oceans is an 
important feature which affects the coupled system. It 
transports large amounts of heat and water from the 
Southern Hemisphere to high latitudes of the North 
Atlantic Ocean. It also plays an important role in 
determining the vertical structure of the world oceans 
(Manabe and Stouffer, 1988) and it may respond to any 
climate change: many models show a weakening in the 
thermohaline circulation in response to increasing 
greenhouse gases (Section 6.2). It is very important that 
observational programs be developed to study this global 
circulation because lack of observations currently limits 
confidence in the simulation of its current and possible 
future structure. 
CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
347 
6.7.1.3 Flux adjustment and climate models 
As discussed in Section 5.2.2, whien an atmospheric model 
is coupled to an ocean model and the implied heat and salt 
transports between the two models are incompatible, a drift 
in the climate system must occur (e.g.. Weaver and 
Hughes, 1996). This drift adversely affects both the 
atmosphere and the ocean. The use of flux adjustments 
may stabilise this drift, but they have the undesirable effect 
of being physically unfounded and often of larger 
magnitude (in places) than the climatological mean fluxes 
(Manabe and Stouffer, 1988; Sausen et al.. 1988). As 
shown by ocean modelling studies (e.g.. Weaver et al., 
1993) , ocean models are capable of sustaining internal 
modes of oscillation under a specified freshwater flux 
boundary condition with thermal damping or a specified 
thermal flux (Greatbatch and Zhang, 1995). In coupled 
atmosphere-ocean simulations, any variability found when 
flux adjustments are used is difficult to interpret. 
It has recenfly been suggested (e.g., Gleckler et al., 
1994) that the discrepancies in the implied and observed 
ocean heat transports lies in the parametrization of clouds 
(especially marine stratocumulus) within the atmospheric 
component of the coupled models. As these and other 
parametrizations are improved (see Section 6.7.1.1) the 
need for flux adjustments should be reduced. 
6.7.1.4 Long-time integrations 
With the recent increase in computer power, centennial-
millennial climate integrations (like the ones in Manabe 
and Stouffer, 1993, Stouffer et al, 1994) will become 
routine. It will be possible to examine transient changes in 
climate variability associated with climate change. One of 
the greatest challenges of the next decade will be for 
coupled 
atmosphere-ocean 
models to duplicate 
(statistically) the records found in the Greenland, Antarctic 
and other ice cores. This would be done through the 
statistical interpretation of an ensemble of integrations 
under time-dependent Milankovitch cycle solar forcing. 
Such simulations of past climates may provide the best 
validation of coupled models used to predict future changes 
in climate. However, this effort will need improved 
reconstructions and understanding of past climate forcings 
(CO2 
aerosols, etc.) as well as inferred temperature 
changes. 
6.7.1.5 Sea ice model improvements 
Sea ice in global coupled models has typically been 
approximated as a motionless thermodynamic slab. In most 
cases, the thermodynamic calculations include a surface 
energy budget and heat conduction through the ice; 
however, details of parametrizations (for example, surface 
albedo as a function of temperature) vary substantially 
between models. Sea ice models need an improved 
understanding of leads and marginal ice zone processes. 
Sea ice albedo needs better treatment and greater attention 
should be given to the differences between processes in the 
two hemispheres. One-dimensional models are currentiy 
being used to investigate improvements in sea ice 
thermodynamics and atmosphere/ice energy exchanges 
(e.g., Ebert and Curry, 1993). 
Inclusion of sea ice dynamics -advection and 
deformation - is necessary to account for the fresh water 
provided by melting sea ice advected from the Arctic into 
the Greenland and Norwegian Seas, and to reproduce 
dynamic/thermodynamic feedback effects. For example, 
experiments with stand-alone sea ice models (e.g., Lemke 
et al., 1990; Hibler, 1984) have shown that thermodynamic-
only models are more sensitive to changes in thermal 
forcing than those which include dynamics. Similarly, 
recent G C M experiments by Pollard and Thompson (1994) 
showed that inclusion of sea ice dynamics produced more 
realistic ice extent and reduced a model's COj-induced 
warming, particularly around Antarctica. Including a more 
realistic dynamical formulation is the principal 
improvement anticipated or being made in the sea ice 
component of global climate models. Examples include the 
use of the Flato and Hibler (1992) ice dynamics scheme in 
models being developed at NCAR (Meehl and Washington, 
1995; Washington and Meehl, 1996), GFDL, U K M O and 
CCC, the use of Mellor and Kantha (1989) at MRI, and the 
use of the more sophisticated (e.g., Hibler, 1979) ice 
dynamics formulation in the E C H A M / O P Y C and CSIRO 
coupled models. However, as the treatment of sea ice 
dynamics becomes more realistic, shortcomings in other 
components of the coupled model, like wind and under-ice 
current fields which drive ice motion, become more 
important. Continued improvement is therefore an iterative 
process. 
6.7.1.6 Improvements in land-surface processes/modelling 
Many improvements in modelling land-surface (including 
glaciers and ice sheets) processes have yet to make their 
way into climate models (see Chapter 9 for a more 
comprehensive discussion). These improvements involve 
advances in both structure and function modelling. In 
structure modelling, changes in land type (e.g., forest to 
grass) are calculated in response to changes in climate. In 
function modelling, changes in the function of a particular 
land type (e.g., evapotranspiration/albedo) are predicted 
with changes 
in climate. Land-surface 
process 
348 
Climate Models - Projections of Future 
Climate 
schemes/models are. however, most often developed and 
validated on scales much smaller than the grid scale of a 
climate model and may need further modification in order 
to be successfully incoфorated. 
Most climate modelling groups are incoiporatiitg, or will 
soon do so, more sophisticated land-suiface representations 
into their GCMs in order to include processes which have 
the potential to influence climate sensitivity. The ultimate 
aim of this work is to quantify the feedbacks associated with 
changes in vegetation structure and function. Two recent 
intercomparisons have highlighted the current uncertainty in 
simulating évapotranspiration over land (PILPS -
Henderson-Sellers et al., 1995b; AMIP - Robock et al.. 
1995). This uncertainty highlights the need for better 
observations and parametrizations of land-suiface processes. 
Land-surface schemes used in GCMs are concerned with 
modelling the fluxes of heat, water and momentum from a 
given land cover type. There have been relatively few 
attempts at modelling changes in vegetation type, even 
though such changes may produce significant climatic 
feedbacks (e.g., Henderson-Sellers and McGuffie, 1995). 
Recent work at the Hadley Centre has attempted to include 
these feedbacks by coupling a vegetation model to the 
Hadley Centre G C M . The vegetation model predicts 
vegetation properties (such as leaf area index, height and 
canopy conductance) based on climate, soil carbon and 
nitrogen contents, and the atmospheric CO^ concentration. 
The coupling to the G C M is two-way, with the G C M 
providing climatic data to the vegetation model and the 
vegetation model predicting the vegetation properties from 
which the G C M land-surface parameters can be derived. 
Such an approach allows mutually consistent climate-
vegetation equilibria to be computed and the vegetation 
feedbacks to be diagnosed. There remains the outstanding 
problem of modelling the dynamics of vegetation change, 
which is very dependent on littie-known rates of natural 
and anthropogenic disturbances (e.g., fires, wind-blows, 
etc.). 
An important land/surface process which may influence 
climate is changes in the areas presently covered by 
permafrost. Large amounts of greenhouse gases are 
currently trapped in permafrost so that any thawing will 
release these gases into the atmosphere, enhancing the 
greenhouse effect. This process has yet to be incorporated 
into a coupled climate model. 
6.7.L7 improvements in radiation 
computation 
A basic element of GCMs is the radiation scheme used to 
compute the short-wave and long-wave fluxes in the 
model. Ma et al. (1994) have shown that by replacing an 
older radiation scheme with an improved, more accurate 
scheme, the simulation of their coupled model greatly 
improved. Betts et al. (1993) compared the short-wave 
calculations of the E C M W F model with the observed 
fluxes obtained over Kansas during the First ISLCP Field 
Experiment (FIFE) from the summer and fall of 1987 for 
clear-sky conditions. They showed that the model 
systematically overestimated the incoming solar flux by 
5-10% at the Earth's surface. The Japan Meteorological 
Agency also found a similar error in their model. They 
ascribe part of this error to neglect of absorption in the 
short-wave by either water vapour or aerosols. The 
improvement of the radiation schemes used in these models 
will continue, especially by the inclusion of vertical 
concentration profiles of trace substances like tropospheric 
aerosols and tropospheric ozone. In this regard, the 
comparison of the fluxes computed by the schemes to so-
called line-by-line calculations will continue to be very 
useful. 
6.7.2 Global Carbon Cycle Models as Part of Climate 
Models 
The response of the carbon cycle to climate change is 
strongly conditional on other elements of the system, and 
its inclusion in comprehensive climate models is just 
beginning (see Chapters 9 and 10). Thus far the focus has 
remained on the response of various carbon reservoirs to 
increasing atmospheric COj in a constant climate regime. 
In the ocean, attempts have been made to model the 
response of the carbon cycle to changes in atmospheric 
COj (e.g.. Sarmiento et al., 1992). These are very difficult 
to verify directly since the observed anomaly in stored 
carbon in the ocean is very small. The models are 
calibrated for observed uptake of carbon-14 from nuclear 
testing. Alternatively one can model the natural carbon 
cycle and'perturb it with anomalous inputs. One such 
model is described by Maier-Reimer (1993). Such models 
require inclusion of a great many more processes such as 
biological carbon fixation and remineralisation and 
sedimentary interaction but also provide many more fields 
amenable to observational verification. Currently, these 
models also use highly simplified representations of 
biological processes, often based on forcing nutrient 
distributions at the surface to fit observations and 
empirically determined ratios of elements in tissue. 
Sensitivity studies such as those of Sarmiento and Orr 
(1991) suggest that changes in biological productivity may 
have a significant effect on carbon sequestration in the 
ocean. 
In the case of ten-estrial response the case is a perhaps 
CUmate Models ~ Projections of Future 
Climate 
349 
easier to model. Here there is no underlying ocean 
circulation which is not well observed. Attempts to 
generalise the physiological and ecological knowledge 
gained on individual and regional scales to the global 
domain are in their early stages. Perhaps the most complete 
attempt so far in a global study is that of Melillo et al. 
(1993). 
As already mentioned, progress in global carbon cycle 
modelling is strongly dependent on progress in other areas 
of global modelling. Ocean carbon cycle models depend on 
the flow field of the underlying ocean general circulation 
model (OGCM) to describe entrainment of chemical 
species such as carbon into the thermocline. Terrestrial 
ecosystem models require specification of heat, moisture 
and radiative fluxes at the Earth's surface. There are, of 
course, areas beyond physical modelling which need 
improvement. In the oceans these include better 
experimental constraint of gas exchange coefficients in 
actual conditions, understanding of processes controlling 
isotopic fractionation, the partition of biological production 
between dissolved and particulate forms and the above 
mentioned treatment of biology. 
Improvement in models which synthesise so many 
components awaits improvements in the process models 
but other developments can be expected in the more 
immediate term. For the oceans this means particularly 
coupling carbon cycle models to models of transient 
climate change to assess how circulation changes may 
affect carbon storage. For the terrestrial models , the most 
immediate improvements are likely to arise from more 
mechanistic representations of the interactions among 
carbon, water and nutrient fluxes and the extent to which 
these are modified by external factors including nitrogen 
deposition (Chapter 9). 
Many groups are in the process of developing, or have 
recently developed, carbon cycle models which are to be 
used in conjunction with their A O G C M simulations. Since 
the gradients of carbon in the atmosphere are not strong, 
most models in the first instance will represent CO^ as a 
function of time only, changes in global mean C O , 
concentration being the calculated result of modelled 
land/air and ocean/air interactions. 
The importance of the "biological pump" is still not 
clear. It is clear that without marine plant and animal life 
the distribution of carbon in the oceans would be 
completely different from that of today. What is less clear 
is whether or not the biological pump, on the time-scales of 
interest here, would have any significant interaction with 
increasing atmospheric C O , (e.g., Broecker, 1991). For 
example, a dramaric change in marine biology would be 
needed to create a change of more than 10 ppm in the 
atmosphere (e.g., Heinze et ai, 1991). Studies planned by 
several groups are designed to show whether the marine 
biological feedback is large enough to warrant its inclusion 
on-line in climate change integrations. 
6.7.3 Climate Models Including Tropospheric Chemistry 
The first A O G C M integrations to include, albeit very 
crudely, the effects of tropospheric aerosols were 
completed recenfly (Secrion 6.2.3). Only the so-called 
direct radiative effects of the aerosols were included in a 
simplistic way. This represents a first attempt to include 
some effects of tropospheric chemistry in an AOGCM. To 
date, no A O G C M experiments have studied the effects on 
climate of changes in tropospheric chemistry, although 
many institutions are planning such experiments in the near 
future. The main problem is how to include large, complex 
tropospheric chemistry models in already very large and 
complex atmosphere-ocean models. Also, there is a great 
deal of uncertainty in the esrimarion of future gas and 
aerosol concentrarions . Most short term efforts will be 
dedicated to the inclusion of sulphates, dust and ozone into 
AOGCMs. With regard to dust and sulphates it is important 
to predict not only their distribution but also their size. For 
ozone, it is important to predict not only the horizontal 
distribution but, more importantly, the vertical distribution 
(Ramaswamy et ai, 1992). 
Other atmospheric trace gases (e.g.. CFCs, CH^,, NjO) 
could be treated, as a first step, in a manner similar to 
carbon dioxide. The inclusion of methane and ozone in 
complex climate models will be a major challenge and will 
involve the coupling of GCMs to interacrive tropospheric 
chemistry models. 
References 
Bardossy, A. and E.J. Plate, 1992: Space-time models for daily 
rainfall using atmospheric circulation patterns. Water Resource. 
Res.2», 1247-1259. 
Barros, A. and D.P. Lettenmaier, 1993: Dynamic modeling of the 
spatial distribution of precipitation in remote mountainous 
areas. Mon. Wea. Rev., 121, 1195-1214. 
Bates, G.T. and G . A . Meehl, 1986: The effect of C O j 
concentration on the frequency of blocking in a general 
circulation model coupled to a simple mixed layer ocean 
model. Mon. Wea. Rev., 114, 687-701. 
Bates, G.T., S.W. Hostetler and F. Giorgi, 1995: Two-year 
simulation of the Great Lakes region with a coupled modeling 
system. Mon. Wea. Rev., 123, 1505-1522. 
Beersma, J.J., 1994: Storm activity over the North Sea and the 
350 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
Netherlands 
in two climate models compared with 
observations. KNMI, WR 94-02. 
Bengtsson, L., M . Botzet and M . Esch, 1994: Hurricane-type 
vortices in a general circulation model. Part II. MPIM-Report 
no. 139. 
Bengtsson, L., M . Botzet and M . Esch, 1995: Hurricane-type 
vortices in a general circulation model, Tellus, 47A, 175-196. 
Betts, A.K., J.H. Ball and A . C . M . Beljaars, 1993: Comparison 
between the land surface response of the E C M W F model and 
the FIFE- 1987 data. Quart. J. R. Mel Soc., 119, 975-1001. 
Bhaskaran, В., J.F.B. Mitchell, J. Lavery and M . Lai, 1995: 
Climatic response of Indian subcontinent to doubled C O j 
concentration. Intl. J. ClimatoL, 15, 873-892. 
Bretherton, C.S., 1994: A turbulence closure model of marine 
stratocumulus clouds. Part I: The diurnal cycle of marine 
stratocumulus during FIRE 1987. Submitted to /. Atmos. Sci. 
Bretherton, F.P., K . Bryan and J.D. Woods, 1990: Time-
dependent greenhouse-gas induced climate change. In; Climate 
Change. The IPCC Scientific Asses.ment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. 
Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, pp. 173-193. 
Broecker, W.S., 1991: Keeping global change honest. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 5, 191-193. 
Campbell, G, T.G.F. Kittel, G.A. Meehl and W.M. Washington, 
1995: Low-frequency variability and C O j transient climate 
change. Part 2. EOF analysis. Global Planet. Change, 10. 
201-216. 
Cao, H-X, J.F.B. Mitchell and J.R. Lavery, 1992: Simulated 
diurnal range and variability of surface temperature in a global 
climate model for present and doubled СОт climates. 
ХС/гтаге, 5,920-943. 
Carnell, R.E., C.A. Senior, J.F.B. Mitchell, 1996: An assessment 
of measures of storminess: Simulated changes in Northern 
Hemisphere winter due to increasing C O j . Clim. 
Dyn.. 
(Accepted) 
Chakraborty, B. and M . Lai, 1994: Monsoon chmate and its 
change in a doubled COj atmosphere as simulated by CSIR09 
model. Terr Atmos. and Oceanic Sci., 5(4), 515-536. 
Chakraborty, B, P.H. Whetton, A.B. Pittock and M . Lai, 1995a: 
Assessment of future climatic change over the Indian 
subcontinent as projected by General Circulation Model 
experiments: Part I - Comparing control climates with 
observations. J. Climate (submitted). 
Chakraborty, B. P.H. Whetton, A.B. Pittock, and M . Lai, 1995b: 
Assessment of future climatic change over the Indian 
subcontinent as projected by General Circulation Model 
experiments: Part II - The greenhouse gas-induced scenarios. J. 
Climate, submitted. 
Charlson, R.J., J. Langner, H . Rodhe, C.B. Leovy and S.G. 
Warren, 1991: Perturbation of the Northern Hemisphere 
radiative balance by backscattering from anthropogenic sulfate 
aerosols. Tellus, 43B, 152-163. 
Chen, S.-C, J. Roads, H.H.-M. Juang and M . Kanamitsu, 1994: 
California precipitation simulation in the N M C nested spectral 
model: 1993 January event. Symposium to Share Weather 
Pattern Knowledge, Rocklin, CA, 25 June. 
Colman, R.A., S.B. Power, B.J. MacAvaney and R.R. Dahni, 
1995: A non-flux-corrected transient COj experiment using the 
B M R C coupled atmosphere/ocean G C M . Geophys. Res. Lett., 
22, 3047-3050. 
Copeland, J.H., T. Chase, J. Baron, T.G.F. Kittel and R.A. 
Pielke, 1994: Impacts of vegetation change on regional climate 
and downscaling of G C M output to the regional scale. In: 
Regional Impacts of Global Climate Change: 
Assessing 
Change and Response at the Scales that Matter. Proceedings of 
the 32rd Hanford Symposium on Health and the Environment, 
Oct 18-21, 1993, Richland, WA. 
Copeland, J.H., R.A. Pielke and T.G.F. Kittel, 1995: Potential 
climatic impacts of vegetation change: A regional modeling 
study. / Geophys. Res., In press. 
Cress, A., H.C. Davies, C. Frei, D. Luthi and C. Schar, 1994: 
Regional cUmate simulations in the Alpine region. LAPETH-32, 
Atmospheric Sciences ETH, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland, 134 pp. 
Cubasch, U., K. Hasselmann, H. Hock, E. Maier Reimer, U. 
Mikolajewicz, B . D . Santer and R. Sausen, 1992: Time-
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 8, 55-69. 
Cubasch, U . , G. Meehl and Z.C. Zhao, 1994a: IPCC W G 1 
Initiative on Evaluation of Regional Climate Change, Summary 
Report, 12 pp. 
Cubasch, U., B.D. Santer, A. Hellach, G. Hegeri, H. Hock, E. 
Maier-Reimer, U . Mikolajewicz and A. Stossl, 1994b; Monte 
Carlo climate change forecasts with a global coupled ocean-
atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 10,1-20. 
Cubasch, U., G. Hegeri, A. Hellbach, H. Hock, U . Mikolajewicz, 
B.D. Santer and R. Voss, 1995a: A climate simulation starting 
in 1935. Clim. Dyn., 11,. 71-84. 
Cubasch, U . , J. Waszkewitz, G. Hegeri and J. Periwitz, 1995b: 
Regional climate changes as simulated in time-slice 
experiments. MPI Report 153. Clim. Change, 31, 273-304. 
Danabasoglu, G., J.C. McWilliams and P.R. Gent, 1994: The 
role of mesoscale tracer transports in the global ocean 
circulation. Science, 264, 1123-1126. 
Deque, M . and J.Ph. Piedelievre, 1995: High resolution climate 
simulation over Europe. Clim. Dyn., 11, 321-340. 
Dignon J. and S. Hameed, 1989: Global emissions of nitrogen 
and sulphur oxides from 1860 to 1980. JAPCA {.tournai of the 
Air and Waste Management Association), 39. 180-186. 
Doscher, R., C.W. Boning and P. Herrmann, 1994: Response of 
circulation and heat transport in the North Atlantic to changes 
in thermohaline forcing in northern latitudes. J. Phys. 
Oceanogr., 24, in press. 
Drijfhout, S.S., C. Heinze, M , Latif and E, Maier-Reimer, 1996: 
Mean circulation and internal variability in an ocean primitive 
equation model, MPI report No, 177; J. Phys. Oceanogr., (in 
press), 
Ebert, E . E , and J,A, Curry, 1993: A n intermediate one-
dimensional thermodynamic sea ice model for investigating 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
351 
ice-atmosphere 
interactions. 
J. Geophys. 
Res., 
98, 
10085-10109. 
England, M.H., 1995: Using chlorofluorocarbons to assess ocean 
climate models. Geophys. Res. Lett, 22, 3051-3054. 
Enting, I.G., T.M.L. Wigley, and M . Heimann, 1994: Future 
Emissions and Concentrations of Carbon Dioxide: Key 
Ocean/Atmosphere/Land Analyses, CSIRO Division 
of 
Atmospheric Physics Technical Paper No. 31, 120 pp. 
Fichefet, T. and C. Tricot, 1992: Influence of the starting date of 
model integration on projections of greenhouse gas induced 
climate change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 19. 1771-1774. 
Flato, G.M. and W.D. Hibler HI. 1992: Modeling paclc ice as a 
cavitating fluid. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 22, 626-651. 
Fowler, A . M . and K.J. Hennessey, 1995: Potential impacts of 
global warming on the frequency and magnitude of heavy 
precipitation. Natural Hazards, 11, 283-303. 
Fowler, L.D., D.A. Randall and S.A. Rutiedge, 1996: Liquid and 
ice cloud microphysics in the CSU General Circulation Model. 
Part 1: model description and simulated microphysical 
processes. J. Climate, in press. 
Gates, W.L., J.F.B. Mitchell, G.J. Boer, U . Cusbach and V.P. 
Meleshko, 1992: Climate modelling, climate prediction and 
model 
validation. In: 
Climate 
Change 
1992. 
The 
Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 97-134. 
Gates, W.L.', y . Cusbach, G . A . Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell and 
R.J. Stouffer, 1993: An intercomparison of selected features 
of the control climates simulated by coupled ocean-
atmosphere general circulation models. WMO/TD No 574 
(Geneva). 
Gent, P.R., J. Willebrand, T.J. McDougall and J.C. McWilliams, 
1995: Parameterizing eddy-induced tracer transports in ocean 
circulation models. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 25, 463-474. 
Ghan, S.J., C . C . Chuang and J.E. Penner, 
1993: A 
parameterization of cloud droplet nucleation. Part I: Single 
aerosol type. Atmos. Res., 30(4), 197-221. 
Ghan, S.J., C.C. Chuang, R.C. Easter and J.E. Penner,1995: A 
parameterization of cloud droplet nucleation. Part II: Multiple 
aerosol types. Atmos. Res., 36(1-2),39-54. 
Giorgi, F., 1990: On the simulation of regional climate using a 
limited area model nested in a general circulation model. J. 
Climate, 3, 941-963. 
Giorgi, F., 1995: Perspectives for regional Earth System 
modeling. Globed and Planetary Change, 10, 23-42. 
Giorgi, F., G.T. Bates and S. Nieman. 1993: The multi-year 
surface climatology of a regional atmospheric model over the 
Western United States. /. Climate, 6, 75-95. 
Giorgi, F., M.R. Matinucci and G. Visconti, 1992: A 2 X CO, 
climate change scenario over Europe generated using a Limited 
Area Model nested in a General Circulation Model. II: Climate 
change scenario. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 10011-10028. 
Giorgi, F., C. Shields Brodeur and G.T. Bates, 1994: Regional 
climate change scenarios over the United States produced with 
a nested regional climate model: Spatial and seasonal 
characteristics. J. Climate, 1. 375-399. 
Gleckler, P.J., D.A. Randall, G. Boer, R. Colman, M . Dix, V . 
Galin, M . Helfand, J. Kiehl, W. Lau, X-.Z. Liang, V. Lykossov, 
B. McAvaney, K. Miyakoda and S. Planton, 1994: Cloud-
radiative effects on implied oceanic energy transports as 
simulated by atmospheric general circulation models. PCMDI 
Tech. Rep. No. IS, Univ. Cal, L L N L , Livermore, CA. 
Gordon, H.B. and B.G. Hunt, 1994: Climatic variability within 
an equilibrium greenhouse simulation. Clim. Dyn., 9, 195-212. 
Gordon, H.B. and S.P. O'FaiTell, 1996: Transient cUmate change 
in the CSIRO coupled model with dynamical sea-ice. Mon 
Wea. Rev. (in press) 
Gordon, H.B., P.H. Whetton, A.B. Pittock, A . M . Fowler and 
M.R. Haylock, 1992: Simulated changes in daily rainfall 
intensity due to the enhanced greenhouse effect: implications 
for extreme rainfall events. Clim. Dyn., 8, 83-102. 
Goyette, S. and R. Laprise, 1995: Numerical investigation with a 
physically based regional climate interpolator: FIZR.7. 
Climate. (Submitted). 
Gray, W.M., 1979: Hurricanes: their formation, structure and 
likely role in the tropical circulation. In: Meteorology over the 
Tropical Oceans., Shaw O.B. (ed). Royal Meteorological 
Society, London, pp 155-218. 
Greatbatch, R.J. and S. Zhang, 1995: An interdecadal oscillation 
in an idealized ocean basin forced by constant heat flux. 
J.Climate, 8,81-91. 
Gregory, J.M. and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1995: Simulation of daily 
variabiUty of surface temperature and precipitation over Europe 
in the current and 2 X COj climates using the U K M O climate 
model. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc. 121, 1451-1476. 
Gyalistras, D, H. Von Storch, A. Fischlin and M . Beniston, 1994: 
Linking GCM-simulated climatic changes to ecosystem 
models: Case studies of statistical downscaling in the Alps. 
Clim.Res.. 4, 167-189. 
Haarsma, R.J., J.F.B. Mitchell and C.A. Senior, 1993: Tropical 
disturbances in a G C M . Clim. Dyn., 8 (5), 247-257). 
Hall, N.M.J., B.J. Hoskins, P.J. Valdes and C.A. Senior, 1994: 
Storm tracks in a high resolution G C M with doubled COj. 
Quart.J. R. Met Soc, 120, 1209-1230. 
Hansen, I.E., D. Johnson, A. Lacis, S. Lebedeff, P. Lee, D. Rind 
and G. Russell 1981: Climate impact of increasing atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Science, 213, 957-966. 
Hansen, J., A. Lacis, R. Ruedy, M . Sato and H. Wilson, 1993: 
How sensitive is the world's climate? National 
Geographic 
Research and Exploration, 9, 142-158. 
Hansen, J.E., M . Sato and R. Ruedy, 1995 : Long term changes 
of the diurnal temperature cycle: implications about 
mechanisms of global cUmate change. Atmospheric Research, 
37, 175-209. 
Harshvardhan and J.A. Weinman, 1982: Infrared radiative 
transfer through a regular array of cuboidal clouds. /. Atmos. 
Sci., 39,431-439. 
Hasselmann, K, R. Sausen, E. Maier-Reimer and R. Voss, 1993: 
352 
Climate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
On the cold stait problem in transient simulations with coupled 
ocean-atmosphere models. Clim. Dyn.. 9, 53-61. 
Hasselmann K., L. Bengtsson, U . Cubasch, G.C. Hegeri, H . 
Rodhe, E. Roecltner, H . von Storch. R. Voss and J. 
Waszkewitz, 1995: Detection of anthropogenic climate change 
using a fingerprint method. In: Proceedings 
of 
"Modern 
Dynamical Meteorology", Sympo.úum in honor of Aksel Wiin-
Nielsen, 1995, P. Ditlevsen (ed.), E C M W F press, 1995. 
Heinze. C , E. Maier-Reimer and K. Winn, 1991: Glacial pCO^ 
reduction by the world ocean: experiments with the Hamburg 
carbon cycle model. Paleoceanogr., 6, 395-430. 
Henderson-Sellers, A, and K. McGuffie, 1995: Global chmate 
models and dynamic vegetation changes. Global and Change 
Biology, 1. 63-76. 
Henderson-Sellers A., J. Hoekstra, Z. Kothavala, N . Holbrook, 
A . - M . Hansen, O. Balachova and K . McGuffie, 1995a: 
Assessing simulations of daily variability by Global Climate 
Models for present and greenhouse climates. Clim. Change 
(submitted). 
Henderson-Sellers A., A.J. Pitman, P.K. Love, P. Irannejad and 
T. Chen, 1995b: The project for intercomparison of land 
surface parameterization schemes (PILPS): Phases 2 and 3. 
BuL Am. Met. Soc, 76. 489-503. 
Hennessey, K.J. and A.B. Pittock, 1995: Greenhouse warming 
and threshold temperature events in Victoria, Australia. Int. J. 
ClimatoL. IS, 591-612. 
Hewitson, B. and R.G. Crane, 1992a: Regional-scale climate 
prediction 
from 
the 
GISS 
G C M . 
Paleogeography, 
Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology, 97, 249-267. 
Hewitson, B. and R.G. Crane, 1992b: Large-scale atinospheric 
controls on local precipitation in tropical Mexico. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 19. 1835-1838. 
Hibler, W.D. III. 1979: A dynamic thermodynamic sea ice 
model. /. Phys. Oceanogr, 9, 815-846. 
Hibler, W.D. III. 1984: The role of sea ice dynamics in modeling 
C O T increases. In: Climate Processes and Climate Sensitivity, 
Geophys. Mon. 29, A G U , 238-253. 
Hirakuchi, H. and F. Giorgi, 1995: Multi-year present day and 2 
X CO2 simulations of monsoon climate over eastern Asia and 
Japan with a regional climate model nested in a general 
circulation model. /. Geophys. Res., 100, 2] 105-21126. 
Hoffert, M.I., A.J. Callegari and C.-T. Hsieh, 1980: The role of 
deep sea heat storage in the secular response to climate forcing. 
/ Geophys. Res., 85, 6667-6679. 
Holland, G.J., 1995: The maximum potential intensity of tropical 
cyclones. J. Atmos. ScL (submitted.) 
Holloway, G., 1992: Representing topographic stress for large-
scale ocean models. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 22. 1033-1046. 
Horton, B.H., 1995: The geographical distribution of changes in 
maximum and minimum temperatures. Atmos. Res., 37, 
101-117. 
Hosteller, S.W., G.T. Bates and F. Giorgi, 1993: Interactive 
coupling of a lake thermal model with a regional climate 
model. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 5045-5057. 
Hosteller, S.W., F. Giorgi, G.T. Bates and P.J. Bartiein, 1994: 
Lake-Atmosphere feedbacks associated with paleolakes 
Bonneville and Lahontan. Science, 263, 665-668. 
Hughes, J.P. and P. Guttorp, 1994: A class of stochastic models 
for relating synoptic atmospheric patterns to regional 
hydrologie phenomena. Water Resour. Res., 30, 1535-1546. 
Hulme, M . , K.R. Briffa, P.D, Jones and C.A. Senior, 1993: 
Validation of G C M control simulations using indices of daily 
airflow types over the British Isles. Clim. Dyn., 9, 95-105. 
Hurrell, Í.W., J.J. Hack and D.P. Baumhefner, 1993: Comparison 
of N C A R Community Climate Model ( C C M ) Climates. 
Technical Note NCAR/TN-395+STR, NCAR, Boulder Colorado. 
Ingram, W.J., C.A. Wilson and J.F.B. Mitchell 1989: Modelling 
climate change: an assessment of sea-ice and surface albedo 
feedbacks. J Geophys. Res., 94, 8609-8622. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Climate 
Change: 
The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J, Jenkins and J,J, Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp, 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J,T, Houghton, B , A , 
Callander and S,K, Varney (eds,), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 198 pp, 
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of 
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC 1S92 Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L,G, Meira Filho, J, Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B,A, Callander, E, Haites, N. Harris and K, Maskell (eds,), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 339 pp, 
Johns, T,C„ R,E, Carnell, J.F, Crossley, J,M. Gregory, J,F,B, 
Mitchell, C A , Senior, S,F,B, Tett and R,A, Wood, 1996; The 
second Hadley Centre coupled ocean-atmosphere G C M : Model 
description, spinup and vahdation. (Submitted to Clim. Dyn.). 
Jones, R.G., J.M. Murphy and M . Noguer, 1995: Simulation of 
climate change over Europe using a nested regional climate 
model. Part I. Assessment of control climate, including 
sensitivity to location of lateral boundaries. Quart. J. R. Met. 
Soc 121, 1413-1449, 
Jones, R,G:, J,M, Murphy, M , Noguer and A,B, Keen, 1996: 
Simulation of climate change over Europe using a nested 
regional climate model. Part II, Comparison of driving and 
regional model responses to a doubling of carbon dioxide 
concentration, (Submitted to Quart. J. R. Met. Soc) 
Kanamitsu, M , and H , - M , H, Juang, 1994: Simulation and 
analysis of an Indian Monsoon by the N M C nested regional 
spectral model. Extended abstract. International Conference on 
Monsoon Variability and Prediction, International Centre for 
Theoretical Physics, Trieste, Italy, 9-13 May, 
Karl, T,R„ W,-C, Wang. M,E, Schlesinger and R,W, Knight, 
1990: A method of relating general circulation model simulated 
climate to the observed local climate. Part I: Seasonal 
Statistics, 7, Climate, 3, 1053-1079, 
Karoly, D,J„ J,A, Cohen, G,A, Meehl, J,F,B, Mitchell, A,H, Oort, 
R.J. Stouffer and R,T, Wetherald, 1994; An example of fmgeфrint 
detection of greenliouse climate change, Clim. Dyn., 10, 97-105, 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
353 
Karoly, D J . , D. Collins, G.A. Meehl and R.J. Stouffer, 1995: An 
example of fingerprint detection of greenhouse climate change. 
Clim. Dyn., 10, 97-105. 
Katz, R.W. and B.G. Brown, 1992: Extreme events in a changing 
climate: variability is more important than averages. Climatic 
Change, 21, 289-302. 
Keen A.В., 1995: Investigating the effects of initial conditions on 
the response of the Hadley Centre Coupled Model. Hadley 
Centre Internal Note no. 71. 
Kerning, C , J. Xiangze, L. Wuyin, Y . Yongquiang, G. Yufu and 
Z. Xuehong, 1994: Lecture in International Symposium on 
Global Change in Asia and the Pacific Region (GCAP). 8-10 
Aug, 1994, Beijing. 
Kida, H., T. Koide, H . Sasaki and M . Chiba, 1991: A new 
approach to coupling a limited area model with a G C M for 
regional climate simulation. /. Met. Soc. Japan, 69, 723-728. 
Kittel, T.G.F., N.A. Rosenbloom, Т.Н. Painter, D.E. Schimel and 
V E M A P modelling participants, 1995: The V E M A P integrated 
database for modeling United States ecosystem/vegetation 
sensitivity to climate change. 
Globed 
Ecology 
and 
Biogeography Letters (in press). 
Kittel, T.G.F., F. Giorgi and G . A . Meehl, 1996: Regional 
intercomparison of coupled atmosphere-ocean 
general 
circulation model climate experiments. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
submitted. 
Knutson, T.R. and S. Manabe, 1994: Impact of increased COj on 
simulated ENSO-like phenomena. Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 
2295-2298. 
Knutson, T.R. and S. Manabe, 1995: Time-mean response over 
the tropical Pacific to increased C 0 2 in a coupled ocean-
atmosphere model. J. Climate, 8 (9), 2181-2199. 
Konig, W., R. Sausen and F. Sielmann. 1993: Objective 
verification of cyclones in G C M simulations. /. Climate, 6, 
2217-2231. 
Lal, M., B. Bhaskaran and B. Chakraborty, 1994a: Intraseasonal 
variability of Indian monsoon rainfall in climate models. In: 
Research Activities in Atmospheric and Oceanic Modelling , 
G.J.Boer (ed.), C A S / J S C Working Group Numerical 
Experimentation, Report 19, February 1994, WMO/TD-No 
592, pp. 7.53 
Lal, M . , U . Cubasch and B.D. Santer, 1994b: Effect of global 
warming on Indian monsoon simulated with a coupled ocean-
atmosphere general circulation model. Current Science, 66, 
430-438. 
Lal, M . , U . Cubasch, R. Voss and J. Waszkewitz, 1995a: The 
effect of transient increase of greenhouse gases and sulphate 
aerosols on monsoon climate. Current Science. 69 (9), 752-763. 
Lal, M . , L. Bengtsson, U . Cubasch, M . Esch and U . Schlese, 
1995b: Synoptic scale disturbances of Indian summer monsoon 
as simulated in a high resolution climate model. Clim. Res., 5, 
243-258. 
Lal, M . , D. Jacob. R. Podzun and U . Cubasch, 1995c: Summer 
monsoon climatology simulated with a regional climate model 
nested in a general circulation model. In: 
International 
Workshop on limited-area and variable resolution models, 
Beijing, China., 23-27 October 1995 
Lambert, S.J. 1995: The effect of enhanced greenhouse warming 
on winter cyclone frequencies and strengths. /. Climate, 8, 
1447-1452. 
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, 1991: A global three-dimensional 
model of the tropospheric sulfur cycle. J. Atmos Chem., 13, 
225-263. 
Lau, N . - C , S.G.H. Philander and M.J. Nath, 1992: Simulation of 
ENSO-like phenomena with a low-resolution coupled G C M of 
the global ocean and atmosphere. /. Climate, 5, 284-307. 
Le Treut, H. and Z.-X. Li, 1988: Using Meteosat data to validate 
a prognostic cloud generation scheme. Atmos. Res., 21, 
273-292. 
Le Treut, H„ M . Forichon, O. Boucher and Z. X . L i . 1996: 
Aerosol and greenhouse gases forcing: Cloud feedbacks 
associated to the climate response. In: Physical Mechanisms 
and their Validation, H. Le Treut (ed.), NATO ASI Series Vol 
I. 34, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 267-280. 
Leggett, J.A., W.J. Pepper and R.J. Swart, 1992: Emissions 
scenarios for the IPCC: an update. In: Climate Change 1992. 
The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, B . A . Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 69-95. 
Lemke, P., W.B. Owens and W.D. Hibler III, 1990: A coupled 
sea-ice mixed-layer pycnocline model for the Weddell Sea. J. 
Geophys. Re.s., 95, 9513-9525. 
Leuenberger, M . and U. Siegenthaler, 1992: Ice-age atmospheric 
concentration of nitrous oxide from an Antarctic ice core. 
Nature, 360, 449-451. 
Leung, R.L. and S.J. Ghan, 1995: A sub-grid parameterization of 
orographic precipitation. Theor. Appl. Climatology, 52(1-2), 
95-118. 
Li, X., Z. Zongci, W. Shaowu and D. Yohui, 1994: Evaluation of 
regional climate change simulation: A case study. IPCC special 
workshop on Article 2 of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change. Fortaleza, Brazil, 17-21 
October 1994. 
Liang, X.-L., W.-C. Wang and M.P. Dudek, 1995: Interannual 
climate variability and its change due to the greenhouse effect. 
Global and Planet. Change, 10, 217-238. 
Lighthill, J., G. J. Holland, W.M. Gray, C. Landsea, K. Emanuel, 
G. Craig, J. Evans, Y. Kunihara and C P . Guard, 1994: Global 
chínate change and tropical cyclones. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 75, 
2147-2157. 
Lilly, D.K., 1968: Models of cloud-topped mixed layers under a 
strong inversion. Quart. J. R .Met Soc, 94, 292-309. 
Liu, Y.F., F. Giorgi and W.M. Washington, 1994: Simulation of 
summer monsoon climate over east Asia with an N C A R 
Regional Climate model. Mon. Wea. Rev., 122, 2331-2348. 
Lupo, A.R., R.J. Oglesby and I.I. Mokhov, 1995: Climatological 
features of blocking anticyclones: a study of Northern 
Hemisphere C C M l model blocking events in present-day and 
double CO2 concentration atmospheres. J. Climate, (In press). 
354 
Climate Models ~ Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
Luthi, D., A. Cress, H.C. Davies, C. Frei and C. Schar, 1996: 
Interannual variability and regional climate simulations. Theor. 
and Applied Clim., (In press) 
Lynch, A.H., W.L. Chapman, J.E. Walsh and G. Weller, 1995: 
Development of a regional climate model of the western Arctic. 
J. Climate, 8, 1555-1570. 
Мя, C . - C , C.R. Mechoso, A. Arakawa and J.D. Farrara, 1994: 
Sensitivity of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to physical 
parameterizations./. Climatel, 
1883-1896. 
Machenhauer, В., D. Jacob and M . Bozert, 1994: Using the 
MPI's nested limited area model for regional climate 
simulations. CAS/JSC WGNE Report No. 19, (WMO/TO-No. 
592), 758-760. 
IVIaier-Reimer, E., 1993: Geochemical cycles in an ocean general 
circulation model. Pre-industrial tracer distributions.G/ofca/ 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 645-677. 
Manabe, S. and A.J. Broccoli, 1990: Can existing climate models 
be used to study anthropogenic changes in tropical cyclone 
climate? Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 1917-1920. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1988. Two stable equilibria of a 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model. / Climate, 1, 841-866. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1993: Century-scale effects of 
increased atmospheric СОт on the ocean-atmosphere system. 
yVamre, 364, 215-218. 
Manabe. S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1994: Multiple century response of 
a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to an increase of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. /. Climate, 7, 5-23. 
Manabe, S. and R.T. Wetherald, 1975: The effects of doubling 
the COj concentration on the climate of a general circulation 
model. J. Atmos. Sci., 32, 3-15. 
Manabe, S., R J. Stouffer, M.J. Spelman and К Bryan, 1991: 
Transient responses of a coupled-ocean atmosphere model to 
gradual changes of atmospheric COj. Part I: Annual mean 
response. J. Climate, 4, 785-818. 
Manabe, S., M.J. Spelman and R.J. Stouffer, 1992: Transient 
responses of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to gradual 
changes of atmospheric COj. Part II: Seasonal response. /. 
Climate, 5, 105-126. 
Maochang, C , H. von Storch and E. Zorita, 1995: Coastal sea 
level and the large-scale climate state: A downscaling exercise 
for the Japanese Islands. Tellus, 47A, 132-144. 
Marinucci, M.R. and F. Giorgi, 1992: A 2 X COj climate change 
scenario over Europe generated using a Limited Area Model 
nested in a General Circulation Model. L.Present day 
simulation. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 9989-10009. 
Marinucci, M.R., F. Giorgi, M . Beniston, M . Wild, P. Tschuck, 
A . Ohmura and A . Bernasconi, 1995: High resolution 
simulations of January and July climate over the western 
Alpine region with a nested regional modeling system. Theor. 
Appl Climatology, 51, 119-138. 
Matyasovszky, I., I. Bogardi, A. Bardossy and L. Duckstein, 
1995: Local temperature estimation under climate change. 
Theor. Appl. Climatology, 50, 1-14. 
McFarlane, N.A., G J. Boer, J.-P. Blanchet and M . Lazare, 1992: 
The Canadian Climate Centre Second-Generation General 
Circulation Model and Its Equilibrium Climate. J. Climate, 5, 
1013-1044. 
McGregor, J.L. and K.J. Walsh, 1993: Nested simulations of 
perpetual January climate over the Australian region. J. 
Geophys. Res., 98, 23283-23290. 
McGregor, J.L. and K . J . Walsh, 1994: Climate change 
simulations of Tasmanian precipitation using muhiple nestings 
J. Geophys. Res., 99, DIO, 20889-20905. 
Mearns, L.O., 1993: ImpUcations of global warming for climate 
variability and the occurrence of extreme climate events. In: 
Drought Assessment Management and Planning: Theory and 
Case Studies., D.A. Wilhite, (ed.), Kluwer, Boston, pp. 109-130. 
Mearns, L.O., F. Giorgi, L. McDaniel and C. Shields, 1995a: 
Analysis of daily variability of precipitation in a nested 
regional climate model: Comparison with observations and 
doubled COj results. Global and Planetary Change, 10, 55-78. 
Mearns, L.O., F. Giorgi, L. McDaniel and C. Shields, 1995b: 
Analysis of variability and diumal range of daily temperature 
in a nested regional climate model: Comparison with 
observations and doubled CO^ results. Clim. Dyn.. 
11, 
193-209. 
Meehl, G.A., 1990: Seasonal cycle forcing of El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation in a global coupled ocean-atmosphere G C M . J. 
Climate, 3. 72-98. 
Meehl, G . A . and W . M . Washington, 1990: C O ^ climate 
sensitivity and snow-sea-ice albedo parametrization in an 
atmospheric G C M coupled to a mixed layer ocean, 
dim. 
Change, 16, 283-306. 
Meehl, G.A. and W.M. Washington, 1993: South Asian summer 
monsoon variability in a model with doubled atmospheric 
carbon dioxide concentration. Science, 260, 1101-1104. 
Meehl, G . A . and W . M . Washington, 1995: Cloud albedo 
feedback and the super greenhouse effect in a global coupled 
G C M . CZiwi. Dyn. IL 399^11. 
Meehl, G.A. and W.M. Washington, 1996: El Niûo-like Pacific 
region climate change in a model with elevated atmosphere 
CO, concehfrations. Nature, submitted. 
Meehl, G.A., G.W. Branstator and W . M , Washington, 1993a: 
Tropical Pacific interannual variability and C O j climate 
change. L Climate, 6, 42-63. 
Meehl, G.A., W . M . Washington and T.R. Karl, 1993b: Low-
frequency variability and COj transient cUmate change. Part 1 : 
Time-averaged differences. Clim. Dyn., 8, 117-133. 
Meehl, G.A,, M . Wheeler and W . M . Washington, 1994: Low-
frequency variability and COj transient climate change. Part 3. 
Intermonthly and interannual variability. Clim. Dyn., 10, 
277-303. 
Melillo, J.M., A.D. McGuire, D.W. Kicklighter, B. Moore III, 
C.J. Vorosmarty and A . L . Schloss, 1993: Global climate 
change and terrestrial net primary production. Nature, 363, 
234-240. 
Mellor, G.L. and L. Kantha, 1989: An ice-ocean coupled model. 
/. Geophys. Res., 94, 10937-10954. 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
355 
Miller, J.R. and G.L. Russell, 1995: Climate change and the 
Arctic hydrologie cycle as calculated by a global coupled 
atmosphere-ocean model. Ann. Glac, 21, 91-95. 
Miller, N . , 1994: A Homogeneity Grouping 
Technique for 
Geophysical Climate Models. Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory Report No. UCRL-JC-115996, 10 pp. 
Mitchell, J.F.B. and J.M. Gregory, 1992: Climatic consequences 
of emissions and a comparison of IS92a and SA90. In: Climate 
Change 
1992: The Supplementary 
Report to the IPCC 
Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. 
Varney (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U K , 
pp. 171-175. 
Mitchell, J.F.B. and T.J. Johns, 1996: Sensitivity of regional and 
seasonal climate to transient forcing by С О , and aerosols. 
(Submitted to / Climate) 
Mitchell, J.FB., S. Manabe, T. Tokioka and V. Meleshko, 1990: 
Equilibrium Climate Change. In: Climate Change. The IPCC 
Scientific Assessment , J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. 
Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
pp. 131-172. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., T.J. Johns, J.M. Gregory and S.B.F. Tett, 1995a: 
Climate response to increasing levels of greenhouse gases and 
sulphate aerosols. Nature, 376, 501-504. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram and C . A . Seitior, 
1995b: On surface temperature, greenhouse gases and aerosols: 
models and observations. J. Climate, 10, 2364-2386. 
Murphy, J.M., 1995a: Transient response of the Hadley Centre 
Coupled Model to increasing carbon dioxide. Part I Control 
climate and flux adjustment. J. Climate, 8, 36-56. 
Murphy, J.M., 1995b: Transient response of the Hadley Centre 
Coupled Model to increasing carbon dioxide. Part III Analysis 
of global -mean response using simple models. /. Climate, 8, 
496-514. 
Murphy, J.M. and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1995. Transient response of 
the Hadley Centre Coupled Model to increasing carbon 
dioxide. Part II. Temporal attd spatial evolution of patterns. /. 
Climate, 8, 57-80. 
Nakamura, 
M . , P . H . Stone and J. Marotzke, 
1994: 
Déstabilisation of the thermohaline circulation by atmospheric 
eddy transports. J. Climate, 12, 1870-1882. 
Noda, A. and T. Tokioka, 1989: The effect of doubling the COj 
concentration on convective and non-convective precipitation 
in a general circulation model coupled with a simple mixed 
layer ocean model. / Met. Soc. Japan, 67, 1057-1067. 
Noguer, M . , 1994: Using statistical techniques to deduce local 
climate distributions. An application for model validation. 
Meteorological Applications, 1, 
Т11-Ж1. 
Osborn, T.J. and T.M.L. Wigley, 1994: A simple model for 
estimating methane concentration and lifetime variations. Clim. 
Dyn., 9, 181-193. 
Ose, T., 1993: An examination of the effects of explicit cloud 
water in the U C L A G C M . J. Met. Soc. Japan, 71, 93-109. 
Parey, S., 1994a: Simulations de trente ans 1 X CO,, 2 X CO^, 3 
X CO2 avec le modele du L M D (64 X 50 X 11) premiers 
résultats. EDF, Direction des Etudes et Recherches, 
HE-
33/94/008. 
Parey, S., 1994b: Les événements de blockage anticyclonique sur 
l'hémisphère nord dans des simulations réalisées avec 
différentes concentrations en COj atmosphérique (1 X СО,, 2 
X COj, 3 X CO2). EDF, Direction des Etudes et Recherches, 
HE-33/94/017. 
Parker D.E., P.E Jones, C.K. Folland and A.J. Bevan, 1994: 
Interdecadal changes of surface temperature since the late 
nineteenth century. J. Geophys..Res., 99, 14373-14399. 
Pielke, R.A., W.R. Cotton, R.L. Walko, C.J. Tremback, W.A. 
Lyons, L.D. Grasso, M.E. Nicholls, M.D. Moran. A. Wesley, 
T.J. Lee and J.H. Copeland, 1992: A comprehensive 
meteorological modeling system - R A M S . Meteor. Atmos. 
Phys., 49, 69-91. 
Pleym, H. and T.R. Kari, 1996: Estimation of CO,-induced local 
climate change in Norway using the CPMS method. J. Climate 
(Submitted). 
Podzun, R, A . Cress, D. Majewski and V . Rennet. 1995; 
Simulation of European climate with a limited area model. Part 
II: A G C M boundary conditions. Submitted to Contributions to 
Atmos. Phys. 68(3), 205-226. 
Pollard, D. and S.L. Thompson, 1994: Sea-ice dynamics and COj 
sensitivity in a global climate model. Atmos.-Ocean, (in press). 
Power, S., R. Colman, В. McAvaney, R. Dahni, A. Moore and N. 
Smith, 1993: The B M R C coupled atmosphere/ocean/sea ice 
model. The BMRC Research Report No 37. 
Raisanen, J., 1995: A comparison of the results of seven G C M 
experiments in Northern Europe. Geophysica, 30 (1-2), 3-30. 
Ramaswamy, V., M . D . Schwarzkopf and K.P. Shine, 1992: 
Radiative forcing of climate from halocarbon-induced global 
stratospheric ozone loss. Nature. 355, 810-812. 
Randall, D . A . , 1989: Cloud parameterization for climate 
modeling: Status and prospects. Atmos. Res., 23, 341-361. 
Raper, S.C.B. and U . Cubasch, 1995: Emulation of the results 
from a coupled general circulation model using a simple 
climate model. Geophys. Res. ten. (submitted) 
Raper, S.C.B., T.M.L. Wigley and R.A. Warrick, 1996: Global 
sea level rise: Past and future. In: Rising Sea Level and 
Subsiding 
Coastal Areas, 
J.D. Milliman (ed.), Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands , 384 pp. 
Rind, D., R. Goldberg and R. Ruedy, 1989: Change in chmate 
variability in the 21st century. Clim. Change, 14, 537. 
Robitaille, D.Y. and A.J. Weaver, 1995: Validation of sub-grid 
scale mixing schemes using CFCs in a global ocean model. 
Geophys. Re.s. Lett., 22, 2917-2920. 
Robock, A . C , C.A. Schlosser, K.Ya. Vinnikov, S. Liu and N.A. 
Speranskaya, 1995: Validation of humidity, moisture fluxes 
and soil moisture in G C M s : report of A M I P Diagnostic 
Subproject 11; Part 1 - soil moisture. In Proc. First AMIP Sci. 
Conf, WCRP-92, WMO TD-No. 732, Geneva. 
Roeckner, E. and H. von Storch, 1980: On the efficiency of 
horizontal diffusion and numerical filtering in an Arakawa-type 
model. Atmosphere-Ocean, 18, 239-253. 
356 
Climate Models ~ Projections 
of Future 
CUmate 
Roeckner, E., T. Siebert and J. Feichter, 1995: Climatic response 
to anthropogenic sulfate forcing simulated with a genera) 
circulation model. Aerosol Forcing of Climate, R.J. Charlson 
and J. Heintzenberg (eds.), John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 
pp. 349-362. 
Russell, G . L , . J.R. Miller and D. Rind. 1995: A coupled 
atmosphere-ocean model for transient climate change studies. 
Atmos-Ocean, 33, 4. 
Santer, B.D., W, Bruggemann, U, Cubasch, K, Hasselmann, E, 
Maier-Reimer and U, Mikolajewicz, 1994: Signal to noise 
analysis of time dependent greenhouse warming experiments. 
Part 1: Pattern Analysis, Clim. Dyn., 9, 267-285, 
Santer B,D„ K,E, Taylor. T.M.L. Wigley, J.E. Penner, P.D. Jones 
and U. Cubasch, 1995: Towards the detection and attribution of 
an anthropogenic effect on climate. Clim. Dyn. 12, 2, 77-100. 
Sarmiento, J.L. and J.C. Orr, 1991: Three-dimensional 
simulations of the impact of Southern Ocean nutrient depletion 
on atmospheric C O j and ocean chemistry. J. 
Limnol. 
Oceanogr, 36, 1928-1950. 
Sarmiento, J,L,, J,C, Orr and U , Siegenthaler, 1992: A 
perturbation simulation of COj uptake in an ocean general 
circulation model, /, Geophys. Res., 91, 3621-3646. 
Sasaki, H . , H . Kida, T. Koide and M , Chiba, 1995: The 
performance of long term integrations of a limited area model 
with the spectral boundary coupling method, J. Met. Soc. 
Japan, 73(2),165-181, 
Sausen, R„ K, Barthel and K. Hasselmann, 1988: Coupled ocean-
atmosphere models with flux corrections. Clim. Dyn., 2, 
154-163. 
Schimel, D.S., 1. Enting, T . M . L . Wigley, M . Heimann, D, 
Raynaud, D, Alves and U, Siegenthaler, 1995: The carbon 
cycle. In: Radiative 
Forcing of Climate Change and an 
Evaluation 
of the IPCC ¡S92 Emissions 
Scenarios. 
J,T, 
Houghton, L,G. Meira Filho, J,P, Bruce, Hoesung Lee, B.A, 
Callander, E,F, Haites, N , Harris and K, Maskell (eds,), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp, 35-71. 
Schlesinger, M . E., Xinjian Jiang and R.J. Charlson, 1993: 
Implication of anthropogenic atmospheric sulphate for the 
sensitivity of the climate system. In: "Climate change and 
energy policy", 
L. Rosen and R. Classer (eds.), American 
Institute of Physics, pp. 75-108. 
Semazzi, F.H.M., N.-H. Lin, Y.-L, Lin and F, Giorgi, 1994: A 
nested model study of the Sahelian climate response to sea-
surface temperature anomalies, Geophys. 
Res. Let., 20, 
2897-2900, 
Send, U , and J, Marshall, 1994: Integral effects of deep 
convection, J. Phys. Oceanogr, 25, 855-872, 
Senior C.A, 1995: The dependence of climate sensitivity on the 
horizontal resolution of a G C M , / Climate.. 8, 2860-2880, 
Senior, C A , and J,F,B, Mitchell, 1993: Carbon dioxide and 
climate: The impact of cloud parameterization, J. Climate, 6, 
393-418. 
Shine, K.P., R.G. Derwent, D.J. Wuebbles and J.-J. Morcrette, 
1990: Radiative forcing of climate. In: Climate Change. The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment. J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and 
J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, pp. 49-68, 
Shine, K,P„ Y, Fouquart, V, Ramaswamy, S, Solomon and J, 
Srinivasan, 1995: Radiative forcing. In: Radiative Forcing of 
Climate Change andan Evaluation of the IPCC 1S92 Emissions 
Scenarios, 
J.T. Houghton, L . G . Meira Filho. J.P. Bruce, 
Hoesung Lee. B.A. Callander, E.F. Haites. N . Harris and K. 
Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 
pp. 163-203. 
Siegenthaler, U . and F. Joos, 1992: Use of a simple model for 
studying oceanic tracer distributions and the global carbon 
cycle. Tellus, 44B, 186-207. 
Singh, S.V. and H . Von Storch, 1994: Downscaling Indian 
monsoon rainfall from the simulations of the ECHAMT21 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model, Proc. 6th. 
International 
Meeting on Statistical Climatology, 19-23 Jime, 1995, Galway, 
Ireland pp. 207-209. 
Smethie, W.M, 1993: Tracing the thermohaline circulation in the 
western North Atlantic using chlorofluoromethanes. Prog. 
Oceanogr, 31. 51-99. 
Smith, I.N., M . Dix and R.J. Allan, 1995: The effect of 
greenhouse SSTs on ENSO simulations with an A G C M . J. 
Climate, (Submitted). 
Smith, R.N.В., 1990: A scheme for predicting layer cloud and 
their water content in a general circulation model. Quart. J. R. 
Met Soc, 112. 371-386. 
Stouffer, R.J., S. Manabe and K.Va. Vinnikov, 1994: Model 
Assessment of the role of natural variability in recent global 
warming. Nature, 367, 634-636. 
Suarez, M., A. Arakawa and D.A. Randall, 1983: Parameterization 
of the planetary boundary layer in the U C L A General Circulation 
Model: formulation and results. Mon. Wea. Rev.. I l l , 2224-2243. 
Sundqvist, H . , 1978: A parameterization scheme for non-
convective parapreterization including prediction of cloud 
water. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc. 104, 677-690. 
Sundqvist, H., 1993: Inclusion of ice phase of hydrometeors in 
cloud parametrisation for mesoscale and large-scale models, 
Contr Atmos. Phy.4., 66, 137-147, 
Tayloi-, К and J,E, Penner, 1994: Climate system response to 
aerosols and greenhouse gases: a model study. Nature, 369, 
734-737. 
Tett, S., 1995: Simulation of El Nino-Southern Oscillation-like 
variability in a global A O G C M and its response to COj 
increase. J Climate, 8, 1473-1502. 
Tett, S.F.B., Т.е. Johns and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1996: Global and 
regional variability in a coupled A O G C M . (Submitted to Clim. 
Dyn.) 
Tiedtke, M . , 1993: Representation of clouds in large-scale 
models. Mon. Wea. Rev., 121, 3040-3061. 
Tokioka, T., A. Noda. A. Kitoh, Y. Nikaidou, S. Nakagawa, T. 
Motoi, S. Yukimoto and K. Takata, 1995: A transient CO, 
experiment with the MRI C G C M -Quick Report-, /. Met. Soc. 
Japan, 74(4), 817-826. 
CUmate Models - Projections 
of Future 
Climate 
357 
Von Storch, H., 1993: Inconsistencies at the interface of climate 
impact studies and global cUmate research. In: Biometeorology, 
A.R. IVIaarouf, N.N. Barthakur and W.O. Haufe (eds.), Proc. 
13th International Congress of Biometeorology, Calgary, 
Canada, September 12-18, 1993: Part 2, Volume 1, pp. 
Von Storch, H., E. Zorita and U. Cubasch, 1993: Downscaling of 
climate change estimates to regional scales: An appUcation to 
winter rainfall in the Iberian Peninsula. / . Climate, 
6, 
1161-1171. 
Walsh, K. and J.L. McGregor. 1995: January and July climate 
simulations over the Australian region using a limited area 
model. /. Clim¿ne, 8, 2387-2403. 
Wang, W.-C, M.P. Dudek and X.-Z. Liang, 1992: Inadequacy of 
effective CO2 as a proxy in the regional cUmate change due to 
other radiatively active gases. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 19. 
1375-1378. 
Warner, M.J. and R.E. Weiss, 1992: Chlorofluoromethanes in 
south Atlantic Antarctic Intermediate water. Deep Sea 
Research, 39, 2053-2075. 
Washington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1989: Climate sensitivity 
due to increased COj: Experiments with a coupled atmosphere 
and ocean general circulation model. Clim. Dyn., 4, 1-38. 
Washington, W . M . and G . A . Meehl, 1993: Greenhouse 
sensitivity experiments with penetrative cumulus convection 
and tropical cirrus albedo effects. Clim. Dyn . 8, 211-223. 
Washington, W.M., and G.A. Meehl. 1996: High latitude climate 
change in a global coupled ocean-atmosphere-sea ice model 
with increased atmospheric CO,. /. Geophys. Res., in press. 
Weaver, A.J. and T.M.C. Hughes, 1992: StabiUty and variabiUty 
of the thermohaline circulation and its link to cUmate. 
Trends in Physical Oceanography, Research Trends Series, 
Council of Scientific Research Integration, Trivandrum. India, 
1, 15-70. 
Weaver, A.J. and T.M.C. Hughes, 1996: On the incompatability 
of ocean and atmosphere models and the need for flux 
adjustments. Chm. Dyn. 12, 141-170. 
Weaver, A.J., J. Marotzke, P.E. Cummins and E.S. Sarachik, 
1993: Stability and variability of the thermohaline circulation. 
J. Phys. Oceanogr, 23, 39-60. 
Weiss, R.F., J.L. BulUster, R.H. Gammon and M.J. Warner, 1985: 
Atmospheric chloroñuoromethanes in the deep equatorial 
Atiantic, Nature, 311, 608-610. 
Wetherald, R.T. and S. Manabe, 1995: The mechanisms of 
summer dryness induced by greenhouse warming. /. Climate, 
8, 3096-3108. 
Whetton, P.H., A . M . Fowler, M.R. Haylock and A.B. Pittock, 
1993: Implications of climate change due to the enhanced 
greenhouse effect on floods and droughts in Australia. Clim. 
Change, 25, 289-317. 
Whetton, P.H., P.J. Rayner, A.B. Pittock and M.R. Haylock, 
1994: An assessment of possible climate change in the 
Australian region based on an intercomparison of General 
Circulation Modeling results, /. Climate, 7, 441^63. 
Whetton, P., M . England, S. O'Farrell, 1. Waterson and B. 
Pittock, 1995: Global comparison of the regional rainfall 
results of enhanced greenhouse coupled and mixed layer ocean 
experiments: Implications for climate change scenario 
development. Clim. Change (Submitted). 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1989: Possible cUmate change due to SO2-
derived cloud condensation nuclei. Nature, 339, 365-367. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1993: Balancing the carbon budget. Implications 
for projections of future carbon dioxide concentration changes. 
Ге/Ы,45В, 409-425. 
Wigley, T . M . L . , 1994: The contribution from emissions of 
different gases to the enhanced greenhouse effect. In: Climate 
Change and the Agenda for Research , T. Hanisch (ed.), 
Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, pp. 193-222. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1995: Global mean temperature and sea level 
consequences of greenhouse gas concentration stabilization. 
Geophys. Res. Lett.,. 22, 45^8. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1987: Thermal expansion of sea 
water associated with global warming. Nature 330, 127-131. 
Wigley, T . M . L . and S.C.B. Raper, 1991: Detection of the 
enhanced greenhouse effect on climate. In: Climate Change: 
Science, Impacts and Policy , J. Jiiger and H.L. Ferguson (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 231-242. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1992: Implications for climate 
and sea level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature 357, 
293-300. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1993: Future changes in 
global-mean temperature and sea level. In: Climate and Sea 
Level Change: Observations, Projections and 
Implications, 
R . A . Warrick, E . M . Barrow and T . M . L . Wigley (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 111-133. 
Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones, K.R. Briffa, and G. Smith, 1990: 
Obtaining sub-grid scale information from coarse-resolution 
general circulation model output. /. Geophys. Res., 95, 
1943-1953. 
Wigley, T.M.L., R. Richels and J.A. Edmonds, 1996: Alternative 
emissions pathways for stabilizing concentrations. Nature, 379, 
240-243. 
Wilks, D.S., 1992: Adapting stochastic weather generation 
algorithms for climate change studies. Clim.Change, 22, 67-84. 
Wilson, L.L., D.P. Lettenmaier and E. Skyllingstad, 1992: A 
hierarchical stochastic model of large-scale atmospheric 
circulation patterns and multiple station daily precipitation. /. 
Geophys. Res., 97, 2791-2809. 
Zorita, E, J.P. Hughes, D.P. Lettenmaier and H. von Storch, 
1995: Stochastic characterization of regional circulation 
patterns for climate model diagnosis and estimation of local 
precipitation. J. Climate, 8, 1023-1042. 
Zwiers, F., 1994; Changes in screen temperature extremes under 
a doubling of COj, In; Research Activities in Atmospheric and 
Oceanic Modelling , G.J.Boer (ed.), pp. 7.44-7.46, CAS/JSC 
Working Group Numerical Experimentation, Report 19, 
February 1994, WMO/TD-No 592. 
7 
Changes in Sea Level 
R.A. WARRICK, С. L E PROVOST, M.F. MEIER, J. OERLEMANS, 
RL. WOODWORTH 
Contributors: 
R.B. Alley, R.A. Bindschadler, C.R. Bentley R.J. Braithwaite, J.R. de Wolde, 
B.C. Douglas, M. Dyurgerov, N.C. Flemming, С Genthon, V. Gornitz, J. Gregory, 
W. Haeberli, R Huybrechts, T. Jóhannesson, U. Mikolajewicz, S.CB. Raper, 
D.L. Sahagian, R.S.W. van de Wal, T.M.L. Wigley 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
363 
7.1 Introduction 
365 
7.2 How Has Sea Level Changed Over the Last 100 
Years? 
365 
7.2.1 Sea Level Trends 
365 
7.2.2 Has Sea Level Rise Accelerated? 
366 
7.3 Factors Contributing to Sea Level Change 
366 
7.3.1 Oceanic Thermal Expansion 
366 
7.3.2 Glaciers and Ice Caps 
370 
7.3.2.1 Processes causing change in glaciers 
and ice caps. 
370 
7.3.2.2 Changes in the last hundred years 
371 
7.3.2.3 Sensitivity to chmate changes 
373 
7.3.3 The Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets 
374 
7.3.3.1 Processes causing change in the ice 
sheets 
374 
7.3.3.2 Current state of balance 
374 
7.3.3.3 Sensitivity to Climate Change 
377 
7.3.4 Surface Water and Ground Water Storage 
379 
7.4 Can Sea Level Changes During the Last 100 
Years be Explained? 
380 
7.5 How Might Sea Level Change in the Future? 
381 
7.5.1 Recent Projections 
381 
7.5.2 Revised IPCC Projections 
382 
7.5.2.1 Methods and assumptions 
382 
7.5.2.2 Modelled past changes 
383 
7.5.2.3 Scenarios IS92a-f 
384 
7.5.2.4 Scenario IS92a 
384 
7.5.2.5 Extreme range 
384 
7.5.2.6 Summary 
385 
7.5.3 Possible Inter-Model Differences 
385 
7.5.3.1 Methods and assumptions 
386 
7.5.3.2 Model results and comparisons 
386 
7.5.4 Possible Longer-term (>100 years) Changes 
388 
7.5.5 Possible Instabilities of the West Antarctic Ice 
Sheet 
389 
7.6 Spatial and Temporal Variability 
389 
7.6.1 Geological and Geophysical Effects 
389 
7.6.2 Dynamic Effects 
391 
7.6.3 Trends in Extremes 
393 
7.7 Major Uncertainties and How to Reduce Them 
394 
7.7.1 Monitoring of Sea Level Change 
394 
7.7.2 Oceanic Thermal Expansion 
395 
7.7.3 Glaciers and Ice Caps 
396 
7.7.4 Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets 
396 
References 
397 
SUMMARY 
The рифове of this chapter is to assess the cuiTent state of 
knowledge regarding climate and sea level change, with 
special emphasis on scientific developments since IPCC 
(1990). The main focus is on changes that occur on the 
time-scale of a century. We thus look for evidence of sea 
level change during the last 100 years, examine the factors 
that could be responsible for such changes, and consider 
the possible changes in sea level during the next 100 years 
as a result of global warming. 
With respect to the past, recent analyses suggest that: 
• 
global mean sea level has risen 10-25 cm over the 
last 100 years. This range is slightly higher than that 
reported in IPCC (1990) (i.e., 10-20 cm). The higher 
estimate results largely from the use of geodynamic 
models for filtering out long-term vertical land 
movements, as well as from the greater reliance on 
the longest tide gauge records for estimating trends. 
• 
there has been no detectable acceleration of sea level 
rise during this century. However, the average rise 
during the present century is significantly higher than 
the rate averaged over the last several thousand years, 
although century-time-scale variations of several 
decimetres almost certainly occurred within that 
longer period. The exact timing of the onset of the 
present, higher rate of sea level rise remains uncertain. 
It is likely that the rise in sea level has been due largely 
to the concurrent increase in global temperature over the 
last 100 years. The possible climate-related factors 
contributing to this rise include thermal expansion of the 
ocean and melting of glaciers, ice caps and ice sheets. 
Changes in surface water and ground water storage may 
also have affected sea level. The assessment of the 
scientific evidence suggests that: 
• 
global warming should, on average, cause the oceans 
to warm and expand, thus increasing sea level. The 
various models, from simple upwelling diffusion 
models to complex coupled atmosphere-ocean 
GCMs, all agree that oceanic thermal expansion is 
one consequence of global warming. The thermal 
expansion over the last 100 years is estimated to be 
2-7 cm. Large-scale observations of changes in sub­
surface ocean temperatures are beginning to support 
these estimates. 
global warming should, on average, increase the melt 
rates of glaciers and ice caps, causing sea level to 
rise. Observational data indicates that, globally, there 
has been a general retreat of glaciers during this 
century. Based on both observations and models, 
recent analyses suggest that this enhanced melting 
may have increased sea level by about 2-5 cm over 
the last 100 years. 
with respect to the Greenland ice sheet, a warmer 
climate should increase the melt rates at the margins. 
The increase in melting should dominate over any 
increase in accumulation rates in the interior, causing 
sea level to rise. However, observational evidence is 
insufficient to say with any certainty whether the ice 
sheet is currently in balance or has increased or 
decreased in volume over the last 100 years. 
with respect to the Antarctic ice sheet, a warmer 
climate should increase the accumulation rates, 
causing sea level to fall. Here, too, the observational 
evidence is insufficient to say with any certainty 
whether the ice sheet is currently in balance or has 
increased or decreased in volume over the last 100 
years. 
it is unclear how changes in surface water or ground 
water storage have affected sea level. Estimates vary 
widely of the net effects of activities (largely 
anthropogenic) such as dam construction and 
reservoir filling, which lower sea level, and ground 
water pumping, deforestation and wetland loss. 
364 
Changes in Sea Level 
which tend to raise sea level. However, the potential 
future effect on sea level from such sources is 
probably relatively small, of the order of a few 
centimetres during the next century. 
An exact accounting of the past sea level rise is difficult, 
particularly in the light of the large uncertainties associated 
with the mass balances of the ice sheets. However, the 
observed rise lies well within the combined ranges of 
uncertainty of the above factors. 
Projections of future changes in sea level as a 
consequence of greenhouse-gas-induced warming were 
made for each of the six IPCC IS92 emission scenarios, 
with and without the effect of aerosol changes after 1990, 
for the period 1990 to 2100. In addition, high, middle and 
low estimates, using a range of parameter values based on 
key model uncertainties, were made for IS92a (the 
emission scenario most comparable to the IPCC (1990) 
Scenario A, the so-called "Business-as-usual" scenario). 
The results showed that: 
• 
for Scenario IS92a, sea level is projected to be about 
50 cm higher than today by the year 2100, with a 
range of uncertainty of 20-86 cm; 
• 
for the range of emission scenarios IS92a-f using 
"best-estimate" model parameters, sea level is 
projected to be 38-55 cm higher than today by the 
year 2100; 
• 
the extreme range of projections, taking into account 
both emission scenarios and model uncertainties, is 
13-94 cm; 
• 
most of the projected rise in sea level is due to thermal 
expansion, followed by increased melting of glaciers 
and ice caps. On this time-scale, the contributions 
made by the major ice sheets are relatively minor, but 
are a major source of uncertainty. 
It is evident that the choice of emission scenario makes 
relatively little difference to the projected rise in sea level, 
especially for the first half of the next century. This is 
because much of the rise has already been determined by 
past changes in radiative forcing, due to lags in the 
response of the oceans and ice masses. For this same 
reason, in model simulations sea level continues to rise 
over many centuries even after concentrations of 
greenhouse gases are stabilised. In contrast, the scientific 
uncertainties - as reflected partly in intra-model 
uncertainties in the choice of individual model parameter 
values, and partly in inter-model uncertainties in the choice 
of methods for climate, glacier and ice sheet modelling -
make a very large difference in the estimate of future sea 
level rise. 
A major source of uncertainty concerns the polar ice 
sheets. Not only is there a lack of understanding of the 
current mass balance, but there is also considerable 
uncertainty regarding the possible dynamic responses on 
time-scales of centuries. Concern has been expressed that 
the West Antarctic Ice Sheet might "surge", causing a rapid 
rise in sea level. The current lack of knowledge regarding 
the specific circumstances under which this might occur, 
either in total or in part, limits the ability to quantify the 
risk. Nonetheless, the likelihood of a major sea level rise 
by the year 2100 due to the collapse of the West Antarctic 
Ice Sheet is considered low. 
The changes in future sea level will not occur uniformly 
around the globe. Recent coupled atmosphere-ocean model 
experiments suggest that the regional responses could 
differ significantly, due to regional differences in heating 
and circulation changes. In addition, geological and 
geophysical processes cause vertical land movements and 
thus affect relative sea levels on local and regional scales. 
Finally, extreme sea level events - tides, waves and storm 
surges - could be affected by regional climate changes but 
are, at présent, difficult to predict. 
Overall, the basic understanding of climate-sea level 
relationships has not changed fundamentally since IPCC 
(1990). The estimates of global sea level rise presented 
here are lower than those presented in IPCC (1990), due 
primarily to significantly lower estimates of global 
temperature change which drive the projections of sea 
level rise. Thus, if global warming were to occur more 
rapidly than expected, the rate of sea level rise would 
consequently be higher. 
Changes in Sea Level 
365 
7.1 Introduction 
In terms of environmental and social consequences, sea 
level rise is arguably one of the most important potential 
impacts of global climate change. As in IPCC (1990), the 
primary purpose of this chapter is to assess what is known 
regarding how sea level has changed in the past and could 
change in the future, on time-scales of decades to centuries. 
The chapter begins by reviewing the evidence for trends in 
sea level over the past 100 years, based on ride gauge 
records. Next, the factors that could contribute to sea level 
change - namely, changes related to oceanic thermal 
expansion, glaciers and small ice caps, the large ice sheets 
of Greenland and Antarctica, and the possible changes in 
land-surface water and ground water storage - are 
examined. Future projections of global mean sea level rise 
are then made, on the basis of scenarios of future 
greenhouse gas emissions and projections of future global 
warming. The important factors that may cause such 
changes in sea level to vary spatially and temporally are 
considered, including geological, geophysical and dynamic 
effects. 
Overall, this chapter finds that the major conclusions 
reached in IPCC (1990) remain qualitarively unchanged 
and are reinforced by the recent scientific literature. 
Nonetheless, improvements in observations and ocean-
atmosphere modelling and in the calculation of future 
radiative forcing changes have led to revisions of the 
estimates of future sea level rise and their uncertainties. 
7.2 How Has Sea Level Changed Over the Last 100 
Years? 
7.2.1 Sea Level Trends 
Secular trends in "eustatic" global sea level (i.e., 
corresponding to a change in ocean volume) over the past 
century have been studied by a large number of authors (as 
summarised in Chapter 9 and Table 9.1 of the 1990 IPCC 
Scientific Assessment and as described in several recent 
reviews - see Emery and Aubrey, 1991; Woodworth, 1993; 
Douglas, 1995). At this time-scale, evidence for such 
trends is obtained from tide gauge data. 
All authors of recent global sea level change reviews 
have used the Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level 
(PSMSL) data set (Spencer and Woodworth, 1993). A 
central problem in identifying trends in eustatic sea level 
from tide gauge data is how to account for vertical land 
movements, which also affect relative sea level change as 
measured by tide gauges. At the global scale, a major 
source of vertical land movement derives from the 
continuing readjustment of the Earth's crust since the 
glacial retreat marking the end of the last ice age. This 
"post-glacial rebound" (PGR) is the only globally coherent 
geological contribution to long-term sea level change about 
which we possess detailed understanding. Since IPCC 
(1990), Douglas (1991) has applied post-glacial rebound 
corrections from the ICE-3G model of Tushingham and 
Peltier (1991) to the observed tide gauge data (avoiding 
tide gauge records in areas of converging tectonic plates, 
since such processes are not represented by the PGR 
model) and produced a highly consistent set of long-term 
sea level trends. The value for the mean rate of sea level 
rise that he obtained from a global set of 21 such stations in 
nine oceanic regions with an average record length of 76 
years during the period 1880-1980 was 1.8 ± O.l mm/year. 
Geodynamic models of post-glacial rebound have also 
been employed in global analyses by Peltier and 
Tushingham (1989, 1991) and Trupin and Wahr (1990), 
who obtained similar results. Uncertainties in global sea 
level trends determined from PGR models may include a 
range of uncertainty of approximately 0.5 mm/year, 
depending on the Earth structure parametrization employed 
by the model (Mitrovica and Davis, 1995). 
Other authors have used geological data directiy for sites 
adjacent to tide gauges, a procedure which, in principle, 
should accommodate other geological processes in addition 
to post-glacial rebound (e.g., Gornitz and Lebedeff, 1987). 
This sort of analysis has been conducted for the North Sea 
region of Europe, which has an extensive tide gauge and 
geological sea level data set, by Shennan and Woodworth 
(1992). Earlier analyses (e.g., BarneU, 1984) simply 
averaged tide gauge records on the implicit assumption that 
the effects of land movements would somehow average out. 
It is interesting that the results of most of these studies are 
within the range 1-2 mm/year, with some bias towards the 
lower end of the range (see Gornitz, 1995a, for a review). 
Gornitz (1995a) has also pointed out that estimates using 
the longest records obtain the highest values, closer to 2 
mm/year than 1 mm/year, and that correction for post-
glacial rebound by means of the Peltier models gives 
higher values for the trend than those analyses which 
employed nearby geological data values directiy. This is a 
result of the post-glacial rebound models producing smaller 
extrapolated sea level trends into the present day than the 
linear fit to nearby geological data procedure such as 
Gornitz and colleagues have employed. Hence, the 
corrected tide gauge trends using the post-glacial rebound 
models will be higher than those using the nearby 
geological observations. In the latter case, problems could 
arise from the large scatter in the geological data 
distributed in area around the gauge locations, and from the 
366 
Changes in Sea Level 
linear extrapolation technique. Gornitz and Lebedeff 
(1987) found that in most cases a linear fit gives as good a 
description of the extrapolated trend from the geological 
data, as a higher order fit (see also discussion in Shennan 
and Woodworth, 1992). However, this ignores the 
additional information on the physics of the problem 
contained in the Peltier post-glacial rebound models. 
Peltier and Tushingham (1989) also commented that the 
sea level trends depend strongly on the choice of minimum 
record length and on the particular time interval selected. 
Their sea level rise estimates, based on tide gauge record 
lengths greater than 50 years, tended to lie closer to 2 
mm/yr than those based on shorter record lengths. Six of 
the longest tide gauge records (unadjusted for post-glacial 
rebound or other geological effects) for each continent are 
shown in Figure 7.1. 
In summary, the best estimate based on recent analyses 
is that sea level has risen about 18 cm over the last 100 
years, with a range of uncertainty of 10-25 cm -
notwithstanding the fact that some authors (e.g., Groger 
and Flag, 1993; Pirazzoli, 1993) maintain that a global 
figure for sea level rise cannot be estimated reliably, 
stressing the limitations of the available data set. This 
range is consistent with the 10-20 cm range given in IPCC 
(1990). As geodynamic models and measurements of 
vertical land movements become more reliable, confidence 
in such estimates will increase. 
7.2.2 Has Sea Level Rise Accelerated? 
Archaeological and geological data suggest that global sea 
levels have probably varied within a range of no more than a 
few tens of centimetres over the past two millennia 
(Flemming, 1969, 1993; Pirazzoli, 1977; Flemming and 
Webb, 1986; Hofstede, 1991; Tanner, 1992; Varekamp et 
al, 1992). The 10-25 cm rise over the past 100 years implies 
a comparatively recent acceleration in the rate of sea level 
change (Gornitz and Seeber, 1990; Shennan and 
Woodworth, 1992; Gornitz, 1995b). However, the exact 
timing of the onset of this acceleration remains uncertain. 
The conclusions given in Woodworth (1990), Gornitz and 
Solow (1991), and Douglas (1992) imply that the 
acceleration probably began before the 1850s. But data for 
the pre-instrumental period is sparse, at best. There is as yet 
no evidence for any acceleration of sea level rise this century 
(Woodworth, 1990; Gornitz and Solow, 1991; Douglas, 
1992), nor would any necessarily be expected from the 
observed climate change to date. Small accelerations have 
been suggested over the past two or three centuries in 
European sea level data (Morner, 1973; Ekman, 1988; 
Woodworth, 1990; Gornitz and Solow, 1991). 
The evidence, or lack of it, for sea level accelerations 
over the past century depends critically on a small number 
of long tide gauge records which is unlikely to be 
supplemented significantly in the future. Nevertheless, the 
search for old records (or "data archaeology") can be 
particularly rewarding when such data are found. For 
example, Maul and Martin (1993) recently extended the 
Key West, Florida data set back to 1846 and demonstrated 
that no significant acceleration of sea level rise has 
occurred since that time. 
The main difficulties in determining a more robust 
estimate for the sea level trends (let alone acceleration) are 
the unequal geographical distribution of historical tide 
gauge data and the considerable amount of typically 
decadal variability present in all records. The former is 
slowly being rectified with the development of a near-
global tide gauge network (GLOSS) and by means of 
satellite radar altimetry (e.g., TOPEX/POSEIDON). 
Atmospheric and oceanic dynamical processes account 
for a large fraction of the interannual and interdecadal 
variability. These fluctuations, 1-2 years to a decade in 
duration and coherent over long distances, reflect changes 
in temperature and salinity, currents, and coupled oceanic-
atmospheric forcing, such as the E l Nino-Southern 
Oscillation phenomenon in the Pacific Ocean (Komar and 
Enfield, 1987), or the North Aflantic Oscillation in the 
North Aflantic Ocean (Maul and Hanson, 1991). The 
Umitations imposed by large interannual sea level changes 
in determining reliable sea level trends and accelerations 
have been particularly emphasised by Douglas (1992) and 
demonstrated by Sturges (1987) and Sturges and Hong 
(1995). The understanding of such interannual processes 
has been an aim of large international programmes such as 
the Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere (TOGA) project 
and the. World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), 
and will continue to be the object of research based on the 
results of a Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS). As 
ocean modelling becomes more detailed, and as surface 
and deep ocean observations become more routine, 
increased understanding of interannual processes will 
result, leading to an improved estimate of any underlying 
long-term trend and acceleration. 
7.3 Factors Contributing to Sea Level Cliange 
7.3.1 Oceanic Thermal Expansion 
At constant mass the volume of ocean water, and thus sea 
level, varies with changes in sea water density (called 
"steric" changes). Density is related to temperature and 
salinity, hence the dependency of sea level on temperature 
Changes in Sea Level 
367 
1800 
1850 
1900 
1950 
Year 
Figure 7.1: Six long sea level records from major worid regions: Takoradi (Africa), Honolulu (Pacific), Sydney (AusUralia), Bombay 
(Asia), San Francisco (North America) and Brest (Europe). Each record has been offset vertically for presentational purposes. The 
observed trends (in nun/yr) for each record over the 20th century are, respectively, 3.1, 1.5, 0.8, 0.9, 2.0 and 1.3. The effect of post-glacial 
rebound (lowering relative sea level) as simulated by the Peltier ICE-3G model is less than, or of the order of 0.5 mm/yr at each site. 
368 
Changes in Sea Level 
and salinity variations of the oceans. The main cause of 
steric change at the global scale is temperature change. As 
density is inversely related to temperature, the volume of 
the ocean must expand and sea level rise if the density of 
the sea water decreases because of rising temperature. 
Marked changes in salinity can occur at the regional 
scale and modify sea water density and volume. In the 
short term, these effects are relatively minor at the global 
scale. However, the main anomalous buoyancy sources are 
located at high latitudes where sea water finds an effective 
pathway from the surface to the deeper layers of the ocean. 
Thus, in the longer term, regional salinity changes can 
affect the whole ocean circulation, the distribution of heat 
and oceanic expansion. 
More generally, because of very complex physics, there 
are other important regional variations and time lags 
involved in sea level rise by thermal expansion. The 
redistribution of buoyancy from source regions to other 
parts of the oceans involves large-scale waves and 
transport by currents. The adjustment processes are very 
slow, because they are related to the internal modes of heat 
and mass redistribution within the ocean. Consequently, a 
sea level rise due to thermal heating must be out of 
equilibrium, especially for rapid climate change. This 
implies that the ocean will rise more rapidly in some areas 
than in other areas. 
An important feedback mechanism between thermal 
expansion and increased sea level caused by increased 
melting of ice is linked to the above processes. Increased 
fresh water fluxes to the ocean have an impact on density 
stratification and thereby on the depths of convection of the 
surface waters. This, in turn, affects the circulation of the 
interior of the ocean and thus the rates of thermal 
expansion for the different layers of the world ocean. 
To estimate oceanic expansion from observations, 
temperature and salinity have to be recorded over the water 
column for a long period of time. In the 1990 IPCC 
Scienflfic Assessment (Subsection 9.4.1), reference was 
made to the works of Roemmich (1985) concerning the 
Panuliris series of deep hydrographie stations off Bermuda 
over the period 1955-1981, and to Thomson and Tabata 
(1987) concerning the station P A P A steric height 
anomalies in the north-east Pacific Ocean over a 27-year 
period. It was noted that the conclusions drawn from these 
data sets were limited geographically and that additional 
ocean observations are required to discern large-scale 
changes. Since 1990, there has been a considerable 
increase in the quantity of high quality hydrography and 
tracer sections produced from programmes like WOCE. 
The analyses of these data sets in relation to previous 
hydrographie surveys are beginning to indicate large-scale, 
coherent changes in sub-surface ocean temperatures (see 
Chapter 3.2.4 for details). Estimates of the thermal 
expansion associated with some of these observed ocean 
temperature changes are similar in magnitude to changes in 
nearby sea level records (Roemmich, 1992; Salinger et al, 
1996). However, these estimates are still regionally 
specific. Such observational consistency between thermal 
expansion and sea level observations will improve in the 
near future with the availability of the new WOCE data 
sets and the measurement of the ocean topography through 
satellite altimetry (Nerem, 1995). 
The problem of a steric rise in sea level due to global 
warming has also been examined using a variety of models. 
These include upwelling diffusion models, two-
dimensional models, subduction models, ocean general 
circulation models (OGCMs), and coupled atmosphere-
ocean models (AOGCMs). 
The advantage of the simpler upwelling diffusion 
climate models is that they are computationally efficient so 
that the sensitivity of results to model parameters and to 
uncertainties in greenhouse gas emissions can easily be 
examined. Eor example, the projections of oceanic thermal 
expansion made by IPCC (1990) (Warrick and Oerlemans, 
1990) were derived with the use of the simple upwelling 
diffusion-energy balance climate model of Wigley and 
Raper (1987, 1993). This model represents the vertical 
profile of area-averaged ocean temperature, which changes 
in response to changes in radiative forcing at the surface. 
Thermal expansion of sea water, and thus sea level change, 
is diagnosed from the temperature profiles through the use 
of expansion coefficients. For the period 1880 to 1990, the 
estimated range of sea level rise due to thermal expansion 
using this model is about 3.1 cm to 5.7 cm, with a best 
estimate of 4.3 cm (consistent with model parameters 
discussed in Chapter 6 and in Section 7.5.2), when the 
model is forced with the estimated radiative forcing 
changes from increases in greenhouse concentrations over 
the same period. A slightly more complex, 2-dimensional 
variant of this kind of model, using a prescribed ocean 
circulation and surface forcing based on observed sea 
surface temperature (de Wolde et al., 1995), leads to 
similar values: 2.2 cm to 5.1 cm with a best estimate 3.5 
cm. The major disadvantage of these simpler models, 
however, is that they do not realistically represent the 
processes involved in the penetration and distribution of 
heat from the surface to deeper layers of the ocean. 
With two-dimensional, zonally averaged dynamical 
models coupled to an energy balance climate model (as 
developed by Harvey, 1992), the upwelling velocities can 
Changes in Sea Level 
369 
be related to the vertical diffusion coefficient. With such a 
model, Harvey (1994) has demonstrated that the 1-D 
upwelling diffusion models have a significantly faster 
surface transient response than the 2-D model, due to 
transient weakening of thermohaline overturning in the 2-D 
model which damps surface temperature warming. This 
difference is most pronounced if the upwelling rate in the 
upwelling diffusion models is constant (Raper et al., 1996). 
Subduction models, while still relatively simple, 
introduce heat into the ocean by advection along isopycnal 
(constant density) surfaces. Such a model has been 
developed by Church et al. (1991). In this model, the 
estimates of the magnitude of global thermal expansion are 
independent of assumptions regarding the magnitudes of 
eddy diffusivity. Furthermore, since this model is three-
dimensional, it provides information on the regional 
differences in sea level change adjustments. Church et al. 
(1991) demonstrate a small dependence of the mean sea 
level rise on the spatial distribution of warming, for a given 
global mean temperature rise. With this model. Church et 
al. (1991) obtain a sea level rise due to thermal expansion 
of about 6.9 cm over the last one hundred yeai's. The major 
disadvantage of this model is that it does not predict 
surface temperature changes, and it also ignores deep water 
formation and associated changes in convective heat 
fluxes. 
A more realistic way to simulate ocean warming and 
thermal expansion is to use an OGCM. One example is the 
study of Mikolajewicz et al. (1990), who used the Large-
Scale Geostrophic (LSG) O G C M of the Max-Planck-
Institute (MPI). The model was forced with time-dependent 
surface temperature changes caused by progressively 
increasing atmospheric CO,, calculated separately from an 
average of the equilibrium results from several GCMs for 
doubled CO2. 
However, in concept, the most realistic simulations 
involve the use of fully coupled A O G C M s . In such 
experiments, changes in the three-dimensional ocean and 
atmosphere feed back on each other as the modelled 
climate evolves. Although such models are very 
demanding on computer resources, transient experiments 
are increasingly being performed with coupled models (see 
Chapter 6). Sea level changes have been analysed from 
some of them. Among these are the experiments of the 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, Princeton (see 
review from Gates et al., 1992), of the MPI, Hamburg 
(Cubasch et ai, 1992, Cubasch et al., 1994a), and of the 
U K Meteorological Office Hadley Centre, Bracknell 
(Gregory, 1993: Mitchell et ai, 1995). A recent simulation 
using the U K M O coupled model (Mitchell et ai, 1995) 
with historical forcing changes gives a 1880 to 1990 sea 
level rise due to thermal expansion of 3.6 cm - in accord 
with simpler models. 
There is no guarantee, however, that coarse resolution 
AOGCMs adequately represent the processes governing 
water mass formation and thus the penetration of surface 
heat into the ocean interior. Furthermore, these models also 
suffer from important unsolved problems to which thermal 
expansion calculations are particularly sensitive. First, 
there is the "cold start" problem. Neglecting past changes 
in greenhouse gas forcing before running scenarios of 
future forcing changes in AOGCMs leads to significant 
underestimation of both future warming and sea level rise 
due to thermal expansion of sea water. For example, 
Cubasch et al. (1994a) showed that starting the MPI 
coupled model from 1935 instead of 1985, but using the 
same future forcing scenario beyond 1985, leads to 
estimates of 7 cm instead of 4 cm for thermal expansion for 
the period 1985-2050. The GFDL model shows a much 
shorter time constant (about 10 years) compared to the MPI 
model (30 years), and different versions of the U K M O 
model show significant differences. A method to correct 
simulations for this "cold start" effect has been proposed 
by Hasselmann et al. (1993). Nonetheless, the issue has not 
been fully resolved, and the magnitude and relevance of 
this error for the surface air temperature and, especially, for 
sea level remains controversial. 
Second, there is the problem of decadal variability and 
predictability. The initial conditions for A O G C M s are 
never fully known. This alone would be sufficient to 
prevent a prediction of the state of the ocean over several 
decades. To estimate the error that stems from this 
uncertainty, Cubasch et al. (1994a) carried out four 50-year 
integrations with the MPI coupled model. In all the 
experiments the greenhouse gas forcing started with 
conditions in 1986 and then followed the IPCC (1990) 
Scenario A . The only differences were in the initial 
conditions of the atmosphere and ocean. The decadal 
means of global warming and sea level rise showed large 
differences. The global mean sea level rise due to thermal 
expansion was 4.2 cm in the last years of integration, but in 
many regions of the world ocean, the local mean response 
had about the same size as two standard deviations of the 
decadal means between the runs. These problems, and 
others like the consequences of differences in spin-up 
techniques, obviously limit the reliability of the 
conclusions presently resulting from these coupled ocean-
atmosphere model transient experiments. 
Comparison of thermal expansion resulting from these 
various model experiments is difficult because of 
370 
Changes in Sea Level 
differences in experimental design, in model assumptions, 
particularly those concerning emission scenarios and 
climate sensitivity, and in the complexity of processes 
incorporated in different models. Carefully designed 
intermodel comparisons have not yet been carried out. 
In summary, oceanic expansion is almost certainly one 
consequence of global warming. Although observational 
data are still too sparse and regionally specific to allow 
global estimates of thermal expansion, analyses of recent 
data sets in relation to previous hydrographie surveys are 
beginning to indicate large-scale, coherent changes in sub-
surface ocean temperatures. Thermal expansion can also be 
predicted from a range of models, from simple to very 
complex. Based on model experiments, the estimated rise 
in sea level due to thermal expansion over the last 100 
years lies within the range 2-7 cm. 
7.3.2 Glaciers and Ice Caps 
7.3.2. ] Processes causing change in glaciers and ice caps 
The amount of land ice on Earth has fluctuated as the 
climate has changed. This section is concerned with the 
numerous mountain glaciers, ice fields and ice caps of the 
world, exclusive of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets 
(Figure 7.2), and their past and future contributions to 
changes in sea level. The potential contributions of glaciers 
and ice caps are not insignificant because the rates of ice 
accumulation and loss are more intense than those on the 
huge ice sheets. 
The change in mass of these glaciers can be expressed as 
the sum of the mass balance at the surface (the difference 
between accumulation and loss, which can be positive or 
negative), plus the meltwater that is refrozen internally 
(internal accumulation), minus any iceberg calving flux. 
The change in mass of ice on land results in a change in sea 
level of opposite sign. The complexity stems from the fact 
that the surface mass balance, internal accumulation, 
iceberg calving flux, as well as the area and shape of the 
ice masses, are functions of time. The surface balance can 
be measured in a straightforward way, although it is a 
labour-intensive process (0strem and Brugman, 1991). It 
can also be inferred, using hydrometeorological or 
climatological models, as the difference between snow 
accumulation (sometimes equated to winter precipitation) 
and snow/ice melt (often modelled using temperature or 
runoff as proxy); both terms are required for accurate 
modelling, including their seasonal differences. 
Internal accumulation, on the other hand, is more difficult 
to measure. This term is often ignored in the modelUng of 
glacier mass balances using climatological data, with the 
result that the calculated loss of water to the sea may be 
overestimated. Simple models to estimate the amount of 
internal accumulation have been developed for mountain 
glaciers (Trabant and Mayo, 1985) and for Arctic glaciers 
including Greenland (e.g., Pfeffer et al, 1991; Reeh, 1991). 
The rate of iceberg calving can be measured (e.g.. Brown et 
al, 1982) but cannot be modelled with confidence. 
Figure 7.2: Global distribution of glaciers (solid dots) and ice sheets (pebble pattern). Note: a single dot may represent one or many 
individual glaciers, and many glaciers around the margin of the Antarctic ice sheet are omitted due to lack of information. 
Changes in Sea Level 
371 
Changes in mass balance and/or iceberg calving produce 
changes in the area and surface profile of a glacier. Thus, 
models of long-term (more than a few years) changes in 
glaciers with respect to climate require incorporation of the 
flow processes - a dynamics model. Although these 
models are in common use and are of some numerical 
complexity, the basal sliding process for temperate glaciers 
is still very uncertain. A strong interaction between iceberg 
calving and glacier dynamics exists (Meier, 1994). The 
distribution of glacier mean thicknesses must also be 
considered because many small glaciers will likely 
disappear during the next century. 
Internal accumulation and iceberg calving can be safely 
ignored in many regions, such as in much of Europe. In 
this case, conventional surface observations, or modelled 
relations, of snow accumulation and melt rates yield 
sufficient information for predicting volume changes as a 
result of climate change. In some areas of significant 
glacier cover, such as in the Arctic, all terms (and their 
time-dependencies) must be taken into consideration. This 
complexity, together with the paucity of observational data 
in many glacierised regions, makes a global synthesis of 
the present or future role of glaciers in sea level change a 
daunting task. 
7.3.2.2 Changes in the last hundred years 
Thinning of glaciers since the mid-19th century has been 
obvious and pervasive in many parts of the world (for 
example, see Figure 7.3). This long-term ice loss has 
considerable spatial and short-term variability. For 
instance, negative mass balances and rapid thinning have 
been observed in this century in the Alps (Haeberli and 
Hoelzle, 1995) and in south-central Alaska but not in the 
Canadian Arctic (Fisher and Koerner, 1994). Significant 
positive spatial correlations in annual mass balances are 
found between some glacierised regions, such as 
Kamchatka and the Northern Rockies (Trupin et al, 1992), 
while negative correlations are found between other 
regions, such as Washington State and Alaska (Walters and 
Meier, 1989). 
Table 7.1 shows improved estimates of the volume of 
glaciers and ice caps of the world, obtained by using data 
from the World Glacier Inventory 
(lAHS(ICSI)/ 
UNEP/UNESCO, 1989). This publication presents the 
numbers of glaciers increasing by size categories from less 
than 0.03 to greater than 1024 km^ for about 45 well-
inventoried regions. Unfortunately, this includes only a 
small fraction of the world's glacier cover. For the 
puiposes of the present report, these data were extended to 
a global estimate of ice cover according to size category 
2 0 
-80 
+ 
-100 
Storbreen 
Hintereisferner 
South Cascade 
1 8 9 0 
1 9 3 0 
1 9 5 0 
Year 
1 9 7 0 
1990 
Figure 7.3: Cumulative mass balances, in metres of water 
equivalent, for the glaciers Hintereisferner (Austria), Rhône 
(Switzerland), Sarennes (France), South Cascade (United States), 
Storbreen (Norway), and Storglaciaren (Sweden). These are 
among the few glaciers with long observational time series Üiat 
have been extended using well calibrated hydrometeorological 
models. A l l values are relative to 1890. 
by: (1) selecting 12 regions with very complete inventories 
that were typical of the world's glacierised regions; (2) 
adding an estimate for coastal Alaska and adjacent Canada 
using U. S. Geological Survey data on 321 large glaciers to 
extend the inventory, and extending these data by power-
law scaling to smaller glacier sizes; (3) assembling 
immbers of glaciers in each size class and total area for the 
13 regions; (4) assigning each of the 31 regions defined by 
Meier (1984) to one or more of these typical inventory 
regions; (5) weighting these regions according to the 31-
region areas, (6) summing the above. Using a power law 
regression of known glacier area/volume relationships 
(e.g., Macheret et al, 1988; Chen and Ohmura, 1990; 
Meier, 1993), the mean thicknesses for glaciers in each size 
category were estimated. On this basis, the total volume of 
glaciers and ice caps is estimated to be about 180,000 km-^, 
and the mean thicknesses range from 7 m to 655 m. Much 
of the glacier area and volume is comprised of glaciers in 
the 100 to 1000 km^ size classes. 
372 
Changes in Sea Level 
Table 7.1: Some physical characteristics of ice on Earth. Accuracy is better than 10% unless indicated otherwise 
Antarctic 
Greenland 
Glaciers and ice caps 
Ice Sheet 
Ice Sheet 
(grounded ice only) 
Ara&iKf'br?-) 
12.1 
1.71 
0.68 
Volume (10*' km^) 
29^ 
2.95 
0.18 + 0.04 
Volume (sea level equivalent, m) 
73+ 
7.4 
0.5 ±0.10 
Accumulation (10'^ kg/yr) 
1660 
553 
670+ 100 
Runoff (lO'^kg/yr) 
53 ±3 0 
237 
690 ± 100* 
Iceberg discharge (10'^ kg/a) 
2016 
316 
50 + 30 
(from ice shelves) 
Data sources: Drewry, 1983; Bentley and Giovinetto, 1991; Jacobs et al., 1992; Meier, 1993; Reeh 1994; Weidick, 1995. 
t 
Total volume, including the amount currently below sea level (1. 9 X 10* km^, or 5 m sea level rise equivalent). 
* Includes runoff into closed basins in Central Asia (60 X 10'^ kg/yr). 
Table 7.2: Estimates of global glacier mass balances during th 
is century. 
Reference 
Time period 
No of observed 
Global area® 
Models: balance 
Sea level change 
glaciers^ (regions)* 
(10%m2), 
dynamic 
(mm/yr) 
Meier (1984) 
1900-61 
25 (31) 
540 
a, f 
0.46 
Trupin et al. ( 1992) 
1965-84 
85 (31) 
540 
b,g 
0.18 
Meier (1993) 
1900-61 
- (31) 
640 
c, f 
0.40 
Dyurgerov ( 1994) 
1960-93 
23-76 (8) 
589§ , 
d, g 
0.35^ 
1985-93 
0.60§ 
Balance Models: 
a) Balance correlated with annual amplitude for measured glaciers in 13 regions, then extended globally based on measured or 
climatically estimated annual amplitudes. 
b) Observed balance data correlated to regional precipitation, runoff data; extended globally using climatological data. 
c) As in a), internal accumulation estimated. 
d) Statistical analysis of all observed balance data. 
Dynamics Models: 
f) Balance adjusted by estimate of mean areal shrinkage (10%). 
g) None (no dynamic response considered). 
Notes 
t 
Number of observed glaciers used in correlations. 
* Number of regions into which data were aggregated. 
@ Assumed total area of glaciers for calculating global contribution. 
§ Does not include contribution of glaciers in drainage basins with internal runoff (52 X 10^ km^). 
Changes in Sea Level 
373 
Internationally co-ordinated long-term monitoring of 
glaciers began in 1894, and now includes compilations of 
data on fluctuations in length, volume and mass balance by 
the World Glacier Monitoring Service (lASH(ICSI)/ 
U N E S C O , 1967; IAHS(ICSI)/UNEP/UNESCO, 1973, 
1977 1988, 1993). 
Many attempts have been made to quantify the global 
rate of change of the world's glacier cover, beginning with 
the seminal work of Thorarinsson (1940). Recent analyses 
are listed in Table 7.2. The principal difficulty is the lack 
of observational data in many areas and some of the 
analyses have extended the data using climate information. 
Virtually no glaciers are being regularly measured in the 
mountains bordering the Gulf of Alaska or in Patagonia, 
two areas thought to contribute significanfly to present-day 
sea level rise (Meier, 1985). The global number of glaciers 
on which the mass balance was directly measured was six 
or less through 1956, then rose to 50-60 during the period 
1967 to 1989, coinciding with the new programmes of the 
International Hydrological Decade/Programme and the 
establishment of the World Glacier Monitoring Service; the 
number has fallen slighfly since 1989 (Dyurgerov, 1994). 
Clearly, insufficient data exist for a long-term global 
synthesis without extending the data using climate 
information. Simplistic models have been used to take 
changes in glacier dynamics into account. Table 7.2 lists 
examples of several recent compilations with brief sketches 
of the approaches used. It is obvious that further refinement 
is needed. Table 7.2 shows that the global contribution of 
glacier wastage to current sea level rise in this century is 
uncertain by a factor of about two. There are many reasons 
for this uncertainty, including: (1) different time periods 
used in analysis; (2) differences in the total glacier area, 
due to incomplete data from many of the highly glacierised 
regions of the world, and inconsistent consideration of 
small glaciers in Greenland and in Antarctica which are not 
part of the ice sheets; (3) incomplete climatic data from 
many parts of the world because of lack of weather stations 
near the glaciers; (4) crude approximations to dynamic 
feedbacks, instead of a real dynamics model; (5) general 
neglect of refreezing of meltwater in cold firn and of 
iceberg calving. 
The results listed in Table 7.2 and Figure 7.4 suggest 
that the sea level rise contribution due to changes in glacier 
volumes averaged about 0.35 mm/yr between 1890 and 
1990, and 0.60 mm/yr between 1985 and 1993. The 
uncertainty of these values is difficult to assess; the spread 
of the individual estimates suggests uncertainties of at least 
±0.1 and ±0.05 mm/yr, respectively. None of the studies 
noted above used an interactive model of the balance-
4000 
- o u u u 
-1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
^ 
1 
1940 
1950 
1960 
1970 
1980 
1990 
2000 
Year 
Figure 7.4: Average annual mass balances (bnAVER) for the 
glaciers of the world. These are weighted by area, and include 
virtually all of the observed glaciers (about 60). Also shown are 
the maximum (bnMAX) and minimum (bnMIN) mass balances 
for each year. To convert to equivalent sea level rise, multiply by 
the ratio of ice area to ocean area ( 1.8 X 10"^). (From Dyurgerov 
and Meier, 1995). 
dynamics feedback. Simple models exist (e.g., Jóhannesson 
et al., 1989), but are difficult to apply over the vast 
spectrum of glaciers: large and small, temperate and cold, 
etc. One recent model of time-changes in glacier profiles, 
using typical or averaged values of ice thickness and a 
parameter specifying the localisation of thickness changes 
near the terminus, produces an estimate of sea level rise 
due to thinning of glaciers over the last 100 years of 0.5 
mm/yr (Schwitter and Raymond, 1993). 
7.3.2.3 Sensitivity to climate changes 
The contribution of glacier wastage to sea level rise in the 
future could be calculated for any climate scenario, 
assuming knowledge of the dependence of the mass 
balance, internal accumulation and iceberg calving on the 
meteorological environment, and how the ensuing changes 
feed back to the glacier area and volume. Most of this 
knowledge does not currently exist. Alternatively, the 
contribution can be estimated using simple models 
developed by comparing past changes in glacier volume 
with observed changes in air temperature, or by calculating 
the present-day relation of mass balance to temperature and 
precipitation - the "sensitivity" (e.g., Oerlemans and 
Fortuin, 1992). 
The term "sensitivity" can be defined in several ways. 
The expression often used to estimate sea level change 
from glacier volume change is the ratio of the rate of 
change of glacier volume to a small change in a climatic 
374 
Changes in Sea Level 
parameter (such as temperature). Here, this ratio is termed 
the static sensitivity of glaciers to climate change. The 
static sensitivity ignores changes in the configuration of the 
glacier. The dynamic response of the glacier and the 
lowering of its surface due to increased melting will 
change the effect of a non-zero mass balance over time-
scales ranging from decades to centuries. Most glaciers in 
the world have not been in equilibrium with their climatic 
environment, at least not since the Little Ice Age, so there 
is a problem in computing the sensitivity value in a non-
equilibrium situation with an unknown or ill-defined initial 
boundary condition. 
Nonetheless, estimates of the static sensitivity have been 
obtained by different authors using different methods. The 
methods include: (1) hydrometeorological modelling using 
precipitation and temperature (e.g., Martin, 1978; Kuhn et 
al, 1979; Tangborn, 1980; Chen and Funk, 1990); (2) 
degree-day modelling (e.g., Laumann and Reeh, 1993; 
Jóhannesson et al, 1995; Wigley et al, 1996); (3) mass 
balance or volume change observations related to an 
assumed linear change in global air temperature (e.g., 
Meier, 1993); (4) energy-balance modelling (Oerlemans 
and Fortuin, 1992). The resulting values range from 0.58 to 
2.6 mm/yr/°C, with much of the spread related to 
assumptions about the initial mass balance condition 
(Wiglùyetal, 
1996). 
7.3.3 The Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets 
7.3.3.1 Processes causing change in the ice sheets 
Most of the non-oceanic water on Earth resides in the two 
great ice sheets (Table 7.1), and most of their volume lies 
on land above sea level. Thus, loss of only a small fraction 
of this volume could have a significant effect on sea level. 
In Antarctica, recent break-ups of the Larsen and Wordie 
Ice Shelves in the Antarctic Peninsula and discharges of 
enormous icebergs from the Filchner and Ross Ice Shelves, 
and the discovery of major recent changes in certain 
Antarctic ice streams, have focused public attention on the 
possibility of "collapse" of this ice reservoir within the 
next century, with potential impacts on sea level. Changes 
in floating ice shelves, of course, cannot affect sea level 
direcfly. Nevertheless, ice shelves are part of a complex, 
coupled ice flow system involving the inland ice and 
relatively fast-moving ice streams that discharge ice from 
land to sea, and changes in the rate of discharge can affect 
sea level. Whether such dynamic processes can be affected 
by climate changes on the time-scale of a century is a key 
issue. 
In this sense, the Greenland ice sheet, which has no 
floating ice shelves of consequence, is different from the 
Antarctic ice sheet. In Antarctica, temperatures are so low 
that comparatively littie surface melting occurs and the ice 
loss is mainly by iceberg calving, the rates of which are 
determined by dynamic processes involving long response 
times. In Greenland, ice loss from surface melting and 
runoff is of the same order of magnitude as loss from 
iceberg calving (Table 7.1). Thus, climate change in 
Greenland could be expected to have immediate effects on 
the surface mass balance of the ice sheet through melting 
and runoff as well as through accumulation. 
On both ice sheets, the residence times for particles of 
ice range from the order of 10^ yr or more for ice near an 
ice divide, to 10-^ yr or less for ice near the equilibrium line 
which separates the area of annual mass gain 
(accumulation) from the area of annual mass loss (melting 
and/or calving). These long residence times and their 
variations over the ice sheets further complicate the 
modelling of the response of ice sheets to climate change. 
7.3.3.2 Current state of balance 
Current changes of the ice sheets can be measured using 
surface mass balance observations or by geodetic (volume-
change) methods. However, the ice sheets respond to 
processes at all time-scales, ranging from the last glacial-
interglacial transition to decade-scale fluctuations in the 
temperature and precipitation fields. As most of our 
observations extend over a few decades only, this 
immediately poses a problem: how can we decide from 
observations whether a small change in ice sheet 
configuration is a response to a short-term climatic 
fluctuation or an ongoing process of slow adjustment to 
changes that happened a long time ago? This question 
requires,numerical modelhng studies of ice sheet dynamics. 
Mass balance studies 
One approach to estimating the current state of balance is 
to collect all available data on specific balance (net gain or 
loss of ice at the surface) and on iceberg production from 
ice shelves or outlet glaciers, and make the sum. When the 
interest is in the effect on sea level, the mass flux across 
grounding lines (the boundary between grounded and 
floating ice) should be considered rather than iceberg 
calving. With the data currently available, this procedure 
leads to very uncertain estimates. 
The vastness of the ice sheets is the major obstacle in 
mass balance studies. In principle, the net mass balance of 
an ice sheet can be determined by summing the balance 
observations at the surface and the loss of ice by calving. 
However, measurements of the surface balance still give a 
poor coverage of both the Greenland and Antarctic ice 
Changes in Sea Level 
Table 7.3: Current state of balance (in 10'2 ^^/^.^ ^f,^^ Antarctic ice sheet. 
375 
Source 
Huybrechts (1990) 
Accumulation 
(grounded ice) 
Budd and Smith (1985) 
1800 
Bendey and 
1660 
Giovinetto (1991) 
Jacobs ei a/. (1992) 
1528 
Mass flux at 
grounding line 
Balance 
(grounded ice) 
1620 
1260 
Remarks 
0 to +360 
+40 to +400 
-351 
More or less reliable data for 42% of 
the ice sheet, extrapolated to whole 
grounded ice sheet 
Estimated calving and runoff: 2613, 
Total accumulation (incl. ice 
shelves): 2144 
Numerical ice sheet model run for 
last 160 kyr 
Table 7.4: Current state of balance (in 1012 kg/yr}.ofthe Greenland ice sheet. 
Source 
Accumulation 
Bauer (1968) 
500 
Reeh(1985) 
557 
Ohmura and Reeh (1991) 
535 
Huybrechts et al. (1991) 
539 
Reeh (1994) 
553 
Huybrechts (1994) 
Runoff 
330 
239 
254 
237 
Calving 
280 
318 
316 
Balance 
Remarks 
-110 
±0 
~0 
+12.6 
New precipitation map 
Degree-day model on grid 
Field data 
Numerical ice sheet model 
run for last 130 kyr 
sheets, and estimating calving rates is an even more 
uncertain exercise. Mass balance estimates for Antarctica 
and Greenland are shown in Tables 7.3 and 7.4. 
For the Antarctic ice sheet, two studies attempted to 
compare accumulation with mass flux across grounding 
lines. Budd and Smith (1985) used existing ice velocity 
measurements to estimate outflow from the grounded ice. 
They concluded that "...the total influx over the Antarctic 
ice sheet of about 2000 km^/yr (= 1800 X lO'^ kg/yr) is 
probably nearly balanced by the outflow with a 
discrepancy most likely in the range of 0 to +20%". 
Bentiey and Giovinetto (1991) made an assessment of the 
imbalance for drainage basins for which a reasonable 
amount of data was available. Most basins seem to have a 
positive balance. Extrapolating the results to the entire 
grounded ice sheet in three different ways yields an 
imbalance between +2 and +25% of the total input. These 
studies thus suggest that grounded ice volume is 
increasing, but the error bars are very large. 
For the Greenland ice sheet, early estimates (Bauer, 
1968) suggested a negative balance. More recently, several 
mass balance studies of a more local nature have been 
carried out. Kostecka and Whillans (1988) compared mass 
balance with ice velocity measurements along two 
transects (International Glaciological expedition to 
Greenland [EGIG] traverse [ 7 r N ] and the Ohio State 
University traverse [65°N]). Results suggest no significant 
changes in ice thickness, with perhaps a very slight 
thickening at the Ohio State University traverse (0.06 ± 
0.08 m/yr). For the Dye 3 station (65°N, 43.5°W) Reeh and 
Gundestrup (1986) obtain a change in ice thickness of 0.03 
± 0.06 m/yr, i.e., not significantly different from zero. 
From south-west Greenland there is a large amount of 
information on fluctuations of ouflet glaciers (Weidick, 
376 
Changes in Sea Level 
1984, 1995). There has been a general retreat of outlet 
glaciers since the end of the 19th century. This retreat has 
slowed down in recent decades (a significant number of 
outlet glaciers are now advancing). It is not exactly clear 
how such fluctuations relate to the total volume of the ice 
sheet, but it appears that the Greenland ice sheet may have 
contributed significantly to sea level rise during the first 
part of this century and that its present contribution may be 
close to zero. 
Geodetic methods 
The most direct method for determining the current state of 
balance is to measure continuously and very accurately the 
surface elevation of the ice sheets. Assuming that 
grounding lines can be located, and changes in density and 
bed topography are sufficienfly small or can be determined 
otherwise, a trend in the amount of grounded ice mass can 
be detected. 
Ground-based levelling studies along transects on the ice 
sheets have been very limited. The EGIG line in Greenland, 
however, has been studied in some detail (Malzer and 
Seckel, 1975; Seckel, 1977; Kock, 1993; Moeller, 1994). 
There appears to be a general thickening from 1959 to 1968 
followed by a thinning to 1992, with an overall change of 
0.1 m/yr or less. It is not known how representative this 
finding is of the whole Greenland ice sheet. 
Recent attempts to measure the surface elevation include 
the use of sateflite radar altimetry. The results are still 
controversial. Zwally et al. (1989) used sateflite radar 
altimetry to estimate the change in surface elevation of the 
Greenland ice sheet south of 72°N (excluding the margins). 
For the period 1978-1985, they found an ice thickening 
rate of 0.23 ± 0.04 m/yr which implied a 25% to 45% 
positive balance for that period. Douglas et al. (1990) 
criticised this result on the basis of inadequate calibration 
of satellite orbits, but Zwafly et al. (1990) obtained a 
similar result using orbits that were consistently calculated 
and adjusted to a common ocean reference. Lingle et al. 
(1991) used this method in the ablation zone, but due to 
errors in the altimetry on these sloping and undulating 
margins, the thickness-change results are not significantiy 
different from zero. Ice sheet modelling by Huybrechts 
(1994) suggests an average thickening south of 72°N, in 
agreement with Zwally's results but somewhat smaller in 
magnitude. 
Numerical modelling 
A different approach simulates the evolution of the ice 
sheets using numerical models that include some of the 
relevant physical processes, attempting to constrain resulting 
35 
30 
E 25^ 
1 20 
¡ 1 5 
О 
2 10 -
5 -
-I 
\ 
Г 
Antarctica 
J 
L 
-150 
-125 
-100 
-75 
-50 
-25 
0 
25 
Thousands of years before/after present 
| 
Present 
Figure 7.5: Long-term model simulations of the changes in ice 
volume of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets due to 
temperature and sea level changes (courtesy of Ph. Huybrechts). 
ice sheet histories as much as possible by (palaeo) field 
evidence of both a geological and glaciological (ice cores) 
nature. The integrations should be performed over at least 
one glacial cycle to remove transient effects. One of the 
problems of such an approach is how to specify the forcing 
history (i.e., how to formulate the mass balance per unit area, 
which is the driving force, as a function of time and space). 
Using a modelling approach, Huybrechts (1990, 1994) 
has carried out long integrations 
with a fairly 
comprehensive model of the Antarctic and Greenland ice 
sheets. This model solves the coupled mechanic and 
thermodynamic equations and includes ice shelves. The 
forcing follows a specified temperature and a sea level 
history. Simple parametrizations are used for the 
generation of the mass balance fields from a uniform 
temperature signal, which is taken from the Vostok ice 
core, and there, is no direct effect of insolation variations on 
the mass balance. From the model, the Antarctic ice sheet 
shows a very strong response to the glacial-interglacial 
transition, as shown in Figure 7.5. This is inainly a 
response to the rise in sea level at that time and involves a 
substantial shrinkage of the West Antarctic ice sheet. The 
Greenland ice sheet show a much weaker response, except 
in the beginning of the integration (which must be 
considered as transient effects). The Greenland ice sheet 
responds solely to the temperature signal (sea level has 
very little effect). With respect to current tnass balance, 
these model simulations suggest that the contribution of the 
Greenland ice sheet to sea level rise may be close to zero, 
while that of the Antarctic ice sheet may be positive. 
Summary 
The paucity of relevant data does not allow a meaningful 
judgement of the current state of balance of the Greenland 
Changes in Sea Level 
377 
and Antarctic ice sheets. Different workers claim changes 
with even different sign, up to (and perhaps exceeding) 
25% of the annual mass turnover (even more for south 
Greenland). A major problem is the use of data on the 
decadal time-scale to infer long-term changes. At present it 
can be concluded that an imbalance of up to 25% cannot be 
detected in a definite way by current methods/data. In 
terms of sea level change, a ±25% imbalance implies: 
Antarctica 
±1.4 mm/yr 
Greenland 
±0.4 mm/yr 
7.3.3.3 Sensitivity to Climate Change 
Tools to study the sensitivity of ice sheet mass balance 
comprise regression analyses, simple meteorological 
models (e.g., energy-balance modelling of a melting glacier 
surface), and GCMs. The sensitivities of Antarctica and 
Greenland to a 1°C warming based on these various 
methods are shown in Tables 7.5 and 7.6. 
Ultimately, GCMs should be the best tools to study the 
mass balance of ice sheets, because in principle they 
include most relevant processes. Nevertheless, published 
climate change studies using GCMs rarely report or discuss 
changes in the water mass balance at the surface of ice 
sheets in spite of the crucial importance of such 
information for predictions of sea level change. This is an 
indication that confidence in such quantification is still 
low. Partly because ice accumulation at the surface of ice 
sheets is very slow, small absolute errors (and regional-
scale precipitation patterns from control runs of GCMs are 
often significantly different from observed climate) come 
out as large relative errors. Even GCMs which fare well on 
average are not entirely reliable for polar climate studies 
(Genthon, 1994). Nevertheless, there have been significant 
improvements in recent years, mainly associated with 
increased resolution (Simmonds, 1990; Budd and 
Simmonds, 1991; Genthon, 1994). It is expected that more 
credible results from AOGCMs will be available in the 
near future. 
For Greenland, a number of estimates of the sensitivity 
of the ice sheet to climate change have been made with 
simple meteorological models (degree-day models and 
energy balance models). The most studied quantity is the 
change in mean specific (surface) balance for a uniform 
1°C increase in air temperature (Table 7.5). The earlier 
studies extrapolated calculations for a particular site to the 
entire ice sheet. In the later studies where calculations were 
made on a 20 km grid, the sensitivity values are somewhat 
Table 7.5: Sensitivity of the Greenland ice sheet to 1 °C climatic warming. 
Source 
Sensitivity 
(mm/yr in equivalent 
sea level change) 
Remarks 
Ambach and Kuhn (1989) 
+0.31 
Based on analysis of EGIG data; energy balance 
[+0.24]* 
considerations at equilibrium Une extrapolated to 
entire ice sheet. 
Bindschadler(1985) 
+0.57 to +0.77 
Based on simple flowline model extrapolated to 
entire ice sheet and including estimated change in 
iceberg calving. 
Braithwaite and Olesen (1990) 
+0.36 to +0.48 
Extrapolation of energy balance calculation for 
South-West Greenland. 
Oerlemans etal. (1991) 
+0.37 
Energy balance model; ice sheet divided in four 
[+0.28]* 
"climatic sectors". 
Huybrechts etal (1991) 
+0.30 
Degree-day model on 20 km grid. 
[+0.22]* 
van de Wal and Oerlemans (1994) 
+0.30 
Energy balance model on 20 km grid. 
[+0.21]* 
* Includes 5% increase in accumulation. 
378 
Changes in Sea Level 
Table 7.6: Sensitivity of the Antarctic ice sheet to 1 °C climatic warming (mm/yr in equivalent sea level change). 
Source/Method 
Sensitivity 
Remarks 
Muszynski and Birchfield (1985) 
-0.38 
Regression on 208 data points 
Fortuin and Oerlemans (1990) 
-0.20 
Grounded ice only 
regression on 486 data points 
Fortuin and Oerlemans (1992) 
-0.27 
2-dimensional atmospheric model: + Г С 
warming at coast and associated greenhouse 
forcing over ice sheet 
Change in accumulation assumed 
-0.34 
20 km grid over grounded ice 
proportional to saturation vapour pressure 
Temperature/sea ice/mass balance coupling 
-0.7 
Sensitivity of accumulation to sea ice extent 
(Giovinetto and Zwally, 1995) coupled with 
sensitivity of sea ice extent to air temperature 
(Parkinson and Bindschadler, 1984) 
less. Nonetheless, the differences between the various 
studies are not very large. This must be due partly to the 
fact that empirical constants/parameters used in the 
different methods come mostly from the same data sets. 
The various approaches have some weak points in common 
as well (treatment of meltwater infiltration and refreezing, 
and of albedo). Also, accumulation rates are treated in the 
same way in all studies: either fixed, or changed in 
proportion to the saturation vapour pressure of the 
overlying air. However, there is little physical reason to 
believe that the precipitation pattern over Greenland is 
invariant for climate change. In fact, some studies using 
current information (Bromwich et al, 1993; Bromwich, 
1995) or results from ice cores (Kapsner et al, 1995) 
suggest that there is littie relation between temperature and 
precipitation changes over Greenland during the Holocene 
owing to the dominant effect of changes in atmospheric 
circulation. 
Iceberg calving is a major component in the mass 
balances of both ice sheets. Reeh (1994) has estimated that 
the iceberg discharge from Greenland is 319 X 10kg/yr, 
compared with a discharge of 239 X lO'^ kg/yr due to 
melting and meltwater runoff. The calving data are still 
approximate, because many major calving glaciers, 
especially in East Greenland, have not been measured, and 
because the seasonality of calving is not well defined even 
for the measured glaciers. Possible changes in the iceberg 
calving regimes due to climate change are not well 
understood, because a physical relation between calving 
rates and climate, geometry and ice flow has not yet been 
defined (Reeh, 1994). Much of the discharge from the 
Antarctic ice sheet is by calving of icebergs, but the 
various estimates of this flux differ. The most serious 
problem is that iceberg breakoff may be very episodic; in 
some areas the mean time between major calving events 
may be >100 years, so that historical data are of limited 
use. Also, the method of measuring the discharge using 
observations of current iceberg distributions is limited by 
uncertainty regarding mean lifetimes of icebergs of 
differing sizes, a critical relation needed for computing 
fluxes. 
For the Antarctic ice sheet, possible changes in 
accumulation rates associated with eventual warming have 
been studied using regression techniques (e.g., Muszynski 
and Birchfield, 1985; Fortuin and Oerlemans, 1990). The 
problem here is the dependence within the set of predictors 
that are used in a multiple regression. Broadly speaking, 
when going from the margin of the ice sheet to the interior, 
the accumulation rate changes by an order of magnitude, 
typically from 0.4 m/yr to 0.04 m/yr (expressed as water-
equivalent). This is partly due to lower air temperature, but 
also to other factors (e.g., distance to moisture source, 
topographic effects). So the sensitivity of the accumulation 
rate to temperature (identified as the regression coefficient 
for temperature) depends on the choice of the other 
predictors. This explains the large difference in the results 
of Muszynski and Birchfield (1985) and Fortuin and 
Oerlemans (1990); see Table 7.6. In addition, accumulation 
rates on the Antarctic ice sheet may be sensitive to changes 
in sea ice extent and concentration (Giovinetto and Zwally, 
Changes in Sea Level 
379 
1995). 
An extensive sensitivity study with a two-dimensional 
(vertical plane) meteorological model was conducted by 
Fortuin and Oerlemans (1992). In this model, the zonal 
mean distribution of temperature and precipitation is 
calculated with a four-layer dynamic model, which 
includes a radiation scheme. For a uniform warming, this 
model predicts a higher accumulation rate and a stronger 
evaporation in the coastal regions than in the interior. The 
net effect over the grounded ice is an increase in the mass 
balance coiTesponding to a -0.27 mm/yr sea level change 
for a 1°C warming. This value is slightly less than the 
-0.34 mm/yr found if the change in accumulation is set 
proportional to the relative change in saturation vapour 
pressure. 
In some parts of the Antarctic Peninsula, surface 
temperatures are sufficiently high that melting occurs. 
Drewry and Morris (1992) estimated the potential 
contribution to sea level due to increased runoff from that 
part of the peninsula where melting may occur (about 
20,000 km2). They suggest a sensitivity of 0.012 mm of sea 
level rise/yr/°C, which is small compared to the sensitivity 
for the whole of Antarctica as listed in Table 7.6. 
In summary, based on Tables 7.5 and 7.6, the value of the 
static sensitivity, in terms of equivalent sea level change, is 
estimated here as 0.30 mm/yr/°C for the Greenland ice 
sheet, and -0.30 mm /yr/°C for the Antarctic ice sheet. The 
spread of the individual estimates suggests uncertainties of 
at least ±0.15 mm/yr/°C for both Greenland and Antarctica 
(excluding the possibility of collapse of the West Antarctic 
ice sheet - see Section 7.5.5). 
7.3.4 Surface Water and Ground Water Storage 
Changes in the terrestrial liquid-water budget can affect sea 
level. Shiklomanov (1993) points out that human activity 
affects the hydrologie cycle through water diversions, 
transformations of stream networks, and changes of the 
surface characteristics of drainage basins, as well as 
causing climatic changes on regional or global scales 
which affect water transfers between land and sea. Both 
direct anthropogenic changes, as well as natural and 
anthropogenic effects on the climate, are involved, and it is 
often difficult to separate the two. Some estimates of the 
contributions from the major components of the liquid-
water budget are as follows: 
• 
Ground water depletion. Ground water pumped at 
a rate in excess of recharge may add to sea level. 
Much of this water is used for irrigation and a major 
fraction is transpired or evaporated to the atmosphere 
or contributes to runoff, eventually reaching the sea. 
Estimates of the current rate of ground water 
depletion range from 0.07 to 0.38 mm/yr in sea level 
equivalent (KUge, 1982; Meier, 1983; Sahagian et 
al, 1994). 
• 
Surface reservoir and lalte storage. The filling of 
surface water reservoirs transfers water from sea to 
land, tending to lower sea level. Lakes depend on the 
balance of precipitation and evaporation, and also 
respond to changes in upstream runoff which may be 
affected by human action. Some of the world's large 
lakes are currently rising; others are falling, due in 
part to upstream irrigation and evaporation. The 
current effect of these non-synchronous changes on 
global sea level is probably small. Estimates of the 
current rate of increase in water storage in artificial 
reservoirs range widely, from about -0.09 to -0.54 
mm/yr sea level equivalent (e. g., Golubev, 1983; 
Chao, 1988, 1994; Shiklomanov, 1993; Gornitz et 
al, 1994; Rodenburg, 1994; Sahagian etal, 1994). 
• 
Deforestation. Gornitz et al. (1994) estimate that 
the combustion and oxidation of forests transfer 
water to the sea at a rate of about 0.03 mm/yr in sea 
level equivalent, but that decreased runoff 
(Henderson-Sellers et al, 1993) increases water on 
land at a rate of 0.15 mm/yr. Sahagian et al. (1994), 
on the other hand, suggest that tropical forest loss 
and desertification are currentiy contributing to sea 
level rise by 0.15 mm/yr, due to the loss of biomass 
water, soil moisture and water vapour in the 
atmosphere. The net effect is thus uncertain. 
• 
Loss of wetlands. Sahagian et al. (1994) estimate a 
sea level rise component of at least 0.01 mm/yr due 
to the loss of wetlands. 
• 
Other changes. Ice-rich permafrost may contain up 
to twice as much water (frozen) as the same soil in a 
thawed state. Lachenbruch and Marshall (1986) 
estimate a secular thawing of permafrost in Arctic 
Alaska equivalent to about 10 mm of ice melt/yr. If 
half of the pore water runs off on thawing, and if half 
of the global permafrost area is similarly ice-rich and 
degrading (certainly an upper limit), the contribution 
of permafrost thawing to sea level rise could be up to 
0.1 mm/yr. Gornitz et al. (1994) have estimated the 
following additional effects: the water pumped for 
irrigation that is returned by infiltration to soil 
380 
Changes in Sea Level 
moisture; tiie water added to the atmosphere as water 
vapour in irrigated areas; the water that seeps into the 
ground each year below reservoirs; and the increased 
water vapour content of the atmosphere in the 
vicinity of the reservoirs. These effects may be 
appreciable, causing a decrease in the overall rate of 
sea level rise. However, these results are conjectural, 
and a more accurate budget calculation will require 
comprehensive global hydrological modelling of the 
type now under development for use in general 
atmospheric circulation models. 
The above estimates of the terrestrial liquid-water 
components affecting sea level vary considerably, and the 
spread is so large that the sum could be either positive or 
negative. Earlier estimates (e.g., Klige, 1982; Meier, 1983; 
Robin, 1986) and more recent work (Chao, 1994; 
Rodenburg, 1994) suggest that the sum is, in fact, close to 
zero. Our best estimate at this time is that the current 
contribution to sea level rise due to these hydrologie 
factors is between -0.40 and -1-0.75 mm/yr, with a mean 
estimate of about -i- 0.1 mm/yr. Over the last 100 years, 
these factors may have contributed about 0.5 cm to sea 
level rise, although the uncertainties are very large indeed. 
Eew authors have ventured an estimate for future years. 
Sahagian et al. (1994) point out that the rate of dam 
building has slowed markedly, but that depletion of ground 
water reservoirs is likely to increase with growing demands 
for water, apart from any effects of climate change. They 
estimate that the contribution of anthropogenic changes in 
land hydrology to sea level rise will be 2.6 cm in the next 
50 years if the present rates are maintained. This estimate, 
largely based on the expected continued depletion of 
ground water reserves, is reasonable, but a future decline in 
dam 
building is not supported by the analysis of 
Shiklomanov (1993). Unfortunately, the contribution to sea 
level from changes in hydrologie practices due to climate 
trends has not yet been fully analysed. 
7.4 Can Sea Level Changes During the Last 100 Years 
be Explained? 
A critical issue is whether the rise in sea level observed over 
the last 100 years can be explained. A synthesis of the 
model and observational data pertaining to the factors 
discussed in Section 7.3 is presented in Table 7.7. In 
general, there is broad agreement that both thermal 
expansion and glaciers have contributed to the observed sea 
level rise, but there are very lai-ge uncertainties regarding 
the role of the ice sheets and other hydrologie factors. 
Table 7.7: Estimated contributions to sea level rise over 
the last 100 years (in cm). 
Component contributions 
Low 
Middle 
High 
Thermal expansion 
2 
4 
7 
Glaciers/small ice caps 
2 
3.5 
5 
Greenland ice sheet 
-A 
0 
4 
Antarctic ice sheet 
-14 
0 
14 
Surface water and ground 
-5 
0.5 
7 
water storage 
TOTAL 
-19 
8 
37 
OBSERVED 
10 
18 
25 
For thermal expansion, the range 2-7 cm reported in 
Table 7.7 derives from model simulations, especially those 
carried out for this report and other recent model results 
(see Section 7.5). The various studies that have addressed 
this issue give answers that are of the same direction and 
similar magnitude. Observational data related to thermal 
expansion are presently too sparse to make global-scale 
estimates. Overall, it is likely that some oceanic thermal 
expansion would have occurred given the global mean 
warming of 0.3 to 0.6 °C observed over the same time 
period. 
It is clear that many of the world's glaciers have 
retreated over the last 100 years. However, continuous, 
long-term measurements of the mass balances of glaciers 
and ice caps are very limited. Based on a combination of 
observations and simple models (see Section 7.3.2.2), it is 
concluded that glaciers and ice caps may have accounted 
for 2-5 cm of the observed sea level rise. 
With respect to the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, 
there is simply insufficient evidence, either from models or 
data, to. say whether the average mass balances have been 
positive or negative. Thus, the "zero" entries in Table 7.7 
should, be interpreted as a reflection of the current poor 
state of knowledge, rather than as an estimate of the current 
state of balance. As mentioned previously (Section 
7.3.3.2), an imbalance of up to 25% of the annual mass 
turnover cannot be ruled out by existing data and methods, 
giving the wide range of uncertainty indicated in Table 7.7. 
However, a large positive mass balance of both ice sheets 
would seem unlikely, as this would have led to a 
substantial sea level lowering and would therefore be 
highly inconsistent with the observed sea level rise. 
The current estimates of changes in surface water and 
ground water storage are very uncertain and speculative. 
Changes m Sea Level 
381 
There is no compelling recent evidence to alter the 
conclusion of IPCC (1990) that the most likely net 
contribution during the last 100 years has been near zero or 
perhaps slightly positive, with an uncertainty of about ±6cm. 
In total, based on models and observations, the 
combined range of uncertainty regarding the contributions 
of thermal expansion, glaciers, ice sheets and land water 
storage to past sea level change is about -19 cm to +37 cm 
- a very wide band of uncertainty which easily embraces 
the observed sea level rise (10-25 cm). The major source 
of uncertainty relates to the current mass balance of the 
polar ice sheets. Although the apparent discrepancy 
between the middle values of the "total" and "observed" 
estimates in Table 7.7 might suggest a net positive 
contribution from the ice sheets, the role of the other 
factors cannot be ruled out within the overall uncertainties. 
This problem in reconciling the past change, especially in 
relation to climate-related factors, emphasises the 
uncertainties in projections of the future, as noted below. 
7.5 How Might Sea Level Change in the Future? 
7.5.1 Recent Projections 
In 1990, the IPCC concluded that for Scenario A, or the 
"Business-as-Usual" scenario, sea level would rise 66 cm 
by the year 2100 (Warrick and Oerlemans, 1990). Since 
then, additional estimates of future sea level rise have been 
made, as shown in Table 7.8. Although these more recent 
estimates seem lower than that of IPCC (1990), direct 
comparisons cannot easily be made due to differences in 
assumptions regarding factors such as emission scenarios, 
gas concentration changes, radiative forcing changes, the 
climate sensitivity and initial conditions. 
For example, the estimate of Church et al. (1991) of 35 
cm by 2050 was based on a rate of global warming which 
was twice that projected by IPCC (1990). The projection of 
Wigley and Raper (1993) of 46 cm by 2100 was based on a 
lower emission scenario (IPCC (1990)-B). The Wigley and 
Raper (1992) estimate of 48 cm by the year 2100 was 
based on the revisions of gas cycle models and lower 
Table 7.8: Recent estimates of future global sea level rise (cm) (updated from Warrick and Oerlemans, 1990). It should be 
noted that the estimates of sea level change are not strictly comparable, as they also reflect the combination of the authors ' 
different estimates of future emissions, radiative forcing changes and model parameters, which are difficult to disentangle. 
Sea level Rise Component 
Total rise" 
Source 
Thermal 
Glaciers 
Greenland 
Antarctic 
Best 
Range*' 
To (Year) 
(emission scenario) 
Expansion 
and ice caps 
ice sheet 
ice sheet 
Estimate 
IPCC90-A 
43 
18 
10 
-5 
66 
31 to 110 
2100 
(Warrick & Oeriemans, 1990) 
Church et al. (\99\f 
25 
[ 
10 (all ice) 
] 
35 
15 to 70 
2050 
Wigley & Raper (1992)'' 
[ 
not specified 
I 
48 
15 to 90 
2100 
Wigley & Raper (1993) 
25 
[.... 
21 (all ice) 
] 
46e 
3 to 124f 
2100 
Titus & Narrayanan (1995)8 
21 
9 
5 
-1 
34 
5 to 77^ 
2100 
IPCC projections, this report ' 
28 
16 
6 
-1 
49 
20 to 86 
2100 
This report (Section 7.5.3.2)) 
15 
12 
7 
-7 
27 
2100 
a In most cases from 1990. 
b No confidence intervals given unless indicated otherwise, 
с 
Assumes rapid warming of 3°C by 2050 for best case, 
d For IPCC emission scenario IS92a. 
e For IPCC (1990) Scenario B, best estimate model parameters. 
f 
For IPCC (1990) Scenarios A and C, with high and low model parameters, respectively. 
g Incoiporates subjective probability distributions for model parameter values based on expert opinion. 
h Represents 90% confidence interval. 
i 
For the IPCC IS92a forcing scenario, using a climate sensitivity of 2.5°C for the mid projection and 1.5°C and 4.5°C for 
the low and high projections, respectively. Also see Raper et a)., 1996. 
j 
For IPCC IS92a forcing scenario, with a constant 2.2°C climate sensitivity (no range provided), 
к 
Also see Raper et al, 1996. 
382 
Changes in Sea Level 
radiative forcing changes implied by IPCC (1992). The 
probabilistic estimates of sea level rise provided by Titus 
and Narrayanan (1995, 1996) were derived from subjective 
estimates of probability distributions of model parameter 
values made by a panel of expert reviewers; the result was 
a median estímate of 34 cm by the year 2100. Despite the 
differences in methods and assumpUons, all of these recent 
"best estimates" of future sea level rise still fall within a 
range of 3-6 cm /decade. 
7.5.2 Revised IPCC Projections 
In this section, we offer revised future sea level projections 
that are consistent with the gas concentraüon, radiative 
forcing and climate changes discussed in earlier chapters. 
The individual contributions from oceanic thermal 
expansion, glaciers and ice caps, and the ice sheets of 
Greenland and Antarctica are calculated separately and 
summed to give the total projected sea level rise to the year 
2100. 
7.5.2.1 Methods and assumptions 
Projections of changes in sea level are made using a simple 
global climate model, a global glacier melt model, and 
sensitivity values relating temperature change to ice sheet 
mass balances. The modelling approaches are similar to 
those used in IPCC (1990) (Warrick and Oeriemans, 1990), 
but the models themselves have been substantially revised 
and updated as discussed below. As in Chapter 6, there are 
two sets of projections for each greenhouse gas emission 
scenario based on two alternative views of future aerosol 
concentrations. In the first, aerosol concentrations change 
in response to the changing emissions of their precursors 
assumed in the IS92 scenarios. In the second, future 
aerosol concentrations are held constant at 1990 levels for 
the purpose of sensitivity analyses. The latter set is 
included because of the large uncertainties in future aerosol 
forcing, related both to uncertainties in future emission 
changes and their consequent effects on radiative forcing 
change. Projections corresponding to "aerosols constant at 
1990 levels" provide an estimate of the sea level response 
to a situation where global emissions of aerosol precursors 
remain similar to 1990 levels. 
The projections of oceanic thermal expansion are made 
using an upwelling diffusion-energy balance climate 
model, that of Wigley and Raper (1987, 1992, 1993). Since 
changes in surface air temperature and oceanic thermal 
expansion are interactive (in general, they tend to be 
inversely related - the greater the thermal expansion, the 
less the surface warming for a positive change in radiative 
forcing), it is appropriate for the sake of consistency that 
this is the same model used to project temperature changes 
in Chapter 6. The model has been recentiy updated and 
revised (Raper et al., 1996) to incorporate different 
land/ocean climate sensitivities and temperature-dependent 
upwelling rates to simulate a slow-down of the 
thermohaline circulation with global warming, effects that 
are suggested by recent coupled ocean-atmosphere model 
experiments (Cubasch et al, 1992; Manabe and Stouffer, 
1994; Murphy, 1995). As demonstrated in Chapter 6, the 
revised model is able to emulate well the thermal 
expansion and temperature predictions of more 
complicated coupled ocean-atmosphere models (see 
Sections 6.3.1-6.3.3 for a description of model parameters, 
assumptions and results). The predicted temperature 
changes from this model were used to force the glacier and 
ice sheet models. 
Changes in the volume of glaciers and ice caps were 
estimated with a revised version of the global glacier 
model used in IPCC (1990) (Wigley and Raper, 1995). In 
the revised model, the driving force for melting (or change 
in ice volume) is the difference between the ice volume and 
the "equilibrium" value of the ice volume, the latter itself 
being a function of temperature change. The model has a 
small number of parameters and is tuned against 
observationally based estimates of the glacier volume 
change over the period 1900 to 1961. The model 
incorporates a range of characteristic response times due to 
glacier dynamics; this is necessary because projections are 
needed for the next 100 years, which is of the same order 
of magnitude as real glacier response times. The model is 
regionally disaggregated to take into account the variations 
in the altitudinal range of the world's glaciers and their 
response times, so that as the more "sensitive" glaciers 
begin to. disappear during model simulations, the average 
characteristic response time and other model parameters 
values are altered, giving a non-linear response of glacier 
melt to temperature change. At the initial year of the 
simulation (1880), it is assumed that the world's glaciers 
are in steady-state with respect to the prevailing climate 
and that they contain a volume equal to 30 cm in sea level 
equivalent. 
For the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, the 
simplifying assumption made for the present set of model 
projections is that Üie dynamic response can be ignored on 
the time-scale of decades to a century (in Section 7.5.3 this 
assumption is relaxed). Accordingly, as for the IPCC 
(1990) assessment, the changes in the surface mass balance 
of the ice sheets are represented by static sensitivity values 
(in terms of sea level equivalent) as discussed above. For 
Greenland the sensitivity value is 0.30 ± 0.15 mm/yr/°C, 
Changes in Sea Level 
383 
and it is assumed that the Greenland ice sheet was in 
equilibrium for the initial year (1880) of the simulation. 
For Antarctica, the sensitivity value is -0.20 ± 0.25 
mm/yr/°C (including a term for the possible instability of 
the West Antarctic ice sheet), and it is assumed that the 
mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet was negative in 
1880 in accordance with glacial-interglacial model 
simulations (Section 7.3.3.2). (An imbalance of 0.1 ± 0.5 
mm/yr in sea level equivalent has been assumed as a 
baseline trend that is extrapolated over the simulation 
period). 
Possible changes in surface and ground water storage are 
not taken into account, for three reasons: (1) the available 
data are insufficient for meaningful extrapolation; (2) 
existing studies (e.g., Sahagian et ai, 1994) suggest that 
the future contribution would, in the worst case, be rather 
small; (3) such changes are not, for the most part, caused 
directly by climate change. 
For all the sea level projections, the climate model was 
run from 1765 to 2100. Up to 1990, the same historical 
radiative forcing changes (including aerosol effects) were 
used; thereafter, the various IS92 emission scenarios were 
applied. The glacier and ice sheet models, which were all 
nm from 1880, were forced with the model-derived global 
mean temperature changes (except in the case of 
Greenland, for which the temperature changes were scaled 
by a factor of 1.5 in accordance with A O G C M results). 
Projections were made for the following sets of scenarios 
(see Chapter 6 for an elaboration of methods and 
assumptions regarding scenarios): 
• 
IS92a-f, using "best-estimate" model parameters, 
both including and excluding the effects of changes 
in aerosol concentrarions after 1990; 
• 
IS92a: low, mid and high projections, both including 
and excluding the effects of changes in aerosol 
concentrations after 1990; 
• 
extreme range of projections, based on the highest 
and lowest forcing scenarios and with model 
parameters chosen to maximise or minimise sea level 
changes. 
7.5.2.2 Mode lied past changes 
For the period 1880 to 1990, the calculated change in sea 
level change ranges from -1 cm to 17 cm, with a middle 
estimate of 7 cm (of which more than half is due to thermal 
expansion, followed by glaciers). This is low in 
comparison to the observed range based on tide gauge 
records (10-25 cm; see Section 7.2.1) because it only takes 
into account an estimate of the anthropogenic component 
of past climate forcing, giving a lower temperature change 
than that observed (about 0.29°C as compared to 0.45°C; 
see Section 6.3). Similarly, for the projections of future sea 
level rise only the estimated anthropogenic climate forcing 
is taken into account; no other assumed climate- or non-
climate-related (or "unexplained") component of the 
observed past sea level rise is extrapolated into the future 
projections. For this reason, both the past and future 
projections are likely to be underestimated. 
(a) 
Including aerosol changes beyond 1990 
60 h 
E 50 h 
40 Ь 
g 30 
re 20 h 
10 
~i 
1 
1 
1 
[-
-T 
1 
Г-
IS92e 
IS92f 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS92C 
—I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 1 
1 _ 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
2080 2100 
Year 
(b) 
Constant 1990 aerosols 
IS92e 
IS92f 
IS92a 
IS92b 
IS92d 
IS92C 
2000 
2020 
2060 
2080 
2100 
2040 
Year 
Figure 7.6: Projections of global sea level rise over the period 
1990 to 2100 for Scenarios IS92a-f, using best-estimate model 
parameters, including the effects of changing aerosol 
concentrations after 1990 (a) and, to indicate the sensitivity of 
projections to aerosol effects, for aerosol amounts constant at 
1990 levels(b). 
384 
Changes in Sea Level 
7.5.2.3 Scenarios IS92a-f 
The 1990-2100 changes in sea level for scenarios IS92a-f, 
with "best-estimate" model parameters, are shown in 
Figure 7.6 (a). The range of the projections shown is 
determined by the range of future emissions under the IS92 
scenarios and does not include the additional uncertainties 
in model parameter values. For the first decades of the 
projection period, the choice of emission scenario has little 
effect on the rate of sea level rise; even by the year 2050, 
the range of projected sea level rise is still relatively small, 
18-21 cm. This is a consequence of lags in the climate 
system, caused primarily by the thermal inertia of the 
ocean, and of the continuing response of the ocean, climate 
and ice masses to past changes in radiative forcing and 
temperature. In the short term (i.e., several decades), future 
sea level rise is largely determined by past emissions of 
greenhouse gases. During the second half of the next 
century, however, the curves diverge noticeably. By the 
year 2100, the uncertainty introduced by the emission 
scenarios gives a range of sea level rise of 38-55 cm. The 
effect of holding aerosol amounts constant at 1990 levels is 
to increase the range of projected sea level rise based on 
the six IS92 scenarios, as shown in Figure 7.6 (b). 
7.5.2.4 Scenario IS92a 
The 1990-2100 rise in sea level for IS92a, with high, 
middle and low projections based on model uncertainties, 
is shown in Figure 7.7 Taking into account future changes 
in aerosol amounts under the IS92a Scenario (Figure 7.7, 
solid curves), sea level is projected to rise by 20 cm by the 
year 2050, within a range of uncertainty of 7-39 cm. By 
the year 2100, sea level is estimated to rise by 49 cm, with 
a range of uncertainty of 20-86 cm. 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
2080 
2100 
Year 
Figure 7.7: High, middle and low projections of global sea level 
rise over the period 1990 to 2100 for Scenario IS92a, for aerosol 
amounts constant at 1990 levels (dashed curves) and for changing 
aerosol amounts after 1990 (solid curves). 
-20 
1 
1 
r - 
\ 
1 
1 
1 
1— 
— Total 
Thermal expansion 
•-• Glaciers/icecaps 
— 
Greenland 
-
- - Antarctica 
^ - - ^ 
"-"""^^ 
-
1 
1 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
2080 
2100 
Year 
Figure 7.8: The projected individual contributions to global sea 
level change, 1990 to 2100, for Scenario IS92a (including the 
effects of changes in aerosol amounts beyond 1990). 
For the middle projection under IS92a, inore than half of 
the rise by the end of the next century is due to oceanic 
thermal expansion alone. This is followed by the 
contribution from glaciers and ice caps and from the 
Greenland ice sheet. The Antarctic ice sheet actually 
causes a slight decrease in sea level due to increased 
accumulation as a result of atmospheric warming (as 
shown in Figure 7.8). 
To indicate the sensitivity of the projections to 
assumptions concerning aerosols. Figure 7.7 (dashed 
curves) shows results with aerosol concentrations held 
constant at 1990 levels: the IS92a projections at the year 
2100 are about 10% higher than the projections that 
include aerosol changes. The inclusion of aerosol effects 
tends to lower the estimated changes in radiative forcing, 
compared to those due to greenhouse gases alone, both for 
the past and the future (see Chapters 2 and 6). This directly 
lowei-s the heating and consequent thermal expansion of 
the oceans, as well as reducing the surface temperature 
changes that drive changes in the glaciers and ice sheets. 
The estimates of sea level rise presented here are lower 
than those given by IPCC (1990). For example, the "best 
estimate" value for IS92a by the year 2100 is 49 cm, 
compared with 66 cm for the coiTesponding case in IPCC 
(1990). This change is due primarily to the lower 
temperature projection (see Section 6.3.3), but it also 
reflects the compensaflng effects of a slow-down in the 
thermohaline circulation (which was not considered in 
1990 and which leads to an increase in thermal expansion) 
and the changes made to the glacier model. 
7.5.2.5 Extreme range 
The extreme projections of sea level rise, taking into 
account uncertainties in both model parameters and future 
radiative forcing changes, are shown in Figure 7.9. There is 
Changes in Sea Level 
385 
120 
•100 
• Including changes in aerosol beyond 1990 
• Constant 1990 aerosol 
110 
IS92e 
IS92a 
13IS92C 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 7.9: Extreme projections of global mean sea level rise 
from 1990 to 2100. The highest sea level rise curves assumed a 
cUmate sensitivity of 4.5°C, high ice melt parameters and the 
IS92e emission scenario, the lowest a climate sensitivity of 1.5°C, 
low ice melt parameters and the IS92c Scenario, and the middle 
curves a climate sensitivity of 2.5°C, mid-value ice melt 
parameters and the IS92a Scenario. The solid curves include the 
effect of changing aerosol; the dashed curves assume aerosol 
emissions remain constant at their 1990 levels. 
an order of magnitude difference between the highest and 
lowest projections. The lowest projection shows sea level 
rising at an average rate of about 1 mm/yr over the next 
century, a rate comparable to that which has occurred over 
the last 100 years. The highest projection indicates an 
average rate of about 9-10 mm/yr, a rate which, on a 
global scale, is probably unprecedented over at least the 
last several thousand years. Although this range should be 
considered extreme, no attempt has been made to quantify 
the confidence interval. 
7.5.2.6 Summary 
The "best estimate" for IS92a is that sea level wiU rise by 
49 cm by the year 2100, with a range of uncertainty of 
20-86 cm. These projections of future sea level rise are 
lower than those presented in IPCC (1990). The differences 
are due primarily to the lower temperature projections, the 
inclusion of a slow-down of the thermohaline circulation, 
and changes to the glacier model. However, the basic 
understanding of climate-sea level relationships has not 
changed fundamentally since IPCC (1990). Thus, if future 
temperature change is higher than expected, sea level rise 
will also be higher. 
Large uncertainties remain. In the particular set of 
models used above, these uncertainties derive mainly from 
uncertainties in radiative forcing and model parameters 
affecting temperature change, especially the value of the 
climate sensitivity (see Chapter 6). Relatively speaking. 
uncertainties in future greenhouse gas emissions have 
comparatively littie effect on the projected sea level rise, 
particularly over the first half of the next century, due 
largely to lags in the climate system. Nonetheless, 
combining the various sources of uncertainty, the extreme 
range of sea level projections is very large - an order of 
magnitude difference between the highest and lowest. 
7.5.3 Possible Inter-Model Differences 
In Section 7.5.2 above, a single set of integrated climate and 
ice-melt models was chosen to maximise consistency with 
the various chapters of this report. Consistency was 
achieved in three ways. First, the same simple climate 
model that was used to estimate oceanic thermal expansion 
was also used to estimate global-mean temperature change, 
thus ensuring consistency between Chapters 6 and 7. 
Second, this climate model was demonstrated to emulate 
both the temperature and thermal expansion predictions of 
certain AOGCMs, selected during the IPCC process as the 
standard for gauging the acceptability of a simple climate 
model as the means for examining the effects of various 
IPCC emission scenarios. Third, the land-ocean temperature 
differences, the changes in thermohaline circulation, and the 
magnitude of temperature changes in polar regions - as weU 
as the global temperature and thermal expansion predictions 
- produced by the AOGCMS, were explicitly taken into 
account in using this set of models. Largely because of this 
consistency, these model results are promulgated as the 
IPCC sea level rise projections for the purposes of the 
present IPCC Assessment. 
Using a single set of models, however, ignores the 
differences and uncertainties that might arise from 
alternative models. For this reason, in this section we 
present and compare the results of another set of clitnate, 
glacier and ice sheet models. This alternative set of models 
incorporates several recent advancements in modelling and 
is a credible complement to those models of Section 7.5.2. 
The models were forced by the identical set of IS92 
radiative forcing scenarios for purposes of comparison. 
However, these models do not necessarily meet all the 
same requirements of consistency with the other chapters, 
and therefore were not put forward to the Summary for 
Policymakers as the IPCC sea-level projections. 
Nonetheless, the results are to be considered internally 
consistent, plausible and "state of the art". In this regard, 
the results highlight the uncertainties that could arise from 
various modelling approaches and emphasise the need for 
systematic inter-model comparisons as a post-IPCC 
activity in order to improve future projections, as discussed 
below. 
386 
Changes in Sea Level 
7.5.3.1 Methods and assumptions 
For predicting temperature changes and thermal expansion, 
a simple two-dimensional energy-balance climate model 
having latitudinal and seasonal resolution was used 
(Bintanja, 1995; Bintanja and Oerlemans, 1995; de Wolde 
et al., 1995). This zonal-mean model has a climate 
sensitivity of approximately 2.2°C, and so would be 
expected to give lower sea-level changes than the best 
estimates described above (which use a sensitivity of 
2.5 °C). The model was first calibrated against the seasonal 
cycle of present-day observations of surface air 
temperature, ocean temperature (Levitus, 1982), and snow 
and sea-ice cover. Radiative forcing values for 1765, 
referenced to 1990 (see Section 6.3.2), were then used to 
obtain the initial state, after which the model was 
integrated over the period 1765-2100. Using comparable 
forcings, the thermal expansion results of this model have 
been compared to several coupled G C M results and found 
to be in reasonable agreement. The latitudinally and 
seasonally varying changes in the surface air temperature 
from the model were used to determine the sea level 
contributions from the glacier and ice sheet models. 
For glaciers and ice caps, a range of sensitivity to 
climate change was used (from Oerlemans and Fortuin, 
1992). The value of the sensitivity varies latitudinally, 
depending on the present-day precipitation rate, since 
glaciers in wetter regions are more sensitive than those in 
drier regions. These sensitivity values are time-independent 
and do not take into account the dynamic response of 
glaciers in a changing climate. Since the dynamic response 
may be very different for individual glaciers, it is uncertain 
how such an averaged dynamic behaviour should be 
included. However, it is assumed that on the time-scales 
considered here, the warming associated with the lowering 
of the ice surface and the decrease of the area due to the 
retreat of the glacier terminus will have a counterbalancing 
effect on the sensitivity values. The model calculations 
stait in 1990. On the assumption that most glaciers are not 
in equilibrium with the present climate, a constant trend of 
0.5 mm/yr is included (consistent with observations and the 
global glacier model results in Section 7.5.2). 
Dynamic ice sheet models were used to estimate the sea 
level contributions of Greenland and Antarctica. These 
models take into account the effects of a changing climate 
on the dynamic responses of ice sheets; these flow 
responses were not explicitly included in the static 
sensitivity values used in Section 7.5.2. The two-
dimensional time-dependent Greenland ice sheet model 
(after van de Wal and Oerlemans (1994), modified for 
dynamics in accordance with Mahaffy (1976) and Cadèe 
(1992)) has a horizontal resolution of 20 X 20 km and is 
driven by atmospheric temperature changes, which change 
the surface mass balance. Ablation is calculated with an 
energy-balance model (van de Wal and Oerlemans, 1994), 
while the accumulation rate is kept constant at its present-
day value (as described by Ohmura and Reeh, 1991). The 
initial state of the fully coupled model is its present-day 
equilibrium state. 
The Antarctic ice sheet model (Huybrechts, 1990) is a 
three-dimensional, thermomechanic model coupled to a 
mass balance model that is driven by temperature changes 
inteфolated onto a 40 km grid. Since accumulation appears 
to be strongly related to temperature in Antarctica, the 
accumulation rate is perturbed in proportion to the 
saturation water vapour pressure as temperature changes. 
The initial state of the ice sheet was obtained by integrating 
the ice sheet model over several glacial cycles. Although 
the model shows a continuing, long-term negative mass 
balance (refer to Figure 7.5), no trend is included for future 
projections because of the large uncertainties in the current 
state of balance due to the paucity of observations; the 
projections are calculated as the difference between the 
perturbed run and the reference run. 
For both the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheet models 
as well as the glacier model, simulations begin in 1990, 
with temperature perturbations referenced to 1990. This is 
because of the non-linear response of the models and the 
tuning to present-day cUmate 
7.5.3.2 Model results and comparisons 
In general, the projections of future sea-level rise from this 
set of models are substantially lower than the revised IPCC 
projections presented in Section 7.5.2 for the identical set 
of IS92 forcing scenarios. To illustrate. Figure 7.10 shows 
the highest and lowest projections of sea level rise for the 
period 1990-2100, along with the "best estimates" for 
IS92a. For IS92a, sea level is estimated to rise by 27 cm by 
the year 2100 (34 cm for the sensitivity case with constant 
aerosols), about 45% lower than the corresponding 
projection in Section 7.5.2. Possible explanations for the 
differences are given below. It should also be noted that, 
unlike Section 7.5.2, the value of the climate sensitivity 
(2.2°C) did not vary for the high and low projections, 
resulting in a smaller range of estimates than would 
otherwise have been the case. 
The individual contributions to the total projected sea 
level change for IS92a (including aerosols) are shown in 
Figure 7.11 (compare to Figure 7.8). The relative 
contributions shown in Figure 7.11 are similar to those 
presented in Section 7.5.2: most of the future rise is caused 
Changes in Sea Level 
387 
"g 40 
^ 3 5 
ш 
• ~ i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
— 
IS92e constant 1990 aerosol 
- - IS92a constant 1990 aerosol 
— IS92a Including changes in 
/ ' 
aerosol beyond 1990 
— IS92c constant 1990 aerosol 
49 
2000 
2020 
2040 
2060 
Year 
2080 
2100 
Figure 7.10: Alternatíve model projections of global sea level 
rise, 1990 to 2100, showing the range resulting from differences 
in IS92 scenarios and assuming a climate sensitivity of 2.2°C. 
The upper and lower curves show projections using the IS92e and 
IS92c Scenarios respectively, and assume aerosol emissions 
remain constant at their 1990 levels Also shown are the middle 
projections for IS92a, including and excluding the effects of 
changes in aerosol amounts beyond 1990. In contrast to Figure 
7.9, these calculations do not span the full range of climate 
sensitivity or ice model parameters. 
by oceanic thermal expansion and increased melting of 
glaciers and ice caps, with a positive contribution from 
Greenland and a negative contribution from Antarctica 
(from increased accumulation). However, there are some 
large apparent differences regarding the absolute 
contributions between the two sets of model results. 
For thermal expansion, the contribution to sea-level rise 
by 2100 is 15 cm, about half of that obtained by the simple 
cUmate model used in Section 7.5.2. This lower thermal 
expansion, however, can be largely explained by two 
factors. First, the climate sensitivity of the climate model is 
lower (2.2°C, as compared to 2.5°C used for the best-
estimate projections in Section 7.5.2). Second, the 
thermohaline circulation is represented differentiy by the 
two models. For the revised IPCC projections in Section 
7.5.2, the simple climate model simulates the slow-down of 
the thermohaline circulation with global warming, in 
accordance with most recent coupled G C M results (see 
Section 6.3), which allows greater warming at depth and 
larger thermal expansion. In the zonal-mean model used 
here, the thermohaline circulation was kept constant, with 
comparatively less thermal expansion. Other possible 
explanations for the differences in thermal explanation 
have yet to be examined fully. 
For the Antarctic ice sheet, the dynamic model gives 
relatively much larger negative contributions to sea level 
by the year 2100 than the constant sensitivity values used 
- L -
-7 
1990 
2000 2010 2020 
2030 
2040 
2050 
2060 
2070 
2080 
2090 2100 
Year 
Figure 7.11: Alternative model projections of the projected 
individual contributions to global sea level change, 1990-2100, 
for Scenario IS92a (including the effects of changes in aerosol 
amounts beyond 1990). 
in Section 7.5.2 (-7 cm as compared to about -1 cm). For 
both the dynamic Antarctic and Greenland models used 
here, however, the portion of sea level change attributed to 
dynamic changes was found to be minor on this time-scale 
and does not appear to account for much of the inter-model 
differences. Rather, the inter-model differences are due 
largely to three other factors. First, the Antarctic 
temperature forcings were very different. For the revised 
IPCC projections, the global-mean temperature change was 
used (consistent with recent A O G C M results which show 
Utile enhancement of temperature changes for Antarctica). 
In contrast, the dynamic ice sheet model used here was 
forced with enhanced polar temperature changes obtained 
by the two-dimensional cUmate model. Second, the ice-
sheet sensitivity value used for the revised IPCC 
projections was considerably lower, since it included a 
term for the possible instability of the West Antarctic ice 
sheet. Third, the revised IPCC projections included an 
extrapolation of an assumed 1880 negative mass balance (a 
relatively small effect) throughout the simulated period . 
Together, these factors result in a substantial difference 
between the two sets of model results for Antarctica. 
For the Greenland ice sheet and glaciers, the sea level 
projections obtained by the two sets of models are in closer 
agreement, perhaps by coincidence, despite the different 
modelling approaches that were followed. 
In summary, the uncertainties in sea level projections 
attributed to inter-model differences may be significant. 
Most of the differences between the model results discussed 
in this section can probably be attributed to assumptions 
about the climate sensitivity, changes in the thermohaline 
388 
Changes in Sea Level 
circulation, and the spatial patterns of temperature changes. 
However, no comprehensive model intercomparisons of the 
different component models used for sea level projections 
have been carried out. Such comparisons are required to 
identify the directions for improved models and to nanow 
the uncertainties in future projections. 
7.5.4 Possible Longer-term (>100 years) Changes 
In IPCC (1990), it was shown that on the decadal time-
scale, sea level could be expected to continue to rise 
throughout the next century even if greenhouse forcing 
were stabilised by 2030 (Warrick and Oerlemans, 1990). 
Since IPCC (1990) several model experiments have been 
carried out, using both complex and simple models, that 
reveal the longer-term, multi-century implications of 
greenhouse-gas forcing on sea level. 
One such transient experiment involved the use of an 
A O G C M in which the COj concentration was increased by 
1%/yr until it doubled, after 70 years (e.g., Manabe and 
Stouffer, 1993, 1994). Although the concentration was 
stabilised after doubling, sea level continued to rise from 
thermal expansion alone. At the end of five hundred years, 
sea level had risen one metre due to thermal expansion and 
was still rising, even though temperature changes had 
largely been stabilised. 
T 
r 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
2400 
Year 
Figure 7.12: Long-term (1990 to 2500) projections of global sea 
level rise for stabilisation of COj concentration at 450 ppmv (S450) 
and 650 ppmv (S650). Dots denote the dates of COj stabilisation 
(from Raper et al, 1996). Calculations assume the "observed" 
history of forcing to 1990, including aerosol effects (see Figure 
6.18) and then CO2 concentration increases only beyond 1990. 
T 
1 
1 
1 
\ 
1 
1 
1 
г 
140 -
120 -
E 
CD 100 -
O) 
С 
— 
CO 
x: 0 
80 -
> 
• 
-
CO 
CD 
-
СЛ 
40 -
20 -
и 1 
1 
\ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
\ 
\ 
1 
2000 
2100 
2200 
2300 
2400 
2500 
Year 
Figure 7.13: Long-term (1990 to 2500) projection of global sea 
level rise under an extended emission scenario comprising IS92a 
Scenario to 2100, with a linear decrease in greenhouse gas 
emissions to zero by the year 2200. 
Similar results have also been derived using a simpler 
climate model (Raper et ai, 1996; Wigley, 1995). To 
illustrate. Figure 7.12 (reproduced from Raper et al., 1996) 
shows the long-term effects on sea level of stabilising the 
atmospheric concentrations of COj at 450 ppmv in 2100 
and 650 ppmv in 2200 (Scenarios S450 and S650, 
respectively - see Chapter 2), for the high, middle and low 
sets of climate and ice-melt model parameters. The 
changes shown are those arising from COj alone. In all but 
the lowest projections, sea level continues to rise at a 
scarcely unabated rate for many centuries 
after 
concentration stabilisation. Figure 7.13 provides another 
illustration of the long-term effects of anthropogenic 
forcing on sea level. In this scenario, anthropogenic 
emissions of COj, CH^, N2O, the halocarbons and SO2 (an 
important precu,rsor of aerosols) follow IS92a to 2100 and 
then are assumed to decline linearly to zero over 2100 to 
2200. In this scenario, total radiative forcing peaks around 
the year 2160, but sea level is still rising by 2500, at which 
time it has reached 150 cm. 
In both the complex coupled atmosphere-ocean models 
and the simpler climate models, most of the residual sea 
level rise is due to the thermal inertia of the oceans and 
continued thermal expansion. In addition, in the case where 
simple ice sheet models are included, the assumed large 
response times involving ice dynamics result in continuing 
effects on ice volumes after temperature changes have 
Changes in Sea Level 
389 
largely ceased. Overall, these results reinforce the 
conclusions of IPCC (1990) that a long-term "sea level rise 
commitment" must accompany greenhouse-gas-induced 
warming. Thus, even if greenhouse gas concentrations 
were stabilised, sea level would continue to rise for many 
centuries because of the large inertia in the ocean-ice-
atmosphere climate system. 
7 . 5 . 5 Possible Instabilities of the West Antarctic Ice 
Sheet 
The West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) is a marine ice sheet 
- it rests on a bed well below sea level. It has long been 
argued (Weertman, 1974) that the WAIS may be inherently 
unstable because the interior, grounded ice (inland ice) 
cannot respond fast enough to changes in thickness of the 
floating portions at their junction, the grounding line. It has 
also been argued (Thomas, 1973, 1985) that the large 
abutting ice shelves create "back pressure" which prevents 
the collapse of the inland ice, such that ice shelf thinning or 
break-up could cause the grounded ice to "surge" - another 
critical element contributing to marine ice sheet instability. 
These nouons are changing. It is now known that the 
activity of the WAIS is dominated by fast-flowing, wet-
based ice streams whose characteristics blend gradually 
into those of the floating ice shelves and whose response 
times to changes in the grounding line appear to be very 
rapid (Alley and Whillans, 1991). However, the effects of 
these dynamic ice streams on the stability of the WAIS is 
very much in dispute. In the view of some glaciologists, the 
ability of ice streams to transport ice rapidly from the 
interior to the ocean, on a time-scale of the order of 100 
years, indicates an enhanced capability for a drastically 
accelerated discharge. A contrary view is that the short 
response time of ice streams removes the flux imbalance at 
the grounding line so that the purported instability may not 
exist. 
Recent theoretical work is equivocal. Several recent 
treatments support the idea that the transition zone between 
the grounded and floating ice does not act as a source of 
instability (Van der Veen, 1985; Herterich, 1987; Barcillon 
and MacAyeal, 1993, Lestingant, 1994). On the other hand, 
there is also support for the idea of instability, which may 
include the concept of ice shelf buttressing at the 
grounding line ( N A S A , 1991). A recent theoretical 
development that suggests dramatic instability of a marine 
ice sheet is the so-called "binge-purge" cycle put forward 
to explain the massive outpourings of icebergs (Heinrich 
events) from Northern Hemisphere ice sheets during the 
last ice age (Alley and MacAyeal, 1994; MacAyeal, 1994). 
A model study of the WAIS over the last million years that 
incorporated ice streams and their slippery beds suggests 
that the ice sheet did collapse in the past but that the 
outflow rates were only a few times faster than at present 
(MacAyeal, 1992). 
Recent observational work does not present a clear 
answer either. On the one hand, there is evidence 
suggesting unstable behaviour of the WAIS: Ice Stream В 
is currently flowing too rapidly for a steady-state; the 
current growth of the Crary Ice Rise is affecting the 
regional velocity field and perhaps reducing the discharge 
of Ice Stream B; and Ice Stream С has stagnated in the last 
100-150 years (Retzlaff and Bentiey, 1993). Furthermore, 
there is geologic evidence that this ice sheet has been 
largely or completely absent at some time after its initial 
formation (Scherer, 1991; Burckie, 1993), which suggests 
transient behaviour in this part of the Ross Ice Shelf 
system. On the other hand, there is evidence that does not 
support the notion of WAIS instability: the steady flow for 
the last 1500 years (except for one pulse a few hundred 
years ago) as suggested by flow tracers in the Ross Ice 
Shelf; the current growth, rather than collapse, of the 
glaciers feeding Pine Island Bay (which lost its ice shelf in 
the recent geologic past); and the lack of evidence of 
drastic change in the height or flow of the WAIS at Byrd 
Station in the last 30,000 years (Whillans, 1976). 
Given our present knowledge, it is clear that while the 
ice sheet has had a very dynamic history, estimating the 
likelihood of a collapse during the next century is not yet 
possible. If collapse occurs, it will probably be due more to 
climate changes of the last 10,000 years rather than to 
greenhouse-induced warming. Nonetheless, such a 
collapse, once initiated, would be irreversible. Our 
ignorance of the specific circumstances under which West 
Antarctica might collapse limits the ability to quantify the 
risk of such an event occurring, either in total or in part, in 
the next 100 to 1000 years. 
7.6 Spatial and Temporal Variability 
7.6.1 Geological and Geophysical Effects 
The only globally coherent geological contribution to long-
term sea level change about which we possess detailed 
understanding due to a detailed theory of the process is 
post-glacial rebound (Peltier and Tushingham, 1989; 
Lambeck, 1990). This is the process by which the solid 
Earth and the ocean have continued to adjust to the effects 
of déglaciation throughout the Holocene period (last 
10,000 years). Sea level changes due to longer time-scale 
geological processes (e.g.,, sea floor spreading) are 
sufficientiy small to be of littie interest to this report (e.g.. 
390 
see Harrison, 1989; Meier, 1990). Most Holocene 
geological sea level data have been assimilated into, or 
used to verify, geodynamic models of the Earth (e.g., 
Tushingham and Peltier, 1991; Peltier, 1994). These 
models attempt to achieve a consistency between the 
geological sea level measurements, the history of 
glaciation, and the physics of the solid Earth, including the 
resulting changes in the gravitational field of the Earth. 
Mantle viscosity is determined from a best fit to the data. 
The models result in estimates of relative sea level at any 
point on the Earth's surface (including the interior of 
continents where for "relative sea level" one infers geoid 
height relative to the land surface). A recent example is 
shown in Figure 7.14. Such models are the only ones which 
can be employed on a global basis to estimate the rate one 
would expect sea level to be changing at the present time at 
each location due to the continuing response of the solid 
Earth to déglaciation. 
Changes in Sea Level 
There is some debate at present concerning the precise 
fomi of the Earth's viscosity profile. Some authors believe 
that the geological sea level data constrain the viscosity to 
be approximately uniform, while others think either that 
there is a large increase in viscosity below a 660 km 
discontinuity, or that the present data do not constrain the 
profile well enough to be useful. It is not clear at the 
present time how the uncertainty in the viscosity profile 
propagates into expected rates of vertical land movement. 
However, it is to be expected that more sophisticated post-
glacial rebound models will be developed as this debate is 
resolved. For example, the removal of post-glacial 
rebound-related land movements from tide gauge records 
by means of Peltier's ICE-4G model (Peltier, 1994) has not 
been investigated. 
Superimposed upon post-glacial rebound are a variety of 
local and regional isostatic and tectonic effects, many of 
which cannot be modelled accurately (for a review, see 
-8.0 
-2.0-1.0 
-0.4 
-0.3 
-0.2 
-0.1 
0.0 
0.4 
0.8 
2.0 
6.0 
i n 
m m / y r 
Figure 7.14: The present day rate of relative sea level change (in mm/yr) based on the topographically and gravitationally self-consistent 
theory of glacial isostatic adjustment of Peltier (1994). The calculation employed the ICE-4G model of the last déglaciation event of 
the current ice age and an internal radial viscoelastic structure comprising a 120 km thick lithosphère and an upper mantel of viscosity 
2 X 10^1 Pa s. This model somewhat oveipredicts the ongoing rate of sea level rise due to post-glacial forebulge collapse along the east 
coast of the USA. 
Changes in Sea Level 
391 
Emery and Aubrey, 1991). This is most obvious in the 
Mediterranean where the available archaeological sea level 
data primarily reflect local tectonic land movements 
(Flemming, 1969, 1978, 1993; Flemming and Webb, 1986) 
and where the Peltier post-glacial rebound models do not 
reproduce relative land-sea movements at all. Most large 
river deltas exhibit submergence associated with 
sedimentary isostasy which is clearly identified in tide 
gauge data. Very local effects, which have no relation to 
regional geology, can take place within the harbour of the 
tide gauge itself. However, differences between tide gauge 
sea level records can be used to provide maps of relative 
land movements on a regional basis, and such maps are 
usually consistent with previous geological knowledge of 
the area (Emery and Aubrey, 1991). 
Studies of the vertical crustal motions on different dme-
scales can help elucidate patterns of tectonic deformation 
affecting tide gauge data. For example, along convergent 
plate boundaries, the uplift recorded by tide gauges or 
geodetic levelling measurements generally represent 
interseismic déformation that typically spans over 90% of 
the earthquake cycle (Bilham, 1991). However, the 
deformation during, and also shortly before or after, a 
major earthquake may exceed the average interseismic rate 
by an order of magnitude. Deformation associated with 
major earthquakes may temporarily cause displacements 
resulting in sea level changes comparable to the global sea 
level change (Bilham and Bamentos, 1991). These recent 
rates of crustal motion may differ substantially from 
longer-term geological trends derived from raised marine 
ten-aces (see, for example, Kelsey et al, 1994; Mitchell et 
ai, 1994). Analyses of the changes in uplift rates on 
different time-scales may contribute to improved modelling 
of the earthquake cycle and extraction of the sea level 
signal from the tidal and geodetic data in those regions. 
Anthropogenic effects (e.g., extraction of water from 
aquifers) can also result in considerable rates of subsidence 
(e.g., 10 cm/yr at Bangkok, Thailand). Ground water 
extraction has been an important factor in Venice sinking 
(Frassetto, 1991), while large recent rates of sea level rise 
at Manila, Philippines, has been blamed on coastal 
reclamation (Spencer and Woodworth, 1993). 
It is important to realise that all sea level measurements, 
whether tide gauge, archaeological or geological, are 
measures of the level of the ocean relative to a land datum. 
The exceptions are those from space (e.g., from radar 
altimetry or via the Global Positioning System) for which 
the datum is in effect the computed satellite orbit. Such 
ground based measurements will always, therefore, contain 
some kind of inherent land-ocean level ambiguity. 
However, with the advent of GPS and other forms of 
advanced geodetic measurement, it is now possible to 
measure vertical land movements independently of sea 
level changes (Section 7.7.1). 
A good example of alternative methods of monitoring 
vertical land movements is provided by the recent 
breakthrough in development of absolute gravimeters 
(Carter et al., 1994). Measurements are now repeatable to 
the 1 or 2 microgal level (1 gal = Icm/s^). For instance, a 
joint USA-Canada effort to produce the first reliable 
gravimetric measurement of glacial rebound shows at 
Churchill, Canada, that gravity has been decreasing at 1.6 
inicrogal/yr since 1987. Theoretical models which account 
for viscous rebound of crust and mantle beneath Canada 
predict a linear relationship between gravity fall and crustal 
rise of about 0.15 microgal/mm. These gravity 
observations therefore indicate crustal uplift to be 11 
mm/yr. At the same location, tide gauge records show that 
the Hudson Bay water level has been falling at an average 
rate of 11 mm/yr for the past 50 years. 
Even if land levels were to be measured to good 
precision, there would still in principle be corresponding 
changes in the geoid to take into account. For example, 
Wagner and McAdoo (1986) presented maps of secular 
trends in geoid heights to be expected from post-glacial 
rebound. However, these are approximately an order of 
magnitude less than the coiTesponding changes in vertical 
land movements, and in studies of sea level changes over 
century time-scales or less, the geoid is considered in most 
applications to be time independent. Repeated space 
gravity missions, together with long-term laser tracking of 
dedicated geodetic satellites, should ideally be mounted to 
monitor such changes, while they can continue to be 
studied within geodynamic models. 
7.6.2 Dynamic Effects 
The variability of sea level on interannual to interdecadal 
time-scales is a major complication in determining reliable 
sea level trends and accelerations (Douglas, 1992). It is 
also clear that the global average sea level change is not a 
good indicator of local changes at any particular place. 
In large part, these interannual to interdecadal 
fluctuations result from the fact that sea level topography, 
referenced to the geoid, is closely related to the dynamics 
and thermodynamics of the ocean. If the ocean were 
homogeneous and at rest, with a uniform atmospheric 
pressure fleld above it and no wind, the sea surface would 
correspond to the geoid (i.e., an equipotential of the gravity 
field). However, it does not; it differs from the geoid by ± 
one metre. Ocean and atmosphere are non-homogeneous 
392 
Changes in Sea Level 
and continuously moving vi'ithin a variety of time and space 
scales, under gravitational forcing (for tides) and thermal 
forcing from the Sun (including variable wind stress and 
heat and fresh water exchanges at the sea surface). 
In analysing trends, high-frequency ocean signals, 
swells, tides and surges are generally easily removed from 
sea level records by filtering techniques, as illustrated, 
among others, by Chelton and Enfield (1986) and Sturges 
(1987). But the analysis of the low-frequency residuals 
remains extremely difficult because these data have red 
spectra (the spectral energy keeps rising at low frequency), 
and the variability of the lowest frequencies that can 
generally be resolved with the longer available sea level 
records is of the same amplitude as (or larger than) the 
rising sea level signal. It is thus very important to 
understand the physical causes of these long-period events 
in order to be able to correct the data and improve the 
signal-to-noise ratio. Unfortunately, the 
forcing 
mechanisms are not well-known, especially at the decadal 
and interdecadal time-scale. The processes involve natural 
oscillations of the ocean-atmosphere system, which result 
in perturbations of the three dimensional state of the ocean, 
in terms of the dynamics and thermodynamics and the 
feedback on the state of the atmosphere. 
At the short-term interannual frequencies, one major 
event is the El Nino-Southern Oscillation phenomenon in 
the Pacific Ocean. Associated sea level oscillations have 
been clearly observed by in situ tide gauges and satellite 
altimetry, typically with eastward propagating equatorial 
Kelvin waves and westward reflected or locally-forced 
Rossby waves (Wyrtki, 1979, 1985; Miller and Cheney, 
1990). Monthly maps of sea level anomalies are now 
produced routinely to document and follow this interannual 
variability of the Pacific Equatorial Ocean. 
Along single coastlines, the efficiency of wave 
propagation processes is a major candidate for explaining 
the often observed coherency of the long-period sea level 
variabilities, as studied by Enfield and Allen (1980) and 
Chelton and Davis (1982) for the Pacific coast of the USA. 
At basin scale, long-period baroclinic Rossby wave 
propagation has been demonstrated to possibly lead to 
coherent sea level signals; Sturges (1987) thus explained 
the 5-8 years period coherency in the long records 
available for San Francisco and Honolulu, with amplitudes 
of 5-15 cm at these long periods. 
At the interannual to decadal periods, sea level 
fluctuations must often be driven primarily by atmospheric 
forcing, wind and pressure. Maul and Hanson (1991) have 
observed a significant coherency, with peaks at 4 and 13 
years, between the sea level variability of the tidal records 
along the AUantic coast of the USA and the long-period, 
basin-scale variations in North Atlantic atmospheric 
surface pressure known as the North Atlantic Oscillation 
(Rogers, 1984). Additionally, Sturges and Hong (1995) 
have demonstrated that, at Bermuda, sea level and 
thermocline variability, estimated from a simple ocean 
model forced by the wind, is in remarkably good 
agreement with observations at long periods. 
However, sea surface temperature variations, and hence 
buoyancy forcing by the atmosphere, are coherent with 
changes in the wind (Kushnir, 1994). Thus, thermodynamic 
processes also have to be considered in interpreting long-
term sea level variations. Decadal to interdecadal changes in 
temperature and salinity of the three-dimensional structure 
of the ocean have been widely reported in many places 
(Gordon et al, 1992). Taking the North Atlantic as an 
example, one can refer to the Great Salinity Anomaly traced 
by Dickson et al. (1988) around the North AUantic subpolar 
gyre from the mid-1960s to the late 1970s, and to the 
cooling at intermediate depth in the North Atlantic sub-
polar gyre observed by Lazier and Gershey (1991), Read 
and Gould (1992) and Koltermann and Sy (1994), due to 
drastic changes in the production rates of Labrador Sea 
Water (LSW) and its property characteristics. This 
freshening is also present in the 24.5°N sections of 
hydrographie data, between 400 and 500 m (Lavin, 1993), 
due to some amount of cooler LSW circulating in the sub-
tropical gyre. The complex picture emerging from these 
observations is related to the North Atlantic Deep Water 
(NADW) production, which propels the global planetary 
Thermohaline Conveyor Belt circulation (Broecker et al, 
1985). Changes in the production rate of N A D W must 
change the northward transport of upper ocean warm water, 
and it could lead to an enhancement of sea rise in the mid-
latitudes of the North Atiantic (Mikolajewicz et al, 1990). 
Large-scale ocean circulation has a direct signature on 
the sea surface topography, through geostrophic balance. 
Sea surface slope variabilities are thus thought to be good 
indicators of the large-scale ocean transport variabilities. 
Maul et al (1990) have shown that it is true for the Gulf 
Stream for the semi-annual and annual band. However, as 
noticed by Sturges and Hong (1995) this has not been fully 
demonstrated for interannual and lower frequencies from 
the analysis of long coastal sea level records, until recentiy 
the only available source of data (see also Whitworth and 
Peterson, 1985, for the Antarctic Circumpolar Current). 
Hence, there is interest in long-term, deep-sea bottom 
pressure measurements (as used in WOCE) and satellite 
altimetry for studying this relation between ocean slope 
and ocean transport variabilities. 
Changes in Sea Level 
393 
As noted by Gates et al. (1992), there are now a 
sufficient number of A O G C M integrations over 50-100 
year and longer periods to provide preliminary information 
on the simulation of atmospheric and oceanic decadal 
variability. Over these last years, a great deal of interest has 
focused on the behaviour of the thermohaline circulation of 
the North Atlantic, the formation of NADW, the Conveyor 
Belt Circulation, and the possible existence of multiple 
equilibrium states for the global ocean circulation. The 
effect of these processes on the interdecadal variabilities of 
sea level has been noted above. Another mode of decadal 
climate variability, in the North Pacific Ocean, has been 
found in A O G C M s of the MPI, attributed to a cycle 
involving air-sea interactions between the sub-tropical gyre 
circulation and the Aleutian low pressure system (Latif and 
Barnett, 1994). Besides its effect on sea surface 
temperature, it has an effect on sea level of 3.4 cm in 
decadal variability. 
Coupled model simulations of climate change under 
increasing CO^ have also shown that the regional 
differences in sea level change are larger than the globally 
averaged change (Mikolajewicz et al, 1990; Gregory, 
1993; Cubasch et ai, 1994b). This spatial variation comes 
mostly from the geographical distribution of surface 
temperature changes, but ocean dynamics do modify it, 
especially in areas where temperature changes occur to 
considerable depth. Different climate models give different 
patterns of local response, although there are some 
common features, such as a strong relative rise off the east 
coast of North America, and a marked relative fall north of 
the Ross Sea. An example from Gregory (1993) is shown 
in Figure 7.15. However, the non-equilibrium response in 
sea level of the world ocean to warming is, as yet, very 
poorly understood, and it is not clear that the present 
generation of A O G C M s can resolve such a process 
correctly. 
Since the launch of the TOPEX/POSEIDON altimeter 
satellite in 1992, it has been possible to construct similar 
global maps of sea level change from direct measurements 
(Cheney et al, 
1994). As in the model simulations, 
regional variations observed by the altimeter are quite 
large, with amplitudes of the order of 5 cm on monthly 
time-scales, as compared to the global average increase of 
3 mm/yr derived from these data. The combination of 
altimetry with sub-surface data and winds will provide a 
way of interpreting these low-frequency sea level 
phenomena. 
7.6.3 Trends in Extremes 
The statistical treatment of data on extreme sea levels has 
progressed considerably over the past few years. For 
example, Tawn and Vassie (1991) developed a "revised 
joint probability method" applicable to all types of tidal 
regime, while Coles and Tawn (1990) employed 
90N 
60N 
30N 
30S 
60S 
90S 
90W 
SOW 
30W 
90E 
120E 
150E 
180 
Figure 7.15: Relative sea level change from a transient A O G C M experiment over the years 66-75 (the decade centred on the time of C O 2 
doubling). Relative sea level change here is calculated as the difference between the anomaly and control minus the change in global 
average sea level of 10.2 cm (source: Gregory, 1993). 
394 
Changes in Sea Level 
multivariate extremes and the spatial properties of extreme 
processes to improve estimations at nearby sites with little 
or no data. Extreme levels, computed by a variety of old 
and new methods, are available for much of the world 
coastline for input to coastal impact studies (e.g., see de 
Mesquita and Franca, (1990) and Simon (1994), for coastal 
areas in Brazil and France, respectively). 
The determination of a trend in extreme values is a 
difficult procedure since, by definition, the data become 
increasingly rare as the extremes are approached and 
estimates of statistics in the tails have increasingly wide 
confidence limits. Secular trends in annual maxima have 
tended to be studied primarily in north-west Europe where 
long records exist. For example, the spatial distribution of 
secular trends in annual maxima around the U K appears to 
be similar on average to those derived from tide gauge 
mean sea level and geological sea level data sets (Dixon 
and Tawn, 1992). Extreme levels, and their apparent 
temporal variation, have been studied at a number of "cities 
on water", such as Venice (Frassetto, 1991; Pirazzoli, 
1991; Rusconi, 1993). 
The continental shelf of north-west Europe is one 
example of an area where trends in storm surge activity 
have been studied. From analyses of storm surge frequency 
around the coast of the U K over the past 70 years, and at 
the Hook of Holland (Hoozemans and Wiersma, 1992) and 
the German coast over the past few centuries (Rodhe, 
1980), there is no evidence of a long-term trend in storm 
surge activity, although Rodhe did point to a possible low-
frequency (approximately 80-year) periodicity in flooding. 
On the other hand, evidence exists for a trend over the 
same period in regional winds and air pressures that would 
result in enhanced German Bight mean sea level (and the 
surge activity that it reflects) based on gridded Norwegian 
meteorological data for the shelf applied to a numerical 
model (Tsimplis et al, 1994). Meanwhile, Führboter and 
Toppe (1991) observed flde gauge data in the German 
Bight directly and also indicate an increase of storm surge 
frequency in the area, at least since 1960 and possibly 
before. Local wind data for the Bight itself appear to show 
no obvious trend (Hoozemans and Wiersma, 1992) from 
1950 to 1980, and in spite of large interdecadal variation, 
very little at all over century time-scales (Schmidt, 1991; 
Schmidt and von Storch, 1993). Clearly, findings will 
depend on the periods analysed and data spans. However, 
the difficulty in drawing conclusions relevant to climatic 
change studies from this relatively well-instrumented part 
of the world cautions against drawing conclusions for areas 
with considerably less data. 
Numerical tidal models are frequenfly employed, with 
reductions in ocean depth, for the study of palaeotides 
(Scott and Greenberg, 1983) and the historical 
development of bedforms (Proctor and Carter, 1989; 
Austin, 1991). Conversely, they can be run with increased 
depth to predict changes in tidal amplitude that might 
accompany potential future sea level rise (Rijkswaterstaat, 
1986). The effect of changes in depth (a surrogate for sea 
level rise) on storm surges can also be investigated. For 
example, Flather and Khandker (1993) described how tides 
and surges might be modified in the Bay of Bengal if sea 
level is modified, assuming that the character of the 
prevailing meteorology does not also change. In most 
cases, there will be little change in tide and surge (of order 
of a few centimetres per metre of sea level rise, unless in 
locally resonant situations). 
7.7 Major Uncertainties and How to Reduce Them 
7.7.7 Monitoring of Sea Level Change 
For a future global sea level monitoring system, it is 
essential that information is integrated from many sources, 
with global and regional products (useful to scientists and 
non-scientists alike) derived from the blended data sets 
(Eden, 1990). Improvements in such a monitoring system 
would include five elements. 
(1) 
It should include a global sea level monitoring 
system based on a network of modern tide gauges. 
The Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) of 
the Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission 
(IOC) is a co-ordinated project for the monitoring of 
long-term global sea level change and is intended to 
serve the various purposes of océanographie and 
climate change research into the next century (IOC, 
1990; Woodworth, 1991). GLOSS consists of a 
network of approximately 300 tide gauges 
worldwide, of which over two-thirds are now 
operational. Technical developments in recent years 
have seen many of the traditional float and stilling 
well tide gauges replaced by modern systems based 
on pneumatic and acoustic principles (Spencer, 
1992). Many of these have satellite or telephone data 
transmission equipment, enabling real-time data 
access and fault checking. Bottom pressure recorders 
(Spencer and Vassie, 1985), inverted echo sounders 
(Wimbush, 1990) and thermistor chain moorings for 
dynamic height (McPhaden, 1993) now provide 
quasi-sea level measurements in several areas of the 
deep ocean, which will provide information on the 
ocean circulation. 
Changes in Sea Level 
395 
topographies from ERS-1 and other near-polar 
orbiting radar altimetric satellites should result in 
complementary data sets of ice balance. When 
operational, laser altimetry over ice should be more 
precise than, and should complement, the radar 
altimeter data. However, the full potential of satellite 
altimetry to measure changes in ice mass will not be 
realised until truly global coverage is available. 
Altimetry is a very important tool now available for 
océanographie research, providing new insights into 
ocean tides, the ocean mesoscale, and basin-scale 
changes, in addition to global sea level change. There 
are corresponding advances in geophysics through 
the acquisition of detailed maps of the mean sea 
surface. In order to compute fields of absolute ocean 
currents for input to climate models with predictive 
sea level capability, precise altimetry of the mean sea 
surface must be complemented by detailed 
knowledge of the geoid by means of space gravity 
missions (Koblinsky et al., 1992). 
(4) 
Measurements are required of the temperature and 
salinity fields of the global ocean. Variations in long 
distance acoustic pulse travel times can provide for 
monitoring of average basin temperatures (Munk, 
1989). 
(5) 
For a better understanding of the ocean response to 
climate variability and future sea level rise, there is a 
need for further 
developments 
of coupled 
atmosphere, ocean and ice models which explicitly 
include sea level predictions. The continued growth 
in computer power will strongly support this effort, 
as it allows the complexity of the models to increase, 
thus improving their performance and realism. The 
scientific programmes 
W O C E and 
C L I V A R 
(Climate 
Variability 
programme) 
and 
the 
development of GOOS will provide the necessary 
observations to feed these models. Data assimilation 
techniques will thus be of primary importance in 
combining such data sets with models for their 
optimal use in understanding the climatic role of the 
ocean and predicting the evolution of sea level. 
(2) 
An improved geodetic network is required which 
enables many of the sea level measurements to be 
placed in a stable global co-ordinate system with sub-
centimetric accuracy, and which provides a 
decoupling of land and ocean level signals in the tide 
gauge records. Remarkable progress has been made in 
the past five years toward achieving the required 
network, through the development of the International 
Terrestrial Reference Frame (ITRF) by the 
International Earth Rotation Service (lERS). The 
ITRF is based on Very Long Baseline Interferometry 
(VLBI), Satellite Laser Ranging (SLR) and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) observations (Carter et al, 
1989; Bilham, 1991; Ashkenazi et al, 1993; Baker, 
1993; Carter, 1994). At many locations measurements 
of land movements near to the tide gauge sites by 
means of GPS will be supplemented by absolute 
gravity recording, with a change of gravity of 1 
microgal (approximately the current accuracy of the 
technique) corresponding to a change of land level of 
5 mm (Carter, 1994). VLBI, GPS and SLR enable 
precise time-series of polar motion and changes in 
rotation rate to be compiled, which may be pertinent 
to the problems addressed in this chapter. 
(3) 
The monitoring system should include near-global 
observations of the ocean and ice sheets by means of 
satellite altimetry. Radar altimetry has become a 
major tool for studying sea level changes over most 
of the world ocean. Although a considerable amount 
of altimeter data have been acquired previously from, 
for example, the USA Navy Geosat satellite and the 
European ERS-1 mission, the launch of ТОРЕХ/ 
POSEIDON in 1992 marked the start of a new era of 
precise sea level measurements from space. 
TOPEX/POSEIDON is providing sea level data with 
a single-point precision of about 5 cm (Fu et al, 
1994), enabling global mean sea level to be measured 
every 10 days with a precision of a few mm. Indeed, 
results from the first 2 years of the mission suggest 
an apparent sea level rise of approximately 3 mm/yr 
(Wagner et al, 1994; Nerem, 1995). Given the 
number of potential altimeter errors at the millimetre 
level, it is premature to attach major significance to 
this result, but if measurements of this quality can be 
calibrated and maintained throughout a long-term 
program of multiple altimeter missions and 
integrated with the long-term GLOSS gauges, global 
sea level monitoring will be placed on a much firmer 
basis (Koblinsky et al, 1992). Meanwhile, ice sheet 
7.7.2 Oceanic Thermal Expansion 
A strategy for long-term observation of the three-dimensional 
state of the ocean needs to be defined. This is the second goal 
of WOCE and will be developed under new programmes, 
like the oceanic component of C L I V A R and GOOS. 
396 
Changes in Sea Level 
Observations derived from three-dimensional monitoring of 
the ocean will then have to be combined with models in order 
to make predictions. It can be anticipated that the on-going 
progress in ocean modelling (Semtner, 1994), and in data 
assimilation techniques within these models, will allow tiie 
improvement of our understanding of the interannual to 
interdecadal variabilities of the thermodynamic state of the 
ocean and the thermal contribution to changes in sea level, 
both temporally and spatially. Thus, continued support of 
both monitoring programmes and dynamic ocean modelUng 
are necessary to enable global and regional predictions of 
future sea level changes. 
7.7.3 Glaciers and Ice Caps 
There remain large uncertainties regarding the future 
change in global glacier volume as a consequence of global 
warming. There are four major gaps in knowledge that 
need to be filled in order to better estimate 
the 
contributions of glaciers to sea level change. 
(1) 
Probably the most critical need is the development of 
simple, yet realistic, models which include the 
processes linking meteorology to mass balance to 
dynamic response, and which include the resulting 
feedbacks (Meier, 1965). The importance of 
incorporating dynamic feedback is obvious when 
considering that in the next 50-100 years the estimated 
glacier volume change is expected to be a significant 
fraction of the total present volume, resulting in a 
major change in glacier area. Thus, the contribution of 
glaciers to sea level rise will reach a maximum and 
then decline despite continuing warming (Kuhn, 
1985). The meteorological calculations can be 
accomplished by simple hydrometeorological (HM) 
models in which accumulation and energy balance are 
approximated by functions of seasonal precipitation 
and air temperature (e.g., Liestol, 1967; Martin, 1978; 
Tangbom, 1980; Reeh, 1991), perhaps parameterized 
for mountain glaciers as functions of altitude (e.g., 
Kuhn, 1981; Oerlemans and Hoogendoorn, 1989; 
Laumann and Reeh, 1993). The dynamic processes 
can be modelled using conventional glacier flow 
models (e.g., Bindschadler, 1982; Stroeven et al., 
1989) or by simpler models that address the response 
times (Jóhannesson et al, 1989; Schwitter and 
Raymond, 1993). 
(2) 
Model studies need to be extended to ice masses that 
are very different from the small mountain glaciers of 
the Alps and Scandinavia in order to encompass the 
broad spectrum of glacier behaviour. Current models 
are based on well-studied reference glaciers, 
practically all of which are small, mid-latitude 
glaciers (Kuhn, 1993). However, in terms of potential 
sea level rise, these glaciers are relatively 
insignificant. The glaciers that are especially critical 
with respect to sea level rise include the following: 
the large valley and piedmont glaciers of south-east 
Alaska; the Patagonian Ice Caps; and the monsoon-
nourished glaciers of central Asia. The ice caps of the 
Arctic are also important and have regimes 
significantly different from those commonly modelled. 
(3) 
There is a need to further quantify the process of 
internal accumulation (refreezing of meltwater) for 
incorporation into mass balance models. Internal 
accumulation (Trabant and Mayo, 1985; Pfeffer et al, 
1991; Reeh, 1991) is pervasive at high latitudes and 
at high altitudes, yet is frequently neglected in 
glacier-meteorological studies. 
(4) 
Better understanding is required of iceberg calving 
flux and its interaction with ice flow dynamics. 
Iceberg calving is a major component of the mass 
balance of some large glaciers in the Arctic, Alaska, 
and at high southern latitudes. However, the iceberg 
calving flux, interacts with ice flow dynamics in ways 
that are not well understood (Meier, 1994). This 
problem needs further investigation and incorporation 
into models. 
7.7.4 Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets 
Of all the terms that enter the sea level change equation, 
the largest uncertainties pertain to the Earth's major ice 
sheets. Relatively small changes in these ice sheets could 
have major effects on global sea level, yet we are not even 
certain of the sign of their present contribution. Obviously, 
better determination of the present ice sheet mass balances 
are needed, and additional historical (palaeoclimatic and 
palaeoglaciologic) studies are required in order to learn 
how changes have occurred in the past. The results of such 
studies need to be incorporated into improved modelling 
schemes in order to anticipate how the ice sheets will 
change in response to future climate perturbations. 
Field (surface-based) observations of mass balances -
the accumulation of snow and superimposed ice and the 
discharge of icebergs and meltwater - need to be continued 
and extended. Special attention also needs to be given to 
detecting change in ice dynamics, including the flow of ice 
streams and iceberg-calving rates. Additional observations 
Changes in Sea Level 
397 
of atmospheric water-vapour flux divergence would be 
useful in order to better define the processes leading to 
possible changes in snow accumulation. New ice cores in 
Greenland and high time-resolution ice cores from 
Antarctica will be needed to show the spatial and temporal 
changes in atmospheric circulation that occurred with the 
abrupt climate changes in the past, in order to test models 
of climate change in the high latitudes. 
Special attention needs to be given to current changes in 
ice shelves, such as the break-up of a large part of the 
Larsen Ice Shelf on the Antarctic Peninsula in 1995, and to 
dynamic interactions between ice sheets, ice streams and 
ice shelves. While ice shelf break-up does not contribute 
directly to sea level rise, changes in the interconnected 
grounded ice will affect sea level in ways that cannot be 
predicted at the present. Improved understanding will 
require 
combined 
studies 
using 
glaciological, 
océanographie and satellite observations. Because sea ice 
extent affects water vapour transport in the Antarctic, 
better definitions of variations in sea ice extent and of the 
distribution of ice thickness are needed. 
The current mass balances of the Antarctic and 
Greenland Ice Sheets need to be determined and future 
changes monitored. Perhaps the most powerful tool for 
doing this in the near future is satellite altimetry. A laser 
altimeter is urgentiy needed on a polar-orbiting satellite, 
especially to detect changes in the low-accumulation 
regions and critical ice sheet margins where the existing 
radar altimetry is not adequate. These measurements 
should commence as soon as possible in order to provide a 
baseline for detecting greenhouse-induced changes in the 
future. The observed seasonal and interannual variations in 
surface elevation will provide information on precipitation 
variations, which can be used in energy-balance models 
and to test atmospheric general circulation model results. 
Accurate mapping of surface elevation changes by laser 
altimetry will also permit monitoring of ice sheet stability. 
Early warning of ice sheet collapse would thus be obtained 
before major ice shelf break-up or massive iceberg 
discharges were observed. Satellite synthetic-aperture radar 
interferometry may allow monitoring of ice stream 
velocities and grounding zone locations (Goldstein et al, 
1993; Herzfeld, 1994). 
Improved modelling of the ice sheets is vitally needed. 
This should involve developing and coupUng more realistic 
models of both atmospheric circulation and ice dynamics. 
Major uncertainties are associated with estimating future 
snowfall on the major ice sheets. Most existing models relate 
accumulation changes to changes in air temperature, which 
assumes that warmer air delivers more snow and that 
atmospheric circulation will not change. Palaeoclimatic data 
show that storm strengths and trajectories have changed in 
the past and have greatiy affected accumulation. This raises 
the possibility that future circulation changes will occur and 
will also affect precipitation. It is important that atmospheric 
and snow-surface processes in ice sheet regions be 
understood well enough so that model-based predictions of 
snow accumulation can be made directly, rather than using 
predictions of temperature and assumed temperature 
sensitivity to estimate precipitation. Palaeoclimatic data from 
high-resolution ice cores are needed to test these models. 
Improvement is also needed in the ice dynamics models. 
Short-tenn, transient behaviour has been observed in major 
ice streams. The fact that these changes exist means that 
the physics incorporated in contemporary ice sheet models 
is not completely realistic. In particular, treatment of basal 
sliding and/or deforming basal till, together with the 
longitudinal stresses involved, needs to be incorporated. 
Another key aspect, currently not well understood and 
therefore impossible to model with confidence, is thé rate 
of iceberg calving. These are the key elements in defining 
the interactions between ice sheets, ice streams and ice 
shelves. These, together 
with changes of snow 
accumulation, are the most uncertain aspects of predicting 
changes in the ice sheets over the next decades to centuries, 
and need major improvement. 
References 
Alley, R.B. and I.M. Whillans, 1991: Changes in the West 
Antarctic Ice Sheet. Science, 254, 959-963. 
Alley, R.B. and D.R. MacAyeal, 1994: West Antarctic ice sheet 
collapse: chimera or clear danger? Antarctic Journal of the U. 
S., 28 (5), 59-60.397 
Ambach, W. and M . Kuhn, 1989: Altitudinal shift of the 
equilibrium line in Greenland calculated from heat balance 
characteristics. In: Glacier Fluctuations and Climatic Change, 
J. Oeriemans (ed.), Kluwer, Dordrecht, pp 281-288. 
Ashkenazi, V., R.M. Bingley, G.M. Whitmore and T.F. Baker, 
1993: Monitoring changes in mean-sea-level to millimetres 
using GPS. Geophys. Res. Lett, 20(18), 1951-1954. 
Austin, R . M . , 1991: Modelling Holocene tides on the N W 
European continental shelf Terra Nova, 3, 276-288. 
Baker, Т.Е., 1993: Absolute sea level measurements, climate 
change and vertical crustal movements. Global Planet. Change, 
8(3), 149-159. 
Barcillon, V. and D.R. MacAyeal, 1993: Steady flow of a viscous 
ice stream across a no-slip/free-slip transition at the bed. J. 
Glacial., 39, 167-185. 
Barnett, T.P., 1984: The estimation of "global" sea level change: 
a problem of uniqueness. J. Geophys. 
Res., 89 (C5), 
7980-7988. 
398 
Changes in Sea Level 
Bauer, A . 1968: Nouvelle estimation du bilan de masse de 
l'Inlandsis du Groenland. Deep Sea Research , 14, 13-17. 
Bentley, C.R. and IVI.B. Giovinetto, 1991: Mass balance of 
Antarctica and sea level change. In: International Conference 
on the Role of the Polar Regions 
in Global 
Change: 
Proceedings of a Conference Held June 11-15, 1990 at the 
University of Alaska Fairbanks, G. Weller, C.L. Wilson and 
B. A.B. Serverin (eds.). Geophysical In,stitute and Centre for 
Global Change and Arctic System Science, University of 
Alaska, Fairbanks, pp 481^88. 
Bilham, R., 1991: Earthquakes and sea level: space and t e i T e s t r i a l 
metrology on a changing planet. Rev. Geophys., 29, 1-30. 
Bilham, R. and S. Barrientes, 1991: Sea level rise and 
earthquakes. Nature, 350, 386. 
Bindschadler, R., 1982: A numerical model of temperate glacier 
flow applied to the quiescent phase of a surge-type glacier. J. 
G/ado/., 28 (99), 239-265. 
Bindschadler, R.A., 1985: Contribution of the Greenland ice cap 
to changing sea level: present and future. In: Glaciers, Ice 
Sheets and Sea Level: Effects of a COj -induced 
Climatic 
Change. National Academy Press, Washington, pp 258-266. 
Bintanja, R., 1995: The Antarctic Ice Sheet and Climate. Ph.D. 
Thesis, Utrecht University, 200pp. 
Bintanja, R. and J. Oerlemans, 1995: The influence of the 
albedo-temperature feed-back on climate sensitivity. Ann. 
Glaciol, 21, 353-360. 
Braithwaite, R.J. and O.B. Olesen, 1990: Increased ablation at 
the margin of the Greenland ice sheet under a greenhouse-
effect climate. Ann. Glaciol, 14, 20-22. 
Broecker, W.S., D. Peteet and D. Rind, 1985: Does the ocean-
atmosphere have more than one stable mode of operation? 
Nature, 315, 21-25 
Bromwich, D., 1995: Ice sheets and sea level. Nature, 373, 
18-19. 
Bromwich, D.H., F . M . Robasky, R.A. Keen and J.F. Bolzan, 
1993: Modeled variations of precipitation over the Greenland 
Ice Sheet. J. Climate, 6 (7),1253-1268. 
Brown, C.S., M.F. Meier and A . Post, 1982; Calving Speed of 
Alaska Tidewater Glaciers, With Application 
to Columbia 
Glacier. Studies of Columbia Glacier, Alaska, Geological 
Survey Professional Paper 1258-C. Government Printing 
Office, Washington DC, 13pp. 
Budd, W.F. and I.N. Smith, 1985; The state of balance of the 
Antarctic ice sheet - an updated assessment 1984. In: Glaciers, 
Ice Sheets and Sea Level: Effects of a C02-induced Climatic 
Change. National Academy Press, Washington, pp. 172-177. 
Budd, W.F. and I. Simmonds, 1991: The impact of global 
warming on the Antarctic mass balance and global sea level. 
In; International Conference on the Role of the Polar Regions 
in Global Change: Proceedings of a Conference Held June 
11-15, 1990 at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, G. Weller, 
C. L. Wilson and B.A.B. Serverin (eds.). Geophysical Institute 
and Centre for Global Change and Arctic System Science, 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks, pp 489^94. 
Burckie, L.H., 1993; Is there direct evidence for late Quaternary 
collapse of the West Antarctic ice sheet? /. Glaciol, 
39, 
491-494. 
Cadèe, M . , 1992; Numerieke modellering van de Groenlandse 
ijskap: de toepasbaarheid van een tweedimensionaal 
ijsstromingmodel. I M A U internal repoit, 'V92-10. 
Carter, W.E. (ed.), 1994; Report of the Surrey Workshop of the 
lAPSO Tide Gauge Bench Mark Fixing Committee, 
13-15 
December 1993, Institute of Océanographie Sciences Deacon 
Laboratory, Wormley, UK. 
Carter, W.E., D . G . Aubrey, T.F. Baker, C. Boucher, C. Le 
Provost, D.T. Pugh, W.R. Peltier, M . Zumberge, R.H. Rapp, 
R.E. Schutz, K.O. Emery and D.B. Enfield, 1989; Geodetic 
fixing of tidegauge bench marks. Woods Hole 
Océanographie 
Institution Technical Report, WHOI-89-31, 44pp. 
Carter, W.E., G. Peter, G.S. Sasagawa, F.L Klopping, K . A . 
Berstis, R.L. Hilt, P. Nelson, G.L. Chnsty, T . M . Niebauer, 
W.Hollander, H . Seeger, B . Richter, H . Wilmes and A . 
Lothammer, 1994; New gravity meter improves measurements, 
EOS, Transactions, 
American Geophysical Union, 75(8), 
90-92. 
Chao, В . Е., 1988, Excitation of the Earth's polar motion due to 
mass variations in major hydrological reservoirs. /. Geophys. 
ЛЕ.5., 93, 811,13811-13819. 
Chao, В.F., 1994: Man-made lakes and sea level rise. Nature, 
370, 258. 
Chelton, D.B. and R.E. Davis, 1982; Monthly mean sea level 
variability along the west coast of North America. J. Phys. 
Oceanogr, 12, 757-1S4. 
Chelton, D.B. and D.B. Enfield, 1986; Ocean signals in tide 
gauge records, J. Geophys. Res., 91, 9081-9098. 
Chen, J. and M . Funk, 1990: Mass balance of Rhonegletscher 
during 1882/83-1986/87. /. Glaciol, 36(123), 199-209. 
Chen, J. and A. Ohmura, 1990; Estimation of alpine glacier water 
resources and their change since the 1870s. In; Hydrology in 
Mountainous Regions. I - Hydrological Measurements; the 
Water Cycle', Proceedings of two Lausanne Symposia, August 
1990. l A H S Publication 193, 127-135. 
Cheney, R.E.. L. IJdiller, R.W. Agreen and N.S. Doyle, 1994; 
TOPEX/POSEIDON: The 2-cm solution, / Geophys. Res., 99 
(C12), 24555-24563. 
Church, J.A., J.S. Godfrey, D.R. Jackett and T.J. McDougall, 
1991: A model of sea level rise caused by ocean thermal 
expansion. J. Climate, 4, 438-456. 
Coles, S.G. and J.A. Tawn, 1990: Statistics of coastal flood 
prevention. Phil Trans. R. Soc. Lond A, 332, 457^76. 
Cubasch, U . , K. Hasselmann, H . Hock, E. Maier-Reimer, U . 
Mikolajewicz, B . D . Santer, and R. Sausen, 1992; Time-
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 8, 55-69. 
Cubasch, U., B.D. Santer, A. Hellbach, G. Hegerl, H. Hock, E. 
Maier-Reimer, U . Mikolajewicz, A. Stossel and R. Voss, 
1994a; Monte Carlo climate change forecasts with a global 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 10, 1-19. 
Changes in Sea Level 
399 
Cubasch, и . , G . C . Hegeri, A . Hellbach, H . Hock, U . 
Mikolajewicz, B.D. Santer and R. Voss, 1994b: A climate 
change simulation starting from 1935. Clim. Dyn., 11, 71-84. 
Dawson, A.G., D. Long and D.E. Smith, 1988: The Storegga 
Slides: evidence from eastern Scotland for a possible tsunami. 
Mar. Geo/., 82, 271-276. 
de Mesquita, A . R . and C.A.S. Franca, 1990: Checking the 
transference method for the mean and extreme sea values. Ann. 
simp. Ecosis. P. Caldas, Est. Minas Geraisd., 1, 30-41. 
de Wolde, J.R., R. Bintanja and J. Oerlemans: 1995: On thermal 
expansion over the last hundred years. J. Climate, 8 (11), 
2881-2891. 
Dickson, R.R., J. Meincke, S-A. Malmberg and A.J. Lee, 1988: 
The "Great Salinity Anomaly" in the northern North Atlantic. 
Progress in Oceanography, 20 (2), 103-151. 
Dixon, M.J. and J.A. Tawn, 1992: Trends in U.K. extreme sea 
levels: a spatial approach. Geophys. J. Int., Ill, 607-616. 
Douglas, B.C., 1991: Global sea level rise. /. Geophys. Res., 96 
(C4), 6981-6992. 
Douglas, B.C., 1992: Global sea level acceleration. J. Geophys. 
Res., 97, C8, 12699-12706. 
Douglas, B.C., 1995: Global sea level change: determination and 
interpretation. In: Reviews of Geophysics, Supplement. U.S. 
National Report to International 
Union of Geodesy and 
Geophysics 1991-1994. pp. 1425-1432. 
Douglas, B.C.. R.E. Cheney, L. Miller and R.W. Agreen. 1990: 
Greenland ice sheet: is it growing or shrinking? Science, 248, 
288-289. 
Drewry, D. J. (ed), 1983: Antarctic glaciological and geophysical 
folio. Scott Polar Research Institute, Cambridge. 
Drewry, D. and E. M . Morris, 1992: The response of large ice 
sheets to climatic change. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Land., В , 338, 
235-242. 
Dyurgerov, M . , 1994: Global Mass Balance Monitoring. Report 
to U.S.A. Department of State, Institute of Geography of 
Russian Academy of Sciences. 
Dyurgerov, M.B. and M.F. Meier, 1995: Year to year fluctuation 
in global mass balances of glaciers and their contribution to 
sea-level changes. lUGG XXI Assembly Abstracts, 
B318, 
American Geophysical Union. 
Eden, H.F. (ed.), 1990: Towards An Integrated System For 
Measuring Long Term Changes In Global Sea Level Report of 
a Workshop held at Woods Hole Océanographie Institution, 
May 1990. Joint Océanographie Institutions Inc. (JOI), 
Washington, DC, 178pp. & appendix. 
Ekman, M . , 1988: The world's longest continued series of sea 
level observations. Pure and Applied Geophysics, 127,1Ъ-11. 
Emery, K.O. and D.G. Aubrey, 1991: Sea Levels, Land Levels, 
and Tide Gauges. Springer-Verlag, New York, 237pp. 
Enfield, D . B . and J.S. Allen, 1980: On the structure and 
dynamics of monthly mean sea level anomalies along the 
Pacific coast of North and South America, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 
10, 557-578. 
Fisher, D.A. and R.M. Koerner, 1994: Signal and noise in four 
ice-core records from the Agassiz Ice Cap, Ellesmere Island, 
Canada: details of the last millennium for stable isotopes, melt, 
and solid conductivity, Holocene, 4 (2), 113-120. 
Flather, R.A. and H. Khandker, 1993: The storm surge problem 
and possible effects of sea level changes on coastal flooding in 
the Bay of Bengal. In: Climate and Sea Level 
Change: 
Observations, 
Projections and Implications, 
R.A.Warrick, 
E.M. Barrow and T.M.L. Wigley (eds.) Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, pp 229-245. 
Flemming, N . C , 1969: Archaeological evidence for eustatic 
change of sea level and earth movements in the western 
Mediterranean in the last 2,000 years. Special Paper of the 
Geological Society of America, 109, 1-125. 
Flemming, N . C , 1978: Holocene eustatic changes and coastal 
tectonics in the north east Mediterranean: implications for 
models of crustal consumption. Phil Trans. R. Soc. Lond., A. 
289, 405-458. 
Flemming, N . C , 1993: Predictions of relative coastal sea level 
change in the Mediterranean based on archaeological, historical 
and tide-gauge 
data. In: Climatic 
Change 
and 
the 
Mediterranean, 
L, Jeftic, J,D, Milkman, G, Sestini (eds,), 
Edward Arnold, London, pp 247-281, 
Flemming, N,C, and C O , Webb, 1986: Regional patterns of 
coastal tectonics and eustatic change of sea level in the 
Mediterranean during the last 10,000 years derived from 
archaeological data, Zeitschrift 
fur 
Géomorphologie, 
December, Suppl - Bd62, 1-29, 
Fortuin, J,P,G, and J. Oerlemans, 1990: Parameterization of the 
annual surface temperature and mass balance of Antarctica. 
Ann. Glacial, 14, 78-84. 
Fortuin. J.P.G. and J, Oerlemans, 1992: An axi-symmetric 
atmospheric model to simulate the mass balance and 
temperature distribution over the Antarctic ice sheet, Z, 
Gletscherk. Glazialgeol, 26, 31-56, 
Frassetto, R, (ed.), 1991: Impact of Sea Level Rise on Cities and 
Regions. Proceedings of the First International Meeting "Cities 
on Water", Venice, December 11-13, 1989, Marsilio Editori, 
Venice, 238pp. 
Fu, L . L . , E.J. Christensen, C.A. Yamarone, M . Lefebvre, Y . 
Menard, M . Dorrer, and P. Escudier, 1994: T O P E X / 
POSEIDON mission overview. /. Geophys. Res., 99 (CI2), 
24369-24381, 
Fiihrboter, A, and A, Toppe, 1991: Duration of storm tides at 
high water levels. In Storm Surges, River Flow and Combined 
Effects. International workshop, held 8-12 April 1991, 
Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany, A contribution to the 
UNESCO-IHP project H-2-2, Unesco, Paris, pp 45-54, 
Gates, W,L„ J,F.B, Mitchell, G,J,Boer, U , Cubash and V,P, 
Meleshko, 1992: Climate modelling, climate prediction and 
model validation. In Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary 
Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J,T, Houghton, B, A, 
Callander and S,K, Varney (eds,), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, pp, 101-134, 
Genthon, C , 1994: Antarctic climate modelling with general 
400 
Changes in Sea Level 
circulation models of the atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 
12953-12961. 
Giovinetto, M.B. and H.J. Zwally, 1995: Annual changes in sea 
ice extent and accumulation on ice sheets: implications for sea 
level variability. Z. Gleischerk. GlazialgeoL, (in press). 
Goldstein, R.M., H. Engelhardt, B. Kamb and R . M . Frolich, 
1993: Satellite radar interferometry for measuring ice sheet 
motion: application to an Antarctic ice stream. Science, 262, 
1525-1530. 
Golubev, G.N. 1983: Economic activity, water resources and the 
environment: a challenge for hydrology. Hydrol. Sci., 28, 
57-75. 
Gordon, A.L., S. Zebiak and K. Bryan, 1992; Climate variability 
and the Atlantic Ocean. EOS, Transactions, 
American 
Geophysical Union, 73 (15). 
Gornitz, V. 1995a: Sea level rise: a review of recent past and 
near-future trends. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 20, 
7-20. 
Gornitz, v., 1995b: A comparison of differences between recent 
and late Holocene sea level trends from eastern North America 
and other selected regions. Journal of Coastal 
Research, 
Special Issue. No.¡7, Holocene Cycles: Climate, Sea Levels 
and Sedimentation, C.W, Einkl, Jr.(ed), pp. 287-297. 
Gornitz, V. and S. Lebedeff, 1987: Global sea level changes 
during the past century. In: Sea Level Change and Coastal 
Evolution, D. Nummedal, O.H. Pilkey and J.D. Howard (eds.). 
Society for Economic Paleontologists and Mineralogists 
(SEPM Special Publication No.41). pp 3-16. 
Gornitz, V. and L. Seeber, 1990: Vertical crustal motions along 
the East Coast, North America, from historic and Holocene sea 
level data. Tectonophysics, 178, 127-150. 
Gornitz, V. and A. Solow, 1991: Observations of long-term tide 
gauge records for indicators of accelerated sea level rise. In: 
Greenhouse 
Gas-Induced 
Climatic 
Change: A 
Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, M.E.Schlesinger 
(ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp 347-367. 
Gornitz, v., C. Rosenzweig and D. Hillel, 1994: Is sea level 
rising or falling? Native, 37, 481. 
Gregory, J . M . , 1993: Sea level changes under increasing 
atmospheric C O j in a transient coupled ocean-atmosphere 
G C M experiment. J Climate, 6, 2247-2262. 
Groger, M . and H.P. Flag, 1993: Estimations of a global sea level 
trend: limitations from the structure of the PSMSL global sea 
level data set. Global Planet. Change, 8, 161-179. 
Haeberli, W. and M . Hoelzle, 1995: Application of inventory 
data for estimating characteristics of and regional climate 
change effects on mountain glaciers - a pilot study with the 
European Alps. Ann. Glaciol, 21, 206-212. 
Harrison, C. G. A., 1989: Rates of sea level change from ocean 
basin volume estimates. EOS, 70 (43), 1002. 
Harvey, L.D.D., 1992: A two dimensional ocean model for long 
term climatic simulations: stability and coupling to atmosphere 
and sea ice models. J. Geophys. Res., 97, 9435-9453. 
Harvey, L.D.D., 1994; Transient temperature and sea level 
response of two-dimensional ocean-climate model to 
greenhouse gas increases. J. Geophys. Res., 99, 18447-18466 
Hasselmann, K., R Sausen, E. Maier-Reimer and R. Voss, 1993: 
On ¡he cold start problem with coupled ocean-atmosphere 
models. Clim. Dyn., 9, 53-61. 
Henderson-Sellers, A., R.E. Dickinson, T.B. Durbridge, P.J. 
Kennedy, K . McGufrie and A . J . Pitman, 1993: Tropical 
deforestation; modeling local- to regional-scale climatic 
change. /. Geophys. Res., 98(D4), 7289-7315. 
Herterich, K., 1987, On the flow within the transition zone 
between ice sheet and ice shelf. In: Dynamics of the West 
Antarctic Ice Sheet, C. J. van der Veen and J. Oerlemans (eds), 
Riedel, Dortrecht, pp 185-202. 
Herzfeld, U.C., C.S. Lingle, L - H Lee, 1994; Recent advance of 
the grounding line of Lambert Glacier, Antarctica, deduced 
from satellite radar altimetry. Ann. Glaciol, 20, 43-47. 
Hofstede, J.L.A. 1991: Sea level rise in the inner German Bight 
(Germany) since A D 600 and its implications upon tidal flats 
geomorphology. In; Von der Nordsee bis zum Indischen Ozean, 
H. Bruckner and U.Radtke (eds.), Franz Steiner, Stuttgart, pp. 
11-27. 
Hoozemans, M.J. and J. Wiersma, 1992: Is mean wave height in 
the North Sea increasing? Hydro. J., 63, 13-15. 
Huybrechts, P., 1990; A 3-D model for the Antarctic ice sheet: a 
sensitivity study on the glacial-interglacial contrast. Clim. Dyn., 
5, 79-92. 
Huybrechts, P. 1994: The present evolution of the Greenland ice 
sheet; an assessment by modelling. Global Planet. Change 9, 
39-51. 
Huybrechts, P., A . Letreguilly and N . Reeh, 1991: The 
Greenland ice sheet and greenhouse warming. Paleogeography, 
Paleoclimatology. Paleoecology, 89, 79-92. 
l A S H ( I C S I ) / U N E S C O , 1967; Fluctuations 
of 
glaciers 
1959-1965. (vol. 1, P. Kasser, ed.). UNESCO, Paris. 
lAHS ( I C S I ) / U N E S C O , 1973: Fluctuations 
of 
glaciers 
1965-1970. (vol. 2, P. Kasser, ed.). UNESCO, Paris. 
lAHS ( I C S I ) / U N E S C 0 , 1977; Fluctuations 
of 
glaciers 
1970-1975. (vol. 3, F. Muller, ed.). UNESCO, Paris. 
lAHS ( l C S I ) / U N E S C O , 1985: Fluctuations 
of 
glaciers 
1975^1980. (vol. 4, W. Haeberii, ed.). UNESCO, Paris. 
lAHS (ICSI)/UNEP/UNESCO, 1988: Fluctuations of glaciers 
1980-1985. (vol. 5, W. Haeberii and P. Muller, ed.). UNESCO, 
Paris. 
lAHS (ICSI)/UNEP/UNESCO, 1989; World glacier inventory -
status 1988. (W. Haeberli, H. Bosch. K. Scherler, G. Ostrem, 
and G. C. Wallen, ed.). UNEP, Nairobi. 
lAHS (ICSI)/UNEP/UNESCO, 1993: Fluctuations of glaciers 
1985-1990. 
(vol. 6, W . Haeberli and M . Hoelzle, ed.). 
UNESCO, Paris. 
IOC(Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission ), 1990: 
Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Implementation 
Plan. 
Intergovernmental Océanographie Coinmission, 
Technical Series, No.35, 90p. 
I P C C (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Changes in Sea Level 
401 
Climate 
Change: 
the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, 
J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, Houghton, J.T., B . A . 
Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 200p. 
Jacobs, S.S., H.H. Helmer, C.S.M. Doake, A Jenkins and R M 
Frolich, 1992: Melting of ice shelves and the mass balance of 
Antarctica. J. GlacioL, 38(130), 375-387. 
Jóhannesson, T., С. Raymond and E. Waddington. 1989: Time-
scale for adjustment of glaciers to changes in mass balance. J. 
GlacioL, 35{m), 355-369. 
Jóhannesson, T., О. Sigurdsson, T. Lauman, and M . Kennett, 
1995: Degree-day glacier mass balance modelling with 
applications to glaciers in Iceland, Norway, and Greenland. J. 
GlacioL, 41, No. 138, 345-358. 
Kapsner, W.R., R.B. Alley, C.A. Shuman, S. Anandakrishnan 
and P.M. Grootes, 1995: Dominant influence of atmospheric 
circulation on snow accumulation in Greenland over the past 
18,000 years. Nature, 373, 52-54. 
Kelsey, H . M . , Engebretson, D.C., Mitchell, C.E., and R . L . 
Ticknor, 1994: Topographic form of the Coast Ranges of the 
Cascadia Margin in relation to coastal uplift rates and plate 
subduction./. Geophys. Res., 99, 12,245-12,255. 
Klige, R.K., 1982: Oceanic level fluctuations in the history of the 
earth. In: Sea and Oceanic Level Fluctuations for 15,000 years. 
Moscow, USSR Academy of Sciences, pp. 11-22. 
Koblinsky, C.J., P. Gaspar and G. Lagerloef (eds.), 1992: The 
future of space-borne altimetry: oceans and climate change. A 
long-term strategy. Washington, D C : Joint Océanographie 
Institutions Inc., 75p. 
Kock, H., 1993: Height determinations along the EGIG line and 
in the GRIP area. GGU Open File Series 93/5, 68-70 (Rep. 
3rd WS„ Mass balance and related topics of the Greenland ice 
sheet, Bremerhaven 1992). 
Koltermann, K.P. and A . Sy, 1994. Western North Aflantic 
Cools at intermediate depths. WOCE Newsletter. 15, 5-6. 
Komar, P.D. and D.B. Enfleld, 1987: Short-term sea level 
changes and coastal erosion. In: Sea level Fluctuation and 
Coastal Evolution, 
D. Nummedal, O.H. Pilkey and J.D. 
Howard (eds.), SEPM Spec. Publ. No. 41, pp. 17-27. 
Kostecka, J.M. and I.M Whillans, 1988: Mass balance along two 
transects of the west side of the Greenland Ice Sheet. /. 
G/ac/o/., 34, 31-39. 
Kuhn, M . , 1981: Climate and glaciers. Int. Assoc. Hydrol. Sci., 
131, 3-20. 
Kuhn, M . , 1985: Reactions of mid-latitude glacier mass balance 
to predicted climatic changes. In: Glaciers, Ice Sheets, and Sea 
Level: Effects of a CO^-Induced Climatic Change, National 
Academy Press, Washington DC, pp.248-254. 
Kuhn, M., 1993: Possible future contributions to sea level change 
from small glaciers. In: Climate and Sea Level 
Change: 
Observations, Projections and Implications. 
R.A. Warrick, 
E.M. Barrow and T.M.L. Wigley (eds.), Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, pp. 134-143. 
Kuhn, M . , G. Kaser, G. Mark, H.P. Wagner and H. Schneider, 
1979: 25 Jahre Massenhaushaltuntersuchen am Hintereisferner. 
Universitat Innsbruk. 
Kushnir, Y., 1994: Interdecadal variations in the North Atiantic 
sea surface temperature and associated atmospheric conditions, 
/ Climate, 1, 141-157. 
Lachenbruch, A . H . and B. V . Marshall, 1986: Changing 
climate: geothermal evidence from permafrost in the Alaskan 
Arctic. Science, 234, 689-696. 
Lambeck, K., 1990: Glacial rebound, sea level change and 
mantie viscosity. Quart J. R. Astron. Soc, 31, 1-30. 
LatiL M . and T.P. Barnett, 1994: Causes of decadal climate 
variability over the North Pacific and North America, Science, 
266, 634-637. 
Laumann, T. and N . Reeh, 1993: Sensitivity to climate change of 
the mass balance of glaciers in southern Norway. /. 
GlacioL, 
39(133), 656-665. 
Lavin, A . M . , 1993: Climatic changes in temperature and salinity 
in the subtropical North Atlantic, Msc Thesis, MIT, 
Cambridge, Mass. 
Lazier, J. and R. Gershey, 1991: AR7W: Labrador sea line, 
WOCE Newsletter 11. 
Lestingant, R., 1994: A two-dimensional finite-element study of 
flow in the transition zone between and ice sheet and an ice 
shelf. Ann. GlacioL, 20, 67-72. 
Levitus, S., 1982: Climatological Atlas of the World Ocean. 
N O A A Professional Paper 13, U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC, 177pp. 
Liestol, O., 1967: Storbreen glacier in Jotunheimen, Norway. 
Norsk Polarinstitutt Skrifter No. 141, 63p. 
Lingle, C.S., A.C. Brenner and J.P. DiMarzio, 1991: Multi-year 
elevation changes near the west margin of the Greenland ice 
sheet from satellite radar altimetry. International Conference 
on the Role of the Polar Regions 
in Global 
Change: 
Proceedings of a Conference Held June 11-15, 1990 at the 
University of Alaska Fairbanks, G. Weller, C.L. Wilson and 
B.A.B. Serverin (eds.). Geophysical Institute and Centre for 
Global Change and Arctic System Science, University of 
Alaska, Fairbanks, pp. 35^2. 
MacAyeal, D.R., 1992: Irregular oscillations of the West 
Antarctic ice sheet. Nature, 359, 29-32. 
MacAyeal, D.R., 1994: Binge/purge oscillations of the 
Laurentide Ice Sheet, a cause of the North Atlantic's Heinrich 
Events. Paleoceanography, 8, 775-784. 
Macharet, Y . Y . , P.A. Cherkasov, and L.I. Bobrova, 1988: The 
thickness and volume of the Dzhungarsky Alatau glaciers from 
the data of airborne radio echo sounding (in Russian). 
Materialy Glyatsiologischeskikh Issledovaniy, 62, 59-71. 
Mahaffy, M.A.W., 1976: A numerical three-dimensional ice flow 
model. /. Geophys. Res., 81(6), 1059-1066. 
Malzer, H. and H. Seckel, 1975: Das geometrische Nivellement 
/ber das Inlandeis - Hohenanderungen zwischen 1959 and 
402 
Changes in Sea Level 
1968 im Ost-West-Prof il der EGIG. Z. Gletscherk. Glazialgeol. 
11, 245-252. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1993: Century-scale effects of 
increased atmospheric COj on the ocean-atmosphere system. 
Nature, 364,215-218. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1994: Multiple-Century response 
of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to an increase of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. /. Climate, 7, 5-23. 
Martin, S., 1978: Analyse et reconstitution de la série des bilans 
annuels du Glacier de Sarennes, sa relation avec les 
fluctuations du niveau de trois glaciers du Massif du Mont-
Blanc (Bossons, Argentiére, Mer de Glace). Z. Gletscherk. 
Glazialgeol, 13(1/2), 127-153. 
Maul, G.A. and K. Hanson, 1991: Interannual coherence between 
North Atlantic atmospheric surface pressure and composite 
southern U.S.A. sea level. Geophys. Res. Lett, 18, 653-656. 
Maul, G.A. and D.M. Martin, 1993: Sea level rise at Key West, 
Florida, 1846-1992: America's longest instrument record? 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 1955-1958. 
Maul, G.A., D.A. Mayer and M . Bushnell, 1990, Statistical 
relationships between local sea level and weather with Florida-
Bahamas Cable and Pegasus measurement of Florida CuiTcnt 
volume transport, /. Geophys. Res., 95, C3, 3287- 3296. 
McPhaden, M.J., 1993: TOGA-TAO and the 1991-93 El Niño-
Southem Oscillation event. Oceanography, 6, 36^4. 
Meier, M.F., 1965: Glaciers and climate. In: The Quaternary of 
the United States: A review of volume for the VIH Congress of 
the International Association for Quaternary Research., H. E. 
Wright Jr. and D. G. Frey (eds.), Princeton University Press, pp 
795-805. 
Meier, M.F., 1983: Snow and ice in a changing hydrological 
world. Journal des hydrologiques, 28(l):3-22. 
Meier, M.F., 1984: Contribution of small glaciers to global sea 
level. Science, 226, 1418-1421. 
Meier, M.F., 1985: Mass balance of the glaciers and small ice 
caps of the world. In: Glaciers, Ice Sheets and Sea Level: 
Effects of a C02-induced Climatic Change, National Academy 
Press, Washington, pp. 139-144. 
Meier, M.F., 1990: Reduced rise in sea level. Nature, 
343, 
115-116. 
Meier, M.F., 1993; Ice, climate, and sea level; do we know what 
is happening? In: Ice in the Climate System, W.R. Peltier (ed.), 
NATO ASI Series I, Global Environmental Change, Vol. 12, 
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, pp. 141-160. 
Meier, M . F , 1994: Columbia Glacier during rapid retreat; 
interactions between ice flow and iceberg calving dynamics. In: 
Workshop on the calving rate of West Greenland glaciers in 
response to climate change, N . Reeh (ed.), Danish Polar 
Centre, Copenhagen, pp 63-83. 
Mikolajewicz, U . , B . D . Santer and E. Maier-Reimer, 1990; 
Ocean response to greenhouse warming. Nature, 345, 589-593. 
Miller, L. and R. Cheney, 1990. Large-scale meridional transport 
in die Tropical Pacific Ocean during the 1986-1987 El Niño 
from Geosat, /. Geophys. Res., 95, CIO, 17905-17919. 
Mitchell, C.E., P. Vincent, R.J. Weldon, II and M.A. Richards, 
1994; Present-day vertical deformation of the Gaseadla margin. 
Pacific Northwest, United States. J. Geophys. 
Res., 99, 
12257-12277. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram and C.A. Senior, 1995; 
On surface temperature, greenhouse gases and aerosols: models 
and observations. J.Climate, 10, 2364-2386 
Mitrovica, J.X. and J.L. Davis, 1995: Present-day post-glacial sea 
level change far from the Late Pleistocene ice sheets; 
implications for recent analyses of tide gauge records. 
Geophys. Res. Lett , 22, 2529-2532. 
Moeller, D., 1994; Das West-Ost-Profil der Internationalen 
Glaziologischen Groenland Expedition (EGIG). Rekonstmktion 
und Nachmessung. Geowissenschaften 12 (3), 80-82. 
Morner, N-A., 1973; Eustatic changes during the last 300 years. 
Paleogeography, Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology, 13, 1-14. 
Munk, W. 1989: Global ocean warming; detection by long-path 
acoustic travel times. Oceanography, 2(2), 4 0 ^ 1 . 
Murphy, J.M., 1995: Transient response of the Hadley Centre 
coupled model to increasing carbon dioxide. Part III, analysis 
of global-mean response using simple models. J.Climate, 8, 
496-514, 
Muszynski, I, and G.E. Birehfield, 1985: The dependence of 
antarctic accumulation rates on surface temperature and 
elevation. Tellus, 37A, 204-208. 
NASA, 1991, West Antarctic Ice Sheet Initiative, vol. 1: Science 
and Implementation Plan, R. A . Bindschadler (ed.), NASA 
Conference Publication 3115. 
Nerem, R.S., 1995: Global mean sea level variations from 
TOPEX/POSEIDON altimeter data. Science, 268, 708-710. 
Oerlemans, J. and N . C. Hoogendoorn, 1989: Mass-balance 
gradients and cUmatic change. J. Glaciol, 35(121), 399-405. 
Oerlemans, J. and J.P.F. Fortuin, 1992; Sensitivity of glaciers 
and small ice caps to greenhouse warming. Science, 
258, 
115-117. 
Oerlemans, J, R.S.W van de Wal and L.A. Conrads. 1991: A 
model for the surface balance of ice masses: Part II: application 
to tbe Greenland ice sheet. Z. Gletscherk. Glazialgeol 27/28, 
85-96. 
Ohmura, A . and N . Reeh, 1991: New precipitation and 
accumulation maps for Greenland. J. Glaciol, 
37 (125), 
140-148. 
0strem, G. and M . Brugman, 1991: Glacier 
Mass-Balance 
Measurements. 
N H R I Science Report No 4. Saskatoon, 
National Hydrology Research Institute. 224 pp. 
Parkinson, C.L. and R.A. Bindschadler, 1984; Response of 
Antarctic sea ice to uniform atmospheric temperature increases. 
In: Climate Processes and Climate Sensitivity, Geophysical 
Monograph 29, Maurice Ewing Vol. 5, A G U , pp. 254-264. 
Peltier, W.R., 1994: Ice age paleotopography. Science, 
265, 
195-201. 
Peltier, W.R. and A . M . Tushingham, 1989; Global sea level rise 
and the greenhouse effect: might they be related? Science, 244, 
806-810. 
Changes in Sea Level 
403 
Peltier, W.R. and A . M . Tushingham, 1991: Influence of glacial 
isostatic adjustment on tide gauge measurements of secular sea 
level change. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 6779-6796. 
Pfeffer, W.T., M.F. Meier, and Т.Н. Ulangaselcare, 1991: Retention 
of Greenland runoff by refreezing: implications for projected 
futore sea level change. J. Geophys. Res.. 96 (CI2), 22117-22124. 
Pirazzoli, P.A., 1977: Sea level relative variations in the world 
during the last 2000 years. Zeitschrift fuer Géomorphologie, 
21 
(3), 284-296. 
Pirazzoli, P.A., 1991: Possible defences against a sea level rise in 
the Venice area, Italy. J. Coastal Res., 7(1), 231-248. 
Pirazzoli, P.A., 1993. Global sea level changes and their 
measurement. Global and Planetary Change, 8, 135-148. 
Proctor, R. and L. Carter, 1989: Tidal and sedimentary response 
to the Late Quaternary closure and opening of Cook Strait, 
New 
Zealand: results 
from 
numerical modelling. 
Paleoceanography, 4, 167-180. 
Raper, S.C.B.. T.M.L. Wigley and R.A. Warrick, 1996: Global 
sea level rise: past and future. In: Rising sea level and 
subsiding coastal areas, J.D. Milliman (ed.) Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, 384 pp.. 
Read, J.F. and W.J. Gould, 1992: Cooling and freshening in the 
subpolar North Atlantic Ocean since the 1960s. Nature, 360, 
55-57. 
Reeh, N., 1985: Greenland ice sheet mass balance and sea level 
change. In: Glaciers, Ice Sheets and Sea Level: Effects of a 
CO., induced Climatic Change. National Academy Press, 
Washington, pp 155-171. 
Reeh, N . , 1991: Parameterization of melt rate and surface 
temperature on the Greenland Ice Sheet. Polarforschung, 59(3), 
113-128. 
Reeh, N., 1994: Calving from Greenland glaciers: observations, 
balance estimates of calving rates, calving laws. Workshop on 
the calving rate of West Greenland glaciers in response to 
climate change, Danish Polar Centre, Copenhagen, 171pp. 
Reeh, N . and N . S. Gundestrup, 1986: Mass balance of the 
Greenland ice sheet at Dye 3. /. GlacioL, 31, 198-200. 
Retzlaff, R. and C.R. Bentley, 1993: Timing of stagnation of Ice 
Stream C, West Antarctica, from short-pulse radar studies of 
buried surface crevasses. Journal of Glaciology, 39, 553-561. 
Rijkswaterstaat, 1986: Sea level rise: struggling with the rising 
water (In Dutch). Rijkswaterstaat, Netherlands, 148p. and figs. 
Robin, G., 1986: Changing the sea level. In: The Greenhouse 
Effect Climate Change, and Ecosystems., B. Bolin B.R. Doos, 
R.A. Warrick and J. Jaeger (eds.), John Wiley & Sonslnc, 
Chichester, pp. 323-359. 
Rodenburg, E., 1994: Man-made lakes and sea level rise. Nature, 
370, 258p. 
Roemmich, D., 1985: Sea level and thermal variabiUty of the 
ocean. In: Glacier. Ice sheets and Sea level: Effects of a CO2 
induced 
CUmate 
Change. 
National Academy Press, 
Washington, pp. 104-115. 
Roemmich, D., 1992: Ocean warming and sea level rise along the 
southwest U.S. coast. Science, 257, 273-275. 
Rohde, H., 1980: Changes in sea level in the German Bight. J. 
Geophys. R. Astron. Soc, 62, 291-302. 
Rogers, I.e., 
1984: The association between the North Atlantic 
Oscillation and the Southern Oscillation in the Northern 
Hemisphere, Мои. Weather Rev., 112, 1999. 
Rusconi, A., 1993: The tidal observations in the Venice Lagoon -
the variations in sea level observed in the last 120 years. In: 
Sea Level Changes and Their Consequences for Hydrology and 
Water Management. 
International 
workshop, 19-23 April 
1993, Noordwijkerhout, Netherlands. Koblenz: Bundesanstalt 
fur Gewasserkunde, IHP/OHP Secretariat, pp. 115-132. 
Sahagian, D.L., F.W., Schwartz, and D.K. Jacobs, 1994: Direct 
anthropogenic contributions to sea level rise in the twentieth 
century. Nature, 367, 54-56. 
Salinger, M.J.. R. Allan, N . Bindoff, J, Hannah. B. Lavery, Z. 
Lin, J. Lindesay, N . Nicholls, N . Plummer and S. Torek, 1996: 
Observed variability and changes in climate and sea level in 
Oceania. In: Greenhouse '94, G. Pearman and M . Manning 
(eds.), CSIRO Press, Melbourne (in press). 
Scherer. R.P., 1991: Quaternary and Tertiary microfossils from 
beneath Ice Stream B: evidence for a dynamic West Antarctic 
ice sheet history. Paleogeography, 
Paleoclimatology. 
Paleoecology, 90(4), 395-412. 
Schmidt, H., 1991: On the variation of the geostrophic wind from 
1876 to 1989 in the German Bight and on other meteorological 
parameters. In: Storm Surges, River Flow and Combined 
Effects. International workshop, held 8-12 April 1991, 
Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany. A contribution to the 
UNESCO-IHP project H-2-2, Paris: UNESCO, pp9-17. 
Schmidt, H . and H. von Storch. 1993: German Bight storms 
analysed. Nature, 365, 791p. 
Schwitter, M . P . and C F . Raymond. 1993: Changes in the 
longitudinal profiles of glaciers during advance and retreat. J. 
GlacioL, 39 (133), 582-590. 
Scott, D.B. and D.A. Greenberg, 1983: Relative sea level rise and 
tidal developments in the Fundy tidal system. 
Canadian 
Journal of Earth Sciences, 20. 1554-1564. 
Seckel, H, 1977: Hohenanderung im Gronlandischen Inlandeis 
zwischen 1959 und 1968. Meddelelser от Gronland, 187(4), 
58p. 
Semtner, A.J., 1994: The future of global modelling within 
WOCE. WOCE Note, 6, 2, 2-3. 
Shennan, I. and P.L. Woodworth, 1992: A comparison of late 
Holocene and twentieth-century sea level trends from the U K 
and North Sea region. J. Geophys. Int., 109, 96-105. 
Shiklomonov, I.A., 1993: World fresh water resources. In: Water 
in crisis - a guide to the world's freshwater resources, P.H. 
Gleick (ed.). Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 13-24. 
Sinimonds, I., 1990: Improvements in general circulation 
performance in simulating Antarctic climate. Antarctic Science, 
2, 287-300. 
Simon, В., 1994: Statistique des niveaux marins extremes le long 
des cotes de France. SHOM, Rapport d'étude, 78p. 
Spencer, N.E., 1992: Joint lAPSO-IOC workshop on sea level 
404 
Changes in Sea Level 
measurements and quality control, Paris, 12-13 October 1992. 
Intergovernmental 
Océanographie 
Commission 
Workshop 
Report No.81, 167p. 
Spencer, N.E. and P.L. Woodworth, 1993: Data holdings of the 
Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level (November ¡993). Bidston, 
Birkenhead: Permanent Service for IVIean Sea Level, 8 Ip. 
Spencer, R. and J.M. Vassie, 1985: Comparison of sea-level 
measurements obtained from deep pressure sensors. In; 
Advances in Underwater Technology and Offshore Engineering, 
Volume 4, Evaluation, 
Comparison 
and Calibration 
of 
Océanographie 
Instruments, Graham and Trotman Ltd., for 
SUT, London, pp. 183-207. 
Stroeven, A., R. van de Wal and H. Oerlemans, 1989: Historic 
front variations of the Rhone Glacier: simulation with an ice 
flow model. In; Glacier Fluctuations and Climatic Change. H. 
Oeriemans (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, pp. 
391-405. 
Sturges, W.E., 1987; Large-scale coherence of sea level at very 
low frequencies. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 17, 2084-2094. 
Sturges, W. and B.G. Hong, 1995: Wind forcing of the Atlantic 
thermocline along 32 °N at low frequencies. / . Phys. 
Oceanogr,25, 1706-1715. 
Tangborn, W., 1980: Two models for estimating climate-glacier 
relationships in the north Cascades, Washington, U.S.A. J. 
GlacioL, 25(91), 3-21. 
Tanner, W.F., 1992: 3000 years of sea level change. BulL Am. 
Met Soc, 73, 297-303. 
Tawn, J.A. and J.M. Vassie, 1991; Recent improvements in the 
joint probability method for estimating extreme sea levels. In; 
Tidal Hydrodynamics, B.B.Parker (ed.), John Wiley and Sons , 
NY, pp. 813-828. 
Thomas, R . H . , 1973: The creep of ice shelves: Theory, J. 
GlacioL, 3, 38-42. 
Thomas, R.H., 1985; Responses of the polar ice sheets to climatic 
warming. In: Glaciers, Ice Sheets and Sea Level: Effects of a 
C02-induced 
Climatic Change, National Academy Press, 
Washington, pp. 301-316. 
Thomson, R.E. and S. Tabata, 1987: Steric height trends of ocean 
station PAPA in the northeast Pacific Ocean. Marine Geodesy, 
11, 103-113. 
Thorarinsson, S., 1940: Present glacier shrinkage and eustatic 
changes of sea level. Geografiska Annaler, 22, 131-159. 
Titus, J.G. and V. Narrayanan, 1995: The Probability of Sea 
Level Rise. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of 
Policy, Planning, and Evaluation, Climate Change Division. 
EPA 230-R-95-008. EPA, Washington, D.C., 186p. 
Titus, J.G. and V. Narrayanan, 1996: The risk of sea level rise: a 
Delphic Monte-Carlo analysis in which twenty researchers 
specify subjective probability distributions for model 
coefficients within their respective areas of expertise.C//m. 
Change (in press). 
Trabant, D.C. and L.R. Mayo, 1985: Estimation and effects of 
internal accumulation on five glaciers in Alaska. Annals of 
Glaciology, 6, 113-117. 
Trupin, A. and J. Wahr, 1990: Spectroscopic analysis of global 
tide gauge sea level data. Geophys. J. Intern. 100, 441^53. 
Trupin, A.S., M.F. Meier and J.M. Wahr, 1992: Effect of melting 
glaciers on the Earth's rotation and gravitational field: 
1965-1984. Geophys. J. Intern., 108, 1-15. 
Tsimplis, M.N., R.A. Flather and J.M. Vassie, 1994: The North 
Sea pole tide described through a tide-surge numerical model. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, 21(6), 449^52. 
Tushingham, A . M . and W.R. РеШег, 1991: ICE-3G: a new 
global model of late Pleistocene déglaciation based upon 
geophysical predictions of post glacial relative sea level 
change. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 4497^523. 
van der Veen, C.J., 1985: Response of a marine ice sheet to 
changes at the grounding line. Quat Res., 42, 257-267. 
van de Wal, R.S.W. and J. Oerlemans, 1994; An energy balance 
model for the Greenland ice sheet. Global PlanetChange, 9, 
115-131. 
Varekamp, J . C , E. Thomas and O. Van de Plassche, 1992; 
Relative sea level rise and climate change over the last 1500 
years. Terra Nova, 4, 293-304. 
Wagner, C.A., R.E. Cheney, L. Miller, C.K. Tai, N.S. Doyle and 
J.L. Lillibridge, 1994, Global sea level change from altimetry, 
EOS, 75 (44), 56p. 
Wagner, C.A. and D.C. McAdoo, 1986: Time variations in the 
Earth's gravity field detectable with Geopotential Research 
Mission intersatellite tracking. J. Geophys. Res, 91(B8), 
8373-8386. 
Walters, R.A. and M.F. Meier, 1989: VariabiUty of glacier mass 
balances iri western North America. In: Aspects of Climate 
Variability in the Pacific and Western Americas, Geophysical 
Monograph 55, D.H. Peterson (ed.), American Geophysical 
Union, pp. 365-281. 
Warrick, R.A. and J. Oerlemans, 1990: Sea Level Rise, In: 
CUmate Change, The IPCC Assessment. J.T. Houghton, G.J. 
Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, pp. 257-281. 
Weertman, J., 1974; Stability of the junction of an ice sheet and 
an ice shelf, J. GlacioL, 13, 3-11. 
Weidick A., ^1984; Review of glacier changes in West Greenland. 
Z. Gletscherk Glazialgeol., 21, 301-309. 
Weidick, A., 1995; Greenland, In: Satellite Image Atlas of Glaciers 
of the World, R.S. Williams, Jr. and J.G. Feirigno (eds.), U.S. 
Geological Survey Professional Paper 1386-C, 141pp. 
Whillans, I.M., 1976: Radio-echo layers and the recent stability 
of the West Antarctic ice sheet. Nature, 264, 152-155. 
Whitworth, T., Ill and R.G. Peterson, 1985: Volume transport of 
the Antarctic Circumpolar Current from bottom pressure 
measurements. J. Phys.Oceanogr., 15, 810-816. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1995: Global-mean temperature and sea level 
consequences of greenhouse gas concentration stabilization. 
Geophys. Res. Lett, 22, 45^8. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.CB. Raper, 1987: Thermal expansion of 
sea level associated with global warming. Nature, 
330, 
127-131. 
Changes in Sea Level 
405 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1992: Implications for climate 
and sea level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature, 357. 
293-300. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1993: РиШге changes in global 
mean temperature and sea level. In: Climate and Sea Level: 
Observations, Projections and Implications. 
R.A. Warriclc, 
E.M. Barrow and T.M.L. Wigley (eds.), Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, pp. 111-133. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1995: An heuristic model for 
sea level rise due to the melting of small glaciers. Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 22, 2749-2752. 
Wigley, T.M.L., A. Hall, S.C.B. Raper and R.A. Wanick, 1996: 
Past sea level rise from glaciers based on a regional degree-day 
model. J. Geophys. Res. (submitted). 
Wimbush, M . 1990: Inferring sea level variation from acoustic 
travel time and bottom pressure measurements. In: Towards an 
Integrated System for Measuring Long Term Changes in Global 
Sea Level, H.F. Eden (ed.). Report of a workshop held at Woods 
Hole Océanographie Institution, May 1990, Joint Océanographie 
Institutions Inc. (JOI), Washington, DC, pp. 147-153. 
Woodworth, P.L., 1990: A search for accelerations in records 
of European mean sea level. Int. Journal. 
Climatol, 
10, 
129-143. 
Woodworth, P.L., 1991: The Permanent Service for Mean Sea 
Level and the Global Sea Level Observing System. Journal of 
Coastal Research, 1, 699-710. 
Woodworth, P.L. 1993: A review of recent sea-level research. 
Oceanography and Marine Biology. An Annual Review, 31, 
87-109. 
Wyrtki, K., 1979: The response of sea level surface topography 
to the 1976 El Niño. J. Phys. Oceanogr, 9, 1223-1231. 
Wyrtki, K.. 1985: Water displacements in the Pacific and the 
genesis of El Niño. J. Geophys. Res. 90, 7129-7132. 
Zwally, H.J„ A.C. Brenner, J.A. Major, R.A, Bindschadler and 
J.G. Marsh (1989): Growth of the Greenland Ice Sheet: 
Measurement. Science, 246, 1587-1589. 
Zwally, H.J. , A.C. Brenner, J.A. Major, R.A. Bindschadler and 
J.G. Marsh, 1990: Greenland Ice Sheet: is it growing or 
slirinking? - Response. Science, 248, 288-289. 
8 
Detection of Climate Change 
and Attribution of Causes 
B.D. SANTER, T.M.L. WIGLEY, T.P. BARNETT, E. ANYAMBA 
Contributors: 
P. Bloomfield, E.R. Cook, С Covey, T.J. Crowley, T. Delworth, W.L. Gates, 
N.E. Graham, J.M. Gregory, J.E. Hansen, K. Hasselmann, G.C. Hegerl, 
TC. Johns, P.D. Jones, T.R. Karl, D.J. Karoly, H.S. Kheshgi, M.C. MacCracken, 
K. Maskell, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.M. Murphy, N. Nicholls, G.R. North, 
M. Oppenheimer, J.E. Penner, S.B. Power, A. Robock, J.L. Santer, C.A. Senior, 
K.E. Taylor, S. Tett, F.W. Zwiers 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
411 
8.1 Introduction 
413 
8.1.1 The Meaning of "Detection" and "Attributíon" 
413 
8.1.2 Types of Climate-Change Detection Studies 
413 
8.1.2.1 Stage 1 studies 
414 
8.1.2.2 Stage 2 studies 
414 
8.1.2.3 Stage 3 studies 
415 
8.1.2.4 Stage 4 studies 
415 
8.1.3 Progress Since IPCC (1990) 
415 
8.2 Uncertainties in Model Projections of 
Anthropogenic Change 
416 
8.4 Evaluation of Recent Studies to Detect and 
Attribute Climate Change 
8.4.1 Studies of Changes in Global Mean Variables 
8.4.1.1 Studies to detect change in observed data 422 
8.4.1.2 Comparisons of model results and 
observed data 
8.4.1.3 Empirical estimation of the sensitivity of 
climate to forcing 
8.4.2 Studies of Modelled and Observed Spatial 
and Temporal Patterns of Change 
8.4.2.1 Greenhouse gas signals 
8.4.2.2 Anthropogenic sulphate aerosol signals 
8.4.2.3 Combined COj and sulphate aerosol 
;.2.i Errors in Simulating Current Climate in 
signals 
Uncoupled and Coupled Models 
416 
8.4.3 Studies of Spatial and Temporal Patterns of 
i.2.2 Inadequate Representation of Feedbacks 
416 
Change in Model Data Only 
;.2.3 Flux Correction Problems 
417 
;.2.4 Signal Estimation Problems 
417 
8.5 Qualitative Consistency Between Model 
;.2.5 "Missing Forcing" and Uncertainties in 
Predictions and Observations 
Space-Time Evolution of Forcing 
417 
8.5.1 Introduction 
1.2.6 Cold-Start Effect 
418 
8.5.2 Global Mean Temperature and Surface 
8.3 Uncertainties in Estimating Natural Variability 
8.3.1 From Instrumental Data 
8.3.2 From Palaeoclimatic Records 
8.3.3 From Numerical Models 
8.3.3.1 Energy balance models 
8.3.3.2 Stochastically forced ocean models 
8.3.3.3 Fully coupled atmosphere-ocean general 
circulation models 
418 
418 
419 
419 
419 
419 
Temperature Patterns 
8.5.3 Diurnal Temperature Range 
8.5.4 Changes in Phase of Annual Temperature Cycle 
8.5.5 Possible Inconsistencies between Modelled and 
Satellite-Derived Temperature Trends 
8.6 When WiU an Anthropogenic Effect on Climate 
be Identified? 
421 
421 
423 
423 
424 
425 
430 
420 
References 
431 
434 
435 
435 
437 
437 
437 
438 
438 
439 
SUMMARY 
Since tlie 1990 IPCC Scientific Assessment considerable 
progress has been made in attempts to identify an 
anthropogenic effect on climate. The first area of 
significant advance is that model experiments are now 
starting to incorporate the possible climatic effects of 
human-induced changes in sulphate aerosols and 
stratospheric ozone. The inclusion of these factors has 
modified in important ways the picture of how climate 
might respond to human influences. Thus, the potential 
climate change "signal" due to human activities is now 
better defined, although important signal uncertainties still 
remain. 
The second area of progress is in better defining the 
background natural variability of the climate system, a 
crucial aspect of the detection problem. "Detection of 
change" is the process of demonstrating that an observed 
change in climate is highly unusual in a statistical sense. 
This requires distinguishing any human effects on climate 
from the background "noise" of climate fluctuations that 
are entirely natural in origin. Such natural fluctuations can 
be either purely internal or externally driven, for example 
by changes in solar variability or the volcanic dust loading 
of the atmosphere. "Total" natural variability includes both 
internal and externally forced components. Estimating 
either component of natural climatic noise from observed 
data is a difficult problem. Recent multi-century model 
experiments that assume no human-induced changes in 
anthropogenic forcings have provided important 
information about the possible characteristics of the 
internal component of total natural variability. However, 
large uncertainties still apply to current estimates of the 
magnitude and patterns of natural climate variability, 
particularly on the decadal- to century-time-scales that are 
crucial to the detection problem. 
The third area of progress is in the application of pattern-
based methods in attempts to attribute some part of the 
observed changes in climate to human activities: i.e., to 
establish a cause-effect relationship. Most studies that have 
attempted to detect an anthropogenic effect on climate have 
used changes in global mean, annually averaged 
temperature. These investigations have compared observed 
changes over the past 10-100 years with estimates of 
internal or total natural variability noise derived from 
palaeodata, climate models, or statistical models fitted to 
observations. The majority of these studies show that the 
observed change in global mean, annually averaged 
temperature over the last century is unlikely to be due 
entirely to natural fluctuations of the climate system. 
Although these global mean results suggest that there is 
some anthropogenic component in the observed 
temperature record, they cannot be considered as 
compelling evidence of a clear cause-and-effect link 
between anthropogenic forcing and changes in the Earth's 
surface temperature. It is difficult to achieve attribution of 
all or part of a climate change to a specific cause or causes 
using global mean changes only. The difficulties arise due 
to uncertainties in natural internal variability and in the 
histories and magnitudes of natural and human-induced 
climate forcings, so that many possible forcing 
combinations could yield the same curve of observed 
global mean temperature change. 
To better address the attribution problem, a number of 
recent studies have compared observations with the spatial 
patterns of temperature-change predicted by models in 
response to anthropogenic forcing. The argument 
underlying pattern-based approaches is that different 
forcing mechanisms have different patterns of response or 
characteristic "fingerprints", particularly if the response is 
considered in three or even four dimensions (e.g., 
temperature changes as a function of latitude, longitude, 
height and time). Thus, a good match between observed 
and modelled multi-dimensional patterns of climate change 
increases the likelihood that the "cause" (forcing change) 
used in the model experiment is in fact responsible for 
producing the observed effect. 
Several recent studies have compared observed patterns 
of temperature change with model patterns from 
simulations with simultaneous changes in carbon dioxide 
(COj) and anthropogenic sulphate aerosols. These 
comparisons have been made both at the Earth's surface 
412 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
and in vertical sections through the atmosphere. The 
results of these studies rest mainly on pattern similarities 
at the largest spatial scales, for which model predictions 
are most reliable: for example at the scale of temperature 
differences between hemispheres, land and ocean, or the 
troposphere and stratosphere. While there are concerns 
regarding the relatively simple treatment of aerosol effects 
in model experiments that attempt to define an 
anthropogenic signal, all such pattern comparison studies 
show 
significant correspondences 
between 
the 
observations and model predictions. The pattern 
correspondences increase with time, as one would expect 
as an anthropogenic signal increases in strength. Pattern 
correspondences using combined COj+aerosol signals are 
generally higher than those obtained if model predictions 
are based on changes in C O j alone. Furthermore, the 
probability is very low that these correspondences could 
occur by chance as a result of natural internal variability. 
The vertical patterns of change are also inconsistent with 
the response patterns expected for solar and volcanic 
forcing. Increasing confidence in the emerging 
identification of a human-induced effect on climate comes 
primarily from such pattern-based work. 
In addition to these quantitative studies, there are areas of 
qualitative agreement between observations and those model 
predicrions that either include aerosol effects or do not 
depend critically on their inclusion. Model and observed 
commonaliries in which we have most confidence, but 
which have not been looked at in detailed detection studies, 
include reduction in diumal temperature range, sea level rise, 
high latitude precipitation increases, and water vapour and 
evaporation increases over tropical oceans. 
Viewed as a whole, these results indicate that the 
observed trend in global mean temperature over the past 
100 years is unlikely to be entirely natural in origin. More 
importantly, there is evidence of an emerging pattern of 
climate response to forcings by greenhouse gases and 
sulphate aerosols in the observed climate record. This 
evidence comes from the geographical, seasonal and 
vertical patterns of temperature change. Taken together, 
these results point towards a human influence on global 
cUmate. Our ability to quantify the magnitude of this effect 
is presentiy limited by uncertainties in key factors, such as 
the magnitude of longer-term natural variability and the 
time-evolving patterns of forcing and response to changes 
in greenhouse gases, aerosols and other human factors. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
413 
8.1 Introduction 
8.1.1 The Meaning of "Detection" and "Attribution" 
The purpose of this chapter is to review work carried out 
over the last five years that has attempted to detect a 
statistically significant change in the global climate system, 
and attribute at least part of that change to anthropogenic 
factors. 
The detection problem arises because any climate-
change "signal" due to anthropogenic influences (such as 
changes in the emissions of greenhouse gases) is 
superimposed on the background "noise" of natural climate 
variability, which may parfly or wholly mask the signal. 
Natural climate variability has both internal and external 
components. The internal component is due solely to 
interactions within the coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice-land-
biosphere system. The external component is primarily 
caused by natural changes in the Sun's output or in the 
volcanic aerosol loading of the atmosphere. Because of 
these natural internal and external processes, climate is 
always changing for reasons that are unrelated to human 
activities. A change in climate is judged to be "significant" 
if it is unusual relative to the changes expected to result 
from natural variability. 
Detection of a significant change is thus by nature a 
statistical problem. A standard approach is to try to 
disprove the statistical "null" hypothesis that an observed 
change in climate can be explained by natural variability. If 
the null hypothesis is rejected, we say that we have 
detected a climate change at a particular significance level. 
This does not yet identify the cause of the climate 
change, which is the attribution problem. Cause and effect 
are generally investigated by carrying out a series of 
experiments in which the response of a system to different 
causes is studied systematically. Such controlled 
experiments cannot be carried out using the real climate 
system: we have only one Earth, and only one observed 
evolution of the climate system. Furthermore, our 
experimentation with the real Earth's climate is not being 
done in any systematic way: we are varying a number of 
"causes" simultaneously (e.g., by changing land surface 
properties, concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse 
gases, and anthropogenic aerosols), rather than changing an 
individual cause, observing a climate response, and then 
varying the next cause. 
Experimentation therefore requires the use of numerical 
models. The attribution of a detected climate change to a 
particular causal mechanism involves tests of competing 
hypotheses. By carrying out model simulations, we can 
determine the signals for different hypothesised causes 
(acting either individually or in combination) and compare 
these with observed changes. Unique attribution of a 
detected "significant" climate change to human activities 
requires the consideration and elimination of all other 
plausible non-anthropogenic mechanisms. 
This is clearly a very difficult task, since there are large 
uncertainties in defining all possible "natural" climate-
change signals. Attribution, therefore, can never be 
"certain" in a purely statistical sense: we can state only that 
the available observations are consistent or inconsistent 
with a postulated hypothesis at a given confidence level. 
The claimed statistical detection of an anthropogenic signal 
in the observations must always be accompanied by the 
caveat that other explanations for the detected climate-
change signal cannot be ruled out completely. There is, 
however, an important distinction between achieving 
"practically meaningful" and "statistically unambiguous" 
attribution. This distinction rests on the fact that scientists 
and policymakers have different perceptions of risk. While 
a scientist might require decades in order to reduce the risk 
of making an erroneous decision on climate change 
attribution to an acceptably low level (say 1-5%), a 
policymaker must often make decisions without the benefit 
of waiting decades for near-statistical certainty. 
In summary, "detection of change" is the process of 
demonstrating that an observed change in climate is highly 
unusual in a statistical sense, but does not provide a reason 
for the change. "Attribution" is the process of establishing 
cause and effect, i.e., that changes in anthropogenic 
emissions are required in order to explain satisfactorily the 
observed change in climate. Unambiguous attribution is 
feasible only in the sense of demonstrating that the 
observed change is consistent or inconsistent with the 
climate responses to a given set of external forcing 
mechanisms. 
Statements regarding the detection and attribution of an 
anthropogenic effect on climate are inherentiy probabilistic 
in nature. They do not have simple "yes-or-no" answers. 
The probability of successful detection of significant 
climate change will be given in a range rather than as a 
discrete value. The width of this range depends on 
uncertainties in model predictions of anthropogenic change 
(Section 8.2) and on uncertainties in estimating natural 
variability (Section 8.3). A probability range for successful 
attribution of the detected changes to human effects will be 
more difficult to define. 
8.1.2 Types of Climate-Change Detection Studies 
There is a hierarchy of settings in which researchers have 
attempted to identify an anthropogenic effect on climate. 
414 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
This hierarchy can be conveniently organised in terms of 
the spatial and temporal detail considered in comparing 
observed climate changes with those predicted by some 
physically based model (e.g., in response to increasing 
greenhouse gases). 
8.1.2.1 Stage 1 studies 
At the base of the hierarchy are studies that deal with the 
largest spatial scales, relatively coarse temporal 
information, and a single variable only. Stage 1 studies 
exist in a variety of different types (see Section 8.4.1). All 
such studies to date deal with global or hemispheric mean 
data for a single variable only, usually annually averaged 
near-surface temperature. 
Stage 1 studies consider whether the observed change in 
global mean temperature over some period of time 
(generally the last century or so) is unusual in a statistical 
sense. To define "unusual" requires some "baseline" or 
"yardstick" of usual behaviour. It is difficult to make direct 
use of the recent observed data themselves, since signal and 
noise are intertwined in a complex way. The yardstick most 
frequently applied is internally generated natural variability, 
either as simulated by some physically based model (e.g., 
Wigley et al., 1989; Wigley and Raper, 1990, 1991a,b; 
Stouffer et al, 1994), or as derived from a statistical model 
fitted to observations (e.g., Karl et al, 1991a; Bloomfield 
and Nychka, 1992; Woodward and Gray, 1993, 1995). The 
observed global mean change is deemed to be significant 
when it is judged highly unlikely to have resulted from 
internally generated natural variability alone. 
Most of the recent work in the detection field has been 
this type of "Stage 1" study. A number of these 
investigations (both pre- and post-IPCC (1990)) have 
claimed the detection of a highly significant change in 
observed global mean temperature over the last 100 years. 
However, none of these studies has convincingly 
demonstrated that this change can be uniquely attributed to 
anthropogenic influences (see Section 8.4.1). 
8.1.2.2 Stage 2 studies 
Stage 2 studies again involve a single variable, but now 
compare model and observed patterns of change, generally 
for temperature. The patterns of change may be defined at 
many locations on the Earth's surface (Barnett and 
Schlesinger, 1987; Santer et al, 1993, 1995a; Kari et al, 
1995a; Hegerl et al, 1996), in a vertical section through 
the atmosphere (Karoly el al, 1994; Santer et al, 1995b), 
or even in three spatial dimensions (Barnett and 
Schlesinger, 1987). Often the model signal pattern has no 
information on time development, and is either taken from 
an equilibrium response experiment or consists of a time-
averaged "snapshot" from a transient response experiment. 
In some cases the time-dependent information is contained 
in a pattern of linear trends (Hasselmann et al, 1995; Karl 
et al, 1995a; Hegerl et al, 1996). The observed data 
always have information on the time evolution of patterns. 
The next step is to compute some statistical measure of the 
similarity between the modelled and observed patterns of 
change. The problem is then to determine whether changes in 
this statistic with time are large relative to changes obtained 
in the absence of any external forcing. As in Stage 1 studies, 
various yardsticks are used to arrive at a probability level for 
detection of the predicted signal in the observed data. 
Detection of a significant observed change in a Stage 2 
study generally implies that even hemispheric- or sub-
continental-scale features of observed and model-predicted 
patterns of change show a level of time-increasing 
agreement well beyond that expected due to natural 
variability a l o n e I f such a pattern correspondence were 
observed for a particular hypothesised set of causal factors, 
then (because this requires simultaneous agreement in a 
number of spatially separated regions) it is less likely that 
similar agreement could be obtained for a different set of 
causal factors. Nevertheless, to claim attribution 
convincingly still requires that alternative non-
anthropogenic explanations for the observed changes be 
tested in a rigorous way, as described in Section 8.1.1. 
In a purely subjective sense, however, a scientist would 
probably feel more confidence in the attribution of 
observed changes to a specific cause or causes after 
"successful detection" in a Stage 2 study than in a Stage 1 
study. The justification for this line of thinking is the 
implicit assumption that different "causes" have different 
climate response patterns. This need not be the case, 
however. For example, some evidence suggests that the 
patterns Qf surface temperature change due to solar forcing 
and C O j doubling may be similar, since both climate 
forcings operate via similar feedback mechanisms, and 
these feedbacks dictate the spatial character of the response 
(Wigley and Jones, 1981; Hansen et al, 1984). Yet the 
detailed three-dimensional 
structure of the thermal 
response to these two different forcings may well be 
different (e.g., Wetherald and Manabe, 1975). In the case 
of combined forcing by COj and anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols, it is unlikely that the spatially distinctive surface 
temperature response could be produced by other causes. 
' Except in cases where it can be shown that the pattern 
correspondence statistic largely provides information on global 
mean changes. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
415 
8.1.2.3 Stages studies 
Like Stage 2 studies, these investigations also involve the 
two- or three-dimensional signal pattern for a single 
climate variable. The difference is that the signal is 
optimised in some way before it is searched for in the 
observed data (Hasselmann, 1979, 1993; Bell, 1982; North 
et al, 1995; North and Kim, 1995). Optimisation involves 
filtering the observed data in order to suppress components 
that are similar to model-estimated natural variability 
noise, thus making the signal more easily detectable. This 
filtering may be in space only, or in both space and time. 
The modified signal is often referred to as an "optimal 
fingerprint". Spatial filtering has been used in two recent 
detection studies (Hasselmann et al, 1995; Hegeri et al, 
1996), while full space-time filtering still awaits a first 
practical application in climate-change detection studies. 
8.1.2.4 Stage 4 studies 
Stage 4 studies differ from the earlier categories in their 
use of a number of climate variables simultaneously. Thus 
the searched-for anthropogenic signal in a Stage 4 
investigation might consist of patterns of change in surface 
air temperature, precipitable water, diurnal temperature 
range, etc. Each variable would be defined in at least two 
(and possibly three or four) dimensions. The individual 
components of this multi-variable "fingerprint" might be 
decided upon by preliminary analysis of the signal-to-noise 
properties of a wide range of climate variables in model 
data (see Section 8.4.3). At Stage 4, "successful detection" 
would mean that the multi-variate, space-time varying 
climate-change signal from a model experiment forced 
with transient increases in anthropogenic emissions was in 
good accord with available observations. To date, only one 
attempt has been made to use a full multi-dimensional and 
multi-variable description of signal and noise in a climate-
change detection study (Barnett and Schlesinger, 1987). 
8.1.3 Progress Since IPCC (1990) 
Scientific understanding of the detection and attribution 
problem has improved markedly since IPCC (1990). We 
now have: 
• 
more relevant model simulations for the definition of 
an anthropogenic climate change signal; 
• 
more relevant simulations for the estimation of 
natural internal variability, and initial estimates from 
palaeoclimatic data of total natural variability on 
global or hemispheric scales; 
• 
more powerful statistical methods for detection of 
anthropogenic change, and increased application of 
pattern-based studies with greater relevance for 
attribution. 
In 1990, most of the available information concerning 
the projected climate changes in response to an enhanced 
greenhouse effect came from experiments in which an 
atmospheric G C M was coupled to a relatively simple 
model of the uppermost 50-100 m of the ocean, and 
atmospheric CO2 levels were instantaneously doubled. In 
the real world C O j is increasing gradually. The more 
relevant question is how the climate system - including the 
intermediate and deep ocean, with their characteristic time-
scales of decades to centuries - will respond to slowly 
increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. 
Before IPCC (1990), only a few experiments with time-
varying CO2 had been performed with fully coupled 
atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (AOGCMs) 
(Stouffer et al, 1989; Washington and Meehl, 1989). Since 
1990, at least four modelling groups have published results 
from such integrations (e.g., Manabe et al, 1991; Cubasch 
et al, 1992; Meehl et al, 1993; Murphy and Mitchell, 
1995; see Chapter 6 for further references). The climate-
change signal from these experiments now has both space 
and time dimensions. The inclusion of full ocean dynamics 
has modified the climate-change projections of earlier 
experiments which had simpler representations of the 
ocean. Furthermore, at least three modelling groups have 
now performed both equilibrium and transient response 
experiments with an A O G C M (Cubasch et al, 1992; 
Manabe and Stouffer, 1993; Murphy and Mitchell, 1995). 
This addresses the question of whether very different 
forcing histories yield fundamentally different signal 
patterns, and hence provides insights into the relevance of 
using results from equilibrium experiments in detection 
studies. There has also been widespread recognition of the 
need for ensemble experiments to obtain more reliable 
estimates of an anthropogenic signal (Cubasch et al, 1994). 
A further major advance is that modelling groups are 
starting to consider the effects of anthropogenic forcings 
other than C O j in climate change experiments. These 
include: 
• 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosol effects, both direct 
(Taylor and Penner, 1994; Hasselmann et al, 1995; 
Mitchell et al, 1995a,b; Roeckner et al, 1995) and 
indirect (Erickson et al, 1995); 
• 
effects of stratospheric ozone reduction (Hansen et 
al, 1995a; Ramaswamy et al, 1996), and of changes 
in other (non-COj) greenhouse gases (Wang et al., 
1991). 
416 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
While some pre-IPCC (1990) studies had attempted to 
estimate the climate effects of anthropogenic aerosols and 
П О П - С О 2 greenhouse gases in global mean terms (e.g., 
Wigley, 1989; Wigley et al, 1989), it is only recently that 
GCMs have been used to estimate their detailed spatial 
signatures. 
Recent model simulations have also provided initial 
information about the background natural internal 
variability against which an anthropogenic signal must be 
detected. This is the second major area of progress since 
IPCC (1990). Two modelling groups have recently 
completed long (>1000 years) control runs, which contain 
a wealth of information on the magnitude, patterns and 
time-scales of internal climate variability generated by 
AOGCMs (Delworth et al, 1993; Stouffer et al, 1994; 
Hasselmann et al, 1995). These model-generated noise 
estimates are now being used as the "yardsticks" for 
judging significance in climate-change detection studies 
(see Section 8.4), and first attempts are underway to check 
the consistency of decadal to century time-scale natural 
variability noise estimates derived from models and 
palaeodata (Barnett et al, 1996). Additionally, information 
from palaeoclimatic proxy records is now being used to 
estimate the natural variability of surface temperature on 
hemispheric or even global spatial scales. 
Statistical methods are the third main area in which 
advances have been made since IPCC (1990). The last five 
years have seen an increase in the number and 
sophistication of statistical techniques that have been 
applied to the problem of identifying anthropogenic 
change. Two important examples are the application of 
Singular Spectrum Analysis (SSA) to partition signal and 
noise in global mean temperature data (e.g., Ghil and 
Vautard, 1991; Schlesinger and Ramankutty, 1994) and the 
definition and application of "optimal detection" 
techniques (Hasselmann, 1979, 1993; Bell, 1982; North et 
al, 1995; North and Kim, 1995). Full optimal detection 
methods provide real promise for dealing with some of the 
statistical problems that will be encountered in Stage 3 and 
Stage 4-type studies (see Section 8.1.3). 
There has also been significant progress in the 
application of pattern-based methods to the detection 
problem, and in the incorporation of refined signal and 
noise estimates in detection studies. Up to 1990, most 
detection studies were of the Stage 1 type, focusing on 
global mean temperature. The main exceptions were the 
pattern-based studies by Barnett (1986) and Barnett and 
Schlesinger (1987). During the last five years, a number of 
research groups have published results from Stage 2 and 
Stage 3 investigations. In addition to the enhanced 
greenhouse effect (Santer et al, 1993; Hegerl et al, 1996), 
the searched-for patterns now include the signals due to 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols (Karl et al, 1995a) and the 
combined effect of greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols 
(Hasselmann et al, 1995; Mitchell et al, 1995a; Santer et 
al, 1995a,b). Although important uncertainties remain in 
these studies, they have yielded initial evidence for the 
existence of an anthropogenic effect on climate. 
Furthermore, we have now started to see pattern-based 
studies that directly address the attribution question, and try 
to rule out various non-anthropogenic forcing mechanisms 
as explanations for some observed pattern of climate change 
(e.g., Karoly et al, 1994; Hansen et al, 1995b). 
8.2 Uncertainties in Model Projections of 
Anthropogenic Change 
There is no direct historical or palaeoclimatic analogue for 
the rapid change in atmospheric COj that has taken place 
over the last century (Crowley, 1991). This means that 
unless we assume that the signal pattern is independent of 
the spatial character of the forcing (see, e.g., Hoffert and 
Covey, 1992), we cannot use palaeoclimatic data or 
instrumental records as analogues for the regional and 
seasonal patterns and rate of climate change over the next 
century. We must therefore rely on models for this 
information. Thé aim of the following section is to consider 
the main uncertainties involved in such projections of 
anthropogenic climate change. 
8.2.1 Errors in Simulating Current Climate in 
Uncoupled and Coupled Models 
Model validation is one of the most important components 
in our efforts to predict future global climate change. 
Although ûiodel performance has generally improved over 
the last decade, both coupled and uncoupled models still 
show systematic errors in their representation of the mean 
state and variability statistics of current climate (see 
Chapter 5, and also Gates et al, 1990, 1992). Such errors 
reduce our confidence in the capability of AOGCMs to 
predict anthropogenic change. 
8.2.2 Inadequate Representation of Feedbacks 
Realistic simulation of the present climate is probably a 
necessary, but not sufficient condition to ensure successful 
simulation of future climate. To be confident that a model 
has predictive skill on time-scales of decades or longer, we 
would also have to be sure that it incorporates correctly all 
of the physics and feedback mechanisms that are likely to 
be important as greenhouse gas concentrations or aerosol-
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
417 
producing emissions increase. As discussed in Chapter 4, it 
is unHkely that all important feedbacks have been inckided 
correctly in current AOGCMs. Feedbacks involving clouds 
and the surface radiation budget are poorly understood, and 
different schemes for parameterizing cloud processes can 
lead to substantially different results in greenhouse 
warming experiments (Cess et ai, 1989; Mitchell et al, 
1989). Other feedbacks that are either currently neglected 
or highly uncertain include interactions between the land 
biosphere and the carbon cycle, and between climate and 
atmospheric chemistry (see Chapters 2 and 4). Deficiencies 
in the treatment and incorporation of feedbacks are a 
source of signal uncertainty. 
8.2.3 Flux Correction Problems 
In present-day AOGCMs, the atmospheric and oceanic 
components are run independently until they achieve a 
steady state, and then coupled together. The coupled model 
is then run for some "adaptation" period prior to initiating a 
control or perturbation experiment. The interactive 
coupling of AOGCMs generally leads to a phenomenon 
known as climate drift - the tendency of the model's 
climate system to drift into a new and unrealistic mean 
state (Gates et al, 1985; Washington and Meehl, 1989), 
The reasons for this drift are discussed in Chapter 5. 
One strategy for dealing with this problem is to make no 
attempt to correct the flux mismatch. The climate response 
in a perturbation experiment is then assumed to be the 
difference between the climate change simulation and a 
drifting control run that started from the same initial state. 
This strategy may lead to erroneous results if the climate 
system is drifting into a state with basically different 
response characteristics (i.e., a climate state unlike that 
currently observed on Earth). An example of such a 
situation might be if the climate drift led to large changes 
in the sea ice distribution or the mean ocean circulation. 
Another procedure is to reduce the drift by balancing the 
flux mismatch through insertion oí flux adjustment terms in 
the coupled model (Sausen et al, 1988; see Chapter 5). 
Advocates of this approach argue that flux adjustment 
should have no impact on the dynamical response 
characteristics of the system for small perturbations about 
the initial state. Critics, however, note that the flux 
adjustments in some models can in certain regions greatly 
exceed the forcing expected from greenhouse gases. 
Such corrections are outward symptoms of underlying 
systematic errors in the uncoupled models. Their impact on 
the reliability of signals from anthropogenic change 
experiments and on the simulated natural variability is 
largely unknown. Some studies with simplified models 
suggest that flux correction may seriously affect the 
simulated signals and natural variability noise (Nakamura et 
al, 1994; Neelin and Dijkstra, 1995; Pierce et al, 1995). 
Our confidence in the anthropogenic climate change signals 
simulated by current flux-adjusted AOGCMs, and in the 
results of detection studies that have used these signals, will 
be increased if the principal features of these signals can be 
reproduced by uncorrected coupled models. There are some 
initial indications that this may be the case (see Chapter 6). 
8.2.4 Signal Estimation Problems 
The anthropogenic signal from any experiment with a fully 
coupled A O G C M is not a "pure" signal - it is the 
combination of a signal and some manifestarion of the 
model's own internally generated natural variability. 
Thus, the "pure", underlying signal in response to time-
evolving anthropogenic forcing cannot be estimated 
precisely from a single transient experiment. This problem 
is exacerbated by uncertainties in the initial state of the 
climate system, parücularly the ocean. More reliable signal 
estimates are likely to be obtained by averaging over 
multiple runs, each starting from different initial 
conditions. Ideally, the initial states chosen should 
encompass the large range of uncertainty in our knowledge 
of the climate state around the middle of the last century. 
The most relevant work in this regard is by Cubasch et 
al (1994), who performed a suite of four 50-year "Monte 
Carlo" experiments with a A O G C M . The model was 
forced with identical increases in greenhouse gases, with 
each experiment starting from different "snapshots" of the 
climate state (taken at 30-year intervals from a long control 
run). Marked differences were found in the space-rime 
structure of the surface temperature response, but these 
differences were no larger than those expected due to 
natural internal variability alone (see Chapter 6). 
Clearly, it is always desirable to carry out a series of 
Monte Carlo experiments and determine the mean climate 
change response and variability statistics from this ensemble. 
The ensemble average is likely to be a better estimate of the 
pure signal than that obtained from any single realisation, 
and the variability statistics provide information on statistical 
uncertainty in the climate-change response, which should be 
accounted for in any detection strategy. 
8.2.5 "Missing Forcing" and Uncertainties in Space-
Time Evolution of Forcing 
A further source of signal uncertainty relates to "missing" 
anthropogenic forcings that have not been included in the 
climate-change signals currently used in detection studies. 
The most important examples include the indirect effects of 
418 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
sulphate aerosols (Erikson et al., 1995), the radiative 
effects of trace gases other than COj (Wang et al., 1991), 
and the forcings associated with large-scale land-use 
changes (Tegen and Fung, 1995) or the carbonaceous 
aerosols generated by biomass burning (Penner et al., 
1992, 1994). At present, none of these factors (other than 
changes in stratospheric ozone; Santer et al, 1995b) have 
been considered in pattern-based detection studies. Some 
of these "missing forcings" may modify our present picture 
of the possible climate-change signal due to anthropogenic 
activities. 
The current magnitude and the historical evolution of the 
radiative forcing is uncertain, both for these missing forcings 
and for anthropogenic forcings (such as sulphate aerosol 
direct effects and stratospheric ozone reduction) that are 
presently included in A O G C M experiments relevant to the 
detection issue. Uncertainties exist at both the global mean 
level and in terms of the forcing pattern (see Chapter 2). 
For pattern-based detection studies, reliable definition of 
an anthropogenic signal requires, at the very least, a 
reliable estimate of present-day SOj emissions and their 
spatial distribution, and an accurate interpretation of these 
in terms of a forcing pattern (Schneider, 1994). Studies that 
involve a time-evolving signal additionally require 
information on the historical evolution of emissions and 
forcing. Current pattern-based detection work is now 
beginning to account for such forcing changes over space 
and time (e.g., Hasselmann et al., 1995; Mitchell et al, 
1995a). 
8.2.6 Cold-Start Effect 
The so-called "cold start" problem results from the neglect 
of anthropogenic forcings (and hence some portion of the 
climate response) that happened before the start of the 
simulation. At present, only two modelling groups have 
performed experiments with a starting date in the latter half 
of the last century, thus avoiding a significant cold start 
error (Hasselmann et al., 1995; Mitchell et ai, 1995a). 
Most climate change experiments run with AOGCMs have 
been initialised from a point much closer in time to the 
present - a time for which we have better forcing and 
observational data for comparison with the model signal. 
Such simulations are inevitably subject to a "cold start" 
error. 
The magnitude of this effect has been estimated in a 
variety of ways, as discussed in Chapter 6. Errors which 
the cold start effect may introduce into the time evolution 
of an anthropogenic signal constitute a further source of 
uncertainty in detection studies. 
8.3 Uncertainties in Estimating Natural Variability 
Denning an anthropogenic climate change signal is only 
one part of the detection problem. The climate state of the 
Earth is always changing in both space and time for 
reasons that have nothing to do with anthropogenic forcing. 
The space-time structure of this natural variability must be 
estimated in order to decide whether the changes that have 
been observed in the past or that will be observed over the 
next 10-20 years are due primarily to human activities or 
natural causes. This spectrum of natural variability is a 
critical element in the significance-testing portion of any 
practical detection or attribution scheme. 
Information on natural climate variability can be derived 
from three main sources: instrumental data, palaeoclimatic 
reconstructions and numerical models. Some of the major 
uncertainties in estimating decadal to century time-scale 
natural variability from these sources are summarised below. 
8.3.1 From Instrumental Data 
Surface air temperature is undoubtedly the best-observed 
climate variable in terms of length of the instrumental 
record and coverage of the Earth's surface (see Chapter 3). 
Even in this case, however, the length of record (ca. 130-
150 years) is barely adequate to obtain a rehable estimate 
of the multi-decadal portion of the spectrum, and is 
inadequate to estimate longer time-scale variability. 
Fuithermore, the instrumental record covers a period when 
both anthropogenic effects and natural variability have 
occurred together, making it very difficult to separate the 
two in an unambiguous way. 
Nevertheless, several attempts have been made to 
estimate the background natural variability by subtracting a 
model-estimated anthropogenic signal from the observed 
data (Schlesinger and Ramankutty, 1994; Hegeri et ai, 
1996). The latter investigation used an A O G C M to define a 
single pattern of temperature, change in response to 
greenhouse gas forcing, and then employed a simple model 
to estimate the time evolution of this signal pattern. This 
estimate of the space-time evolving greenhouse signal was 
then subtracted from the observed data, and the residuals 
were used to estimate natural variability. The reliability of 
such'variability estimates depends critically on the 
accuracy of the A O G C M ' s climate sensitivity, on the 
correctness of any assumed lag between radiative forcing 
and temperature response in the simple model, on the 
reliability of the signal pattern, and on the correctness of 
the assumed radiative forcing history. Estimating multi-
decadal natural variability from the observed data in a way 
that accounts for such uncertainties is a difficult task. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
419 
8.3.2 From Palaeoclimatic Records 
Changes in climate affect a wide range of biological, 
chemical, and geological processes. As a result, climatic 
information is recorded naturally in tree rings, ice cores, 
coral reefs, laminated sediments, etc. (e.g.. Cook et al., 
1991; Crowley and North, 1991; Bradley and Jones, 1992; 
Briffa et al., 1992). If we can understand the recording 
mechanism, for example the process by which climate 
imprints itself on tree growth and annual ring formation, 
then we have the potential to unlock a wealth of climate 
information stored in palaeoclimate records. 
Unfortunately, unravelling the history of climatic 
variability contained in such records is not a simple task, as 
is discussed in Chapter 3. Few proxy records are capable of 
providing well-dated millennia-long reconstructions with at 
least decadal time-scale resolution. In addition, a number 
of general problems are common to all proxy records. Most 
temperature reconstructions, for example, are seasonally 
specific, rather than providing some integrated response to 
annual-mean conditions. In order to produce a 
reconstruction, the raw data are generally subjected to 
some form of statistical manipulation, through which only 
part of the original climate information can be retrieved 
(typically less than 50%). Such manipulations can also 
affect the frequency characteristics of the reconstruction 
(Briffa et al., 1996). More importantiy, spatial coverage is 
poor for high temporal resolution palaeoclimate data, and it 
is often difficult to compare the climate information 
extracted from different locations (e.g., land and ocean) or 
from different proxy sources. 
Initial attempts are now being made to use palaeoclimate 
data in order to reconstruct a satisfactory, spatially 
comprehensive picture of climate variability over the past 
1000 years (Bradley and Jones, 1993). The process of 
quality-controlling palaeoclimatic data, integrating 
information from different proxies, and improving spatial 
coverage should be encouraged. Better palaeoclimatic data 
bases for at least the past millennium are essential in order 
to assess the contribution of natural variability to recent 
observed changes and to validate coupled model noise 
estimates on century time-scales (Barnett et ai, 1996). 
8.3.3 From Numerical Models 
8.3.3 1 Energy balance models 
Some of the first model-based studies of natural variability 
used simple energy balance models (EBMs; e.g., 
Hasselmann, 1976). Such models generally solve equations 
for the heat balance of a highly idealised representation of 
the Earth's atmosphere and ocean (Lemke, 1977; Hoffert 
and Flannery, 1985). By forcing an E B M with white 
n o i s e i t has been possible to investigate the relationship 
between daily weather noise and the model's internally 
generated variability on time-scales of years to centuries. 
These early studies, together with more recent E B M 
studies by other groups (e.g., Wigley and Raper, 1990, 
1991a; Kim and North, 1991), have demonstrated that even 
simple EBMs can generate useful information on decadal 
to century time-scale surface temperature fluctuations as an 
integrated response to shorter time-scale random 
fluctuations. 
While EBMs successfully reproduce many details of 
observed surface temperature variability on the annual-to-
decadal-time-scales (Kim and North, 1991), they may 
underestimate the magnitude of internal variability on 
longer time-scales, since they cannot explicitiy simulate the 
changes in the horizontal and vertical transport of heat, salt 
and momentum necessary for an accurate representation of 
the ocean circulation. EBMs therefore simulate only the 
"passive" component of natural variability (Wigley and 
Raper, 1990), and fail to capture any dynamically induced 
variations in the ocean. Nevertheless, the spectrum of 
EBM-based variability is within the range of spectral 
estimates derived from A O G C M s that simulate both 
components (Santer etal., 1995a). 
8.3.3.2 Stochastically forced ocean models 
More sophisticated estimates of natural variability may be 
obtained from O G C M s forced by various forms of 
statistical atmospheres. Virtually all such simulations show 
interdecadal to centennial time-scale variations no matter 
what the form of the ocean G C M or the character of the 
forcing (see Chapter 5). The key forcing variable seems to 
be the fresh water flux between the atmosphere and the 
ocean. Typical time-scales of the induced natural variability 
range from 10-350 years or longer. The more realistic of 
these simulations show a rich set of oscillatory modes 
specific to individual ocean basins, with the most energetic 
mode being global in extent with largest amplitude in the 
high latitudes of the southern oceans (Mikolajewicz and 
Maier-Reimer, 1990; Pierce et al, 1995). 
The problems with the class of experiments discussed 
above are at least threefold. First, many of the simulations 
are very simplified, and the realism of their simulated 
variability is subject to considerable doubt. Second, the 
OGCMs used in such experiments have almost exclusively 
used so-called mixed boundary conditions (see, e.g.. Power 
' e.g., by heat flux anomalies that are essentially random in time, 
and thus can be thought of as characteristic of the internal 
variability that is generated by daily weather fluctuations. 
420 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
and Kleeman, 1993; Mikolajewicz and Maier-Reimer, 
1994) that guarantee the model is constrained to relax from 
any perturbed state back towards a climatological 
temperature field. A number of studies have shown that the 
simulated oceanic variability is highly sensitive to the value 
of the time constant used to restore temperature to 
climatology (Mikolajewicz and Maier-Reimer, 1994; Power 
and Kleeman, 1994). Finally, the statistical atmospheres 
used to date do not expKcitly account for feedbacks and the 
meridional transport of water or heat. It is possible that 
variations in these transports play a significant role in 
decadal and longer time-scale climate variations. 
8.3.3.3 Coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation 
models 
At present there are only two long integrations with 
AOGCMs that might allow one to estimate the spectrum of 
multi-decadal to century time-scale internally generated 
natural variability. These are the 1000-year control 
integration recently performed 
with the 
G F D L 
(Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory) model by 
Stouffer et al. (1994), and a 1260 year integration carried 
out with the European Centre/Hamburg (ECHAM-1) 
model (Hasselmann et al, 1995). This situation is likely to 
change in the next few years, since a number of other 
groups are currently performing long control integrations 
with coupled models (e.g., Mitchell et al, 1995a). 
Since the variability in the GFDL and ECHAM-1 control 
integrations has already been used as a "yardstick" for 
judging the significance of observed trends in climate 
(Stouffer et al, 1994; Hasselmann et al, 1995; Hegerl et 
al, 1996; Karl et al, 1995a; Santer et al, 1995a,b), it is 
crucial to determine how well these models reproduce 
important features of observed climate variability. This is 
now being attempted, at least on interannual and decadal 
time-scales. The study by Stouffer et al (1994) and work 
presented in Chapter 5 show that qualitative agreement 
exists between observed patterns of near-surface 
temperature variability on time-scales of one to five years 
and those simulated in the GFDL and ECHAM-1 control 
runs. The Stouffer et al analysis, and more recent work by 
Manabe and Stouffer (1996), also indicated that some of 
the observed relationships between global mean and 
regional temperature changes are well-simulated in the 
GFDL control run. On longer decadal time-scales, Mehta 
and Delworth (1995) found considerable similarity 
between observed patterns of SST variability in the tropical 
Atlantic and those simulated by the GFDL model. 
A comparison of the observed spectrum of global mean 
temperature variability with that obtained from the GFDL, 
100^ 
10^ 
I d 
10 
1 
Period (years) 
Figure 8.1; Spectrum of variability of global mean, annually 
averaged near-surface temperature estimated from observed data 
and from three A O G C M control runs. Observed data are from 
Jones and Briffa (1992). Model results are from the 1000-year 
GFDL conttol run (Stouffer et al, 1994), the first 600 years of the 
1000-year ECHAM-1/LSG control integration (Hasselmann et al, 
1995) and the first 310 years of the U K M O control run (Mitchell 
et al, 1995a). The spectrum provides information on the 
distribution of variance on different time-scales, ranging from two 
years (the shortest period that can be resolved using annual-mean 
data) to nearly 400 years for the long GFDL control run. Spectra 
were estimated after first subtracting overall linear ttends from 
the modelled and observed tiine-series. 
ECHAM-1, and U K M O (United Kingdom Meteorological 
Office) (Mitchell et al, 1995a) control runs shows that the 
G F D L and U K M O spectra are quite close to the 
observations over the range of periods for which they 
overlap, whereas E C H A M - 1 has consistently less 
variability than the observations on time-scales of roughly 2 
to 60 years (see Figure 8.1). The observations have a clear 
peak in'the spectrum at around 3-5 years corresponding to 
El NiûoTSouthern Oscillation (ENSO) variability. This is 
not well-simulated by any of the three models. 
The short length of the observed record (140 years) and 
the U K M O control run preclude their use in estimating 
century time-scale variability. The GFDL and ECHAM-1 
spectra differ substantially on tliese longer time-scales, 
with the GFDL spectrum flattening out at periods greater 
than 100 years, while variability in the ECHAM-1 control 
run continues to increase. A major part of the explanation 
for this difference in power at the low-frequency end of the 
spectrum is the large drift over the first 200 years of the 
ECHAM-1 control run. If this drift is excluded, the low-
frequency temperature variability in the G F D L and 
ECHAM-1 control runs is much more similar, with the 
latter also showing a pronounced flattening. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
421 
The ubiquity of substantial power at century time-scales 
in palaeoclimate spectra (see, e.g., Crowley and North, 
1991; Stocker and Mysak, 1992) suggests either that the 
palaeodata have some low-frequency forcing that the 
models are lacking (e.g., solar variability, volcanoes), or 
that both GFDL and ECHAM-1 are underestimating the 
magnitude of century-time-scale internally generated 
variability, a possible consequence of the flux-adjustment 
schemes used to stabilise model climate. A further possible 
explanation for this discrepancy is that the palaeodata are 
themselves erroneous'. 
One preliminary attempt to compare decadal to century 
time-scale natural variability estimates from coupled 
models^ and from palaeoclimatic data suggests that there is 
disagreement between the two, both in terms of the patterns 
and amplitude of variability (Barnett et ai, 1996; see Figure 
8.2). The significance of this mismatch is difficult to 
interpret for the reasons pointed out above. Nevertheless, 
this result does point towards the need for a more extensive, 
quality-controlled palaeoclimatic data base, and for some 
caution in the interpretation of results from current 
detection studies that use model-based noise estimates for 
evaluating the significance of observed changes. 
8.4 Evaluation of Recent Studies to Detect and 
Attribute Climate Change 
The following section reviews recent efforts to detect an 
anthropogenic climate-change signal in the observed data. 
It primarily covers studies of change in globally averaged 
variables and pattern-based approaches, and concentrates 
on those analyses that have used quantitative methods to 
compare model and observed data. The final portion of this 
section briefly considers studies involving model data only. 
Such work has attempted to identify in the model data 
climate variables that might be promising components of a 
multi-variable "fingerprint" for detecting anthropogenic 
change. 
L_l 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
L 
100 
10 
Period (years) 
Figure 8.2: Spectra of near-surface temperature variability as 
estimated from two different model control runs and from 
palaeoclimatic temperature reconstructions. Results are from 
Barnett et al. (1996). Palaeoclimatic data were taken from 
Bradley and Jones (1993), and consist of temperature 
reconstructions from tree rings, corals, ice melt records, ice cores 
and historical documentary records. A total of 16 proxy records 
were used, each covering the common period 1600 to 1950. The 
space-time variability in this data set was investigated by means 
of an Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) analysis, in which the 
dominant modes of variability are represented by a limited 
number of spatial patterns (EOFs) and time-series. The bold solid 
line shows the spectrum of the amplitude time-series for the 
dominant palaeoclimatic pattern of variability. Control runs with 
the GFDL (Stouffer ei a/., 1994) and ECHAM-1/LSG 
(Hasselmann et al, 1995) AOGCMs were sampled at grid-points 
closest to the 16 locations of the palaeodata. Model temperature 
data for two separate 350-year chunks of each control run were 
then projected onto the dominant EOF pattern from the 
palaeodata. The resulting four time-series were then subjected to 
spectral analysis. The model data have lower variance than the 
palaeodata at all time-scales considered (from 2 years to > 100 
years), with the largest mismatches occuiring on the longer time-
scales. 
' As pointed out in Section 8.3.2, statistical manipulation of the 
paleodata may alter their low-frequency characteristics. However, 
this is more likely to have decreased low-frequency power than to 
have amplified it, at least for the case of temperature reconstmctions 
from tree rings. Note also that the paleospectra are for individual 
sites, not for global-mean temperature, so a direct comparison 
between "reconstructed" variability at specific locations and 
model estimates of global-mean variability is not valid. 
- As sampled at model grid-points close to the locations for 
which paleoclimatic temperature data were available. 
8.4.1 Studies of Changes in Global Mean Variables 
Stage 1 studies related to the detection of anthropogenic 
climate change may be divided into three types: detection of 
a statistically significant change or trend in a single climate 
variable; comparison of model simulations with 
observations; and empirical estimation of the climate 
sensitivity. A l l studies in these areas have chosen near-
surface temperature as the detection variable, and have used 
either global mean data or some large-area subset of this 
(such as the average over Northern Hemisphere land areas). 
422 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
8.4.1.1 Studies to detect change in observed data 
Studies to detect change are concerned primarily with 
determining whether the observed warming is statistically 
significant, i.e., highly unusual relative to natural 
variability and unlikely to have occurred by chance alone. 
If the observed change is judged unlikely to have occurred 
due to natural processes, then an anthropogenic factor is 
implicated. 
While this sounds straightforward, the assessment of 
significance is in fact quite difficult. This is primarily due 
to uncertainties in the magnitude of natural variability on 
the decadal to century time-scales relevant to the 
anthropogenic climate change issue. Even if a change were 
significant relative to internal variability, this does not 
mean that anthropogenic forcing is responsible: the change 
may be due to natural external forcing factors. 
A number of studies have claimed that the observed 
warming is statistically significant. The credibility of these 
claims depends on how they have estimated the magnitude 
of natural variability and/or assessed the statistical 
significance of any change or trend. There are two basic 
approaches. In the first, natural variability is estimated 
using some form of statistical model fitted to observations, 
while the second approach uses an estimate derived from a 
physical model. 
The statistical models generally attempt to represent the 
observed global mean, annually averaged temperature data 
by some model consisting of a deterministic trend (which 
may be either linear or non-linear) plus "residuals" about 
the trend, which represent natural variability. These 
residuals are strongly autocorrelated. Even the earliest 
studies (Madden and Ramanathan, 1980; Wigley and 
Jones, 1981) recognised that standard statistical tests, 
which evaluate trend significance relative to assumed 
"white noise" (or non-autocorrelated) residuals, were 
inappropriate to the climate change problem. The 
differences between subsequent studies arise largely from 
the way the residuals are modelled, i.e., how their 
autocorrelation structure is accounted for. 
Wigley et al. (1989) and Allen and Smith (1994) have 
shown the warming trend to be significant for first-order 
(AR-1) autocorrelated residuals. A number of more 
sophisticated models of the residuals, allowing for much 
more complex natural variability behaviour than an AR-1 
model, have also demonstrated the significance of the 
warming trend (see, e.g., Kuo et al, 1990; Bloomfield, 
1992; Bloomfield and Nychka, 1992; Galbraith and Green, 
1992; Toi and de Vos, 1993; Toi, 1994). Alternately, 
several authors have shown that some noise models with 
correlation of the residuals over century time-scales are 
consistent with the data but lead to a non-significant result 
for the observed warming trend (Kheshgi and White, 
1993a; Woodward and Gray, 1993, 1995). 
Claims of non-significance of the global warming trend 
have also been made by Ghil and Vautard (1991) using 
Singular Spectrum Analysis (SSA). The basic argument is 
that the data show a low-frequency cyclic component that 
is in phase with and explains most of the observed trend. 
While the cyclic component is a characteristic of the data, 
whether or not it is a valid alternative explanation of the 
trend depends on whether it is a basic, long-lasting, 
deterministic property of the climate system. It is 
impossible to determine whether this is correct given the 
shortness of the available data (see, e.g., Allen et al, 1992; 
Cook et al, 
1996). Eurthermore, Schlesinger and 
Ramankutty (1994) have shown that a better explanation of 
the cyclic component identified by Ghil and Vautard is to 
assume that it is superimposed on an anthropogenic trend. 
In their analysis, the 60-65 year cycle accounts for only a 
relatively small (<10%) fraction of the overall variation in 
global mean temperature. 
The second approach to assessing trend significance has 
been to use a climate model to generate the background 
"unforced" variability. Using a simple upwelling diffusion-
energy balance model, Wigley and Raper (1990, 1991a) 
have shown that the observed century time-scale trend is 
highly significant relative to the range of possible unforced 
trends. The same result has been obtained by Stouffer et al 
(1994) using results from a 1,000-year control run 
simulation with the GFDL A O G C M . 
Figure 8.3 shows how observed trends in global mean, 
annually averaged temperature over the past 10 (1984-
1993) to 100 (1894-1993) years compare with the trends 
expected to occur through natural internal variability, based 
on the best esjimates currently available from AOGCMs 
(Stouffer et a/.,1994; Hasselmann et al, 1995; Mitchell et 
al, 1995a). Model global mean temperature data were used 
to generate sampling distributions of linear trends, and the 
95th percentiles are plotted for each trend length. There are 
model-specific differences in the magnitude of variability 
and its partitioning on different time-scales (see also 
Section 8.3.3.3 and Figure 8.1). While observed trends 
over the last 10 years lie within the range of 10-year 
"natural" trends of two of the three models, observed 
trends on longer time-scales are larger than (at least) 95% 
of the unforced trends simulated by the models. Evaluation 
of the true significance of the observed trends is difficult 
since the model noise estimates do not incorporate the 
effects of changes in natural external forcing factors such 
as the Sun's output or volcanic aerosols, and so are likely 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
423 
0.1000-—' 
' • ' ^^-^ 
' ' ^ 
1 ' 
' 
' 
1 ' 
; 
OBSERVED 
95th Percentile: GFDL 
. 4 , 
95tl1 Percentile: ECHAM 
I 0.0010^ 
0.0001 J  
- l 
I — , — 1 I — 1 — i — • — I — , — 1 — i — I — I — I — , — I — 1 — , — , 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Trend length (years) 
Figure 8.3: Significance of observed changes in global mean, 
annually averaged near-surface temperature. The solid line gives 
the magnitude of the observed temperature trend (in °C/year) over 
the recent record - i.e., over the last 10 years (1984 to 1993). 20 
years (1974 to 1993), etc. to 100 years. Observed data are from 
Jones and Briffa (1992). Model results from three A O G C M 
control integrations (see Figure 8.1) were used to evaluate 
whether the observed linear trends are unusually large relative to 
the trends likely to result from internally generated natural 
variability of the climate system. Linear trends were fitted to 
overlapping "chunlis" of the model temperature series, thus 
allowing sampling distributions of trends to be generated for the 
same 10 to 100 year time-scales for which observed temperature 
trends were estimated. The 95th percentiles of these distributions 
are plotted for each model control run and each trend length, 
to imderestimate the "total" natural variability of the real-
Vk'orld climate system. They may also be affected by flux 
correction procedures. Furthermore, the short length of the 
three control runs used here precludes reliable estimates of 
the statistical properties of internally generated variability 
on time-scales longer than two to three decades. 
The conclusion that can be drawn from this body of work, 
and from earlier studies reported in Wigley and Barnett 
(1990), is that the warming trend to date is unlikely to have 
occurred entirely by chance due to natural variability of the 
climate system. Implicit in such studies is a weak 
attribution statement - i.e., some (unknown) fraction of the 
observed trend is being attributed to human influences. 
Any such attribution-related conclusions, however, rest 
heavily on the reliability of our estimates of both century 
time-scale natural variability and the magnitude of the 
observed global mean warming trend. At best, therefore, 
trend significance can only provide circumstantial support 
for the existence of an anthropogenic component to climate 
change. 
8.4.1.2 Comparisons of model results and observed data 
The basic strategy underlying these studies is to force some 
form of climate model with anthropogenic and/or natural 
forcing factors and then compare the resulting global mean 
temperature output with the observed record. The types of 
model used have varied from what amounts to a "null" 
model (i.e., assuming, unrealistically, that solar forcing and 
temperature response aie proportional and in phase - as in 
the work of Friis-Christensen and Lassen, 1991), through 
simple regression models (as in the work of Schonwiese et 
al., 1994, and earlier papers cited therein) that are 
unrealistically constrained to have a constant lag between 
forcing and response, to using an upwelling diffusion-
energy balance model (UD/EBM), as in IPCC (1990) 
(Wigley and Barnett, 1990). In terms of imposed forcing, 
some studies have considered only a single forcing factor, 
such as solar variability alone in the work of Friis-
Christensen and Lassen, while others have considered 
multiple forcing factors, both natural and anthropogenic. 
Since the primary area of uncertainty is in the response to 
anthropogenic forcing, global mean studies using only a 
single "natural" forcing factor and ignoring any 
anthropogenic component are inadequate, as pointed out by 
Schlesinger and Ramankutty (1992) and Kelly and Wigley 
(1992). 
The main conclusion that can be drawn from these 
investigations is that the observed record of global mean 
temperature changes can be well simulated by a range of 
combinations of forcing. Best fits are obtained when 
anthropogenic forcing factors are included, and, when this 
is done, most of the observed trend is found to result from 
these factors. Within the range of forcing and model 
parameter uncertainties, there is no inconsistency between 
observations and the modelled global mean response to 
anthropogenic influences. 
8.4.1.3 Empirical estimation of the sensitivity of climate to 
forcing 
A related univariate approach attempts to use observational 
data to deduce AT"-,^, the so-called climate 
sensitivity 
parameter - a measure of how sensitive the climate system 
is to external forcing. ' This is done by running a series of 
E B M simulations with different sensitivity values and 
choosing the value that gives a best fit with observed 
global mean changes. In such experiments there are a 
number of "tuning knobs" other than the sensitivity, both 
' The climate sensitivity is usually expressed as the equilibrium 
warming for a COj doubling. 
424 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
1850 
1880 
1910 
1940 
1970 
2000 
Time (years) 
Figure 8.4: Observed changes in global mean temperature over 
1861 to 1994 compared with those simulated using an upwelling 
diffusion-energy balance climate model. The model was run first 
with forcing due to greenhouse gases alone (a), then with 
greenhouse gases and aerosols (b), and finally with greenhouse 
gases, aerosols, and an estimate of solar irradiance changes (c). 
The radiative forcings were the best-guess values recommended 
in this report. Simulations were carried out with cUmate 
sensitivities (AT^-^) of 1.5, 2.5 and 4.5°C for the equilibrium 
COj-doubling temperature change. 
for the input historical forcings and for the E B M 
parameters. A few papers have considered the joint 
optimisation of AT^^. and one Or more forcing factors, such 
as solar variability and/or sulphate aerosol forcing (e.g., 
Kelly and Wigley, 1992; Schlesinger et al., 1992; 
Schlesinger and Ramankutty, 1992). 
A crucial factor in studies of this type is the assumed 
radiative forcing. In IPCC (1990) (Wigley and Barnett, 
1990), it was shown that forcing a UD-EBM with observed 
greenhouse gas forcing implied a AT^y^ value of around 
1.5°C. Since that time, the importance of tropospheric 
aerosol forcing has been realised and this has a large effect 
on the implied AT^^ (Wigley, 1989; Schlesinger and 
Ramankutty, 1992; 1994; Wigley and Raper, 1992). This 
sensitivity is illustrated in Figure 8.4. 
The top panel of this figure compares observations with 
model output for different AT^^ for the case of greenhouse 
gas forcing alone. The optimum AT^^ value is between 
1°C and 2°C, consistent with IPCC (1990). There are small 
differences, relative to IPCC (1990), due mainly to 
modifications in the history of past radiative forcing. The 
middle panel adds a global mean aerosol forcing reaching 
around -1.3 Wm"2 in 1990 (the best-guess value from 
Chapter 2). As before, a reasonable fit between model and 
observations can be obtained, but now for a value of AT^^ 
well above 4.5°C. A lower aerosol component would lead 
to a lower AT^^, as in Wigley and Raper (1992) and 
Schlesinger et al. (1992). The bottom panel shows that an 
improved fit to the data and a sensitivity estimate in better 
agreement with our current best estimates (see Chapter 6) 
can be obtained if a recent estimate of solar irradiance 
variations (consistent with that used in Chapter 2) is added 
as an additional forcing factor. In this case, the implied 
best-fit ATjx lies between 3 and 4°C. 
These empirical estimates of AT^^ are subject to 
considerable uncertainty, as shown in a number of studies 
(see, e.g., Wigley and Barnett, 1990; Wigley and Raper, 
1991b; Kheshgi and White; 1993b). In summary, such 
studies offer support for a AT^^ value similar to that 
obtained from GCMs, and suggest that human activities 
have had a measurable impact on global climate, but they 
cannot establish a unique link between anthropogenic 
forcing changes and climate change. 
8.4.2 Studies of Modelled and Observed Spatial and 
Temporal Patterns of Change 
Current pattern-based studies have compared modelled and 
observed patterns of change at many individual points on 
the Earth's surface, or along a vertical section through the 
atmosphere. The basic approach in these studies is to 
compare the patterns of observed changes in climate with a 
single equilibrium signal pattern or a sequence of time-
evolving signal patterns derived from an AOCGCM. Different 
comparison statistics have been used, generally classifiable 
as centred or uncentred statistics. ' Since one would expect 
1 Uncentred statistics retain information on the spatially averaged 
changes in the two fields being compared. In contrast, centred 
statistics subtract these spatial-mean components and compare the 
patterns of spatial variability about the respective spatial means of 
the two fields. The standard product-moment pattern correlation 
is an example of a centred statistic. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
425 
from the history of increasing emissions of anthropogenic 
pollutants that the observed climate data should show a 
growing anthropogenic signal, the pattern similarity 
statistic should show an overall upward trend. Increases in 
the statistic with time are unlikely to be monotonie, since 
the behaviour of the statistic is also modulated by natural 
internal variability and by changes in natural external 
forcings. A statistically significant overall trend would 
constitute a form of detection. 
Studies of this type have searched the observed data for 
the signals due to the individual effects of greenhouse 
gases (generally CO2 only) or anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols, or for signals due to simultaneous changes in 
several forcings, such as greenhouse gases and sulphate 
aerosols. The principal results of previous pattern-based 
investigations are discussed below. 
8.4.2.1 Greenhouse gas signals 
Most of the pioneering work on pattern-based detection 
studies was carried out by Barnett and collaborators 
(Barnett, 1986, 1991; Barnett and Schlesinger, 1987; 
Barnett et ai, 1991). These studies focused primarily on 
the development of statistical methods for comparing 
model-predicted signals with observed cUmatic changes. 
They also highlighted a number of key issues: 
• 
the difficulty of using global mean changes to 
address the attribution issue; 
• 
the need in detection strategies to account for the 
model-dependence of the signal and model errors in 
simulating present climate; 
• 
the desirability of "pre-screening" model data to 
identify climate variables with high signal-to-noise 
ratios; 
• 
the importance of considering a variety of statistical 
approaches in detection studies. 
This initial pattern-based work used "COj-only" signals, 
and searched for these in recent observed records of sea 
surface temperature, near-surface air temperature, and the 
three-dimensional structure of tropospheric temperature. 
The various statistics used to compare model equilibrium-
or transient-change patterns with observed patterns of 
change failed to yield any sustained, multi-decadal positive 
trends, beyond those trends that were related to trends in 
global mean quantities. 
Santer et al. (1993) pursued some of the methodological 
issues raised by Barnett's work. They showed that an 
uncentred pattern similarity statistic could be split into two 
terms, one proportional to changes in the spatial average 
value of the variable considered (e.g., the global mean 
temperature), and the other proportional to the centred 
pattern correlation. For the C02-only temperature-change 
signals considered by Santer et al. (1993), the spatial mean 
term accounted for almost all of the variability in the 
uncentred statistic, i.e., the statistic contained negligible 
sub-global-scale pattern information. Santer et al. also 
showed that normalisation of model and observed mean-
change fields by a common standard deviation field (in 
order to assign higher weight to grid-points with larger 
signal-to-noise ratios) introduced a so-called "common 
factor" effect which made trend interpretation difficult. 
The Santer et al. (1993) study, like the earlier work by 
Barnett, failed to yield evidence for the existence of the 
sub-global-scale features of a model-predicted CO2 signal 
in observed records of surface air temperature change. This 
result has three basic explanations: 
• 
The C02-only signal may have been incorrect, e.g., 
due to the lack of a fully dynamic ocean in the 
models used. 
• 
The signal may have been correct but masked by the 
(neglected) regional-scale effects of anthropogenic 
aerosols on climate (i.e., a realistic C02-only signal 
but a sub-optimal anthropogenic signal). 
The signal could have been correct but still too small 
to discern against the background noise of natural 
climatic variability at smaller than global spatial 
scales. 
The most plausible interpretation involves some 
combination of these three explanations. 
More recent work by Hegeri et al. (1996) has claimed 
that a model-predicted CO2 signal pattern can be detected 
with a high degree of confidence in the observed surface 
air temperature record. This work differs from the studies 
described above in two important respects: 
• 
A form of the optimum detection strategy proposed 
by Hasselmann (1979) was applied in order to 
enhance signal-to-noise ratios. 
• 
It attempted to assess statistical significance by using 
natural variability noise estimates from three separate 
AOGCMs and from observations (from which an 
estimated greenhouse warming signal had been 
removed; see Section 8.3.1). 
Hegeri et al. used both non-optimised and optimised 
forms of an uncentred pattern similarity statistic to 
compare observed and model-predicted patterns of 
426 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
1.5 Ч 
oj 1.0 Ч 
2 
о 
Ü 
0.5 Ч 
a 
0.0 Ч 
-0.5 Ч 
_L-
O B S E R V A T I O N S 
E I N 
E X P E R I M E N T 
9 5 % 
C O N F I D E N C E 
L E V E L 
( F R O M 
O B S . ) 
9 5 % 
C O N F I D E N C E 
L E V E L 
{ F R O M 
G F D L ) 
1850 
1900 
1950 
2000 
Time (years) 
2050 
210C 
Figure 8.5: Evolution of an uncentred statistic ("detection variable") 
measuring the similarity between modelled and observed patterns 
of 20 year trends in near-surface teinperature (Hegeri et al., 
1996). 
Observed trend patterns were computed from the Jones and Briffa 
(1992) data set, and are overiapping in time, i.e., the first observed 
trend pattern spans the period 1860 to 1879, the second the period 
1861 to 1880, etc. The detection variable was calculated by 
projecting the observed trend patterns onto a "fingerprinf, here 
defined as the long-term pattern of temperature change (from 
roughly 1990 to 2080) in an "Early IndustriaUsation" experiment 
with time-increasing greenhouse gas forcing (EIN) 
(Cubasch et al, 
1995). The fingeфrint was optimally filtered in order to enhance 
the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) (Hasselmann, 1979). This procedure 
accentuates the contribution to the total S/N of areas where the 
signal is large and spatially dissimilar to model-estimated natural 
internal variability. The detection variable was also computed using 
the optimised fingerprint and patterns of overlapping 20-year trends 
from the EIN 
experiment. In the latter and in the observations, the 
value of the detection variable increases with time, primarily 
reflecting the increase in global mean temperature. The behaviour 
of the detection variable in the absence of external forcing was 
detennined by projecting patterns of overlapping 20-year trends 
from long control integrations (and from "detrended" observations; 
see Section 8,3.1 and Hegeri et al. for details) onto the optimised 
fingerprint. The 
most recent values of the detection variable in the 
observations are significantly larger than would be expected due to 
natural internal variability. Note that all values of the detection 
variable are plotted on the last year of the 20-year trend. 
temperature trends. The most recent 20- to 30-year trends 
in this statistic were significant at the 5% level or better 
(relative to three out of four natural variability estimates). 
Significance levels were enhanced by the optimisation 
technique (see Figure 8.5). 
This result does not mean that the regional-scale features 
of a model-predicted greenhouse warming pattern have 
been detected and convincingly attributed to increases in 
atmospheric CO2. As Hegeri et al. show, and as shown 
previously by Santer et al. (1993), the uncentred statistic 
they use is dominated by changes in observed spatial mean, 
annually averaged temperature. In essence, this result says 
that the most recent (20- to 30-year) trends in global mean 
temperature are significantly different from the estimated 
level of background noise. As noted for Stage 1 studies, 
this does not resolve the attribution issue. ' 
Hegeri et al's finding of significant trends in the most 
recent 20 and 30 years of an uncentred paUern similarity 
statistic is in accord with the results of Santer et al. (1993, 
1995a). While Hegeri et al. had focused on annual-mean 
changes, Santer et al. (1995a) showed additionally that the 
most recent 20- to 50-year trends in an uncentred statistic 
were significant in all four seasons. However, Santer et al 
found no significant trends in the centred statistic used to 
compare the sub-global-scale features of modelled and 
observed temperature-change patterns. 
A common feature of the studies by Hegeri et al (1996) 
and Santer et al. (1995a) was that both examined the 
significance of changes over time (trends) in model versus 
observed pattern similarity. A different approach was 
adopted in a recent study by Mitchell et al (1995a), who 
focused instead on the significance of the absolute values of 
centred pattern correlations. Mitchell et al. compared 
decadally averaged patterns of near-surface temperature 
change from a transient greenhouse warming experiment 
with observed patterns of change, and assumed a one-to-one 
time correspondence between the experiment (with a start 
date in 1860) and observations. There was no evidence that 
sub-global-scale features of the model-predicted COj-only 
signal were becoming increasingly evident in observed 
records, nor that the absolute values of the centred pattern 
coiTclation were significant (see Figure 8.6). 
The 
only other recent pattern-oriented work that has 
attempted to find a COj-only signal in observed surface air 
temperature data is that by Michaels et al (1994). This 
investigation makes use of the time-dependent signal from 
a transient greenhouse warming experiment performed 
with the G F D L A O G C M (Manabe et al, 1991). The 
premise underlying this investigation is that if the model-
predicted transient signal is not found in the observed 
temperature record, the model is wrong. The authors fail to 
find this signal in the observed data, a result that is used to 
justify a condemnation of climate models in general. 
' Optimisation does not greatiy modify the pattern of the Hegeri 
et al. fingerprint, so the same argument applies to the optimised 
version of their uncentred statistic. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
427 
0,4 
1 
1 1 1 f 
1 ] 
i 
 
0,2-
, f • 
~^^^JSsJ\ 
-
С 
/ 
о 
• / 
/ / \ 
/ 
7 
-
о 
-
/ \ 
/Л 
/"-
8 0.0-
/ 
\ ... / 
]^^^^ \ 
1 
V 
/ 
£ 
/ 
д /. 
я 
/ 
v "• 
Q. 
/ 
•' 
-
-0,2-
' 
C02+S04 
-
СОг-ONLY 
10% SIGNIFICANCE: СОг+SO. 
-0.4, 
10%StGNIFIGAN0E;CO2-ONLY 
—I—1—1—1—г—i—1—1—1—I—1—1—r 1 1—1 1 1 1 1 . . . . , , , — 
T 
1860 
1880 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
1980 
200C 
Time (years) 
Figure 8.6: Similarity between observed patterns of near-surface 
temperature change and changes predicted by an A O G C M in 
experiments with time-dependent forcing by equivalent CO-, only 
and CO2 + anthropogenic sulphate aerosols (Mitchell et al., 
1995a). All comparisons assume a one-to-one correspondence in 
time between the model experiments and observations. Changes 
were expressed relative to time averages over the first 130 years 
(i.e., 1860 to 1990) of the observations and the model experiment, 
after application of the "mask" of observational data coverage 
appropriate to each decade. Centred pattern correlations were then 
computed using decadally averaged data. The significance of 
these results was assessed by coirelating the signal patterns from 
the two perturbation experiments with all possible decadal 
anomaly patterns from a 400-year A O G C M control integration. 
This procedure yields information on the degree of pattern 
similarity expected due to natural internal variability alone. In the 
most recent decades, the spatial correspondence between 
observed near-surface temperature changes and those predicted in 
the model experiment with combined COj + sulphate aerosol 
forcing is significantly larger (at the 10% level) than the 
agreement expected due to natural internal climate ñuctuations. 
Significant pattern correlations are not obtained in the COj-only 
experiment. 
There are a number of serious problems with this analysis. 
As discussed in Section 8.2.4, a time-dependent 
greenhouse warming experiment performed with a fully 
coupled A O G C M does not have a pure signal as its output. 
The output consists of signal plus noise, and the early 
decades of such simulations, which were the focus of the 
Michaels et al. study, are often dominated by the noise. A 
null result on the basis of a single transient experiment 
such as this does not constitute "proof that the model is 
erroneous, nor that the searched-for signal does not exist. 
Furthermore, the Michaels et al. study categorically 
dismisses the possibility that their failure to find a time-
dependent greenhouse gas signal may be due to the masking 
effects of anthropogenic sulphate aerosols. This dismissal is 
made on the following grounds. Michaels et al. argue that if 
sulphate aerosols have had an impact on climate, then the 
impact should be very small or close to zero in regions 
remote from areas where the forcing due to aerosols is 
large. This hypothesis is not supported by recent G C M 
experiments, which suggest that the atmospheric general 
circulation can, via dynamics, produce large remote surface 
temperature responses to highly regionalised forcing by 
sulphate aerosols (Taylor and Penner, 1994; Mitchell et al.. 
1995b; Roeckner et al, 1995). 
The Michaels et al. results are difficult to compare with 
those of other Stage 2 studies that have searched for a COj-
only signal, primarily due to differences in definition of the 
signal, in methodology and in the areas of the globe 
considered. Nevertheless, their failure to find the sub-
global-scale pattern of this signal is consistent with the 
results of Santer et al. (1993, 1995a). One possible 
explanation for this result is that some part of the regional-
scale features of a C02-only signal has been obscured by 
aerosol effects (see Section 8.4.2.3). 
Changes in the vertical temperature structure of the 
atmosphere have also been proposed as a promising 
component of a multivariate, COj-specific fingerprint 
(Epstein, 1982; Karoly, 1987, 1989). Model equilibrium 
and transient response experiments both show a consistent 
picture of stratospheric cooling and tropospheric warming 
as a direct radiative response to the change in atmospheric 
CO2. The precise details of this picture are model-
dependent, e.g., the height of maximum warming in the 
tropical upper troposphere. Recently, Karoly et al. (1994) 
attempted to find this signal pattern in temperature 
measurements from radiosondes, using data from Oort and 
Liu (1993). The observed records spanned the period from 
1963 to 1988 only. This is a relatively short record length 
for the detection of long-term anthropogenic climate 
change (Karl, 1994). Furthermore, there are known 
deficiencies in this data set, the most serious of which are 
the existence of rime-varying instrumental biases and 
inadequate spatial coverage, particularly over the Southern 
Ocean (see Chapter 3; also Oort and Liu, 1993; Karoly et 
al., 1994). However, comparisons of the Oort and Liu data 
with independently derived satellite estimates of vertical 
temperature changes indicate that the two data sets are in 
good global mean and hemispheric agreement for the 
period of overlap (see Chapter 3). This enhances 
confidence in the usefulness of the radiosonde temperature 
measurements for detection studies. 
Karoly et al. used both centred and uncentred statistics 
to compare model and observed patterns of zonal mean 
temperature change through the atmosphere. They found 
428 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
-1.5 
-0.9 
-0.3 
0.3 
0.9 
1.5 
Figure 8.7: Modelled and observed changes in the zonal-mean, annual-average temperature structure of the atmosphere ("C). Model 
results are from equilibrium response experiments performed by Taylor and Penner (1994), in which an A G C M with a mixed-layer 
ocean was coupled, to a tropospheric chemistry model and forced with present-day atmospheric concentrations of CO^ (a) and by the 
combined effects of present-day CO, levels and sulphur emissions (b). Model changes are expressed relative to a control run with pre-
industrial levels of COj and no anthropogenic sulphur emissions. Observed changes (c) are radiosonde-based temperature 
measurements from the data set by Oort and Liu (1993) and are expressed as total least-squares linear trends over the 25-year period 
extending from May 1963 to April 1988 (i.e., "0/25 years). A common pattern of stratospheric cooUng and tropospheric warming is 
evident in the observations and in both model experiments. In the model data, this pattern primarily reflects the direct radiative effect of 
changes in atmospheric C O 2 . Temperature changes in the observations and in the experiment with combined COj + aerosol forcing also 
show a common pattern of hemispherically asymmetric warming in the low- to mid-troposphere, with reduced warming in the Northern 
Hemisphere. This asymmetry is absent in the COj-only case. For further details refer to Santer et al. (1995b). 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
429 
significant positive trends in botfi types of statistic. An 
innovative feature of this study was its attempt to address 
the attribution question, at least in a qualitative way, by 
comparing the characteristic CO2 signal pattern with the 
patterns produced by other mechanisms, such as decreases 
in stratospheric ozone concentration or changes in the 
frequency and amplitude of El Niño/Southern Oscillation 
events. Karoly et al. concluded that these mechanisms 
could not mimic the C02-induced fingerprint of 
stratospheric cooling/tropospheric warming. 
It is highly likely that the observed stratospheric ozone 
reduction over the last two decades is related to the 
industrial production of halocarbons, and hence represents 
an anthropogenic effect on climate rather than a natural 
forcing mechanism. One recent A G C M experiment by 
Hansen et al. (1995a) with a combined increase in COj and 
reduction in stratospheric ozone (O3) has shown that the 
inclusion of O3 effects improves model agreement with the 
Oort and Liu radiosonde temperature measurements in the 
upper troposphere. While this improvement was 
demonstrated in global mean terms only, Ramaswamy et 
al. 
(1996) 
further 
showed that 
satellite-based 
measurements of the pattern of latitudinal and seasonal 
changes in lower stratospheric temperature were in good 
accord with a model-predicted signal pattern in response to 
imposed stratospheric ozone reduction. 
A recent study by Santer et al. (1995b) confirmed the 
Karoly et al. finding of a common pattern of stratospheric 
cooling and tropospheric warming in the radiosonde 
observations and in model C02-only experiments (see 
Figure 8.7). As in the Karoly et al. case, the strength of the 
model/data pattern correspondence was found to increase 
in the observational record. To determine the significance 
of this result, Santer et al. used estimates of the natural 
internal variability of atmospheric temperature from two 
multi-century model control runs. They showed that the 
model-derived natural internal fluctuations could not 
plausibly 
explain 
the 
level 
of time-increasing 
correspondence between the model signal and observations 
over the period 1963 to 1988. 
Some concerns remain regarding the uniqueness of this 
fingerprint of stratospheric cooling and tropospheric 
warming. Although the Santer et al. (1995b) study points 
towards important differences between natural internal 
variabihty (as simulated by two AOGCMs) and the response 
to changes in atmospheric CO2, in terms of both pattern, 
amplitude and time-scale, other results are more ambiguous 
(see, e.g., L i u and Schuurmanns, 1990). A control 
integration and transient greenhouse warming experiment 
performed with a different A O G C M indicated that the 
dominant mode of "unforced" variability in that model was 
similar in pattern and amplitude to the expected greenhouse 
signal of stratospheric cooling and tropospheric warming, 
at least in the tropics (Santer et al, 1994). This latter result 
may be suspect, however, due to the large initial drift in 
temperature in the control run that was examined. 
There is little evidence that the observed pattern of 
stratospheric cooling and tropospheric warming is due to 
either solar variability and/or volcanic effects (Wetherald 
and Manabe, 1975; Hansen et al, 1978). Model-predicted 
responses to changes in the solar constant do not show 
stratospheric cooling, while our best informarion from 
observations and relevant model experiments indicates that 
volcanically injected stratospheric aerosols tend to warm 
the stratosphere and cool the troposphere - a response that 
is the inverse of an expected greenhouse gas signal. The 
vertical structure of atmospheric temperature changes 
might therefore prove to be a fingerprint that is highly 
specific to anthropogenic forcing 
Recent studies by Kari et al (1995b, 1996a), although 
not strictly pattern-based, have also employed a 
multivariate description of a greenhouse gas signal. The 
authors defined a "U.S. Greenhouse Climate Response 
Index" (GCRI) with individual components that measure 
selected changes in USA climate thought to be sensitive to 
increased emissions of greenhouse gases. The index 
focused on climatic events of direct relevance to the public 
and policymakers, for example, unequal increases in 
maximum and minimum temperature (10% greater for the 
minimum compared to the maximum), increases in cold 
season precipitation, severe summertime drought and the 
proportion of total precipitation derived from extreme one-
day precipitation events, and decreases in day-to-day 
temperature variations. Both weighted and unweighted 
forms of the GCRI were computed, with weights assigned 
according to a subjective assessment of confidence in the 
GCM-predicted changes in these individual quantities. The 
resultant weighted and unweighted indices showed a trend 
towards elevated values in the last two decades, consistent 
with model-based projections for an enhanced greenhouse 
effect (Figure 8.8). 
Karl et al assessed the significance of these resuhs by 
fitting a variety of statistical models to the index time-
series, and then randomly generating hundreds of synthetic 
' Note, however, that long-term trends in volcanic forcing could 
account for some fraction of the observed changes in the thermal 
structure of the atmosphere. This possibility requires further 
investigation. 
430 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
Time (years) 
1980 
200C 
Figure 8.8: Evolution of a weighted "U.S. Greenhouse Climate 
Response Index" (GCRI). The index consists of five individual 
components that measure selected changes in USA climate 
thought to be sensitive to increased emissions of greenhouse gases 
(Karl et al, 1995b, 1996a). These comprise unequal increases in 
maximum and minimum temperature, increases in cold season 
precipitation, severe summertime drought and the proportion of 
total precipitation derived froin extreme one-day precipitation 
events and decreases in day-to-day temperature variations. The 
likelihood that increases in the GCRI since 1976 are due to purely 
natural causes is relatively small (between 1 and ' 
time-series with statistical properties similar to those of the 
"observed" index time-series. The probability that changes 
in the GCRI since 1976 could be purely random in nature 
ranged from 1% to 20% and from 1% to 9% for 
unweighted and weighted versions of the G C R I 
(respectively), with the range dependent on the assumed 
statistical model. This indicated that changes in weighted 
and unweighted forms of the index since 1976 were 
unlikely to be due to natural variability alone, although this 
explanation could not be totally dismissed. 
In summary, attempts to detect a COj-only signal in the 
climate system have given ambiguous results. Existing 
multi-variate detection studies have used signals from very 
different experiments and climate models. They differ in 
terms of the measures of pattern similarity and statistical 
significance testing procedures that were used, and in the 
climate variables and geographical regions that were 
examined. Nevertheless, it is possible to reach a few 
general conclusions. 
As noted in this section, the searched-for greenhouse 
warming signal has both a global mean component and a 
sub-global-scale pattern component. The investigations by 
Hegeri et al. (1996) and Santer et al. (1995a) suggest that a 
global mean greenhouse warming signal is detectable with 
high confidence in records of surface air temperature 
change over the last 20 to 50 years, in accord with Stage 1 
detection studies (see Section 8.4.1). Implicit in these 
global mean results is a weak attribution statement - if the 
observed global mean changes over the last 20 to 50 years 
cannot be fully explained by natural climate variability, 
some (unknown) fraction of the changes must be due to 
human influences. Significant results have not been 
obtained for the sub-global-scale pattern component of a 
greenhouse warming signal, thus precluding more 
confident statements regarding attribution of observed 
changes to the specific cause of increases in greenhouse 
gas concentrations. The validity of conclusions on the 
significance of both the global mean and pattern 
components of a greenhouse gas signal depends on whether 
the estimates of natural variability noise used in these 
studies are realistic. 
Several studies indicate that the vertical structure of 
atmospheric temperature changes might prove to be a 
fingeiprint that is highly specific to combined changes in 
CO2 and stratospheric ozone. The latitude-height patterns 
of temperature change in the available radiosonde 
observations over 1963 to 1988 are becoming increasingly 
similar to the model-predicted pattern of stratospheric 
cooling and tropospheric warming. Further work is 
necessary to clarify the uniqueness of this fingerprint and 
to improve the quality of the radiosonde data. 
8.4.2.2 Anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosol 
sigttals 
Until recently, investigations of the possible impact of 
anthropogenic sulphate aerosols on observed surface air 
temperature were restricted to analyses of observed 
changes in areas where SO, emissions and/or forcing are 
likely to have been large (Wigley et al., 1992; Hunter et 
al., 1993), or to a visual comparison of observed 
temperature change patterns and patterns of vertically 
integrated aerosol concentration predicted by a chemical-
transport model (Èngardt and Rodhe, 1993). These studies 
have shown qualitatively that some features of the recent 
instrumental surface temperature record are consistent with 
a sulphate aerosol effect on climate. 
Only two studies have used quantitative techniques to 
search for an anthropogenic sulphate aerosol signal in 
observed data. The first, by Karl et al. (1995a), used 
gridded land surface air teinperature data to compare linear 
trends from 1966 to 1980 with the mean changes in SOj 
emissions over the same period. Spatial correlations were 
then computed between the temperature trends and 
emissions changes, but along 5° latitude bands (from 20°N 
to 60°N) rather than over the full data fields. This yielded a 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
431 
series of correlation coefficients as a function of latitude 
and season. The significance of these results was evaluated 
by correlating the emissions changes with many samples of 
"natural" 15-year temperature trends from the 1000 year 
GFDL control run (Stouffer et al, 1994). 
In over two-thirds of the cases, the correlations were 
negative, indicating a decrease in temperature as emissions 
increased over the period 1966 to 1980. The most 
significant negative correlations were obtained in zones of 
high emissions (50°N-55°N) and at times of high 
insolation. The number of significant correlations was far 
greater than would be expected by chance alone. Karl et al. 
interpreted these results as being consistent with the 
anticipated direct effects of anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols. 
This is encouraging in terms of attribution, since the 
similarity between emissions changes and temperature 
changes is not simply at a global mean level, and since 
seasonal variations in the obtained significance levels are 
in agreement with our physical understanding of the 
seasonality in forcing due to direct aerosol effects. There is 
some scope for improving these results by using a pattern 
of temperature response rather than a pattern of change in 
emissions or forcing. Detection studies that employ some 
"proxy" for the temperature response, such as the pattern of 
observed changes in sulphur emissions used by Karl et al 
or the pattern of sulphate aerosol distribution or aerosol 
forcing predicted by a sulphur chemistry model (Wigley et 
al. 
1992; Engardt and Rodhe, 1993), do not account for 
any modulation of the regional aerosol forcing by the 
general circulation of the atmosphere, and could be 
searching for sub-optimal signals. This may be of lesser 
consequence in the latitude bands (50°N-55°N) where Karl 
et al. find the strongest relationships between SOj 
emissions and temperature changes, since this is likely to 
be a region where there is a stronger correspondence 
between emissions, forcing and response. 
The recent study by Santer etal. (1995a) differs from the 
work of Karl et al (1995a) in that it searches directly for a 
temperature response pattern due to anthropogenic sulphate 
aerosols, rather than a forcing pattern. The response pattern 
was taken from experiments performed by Taylor and 
Penner (1994) with an A G C M coupled to a tropospheric 
chemistry model. As in the greenhouse gas detection 
studies described in Section 8.4.2.1, Santer et al used both 
centred and uncentred statistics to compare observed 
temperature changes with the model predictions. These 
comparisons were made over the (near-global) data fields 
rather than at individual latitude bands. Only one result 
achieved significance: the most recent 50-year trend in a 
centred pattern correlation for the autumn season 
(September to November). In this single case, the model-
predicted regional scale pattern was detectable in the data. 
It is difficult to compare the results of these two studies 
directly, because of their use of different signals and 
different time periods for the observations, and their 
consideration of pattern similarities at different spatial 
scales. The key point is that both studies show evidence 
supporting the idea of a sulphate aerosol cooling effect on 
climate, based on pattern coiTespondences at spatial scales 
smaller than the global mean. 
8.4.2.3 Combined CO2 and sulphate aerosol 
signals 
Four separate multi-variate detection studies have searched 
for a model-predicted temperature change pattern in 
response to combined C O , and sulphate aerosol forcing. 
Three of these have dealt with changes in near-surface 
temperature (Hasselmann et al, 1995; Mitchell et al, 
1995a; Santer et al, 1995a), while one has considered 
modelled and observed changes in the vertical structure of 
atmospheric temperature (Santer et al, 1995b). The latter 
additionally attempted to incorporate the effects of 
stratospheric ozone reduction in the searched-for 
anthropogenic signal. 
The 
climate-change signal in the 
near-surface 
temperature study by Santer et al (1995a) was derived 
from equilibrium response experiments by Taylor and 
Penner (1994), in which an A G C M coupled to a mixed-
layer ocean and a model of tropospheric sulphate chemistry 
was forced by present-day levels of atmospheric CO-, and 
anthropogenic sulphur emissions. The temperature 
response to the combined forcing in the Taylor and Penner 
experiment is very different from the response to forcing 
by CO2 alone (see Figure 8.9), showing both spatially 
coherent cooling and warming regions - a characteristic of 
the way surface temperature in the real world has actually 
changed (see Chapter 3). This response pattern has large 
uncertainties. Perhaps the most important of these is that 
the pattern is clearly a function of the relative magnitudes 
of the positive forcing by COj and the negative forcing by 
the direct effect of anthropogenic sulphate aerosols, with 
the latter only poorly known (see Chapter 2 and Section 
8.2.5). Further signal uncertainties include those arising 
from the lack of a dynamic ocean, the neglect of the 
indirect effects of sulphate aerosols, possible model-
dependence of the results, and signal estimation problems 
(see Section 8.2.4 and 8.2.5). 
Santer et al used both centred and uncentred statistics to 
compare the seasonally and annually 
averaged 
(equilibrium) near-surface temperature-change patterns 
432 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
Figure 8.9: Summertime (JJA) near-surface air temperature changes (°C) in an A G C M experiment with forcing by COj only (a), and by 
both CO2 and anthropogenic sulphate aerosols (b). For sources of model data, refer to Figure 8.7. Temperature changes in the 
observations (see Chapter 3, Figure 3.14) are qualitatively more similar to the changes in the combined forcing experiment than in the 
CO2 only experiment. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
433 
(a) 
0.6 
1940 
1960 
Time (years) 
2000 
(b) 
0,6 
.o 
S 
8 0.0 
-0,6 
COj + sulphate aerosols 
50-Year linear trend 
1900 
1920 
1940 
1960 
Time (years) 
1980 
2000 
Figure 8.10: Behaviour of a centred pattern correlation statistic, R(t), 
measuring the similarity between model-predicted and observed 
patterns of near-surface air temperature change. The model 
predictions are from equilibrium response experiments with forcing 
by present-day atmospheric concentrations of COj (a), and by the 
combined effects of present-day C O 2 levels and sulphur emissions 
(b) (see Figure 8.7 for details). For each experiment, a single 
pattern characterises the temperature-change signal. This signal is 
then searched for in observed time-vaiying records of near-surface 
temperature change. The figure shows results for the autumn season 
(SON). In the case of combined CO, 4- sulphate aerosol forcing, 
there is a positive linear trend in the R(t) time-series over the last 50 
years (1944 to 1993), indicating that sub-global-scale features of the 
observed temperature-change patterns are becoming increasingly 
similar to the predicted signal pattern. No such increasing similarity 
is found for the COj-only signal. The 50-year trend in R(tj in the 
experiment with combined forcing was highly significant relative 
to estimates of internally generated natural variability from two 
extended A O G C M control runs (Santer et al., 1995a), The initial 
decrease in R(t) from roughly 1910 to 1945 (b) has not been fully 
explained, but is likely due to the fact that the observed warming in 
the 1930s and 1940s had some similarity to a COj-only signal, and 
was different in character from more recent changes. 
from this combined forcing experiment with observed 
temperature changes. Their key finding was that the long-
term (most recent 50-year) trends in a centred statistic for 
the July to August and September to November signals 
were statistically significant relative to two different G C M -
based estimates of internally generated variability (see 
Figure 8.10). In these two seasons, therefore, the sub-
global-scale features of a combined COj + sulphate aerosol 
signal pattern were increasingly evident in the observed 
surface air temperature data. This result is highly unlikely 
to be due to the noise of natural internal variability, 
assuming that the coupled model noise estimates were 
realistic. 
Similar results were obtained by Mitchell et al. (1995a) 
and Hasselmann et al. (1995) in detection studies involving 
annual-mean near-surface temperature signals from 
A O G C M transient experiments with combined C O j + 
sulphate aerosol forcing. Direct sulphate aerosol effects in 
both experiments were parameterized by changes in 
surface albedo. As noted previously (Section 8.4.2.1), the 
Mitchell et al. study used a centred correlation statistic to 
compare patterns of decadally averaged temperature change 
from the COj + sulphate aerosol experiment with observed 
patterns of change, under the assumption of a one-to-one 
time correspondence between the observations and the 
model signal. The absolute values of the correlation statistic 
increased in the most recent decades, and were deemed to 
be significant relative to the typical values obtained in the 
absence of external forcing (see Figure 8.6). Significant 
results were not obtained for the C02-only signal. 
As in the investigation by Hegeri et al. (1996) (Section 
8.4.2.1), Hasselmann et al. (1995) compared modelled and 
observed patterns of 30-year trends in near-surface 
temperature. A centred statistic indicated that correlations 
(for 30-year trends ending in 1970 to 1990) were generally 
higher for the combined COj + aerosol signal than for a 
C02-only signal. An optimised uncentred statistic yielded 
the opposite result, largely reflecting the lower global mean 
change in the combined forcing experiment. 
In work complementing the above studies, Santer et al. 
(1995b) (Section 8.4.2.1) searched for a combined CO^ + 
sulphate aerosol signal in observed changes in the vertical 
temperature structure of the atmosphere, and additionally 
considered the possible effects of stratospheric ozone 
depletion. The C O 2 + aerosol signal was taken from the 
A G C M experiments by Taylor and Penner (1994), while 
the temperature response to stratospheric O3 reduction was 
obtained from an experiment by Ramaswamy et al. (1996). 
Since experiments with simultaneous changes in COj, 
sulphate aerosols and O^ have not yet been performed, the 
C O 2 + O 3 + aerosol temperature-change signals were 
estimated by linearly combining results from the Taylor 
and Penner and Ramaswamy et al. integrations. 
A centred statistic was used to compare modelled and 
observed patterns of temperature change over the lower 
434 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
troposphere to the lower stratosphere (850 to 50 hPa) and 
over the low- to mid-troposphere only (850 to 500 hPa). 
This statistic exhibited strong trends for comparisons made 
over 850 to 50 hPa, both in the COj-only signals and in 
signals incorporating the added effects of sulphate aerosols 
and stratospheric O3 reduction. The trends were largely due 
to a common pattern of stratospheric cooling and 
tropospheric warming in the obseiwations and in all model 
experiments (see Figure 8.7). 
Pattern comparisons restricted to the 850 to 500 hPa 
region revealed that the observations were in better 
statistical agreement with the temperature-change patterns 
due to combined forcing (COj + aerosols + Of) than with 
the CO,-only pattern. This was the result of hemispheric 
scale temperature-change contrasts, with less warming in 
the Northern Hemisphere, that were common to the 
observations and the combined forcing signal but absent in 
the COj-only case (Figure 8.7). The closest statistical 
agreement between modelled and observed patterns of 
temperature change was achieved when stratospheric ozone 
effects were incorporated. The levels of model-versus-
observed pattern similarity increased with time over 1963 
to 1988, in all cases save for the CO^-only signal defined 
over 850 to 500 hPa. These increases were found to be 
highly significant (at the 5% level or better) relative to 
model-derived estimates of natural internal variability. 
In summary, all four studies show that sub-global-scale 
features of model-predicted CO2 + sulphate aerosol signals 
are increasingly evident in the record of observed near-
surface and vertical temperature changes over the last half 
century. "Increasingly evident" signifies that the value of the 
statistic used to compare modelled and observed patterns of 
change increases with time. This conclusion does not depend 
on the realism of the model-simulated natural internal 
variability. The four studies also show that these combined 
signals are detectable relative to cun'ent model estimates of 
natural internal climate variability. This result means that the 
combined 
C 0 2 + sulphate 
aerosol signals can be 
distinguished from model noise estimates with a high level 
of statistical confidence. The latter conclusion is dependent 
on the realism of model internal noise estimates in tenns of 
pattern, amplitude and time-scale. 
One of the implications of this work is that some of the 
sub-global-scale background noise, against which these and 
previous studies have attempted to detect a C02-only signal, 
is in fact part of a sulphate aerosol effect on climate. 
Detection studies that search for the individual 
effects of 
greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols on climate therefore 
may be less successful in explaining observed temperature 
changes than studies that search for their combined effects. 
To date, pattern-based studies have not been able to 
quantify the magnitude of a greenhouse gas or aerosol 
effect on climate. Our current inability to estimate reliably 
the fraction of the observed temperature changes that are 
due to human effects does not mean that this fraction is 
negligible. The very fact that pattern-based studies have 
been able to discern sub-global-scale features of a 
combined CO2 + aerosol signal relative to the ambient 
noise of natural internal variability implies that there may 
be a non-negligible human effect on global climate. 
8.4.3 Studies of Spatial and Temporal Patterns of 
Change in Model Data Only 
A number of purely model-based studies have explored the 
question of whether model data can help to identify climate 
variables that might be promising components of a multi-
variable "fingerprint" for detecting anthropogenic change. 
The first studies of this kind were by Barnett and Schlesinger 
(1987), Barnett et al. (1991), and Santer et al. (1991), and 
used a variety of statistical approaches to characterise the 
degree of similarity between a model-predicted signal and 
the internally generated natural variability produced by the 
same model in a control run. The modelled signal in this 
early work was invariably in response to a doubling of 
atmospheric C O j , and was always generated by an 
atmospheric G C M coupled to a mixed-layer ocean. 
More recent work has taken signal and noise data from 
time-dependent greenhouse warming experiments 
performed with AOGCMs, and explored the suitability of 
different statistical techniques for: 
• 
efficiently describing the space-time evolution of 
greenhouse warming signals and natural variability 
noise (Santer et al, 1994; Murphy and Mitchell, 
1995), and determining at what point in time the 
model signal can be discriminated from the model 
noise (see Figure 8.11); 
• 
identifying atmospheric variables (Santer et al, 
1994; Murphy and Mitchell, 1995) and oceanic 
variables (Mikolajewicz et al, 1993; Santer et al, 
1995c) with high signal-to-noise ratios in the model 
data. Signal-to-noise has been investigated in terms 
of both pure pattern similarity and the relative 
amplitudes of an enhanced greenhouse effect signal 
and natural variability noise. 
In general these studies have shown that for an enhanced 
greenhouse effect signal, changes in near-surface air 
temperature are likely to have a large signal-to-noise ratio. 
of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
435 
(a) 
20 
10 
CM 
Ü. 
0 
О 
Ш 
° -10|-
С 
I -20 
-30 h-
-40 
L_ 
-30 
G H G 
E X P T Y E A R 100 
4 
• 
C O N T R O L 
•= 
G H G 
E X P T 
30 
60 
Loading on EOF 1 
90 
120 
(b) 
Z 20 
2 
q -20 
-40 h 
-60 
G H G 
E X P T 
Y E A R 
7 5 ' 
. G H G 
E X P T 
. 
C O N T R O L 
-150 
-110 
-70 
-30 
Loading on EOF 1 
10 
50 
Figure 8.11: Model predictions of the time evolution of annual 
mean neai-surface temperature changes in greenhouse wanning 
experiments and control runs. Results are from experiments 
perfonned by Cubasch et al. ( 1992) (a), and МифЬу and Mitchell 
(1995) (b). A statistical technique known as EOF 
analysis was used 
to describe the evolution of the modelled greenhouse warming 
signals and natural internal variability in terms of a small number 
of patterns (EOFs) and time-series (see Santer et al, 1994). 
Temperature data from the control runs and greenhouse warming 
experiments were then "projected" onto the first two EOF 
patterns 
of the respective greenhouse warming experiments. Each dot 
represents one year of a control run or greenhouse experiment, and 
successive years are joined by lines. The control run results all 
cluster closely in a "noise cloud" that defines the limits of internally 
generated natural variability. If the greenhouse warming signals 
were similar to the (model-simulated) natural variability, both in 
terms of amplitude and pattern, they would be contained within 
these noise clouds. This is not the case, and the signals clearly 
separate from the noise within 20-30 years. 
while mean sea level pressure and precipitation changes 
have less desirable signal-to-noise characteristics. Such 
rankings of climate variables according to their signal-to-
noise characteristics may depend on the extent to which the 
model noise represents bona fide internally generated 
variability rather than climate drift, and may change as 
anthropogenic factors other than COj (such as sulphate 
aerosol effects) are included in model climate-change 
experiments. This type of work is also a useful tool for 
testing statistical methodology in an idealised setting with 
no missing data and adequate record lengths for estimating 
model noise properties. 
8.5 Qualitative Consistency Between Model Predictions 
and Observations 
8.5.1 Introduction 
The 
focus of Section 8.4 has been on studies that have used 
quantitative approaches to compare model-predicted 
signals with observations. There are, however, a large 
number of investigations that have highlighted areas of 
qualitative 
agreement (or disagreement) between models 
and observations. Such information is necessarily less 
compelling than evidence obtained from quantitative 
detection studies. Nevertheless, claims of detection of an 
anthropogenic effect on climate that are based solely on 
complex statistical techniques are likely to be controversial 
unless they are supported by a broad range of evidence, 
some of which will be qualitative in nature. 
Before such evidence is examined, it is necessary to 
point out that there is a fundamental difficulty in assessing 
"qualitative consistency". Our ideas about an expected 
signal in response to anthropogenic activities have changed 
with time, and are likely to change in the future. In the 
1980s, expectations of the climate response to 
anthropogenic factors were largely dictated by C02-only 
results from AGCMs coupled to mixed-layer oceans. The 
incorporation of full ocean dynamics and the direct effect 
of sulphate aerosols have modified this picture in important 
ways (Figure 8.12). 
The 
incoфoration of sulphate aerosol effects in climate 
models marks another important stage in the evolutionary 
process of predicting and identifying future cUmate change, 
but it is clear that this process has not ended. The implication 
is that caution must be exercised in examining "qualitative 
consistency". What was qualitatively inconsistent yesterday 
could be qualitatively consistent today. 
Chapter 3 identified observed changes in a wide range of 
climate parameters, and attempted to assign confidence 
levels to these changes based on our current understanding 
of data uncertainties (see Figure 3.23). A similar exercise 
was attempted for model projections of the climate 
response to CO2 doubling in Chapter 6 (Figure 6.1). In the 
following section, we compare selected model predictions 
gOS i 
I 
I 
180 
150W 
120W 
90W 
60W 
30W 
' 0 
ЗОЕ 
, 60E 
ЭОЕ 
120E 
150E 
180 
-
5
-
3
-
1
1 
3 
5 
7 
-
6
-
4
-
2 
О 
2 
4 
6 
8 
Figure 8.12: Evolution of model predictions for the expected annual average neaj-surface temperature response to anthropogenic 
activities (°C). Resuhs are from an equilibrium CO^ doubling experiment with an AGCIVI coupled to a mixed-layer model of the 
upper ocean (Senior, 1995) (a), from an experiment with an AOGCIVl driven by time-increasing atmospheric levels of equivalent CO2 
(Cubasch et al., 1992) (b), and from an experiment with an A O G C M forced by time-evolving changes in equivalent CO^ and 
anthropogenic sulphur emissions (Mitchell et al, 1995a) (с). AU results show the temperature response at the approximate time 
of CO2 doubling in the model experiment. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
437 
with observed changes in order to assess where there is and 
where there is not qualitative consistency. This section 
does not attempt to provide an exhaustive analysis of 
qualitative consistency for a wide range of climate 
variables. Instead, we focus on areas that have received 
recent attention in the scientific literature. 
The potential problems of comparisons between a COj-
only signal and observed changes have been discussed 
above. Where possible, therefore, we also make use of 
recent model projections based on forcing by both 
greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols. 
8.5.2 Global Mean Temperature and Surface 
Temperature Patterns 
The best available evidence suggests that observed near-
surface air temperature has increased by 0.3°C to 0.6°C in the 
last 100 yeais (Chapter 3). This result is in accord with both 
simple and more complex model predictions of the global 
mean temperature change in response to time-dependent 
changes in greenhouse gases and aerosols. As noted in 
Chapter 6, the time-series of global mean temperature 
changes simulated in two recent A O G C M experiments with 
combined CO2 + sulphate aerosol forcing (Hasselmann et al, 
1995; Mitchell et al, 1995a) are generally in better 
agreement with observations than the results from 
comparable experiments with COj forcing alone. 
This agreement 
does not, however, constitute 
identification of an anthropogenic effect on climate and 
may be serendipitous. The degree of consistency between 
modelled and observed global mean, annually averaged 
temperature changes depends on a variety of factors. These 
include the model's climate sensitivity, the magnitude and 
sign of simulated muUi-decadal variability (and or climate 
drift), oceanic thermal inertia, and the relative strength of 
the positive forcing due to greenhouse gases and the 
negative forcing due to aerosols. It is certainly feasible that 
qualitative agreement could be due to compensating errors, 
such as a climate sensitivity that is too high being partially 
offset by cooling due to a residual drift, or by an 
overestimated aerosol effect. Nevertheless, the recent 
modelling work does show that it is possible to explain past 
changes in a global-scale property of the climate system in 
a plausible way. 
More importantly, we have seen initial evidence of 
qualitative and quantitative consistency between observed 
patterns of near-surface temperature change and model 
predictions in response to combined greenhouse gas and 
aerosol forcing. Pattern correspondence is more difficult to 
achieve than global mean consistency, and hence is more 
meaningful in the context of attribution. Our best model-
based estimates of natural internal variability indicate that 
this correspondence is unlikely to be due to natural causes. 
Simultaneous model-observed agreement in terms of 
changes in both global means and patterns, as in the recent 
study by Mitchell et al (1995a), is even less likely to be a 
chance occurrence or the result of compensating model 
errors. 
8.5.3 Diurnal Temperature Range 
Past changes in the diumal temperature range (DTR) also 
show some similarity in the real world and in model 
predictions. Several studies in Chapter 3 reported that, 
since the 1950s, minimum temperatures have increased two 
to three times faster than maximum temperatures over large 
areas of land in the Northern Hemisphere (Karl et al, 
1991b; Kari et al, 1993; Kukla and Karl, 1993; Horton, 
1995). The result is a reduction in DTR, especially during 
summer and autumn. 
Early attempts to explain these changes were 
unsuccessful. Model simulations with increases in 
greenhouse gases alone or in combination with the direct 
effects of sulphate aerosols could not capture the amplitude 
and pattern of the observed changes. New modelling and 
observational studies (Hansen et al, 1995b; Stenchikov 
and Robock, 1995) have provided insight into this apparent 
inconsistency between model projections and the observed 
decrease of DTR by noting the importance of cloud effects. 
Thus, Hansen et al (1995b) found that no plausible 
combination of forcings other than CO2, sulphate aerosols 
and increases in cloud cover could explain the observed 
reduction in DTR and the increase in mean temperature in 
tiieir model. Whether the required cloud changes, which 
are in accord with available observations, are also 
primarily an anthropogenic effect (i.e., due to the indirect 
effects of sulphate aerosols; see Chapter 2) or are due to 
natural climate variability is currently unknown. 
8.5.4 Changes in Phase of Annual Temperature Cycle 
A recent study by Thomson (1995) of the multi-century 
Central England time-series of monthly mean temperatures 
(and of other long instrumental records) employed a 
sophisticated spectral analysis technique to discern 
underlying periodicities in the data. After identifying and 
removing a signal due to the precession of the Earth's axis, 
Thomson found that the phase of the annual cycle of 
surface air temperature was remarkably stable until roughly 
1940, at which time it changed abruptly and at an 
unprecedented rate (see Chapter 3). The оссштепсе of this 
phase shift at a time when atmospheric greenhouse gas 
concentrations and anthropogenic aerosol loadings were 
438 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
increasing rapidly is interesting information, but it does not 
prove that a causal relationship exists. 
Furthermore, subsequent analysis of Central England 
and other time-series by Emslie and Christy (1996) and 
Karl et al. (1996b) have failed to confirm the existence of a 
significant post-1940 phase shift in the annual cycle (see 
Chapter 3). It remains to be determined whether such phase 
shifts are robust features of the data and are consistent with 
the predictions of AOGCMs in experiments with time-
dependent forcing by CO2 and aerosols. 
8.5.5 Possible Inconsistencies between Modelled and 
Satellite-Derived Temperature Trends 
As discussed in Chapter 3 and by Hansen et al. (1995a), 
there has been considerable confusion in the scientific 
literature regarding the question of whether instrumental-
and model-based estimates of global temperature trends 
over the period 1979 to 1993 are in conflict with satellite-
based observations. Here, we consider only whether model-
predicted near-surface temperature trends are inconsistent 
with estimates of low to mid-tropospheric temperature 
trends derived from the satellite-based Microwave 
Sounding Unit (MSU). 
Christy and McNider (1994) cited model-predicted 
tropospheric trend estimates of 0.3-0.4°C/decade. These 
were based on: 
• 
model predictions of surface air temperature changes 
(in response to increases in COj) given in IPCC 
(1992); 
• 
model predictions of more rapid warming of the 
global troposphere than global near-surface air. 
They concluded that these values were roughly four 
times larger than the MSU-based trend of roughly 
0.09°C/decade, which was obtained after adjusting the 
M S U data for the effects of El Niño and volcanic aerosols. 
However, as noted by Hansen et al. (1995b), the model 
predictions on which this comparison is based were taken 
either from equilibrium COj doubling experiments that 
were not relevant to the problem of predicting time-
dependent change, or from time-dependent "C02-only" 
simulations with rates of change of radiative forcing that 
were larger than observed. 
More recent A O G C M experiments initialised with levels 
of atmospheric CO2 corresponding to late 19th century 
conditions, and driven by changes in both CO2 and sulphur 
emissions (Hasselmann et al, 1995; Mitchell et al, 1995a), 
show rates of near-surface temperature change for the 11- and 
15-year model periods corresponding to 1979 to 1990 and 
1979 to 1993 that range from 0.06-0.22°C/decade (J.F.B. 
Mitchell, pers. comm.). This would translate to a tropospheric 
trend of about 0.08-0.30°C/decade given the observed 
magnitude of surface versus tropospheric variability. These 
latter linear trend estimates ai^e in much closer agreement 
with the adjusted M S U data, i.e., there is no serious 
inconsistency between the most recent model predictions and 
MSU-based trend estimates (Hansen et al, 1995a). 
The key point to note here is that the M S U record is 
short (>20 years) for the purposes of detecting a slowly 
evolving anthropogenic signal. This short record limits 
comparisons of satellite-based and model-predicted data to 
decadal time-scale temperature trends. These trends are 
strongly affected by the background noise of interannual to 
decadal time-scale natural variability (see, for example, the 
lack of significance for the most recent 10-year trends in 
near-surface temperature in Figure 8.3). It is therefore 
difficult to make a meaningful interpretation of any 
differences in trends on these short time-scales. 
8.6 When Will an Anthropogenic Effect on Climate be 
Identified? 
Detection of a human-induced change in the Earth's 
climate will be an evolutionary and not a revolutionary 
process. It is the gradual accumulation of evidence that will 
implicate anthropogenic emissions as the cause of some 
part of observed climate change, not the results from a 
single study. While there is already initial evidence for the 
existence of an anthropogenic climate signal, it is likely (if 
model predictions are correct) that this signal will emerge 
more and more convincingly with time. It is probable that 
it will be discernible at the global scale first and only later 
at regional scales (Briffa et al, 1990; Kari et al, 1991a), 
and that,it will be clearer in some variables than in others. 
Convincing attribution, however, is likely to come from the 
analysis of full spatial patterns of change: again, as an 
evolutionary process. 
The gradual emergence of an anthropogenic climate 
change signal from the background noise of natural 
variability guarantees that any initial pronouncement that a 
change in the climate has been detected and attributed to a 
specific cause will be questioned by some scientists. 
Nevertheless, if the current rate of increase of 
anthropogenic emissions is maintained and if the 
sensitivity of the climate system to anthropogenic 
perturbations is within the range predicted by current 
climate theory, it should become increasingly easy to 
eliminate natural variability and other natural external 
forcings as causes for most of the observed changes. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution 
of Causes 
439 
Finally, we come to the difficult question of when the 
detection and attribution of human-induced climate change 
is likely to occur. The answer to this question must be 
subjective, particularly in the light of the large signal and 
noise uncertainties discussed in this chapter. Some 
scientists maintain that these uncertainties currently 
preclude any answer to the question posed above. Other 
scientists would and have claimed, on the basis of the 
statistical results presented in Section 8.4, that confident 
detection of a significant anthropogenic climate change has 
already occurred. 
As noted in Section 8.1, attribution involves statistical 
testing of alternative explanations for a detected observed 
change, and few would be willing to argue that completely 
unambiguous attribution of (all or part of) this change has 
already occurred, or was likely to happen in the next few 
years. However, evidence from the pattern-based studies 
reported on here suggests that an initial step has now been 
taken in the direction of attribution, since correspondences 
between observations and model predictions in response to 
combined changes in greenhouse gases and anthropogenic 
sulphate aerosols: 
• 
have now been seen both at the surface and in the 
vertical structure of the atmosphere; 
• 
have been found in terms of complex spatial patterns 
rather than changes in the global mean alone; 
• 
show an overall increase over the last 20 to 50 
years; 
• 
are significantly different from our best model-based 
estimates of the correspondence expected due to 
natural internal climate variability. 
Furthermore, although quantitative attribution studies 
have not explicitly considered solar and volcanic effects, 
our best information indicates that the observed patterns of 
vertical temperature change are not consistent with the 
responses expected for these forcings. 
The body of statistical evidence in Chapter 8, when 
examined in the context of our physical understanding of 
the climate system, now points towards a discernible 
human influence on global climate. Our ability to quantify 
the magnitude of this effect is currently limited by 
uncertainties in key factors, including the magnitude and 
patterns of longer-term natural variability and the time-
evolving patterns of forcing by (and response to) 
greenhouse gases and aerosols. 
References 
Allen, M.R., P.L. Read and L . A . Smith, 1992: Temperature 
oscillations. Nature, 359, 679. 
Allen, IVl.R. and L.A. Smith, 1994: Investigating the origins and 
significance of low-frequency modes of climate variability. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 21, 883-886. 
Barnett, T.P., 1986: Detection of changes in global tropospheric 
temperature field induced by greenhouse gases. J. Geophys. 
Res., 91, 6659-6667. 
Barnett, T.P., 1991: An attempt to detect the greenhouse-gas 
signal in a transient G C M simulation. In: Greenhouse-Gas-
Induced Climatic Change: A Critical Appraisal of Simulations 
and Observations, 
M . E . Schlesinger (ed.), Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, pp. 559-568. 
Barnett, T.P. and M.E. Schlesinger, 1987: Detecting changes in 
global climate induced by greenhouse gases. / Geophys. Res., 
92, 14772-14780. 
Barnett, T.P., M . E . Schlesinger and X . Jiang, 1991: On 
greenhouse-gas detection strategies. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-
Induced Climatic Change: A Critical Appraisal of Simulations 
and Observations, 
M . E . Schlesinger (ed.), Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, pp. 537-558. 
Barnett, T.P., B.D. Santer, P.D. Jones, R.S. Bradley and K.R. 
Briffa, 1996: Estimates of low-frequency natural variability in 
near-surface air temperature. Holocene (in press). 
Bell, T.L., 1982: Optimal weighting of data to detect climatic 
change: Application to the carbon dioxide problem. J. 
Geophys. Res., 87, 11161-11170. 
Bell, T.L., 1986: Theory of optimal weighting of data to detect 
climatic change. /. Atmos. Sci., 43, 1694-1710. 
Bloomfield, P., 1992: Trends in global temperature. 
Clim. 
Change, 21, 1-16. 
Bloomfield, P. and D. Nychka, 1992: Climate spectra and 
detecting climate change. Clim. Change, 21, 275-287. 
Bradley, R.S. and P.D. Jones, 1992: Climate Since A.D. 1500. 
Routiedge, London, 679 pp. 
Bradley, R.S. and P.D. Jones, 1993: "Little Ice Age" summer 
temperature variations: their nature and relevance to recent 
warming trends. Holocene, 3, 367-376. 
Briffa, K.R., T.S. Bartholin, D. Eckstein, P.D. Jones, W. Karién, 
F.H. Schweingruber and P. Zetterberg, 1990: A 1,400-year 
tree-ring record of summer temperatures in Scandinavia. 
Nature, 346, 434-439. 
Briffa, K.R., P.D. Jones, T.S. Bartholin, D. Eckstein, F . H . 
Schweingruber, W. Karién, P. Zetterberg, and M . Eronen, 
1992: Fennoscandian summers from A.D. 500: Temperature 
changes on short and long time-scales. Clim. Dyn., 7, 111-119. 
Briffa, K.R., P.D. Jones, F.H. Schweingruber, W. Karién and 
S.G. Shiyatov, 1996: Tree-ring variables as proxy climate 
indicators: Problems with low-frequency signals. In: Climatic 
Variations and Forcing Mechanisms of the Last 2000 years, 
P.D. Jones, R.S. Bradley and J. Jouzel (eds.). Springer Verlag, 
Beriin, pp. 9 ^ 1 . 
440 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution 
of Causes 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, J.P. Blanchet, G.J. Boer, S.J. Ghan, J.T. 
Kiehl, H. Le Treut, Z.-X. Li, X.-Z. Liang, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. 
Morcrette, D . A . Randall, M . R . Riches, E. Roeckner, U . 
Schlese, A . Slingo, K . E . Taylor, W . M . Washington, R.T. 
Wetherald and I. Yagai, 1989; ШггркШюп 
of cloud-climate 
feedback as produced by 14 atmospheric general circulation 
models. Science, 245, 513-516. 
Christy, J.R. and R.T. McNider, 1994: Satellite greenhouse 
signal. Nature, 367, 325. 
Cook, E.R., T. Bird, M . Peterson, M . Barbetti, B. Buckley, R. 
D'Arrigo, R. Francey and P. Tans, 1991; Chmatic change in 
Tasmania inferred from a 1089-year tree-ring chronology of 
Huon pine. Science, 253, 1266-1268. 
Cook, E.R., B. Buckley and R. D'Arrigo, 1996; Inter-decadal 
climate variability in the Tasmanian sector of the Southern 
Hemisphere: Evidence from tree rings over the past three 
millennia. In: Climatic Variations and Forcing Mechanisms of 
the Last 2000 years, P.D. Jones, R.S. Bradley and J. Jouzel 
(eds.). Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp.141-160. 
Crowley, T.J., 1991; Utilization of paleoclimate results to 
validate projections of a future greenhouse warming. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic 
Change: A 
Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations , M.E. Schlesinger 
(ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 35^5. 
Crowley, T.J. and G.R. North, 1991: Paleoclimatology. Oxford 
University Press, New York, 339 pp. 
Cubasch, U., K . Hasselmann, H . Hock, E. Maier-Reimer, U . 
Mikolajewicz, B . D . Santer and R. Sausen, 1992; Time-
dependent greenhouse warming computations with a global 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 8, 55-69. 
Cubasch, U., B.D. Santer, A. Hellbach, G. Hegeri, H. Hock, E. 
Maier-Reimer, U. Mikolajewicz, A. Stossel and R. Voss, 1994: 
Monte Carlo climate change forecasts with a global coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Clim. Dyn., 10, 1-19. 
Cubasch, U., G. Hegeri, A. Hellbach, H. Hock, U. Mikolajewicz, 
B.D. Santer and R. Voss, 1995: A climate change simulation 
starting at an early time of industtialization. Clim. Dyn., 11, 71-84. 
Delworth, T., S. Manabe and R.J. Stouffer, 1993: Interdecadal 
variability of the thermohaline circulation in a coupled ocean-
atmosphere model. J. Climate, 6, 1993-2011. 
Emslie, A.G. and J.R. Christy, 1996; Astronomical influences and 
long-term trends in terrestrial temperature. Geophys. Res. Lett. 
(submitted). 
Engardt, M . and H . Rodhe, 1993: A comparison between 
patterns of temperature trends and sulphate aerosol pollution. 
Geophys. Res. Lett., 20, 117-120. 
Epstein, E.S., 1982: Detecting cUmate change. J. Appl Met., 21, 
1172-1182. 
Erickson, D.J., R.J. Oglesby and S. Marshall, 1995: CUmate 
response to indirect anthropogenic sulfate forcing. Geophys. 
Res. Lett, 22, 2017-2020. 
Friis-Christensen, E. and K. Lassen. 1991: Length of the solar 
cycle; An indicator of solar activity closely associated with 
climate. Science, 254, 698-700. 
Galbraith, J.W. and C. Green, 1992; Inference about trends in 
global temperature data. Clim. Change, 22, 209-221. 
Gates, W.L., Y.J. Han, and M.E. Schlesinger, 1985: The global 
climate simulated by a coupled atmosphere-ocean general 
circulation model; preliminary results. In: Coupled Ocean-
Atmosphere Models, J.C.J. Nihoul (ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, 
pp. 131-151. 
Gates, W.L., P.R. Rowntree and Q.C. Zeng, 1990: Vahdation of 
climate models. In: Climate Change. The IPCC 
Scientific 
Assessment., J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums 
(eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U K , pp. 
93-130. 
Gates, W.L., J.F.B. Mitchell, G.J. Boer, U. Cubasch, and V.P. 
Meleshko, 1992; Climate modeUng, climate prediction and 
model 
validation. In; 
Climate 
Change 
1992, 
The. 
Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, B.A. Callander and S.K. Vamey (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 97-134. 
Ghil, M . and R. Vautard, 1991: Interdecadal oscillations and the 
warming trend in global temperature time series. Nature, 350, 
324-327. 
Hansen, I.E., W.-C. Wang and A.A. Lacis, 1978; Mount Agung 
provides a test of a global climatic perturbation. Science, 199, 
1065-1068. 
Hansen, I.E., A. Lacis, D. Rind and G. Russell, 1984: Climate 
sensitivity; Analysis of feedback mechanisms. In: CUmate 
Processes and CUmate Sensitivity, J.E. Hansen and T. Takahasi 
(eds.), Maurice Ewing Series 5, American Geophysical Union, 
pp 130-163. 
Hansen, I.E., H. Wilson, M . Sato, R. Ruedy, K.P. Shah and E. 
Hansen, 1995a: Satellite and surface temperature data at odds? 
Clim. Change, 30, 103-117. 
Hansen, I.E., M . Sato and R. Ruedy, 1995b: Long-term changes 
of the diurnal temperature cycle: Implications about 
mechanisms of global climate change. Atmos. Res., 37, 
195-209. 
Hasselmann, K., 1976: Stochastic climate models. Part I: Theory. 
Tellus, 28, 473^85. 
Hasselmann, K . , 1979; On the signal-to-noise problem in 
atmospheric response studies. In: Meteorology of Tropical 
Oceans, D . B . Shaw (ed.). Royal Meteorological Society 
London, pp. 25Ь259. 
Hasselmann, K., 1993: Optimal fingeiprints for the detection of 
time dependent climate change. J. Climate, 6, 1957-1971. 
Hasselmann, K., L. Bengtsson, U . Cubasch, G.C. Hegeri, H. 
Rodhe, E. Roeckner, H. v. Storch and R. Voss, 1995: Detection 
of anthropogenic climate change using a fingerprint method. 
Max-Planck Institut fiir Météorologie Report No. 168. 20 pp. 
Hegeri, G., H . v. Storch, K . Hasselmann, B . D . Santer, U . 
Cubasch and P.D, Jones, 1996; Detecting anthropogenic 
cUmate change with a fingerprint method. J. Climate (in press). 
Hoffert, M.I. and B.P. Flannery, 1985; Model projections of the 
time-dependent response to increasing carbon dioxide. In: 
Projecting the Climatic Effects of Increasing Carbon Dioxide, 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution 
of Causes 
441 
M.C. MacCracken and F.M. Luther (eds.), U.S. Department of 
Energy, Carbon Dioxide Research Division, Washington, DC, 
pp. 149-190. 
Hoffert, M.I. and C. Covey, 1992: Deriving global climate 
sensitivity from paleoclimate reconstructions. Nature, 360, 
573-576. 
Horton, E.B., 1995: Geographical distribution of changes in 
maximum and minimum temperature. Atmos. Res., 37, 
102-117. 
Hunter, D.E., S.E. Schwartz, R. Wagoner and C M . Benkovitz, 
1993: Seasonal, latitudinal, and secular variations in 
temperature trend: Evidence for influence of anthropogenic 
sulphate. Geophy.^. Res. Leu., 20, 2455-2458. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 1990: 
Climate Change: 
The IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds). Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report 
to the IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, J.T. Houghton, B . A . 
Callander and S.K. Vamey (eds). Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK, 198 pp. 
Jones, P.D. and K.R. Briffa, 1992: Global surface air temperature 
variations during the Twentieth century: Parti. Spatial, 
temporal and seasonal details. Holocene, 3, 77-88. 
Karl, T.R., 1994: Smudging the fingerprints. Nature, 
371, 
380-381. 
KarL T.R., R.R. Heim Jr. and R . G . Quayle, 1991a: The 
greenhouse effect in central North America: If not now, when? 
Science, 251, 1058-1061. 
Karl, T.R., G. Kukla, V . N . Razuvayev, M.J. Changery, R.G. 
Quayle, R.R. Heim Jr., D.R. Easterling and C.B. Fu, 1991b: 
Global wanning: Evidence for asymmetric diurnal temperature 
change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 18, 2253-2256. 
Karl, T.R., P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight, G. Kukla, N. Plummer, V. 
Razuvayev, K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay, R.J. Charlson and T.C. 
Peterson, 1993: Asymmetric trends of daily maximum and 
minimum temperature. Bull Am. Met. Soc, 74, 1007-1023. 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight, G. КиЫа and J. Gavin, 1995a: Evidence 
for radiative effects of anthropogenic sulphate aerosols in the 
observed climate record. In: Aerosol Forcing of Climate, R. 
Charlson and J. Heintzenberg (eds.), John Wiley and Sons, 
Chichester, pp. 363-382. 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight, D.R. Easterling and R.G. Quayle, 
1995b: Trends in U.S. climate during the Twentieth Century. 
Consequences, 1, 3-12. 
Karl, T.R., R.W. Knight, D.R. Easterling and R.G. Quayle, 
1996a: Indices of climate change for the United States. Bull 
Am. Met Soc. (in press). 
Karl, T.R., P.D. Jones and R.W. Knight, 1996b; A note on David 
J. Thomson's article; 'The Seasons, Global Temperature, and 
Precession". Science (in press). 
Karoly, D.J, 1987: Southern Hemisphere temperature trends: A 
possible greenhouse gas effect? Geophys. Res. Lett., 14, 
1139-1141. 
Karoly, D.J, 1989; Northern Hemisphere temperature trends: A 
possible greenhouse gas effect? Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 
465^68. 
Karoly, D.J., J.A. Cohen, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, A . H . 
Oort, R.J. Stouffer and R.T. Wetherald, 1994: An example of 
fingerprint detection of greenhouse climate change. Clim. Dyn., 
10, 97-105. 
Kelly, P . M . and T . M . L . Wigley, 1992: Solar cycle length, 
greenhouse forcing and global climate. Nature, 360, 328-330. 
Kheshgi, H.S. and B.S. White, 1993a: Does recent global 
warming suggest an enhanced greenhouse effect? 
Clim. 
Change, 23, 121-139. 
Kheshgi, H.S. and B.S. White, 1993b; Effect of climate 
variability on estimation of greenhouse parameters: Usefulness 
of a pre-instrumental temperature record. Quat. Sci. Rev., 12, 
475-481. 
Kim, K . - Y . and G.R. North, 1991: Surface temperature 
fluctuations in a stochastic climate model. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 
18573-18580. 
Kukla, G. and T.R. Karl, 1993; Nightrime warming and the 
greenhouse effect. Environ. Sci. and Tech., 27, 1468-1474. 
Kuo, C , C. Lindberg and D.J. Thomson, 1990; Coherence 
established between atmospheric carbon dioxide and global 
temperature. Nature, 343, 709-713. 
Lemke, P., 1977; Stochastic climate models. Part 3; Application 
to zonally averaged energy models. Tellus, 29, 385-392. 
L i u , Q. and C.J.E. Schuurmanns, 1990; The correlation of 
tropospheric and stratospheric temperatures and its effect on 
the detection of climate changes. Geophys. Res. Lett., 17, 
1085-1088. 
Madden, R.A. and V . Ramanathan, 1980; Detecting climate 
change due to increasing carbon dioxide. Science, 
209, 
763-768. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1993; Century-scale effects of 
increased atmospheric COj on the ocean-atmosphere system. 
Nature, 364,215-218. 
Manabe, S. and R.J. Stouffer, 1996; Low-frequency variability of 
surface air temperature in a 1,000-year integration of a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. /. Climate, 9, 376-393. 
Manabe, S., R. J. Stouffer, M . J. Spelman and K. Bryan, 1991; 
Transient responses of a coupled ocean-atmosphere model to 
gradual changes of atmospheric C O , . Part I: Annual mean 
response. J. Climate, 4, 785-818. 
Meehl, G.A., W . M . Washington and T.R. Kari, 1993: Low-
frequency variability and COj transient climate change. Clim. 
Dyn.,S, 117-133. 
Mehta, V . M . and T. Delworth, 1995; Decadal variability of the 
tropical Atlantic Ocean surface temperature in shipboard 
measurements and in a global ocean-atmosphere model. /. 
Climate, 8, 172-190. 
Michaels, P.J., P.C. Knappenberger and D.A. Gay, 1994: General 
circulation models; Testing the forecast. Journal of the 
Franklin Institute, 331A, 123-133. 
Mikolajewicz, U . and E. Maier-Reimer, 1990; Internal secular 
442 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution 
of Causes 
variability in an ocean general circulation model. Clim. Dyn., 4, 
145-156. 
IVIikolajewicz, U. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994: Mixed boundary 
conditions in ocean general circulation models and their 
influence on the stability of the model's conveyor belt. /. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 22633-22644. 
Mikolajewicz. U . , E. Maier-Reimer and T.P. Barnett, 1993: 
Acoustic detection of greenhouse-induced climate changes in 
the presence of slow fluctuations of the thermohaline 
circulation. J. Phys. Oceanogr., 23, 1099-1109. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., C.A. Senior and W.J. Ingram, 1989: C O 2 and 
climate: a missing feedback? Nature, 341, 132-134. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., Т.е. Johns, J.M. Gregory and S.F.B. Tett, 
1995a: Transient climate response to increasing sulphate 
aerosols and greenhouse gases. Nature. 376, 501-504. 
Mitchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram and C.A. Senior, 
1995b: On surface temperature, greenhouse gases and aerosols: 
Models and observations. J. Climate, 8, 2364-2386. 
Murphy, J.M. and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1995: Transient response of 
the Hadley Centre coupled ocean-atmosphere model to 
increasing carbon dioxide. Part II. Spatial and temporal 
structure of response. J. Climate, 8, 57-80. 
Nakamura, 
M . , P . H . Stone, and I. Marotzke, 1994: 
Destabilization of the thermohaline circulation by atmospheric 
eddy transports. J. Climate, 1, 1870-1882. 
Neelin, J.D. and H . A . Dijkstra, 1995: Ocean-atmosphere 
interaction and the tropical climatology. Part I: The dangers of 
flux correction. J. Climate, 8, 1325-1342. 
North, G.R. and K.-Y. Kim, 1995: Detection of forced climate 
signals. Part II: Simulation results. J. Climate, 8, 409^17. 
North, G.R., K . - Y . Kim, S.R Shen and J.W. Hardin, 1995: 
Detection of forced climate signals. Part I: Filter theory. J. 
Climate, 8, 401-4-08. 
Oort, A.H. and H. Liu, 1993: Upper-air temperature trends over 
the globe, 1958-1989. J. Climate, 6, 292-307. 
Penner, J.E., R.E. Dickinson, and C.A. O'Neill, 1992: Effects of 
aerosol from biomass burning on the global radiation budget. 
Science, 256, 1432-1434. 
Penner, I.E., R.J. Charison, J.M. Hales, N.S. Laulainen, R. 
Leifer, T. Novakov, J. Ogren, L.E. Radke, S.E. Schwartz and L. 
Travis, 1994: Quantifying and minimizing uncertainty of 
climate forcing by anthropogenic aerosols. Bull. Am. Met. Soc, 
75, 375-400. 
Pierce, D.W., T.P. Barnett and U. Mikolajewicz, 1995: On the 
competing roles of heat and fresh water flux in forcing 
thermohaline oscillations. J. Phys. Oceanog., 
25(9), 
2046-2064. 
Power, S.B. and R. Kleeman, 1993: Multiple equilibria in a 
global ocean general circulation model. /. Phys. Oceanog., 23, 
1670-1681. 
Power, S.B. and R. Kleeman, 1994: Surface heat 
flux 
parameterization and the response of ocean general circulation 
, models to high-latitude freshening. Tellus, 46A, 86-95. 
Ramaswamy, V., M.D. Schwiuzkopf and W.J. Randel, 1996: An 
unanticipated climate change in the global lower stratosphere 
due to ozone depletion. Nature (submitted). 
Roeckner, E., T. Siebert and J. Feichter, 1995: Climatic response 
to anthropogenic sulphate forcing simulated with a general 
circulation model. In: Aerosol Forcing of Climate, R. Charlson 
and J. Heintzenberg (eds.), John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 
pp. 349-362. 
Santer, B.D.. T.M.L Wigley, P.D. Jones and M.E. Schlesinger, 
1991: Multivariate methods for the detection of greenhouse-
gas-induced climate change. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic Change: A Critical Appraisal of Simulations and 
Observations, M.E. Schlesinger (ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 
511-536. 
Santer, B.D., T.M.L. Wigley and P.D. Jones, 1993: Correlation 
methods in fingerprint detection studies. Clim. Dyn., 8, 
265-276. 
Santer, B.D., W. Bruggemann, U. Cubasch, K. Hasselmann, H. 
Hock, E. Maier-Reimer and U . Mikolajewicz, 1994: Signal-to-
noise analysis of time-dependent greenhouse warming 
experiments. Part 1: Pattern analysis. Clim. Dyn., 9, 267-285. 
Santer, B.D., K.E. Taylor, T.M.L. Wigley, J.E. Penner, P.D. 
Jones and U . Cubasch, 1995a: Towards the detection and 
attribution of an anthropogenic effect on climate. Clim. Dyn., 
12, 79-100. 
Santer, B.D., K . E , Taylor, T , M , L , Wigley, P,D, Jones, D,J, 
Karoly, J.F.B. Mitchell, A . H . Oort, J.E. Penner, V . 
Ramaswamy, M.D. Schwarzkopf, R.J. Stouffer and S. Tett, 
1995b: A search for human influences on the thermal stracture 
of the atmosphere, PCMDI Report no. 27, Lawrence Livermore 
National Laboratory, Livermore, 26pp. 
Santer, B.D,, U, Mikolajewicz, W. Bruggemann, U. Cubasch, K. 
Hasselmann, H. Hock, E. Maier-Reimer and T.M.L. Wigley, 
1995c: Ocean variability and its influence on the detectability 
of greenhouse warming signals. J. Geophys. 
Res., 
100, 
10693-10725. 
Sausen, R,, K, Barthel and K, Hasselmann, 1988: Coupled ocean-
atmosphere models with flux corrections. Clim. Dyn., 2, 
154-163. 
Schlesinger, M.E. and N . Ramankutty, 1992: Implications for 
global warming of intercycle solar irradiance variations. 
Nature, 360, 330-333. 
Schlesinger. M.E. and N . Ramankutty. 1994: An oscillation in 
the global climate system of period 65-70 years. Nature, 367, 
723-726. 
Schlesinger, M.E., K. Jiang and R.J. Chailson, 1992: Implication 
of anthropogenic atmospheric sulphate for the sensitivity of the 
climate system. In: Climate Change and Energy Policy, L. Rosen 
and R. Classer (eds.), American Institute of Physics, pp. 75-108. 
Schneider, S.H., 1994: Detecting climatic change signals: Are 
there any "fingerprints"? Science, 263, 341-347. 
Schonwiese, C.-D., R. Ulrich, F. Beck and J. Rapp, 1994: Solar 
signals in global climatic change. Clim. Change, 21, 259-281. 
Senior, C.A., 1995: The dependence of climate sensitivity on the 
horizontal resolution of a G C M . J. Climate, 8, 2860-2880. 
Detection of Climate Change and Attribution 
of Causes 
443 
Stenchikov, G.L. and A. Robock, 1995: Diurnal asymmetry of 
climatic response to increased COj and aerosols: Forcings and 
feedbacks. / Geophys. Res., 100, 26211-26227. 
Stocker, T.F. and L.A. Mysak, 1992: Climatic fluctuations on the 
century time scale: A review of high-resolution proxy data and 
possible mechanisms. Clim. Change, 20, 227-250. 
Stouffer, R.J., S. Manabe and K. Bryan, 1989: Interhemispheric 
asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of 
atmospheric CO^. Nature, 342, 660-662. 
Stouffer, R.J., S. Manabe and K. Ya. Vinnikov, 1994: Model 
assessment of the role of natural variability in recent global 
warming. Nature, 367, 634-636. 
Taylor, K.E. and J.E. Penner, 1994: Anthropogenic aerosols and 
climate change. Nature, 369, 734-736. 
Tegen, I. and I. Fung, 1995: Contribution to the atmospheric 
mineral aerosol load from land surface modification. /. 
Geophys. Res., 100, 18707-18726. 
Thomson, D.J., 1995: The seasons, global temperature, and 
precession. Science, 268, 59-68. 
Toi, R.S.J., 1994: Greenhouse statistics - time series analysis: 
Part II. Theor Appl. Climatol. 49, 91-102. 
Toi, R.S.J, and A.F. de Vos, 1993: Greenhouse statistics - time 
series analysis. Theor Appl. Climatol. 48, 63-74. 
Wang, W . - C , M.P. Dudek, X.-Z. Liang and J.T. Kiehl, 1991: 
Inadequacy of effective CO^ as a proxy in simulating the 
greenhouse effect of other radiatively active gases. Nature, 
350, 573-577. 
Washington, W . M . and G . A . Meehl, 1989: Seasonal cycle 
experiments on the climate sensitivity due to a doubUng of COj 
with an atmospheric general circulation model coupled to a simple 
mixed layer ocean model. /. Geophys. Res., 89, 9475-9503. 
Wetherald, R.T, and S. Manabe, 1975: The effects of changing 
the solar constant on the climate of a general circulation model. 
/. Atmos. Sci., 32, 2044-2059. 
Wigley, T.M.L., 1989: Possible climate change due to SO^-
derived cloud condensation nuclei. Nature, 339, 365-367. 
Wigley, T.M.L and P.D. Jones, 1981: Detecting COj-induced 
climatic change. Nature, 292, 205-208. 
Wigley, T . M . L . and T.P. Barnett, 1990: Detection of the 
greenhouse effect in the observations. In: Climate Change. The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and 
J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, pp. 239-256. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1990: Natural variabiUty of the 
climate system and detection of the greenhouse effect. Nature, 
344, 324-327. 
Wigley, T.M.L and S.C.B. Raper, 1991a: Internally-generated 
natural variability of global-mean temperatures. In: 
Greenhouse-Gas-Induced 
Climatic 
Change: A 
Critical 
Appraisal of Simulations and Observations, M.E. Schlesinger 
(ed.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 471-482. 
Wigley, T . M . L . and S.C.B. Raper, 1991b: Detection of the 
enhanced greenhouse effect on clim.ate. Proceedings of the 
Second World Climate Conference, World Meteorological 
Organization, Geneva. 
Wigley, T.M.L. and S.C.B. Raper, 1992: Implications for climate 
and sea-level of revised IPCC emissions scenarios. Nature, 
357, 293-300. 
Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones, P.M. Kelly and S.C.B. Raper, 1989: 
Statistical significance of global warming. Proceedings 13th 
Annual Climate Diagnostics Workshop, pp. A1-A8. 
Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones, P.M. Kelly, and M . Hulme, 1992: 
Recent global temperature changes: Ozone and aerosol 
influences. Proceedings 
16th Annual Climate 
Diagnostics 
Workshop, pp. 194-202. 
Woodward, W.A. and H.L. Gray, 1993: Global warming and the 
problem of testing for trend in time series data. / Climate, 6, 
953-962. 
Woodward, W.A. and H.L. Gray, 1995: Selecting a model for 
detecting the presence of a trend. /. Climate, 8, 1929-1937. 
9 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses to Environmental 
Change and Feedbacks to Climate 
J.M. MELILLO, I.e. PRENTICE, G.D. FARQUHAR, E.-D. SCHULZE, G.E. SALA 
Contributors: 
RJ. Bartlein, F.A. Bazzaz, R.H.W. Bradshaw, J.S. Clark, M. Claussen, 
G.J. Collatz, M.B. Coughenhour, CB. Field, J.A. Foley, A.D. Friend, 
B. Huntley, CH. KÔrner, W. Kurz, J. Lloyd, R. Leemans, RH. Martin, 
A.D. McGuire, KG. McNaughton, R.R Neilson, W.C Oechel, 
J.T. Overpeck, W.A. Parton, L.F Pitelka, D. Rind, S.W. Running, 
D.S. Schimel, T.M. Smith, T. Webb III, С Whitlock 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
449 
9.1 Introduction 
451 
9.2 Land-atmosphere COj Exchange and the Global 
Carbon Balance: the Present 
451 
9.2.1 Changes in the Area of Agricultural Land 
451 
9.2.2 Changes in the Age Structure of Forests 
451 
9.2.3 Changes in Ecosystem Metabolism 
452 
9.2.3.1 Climate change 
452 
9.2.3.2 Carbon dioxide fertilisation 
454 
9.2.3.3 Air pollution 
455 
9.2.3.4 Nitrogen fertilisation associated 
with acid rain 
455 
9.2.4 Estimates of Current TeiTestrial Carbon Sinks 
from Atmospheric Measurements 
456 
9.3 Possible Effects of Climate Change and 
Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Increases on 
Ecosystem Structure 
458 
9.3.1 Environmental Controls on Vegetation Structure: 
Ecophysiological Constraints on Plant Types 
458 
9.3.2 Environmental Controls on Vegetation Structure: 
Resource Availability 
458 
9.3.3 Environmental Mediation of the Competitive 
Balance 
459 
9.3.4 Global Biome Model Projections 
459 
9.3.5 Regional Biome Model Projections 
460 
9.3.6 Changes in Biome Distribution Since the 
Last Glacial Maximum 
461 
9.3.7 Dynamics of the Vegetational Response to 
Climate Change 
461 
9.4 Effects of Climate Change and Carbon Dioxide 
Increases on Regional and Global Carbon Storage: 
Transient and Equilibrium Analyses 
464 
9.4.1 Possible Transient Effects of Chmate Change 
on Global Carbon Storage 
464 
9.4.2 Equilibrium Analyses: Regional Ecosystem 
Model Projections 
464 
9.4.3 Equilibrium Analyses: Global Ecosystem 
Model Projections 
464 
9.4.4 The Palaeo-record and Imphcations for a 
Future Climate Equilibrium: Increasing 
Terrestrial Carbon Storage with Increases 
in Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide and Global 
Mean Temperature after the Last Glacial 
Maximum 
466 
9.5 Methane: Effects of Climate Change and an 
Increase in Atmospheric COj on Methane Flux 
and Carbon Balance in Wetlands 
468 
9.6 Nitrous Oxide 
469 
9.7 Global-Scale Biogeophysical Feedbacks: 
Changes in Ecosystem Structure and Function 
Affect Climate 
469 
9.7.1 Effects of Vegetation Structure on Land-surface 
Characteristics 
469 
9.7.2 Effects of Land-surface Changes on Climate 
469 
References 
471 
SUMMARY 
Terrestrial ecosystems and climate are closely coupled. 
Changes in climate and the carbon dioxide concentration of 
the atmosphere cause changes in the structure and function 
of terrestrial ecosystems. In turn, changes in the structure 
and function of terrestrial ecosystems influence the 
climatic system through biogeochemical processes that 
involve the land-atmosphere exchanges of radiatively 
active gases such as carbon dioxide (CO^), methane (CH^) 
and nitrous oxide (N,0), and changes in biogeophysical 
processes that involve water and energy exchanges. The 
combined consequences of these effects and feedbacks 
must be taken into account when evaluating the future state 
of the atmosphere or of tenestrial ecosystems. 
The global carbon budget and net CO2 exchange between 
the land and the atmosphere 
Analyses based on atmospheric C O j and ' ^ C O j 
measurements suggest that the terrestrial biosphere is 
currently a net carbon sink. Such analyses quantify the 
strength of this sink as 0.5-1.9 GtC/yr during the 1980s, 
and as high as 2.6 GtC/yr during 1992-3; they also suggest 
that the tropics have been a net carbon source, implying 
even greater rates of carbon storage in mid- to high 
latitudes. Direct observations to establish the processes 
responsible for this carbon storage are, however, lacking. 
Possiblities include post-harvest regrowth of mid- and high 
latitude forests (0.5-0.9 GtC/yr according to IPCC WGII 
(1995), Chapter 24), enhanced vegetation growth due to 
physiological effects of increasing COj (0.5-2.0 GtC/yr) 
and nitrogen deposition (0.5-1.0 GtC/yr) (figures from 
model calculations), and, probably, a substantial range 
(0-2.0 GtC/yr) of interannual variation due to climatic 
anomalies. These processes are not additive: for example, 
the rate of carbon sequestration in mid-latitude forests may 
include effects of all of the other processes. 
The future role of the terrestrial biosphere in controlling 
atmospheric C O j concentrations is difficult to predict 
because we do not know which of these processes will 
dominate. As long as COj increases, the CO2 fertilisation 
effect is expected to play a role in enhancing terrestrial 
carbon storage. However, this role will disappear if 
atmospheric COj is stabilised; also, plant growth may not 
continue to increase if the atmosphere's CO2 concentration 
rises above some level, perhaps around 1000 ppmv, 
because the COj fertilisation response is then saturated. 
Nitrogen fertilisation may continue to promote carbon 
storage in the forests of the Northern Hemisphere, but this 
effect would cease if the cumulative nitrogen inputs reach 
levels, yet to be defined, beyond which the impacts on 
plant growth become deleterious. Deforestation, which is 
already causing a net release of carbon from tropical lands 
to the atmosphere of 1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr, may increase to 
meet the food needs of an expanding human population, 
and extensive deforestation could adversely affect the 
biosphere's continued capacity to act as a carbon sink. 
Further uncertainties arise because changes in climate 
and atmospheric CO2 over the next decades to a century 
are likely to produce changes in the structure of natural and 
managed ecosystems. Structural changes include changes 
in the local abundance of species and genetic sub-groups 
(genotypes), and in the global geographic distributions of 
assemblages of species (biomes). There will be transient 
effects, varying according to the rate of climate change. 
With slow change, shifts in competitive balance among 
species might occur subtly with minor effects on terrestrial 
carbon storage. With rapid change, direct impacts on the 
growth and survival of particular types of plants could 
cause die back and carbon loss before better adapted types 
become established. This possible asymmetry of terrestrial 
carbon loss and accumulation under rapid climate change 
has led to the concern that climate-induced transient 
vegetation changes could release C O , into the atmosphere, 
counteracting the biosphere's capacity to take up CO2. The 
magnitude of this feedback is highly uncertain: it could be 
near zero or, with low probability, as much as 200 GtC 
over the next one to two centuries. The more rapid the 
climate change, the greater the probability of a large 
transient carbon release. The probability also depends on 
the extent, intensity and impact of mid-continental drought, 
which is a major discrepancy both among general 
450 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
circulation modelsi (GCMs) and among ecosystem models. 
More reliable projections of drought and its impacts on 
ecosystems will require the incorporation of ecosystem 
dynamics in global carbon cycle models and the coupling 
of ecosystem models with GCMs. 
Methane (or CO2) release from wetlands 
Methane is produced in flooded organic soils as a result of 
the metabolic activities of micro-organisms in the absence 
of oxygen. Methane emissions from natural weflands 
contribute about 20% to the global emissions of this gas to 
the atmosphere. Methane flux from weflands could either 
increase due to rising temperatures and COj, or decrease 
due to drying of the soils. If high latitude weflands dry out, 
however, there will be a release of stored carbon as COj. 
The rate of CO2 release with drying is uncertain, but 
potentially large since as much as 450 GtC may be stored 
in high latitude wetiands. 
Nitrous oxide release from soils 
The global nitrous oxide budget is dominated by microbial 
processes in soils, especially those in the moist tropics. The 
major N20-producing process is denitrification. 
Denitrification is promoted by high nitrate supply and low 
soil oxygen concentration. Warmer soils promote more 
rapid nitrogen cycling and often more nitrate, while wetter 
soils lead to low soil oxygen levels. Where soils become 
warmer and wetter, the production of N2O will increase, 
but the global magnitude of this increase has not been 
estimated. 
Effects of land-surface changes on climate 
Vegetation mediates the exchange of water and energy 
between the land surface and the atmosphere, and thereby 
affects climate. As biomes shift, the climate will be 
affected. For example, high latitude warming is expected to 
cause forests to spread into tundra. This change would be 
expected to increase the warming in northern mid- to high 
latitudes by more than 50% over 50-150 years because of 
the lower albedo of forests during the snow season. Such 
feedbacks will, however, be modified by land-use changes 
such as deforestation. 
As atmospheric COj increases, stomatal conductance 
declines, so that the effectiveness of water conservation by 
plants is increased and the effects of drought on plant 
growth ameliorated. But declining stomatal conductance 
will also have feedback effects on climate. It has been 
estimated that a global halving of stomatal conductance, 
with no change in leaf area, would lead to an additional 
surface air warming of about 0.5°C averaged over the land. 
1 Throughout this chapter a G C M refers to an atmospheric general 
circulation model coupled to a mixed-layer ocean model. 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
451 
9.1 Introduction 
Terrestrial ecosystems can influence the climate system 
through biogeochemical and biogeophysical processes. 
Key biogeochemical effects and feedbacks of ecosystems 
on climate involve the land-atmosphere exchange of 
radiatively active gases, such as COj, CH^ and NjO. These 
gases exert a major control on the climate system. Their 
atmospheric content can be increased or decreased by 
changes in the structure and function of terrestrial 
ecosystems as these systems respond to environmental 
changes including changes in climate. Structural and 
functional changes in land ecosystems can also cause 
biogeophysical effects and feedbacks by altering the 
exchange of water and energy, leading to changes in 
surface temperatures, atmospheric circulation and 
precipitation patterns. 
In this chapter we will consider major feedbacks 
between teirestrial ecosystems and the climatic system for 
three time intervals: (1) the present; (2) a future period of 
"climate transition" that is likely to range from decades to 
centuries; and (3) a hypothesised "new equilibrium 
condition" that is probably centuries into the future. We 
deal with feedbacks in the global carbon, methane and 
nitrous oxide budgets. We also discuss how changes in 
ecosystem structure and function affect climate through 
biogeophysical feedbacks. 
The range of topics covered in this chapter is more 
restricted than the range covered in the first IPCC 
Scientific Assessment (Melillo et al., 1990). This is 
because an extensive assessment of terrestrial impacts is 
given in IPCC w o n (1995). 
9.2 Land-atmosphere COj Exchange and the Global 
Carbon Balance: the Present 
Land ecosystems of the Earth contain about 2,200 GtC; an 
estimated 600 GtC in vegetation and 1600 GtC in soils. 
These land carbon stocks are changing now and are likely 
to continue to change in the future in response to changes 
in any or all of the following factors; area of agricultural 
land, age structure of forests, climate, and chemistry of the 
atmosphere and precipitation. 
9.2.1 Changes in the Area of Agricultural Land 
Agricultural land occupies almost one fifth of the Earth's 
terrestrial surface (Olson, 1983). A substantial portion of 
this land was once forested and so contained relatively 
large carbon stocks in both trees and soils. The conversion 
of forests to agricultural lands releases carbon, mostiy from 
trees, to the atmosphere through burning and decay. 
Conversely, the regrowth of forests on abandoned lands 
withdraws carbon from the atmosphere and stores it again 
in trees and soil. The net flux of carbon from the land to the 
atmosphere primarily associated with agricultural 
expansion for 1980 has been estimated at between 0.6 and 
2.5 GtC/yr (Houghton et ai, 1987; Hall and UhUg, 1991; 
Houghton, 1991; Houghton, 1995). IPCC (1994) indicates 
that the net emission from changes in tropical land-use was 
1.6 ± 1.0 GtC/yr for the period 1980 through 1989 
(Schimel et al, 1995). Houghton (1995) estimated that in 
1990 the net flux to the atmosphere, essentially all from the 
tropics, was 1.7 GtC/yr with an uncertainty of ±30%. 
9.2.2 Changes in the Age Structure of Forests 
Young and middle-aged forests accumulate carbon, while 
old-growth forests accumulate littie if any carbon. Forests 
of the Northern Hemisphere's mid-latitudes that were 
harvested in the early and middle parts of the 20th century 
are still regrowing and accumulating carbon (e.g., Kauppi et 
al, 1992; Wofsy et al., 1993). Estimates of rates of carbon 
accumulation related to forest regrowth in these regions 
range between 0.7 and 0.8 GtC/yr for the 1980s (Melillo et 
al., 1988; Sedjo, 1992; Dixon et al, 1994). Melillo et al. 
(1988) have argued that the fate of the cut wood must also 
be taken into account when evaluating the net effect of 
forest harvest and regrowth in the global carbon budget; that 
is, the rate at which the carbon in the cut wood is returned 
to the atmosphere as a result of burning and decay must be 
considered. When Melillo et al. did this, they concluded 
that the net effect of forest harvest and regrowth for the 
middle and high latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere on 
ten-estrial net carbon storage was approximately zero in the 
1980s. It must be recognised that there are considerable 
uncertainties associated with estimating the fate of cut 
wood, including wood left at the harvest sites, fire wood, 
and wood products such as paper and lumber (Melillo et ai, 
1988; Harmon et al., 1990). Because of these uncertainties, 
IPCC (1994) estimated that forest harvest and regrowth 
resulted in an accumulation on land of 0.5 ± 0.5 GtC/yr 
during the 1980s (Schimel et ai, 1995). 
Changes in the frequency of fires, insect outbreaks and 
other disturbances can also alter the age structure of forests 
and affect their capacity to store carbon. Disturbance 
regimes are affected by climatic conditions such as 
warming and drought. Kurz and Apps (1995) have reported 
that since 1970, the boreal forest regions of Canada have 
experienced increased rates of disturbance, especially 
spruce budworm outbreaks and fire. As a consequence, 
these forests have switched from being a sink for 
452 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
atmospheric CO, (0.15 GtC/yr) to being a carbon source to 
the atmosphere (0.05 GtC/yr), albeit a small one. Kurz et 
al. (1995) consider warming to be one of several factors 
possibly responsible for the recent increase in fire 
frequency in Canada. While climate-related increases in 
disturbance frequencies may be occurring in other regions 
(Woodwell, 1995), we do not have a good global 
accounting of them or of their consequences for terrestrial 
carbon storage. 
9.2.3 Changes in Ecosystem Metabolism 
Each year, about 5% of the land's total carbon stock is 
exchanged with the atmosphere as a result of plant and soil 
metabolic 
activities. 
Through 
the 
process 
of 
photosynthesis, land plants take up on the order of 120 
GtC/yr in the form of C O , from the atmosphere. This 
carbon uptake is approximately balanced by plant and soil 
respiration, which release carbon as C O j to the 
atmosphere. 
A change 
in the balance 
between 
photosynthesis and respiration will change the carbon stock 
on land and also has the potential to alter the COj content 
of the atmosphere. 
The relationships among the various metabolic processes 
in terrestrial ecosystems can be defined by three equations: 
NEP=GPP-R^~R^ 
(9.1) 
NPP = GPP - R^ 
(9.2) 
NËP 
= NPP - Ry^ 
(9.3) 
where, at an annual time step: 
'^NEP 
is net ecosystem production, the yearly rate of 
change in carbon storage in an ecosystem. It can be 
either positive or negative. A positive NEP indicates 
that the ecosystem has accumulated carbon during the 
year, while a negative NEP indicates that it has lost 
carbon during the year. 
Y.GPP is gross primary production, the amount of 
carbon fixed through the process of photosynthesis by 
the ecosystem's green plants in a year. 
1.R^ is autotrophic respiration, the amount of carbon 
released to the atmosphere as CO2 by the ecosystem's 
green plants through respiration in a year. 
is heterotrophic respiration, the amount of carbon 
released to the atmosphere as CO2 by the ecosystem's 
animals and micro-organisms through respiration in a 
year. 
Y.NPP is net primary production, the difference between 
gross primary production (GPP) and plant respiration 
(/?!,) in a year. 
As we face the prospect of climate change, an important 
question to ask ourselves is: how will the relationship 
between NPP and R^ change as the Earth warms in 
response to the accumulation of carbon dioxide and other 
heat-trapping gases in the atmosphere? An answer to this 
question is complicated by the fact that both positive and 
negative metabolic feedbacks may be simultaneously 
involved. 
The major positive metabolic feedback is associated 
with warming. The suggestion is that an increase in 
temperature will increase rates of both plant and microbial 
respiration and speed the release of carbon into the 
atmosphere from plants and soils (Woodwell, 1983, 1989, 
1995). Negative feedbacks have been proposed that are 
associated with an increase in atmospheric CO2 and with 
warming. The increase in atmospheric CO2 may cause a 
stimulation in rates of photosynthesis and an increase in 
carbon storage (e.g., Oechel and Strain, 1985). In nutrient-
limited forests, warming may increase terrestrial carbon 
storage by relieving plant nutrient limitations (McGuire et 
al., 1992; Shaver eí a/., 1992). 
In addition to the possibility of simultaneous feedbacks 
of opposite sign, there are other aspects of global change 
that may affect terrestrial ecosystem metabolism and carbon 
storage. Some of the major effects are associated with the 
burning of fossil fuels, which causes changes in the 
chemisfry of the atmosphere and precipitation. Fossil fuel 
burning can lead to the production of air pollutants such as 
sulphur dioxide and ozone that are toxic to plants. These air 
pollutants can decrease NPP and carbon storage (Allen and 
Amthor, 1995). The burning of fossil fuels can also lead to 
increases in nitrogen in precipitation. Up to some 
cumulative level, increased nitrogen inputs to nitrogen-
limited ecosystems, such as many temperate and boreal 
forests of the nohhern hemisphere, can cause increases in 
NPP and carbon storage. Nitrogen inputs beyond the 
threshold level can lead to decreases in NPP and carbon 
storage (Aber et al, 1989; Schulze et ai. 1989). 
9.2.3.1 CUmate change 
Climate changes may affect NPP in a variety of ways. 
Elevated temperature may increase NPP by enhancing 
photosynthesis (Larcher, 1983) or through increased 
nutrient availability if decomposition and nutrient 
mineralisation are enhanced (Bonan and Van Cleve, 1992; 
McGuire et al., 1992; Melillo et al, 1993, 1995a). It may 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
453 
The Link Between Carbon Storage and Nitrogen 
Distribution in Terrestrial Ecosystems 
Changes in the distribution of nitrogen between plants 
and soil can change the amount of carbon stored in an 
ecosystem. Plant and detrital tissues in terrestrial 
ecosystems vary widely in their stoichiometric ratios of 
С and N (Melillo and Gosz, 1983; Schindler and 
Bayley, 1993; Gifford, 1994; Kinzig and Socolow, 
1994; SchuIze et ai, 1994). If warming of the Earth 
accelerates mineralisation of N from soil organic 
matter, where the C;N ratio usually ranges from 10 to 
25, and if the N is taken up by plants and used to 
produce more woody biomass with a C:N ratio between 
40 and 400, then the ecosystem would experience a net 
increase in carbon storage (Gifford, 1994; Peterjohn et 
ai. 1994; MeüUo, 1995; Melillo et ai, 1995a). On the 
other hand, if the processes of microbial mineralisation 
of soil organic matter and plant uptake of mineral N are 
decoupled in space or time, then N might be lost from 
the ecosystem via leaching or denitrification, resulting 
in a net loss of both С and N from that ecosystem. 
decrease NPP by decreasing soil moisture which may 
reduce photosynthesis through decreased stomatal 
conductance (Hsaio, 1973; Gifford, 1994) or decreased 
decomposition and mineralisarion (McGuire et ai, 1992, 
1993; Pastor and Post, 1988; Parton et al, 1995). Elevated 
temperature may also increase plant respiration and so 
reduce NPP (McGuire et al, 1992, 1993; Running and 
Nemani. 1991), although this effect may have been 
overestimated (Gifford, 1993). The effects of precipitation 
and cloudiness on NPP can also be positive or negative in 
different situations. In dry regions, lower precipitation or 
lower cloudiness may decrease NPP by lowering soil 
moisture. In moist regions, increased cloudiness may 
decrease NPP 
by reducing the 
availability of 
photosynthetically active radiation (PAR). Climate changes 
may further influence NPP by affecting leaf phenology in 
deciduous vegetation (Long and Hutchin, 1991). 
Climate affects carbon storage in terrestrial ecosystems 
because temperature, moisture, and radiation influence 
both carbon gain through photosynthesis and carbon loss 
through respiration. Soil respiration is generally 
accelerated by higher temperatures, producing an increase 
in the release of C O j from terrestrial ecosystems 
(Houghton and Woodwell, 1989; Melillo et al, 1990; 
Shaver et al, 1992; Townsend et al, 1992; Oechel et al, 
1993; Peterjohn et al, 1993, 1994; Lloyd and Taylor, 
1994; Schimel et al, 
1994; Kirschbaum, 1995). It is 
thought that in many ecosystems the increase of soil 
respiration with temperature is steeper than any increase of 
NPP with temperature, so that the net effect of warming is 
to reduce carbon storage. Lloyd and Taylor (1994), 
however, caution that valid conclusions regarding the 
effects of possible changes in temperatures on soil carbon 
pools cannot yet be made because we lack a detailed 
knowledge of the temperature sensidvity of carbon input 
into the soil via NPP. 
Oechel et al. (1993) report that the recent general pattern 
of warming of the north slope of Alaska and the Canadian 
Arcflc may have led to a reducrion of carbon storage in 
tundra ecosystems of the region. At a set of sites in the 
tundra of the north slope of Alaska, they measured whole 
ecosystem COj flux over five summers between 1983 and 
1990, and found a net flux of carbon from the land to the 
atmosphere. Extrapolating their results from the Alaskan 
tundra to the circumpolar Arctic, Oechel et al. (1993) 
estimate that regional warming could have caused a net 
flux from the land to the atmosphere of about 0.2 GtC/yr 
during the 1980s. 
Wanning may not always lead to a reduction of carbon 
storage in terrestrial ecosystems. It has also been suggested 
that in nutrient-limited forests, particularly in cold 
climates, warming may increase carbon storage through a 
two-step mechanism (McGuire et al, 1992; Shaver et al, 
1992; Melillo et al, 1993; see Box on The Link Between 
Carbon Storage and Nitrogen Distribution). First, warming 
may increase the decay rate of low carbon-to-nutrient ratio 
soil organic matter which may release nutrients to soil 
solution and some CO^ to the atmosphere (Peterjohn et al, 
1994; Melillo et al, 
1995a). Second, there may be 
increased nutrient uptake by trees which store nutrients in 
woody tissues which have a high carbon-to-nutrient ratio. 
By differentially affecting NPP and R^, climate 
variations in temperature, precipitation and cloudiness on 
the annual to decadal time-scale may have affected 
terrestrial carbon storage. Dai and Fung (1993) and 
Keeling et al (1995) have suggested that these variations 
could have resulted in a substantial terrestrial carbon sink 
in recent years. Ciais et al (1995a) suggested that cooling 
arising from the effects of Mt. Pinatubo's eruption in June, 
1991, may have increased terrestrial carbon storage and 
contributed to the observed reduction in atmospheric 
growth rate during the 1991 to 1992 period. The magnitude 
of the effect of these climatic variations on global 
terrestrial carbon storage is highly uncertain, but may be 
between 0 and 2.0 GtC/yr. Terrestrial carbon storage 
454 
Terrestrial Biotic 
Responses 
caused by climate anomalies may be spatially complex due 
to the potential for a spatial mosaic structure of the 
anomalies. In the near term, some regions may experience 
increases in carbon storage and others decreases. 
9.2.3.2 Carbon dioxide 
fertilisation 
Results of laboratory and field studies 
A short-term increase in CO2 concentration causes an 
increase in photosynthesis at the level of individual leaves 
(e.g., Idso and Kimball, 1993). Leaves may acclimate to 
increased COj such that long-term increases in COj result 
in smaller increases in leaf-level photosynthesis (Wong, 
1979; Tissue and Oechel, 1987; Fetcher et al, 1988; Sage 
et ai, 1989); but this does not always occur (e.g., Masle et 
al, 1993; Gunderson and Wullschleger, 1994; Luo et al, 
1994; Sage, 1994). At the level of the whole plant, 
feedbacks from non-leaf organs can influence leaf 
photosynthetic responses to C O 2 . If photosynthesis 
increases to a greater extent than the rate at which carbon 
assimilated during photosynthesis can be used in additional 
growth, photosynthesis can be slowed by negative 
metabolic feedbacks in plants (Arp, 1991; Bowes, 1991; 
Luo et al., 1994; Sage, 1994). On the other hand, an 
increased carbohydrate supply which is allocated below 
ground may help to alleviate nutrient limitations on 
photosynthesis by enhancing biological nitrogen fixation 
and/or increasing mychorrizal activity leading to greater 
uptake of phosphorus (Norby, 1987; O'Neill et al., 1987; 
Arnone and Gordon, 1990; Lewis et al., 1994; O'Neill, 
1994). 
Studies of both crop and non-crop plants grown in 
doubled CO2 have shown increased growth responses often 
in the range of 15 to 71%. The total range is from a 
negative response of 43% to a positive response of up to 
375% (Kimball, 1975; Kmball and Idso, 1983; Eamus and 
Jarvis, 1989; Poorter, 1993; Ceulemans and Mousseau, 
1994, Idso and Idso, 1994; McGuire et al., 1995a; 
Wullschleger et al., 1995). Across the tissue, plant and 
ecosystem levels the experimental evidence shows that the 
proportional response of NPP to elevated CO2 is greater 
when soil moisture is depleted. Elevated CO2 generally 
decreases stomatal conductance and hence transpiration, 
enhancing NPP by promoting greater water use efficiency 
(Gifford, 1979; Wong, 1979; Morrison and Gifford, 1984; 
Policy et al., 1993). There is some evidence that nitrogen-
limited plants are less responsive to increases in CO2 level 
(McGuire et ai, 1995a), but a recent review suggests that 
this is not always true (Lloyd and Farquhar, 1995). 
Increased CO2 may lead to increased carbon storage, but 
the magnitude of this effect is highly uncertain. Carbon 
sequestration at the ecosystem level depends not only on 
plant photosynthesis, respiration and growth, but also on 
the fluxes of carbon out of litter and soil carbon pools. At 
equilibrium, plant NPP would be balanced by these 
microbially mediated soil fluxes (i?^). However, if there is 
a progressive change in NPP such as a progressive increase 
in NPP due to the effect of rising CO2, the system will not 
be in equilibrium. In general the soil CO2 flux (Rj^) is 
proportional to the size of the decomposing carbon pools, 
whereas NPP is determined by the activity of the leaves. If 
CO2 increases, NPP may therefore increase immediately 
while the size of the decomposing pools takes time to build 
up. If NPP were to stop increasing (e.g., due to CO2 
stabilisation), the sink would weaken, with a decay time 
determined by the residence times of the pools to which 
carbon has been added. This is the theoretical explanation 
for why rising CO2 is thought to be producing a carbon 
sink, and why the sink may be a transient one (Taylor and 
Lloyd, 1992). 
A number of C02-enrichment field experiments have 
been conducted on intact ecosystems (Drake, 1992a; Nie et 
ai, 1992; Owensby et ai, 1993; Oechel et al, 1994; 
Jackson et ai, 1994; Kôrner and Diemer, 1994). When the 
NEP responses to CO2 increases were measured, the results 
ranged from relafively large increases in a temperate 
wefland (Drake, 1992a,b), to a small increase in a tundra 
(Oechel et al., 1994). There have been no comparable 
experiments on forests and this has resulted in an important 
gap in our understanding of how terrestrial ecosystems 
respond to increased atmospheric CO2. Carbon dioxide 
fertilisation studies in forests are a high research priority. 
Modelling studies 
The first model-based analyses of the cuirent effects of 
CO2 increase on terrestrial carbon storage were performed 
with simple models in which the terrestrial biosphere was 
represented by one or a few boxes. In one such analysis, 
Gifford (1993) worked within a plausible range of values 
(10, 25 and 40%) for the increase in NPP at doubled CO2. 
Assuming that the terrestrial biosphere was in equilibrium 
in pre-industrial fimes, he forced his model with the 
historical record to give an idea of the extent to which the 
CO2 increase would produce an imbalance of carbon 
uptake and release. The resulting terrestrial carbon storage 
rates due to this mechanism were 0.5, 2.0 and 4.0 GtC/yr 
during the 1980s. Rotmans and den Elzen (1993) showed, 
in an analogous model experiment, that CO2 ferülisatíon 
was stimulating carbon storage at a rate of 1.2 GtC/yr. A 
new version of a global biogeochemistry model, the 
Terrestrial Ecosystem Model (ТЕМ), (McGuire et al.. 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
455 
46 
g 45 
О 
ф 
X 
g 431-
c 
О 
XI 
44 
СО 
О 41 
1750 
1 
1 
(а) 
1 
1 
1 
-
• •' 
---NPP 
1 
1 
_ 1 
1 
1 
1800 
1850 
1900 
Year 
1950 
2000 
2050 
1750 
1800 
1850 
1900 
Year 
1950 
2000 
2050 
Figure 9.1: Simulated development of a terrestrial biosphere 
carbon sink due to COj-induced increases in net primary 
production (NPP), as simulated with the Terrestrial Ecosystem 
Model (Melillo et al., 1995b). The biosphere was assumed to be 
in equilibrium before 1750. Climate was kept constant (as 
present), (a) Simulated time course of net primary production 
(NPP) and heterotrophic respiration (R¡f (b) Cumulative net 
ecosystem production (NEP), i.e., sink strength. 
1995b) was used by Melillo et al. (1995b) in the transient 
mode to explore the effects of COj enrichment, taking into 
account the variety of responses by different ecosystems. 
The model indicated that the mean COj-stimulated carbon 
storage (NPP minus Rf^) during the 1980s was 0.9 GtC/yr, 
and that it reached almost 1.0 GtC/yr in 1990 (Figure 9.1). 
Based on our current knowledge from laboratory, field and 
modelling studies, we consider a plausible range of the 
CO2 fertilisation effect to be 0.5-2.0 GtC/yr for the 1980s. 
9.2.Í.Í Air pollution 
The world's two major phytotoxic air pollutants are ozone 
(O3) and sulphur dioxide (SOj). They are spread 
throughout the industrial and agricultural regions (Heck, 
1984). Experimental studies have documented significant 
effects of ozone on a variety of plant processes. It can 
reduce photosynthesis, increase respiration and promote 
early leaf senescence. These effects, either singly or in 
combination, can lead to reduced plant growth (Allen and 
Amthor, 1995). Chameides et al. (1994) have presented 
evidence that the growth of urban and industrialised areas 
and intensive agriculture, through their production of 
tropospheric ozone, are reducing agricultural yields and, 
presumably, plant growth in adjacent non-agricultural 
ecosystems. Sulphur dioxide's main effect appears to be to 
reduce photosynthesis, which leads to reduced plant growth 
(Allen and Amthor, 1995). In combination, ozone and 
sulphur dioxide can interact to magnify the negative effects 
of either pollutant alone on plant growth (Ormrod, 1982). 
While it is not disputed that ozone and sulphur dioxide 
pollution have the potential to reduce both NPP and carbon 
storage in terrestrial ecosystems, there is little basis for 
making global estimates of these effects (Chameides et ai, 
1994). 
9.2.3.4 Nitrogen fertilisation 
associated with acid rain 
Those mid-latitude ecosystems of the Northern Hemisphere 
that are near or downwind of industrial and agricultural 
areas are receiving large inputs of nitrogen, mostly from 
fossil fuel burning. Forests in western and central Europe 
and eastern North America receive up to 50 kg N/ha/yr 
(Melillo et al, 1989; SchuIze et al, 1989) or more. These 
nitrogen inputs may be enhancing NPP and terrestrial 
carbon storage. For example, Kauppi et al. (1992) 
suggested that increases in the growth rates of European 
forests observed between 1950 and 1980 were due to 
nitrogen fertilisation, although other mechanisms such as 
CO2 fertilisation, climate variability and management 
changes may also be involved. 
Experimental evidence supports the nitrogen-stimulation 
mechanism for increasing carbon storage in mid-laritude 
forests. In a field study in which 50 kg N/ha/yr has been 
added to large plots of healthy evergreen and deciduous 
forests for several years, carbon storage in aboveground 
woody tissue has increased by 10-20%/yr (Aber et al, 
1993). However, this increase in carbon storage is expected 
to reach a threshold level beyond which further additions 
of nitrogen are likely to result in NPP reduction, tree death, 
and carbon loss (Aber et al, 1989; SchuIze et al, 1989). 
Many terrestrial ecosystems, especially those in middle 
and high latitudes, are nitrogen limited; that is, added 
nitrogen will produce a growth response and additional 
carbon storage (e.g., Melillo and Gosz, 1983; Vitousek and 
Howarth, 1991; Schimel et al, 1994; Melillo, 1995). 
Nitrogen deposition from fertilisers and oxides of nitrogen 
released from the burning of fossil fuel during the 1980s is 
estimated to amount to a global total of 0.05-0.08 GtN/yr 
(Peterson and Melillo, 1985; Duce et al, 1991; Galloway et 
al, 1995; Melillo, 1995), spatially concentrated in the 
456 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
Table 9.1: Recent estimates of nitrogen-stimulated 
carbon storage in terrestrial 
ecosystems. 
Region(s) considered 
N input 
TgN/yr 
С store 
GtC/yr 
Kohlmaiereio/., 1988 
30 - 60°N 
21 ± 7 
up to 0.7 
Schindler and Bayley, 1993 
globe 
13 
- 0 . 7 - 2 . 0 
Hudson et al, 1994 
Northern Hemisphere 
30 
-0.7 
Townsend et al., 1994 
global (excluding cultivated areas) 
7+ 
0.2-1.2* 
Melillo, 1995 
temperate and boreal forests of North America and Europe 
18 
0.6 - 0.9+ 
+ NO3 only. 
* Best estimate 0.3 - 0.6. 
+ Lower end of range more likely. 
northern mid-latitudes. The carbon sequestration which 
results from this added nitrogen is estimated to be 0.2-2.0 
GtC/yr (see Table 9.1), depending on assumptions about: 
(1) the proportion of nitrogen that remains in ecosystems; 
(2) the relative distribution of nitrogen between vegetation 
and soil; and (3) the C:N ratios of the vegetation and soil. 
Estimates higher than 1 GtC/yr seem unrealistic because 
they assume that all of the N would be stored, and in forms 
with high C:N ratios, which is improbable. Recent studies 
of the fate of nitrogen added to forest ecosystems suggests 
that between 70 and 90% ends up in the soil, which has a 
relatively low C:N ratio (Aber et al., 1993; Nadelhoffer et 
al., 1995). In addition, much atmospheric nitrogen is in 
reality deposited on grasslands and agricultural lands where 
storage occurs in soils with low average C:N ratios. A more 
plausible range for this effect is therefore 0.5-1.0 GtC/yr. 
Model calculations have not yet considered the fact that 
CO2 and nitrogen fertilisation are likely to be interacting. 
The additional nitrogen may enhance photosynthesis and 
plant growth (Bazzaz and Fajer, 1992; Diaz et al., 1993; 
McGuire et ai, 1995a - see Section 9.2.3.1), and possibly 
lead to increased carbon storage. 
9.2.4 Estimates of Current Terrestrial Carbon Sinks from 
Atmospheric Measurements 
Observations at stations monitoring background 
concentrations of COj indicate that only a portion of the 
fossil fuel-derived C O j remains airborne, while the 
remainder is absorbed by the oceans and the terrestrial 
biosphere. A first order estimate of the global distribution 
of sinks by latitude can be made using CO2 concentration 
data from networks of monitoring stations (Denning et ai, 
1995), but the distinction between land and ocean sinks and 
sources within a particular latitudinal band requires 
additional information. The relative roles of terrestrial 
versus ocean ecosystems in these bands can be estimated 
with several approaches (Tans et ai, 1995), including ones 
that use the ^^Cf^C ratio of the CO2. The carbon isotope 
ratio of CO2 is useful because terrestrial uptake 
discriminates strongly against '•'C while the ocean uptake 
shows little discrimination (Keeling et ai, 1989, 1995; 
Francey et al., 1995). Francey et al. (1995), using a 
terrestrial discrimination value of 18 parts per thousand, 
estimated a net terrestrial storage over the last decade of 1 
to 3 GtC/yr. 
Lloyd and Farquhar (1994) pointed out that the 
magnitude of ^•'C discrimination among land plants 
depends on the biochemical pathway they use in 
photosynthesis and that this affects the analysis of 
atmospheric observations. The C 3 pathway results in a 
discrimination of 18 parts per thousand, while the C^ 
pathway results in very little discrimination. ' Considering 
the distribution of C 3 and C 4 plants and their share in 
global NPP, Lloyd and Farquhar (1994) estimated that the 
global average terrestrial discrimination factor is about 15 
parts per thousand. This means that Francey et al. (1995) 
may have underestimated the net terrestrial uptake by up to 
25%. Ciais et al. (1995b) included the C 4 effect in an 
' C 3 photosynthesis is the normal biochemical pathway of carbon 
fixation in plants. C^ photosynthesis is a more complex pathway, 
found for example in tropical grasses, which includes a mechanism 
for concentrating C O , at the sites of carbon fixation. The C 4 
pathway accounts for a substantial fraction of total NPP in 
tropical grasslands and savannahs. Some tropical crops, including 
sugar cane, also use this pathway 
Terrestrial Biotic 
Responses 
457 
analysis of data from a greatly expanded global network. 
They found that the net terrestrial carbon sink averaged 2.6 
GtC/yr during the years 1992 and 1993. 
The analyses of Ciais et al. (1995b) indicate that for the 
land ecosystems outside of the equatorial band from 30°S 
to 30°N, net carbon storage (i.e. NEP) averaged 4.3 Gt/yr 
for the years 1992 and 1993. Most of this storage, an 
average of 3.5 GtC/yr, was between 30° and 60°N. These 
are large numbers in the global carbon cycle when 
compared to the annual fossil fuel emissions for the same 
two years, which was about 6.1 GtC/yr. It follows that the 
terrestrial biosphere is currently playing a major role in the 
carbon cycle, in some years more than compensating for 
terrestrial ecosystem sources of carbon, including those 
associated with deforestation (see Section 9.2.1) and 
enhanced respiration in response to regional warming in 
the circumpolar tundra (see Section 9.2.3.1). The future 
maintenance of this role is crucially important to scenarios 
of CO2 stabilisation. 
A major complication in developing future scenarios of 
C O 2 stabilisation that accurately include the role of 
terrestrial ecosystems in the global carbon cycle is that the 
magnitude of the extra-tropical sink appears to vary 
substantially through time (see Table 9.2, Keeling et al.. 
1989; Tans et al, 1990; Ciais et al, 1995b; Francey et al, 
1995) and may be responding to climatic variations on the 
scale of years to decades (Dai and Fung, 1993; Keeling et 
al., 1995). The magnitude of the response to climatic 
anomalies is highly uncertain but may be in the range of 
±2.0 GtC/yr. 
Longer time-series with information on carbon isotope 
composition of CO2 will provide us with a better idea of 
how much the extra-tropical carbon sink changes through 
time. Refined estimates of the role of terrestrial ecosystems 
in the global carbon balance will likely soon come from 
data on the oxygen isotope composition of CO2 (Francey 
and Tans, 1987; Farquhar et al, 1993) which can also be 
obtained from the global network. Further information will 
come from measurements of the atmospheric concentration 
of oxygen and its spatial variation (Keeling and Shertz, 
1992). 
While various pieces of evidence support a substantial 
terrestrial carbon sink in the Northern Hemisphere, direct 
observations to confirm the hypothesis and to establish the 
processes for this carbon storage are lacking. Expanding 
our understanding of the processes responsible for net 
annual storage of carbon by the terrestrial biosphere is 
among our greatest challenges. 
Table 9.2: Estimated global carbon budgets based on atmospheric observations, obtained using a range of methods for 
various years during the 1980s and 1990s (modified from Tans et al, 1995). 
Reference 
Year(s) 
Global 
net flux 
GtC/yr 
Tropical 
net flux§ 
GtC/yr 
Extra-tropica! 
net flux 
GtC/yr 
Primary constraints 
Keeling eia/.,1989 
1984 
-0.5« 
-ьО.З* 
0.7t 
history of atmospheric [COj], and its 
'3C/'2C ratio 
Tans etal, 1990 
1981-1987 
-1.9 
+0.5 
-2.41-
observed latitudinal gradient of 
atmospheric [CO2], and its global 
annual rate of increase 
Cmisetal, 
1995a 
1992-1993 
-2.6 
+1.7 
-4.3* 
observed latitudinal gradient of 
atmospheric [COj], and its ^-^Cf^-C 
ratio 
§ The net tropical flux term represents both the release of carbon from the land to the atmosphere due to deforestation and any 
storage occurring in undisturbed forests associated with processes such as COj fertilisation. 
$ A negative sign represents uptake of carbon by terrestrial ecosystems from the atmosphere, a positive sign represents a release 
of carbon by terrestrial systems to the atmosphere, 
t 
Extra-tropical region includes all land outside of a band between 15°N and I5''S. 
* 
Extra-tropical region includes all land outside of a band between 30°N and 30°S. 
458 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
9.3 Possible Effects of Climate Change and 
Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Increases on 
Ecosystem Structure 
Changes in climate and atmospheric carbon dioxide 
concentration affect the species composition and structure 
of ecosystems because the environment limits both the 
types of organisms that can thrive and the amounts of plant 
tissues that can be sustained. Compositional and structural 
changes, in turn, affect ecosystem function (Schulze, 1982; 
Schulze and Chapin, 1987; Schulze, 1994). Compositional 
and structural changes will occur over a longer period than 
functional changes and these may not keep pace with rapid 
environmental change, so complex transient effects may 
result. 
Experimental approaches have shown strong effects of 
climate change on vegetation composition and structure 
(Harte and Shaw, 1995). However, longer-term changes 
cannot be investigated experimentally, so much of what we 
understand about these changes is based on modelling and 
palaeodata. 
9.3.1 Environmental Controls on Vegetation Structure: 
Ecophysiological Constraints on Plant Types 
The ecosystems of the world are usually classified into 
15-20 "biomes", each characterised by the dominance of 
one or more structural/functional types of plant. The global 
distributions of biomes are determined by ecophysiological 
constraints on the dominant plant types of each biome 
(Schulze, 1982; Woodward, 1987). The main constraints 
are related to temperature and water. 
Cold tolerance in woody plants ranges from tropical 
trees, some damaged by temperatures of less than 10°C, to 
boreal deciduous trees which in their leafless, cold-
hardened state have apparently unlimited tolerance (Sakai 
and Weiser, 1973; Larcher, 1983; Woodward, 1987). 
Warmer winters would cause an expansion of more diverse 
woody plant types towards the poles and continental 
interiors. Warmer summers, and/or longer growing 
seasons, would also allow some cold-adapted trees to 
spread poleward (Emanuel et al., 1985; Pastor and Post, 
1988) especially at the polar tree-line where growing-
season warmth is limiting. Cold-tolerant woody plants 
have, however, evolved mechanisms to delay spring 
budburst until day length is adequate, and/or a long enough 
chilling period has occurred. These mechanisms insure 
against the possibility of premature budburst in a mild 
period during winter. Premature budburst would be 
damaging because the leaves could be killed by a 
subsequent frost. Chilling requirements keep continental 
woody plants out of maritime climates. Warmer winters 
will force such species to retreat from their low latitude and 
maritime limits (Dabi, 1990; Overpeck et al, 1991; Davis 
andZabinski, 1992). 
Plants vary enormously in their ability to tolerate 
drought, ranging from rain forest trees that can tolerate 
only a few weeks without rain unless they have access to 
deep water, to succulents that store water, and other hot 
desert species that can persist in a dry state. Some 
evergreen trees survive drought by reducing transpiration 
to near zero, while drought deciduous trees lose their 
leaves. As water availability declines further, trees give 
way to fire-adapted grasses and/or shrubs, then ultimately 
to the low shrubs, forbs and other drought-adapted life 
forms characteristic of steppes and deserts. Changes in 
water availability, whether positive or negative, will lead to 
shifts along this continuum. 
9.3.2 Environmental Controls on Vegetation Structure: 
Resource Availability 
Vegetation structure is determined not only by the types of 
plants present but also by the height and foliage cover they 
attain. Foliage cover, often expressed as leaf area index 
(LAI), is constrained by resource availability (water, 
carbon, nitrogen). L A I decreases as water availability 
declines. Along moisture gradients, vegetation composition 
and structure change due partly to replacement of drought-
sensitive by drought-tolerant (or more deep-rooted) plant 
types, and partly to reductions in the L A I of each type 
(Walter, 1979). Values for LAI are typically low enough to 
prevent drought damage in most years (Specht, 1972; 
Woodward, 1987; Neilson, 1995), so maintaining annual 
NPP near maximal for the environment (Eagleson, 1978; 
Haxeltine et al.; 1996). Ciianges in water availability will 
therefore affect LAI (Smith et al., 1993), but the response 
may be modified by changes in C O 2 . In particular, 
increasing C O 2 (by reducing transpiration) would be 
expected to compensate for the effect of reduced water 
availability on L A I (Jarvis, 1989; Woodward, 1992; 
V E M A P Members, 1995). 
Vegetation structure also changes with light availability, 
summer temperature and growing season length. From 
boreal forest to high-arctic tundra, trees are gradually 
replaced by shrubs and grasses as NPP declines. 
Comparable vegetation gradients occur at high elevations 
in all latitudes (Walter, 1979). In these cold environments 
warming should generally increase NPP and therefore LAI. 
Rising C O 2 may also increase L A I in so far as C O 2 
fertilisation can increase NPP (see Section 9.2.3.2). NPP in 
cold climates today may be further limited by the slow rate 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
459 
of nitrogen mineralisation (see Section 9.2.3.1). The 
combination of warming with COj increase could therefore 
increase LAI especially in high latitudes. 
The ecophysiological and resource-availability constraints 
that determine the natural distribution of biomes also closely 
determine potential (non-agricultural) land-use, for example, 
suitability for forestry or grazing, the types of tree which can 
be exploited for forestry, sustainable density of grazing 
animals. Changes in these constraints strongly affect both 
natural and managed ecosystems. 
9.3.3 Environmental Mediation of the Competitive 
Balance 
The physical environment also contributes to determining 
the natural competitive balance among those plant types 
that can co-exist in a given environment. For example: 
(1) 
Wet tropical climates support evergreen rain forest; 
longer dry seasons favour drought-deciduous trees in 
seasonal and dry forests (Chabot and Hicks, 1982; 
Haxeltine et al, 1996). Any change in monsoon 
duration would shift the natural boundaries among 
these forest types. 
(2) 
Savannahs represent an equilibrium of trees and 
grasses. In seasonal tropical climates, grasslands are 
favoured by summer rainfall and slow-percolating 
clay soils, woodlands by winter rainfall and sandy 
soils (Walter, 1979; Walker and Noy-Meir, 1982; 
Lauenroth et al, 1993). Natural savannahs occur in 
intermediate situations, where the combination is 
favoured (Eagleson and Segarra, 1985; Haxeltine et 
al, 1996). Changes in rainfall seasonality, as well as 
changes in land management, would affect the 
tree-grass balance. 
(3) 
Seasonal shifts between Cj and C^ grass dominance 
(Groves and Williams, 1981) occur because C4 plants 
have a higher light use efficiency than C3 plants 
wherever temperatures exceed a threshold of about 
22°C, at current CO2 concentration (Ehleringer and 
Monson, 1993). A n increase in atmospheric C O j 
raises this temperature threshold (Drake, 1992b; Arp 
et al, 1993; Johnson et al, 1993). Warming should 
therefore favour C^, but increasing CO2 may favour 
C 3 . Increasing CO2 might have caused the recent 
invasion of some C^ grasslands by C3 woody plants 
(e.g., Johnson et al, 1993), although other factors 
such as land-use changes may be involved as well 
(Archer ei a/., 1995). 
(4) 
In temperate and cold climates, evergreen woody 
plants are favoured over winter-deciduous woody 
plants wherever carbon and/or nutrient costs of 
replacing leaves annually exceed the costs of 
maintaining leaves during winter (Chabot and Hicks, 
1982; Reich et al, 1992; Chapin, 1991; Mooney et 
al, 1991; Shaver and Chapin, 1991; Arris and 
Eagleson, 1994; Chapin et al, 1995). Changes in the 
seasonality of either temperature or precipitarion 
could alter the balance between evergreen and 
deciduous trees. 
9.3.4 Global Biome Model Projections 
Global models for ecosystem dynamics, that can simulate 
the transient response of vegetation structure to changes in 
climate and atmospheric CO2, are being developed by 
several groups but none has yet been published. Simple 
biome models project equilibrium distributions of broad 
vegetation types ("potential natural vegetation") from 
ecophysiological constraints, but without consideration of 
CO2 effects on plant physiology. The B I O M E model 
(Prentice et al, 
1992) reproduces well the present 
vegetation as mapped by Olson et al (1983), except where 
intensive agriculture predominates. B I O M E has been 
applied to various 2 X CO2 equilibrium climate scenarios 
developed using outputs from atmospheric general 
circulation models (GCMs) (Solomon et al, 
1993; 
Claussen, 1994; Claussen and Esch, 1994; Prentice and 
Sykes, 1995). Consistent results include poleward shifts of 
the northern-hemisphere taiga, temperate deciduous, and 
warm-temperate evergreen/warm mixed forest belts, a 
northward shift of the Eurasian taiga, and a slight 
expansion of tropical seasonal and rain forests into areas of 
warm-temperate evergreen forests (IPCC W G II, 1995). 
Differences among G C M scenarios in the extent of these 
changes are consistent with the GCMs' different climate 
sensitivities. Some scenarios (not all) show reductions of 
temperate forests in the continental interiors. 
These results differ from analyses based on earlier, 
empirical models, e.g., in the tropics where the Holdridge 
(Prentice and Fung, 1990; Smith et al, 1992, 1993) and 
Budyko (Tchebakova et al, 1992) models showed greater 
expansions of tropical rain forest. Such expansions are 
probably an artefact, due to ignoring rainfall seasonality. 
The Holdridge model also showed a smaller northward and 
eastward shift of the Eurasian taiga than other models 
(including Tchebakova et al, 1992; Monserud et al, 
1993), because temperature seasonality is ignored. 
Comparisons with past biome distributions are 
instructive. At 6000 yr bp (before present) there was more 
460 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
insolation than today in the Northern Hemisphere summer, 
and more total annual insolation (leading to wanner year-
round temperatures) at high latitudes. 6000 yr bp is not an 
analogue for the future, because the Earth's orbital 
configuration was different from present, while the CO2 
concentration was similar to pre-industrial (Mitchell et al, 
1990; Monserud et al, 1993). Palaeoecological data for 
6000 yr bp show that climate change alone does indeed 
cause major biome shifts. G C M simulations (e.g., 
Kutzbach and Guetter, 1986) driven by the insolation 
changes ("orbital forcing") capture the general direction of 
these shifts (COHMAP Members, 1988; Wright et al, 
1993; Foley, 1994). Their magnitude tends to be 
underestimated, however, possibly because the G C M 
modelling procedure disregards biogeophysical feedback 
(Henderson-Sellers and McGuffie, 1995; Section 9.7). 
9.3.5 Regional Biome Model Projections 
"Second-generation" biome models include resource 
limitation and competitive balance effects. Examples are 
MAPSS (Neilson, 1995; Neilson and Marks, 1995) and 
BI0ME2 (Haxeltine et al, 1996). In an application to the 
continental USA both models produced good simulations 
of potential natural vegetation (VEMAP Members, 1995; 
Figure 9.2). Temperature-controlled biome boundaries 
responded to 2 X CO2 climates in a similar way to the 
earlier BIOME results. Moisture-controlled boundaries 
(e.g., the forest-grassland boundary) responded differendy, 
due to different évapotranspiration parametrizations, in the 
two models. In the central and eastern USA, some climate 
scenarios without corresponding C O , doubling caused 
partial replacement of forests by grasslands. This effect 
was more extensive in M A P S S , but the effect was 
Present 
climate 
В Ю М Е 2 
GFDL R30 
climate: 2xC02 
physiological effects: 
CO2 concentration = current 
GFDL R30 
climate: 2xC02 
physiological effects: 
CO2 concentration = 710 ppmv 
MAPSS 
В 
Present 
potential 
yí;i 7-
vegetation 
LEGEND 
, Temp. Mixed Xeromorphic Wood. 
¡ Tropical Evergreen Forest 
яНв 
Tropical Deciduous Forest 
Temperate Deciduous Forest 
' Warm Temp. Mixed/Everg. Forest 
^Ht 
: Cool Temp. Mixed Forest 
! Continenlol Temp. Conifer Forest 
H H 
'i't 
II Maritime Temp. Conifer Forest 
Iff.j.i Boreol Forest 
yl l ¿ j 
Tundro 
Subtropical Arid Shrublands 
Temperate Arid Shrublands 
Mediterrean Shrublands 
C4 Grasslands 
C3 Grasslands 
Tropical Deciduous Savanna 
Temperate Conifer Savanna 
Warm Temp./S.T. Mixed Sovonna 
Temperate Deciduous Sovanna 
Tropical Thorn Woodland 
Temp. Conifer Xeromorphic Wood. 
Figure 9,2: Changes in potential natural vegetation of the conterminous USA, simulated with the BI0ME2 and MAPPS vegetation 
models. Left: simulations based on present climate. The actual distribution of potential natural vegetation types is shown for 
comparison. Centre: simulations based on "2 X CO2" climate scenario. This scenario was derived by using an equilibrium simulation 
from the GFDL R30 atmospheric/mixed-layer ocean model to modify the chmate data. Right: simulations based on the same climate 
scenario, but including the physiological effects of a CO^ concenti'ation of 710 ppmv. After V E M A P Members (1995). 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
461 
mitigated in botii models by the physiological effects of 
CO2. This mitigation was more effective in MAPSS. Note 
that the mitigation is an effect of C O , only; it does not 
apply to the other greenhouse gases. 
BI0ME2 also simulates the differential effects of CO2 
on photosynthesis in C 3 and C^ plants. Warming alone 
pushes the area of potential C^ grasslands northwards, but 
CO2 doubling overwhelms this effect, favouring C3 grasses 
down to the subtropics. The competition between C^ 
grasses and woody plants is determined mainly by the 
climate change and only slightly by CO2, according to this 
model. MAPSS simulates only the differential effects of 
CO2 on water use, which in combination with greater 
simulated drought produces the opposite effect favouring 
C4 plants up to the boreal zone. 
BI0ME2 and MAPSS probably bracket the plausible 
range for the sensitivity of moisture-related biome 
boundaries to temperature and CO2, and for the response of 
C3 versus C4 plants to changes in CO2. More realistic 
treatment of the coupling between carbon and water fluxes 
should help to resolve the discrepancies. 
These 
discrepancies represent an important uncertainty about the 
ecosystem impacts of climate change, comparable in 
magnitude with the uncertainty due to differences in the 
regional climate anomalies predicted by GCMs. 
9.3.6 Changes in Biome Distribution Since the Last 
Glacial Maximum 
CHmatically controlled changes in biome distriburions are 
well documented for the recent glacial-interglacial cycle, 
especially from the last glacial maximum (LGM, 21,000 yr 
bp) to the present (Wright et ai, 1993). Atmospheric COj 
increased by about 90 ppmv to the pre-industrial value of 
280 ppmv after the L G M (Chapter 2). Large changes 
occurred in global climate and vegetation patterns 
(Overpeck and Bartlein, 1989; Webb, 1992). 
CUmate simulations of the L G M are based mainly on the 
ice sheet distributions, sea level, sea surface temperatures and 
CO2 (Kutzbach and Guetter, 1986; Broccoli and Manabe, 
1987); the Earth's orbital configuration was also slightly 
different from present. BIOME results derived from the 
L G M climate simulation by Lautenschlager and Herterich 
(1990) agree qualitatively with palaeoclimatic and 
palaeoecological data (COHMAP Members, 1988; Street-
Perrott et ai, 1989; Prentice et ai, 1993a). Thus, major 
changes in biome distribution after the L G M can be 
explained as a result of changes in climate. Direct effects of 
low CO, may also have been involved, due to reduced carbon 
assimUation or low water-use efficiency of C3 plants at the 
L G M (Beeriing and Woodward, 1993; Giresse etal, 1994). 
9.3.7 Dynamics of the Vegetational Response to Climate 
Change 
The geographic distribution of biomes, and the 
composition of natural and managed vegetation types, will 
not remain in equilibrium with the changing climate during 
the next 100 years. There will be transient effects, varying 
according to the rate of climate change, which may depart 
considerably from the pattern indicated by biome models. 
These effects depend on the particular mechanisms 
involved. Shifts in competitive balance might occur subtiy 
over time. Direct impacts on the growth or survival of 
particular types of plant could cause die back (and carbon 
loss) before better-adapted types become established. This 
possible asymmetry of carbon loss and accumulation has 
led to the concern that transient vegetation changes could 
produce a CO2 "spike" (King and Neilson, 1992; Smith et 
ai, 1992; Smith and Shugarl, 1993). We return to this issue 
in Section 9.4.1. 
Some aspects of vegetation's dynamic response to 
environmental changes, on time-scales from 10 to 10"^ 
years, have been established from palaeoecology (Prentice, 
1986; Bennett, 1986; Huntley, 1988; Davis, 1990; Webb, 
1992). For perennial plants, the evolution of new 
adaptations is too slow to be an effective response. Instead, 
changes occur both in the local abundances of species and 
genotypes (Type A response, Webb, 1986) and in the 
geographic distributions of species (Type В response) 
(Figure 9.3). In this process biomes do not change or move 
en bloc; 
instead, species react to climate change 
individually according to their biology. When climate 
changes to produce novel regional climates, novel 
associations of plants arise (Webb, 1992). Successive 
interglacial periods have therefore been characterised by 
different vegetation assemblages (Watts, 1988). The 
general directions of change are predictable from a 
knowledge of the climate change and the present-day 
climatic tolerances (realised niches) of the species. 
Type A vegetation responses are caused primarily by the 
differential effects of climate on the growth and 
regeneration of different taxa and plant types. These 
responses can occur at different rates depending on the rate 
of climate change. In periods of rapid climate changes, 
Type A vegetation responses have been reported to occur 
within 150 yr (MacDonald et ai, 1993), 50-100 yr (Mayle 
and Cwynar, 1995) and even within 30 yr (Gear and 
Huntiey, 1991; Zackrisson etal., 1995). Type A vegetation 
responses can be modelled with vegetation-dynamics 
models such as forest succession models (Botkin et ai, 
1972; Shugart, 1984). These represent regeneration, growth 
and mortality of statistical populations of individual plants 
462 . 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
Observed pollen (radiocarbon dated) 
Thousands of ^^C years before present 
Figure 9.3: Postglacial changes in the distribution and abundance of some major tree types in easfern North America, based on pollen 
analysis data. After Webb et al. (1993). 
on a plot whose size reflects the scale of competition. With 
no environmental change, such models simulate the natural 
cyclical behaviour of ecosystems (Shugart, 1984; Prentice 
and Leemans, 1990). Climate effects modify the growth 
and regeneration functions. Applied to the past, such 
models have shown responses of forest composition to 
climate change that agree well with changes shown in 
pollen records (Solomon and Bartiein, 1992; Campbell and 
McAndrews, 1993). 
When driven by climate-change scenarios, forest 
succession models can describe the interaction of climate 
and natural cycles (Solomon, 1986; Prentice, etal, 1991a). 
Various transient effects have appeared, including transient 
die backs of species whose growth becomes reduced 
(Solomon and Bartiein, 1992). However, many succession 
models assume stylised climatic responses (e.g., dome-
shaped responses of total annual growth to annual growing 
degree days) which have no physiological basis and may 
give misleading results (Bonan and Sirois, 1992). The 
growth equation used in many such models is also 
physiologically unrealistic (Moore, 1989), producing too 
sudden mortality in large trees. Because of these and other 
uncertainties, including the potential significance of short-
lived climatic extremes, the structure of vegetation 
dynamics models is undergoing re-examination (Bugmann, 
1993; Prentice ei a/., 1993b). 
Climate change may further alter ecosystem structure 
and composition by affecting the disturbance regime 
(Grimm, 1983; Torn and Fried, 1992; Clark, 1993). Natural 
disturbances generally facilitate plant migration and the 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
463 
attainment of compositional equilibrium with climate 
(Davis and Botkin, 1985; Bradshaw and Hannon, 1992). 
But climatically induced transitions between biomes may 
also show hysteresis, due to positive feedbacks that tend to 
maintain vegetation structure (Grimm, 1983). Such effects 
can cause delays of up to 100 yr (Grimm, 1984). The total 
response time of vegetational composition (combined Type 
A and В responses) has been estimated as between 300 and 
1500 yr; fast enough to track the "envelope" of climate 
changes since the L G M (Overpeck and Bartiein, 1989; 
Prentice et al, 1991b), but too slow to track interdecadal 
climate variability without considerable lag (Davis and 
Botkin, 1985; Campbell and McAndrews, 1993). 
Faced with climate change, species presumably can (in 
the right conditions) spread at least as fast as they have 
done before. Species spread (migration) involves a number 
of factors including dispersal, regeneration on a suitable 
site, growth to maturity and seed production. Dispersal 
seems not to have been a major limitation in the past, at 
least to the major species detected over the long time-
periods 
represented 
in the 
palaeo-record 
(see 
Biogeographic Dynamics Box). The mechanisms of rapid 
spread as observed in the Holocene may involve 
coalescence of many populations, each starting from an 
"infection centre" which could either be a pre-existing 
small population in a favourable microhabitat, or a new 
population founded by long-distance seed dispersal (birds, 
mammals and tornadoes are possible vectors; see 
references in Box). This way, species distribution ranges 
could expand orders of magnitude faster than they would if 
they advanced along an orderly front. 
The palaeo-record tells us mainly about migration in a 
natural matrix. Future migrations may be very different. 
For example, the modern landscape provides fewer 
regeneration sites. Migrating species in the past exploited 
recently disturbed sites, whereas now natural vegetation is 
often fragmented (Peters, 1992) and confined to 
tmdisturbed sites. On the other hand, humans are already 
spreading many species beyond their natural ranges both 
deliberately and accidentally. Outlier populations spread by 
humans could be future infection centres even if they are 
not regenerating now (Davis and Zabinski, 1992). The net 
effect of human activities on plant species' ability to 
migrate is unclear. 
Climate changes implied by the IS92 emission scenarios 
(see Chapter 6) call for migration rates up to ten times 
faster than historically observed for many taxa, so 
vegetation composition may be out of equilibrium with the 
changing climate (Davis, 1989, 1990; Davis and Zabinski, 
1992). Non-equilibrium vegetation types could take many 
forms. At one extreme, an existing vegetation type might 
persist until gradually invaded by other species, with 
minimal implications for the atmosphere. At the other 
extreme, large areas of forests might die (e.g., due to heat 
stress, drought and fire; Auclair and Carter, 1993) and be 
temporarily replaced by shrublands. This would result in 
different stiTictural and functional properties, the transition 
being accompanied by changes in albedo, canopy 
roughness and rooting depth, reductions in NPP, and losses 
of plant and soil carbon to the atmosphere (Neilson, 1993; 
Section 9.4.1). The larger and more rapid the climate 
change, the greater the chance that effects of the latter type 
will occur. 
Biogeographic Dynamics: 
The Issue of Dispersal Rate 
Rates of species spread in response to Holocene climate 
changes have been reconstructed by mapping pollen 
data from networks of ''^C-dated sediment cores. They 
range from 50-2000 m/yr for most woody species in 
Europe and North America (Davis, 1976; Huntiey and 
Birks, 1983; Huntley, 1988). The puzzle is how species 
could spread so fast. Several explanations have been 
offered. For example, the rapid spread of Picea 
glauca 
into interior Canada immediately after déglaciation has 
been attributed to long-distance dispersal aided by 
strong anticyclonic winds (Ritchie and MacDonald, 
1986). Migrations into already-vegetated regions that 
appear instantaneous over hundreds of kilometres, such 
as the spread of Tsuga into the Great Lakes region in 
response to precipitation and winter temperature 
increases ~ 7000 yr bp (Prentice et al, 1991b), may be 
better described as infilling by the expansion of 
scattered "advance populations" (Clark, 1993; Davis, 
1983; MacDonald et al, 1993). 
Rates of spread of different species within genera 
(e.g.. Picea, Fagus) were similar regardless of whether 
the migration route lay in mountain regions or lowlands 
(Davis, 1983; Bennett, 1986). Species spread at 
comparable rates whether their seeds are adapted to 
wind- or animal transport (Davis, 1983). Migrating 
species were not stopped by water bodies such as Lake 
Michigan or the Baltic (Davis et al, 1986; Huntley and 
Webb, 1989). The lesson for the future is that dispersal 
as such will not necessarily limit species migration 
rates. Other factors, such as the availability of sites for 
regeneration, may well provide greater barriers. 
464 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
9.4 Effects of Climate Change and Carbon Dioxide 
Increases on Regional and Global Carbon Storage: 
Transient and Equilibrium Analyses 
9.4.1 Possible Transient Effects of Climate Change on 
Global Carbon Storage 
While biome shifts may have a major effect on terrestrial 
carbon storage during the climate transient, many other 
things may be happening at the same time that have the 
potential to affect terrestrial carbon storage. Continued 
forest clearing for agriculture to meet the food needs of a 
growing human population combined with an expansion 
and intensification of air-pollution stress on terrestrial 
ecosystems could further reduce carbon storage on land. 
Alternatively, mechanisms such as C O , fertilisation may 
continue to result in enhanced carbon storage in land areas 
not involved in biome shifts. Improved quantification of 
these transient processes is a research priority. 
9.4.2 Equilibrium Analyses: Regional Ecosystem Model 
Projections 
In a rapidly changing environment, there may be complex 
transient effects including possible releases of carbon due 
to climate-change-induced forest die back as mentioned in 
Section 9.3.7. At the present time there is no consensus on 
the likely magnitude of such releases. In a modelling study, 
Smith and Shugart (1993) began to explore how large they 
might be. In Smith and Shugart's model, climate-induced 
vegetation redistribution initially led to a large transient 
release of about 200 GtC during 100-200 years due to die 
back of forests. While an important conceptual advance, 
this transient analysis contains many crude assumptions 
such as very long lags due to slow migration. This estimate 
probably represents an upper bound to the effect of biome 
shifts alone in causing a transient loss of carbon from the 
terrestrial biosphere. Such losses would be expected to 
depend strongly on the rate of climate change; that is, the 
faster the rate of climate change, the greater the likelihood 
of large carbon losses from terrestrial ecosystems due to 
biome shifts during the transient (Woodwell, 1995). 
A number of terrestrial biogeochemistry models are now 
capable of evaluating how terrestrial carbon storage might 
change with shifts in climate and atmospheric C O , 
concentrations from one equilibrium condition to another. 
Examples are B I O M E - B G C (Hunt and Running, 1992; 
Running and Hunt, 1993), CENTURY (Parton et al., 1987, 
1988, 1993) and ТЕМ (Raich et al., 1991; McGuire et al, 
1992; Melillo et al., 1993). In an application to the 
continental United States, these models were run for a 
range of future equilibrium climates at doubled CO,. The 
BIOME-BGC model projected terrestrial carbon losses up 
to 33% relative to the cuiTent condition, and CENTURY 
and ТЕМ projected carbon gains of between 6 and 16% 
(VEMAP Members, 1995). 
As part of the V E M A P activity, these three 
biogeochemistry models were coupled with three 
biogeography models^ (see Section 9.3.5); B I 0 M E 2 
(Haxeltine et al., 1996), D O L Y (Woodward and Smith, 
1994; Woodward et al, 1995), and MAPSS (Neilson, 1995; 
Neilson and Marks, 1995). Each of the model pairs was then 
run with three GCM-generated climate scenarios for doubled 
CO,. The terrestrial carbon storage response ranged from a 
loss" of 39% for the B I O M E - B G C / M A P S S pair with a 
U K M O - G C M climate, to a 32% gain for the TEM/MAPSS 
pair with an O S U - G C M climate (Figure 9.4). The 
B I O M E - B G C / M A P S S response for the U K M O climate 
scenario was primarily caused by decreases in forested area 
and temperature-induced water stress. The TEM/MAPSS 
response for the OSU climate was largely attributable to 
forest expansion and temperature-enhanced nitrogen cycling. 
This range of responses represents the pooled uncertainty for 
structural and functional ecosystem responses and for the 
regional climate anomalies inferred from three GCMs. 
9.4.3 Equilibrium Analyses: Global Ecosystem Model 
Projections 
Several process-based ecological models including ТЕМ 
and IMAGE2 (Alcamo et ai, 1994) have been used to 
evaluate the effects of equilibrium climate and atmospheric 
carbon dioxide shifts on global terrestrial carbon storage. 
Melillo et al. (1995b) used a new version of ТЕМ 
(McGuire et al, 1995b) to assess the equilibrium response 
of global ecosystem carbon storage to a C O , doubling 
alone, with no climate change and no change in vegetation 
distribution. Under these conditions, terrestrial carbon 
storage was projected to increase by 360 GtC (Figure 9.5). 
The ТЕМ model was also used to simulate the response 
of terrestrial cai'bon storage with constant COj, but with 
COj-induced climate changes inferred from equilibrium 
simulations with the G F D L - G C M . The result was a 
projected net loss of terrestrial carbon of 130 Gt (Figure 
9.5). This result was obtained under the assumption of no 
vegetation redistribution. When ТЕМ was coupled to a 
modified version of BIOME (Prentice et al., 1992), the 
' Terrestrial biogeochemistry models simulate carbon, water and 
nutrient fluxes through ecosystems, assuming a prescribed 
vegetation structure. Thus they contrast with biome (or 
biogeography) models, which simulate the geographic 
distributions of vegetation structural types (biomes). 
466 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
6000 
5000 
-
4000 
-
3000 
-
CD 
T3 
о 
LO 
Ü 
o> 2000 
Ф 
I 
Ü 
о 
В 
1000 
-
-1000 
-
-2000 
-90 
15 
30 
45 
60 
75 
90 
-75 
-60 
-45 
-30 
-15 
0 
Latitude 
Figure 9 . 5 : Simulated changes in equilibrium terrestrial carbon storage as a function of latitude due to: direct effects of a doubling of 
COj (dotted line); effects of climate change, from the GFDL 2 X COj scenario (thick solid line); combined effects of CO2 and climate 
without vegetation redistribution (thin solid line); combined effects of CO^ and climate with vegetation redistribution (dashed line). 
After IVIeliUo etal. (1995b). 
0 
projected carbon loss was o f a similar magnitude (Figure 
9.5). A l t h o u g h some other m o d e l l i n g studies have projected 
l o n g - t e r m increases i n carbon storage o f u p to about 100 
G t C o v e r s e v e r a l h u n d r e d years ( C r a m e r a n d S o l o m o n 
1993; S m i t h a n d Shugart 1993; Prentice and Sykes 1995), 
due t o c l i m a t e c h a n g e alone, these results are p r o b a b l y 
unreaUstic. T h e T E M - B I O M E result (Figure 9.5) includes 
the effects o f both biogeochemistry and biogeography; the 
o t h e r r e s u l t s i n c l u d e d o n l y b i o g e o g r a p h i c a l 
c h a n g e s , 
assuming f i x e d carbon densities i n each b i o m e . 
E c o s y s t e m models have also been used to evaluate the 
c o m b i n e d response o f terrestrial c a r b o n storage t o C O j 
f e r t i l i s a t i o n a n d c l i m a t e c h a n g e . Т Е М ( M e l i l l o et 
al., 
1995b) projected a net increase o f 290 G t C (Figure 9.5). 
T h e g a i n d u e to CO2 fertilisation o u t w e i g h e d the loss due 
to w a r m i n g . A g a i n , a l l o w i n g vegetation redistribution d i d 
not appreciably change this result (Figure 9.5). A l c a m o et 
al. ( 1 9 9 4 ) used the I M A G E 2 m o d e l to assess the c o m b i n e d 
effects o f CO2 fertilisation and cUmate change plus various 
s c e n a r i o s o f l a n d - u s e c h a n g e . T h e i r s t u d y p r o j e c t e d a n 
increase i n terrestrial carbon storage, i n the range 2 0 0 - 2 5 0 
G t d e p e n d i n g u p o n . f u t u r e land-use a s s u m p t i o n s 
( F i g u r e 
9 . 6 ) . T h e s e e q u i l i b r i u m m o d e l results suggest t h a t t h e 
effect o f CO2 i n increasing carbon storage c o u l d d o m i n a t e 
over any w a r m i n g - i n d u c e d reduction i n carbon storage, b u t 
this resuh must be considered as preliminary. 
9.4.4 The Palaeo-record and Implications for a Future 
Climate Equilibrium: Increasing Terrestiial 
Carbon Storage with Increases in Atmospheric 
Carbon Dioxide and Global Mean Temperature 
after the Last Glacial Maximum 
B e t w e e n t h e last g l a c i a l m a x i m u m a n d t h e start o f t h e 
present (Holocene) interglacial there were large increases 
b o t h i n a t m o s p h e r i c greenhouse gas c o n c e n t r a t i o n s a n d 
g l o b a l m e a n t e m p e r a t u r e . C O 2 i n c r e a s e d b y a b o u t 9 0 
p p m v . There may have been several causes o f the increase 
i n a t m o s p h e r i c C O 2 , b u t they p r o b a b l y a l l i n c l u d e d an 
o c e a n source ( S i e g e n t h a l e r , 1 9 8 9 ; H e i n z e et ai, 
1 9 9 1 ; 
P e l t i e r et al, 
1 9 9 3 ; A r c h e r a n d M a i e r - R e i m e r 1 9 9 4 ; 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
467 
(a) 
Net carbon flux 1990 (tonC/km2) 
1500 - 7000 
200 - 500 
_ 150 - 200 
' 100 - 150 
J 50 - 100 
J5 - 50 
-5 - 5 
•50 - - 5 
-100 - -50 
-150 - -100 
-200 - -150 
-500 - -200 
-2000 - -500 
(b) 
Net carbon flux 2050 (tonC/km2) 
I 500 - 7000 
30 - 500 
150 - 200 
100 - 150 
'50 - 100 
¡ 5 - 5 0 
- 5 - 5 
-50 - -5 
1-100 - -50 
-150 - -100 
-200 
150 
-500 - -200 
-2000 - -500 
Figure 9.6: Net carbon flux from the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere simulated by the IMAGE2 integrated assessment model for 
(a) 1990 and (b) 2050 under a "conventional wisdom" scenario. The net flux includes deforestation and forest regrowth as well as 
climate and COj effects. The large sinks shown in the northern temperate regions for 2050 are due to abandonment of agricultural land. 
After Alcamo et al. (1994). 
468 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
Ganeshram et 
1995; Chapter 10). Along with the 
atmospheric C O j increase, global mean temperature 
increased by A-1°C according to climate model estimates 
(Kutzbach and Guetter, 1986; Broccoli and Manabe, 1987; 
Kutzbach et al., 1995). Palaeodata indicate local 
temperature increases on the order of 5°C or more in both 
temperate and tropical regions (Wright et al, 1993; Stute et 
al, 1995; Thompson et al, 1995). Over the same period, 
global teiTestrial carbon storage increased by 310-550 Gt 
(Duplessy etal, 1988; Bird 
a/., 1994), 
For several reasons this is not a strict analogy for future 
CO2 and climate changes. The detailed rime courses of 
change in global mean temperature, C O , and especially 
cai-bon storage are not known. The increase in temperature 
was partly due to the disappearance of the ice sheets, and was 
about twice as large as would be expected due to the 
radiative-forcing changes alone (Lorius et al., 1990). 
Déglaciation increased the area available for vegetation; 
however, a similar area of the exposed continental shelf was 
flooded. The increase in unglaciated land area from the L G M 
to the present was, at most, 2% (Prentice et al, 1993b). The 
lesson is that a combined COj increase and global warming 
can lead to a substantial (in this case, about 25%) increase in 
the amount of carbon stored in tetrestrial vegetation and soils. 
9.5 Methane: Effects of Climate Change and an 
Increase in Atmospheric CO^ on Methane Flux and 
Carbon Balance in Wetlands 
Methane (CH^) is produced in flooded organic soils as a 
result of anaerobic respiration (methanogenesis), and CH^ 
emissions from natural weflands are estimated to contribute 
about 20% to the global emissions of this gas to the 
atmosphere (Chapter 2; Prather et al, 1995). Climate 
change could either increase or decrease CH^ flux from 
wetlands. Factors increasing C H ^ flux would include 
northward spread of peat-forming areas into the high 
latitudes (enhanced by increased precipitation) and faster 
carbon turnover due to warmer temperatures (Crill et al, 
1988; Christensen and Cox, 1995) and/or higher COj 
(Hutchin et al, 1995). Factors decreasing CH^ flux would 
include drier conditions (lower water table) in extant 
peaflands (Whalen and Reeburgh, 1990; Roulet et al, 
1992), and drying-out and/or permafrost melting leading to 
loss of peat-forming areas in the continental interiors 
(Lachenbruch and Marshall, 1986; Oechel et al, 1993; 
Oechel and Vouriitis, 1994; Gorham, 1995). 
However, if CH4 flux declines in some regions due to 
drying, this would imply an additional flux of C O , to the 
atmosphere due to enhanced aerobic respiration and. 
perhaps, large-scale oxidation of the peat by erosion and 
fire (Hogg et al., 1992). This scenario is of concern 
because as much as 450 GtC may be stored in high latitude 
peats (Gorham, 1991; Botch et al, 1995). It has been 
suggested that the large warming that climate models 
predict for the high latitudes could thus threaten the 
integrity of this carbon store (Gorham, 1991, 1995). Like 
the possible carbon "spike" due to transient vegetation 
changes, this possible source of carbon to the atmosphere 
represents a potential positive feedback that has not been 
adequately quantified (Nisbet and Ingham, 1995). 
Analysis of the palaeo-record of CH4 support the idea 
that the net CH4 tlux from wetiands could either increase 
due to warming and CO2 increase, or decline due to drying. 
Atmospheric CH^ concentration increased (by 300 ppbv) 
after the L G M , and closely tracked global climate changes 
through the déglaciation (Stauffer et al, 1988; Chapellaz et 
al, 1990; Chapellaz et al, 1993a). The increase in CH^ 
concentration contributed to the global warming that 
followed the L G M (Lorius et al, 
1990; Lorius and 
Oeschger, 1994). In contrast to CO2, the increase in CH^ is 
thought to represent a positive feedback involving the 
terrestrial biosphere (Schimel etal, 1995). 
Model calculations suggest that the low C H 4 
concentration at the L G M was primarily due to low CH^ 
production by terrestrial ecosystems (Chapellaz et al, 
1993b), rather than to high O H concentrations in the 
atmosphere (Pinto, 1991; Thompson et al, 1993; Crutzen 
and Bruhl, 1993; Martinerie et al, 
1995). Low СН^ 
production would be expected at the L G M , because 
tropical and high latitude weflands were less extensive 
(implying a redqced source area: Petit-Maire et al, 1991) 
and temperatures and CO., were lower, both factors 
implying slower carbon turnover in the source area. 
Atmospheric CH^ concentration stood at 700-750 ppbv 
in the early Holocene, had fallen to < 600 ppbv by the mid-
Hojocene, then rose gradually in the late Holocene to once 
again reach the "pre-industrial" level of 700-750 ppbv. 
These variations may reflect a trade-off between the extent 
of tropical and high latitude wetlands (Blunier et al, 1995). 
Tropical wetlands were most extensive in the early 
Holocene due to increased monsoonal precipitation (Petit-
Maire et al, 1991; Street-Perrott, 1992). High latitude 
wetlands have increased in extent during the late Holocene 
due to decreasing temperatures and evaporation (Ovenden, 
1990; Zoltai and Vitt, 1990; Gorham, 1991; Botch et al, 
1995). The lesson is that warming in high latitudes can 
either increase or decrease natural C H ^ production, 
depending on the extent to which increased temperatures 
are matched by increased precipitation and/or CO-,. 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
469 
9.6 Nitrous Oxide 
Our current understanding of the global budget of nitrous 
oxide (NjO) is reviewed in Chapter 2 and by Prather et al. 
(1995). The budget is largely controlled by microbial 
processes in soils. Today, the warm, moist soils of the 
tropical forests are probably the single most important 
source of N 2 O . Land-use and the intensification of 
agriculture in the tropics appear to be increasing the size of 
the NjO source from this region. 
The microbial process responsible for the production of 
most of the NjO is denitrification; the dissimilatory 
reduction of oxides of nitrogen that produces N , as well as 
N , 0 . The rate of denitrification is controlled by oxygen 
(Oj), nitrate (NO3) and carbon. Moisture has an indirect 
effect on denitrification by influencing 
content of soil. 
If other conditions are appropriate, then temperature 
becomes an important controller of denitrification. 
Denitrifiers in natural environments are capable of 
producing either N-,0 or Nj as end products. Numerous 
factors have been reported to affect the proportion of N2O 
produced relative to N2. Perhaps most important are the 
relative supplies of nitrate and carbon (Firestone and 
Davidson, 1989). The dominant product of denitrification 
may be NjO in systems where, at least for a time, nitrate 
supply is high and carbon supply is low, but not 
excessively so. 
Probably due to a combination of more extensive 
wetland areas and increased rates of nitrogen cycling in 
terrestrial ecosystems under warmer and/or moister 
climates after the L G M , atmospheric NjO concentration 
increased from -200 ppbv to -270 ppbv (Leuenburger and 
Siegenthaler, 1992). In the future, a wetter climate may 
lead to increased N2O production, although this potential 
positive feedback has not been adequately quantified. 
9.7 Global-Scale Biogeophysical Feedbacks: Changes 
in Ecosystem Structure and Function Affect 
Climate 
9.7.1 Effects of Vegetation Structure on Land-surface 
Characteristics 
Vegetation mediates the exchange of water and energy 
between the land surface and the atmosphere (Rind, 1984; 
Sud et al, 1990; Hostetler et al, 1994). Land-atmo.sphere 
interactions are physically represented by land-surface 
models designed for implementation in current GCMs (see 
Chapter 5, Section 5.3.2). These models require a global 
vegetation type (biome) distribution to be prescribed. Most 
climate change analyses with GCMs have assumed no 
change in vegetation distribution. However, both land-use 
change 
(e.g., deforestation 
and 
human-induced 
deforestation) and climatically induced natural vegetation 
change can significantiy alter global vegetation distribution 
over decades to centuries. 
The main land-surface parameters influenced by 
vegetation structure are surface albedo (normal and snow-
covered), roughness length (affecting boundary-layer 
conductance), canopy conductance and rooting depth. 
Snow-free surface albedo for total short-wave radiation 
ranges from -0.15 in closed forests to 0.4-0.5 in hot 
deserts (Henderson-Sellers and McGuffie, 1987). The 
largest effect of snow cover is on low vegetation types such 
as grasslands and tundra, where the snow-covered albedo 
can be up to 0.8. Roughness length increases with 
vegetation height: tall forests therefore present a boundary-
layer conductance that is much larger than short grasslands. 
Canopy conductance is influenced by foliage density, plant 
nitrogen content, atmospheric C O , content and drought 
stress (Schulze et al, 1994). At present ambient COj, most 
natural vegetation types have a maximum stomatal 
conductance of 3-6 mm/s while field crops have a higher 
conductance, up to 12 mm/s (Kelliher et al, 1993). Canopy 
conductance increases asymptotically with leaf area index, 
towards a value of about 3 ^ times stomatal conductance 
for a closed canopy (Schulze et al, 1994). Maximum 
stomatal conductance is lowered under increased ambient 
CO2. Stomatal closure under midday conditions of high 
evaporative demand acts to restrict canopy conductance. 
This closure occurs sooner as soil moisture supply is 
reduced and vapour pressure deficit increases. 
9.7.2 Effects of Land-surface Changes on Climate 
The sensirivity of climate to changes in these different 
land-surface properties varies regionally. For example, 
albedo effects are important in controlling precipitation in 
climatic regimes where precipitation is controlled by large-
scale dynamics or convection; canopy conductance and 
rooting depth are important in regimes where a large 
proportion of precipitation arises by recycling of 
évapotranspiration from the land surface (Rind, 1984). 
Sensitivity analyses with GCMs have been used to 
estimate the response of climate to major changes in the 
land surface, such as tropical deforestation (Dickinson, 
1989; Shukla et al, 1990; Nobre et al, 1991; Henderson-
Sellers et al, 1993; Polcher and Laval, 1994). Through 
raising albedo and/or lowering évapotranspiration, large-
scale deforestation tends to reduce moisture convergence 
and precipitation. The potential area of tropical rain forests 
and seasonal forests is therefore reduced. More generally, 
albedo exerts a strong control over évapotranspiration and 
470 
precipitation i n the tropics and subtropics ( C h a m e y , 1975; 
C h a m e y et al, 
1977; M y l n e and Rowntree, 1992). 
A l b e d o changes i n the h i g h latitudes can also have major 
e f f e c t s . B o n a n et al 
( 1 9 9 2 ) a n d C h a l i t a a n d L e T r e u t 
(1994) examined the sensitivity o f global climate to boreal 
deforestation (replacement o f the boreal forests b y tundra). 
T h e l a r g e increase i n s n o w - c o v e r e d a l b e d o r e s u l t e d i n 
colder winters and a longer snow season. I n B o n a n et 
al's 
s t u d y , w h i c h i n c l u d e d a m i x e d - l a y e r ocean m o d e l , the 
thickness and duration of A r c t i c sea ice was increased and 
the c o o l i n g thereby extended f r o m w i n t e r i n t o s u m m e r . 
T h e total effect was felt across the N o r t h e r n H e m i s p h e r e 
a n d s u m m e r t e m p e r a t u r e s b e c a m e t o o c o l d f o r t h e 
persistence o f boreal forests i n their present range. Such 
sensitivity studies suggest that large biogeophysical effects 
o f vegetation structure o n c l i m a t e c o u l d be b r o u g h t i n t o 
play by land-use change. 
C l i m a t e - i n d u c e d changes i n b i o m e d i s t r i b u t i o n w o u l d 
p r e s u m a b l y 
a l s o 
c a u s e 
f e e d b a c k s . 
P a l a e o c l i m a t e 
s i m u l a t i o n s suggest that such f e e d b a c k s are i m p o r t a n t . 
S t r e e t - P e r r o U et al 
( 1 9 9 0 ) s h o w e d t h a t a G C M w i t h 
surface boundary conditions kept as today c o u l d simulate 
the p h e n o m e n o n , b u t n o t the extent a n d m a g n i t u d e , o f 
A f r i c a n monsoon expansion at 9000 y r bp. W h e n a realistic 
expansion o f vegetation across the present-day Sahara was 
included (via the albedo effect), precipitation increased b y 
a further ~ 1 m m / d a y over large areas, i n c l u d i n g northern 
and w e s t e r n r e g i o n s that w e r e s c a r c e l y a f f e c t e d i n the 
o r i g i n a l s i m u l a t i o n . F o l e y et al. ( 1 9 9 4 ) s h o w e d that the 
w a r m i n g - i n d u c e d p o l e w a r d expansion o f boreal forests into 
w h a t is n o w tundra at 6000 y r bp could have doubled the 
i n i t i a l e f f e c t s o f o r b i t a l f o r c i n g ( F i g u r e 9 . 7 ) . I n b o t h 
examples, b i o g e o p h y s i c a l feedbacks a m p l i f i e d the i n i t i a l 
radiative f o r c i n g . 
M o r e detailed investigation o f biogeophysical feedbacks 
r e q u i r e s 
c o u p l i n g 
v e g e t a t i o n 
m o d e l s 
w i t h 
G C M s 
( H e n d e r s o n - S e l l e r s , 1 9 9 3 ; C l a u s s e n , 1 9 9 4 ) . 
C l a u s s e n 
(1993) c o u p l e d the B I O M E m o d e l a s y n c h r o n o u s l y to an 
G C M , using an iterative procedure: 4 - 6 year ensembles o f 
s i m u l a t e d c l i m a t e w e r e u s e d t o m o d i f y t h e b i o m e 
d i s t r i b u t i o n , w h i c h i n t u r n m o d i f i e d the c l i m a t e . T h e 
c o u p l e d s y s t e m p r o v e d s t a b l e w i t h r e s p e c t t o s n i a l l 
perturbations o f the b i o m e d i s t r i b u t i o n , as also f o u n d by 
H e n d e r s o n - S e l l e r s 
( 1 9 9 3 ) . 
H o w e v e r 
a v e r y 
l a r g e 
p e r t u r b a t i o n 
t r i g g e r e d a c o m p l e x 
r e s p o n s e i n t h e 
atmospheric circulation and caused the coupled system to 
return to an alternative state i n w h i c h the south-western 
Sahara remained w o o d e d . W i t h 6000 y r bp orbital f o r c i n g , 
the coupled system approached an even more extreme state 
i n w h i c h most o f the Sahara turned to savannah (Claussen 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
(a) 
180 
0 
А/ (°C) - Annual average 
(b) 
180 
0 
At (°C) - Annual average 
Figure 9.7: Amplification of 6,000 yr bp radiative forcing due to 
biogeophysical feedback, as simulated with the GENESIS 
atmospheric/mixed-layer ocean model, (a) Increase in annual 
mean temperature due to radiative forcing alone, (b) Additional 
increase due to northward extension of the boreal forest. After 
Foley etal. (1994). 
and Gayler, 1995). T h i s state is similar to the 6 0 0 0 y r bp 
situation s h o w n by palaeoecological data. 
C O j - i n d u c e d c h a n g e s i n c a n o p y c o n d u c t a n c e are 
e x p e c t e d to h a v e f u r t h e r f e e d b a c k e f f e c t s o n c l i m a t e 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
471 
(Martin et al, 1989; Field et al, 1995). As ambient CO^ 
increases, stomatal conductance declines. G C M sensitivity 
studies indicate that a global halving of surface 
conductance, with no change in leaf area, would lead to 
reduced évapotranspiration rates, increased surface air 
warming about 0.5°C averaged over terrestrial areas, 
compared with 1.1 to 2.5°C which is predicted for the 
combined effects of radiative forcing and aerosols (Chapter 
6), and in some regions increase soil moisture storage 
(Henderson-Sellers et al, 1995; Pollard and Thompson 
1995). This latter effect of C O , could mitigate or even 
reverse the mid-latitude drying seen in some 2 X CO2 
simulations with fixed surface conductance (Chapter 6). 
Compensatory increases in leaf area would work against 
the effect of COj-induced reductions in stomatal 
conductance. However, a study with a coupled (single 
column) model of the soil-ecosystem-atmosphere system, 
including interactive adjustment of leaf area in response to 
COj, suggested that the stomatal conductance response 
would dominate over the compensatory leaf area response 
(Friend and Cox, 1995). Thus, the net "physiological" 
effect of C O , on climate would be to reduce 
évapotranspiration and increase soil moisture, relative to 
the scenarios based on radiative forcing alone. 
Such studies underline the sensitivity of the simulated 
hydrological cycle to land-surface properties that are 
determined by ecosystem functional and structural 
responses to climate and C O j . In particular, G C M 
simulations of regional changes in soil moisture in a high-
CO2 world are questionable because such simulations have 
not, as yet, taken into account changes in ecosystem 
structure and function that would have major feedback 
effects on the hydrological cycle. The uncertainty is 
compounded because most current GCMs do not resolve 
the vertical structure of the planetary boundary layer 
(PBL), which may limit the effect of changes in stomatal 
conductance 
on 
évapotranspiration 
(Jarvis 
and 
McNaughton, 1986; Martin, 1989; McNaughton and Jarvis, 
1991;Monteith, 1995). 
Proper representation of these feedbacks in models 
requires a physiologically based representation of the 
processes controlling canopy conductance (e.g., Collatz et 
al, 1991; Friend and Cox, 1995), a sufficiently resolved 
representation of the P B L (e.g., Troen and Mahrt, 1986; 
MacNaughton and Jarvis, 1991; Jacobs and de Bruin, 
1992), and these elements to be fully interactive in the 
G C M . Such a coupling of atmospheric and ecosystem 
processes appears to be a high priority because the 
potential for future drought is; (a) a key issue in assessing 
the biological and societal impacts of global change; and 
(b) one of the main hypotheses underlying predictions of 
positive biogeochemical feedbacks leading to COj release 
and further warming, as discussed in Section 9.2.3.1 and in 
Woodwell and Mackenzie (1995). 
In conclusion, biogeophysical feedbacks involve 
interactions between the atmosphere and biosphere which 
can only be assessed quantitatively through the further 
development of coupled models including the terrestrial 
biosphere as an integral component of the climate system. 
Model sensitivity studies (including palaeoclimate 
simulation) suggest that these feedbacks are potentially of 
similar magnitude to the direct effects of changes in 
radiative forcing. 
References 
Aber, J.D., J.K. Nadelhoffer, P.A. Steadier and J.M. Melillo, 
1989; Nitrogen saturation in northern forest ecosystems ~ 
hypotheses and implications. BioScl, 39, 378-386. 
Aber, J.D., A. Magill, R. Boone, J.M. Melillo, P. Steadier and R. 
Bowden, 1993; Plant and soil responses to chronic nitrogen 
additions at the Harvard Forest, Massachusetts. Ecol Appl, 3 
(1), 156-166. 
Alcamo, J., G.J. Van den Born, A.F. Bouwman. B. de Haan, K. 
Klein-Goldewijk, O. Klepper, R. Leemans, J.A. Oliver, B. de 
Vries, H. van der Woerd and R.F. van den Wijngaard, 1994; 
Modeling the global society-biosphere-climate system. Part 2; 
Computed scenarios. Water Air Soil Pollut, 76, 37-78. 
Allen, L . H . Jr., and J.S. Amthor, 1995; Plant physiological 
responses to elevated CO2, temperature, air pollution, and UV-
B Radiation. In: Biotic Feedbacks in the Global Climatic 
System, G . M . Woodwell and F.T. Mackenzie (eds), Oxford 
University Press, New York, pp. 51-84. 
Archer, D. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1994; Effect of deep-sea 
sedimentary calcite preservation on atmospheric C O j 
concentration. Nature, 367, 260-263. 
Archer, S., D.S. Schimel and E.A. Holland, 1995: Mechanisms 
of shrubland expansion: land use, climate or CO2? Clim. 
Change 29,9\~99. 
Arnone, J.A., 111 and J.C. Gordon, 1990; Effect of nodulation, 
nitrogen fixation, and C O , enrichment on the physiology, 
growth and dry mass allocation of seedlings of Alnus rubra 
Bong. New Phytol, 116, 55-66. 
Arp, W . J . , 1991: Effects of source-sink relations on 
photosynthetic acclimation to elevated COj. Plant, Cell and 
Environ., 14, 869-75. 
Arp, W.J., B.G. Drake, W.T. Pockman, P.S. Curtis and D.F. 
Whigman, 1993; Interactions between C3 and C^ salt marsh 
plant species during four years of exposure to elevated 
atmospheric COj. Vegetatio, 104/105, 133-143. 
Arris, L.L., and P.S. Eagleson, 1994; A water use model for 
locating the boreal/deciduous forest ecotone in eastern North 
America. Water Resour. Res., 30, 1-9. 
472 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
Auclair, A.N.D. and T.B. Carter, 1993: Forest wildfires as a 
recent source of COj at northern latitudes. Can. J. For Res., 
23, 1528-1536. 
Bazzaz, F.A. and E.D. Fajer, 1992: Plant life in a CO^-rich world. 
Sci. Am., 266, 68-74. 
Beeriing, D.J. and F.I. Woodward, 1993: Ecophysiological 
responses of plants to global environmental change since the 
last glacial maximum. New Phytol, 125, 641-648. 
Bennett, K.D., 1986: The rate of spread and population increase 
of forest trees during the postglacial. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
London, B, 314, 523-31. 
Bird, M.L, J. Lloyd and G.D. Farquhar, 1994: Terrestrial carbon 
storage at the L G M . Nature, 371, 585. 
Blunier, T., J. Chapellaz, J. Schwander, B. Stauffer and D. 
Raynaud, 
1995: Variation in atmospheric 
methane 
concentration during the Holocene epoch. Nature, 374, 46^9. 
Bonan, G.B. and L. Sirois, 1992: Air temperature, tree growth, 
and the northern and southem range limits to Picea mariana. J. 
Veg. Sci, 2, 495-506. 
Bonan, G.B.and K. Van Cleve, 1992: Soil temperature, nitrogen 
mineralization, and carbon source-sink relationships in boreal 
forests. Can. J. For Res., 22, 629-639. 
Bonan, G.B., D. Pollard and S.L. Thompson, 1992: Effects of 
boreal forest vegetation on global climate. Nature. 
359, 
716-718. 
Botch, M.S., K.I. Kobak T.S. Vinson and T.P. Kolchugina, 1995: 
Carbon pools and accumulation in peatlands of the former 
Soviet Union. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles, 9, 37-46. 
Botkin, D.B., J.F.Janak and J.R. Wallis, 1972: Some ecological 
consequences of a computer model of forest growth. J. Ecol, 
60, 948-972. 
Bowes, G., 1991: Growth at elevated C O , : photosynthetic 
responses mediated through Rubisco. Plant, Cell and Environ., 
14, 795-806. 
Bradshaw, R.H.W. and G.E. Hannon, 1992: Climatic change, 
human influence and disturbance regime in the control of 
vegetation dynamics within Fiby forest, Sweden. J. Ecol, 80, 
625-632. 
Broccoli, A.J. and S. Manabe, 1987: The influence of continental 
ice, atmospheric C O , and land albedo on the climate of the last 
glacial maximum. СШп. Dyn., 1, 87-99. 
Bugmann, H . K . M . , 1993: On the Ecology of Mountainous 
Forests in a Changing Climate: A Simulation Study, Ph. D. 
thesis, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich. 
Campbell, 
I.D. and J.H. McAndrews, 
1993: 
Forest 
disequilibrium caused by rapid Littie Ice Age cooling. Nature, 
366, 336-338. 
Ceulemans, R. and M . Mousseau, 1994: Effects of elevated 
atmospheric COj on wood plants. New Phytol, 127, 425-426. 
Chabot, B.F. and D.J. Hicks, 1982: The ecology of leaf life 
spans. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst., 13, 229-259. 
Chalitii, S. and H. Le Treut, 1994: The albedo of temperate and 
boreal forest and the northern hemisphere climate: A sensitivity 
experiment using the L M D G C M . Clim. Dyn., 10, 231-240. 
Chameides, W.L., P.S. Kasibhatla, J. Yienger and H. Levy П, 
1994: Growth of continental-scale metro-agro-plexes, regional 
ozone production, and world food production. Science, 264, 
74-77. 
Chapellaz, J., J.M. Barnola, D. Raynaud, Y.S. Korotkevitch and 
C. Lorius, 1990: Ice core record of atmospheric methane over 
the past 160,000 years. Nature, 345, 127-131. 
Chapellaz, J., T. Blunier, D. Raynaud, J . M . Barnola, J. 
Schwander and B. Stauffer, 1993a: Synchronous changes in 
atmospheric CH^ and Greenland climate between 40 and 8 kyr 
bp. Nature, 366, 443^45. 
Chapellaz, J.A., I.Y. Fung and A . M . Thompson, 1993b: The 
atmosphere CH^ increase since the last glacial maxintum;l. 
Source estimates. Tellus, 45B, 228-241. 
Chapin, F.S. Ill, 1991: Effects of multiple environmental stresses 
on nutrient availability and use. In: Response of Plants to 
Multiple Stresses, H.A. Mooney et al, (eds.). Academic Press, 
San Diego, CA, pp. 67-88. 
Chapin, F.S. Ill, G.R. Shaver, A.E. Giblin, K.J. Nadelhoffer and 
J.A. Laundre, 1995: Réponses of arctic tundra to experimental 
and observed changes in climate. Ecology, 76, 694-711. 
Charney, J.G., 1975: Dynamics of deserts and drought in the 
Sahel. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc. 101, 193-202. 
Charney, J.G, W. Quirk, J. Chow and J. Kornfield, 1977: A 
comparative study of the effects of albedo change on drought in 
semi-arid regions. J. Atmos. Sci.. 34, 1366-1385. 
Christensen, T.R. and P. Cox, 1995: Response of methane 
emission from arctic tundra to climatic change: results from a 
model simulation. Tellus, 47B, 301-310. 
Ciais, P., P.P. Tans, J.W.C. White, M . Troher, R.J. Francey. J.A. 
Berry, D.R. Randall, P.J. Sellers, J.G. Collatz and D.S. 
Schimel, 1995a: Partitioning of ocean and land uptake of C O , 
as inferred by 8'^C measurements from the N O A A Climate 
Moinitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory Global Air Sampling 
Network, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 5051-5057. 
Ciais, P., P.P. Tans, M . Trolier, J.W.C. White and R.J. Francey, 
1995b: A large northern hemisphere terrestrial C O j sink 
indicated by '^C/'^C of atmospheric C O , . Science, 
269, 
1098-1102. 
Clark, J.S., 1993: Paleoecological perspectives on modeling 
broad scale responses to global change. In: Biotic Interactions 
and Global Change, P.M. Kareiva, J.G. Kingsolver, R.B. Huey 
(eds.), Sinauer, Sunderland. M A , pp. 315-332. 
Claussen, M . , 1993: Shift of biome patterns due to simulated 
climate variability and climate change. Max-Planck-Institut fiir 
Météorologie, Report No. 115, Hamburg , 30 pp. 
Claussen, M . , 1994: On coupling global biome models with 
climate models. Clim. Res., in press. 
Claussen, M . and M . Esch, 1994: Biomes computed from 
simulated climatologies. Clim. Dyn., 9, 235-243. 
Claussen, M and V. Gay 1er. 1995: Modelling paleo and present-
day vegetation patterns. Annales Geophysicae, Suppl. II to 
Volume 13, C357. 
COHMAP Members, 1988: Climate changes of the last 18,000 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
473 
years: Observations and model simulations. Science, 
241, 
1043-1052. 
CoUatz, G.J., J.T. Ball, C. Grivet and J.A. Berry, 1991: Physiological 
and environmental regulation of stomatal conductance, 
photosynthesis and teanspiration: a model that includes a laminar 
boundary layer. Agrie. For Meteorol., 54, 107-136. 
Cramer, W.P. and A . M . Solomon, 1993: Climate classification 
and future global redistribution of agricultural land. Clim. Res., 
3, 97-110. 
Crill, P.M., K.B. Bartlett, R.C. Harriss, E. Gorham, E.S. Verry, 
D.I. Sebacher, L. Madzar and W. Sanner, 1988: Methane flux 
from Minnesota Peatlands. Glob. Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 2, 
371-384. 
Crutzen, P.J. and C. Br/hl, 1993: A model study of atmospheric 
temperatures and concentrations of ozone, hydroxyl, and some 
other photochemically active gases during the glacial, the 
preindustrial Holocene, and the present. Geophys. Res. Lett., 
20, 1047-1050. 
Dahl, E., 1990: Probable effects of climatic change due to the 
greenhouse effect on plant productivity and survival in North 
Europe. In: Effects of CUmate Change 
on 
Terrestrial 
Ecosystems, J.I. Holten (ed.), Nina Notât 4, 7-17. Norwegian 
Institute for Nature Research, Trondheim. 
Dai, A. and I.Y. Eung, 1993: Can climate variability contribute to 
the "missing" C O j sink? Glob. Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 
7, 
599-609. 
Davis, M . B . , 1976: Pleistocene biogeography of temperate 
deciduous forests. Geoscience and Man, 13, 13-26. 
Davis, M.B., 1983: Quatenary history of deciduous forests of 
eastern North America and Europe. Annals of the Missouri 
Botanical Garden, 70, 550-563. 
Davis, M.B., 1989: Lags in vegetation response to greenhouse 
warming. Clim. Change, 15, 75-82. 
Davis, M.B., 1990: Climatic change and the survival of forest 
species. In: The Earth in Transition: Patterns and Processes of 
Biotic Impoverishment, G . M . Woodwell (ed.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 99-110. 
Davis, M.B. and D.B. Botkin, 1985: Sensitivity of cool-temperate 
forests and their fossil pollen record to rapid temperature 
change. Quat Res., 23, 327^0. 
Davis, M.B. and C. Zabinski, 1992: Changes in geographical 
range resulting from greenhouse warming: effects on 
biodiversity in forests. In: Global Warming and Biological 
Diversity, R.L. Peters and Т.Е. Lovejoy (eds.), Yale University 
Press, New Haven, pp. 297-308. 
Davis, M.B., K.D. Woods, S.L. Webb and R.P. Futyma, 1986: 
Dispersal versus climate: expansion of Fagus and Tsuga into 
the Upper Great Lakes region. Vegetatio, 67, 93-103. 
Denning, A.S., I.Y. Fung and D. Randall, 1995: Latitudinal 
gradient of atmospheric CO2 due to seasonal exchange with 
land biota. Nature, 376, 240-243. 
Diaz, S., J.P. Grime, J. Harris and E. McPherson, 1993: Evidence 
of a feedback mechanism limiting plant response to elevated 
carbon dioxide. Nature, 364, 616-617. 
Dickinson, R.E., 1989: Modeling the effects of Amazonian 
deforestation on regional surface climate: a review. Agrie. For. 
Meteorol, il, 339-347. 
Dixon, R.K., S.A. Brown, R.A. Houghton, A . M . Solomon, M.C. 
Trexler and J. Wisniewski, 1994: Carbon pools and flux of 
global forest ecosystems. Science, 263, 185-190. 
Drake, B.G., 1992a: A field study of the effects of elevated COj 
on ecosystem processes in a Chesapeake Bay wetiand. Aiistr. J. 
Sot, 40, 579-595. 
Drake, B.G., !992b; The impact of rising CO^ on ecosystem 
production. Water Air Soil Pollut, 64, 25-44. 
Duce, R.A., P.S. Liss, J.T. Merrill, E.L. Atlas, P. Buat-Menard, 
B.B. Hicks, J.M. Miller, J.M. Prospero, R. Arimoto, T . M . 
Church, W. Ellis, J.N. GaUoway, L. Hansen, T.D. Jickells, 
A . H . Knap, K . H . Reinhardt, B. Schneider, A . Soudine, J.J. 
Tokos, S. Tsunogai, R. Woflast and M . Zhou, 1991: The 
atmospheric input of trace species to the world ocean. Glob. 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 5, 193-259. 
Duplessy, J.C, N.J. Shackleton, R.G. Fairbanks, L. Labeyrie, D. 
Oppo and N . Kallel, 1988: Deepwater source variations during 
the last climatic cycle and their impact on the global deepwater 
circulation. Paleoceanography , 3, 343-360. 
Eagleson, P.S., 1978: Climate, soil and vegetation 6. Dynamics 
of the annual water balance. Water Resour. Res., 14, 749-764. 
Eagleson. P.S. and R.I. Segarra, 1985: Water-limited equilibrium 
of savanna vegetation systems. Water Resour. Res., 21, 
1483-1493. 
Eamus, D. and P.G. Jarvis, 1989: The direct effects of increase in 
the global atmsopheric C O j concentration on natural and 
commercial temperate trees and forests. Adv. EcoL Res., 19, 
1-55. 
Ehleringer, J.R. and R.K. Monson, 1993: Evolutionary and 
ecological aspects of photosynthetic pathway variation. Ann. 
Rev. Ecol Sy St., 24, 
4П-439. 
Emanuel, W.R., H . H . Shugart and M . P . Stevenson, 1985: 
Climatic change and the broad-scale distribution of teirestrial 
ecosystem complexes. Clim. Change, 1, 29-43. 
Farquhar, G.D., J. Lloyd, J.A. Taylor, L . B . Flanagan, J.P. 
Syvertsen, K.T. Hubick, S.C. Wong and J.R. Ehleringer, 1993: 
Vegetation effects on the isotopic composition of oxygen in 
atmospheric CO^. Nature, 363, 439-443. 
Fetcher, N., C H . Jaeger, B.R. Suain and N . Sionit, 1988: Long-
term elevation of atmospheric C O j concentration and the 
carbon exchange rates of saplings of Pinus and Liquidamber 
styraciflua (L.). Tree Physiol, 4, 255-262. 
Field, C.B., R.B. Jackson and H.A. Mooney, 1995: Stomatal 
responses to increased CO,: Implications from the plant to the 
global scale. Plant, Cell Environ., in press. 
Firestone, M.K. and E.A. Davidson, 1989: Microbial basis for 
NO and NjO production and consumption in soil. In: Exchange 
of Trace Gases between Terrestrial 
Ecosystems and the 
Atmosphere, M . O . Andreae and D.S. Schimel (eds.), John 
Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Chichester, pp. 7-22. 
Foley, J.A., 1994: Sensitivity of the terrestrial biosphere to 
474 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
climatic change: A simulation of the middle holocene. Glob. 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 405^25. 
Foley, J.A., J.E. Kutzbach, IVI.T. Сое and S. Levis, 1994: 
Feedbacks between climate and boreal forests during the mid-
Holocene. Nature, 371, 52-54. 
Francey, R.J. and P.P. Tans, 1987: Latitudinal variation in 
oxygen-18 in atmospheric CO^. Nature, 327, 495-497. 
Francey, R.J., P.P. Tans, C E . Alhson, I.G. Enting, J.W.C. White 
and M . Trolier, Í995: Changes in oceanic and terrestrial carbon 
uptake since 1982. Nature, 373, 326-330. 
Friend, A . D . and P.M. Cox, 1995: Modeling the effects of 
atmospheric C O j on vegetation-atmosphere 
interactions. 
Agrie. For Meteorol., 73, 285-295. 
Galloway, J.N., W.H. Schlesinger, H. Levy II, A. Michaels and 
J.L. Schnoor, 1995: Nitrogen fixation: Anthropogenic 
enhancement-environmental response. Glob. 
Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 9, 235-252. 
Ganeshram, R.S., Т.Е. Pedersen, S.F. Calvert and J.W. Murray, 
1995: Large changes in oceanic nutrient inventories from 
glacial to interglacial periods. Nature, 376, 755-758. 
Gear, A.J. and B. Huntley, 1991: Rapid changes in the range 
limits of Scots pine 4000 years ago. Science, 251, 544-547. 
Gifford, R.M., 1979: Growth and yield of C02-enriched wheat 
under water-limited conditions. Aust. J. Plant Physiol, 
6, 
367-378. 
Gifford, R.M., 1993: Implications of C O , effects on vegetation 
for the global carbon budget. In: The Global Carbon Cycle, M . 
Heimann (ed.), Proceedings of the N A T O Advanced Study 
Institute, II Ciocco, Italy, September 8-20, 1991, pp. 165-205. 
Gifford, R.M., 1994: The global carbon cycle: A viewpoint on 
the missing sink. Austr J. Plant Physiol, 21, 1-15. 
Giresse, P., J. Maley and P. Brenac, 1994: Late Quaternary 
paleoenvironments in the Lake Barombi Mbo (West 
Cameroon) deduced from pollen and carbon isotopes of organic 
matter. Paleogeogr., Paleoclim., Paleoecol, 107, 65-78. 
Gorham, E., 1991: Northern peatlands: role in the carbon cycle and 
probable responses to cUmatic wanning. Ecol Appl, 2, 182-195. 
Gorham, E., 1995: The biogeochemistry of northern peatlands 
and its possible response to global warming. In: Biotic 
Feedback in the Global Climatic System, G.M. Woodwell and 
F.T. Mackenzie (eds.), Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 
169-187. 
Grimm, E.G., 1983: Chronology and dynamics of vegetation 
change in the prairie-woodland region of southern Minnesota, 
U.S.A. New Phytol, 93, 311-350. 
Grimm, E.C., 1984: Fire and other factors controlling the Big 
Woods vegetation of Minnesota in the mid-nineteenth century. 
Ecol Monogr., 54, 291-311. 
Groves, R.H. and O.B. Williams, 1981: Natural grasslands. In: 
Australian 
Vegetation, 
R . H . Groves (ed), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 293-316. 
Gunderson, C.A. and S.D. Wullschleger, 1994: Photosynthetic 
acclimation in trees to rising atmospheric CO^. A broader 
perspective. Photosynth. Res., 39, 369-388. 
Hall, C.A.S. and J. Uhlig, 1991: Refining estimates of carbon 
released from tropical land-use change. Can. J. For Res., 21, 
118-131. 
Harmon, M.E., W.K. Ferrel and J.F. Frankhn, 1990: Effects on 
carbon storage of the conversion of old-growth forests to young 
forests. Science, 247, 699-702. 
Harte, J. and R. Shaw, 1995: Shifting dominence in a montane 
vegetation community: results of a climate-warming 
experiment. Science, 267, 876-880. 
Haxeltine, A., I.C. Prentice and I.D. Cresswell, 1996: A coupled 
carbon and water flux model to predict vegetation structure. /. 
Veg. Set, in press. 
Heck, W.W., 1984: Defining gaseous pollution problems in North 
America. In: Gaseous Air Pollutants and Plant Metabolism, 
M.J. Koziol and F.R. Whatley (eds.), Butterworths, London, 
pp. 35-48. 
Heinze, C , E. Maier-Reimer and K. Winn, 1991: Glacial PCO2 
reduction by the world ocean: experiments with the Hamburg 
ocean model. Paleoceanography , 6, 395^30. 
Henderson-Sellers, A . , 1993: Continental vegetation as a 
dynamic component of global climate models: a preliminary 
assessment. Clim. Change, 23, 337-378. 
Henderson-Sellers, A . and K . McGuffie, 1987: A Climate 
Modeling Primer J. Wiley & Sons, New York, 217pp. 
Henderson-Sellers, A. and K. McGuffie, 1995: Global climate 
models and 'dynamic' vegetadon changes. Global Change 
Biology, 1, 63-76. 
Henderson-Sellers, A., R.E. Dickinson, T.B. Durbidge, P.J. 
Kennedy, K . McGuffie and A . J . Pitman, 1993: Tropical 
deforestation: modeling local- to regional-scale climate change. 
J. Geophys. Res., 98, 7289-7315. 
Henderson-Sellers, A . , K . McGuffie and C. Gross, 1995: 
Sensitivity of global climate model simulations to increased 
stomatal resistance and CO2 increases. J. Climate, in press. 
Hogg, E.H., V.J. Lieffers and R.W. Wein, 1992: Potential carbon 
losses from peat profiles. Ecol Appl, 2, 298-306. 
Hostetler, S.W., F. Giorgi, G.T. Bates and P.J. Bartlein, 1994: 
Lake-atmosphere feedbacks associated with Paleolakes 
Bonneville and Lahontan. Science, 263, 665-668. 
Houghton, R.A., 1991: Tropical deforestation and atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. Clim. Change, 19, 99-118. 
Houghton, R.A., 1995: Effects of land-use change, surface 
temperature, and C O j concentration on terrestrial stores of 
carbon. In: Biotic Feedbacks in the Global Climatic System, 
G.M. WoodweU and F.T. Mackenzie (eds), Oxford University 
Press, New York, pp. 333-366. 
Houghton, R.A. and G . M . Woodwell, 1989: Global climatic 
change. ScL Am., 260, 36^7. 
Houghton, R.A., R.D. Boone, J.R. Fruci, J.E. Hobbie, J.M. 
Melillo, C . A . Palm, B . J . Peterson, G.R. Shaver, G . M . 
Woodwell, B. Moore, D.L. Skole and N. Myers, 1987: The flux 
of carbon from terrestrial ecosystems to the atmosphere in 1980 
due to changes in land use: Geographic distribution of the 
global flux. Tellus, 39B, 122-139. 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
475 
Hsaio, T., 1973: Plant responses to water stress. Annu. Rev. Plant 
Physiol, 24, 519-570. 
Hudson, R . J . M . , S.A. Gherini and R . A . Goldstein, 1994: 
Modeling the global carton cycle: Nitrogen fertilization of the 
terrestrial biosphere and the "missing" C O j sink. Glob. 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 307-333. 
Hunt, E.R. Jr. and S.W. Running, 1992: Simulated dry matter 
yields for aspen and spruce stands in the North American 
Boreal Eorest. Can. J. Rem. Sens., 18, 126-133. 
Huntley, В., 1988: Europe. In: Vegetation History, B. Huntley 
and T. Webb III (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, pp. 341-383. 
Hundey, B. and H.J.B. Birks, 1983: An Atlas of Past and Present 
Pollen Maps for Europe: 0-13000 B.P. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Huntley, B. and T. Webb III, 1989: Migration: species' response 
to climatic variations caused by changes in the earth's orbit. J. 
Biogeogr., 16, 5-19. 
Hutchin, P.A., M.C. Press, J.A. Lee and T.W. Ashenden, 1995: 
Elevated concentrations of COj may double methane emissions 
from mires. Global Change Biology, I, 125-128. 
Idso, S.B. and B . A . Kimball, 1993: Tree growth in carbon 
dioxide enriched air and its implications for global carbon 
cycling and maximum levels of atmospheric C O j . Glob. 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 537-555. 
Idso, K.E. and S.B. Idso, 1994: Plant responses to atmospheric 
COj enrichment in the face of environmental constraints: a 
review of the last 10 years' research. Agrie. For Meteorol, 69, 
153-203. 
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of 
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC 1S92 Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, Hoesung 
Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N. Harris and K. Maskell (eds.). 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC WGII, 1995: Clijnate Change 1995-lmpacts, Adaptations 
and Mitigations 
of Climate Change: 
Scientific-Technical 
Analyses:The 
Second Assessment Report of the Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change. R.T. Watson, N.C. 
Zinyowera and R.H. Moss (eds.). Cambridge University Press, 
New York, USA, 
Jackson, R.B., G.E. Sala, C.B. Field and H.A. Mooney, 1994: 
CO2 alters water use, carbon gain, and yield in a natural 
grassland. Oecologia, 98, 257-262. 
Jacobs, C.M.J, and H.A.R. de Bruin, 1992: The sensitivity of 
regional transpiration to land-surface 
characteristics: 
significance of feedback. /. Climate, 5, 683-698. 
Jarvis, P.G., 1989: Atmospheric carbon dioxide and forests. Phil 
Trans. R. Soc. London B, 324, 369-392. 
Jarvis, P.G. and K.G. McNaughton, 1986: Stomatal control of 
transpiration: scaling up from leaf to region. Adv. Ecol. Res., 
15, 1-49. 
Johnson, H.B., W. Polley and H.S. Mayeux, 1993: Increasing 
CO2 and plant-plant interactions: effects on natural vegetation. 
Vegetatio, 104/105, 157-170. 
Kauppi, P.E., K. Mielkainen and K. Kuusela, 1992: Biomass and 
carbon budget of European forests. Science, 256, 70-74. 
Keeling, C O . , R.B. Bacastow, A.F. Carter, S.C. Piper, T.P. 
Whorf, M . Heimann, W.G. Mook and H. Roeloffzen, 1989: A 
three dimensional analysis of atmospheric COj transport based 
on observed winds. I. Analysis of observational data. In: 
Aspects of Climatic Variability in the Pacific and Western 
Americas, J.H. Peterson (ed.). Geophysical Monograph 55, 
American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp 165-236. 
Keeling, C D . , T.P. Whorf, M . Wahlen and J. van der Plicht, 
1995: Interannual extremes in the rate of rise of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide since 1980. Nature, 375, 666-670. 
Keeling, R.E. and S.R. Shertz, 1992: Seasonal and interannual 
variations in atmsopheric oxygen and implications for the 
global carbon cycle. Nature, 358, 723-727. 
Kelliher, F . M . , R. Leuning, R. and E . - D . SchuIze, 1993: 
Evaporation and canopy characteristics of coniferous forests 
and grasslands. Oecologia, 95, 153-163. 
Kimball, B.A., 1975: Carbon dioxide and agricultural yield: An 
assemblage and analysis of 430 prior observations. Agronomy 
Journal 75, 779-788. 
Kimball, B.A. and S.B. Idso, 1983: Increasing atmospheric COj: 
Effects on crop yield, water use and climate. Agrie. Water 
Manage., 7, 55-72. 
King, G.A. and R.P, Neilson, 1992: The transient response of 
vegetation to climate change: a potential source of СО, to the 
atmosphere. Water Air Sod Pollut., 64, 365-383. 
Kinzig, A.P. and R.H. Socolow, 1994: Human impacts on the 
Nitrogen Cycle. Phy.ms Today, 47(11), 24-31. 
Kirschbaum, M.V.F., 1995: The temperature dependence of soil 
organic matter decomposition and the effect of global warming 
on soil organic carbon storage. Soil Biol Biochem., 27, 753-760. 
Kohlmaier, G.H., A. Janecek and M . PlochI, 1988: Modeling 
response of vegetation to both excess C O j and airborne 
nitrogen compounds within a global carbon cycle model. In: 
Advances in Environmental 
Modeling, 
A . Marani (ed.), 
Elsevier, New York, pp. 207-234. 
Korner, С and M . Diemer. 1994: Evidence that plants from high 
altitudes retain their greater photosynthetic efficiency under 
elevated CO^. Funct. Ecol, 8, 58-68. 
Kurz, W.A. and M.J. Apps, 1995: Retrospective assessment of 
carbon flows in Canadian boreal forests. In: Forest Ecosystems, 
Eorest management and the Global Carbon Cycle, M.J. Apps 
and D.T. Price (eds.), Springer-Veriag, N A T O Advanced 
Science Institute Series, in press. 
Kurz, W.A., M.J. Apps, B.J. Stocks and W.J.A. Volney, 1995: 
Global climate change: disturbance regions and tropospheric 
feedbacks of temperate and boreal forests. In: Biotic Feedbacks 
in the Global Climatic System, G. M . Woodwell, G.M. and F.T. 
Mackenzie (eds.), Oxford University Press, New York. 
Kutzbach, J.E. and P. Guetter, 1986: The influence of changing 
orbital parameters and surface boundary conditions on climate 
simulations for the past 18,000 years. J. Atmos. ScL, 43, 
1726-1759. 
476 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
Kutzbach, J.E., R. Gaiiimore, S.P. Harrison, P. Behling, R. Seiin 
and F. Laurif, 1995: Chmate and biome simtdations for the past 
21,000 years. Quant. Sci. Rev., in press. 
Lachenbruch, A.H. and B.V. Marshal!, 1986: Changing climate: 
Geothermal evidence from permafrost in the Alaskan Arctic. 
Science, 234, 689-696. 
Larcher, W., 1983: Physiological 
Plant Ecology, 2nd edn. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Lauenroth, W.K., D.L. Urban, D.P. Coffin. W.J. Parton, H.H. 
Shugart, T.B. Kirchner and T . M . Smith, 1993: Modeling 
vegetadon structure-ecosystem process interactions across sites 
and ecosystems. Ecol. Model., 67, 49-80. 
Lautenschlager, M . and K . Herterich, 1990: Atmospheric 
response to ice age conditions - climatology near the earth's 
surface. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 22547-22557. 
Leuenburger, M . and U. Siegenthaler, 1992: Ice-age atmospheric 
concentration of nitrous oxide from an Antarctic ice core. 
Nature, 360, 449-451. 
Lewis, J.D., R.B. Thomas and B.R. Strain, 1994: Effect of 
elevated CO^ on mycorrhizal coloniation of loblolly pine 
(Pinus taeda L.) seedlings. Plant and Soil, 165, 81-88. 
Lloyd, J. and G.D. Farquhar, 1994: '^C discriminadon during 
C O , assimilation by the terrestrial biosphere. Oecologia, 99, 
201-215. 
Lloyd, J. and G.D. Farquhar, 1995: The C O j dependence of 
photosynthesis, plant growth responses to elevated atmospheric 
COj concentrations, and their interaction with soil nutrient 
status. I. General principles and forest ecosystems. Funct. 
Ecol., in press. 
Lloyd, J. and J.A. Taylor, 1994: On the temperature dependence 
of soil respiration. Funct. Ecol., 8, 315-323. 
Long, S.P. and P.R. Hutchin, 1991: Primary production in 
grasslands and coniferous forests with climate change: An 
overview. Ecol. Appl., 1, 139-156. 
Lorius, C. and H. Oeschger, 1994: Paleo-perspectives: reducing 
uncertaindes in global change? Ambio, 23, 3036. 
Lorius, C , J. Jouzel, D. Raynaud, J. Hansen and H . Le Treut, 
1990: The ice-core record: Climate sensitivity and future 
greenhouse warming. Nature, 347, 139-145. 
Luo, Y . , C . B . Field and H . A . Mooney, 1994: Predicting 
responses of phyotosynthesis and root fraction to elevated 
[COj]: interactions among carbon, nitrogen, and growth. Plant, 
Cell and Environ., 17, 1195-1204. 
MacDonald, G.M., T.W.D. Edwards, K.A. Moser, R. Pienitz and 
J.P. Smol, 1993: Rapid response of treeline vegetation and 
lakes to past climatic warming. Nature, 361, 243^6. 
Martin, P.H., 1989. The significance of radiative coupling 
between vegetation and atmosphere. Agrie. For. Meteorol., 49, 
45-53. 
Martin, P., N . J . Rosenberg and M . S . McKenney, 1989: 
Sensitiviy of évapotranspiration in a wheat field, a forest, and a 
grassland to changes in cUmate and the direct effects of carbon 
dioxide. Clim. Change, 14, 117-151. 
Martinerie, P., G.P. Brasseur and C. Granier, 1995: The 
chemical composition of ancient atmospheres; a model study 
constrained by ice core data. J. Geophys. 
Res., 
100, 
14291-12304. 
Masle, J., G.S. Hudson and M.R. Badger, 1993: Effects of 
ambient C O , concentration on growth and nitrogen use in 
tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) plants transformed with an 
antisense gene to the small subunit of ribulose-1, 5-
bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. Plant Physiology, 103, 
1075-1088. 
Mayle, F.E. and L.C. Cwyner, 1995: Impact of the Younger 
Dryas cooling event upon lowland vegetation of Maritime 
Canada. Ecol. Monogr, 65, 129-154. 
McGuire, A.D.. J.M. MeUUo, L.A. Joyce, D.W. Kicklighter, A.L. 
Grace, B. IVioore i l l and C.J. Vorosmarty, 2992; fnteraciions 
between carbon and nitrogen dynamics in estimating net 
primary productivity for potential vegetation in North America. 
Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles, 6, 101-124. 
McGuire, A.D., L.A. Joyce, D.W. Kicklighter, J.M. Melillo, G. 
Esser and C.J. Vorosmarty, 1993; Productivity response of 
climax temperate floresis to elevated temperature and carbon 
dioxide; A North American comparison between two global 
models. Clim. Change, 24, 287-310. 
McGuire, A.D., J.M. Melillo and L.A. Joyce, 1995a: The role of 
nitrogen in the response of forest net primary production to 
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst., 
26. 473-503. 
McGuire, A.D., J.M. Melillo, D.W. Kicklighter and L.A. Joyce, 
1995b: Equilibrium responses of soil carbon to climate change; 
Empirical and process-based estimates. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 
Lett., in press. 
McNaughton, K.G. and P.G. Jarvis, 1991: Effects of spatial scale 
on stomatal control of transpiration. Agrie. For. Meteorol., 54, 
279-301. 
Melillo, J.M., 1995: Human influences on the global nitrogen 
budget attd their implications for the global carbon budget. In: 
Toward Global Planning of Sustainable Use of the Earth: 
Development of Global Eco-Engineering, 
S. Mural and M . 
Kimura (eds.), Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 117-134. 
Melillo, J . M . , and J.R. Gosz, 
1983; Interactions 
of 
biogeochemical cycles in forest ecosystems. In; The Major 
Biogeochemical Cycles and Their Interactions, B. Bolin and 
R.B. Cook (eds.), John Wiley and Sons, New York, pp. 
177-222. 
Melillo, J.M, J.R. Fruce, R.A. Houghton, B. Moore and D.L. 
Skole, 1988: Land-use change in the Soviet Union between 
1850 and 1980; Causes of a net reíase of C O , to the 
atmosphere. Tellm, 40B, 116-128. 
Melillo, J.M., P.A. Steudler, J.D. Aber and R.D. Bowden, 1989: 
Atmospheric deposition and nutrient cycling. In; Exchange of 
Trace Gases between Terrestrial 
Ecosystems 
and the 
Atmosphere, M.O. Andreae and D.S. Schimel (eds), Dahlem 
Conference Proceedings, John Wiley and Sons, New York and 
Chichester, pp. 263-280. 
Melillo, J.M., T.V. Callaghan, F.I. Woodward, E. Salati and S.K. 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
477 
Sinha, 1990: Effects on ecosystems. In: Climate Change: The 
IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and 
J.J. Ephraums, (eds), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
UK, pp. 283-310. 
IVIelillo, J.iVI., A.D. McGuire, D.W. KickUghter, B, Moore III. 
C.I. V o r o s m a r t y and A . L . Schloss, 1993: Global chmate 
change and terrestrial net primary production. Nature, 363, 
234-240. 
Melillo, J.M., D.W. Kicklighter, A.D. McGuire, W.T. Peterjohn 
and K. Newkirk, 1995a: Global change and its effects on soil 
organic carbon stocks. In: Dahlem Conference 
Proceedings, 
John Wiley and Sons, Nevii York, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 
Chichester, pp. 175-189. 
Melillo, J.M., D.W. Kicklighter, A.D. McGuire, B. Moore 111, 
C.J. Vorosmarty and A.L. Schloss, 1995b: The effect of CO2 
fertilization on the storage of carbon in terrestrial ecosystems: a 
global modeling study. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles, (submitted) 
Mitchell, J.F.B., S. Manabe, V. Melesko and T. Tokioka, 1990: 
Equilibrium climate change and its implications for the future. 
In: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment , J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums, (eds.), Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 131-172. 
Monserud, R.A., N . M . Tchebakova and R. Leemans, 1993: 
Global vegetation change predicted by the modified Budyko 
model. Clim. Change, 25, 59-83. 
Monteith. J.L., 1995: Accommodation between transpiring 
vegetation and the convective boundary layer. J. Hydrol, 166, 
251-263. 
Mooney, H.A., B.G. Drake, R.J. Luxmoore, W.C. Oechel and 
L.E. Pitelka, 1991: Predicting ecosystem responses to elevated 
C O , concentrations. Bioscience, 41, 96-104. 
Moore, A.D., 1989: On the maximum growth equation used in 
forest gap simulation models. Ecol Model, 45, 63-67. 
Morrison, J.I.L. and R.M. Gifford, 1984: Plant growth and water 
use with limited water supply in high C O , concentration: II 
Plant dry weight, partitioning and water use efficiency. Austr 
J. Plant Physiol, 11, 374-384. 
Mylne, M.F. and P.R. Rowntree, 1992: Modeling the effects of 
albedo change associated with tropical deforestation. Clim. 
Change, 21, 317-343. 
Nadelhoffer, K.J., M.R. Downs, B. Fry, J.D. Aber, A.H. Magill 
and J . M . Melillo, 1995: The fate of ' ^ N labeled nitrate 
additions to a northern hardwood forest in eastern Maine, USA. 
Oecologia (in press). 
Neilson, R.P., 1993: Vegetation redistribution: a posssible 
biosphere source of CO2 during climatic change. Water, Air 
and SoU Pollut., 70, 659-673. 
Neilson, R.P., 1995: A model for predicting continental scale 
vegetation distribution and water balance. Ecol. Appl, 
5, 
362-385. 
Neilson, R.P. and D. Marks, 1995: A global perspective of 
regional vegetation and hydrologie sensiüvites from climate 
change. J. Veg Sci., 5, 715-730. 
Nie, D., M . B . Kirkham, L . K . Ballou, D.J. Lawlor and E.T, 
Kanemasu, 1992: Changes in prairie vegetation under elevated 
carbon dioxide levels and two soil moisture regimes. J. Veg. 
ScL, 3, 673-678. 
Nisbet, E.G. and B. Ingham, 1995: Methane output from natural 
and quasinatural sources: a review of the potential for change 
and for biotic and abiotic feedbacks. In: Biotic Feedbacks in 
the Global Climatic 
System, G . M . Woodwell and F.T. 
Mackenzie (eds.), Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 
190-218. 
Nobre, C . A , , P.J. Sellers and J. Shukla, 1991: Amazonian 
deforestation and regional climatic change. /. Climate, 4, 
957-988. 
Norby, R.J., 1987: Nodulation and nitrogenase activity in 
nitrogen-fixing woody plants stimulated by CO2 enrichment of 
the atmosphere. Physiol Plant., 71, 77-82. 
Oechel, W.C. and B.R. Strain, 1985: Native species responses to 
increased atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. In: 
Direct Effects of Increasing Carbon Dioxide on Vegetation., 
B.R. Strain and J.D. Cure (eds.), D O E / E R - 0 2 3 8 , U.S. 
Department of Energy, Carbon Dioxide Research Division, 
Washington, D . C , pp. 117-154. 
Oechel, W.C. and G.L. Vouriitis, 1994: The effects of chmate 
change on land-atmosphere feedbacks in arctic tundra regions. 
TREE, 9, 324-329. 
Oechel, W . C , S.J. Hastings, G. Vouriitis, M . Jenkins, G. 
Riechers and N . Gruike, 1993: Recent change of Arctic tundra 
ecosystems from a net cai'bon dioxide sink to a source. Nature, 
361, 520-523. 
Oechel, W . C , S. Cowles, N. Gruike, S.J. Hastings, B. Lawrence, 
T. Prudhomme, G. Riechers, B. Strain, D. Tissue and G. 
Vouriitis, 1994: Transient nature of CO^ fertilization in Arctic 
tundra. Nature, 371, 500-503. 
Olson, J.S., A. Watts and L.J. Allison, 1983: Carbon in Live 
Vegetation of Major World Ecosystems. ORNLO-5861, Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee. 
O'Neill, E . G . , 1994: Responses of soil biota to elevated 
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Plant and Soil, 165, 55-65. 
O'Neill, E.G., R.J. Luxmoore and R.J. Norby, 1987: Increases in 
mycorrhizal colonization and seedling growth in Pinus 
echinata and Quercus alba in an enriched COj atmosphere. 
Can. J. For Res., 17, 878-883. 
Ormrod, D.P., 1982: Air pollutant interactions in mixtures. In; 
Effects of Air Pollution in Agriculture and HorticuUure, M.H. 
Unsworth and D.P. Ormrod (eds.), Butterworths, London, pp. 
307-331. 
Ovenden, L., 1990: Peat accumulation in northern wetiands. 
Quat. Res., 33, 377-386. 
Overpeck, J.T. and P.J. Bartiein, 1989: Assessing the response of 
vegetation to future climate change: ecological response 
surfaces and paleoecological model validation. In: The 
potential effects of global climate change on the United States. 
Appendix D. Forests, United States Environmental Protection 
Agency Report PM-221. 
Overpeck, J.T., P.J. Bartiein and T, Webb III, 1991: Potential 
478 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
magnitude of future vegetation ctiange in eastern North 
America: comparisons with the past. Science, 254, 692-695. 
Owensby, C.E., P.I. Coyne, J.IVI. Ham, L . M . Auen and A . K . 
Knapp, 1993: Biomass production in a tallgrass prairie 
ecosystem exposed to ambient and elevated CO,. Ecol. Appl., 
3, 644-653. 
Parton, W.J., D.S. Schimel, C.V. Cole and D.S. Ojima, 1987: 
Analysis of factors controlling soil organic matter levels in 
Great Plains grasslands. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 51, 1173-1179. 
Parton, W.J., J.W.B. Stewart and C.V. Cole, 1988: Dynamics of C, 
N, P and S in grassland soils: A model. Biogeochem., 5, 109-131. 
Parton, W.J., J.M.O. Scurlock, D.S. Ojima, T.G. Gilmanov, R.J. 
Scholes, D.S. Schimel, T.B. Kirchner, J.-C. Menant, T. 
Seastedt, E. Garcia Moya, Apiñan Kamnalrut and J.L 
Kinyamario, 1993: Observations and modeling of biomass and 
soil organic matter dynamics for the grassland biome 
worldwide. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 785-809. 
Parton, W.J., J.M.O. Scurlock, D.S. Ojima, D.S. Schimel, D.O. 
Hall and S C O P E G R A M Group Members, 1995: Impact of 
climate change on grassland production and soil carbon 
worldwide. Global Change Biology, 1, 13-22. 
Pastor, J. and W.M. Post, 1988: Response of northern forests to 
C02-induced climate change. Nature, 334, 55-58. 
Peltier, W.R., C.A. Burga, J.-C. Duplessy, K. Herterick, I. Levin, 
E. Maier-Reimer, M . McElroy, J.T. Overpeck, D. Raynaud and 
U . Siegenthaler, 1993: Group report: how can we use paleodata 
to evaluate the internal variability and feedbacks in the climate 
system? In: Global Changes in the Perspective of the Past, J.A. 
Eddy and H . Oeschger (eds.), John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 
Chichester, pp. 239-263. 
Peterjohn, W.T., J.M. Melillo, F.P. Bowles and P.A. Steudler, 
1993: Soil warming and trace gas fluxes: Experimental design 
and preliminary flux results. Oecologia, 93, 18-24. 
Peterjohn, W.T., J.M. Melillo, P.A. Steudler, K . M . Newkirk, 
F. P. Bowles and J.D. Aber, 1994: Responses of trace gas fluxes 
and N availability to experimentally elevated soil temperatures. 
Ecol Appl, 4, 617-625. 
Peters, R.L., 1992: Conservation of biological diversity in the 
face of climate change. In: Global Warming and Biological 
Diversity, R.L. Peters and Т.Е. Lovejoy (eds), Yale University 
Press, New Haven, pp. 15-30. 
Peterson, B.J. and J.M. Melillo, 1985; The potential storage of 
carbon caused by eutrophication of the biosphere. Tellus, 37B, 
117-127. 
Petit-Marie, 
N . , M . Fontugne and C. Rouland, 1991; 
Atmospheric methane ratio and environmental changes in the 
Sahar and Sahel during the last 130 kyrs. 
Paleogeogr., 
Paleoclimatol, Paleoecol, 86, 197-204. 
Pinto, J.P., 1991; The stability of tropospheric O H during ice 
ages, interglacial epochs and modern times. Tellus, 43B, 
347-352. 
Polcher, J. and K. Laval, 1994; A statistical study of the regional 
impact of deforestation on climate in the L M D G C M . Clim. 
Dyn. 10, 205-219. 
Pollard, D. and S.L. Thompson, 1995; The effect of doubling 
stomatal resistance in a global climate model. Global and 
Planetary Change, in press. 
Policy, H.W., H.B. Johnson, B.D. Marino and H.S. Mayeux, 
1993; Increase in C j plant water-use efficiency and biomass 
over Glacial to present CO2 concentrations. Nature, 
361, 
61-63. 
Poorter, H., 1993; Interspecific variation in the growth response 
of plants to an elevated ambient CO2 concentration. Vegetatio, 
104/105, 77-97. 
Prather, M., R. Derwent, D. Ehhalt, P. Fraser, E. Sanhueza and 
X. Zhou, 1995: Other trace gases and atmospheric chemistry. 
In; Clitnate Change 1994. J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. 
Bruce, H . Lee, B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N . Harris and K. 
Maskell (eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U K , 
pp. 72-126. 
Prentice, I.e., 
1986; Vegetation responses to past climatic 
variation mechanisms and rates. Vegetatio, 67, 131-141. 
Prentice, I.C. and R. Leemans, 1990; Pattern and process and the 
dynamics of forest structure; a simulation approach. 
Ecol, 
78, 340-55. 
Prentice, I.C. and M.T. Sykes, 1995; Vegetation geography and 
global carbon storage changes. In: Biotic Feedbacks in the 
Global Climate System, G.M. Woodwell and F.T. Mackenzie 
(eds.), Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 304-312. 
Prentice, I.e., 
M.T. Sykes and W. Cramer, 1991a; The possible 
dynamic response of northem forests to global warming. Glob. 
Ecol Biogeogr Let., 1, 129-135. 
Prentice, I.e., P.J. Bartlein and T. Webb III, 1991b; Vegetation 
change in eastern North America since the last glacial 
maximum; a response to continuous climatic forcing. Ecology, 
72, 2038-2056. 
Prentice, I.e., 
W. Cramer, S.P. Harrison, R. Leemans, R.A. 
Monserud and A . M . Solomon, 1992; A global biome model 
based on plant physiology and dominance, soil properties and 
climate. J. Biogeogr, 19, 117-134. 
Prentice, I.e., M.T. Sykes, M . Lautenschlager, S.P. Harrison, O. 
Denissenko and P.J. Bartlein, 1993a: Modeling global 
vegetation patterns and terrestrial carbon storage at the last 
glacial maximum. Glob. Ecol Biogeogr. Lett, 2, 67-76. 
Prentice, I.e., M.T. Sykes and W. Cramer, 1993b: A simulation 
model for the transient effects of climate change on forest 
landscapes. Efol Model, 65, 51-70. 
Prentice, K. and I.Y. Fung, 1990: The sensitivity of terrestrial 
carbon storage to climate change. Nature, 346, 48-50. 
Raich, J.W., E.B. Rastetter, J.M. Melillo, D.W. Kicklighter, P.A. 
Steudler, B.J. Peterson, A . L . Grace, B. Moore III and C.J. 
Vorosmarty, 1991: Potential net primary productivity in South 
America: Application of a global model. Ecol. Appl., 1, 
399-429. 
Reich, P.B., M.B. Walter and D.S. Ellsworth, 1992: Leaf hfe-
span in relation to leaf, plant, and stand characteristics among 
diverse ecosystems. Ecol Monogr., 62, 365-392. 
Rind, D., 1984; The influence of vegetation on the hydrologie 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
479 
cycle in a global climate model. In: Climate Processes and 
Climate Sensitivity, 
J.E. Hansen and T. Takahashi (eds.), 
Geophysical Monographs 29, Volume 5. American 
Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, pp. 73-91. 
Ritchie, J.C. and G.M. MacDonald, 1986: The patterns of post­
glacial spread of white spruce. J. Biogeogr, 13, 527-540. 
Rotmans, J. and M.G.J, den Elzen, 1993: Modeling feedback 
mechanisms in the carbon cycle: balancing the carbon budget. 
Tellus, 45B, 301-320. 
Roulet, N.T., T.R. Moore, J. Bubier and P. Lafleur, 1992: 
Northern fens: methane flux and climatic change. Tellus., 44B, 
100-105. 
Running, S.W. and R.R. Nemani, 1991: Regional hydrologie and 
carbon balance responses of forests resulting from potential 
climate change. Clim. Change, 19, 349-368. 
Running, S.W. and E.R. Hunt Jr., 1993: GeneraUzation of a 
forest 
ecosystem 
process 
model for other 
biomes, 
BIOME-BGC, and an application for global-scale models. In: 
Scaling Processes Between Leaf and Landscape Levels, J.R. 
Ehleringer and C. Eield (eds.). Academic Press, Orlando, pp. 
141-158. 
Sage, R.F., T.D. Sharkey and J.R. Seeman, 1989: Acclimation of 
photosynthesis to elevated C O j in five C j species. Plant 
Physiol, 89, 590-596. 
Sage, R.F., 1994: Acclimation of photosynthesis to increasing 
atmospheric COj. The gas exchange perspective. Photosynth. 
Res. 39, 351-68 
Sakai, A. and C.J. Weiser, 1973: Freezing resistance of trees in 
N . America with reference to tree regions. Ecology, 
54, 
118-126. 
Schimel, D.S., B.H. Braswell, Jr., E.A. Holland, R. McKeown, D.S. 
Ojima, Т.Н. Painter, W.J. Parton and A.R. Townsend, 1994: 
Climatic, edaphic and biotic controls over storage and turnover of 
carbon in soils. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 279-293. 
Schimel, D.S., I.G. Enting, M . Heimann, T.M.L. Wigley, D. 
Raynaud, D. Alves and U . Siegenthaler, 1995: COj and the 
carbon cycle. In: Climate Change 1994: Radiative Forcing of 
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce, H. Lee, 
B.A. Callander, E. Haites, N . Harris and K. Maskell (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp. 35-71. 
Schindler, D.W. and S.E. Bayley, 1993: The biosphere as an 
increasing sink for atmospheric carbon: estimates from 
increased nitrogen deposition. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles 7, 
717-734. 
SchuIze, E.-D., 1982: Plant life forms and their carbon, water and 
nutrient relaflons. Encyclopedia 
of Plant Physiology, 
12B, 
615-676, Springer-Veriag, Beriin. 
SchuIze, E.-D., 1994: Flux control at the ecosystem level. Trends 
EcoL EvoL, 10, 40^3. 
SchuIze, E.-D. and F.S. Chapin III, 1987: Plant specialization to 
environments of different resource availability. In: Potentials 
and Limitations in Ecosystem Analysis, E.-D. SchuIze and H. 
Zwolfer (eds), Springer-Veriag, Berhn, pp. 120-148. 
SchuIze, E.-D., W. DeVries, M . Hauhs, K. Rosen, L. Rasmussen, 
O.-C. Tann and J. Nilsson, 1989: Critical loads for nitrogen 
deposition in forest ecosystems. Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 48, 
451-456. 
SchuIze, E.-D., F . M . Kelliher, C. Korner, J. Lloyd and R. 
Leuning, 1994: Relationships between maximum stomatal 
conductance, ecosystem surface conductance, carbon 
assimilation rate and plant nitrogen nutrition. Ann. Rev. Ecol 
Syst., 25, 629-660. 
Sedjo, R.A., 1992: Temperate forest ecosystems in the global 
carbon cycle. Ambio, 21, 274-277. 
Shaver, G.R. and F.S. Chapin III, 1991: Production: Biomass 
relationships and element cycling in contrasting arctic 
vegetation types. Ecol Monogr., 61, 1-31. 
Shaver, G.R., W.D. BilHngs, F.S. Chapin HI, A.E. Gibhn, K.J. 
Nadelhoffer, W.C. Oechel and E.B. Rastetter, 1992: Global 
change and the carbon balance of Arctic ecosystems. BioScL, 
42, 433-441. 
Shugart, H.H., 1984: A Theory of Forest Dynamics. Springer-
Veriag, New York. 
Shukla, J., C. Nobre and P. Sellers, 1990: Amazon deforestation 
and climate change. Science, 247, 1322-1325. 
Siegenthaler, U., 1989: Glacial-interglacial atmospheric C O j 
variations. In: Global Changes of the Past, R.S. Bradley (ed.), 
UCAR/OIES, pp. 245-260. 
Smith, T.M. and H.H. Shugart, 1993: The transient response of 
terrestrial carbon storage to a perturbed climate. Nature, 361, 
523-526. 
Smith, T.M., H.H. Shugart, G.B. Bonan and J.B. Smith, 1992: 
Modeling the potential response of vegetation to global climate 
change. Adv. Ecol Res., 22, 93-116. 
Smith, T . M . , W.P. Cramer, R . K . Dixon, R. Leemans, R.P. 
Nielsen and A . M . Solomon, 1993: The global terrestrial carbon 
cycle. Water,Air,Soil Pollut., 70, 19-37. 
Solomon, A . M . , 1986: Transient response of forests to C O j -
induced climate change: simulation modeling experiments in 
eastern North America. Oecologia, 68, 567-579. 
Solomon, A . M . and P.J. Bartiein, 1992: Past and future climate 
change: response by mixed deciduous-coniferous forest 
ecosystems in northern Michigan. Can. J. For. Res., 22, 
1727-1738. 
Solomon, A . M . , K.C. Prentice, R. Leemans and W.P. Cramer, 
1993: The interaction of climate and land use in future 
terrestrial carbon storage and release. Water, Air, Soil Pollut. 
70, 595-614. 
Specht, R.L., 1972: Water use by perennial evergreen plant 
communities in Australia and Papua, New Guinea. Austr. J. 
ñof.,20, 273-299. 
Stauffer, В., E. Lochbronner, H. Oeschger and J. Scwander, 
1988: Methane concentration in the glacial atmosphere was 
only half that of the preindustrial Holocene. Nature, 
332, 
812-814. 
Street-Perrott, F.A., 1992: Atmospheric methane: tropical 
wetland sources. Nature, 355, 23-24. 
480 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
Street-Perrott, F.A., D.S. Marchand, N . Roberts and S.P. 
Harrison, 1989: Global lake-level variations from 18,000 to 0 
years ago: a paleoclimatic 
analysis. U.S. Department of 
Energy Report ER/6-304-H1. 
Street-Perrott, F.A., J.F.B. Mitchell, D.S. Marchand and J.S. 
Brunner, 1990: Milankovitch and albedo forcing of the tropical 
monsoons: a comparison of geological evidence and numerical 
simulations for 9000 yr bp. Trans. R. Soc. Edinburgh: Earth 
Sci., 81, 407-427. 
Stute, M . , M.Foster, H . Frischkom, A . Serejo, J.F. Clark, P. 
Schlosser, W.S. Broecker and G. Bonani, 1995: Cooling of 
tropical Brazil (5°C) during the last glacial maximum. Science, 
179, 371-383. 
Sud, Y.C., P.J. Sellers, Y. Mintz, M.D. Chou, G.K. Walker and 
W.F. Smith, 1990: Influence of the biosphere on the global 
circulation and hydrologie cycle - a G C M simulation 
experiment. Agn'c. For. Meteorol., 52, 133-180. 
Tans, P.P., I.Y.Fung and T. Takahashi, 1990: Observational 
constraints on the global atmospheric carbon dioxide budget. 
Science, 247, 1431-1438. 
Tans, P.P., I.Y. Fung and I.G. Enting, 1995: Storage versus flux 
budgets: The terrestrial uptake of CO^ during the 1980s. In: 
Biotic Eeedbacks in the Global Climatic System, G . M . 
Woodwell and F.T. Mackenzie (eds.), Oxford University Press, 
New York, pp. 351-374. 
Taylor, J.A., and J. Lloyd, 1992: Sources and sinks of CO2. 
Austr J. Bot., 40, 407-418. 
Tchebakova, N . M . , R.A. Monserud, R.A. Leemans and D.L 
Nazimova, 1992: Possible vegetation shifts in Siberia under 
climatic change. In: Impacts of Climate Change on Ecosystems 
and Species, R. Leemans, O. Elder and J. Pernetta (eds.). 
Chapman & Hall, New York. 
Thompson, A . M . J.A. Chapellaz, I.Y. Fung and T.L. Kuscera, 
1993: The atmospheric CH^ increase since the last glacial 
maximum: 2. Interaction with oxidents. Tellus, 45B, 242-257. 
Thompson, E.G., E. Mosley-Thompson, M.E. Davis, P.-N. Lin, 
K.A. Henderson, J.Cole-Dau, J.F. Bolzan and L.-B. Liu, 1995: 
Late glacial stage and Holocene tropical ice core records from 
Huascarçn, Peru. Science, 269, 46-50. 
Tissue, D.T. and W.C. Oechel, 1987: Response of Eriophorum 
vaginatum to elevated CO2 and temperature in the Alaskan 
arctic tundra. Ecology, 68(2), 401-410. 
Torn, M.S. and J.S. Fried, 1992: Predicting the impacts of global 
warming on wildland fire. Clim. Change, 21, 257-274. 
Townsend, A.R., P.M. Vitousek and E.A. Holland, 1992: Tropical 
soils could dominate the short-term carbon cycle feedbacks to 
increased global temperatures. Clim. Change, 22, 293-303. 
Townsend, A.R., B.H. Braswell, E.A. Holland and J.E. Penner, 
1994: Spaflal and temporal patterns in potential terrestrial 
carbon storage resulting from deposition of fossil fuel derived 
niüogen. Ecological Applications, (in press). 
Troen, L B . and L . Mahrt, 1986: A simple model of the 
atmospheric boundary layers: sensitivity to 
surface 
evaporation. Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 37, 129-148. 
V E M A P Members, 1995: V E M A P : A comparison of 
biogeography and biogeochemistry models in the context of 
global climate change. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles, 9, 407^37. 
Vitousek, P.M. and R.W. Howarth, 1991: Nitrogen limitation on 
land and in the sea: how can it occur? Biogeochem. 13, 87-115. 
Walker, B.H. and I. Noy-Meir, 1982: Aspects of stability and 
resilience of savanna ecosystems. In: Ecology of Tropical 
Savannas, B. Huntley (ed.), Springer-Veriag, Berlin, pp. 
577-590. 
Walter, H . , 1979: Vegetation 
of the Earth and 
Ecological 
Systems of the Geo-biosphere, 2nd edn. Springer-Veriag, New 
York. 
Watts, W.A., 1988: Europe. In: Vegetation History, B. Huntley 
and T. Webb III (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, pp. 155-192. 
Webb, T. Ill, 1986: Is vegetation in equilibrium with climate? 
How to interpret late-Quaternary pollen data. Vegetatio, 67, 
75-91. 
Webb, T. I l l 1992: Past changes in vegetation and climate: 
lessons for the future. In: Global Warming and Biological 
Diversity, R.L. Peters and Т.Е. Lovejoy (eds.), Yale University 
Press, New Haven, pp. 59-75. 
Webb, T. Ш and P.J. Bartiein, 1992: Global changes during the 
last 3 million years: climatic controls and biotic responses. 
Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst, 23, 141-173. 
Webb, T, in, P. J. Bartiein, S. P. Harrison and K. H. Anderson, 
1993: Vegetation, lake levels, and climate in eastern North 
America for the past 18,000 years. In: Global Climates Since the 
Last Glacial Maximum. H. E. Wright, J. E. Kutzbach, T. Webb 
in, W. F. Ruddiman, F. A. Street-Perrott and P. J. Bartiein (eds.). 
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, pp. 415-467. 
Whalen, S.C. and W.S. Reeburgh, 1990: Consumprion of 
atmospheric methane by tundra soils. Nature, 346, 160-162. 
Wofsy, S.C, L E . Munger, P.S. Bakwin, B.C. Daube and T.R. 
Moore, 1993: Net CO2 uptake by northern woodlands. 
Science, 260, 1314-1317. 
Wong, S.C, 1979: Elevated atmospheric partial pressures of COj 
and plant growth: I. Interacrions of nitrogen nutrition and 
photosynthetic capacity in in C 3 and C^. Oecologia, 44, 68-74. 
Woodward, F . L , 1987: Climate and Plant 
Distribution. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Woodward, F.L, 1992: A review of the effects of climate on 
vegetation: ranges, competition, and composition. In: Global 
Warming and Biological 
Diversity, 
R . L . Peters and Т.Е. 
Lovejoy (eds.), Yale University Press, New Haven, pp. 
105-123. 
Woodward, F . L and T . M . Smith, 1994: Predictions and 
measurements of the maximum photosynthetic rate at the 
global scale. In: Ecophysiology 
of Photosynthesis, 
E.-D. 
SchuIze and M . M . Caldwell (eds.). Ecological Studies, vol. 
100, Springer-Veriag, Beriin, pp. 491-509. 
Woodward, F.I„ T.M. Smith and W.R. Emanuel, 1995: A global 
primary productivity and phytogeography model. Glob. 
Biogeochem. Cycles , 9, 471-490. 
Terrestrial Biotic Responses 
481 
Woodwell, G.M., 1983: Biodc effects on the concentration of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide: A review and projection. In: 
Changing Climate, National Academy of Science Press, 
Washington, DC, pp. 216-241. 
Woodwell, G.M., 1989: The warming of the industrialized middle 
latitudes 1985-2050: Causes and consequences. Clim. Change, 
15,31-50. 
Woodwell, G.M., 1995: Will the warming speed the warning? In: 
Biotic Feedbacks 
in the Global Climatic System, G . M . 
Woodwell and F.T. Mackenzie (eds), Oxford University Press, 
New York. 
Woodwell, G.M. and F.T. Mackenzie, 1995: Biotic Feedbacks in 
the Global Climatic System, Oxford University Press, New 
York, 416 pp. 
Wright, H.F. Jr., J.E. Kutzbach, T. Webb III, W.F. Ruddiman, 
F.A. Street-Perrott and P.J. Bartlein, 1993: Global Climates 
since the Last Glacial Maximum. University of Minnesota 
Press, Minneapolis. 
Wullschleger, S.D., W . M . Post and A.W. King, 1995: On the 
potential for a CO^ fertilization effect in forest trees - an 
assessment of 58 controUed-exposure studies and estimates of 
the biotic growth factor. In: Biotic Feedbacks in the Global 
Climatic System, G.M. Woodwell and F.T. Mackenzie (eds.), 
Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 85-107. 
Zackrisson, O., M.-C. Nilsson, I. Steijlen and G. Hornberg, 1995: 
Regeneration pulses and climate-vegetation interactions in 
non-pyrogenic boreal Scots pine stands. J. Ecol., in press. 
Zoltai, S.C. and D.H. Vitt, 1990: Holocene climatic change and 
the distribution of peatlands in western interior Canada. Quat. 
Res., 33, 231-240. 
10 
Marine Biotic Responses to Environmental 
Change and Feedbacks to Climate 
K. DENMAN, E. HOFMANN, H. MARCHANT 
Contributors: 
M.R. Abbott, T.S. Bates, S.E. Calvert, M.J. Fasham, R. Jahnke, 
S. Kempe, R.J. Lara, C.S. Law, P.S. Liss, A.F. Michaels, T.F Pedersen, M.A. Peña, 
T. Piatt, J. Sharp, D.N. Thomas, K.A. Van Scoy, J.J. Walsh, A.J. Watson 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
487 
10.1 Introduction 
489 
10.2 Ocean Processes - Biogeocliemical Responses 
489 
10.2.1 Oceanic Space and Time-scales in the 
Context of Climate Change Effects 
489 
10.2.2 Marine Biological Production and Climate 
491 
10.2.3 Direct Effects of CHmate Change on Marine 
Biota 
492 
10.2.4 Responses to Changes in Circulation Patterns 
and Other Océanographie Processes 
493 
10.2.5 Evidence from the Palaeorecord 
494 
10.3 Feedbaclis: Influence of Marine Biota on 
Climate Change 
495 
10.3.1 Criticallssues 
495 
10.3.2 Response of the Biological Pump to Climate-
Induced Change and Possible Feedbacks 
495 
10.3.2.1 The open ocean biological pump 
495 
10.3.2.2 The Redfield ratios - are they constant? 499 
10.3.2.3 Carbonate production 
499 
10.3.2.4 Role of continental margins 
500 
10.3.2.5 Biological pump summary 
501 
10.3.3 Fertilisation of Ocean Productivity - Natural 
and Anthropogenic 
501 
10.3.3.1 Inputs of nitrogen and iron from the 
atmosphere and rivers 
501 
10.3.3.2 Fertilisation of phytoplankton 
productivity by iron 
503 
10.3.4 DMS Production and Possible Changes to 
Cloud Condensation Nuclei 
504 
10.3.5 Marine Biota and Other Greenhouse Gases 
505 
10.3.5.1 Methane 
505 
10.3.5.2 Nitrous oxide 
505 
10.3.5.3 Other trace gases 
505 
10.3.6 Effect of UV-B on Marine Plankton with 
Potential Feedback to Climate 
505 
10.4 The State of Biogeochemical Ocean Modelling 
508 
References 
509 
SUMMARY 
Marine biogeochemical processes both respond to and 
influence climate. Atmospheric carbon dioxide (COj) is the 
most important greenhouse gas increasing rapidly due to 
human activities. The oceans contain about 40,000 GtC in 
dissolved, particulate, and living forms. By contrast, land 
biota, soils and detritus total about 2200 GtC. Living and 
dead biogenic matter in the ocean contains at least 700 
GtC, almost equal to the amount of COj in the atmosphere 
(about 750 GtC). The increase in atmospheric carbon since 
pre-industrial times (150 GtC) is equivalent to that cycled 
through the marine planktonic ecosystem in less than 5 
years. Simulation models calibrated with oceanic 
observarions indicate that instead of the pre-industrial 
atmospheric C O j concentration of 280 ppmv, the 
atmospheric concentration of COj would have been 450 
ppmv in the absence of marine biota. Clearly, it is 
imperative that we understand the contribution of 
biogeochemical processes in maintaining the steady state 
functioning of the ocean carbon cycle. In addition to their 
importance in the global cycling of CO2, marine organisms 
are significant sources of climatically active trace gases, 
especially dimethyl sulphide (DMS). 
Because of the complexity of biological systems, we 
cannot yet say whether some likely feedbacks from the 
marine biota in response to climate related changes will be 
positive or negative. However improved quantitative 
understanding is likely within the next decade. The 
principal result of this chapter is the assessment of our 
scientific knowledge on the following topics: 
• 
New nutrients (including iron) coming from outside 
the ocean (both as a result of increased atmospheric 
deposition or coastal runoff from human activities) 
would increase organic carbon C^^^ production, its 
export to the deep ocean (the "biological pump"), 
and the drawdown of atmospheric COj (probably by 
less than 1 GtC/yr). Increased export carbon 
production would also result in increased 
remineralisation of organic matter at depth with an 
accompanying increase in production of nitrous 
oxide (NjO), a potent greenhouse gas. The oceans 
contribute about 20% of the total input to the 
atmosphere, but it is unlikely that any possible 
increases 
could 
even 
double 
the 
ocean's 
contiibution. 
• 
Carbon is considered to be taken up by 
phytoplankton during primary production and 
released during remineralisation of organic matter in 
constant proportion to the major nutrients CQj.g:N:P, 
refcrted to as the Redfield ratios. If these ratios (or 
their vertical gradients) change in time in response to 
changes in ocean circulation or other properties, 
model simulations indicate that there is a large 
potential for the biological pump to influence 
atmospheric CÜ2 concentrations. 
• 
Calcium carbonate (CaCOj) is fixed during 
photosynthesis by those marine algae and animals 
that have "hard" parts of СаСОз: this CaCOj also 
sinks out of the surface layer with the exported 
organic carbon, but each molecule removed is 
accompanied by creation of a molecule of COj in the 
surface ocean, counteracting the removal of the 
organic carbon. Globally, the ratio Ср^,^:СаСОз 
exported from the surface ocean is about 4:1, but a 
shift in phytoplankton species causing a shift to a 
ratio of 1:1 would neutralise the effect of the 
"biological pump" on surface pC02- At present, we 
cannot quantify the probability or extent of such a 
shift occurring as a response to climate change. 
• 
Biogeochemical processes occur principally in the 
top few hundred metres of the sea. The continental 
margins play a major, but poorly assessed, role in 
oceanic biogeochemical cycling and are the burial 
sites of a substantial amount of organic carbon 
derived both from these oceanic processes as well as 
terrestrial sources. A potential feedback may result 
from anthropogenic eutrophication of continental 
488 
Marine Biotic Responses 
shelf areas. There, increased nutrient availability may 
promote denitrification and thus the release of 
elemental nitrogen (N2) and methanogenesis 
releasing a minor amount of methane (CH^). 
• 
Iron in atmospheric dust may have contributed to the 
transition from glacial to interglacial periods. Lack of 
iron appears to limit phytoplankton growth in 
oceanic regions where 
the 
macronutrients, 
particularly nitrogen, phosphorous and silica, are 
abundant yet phytoplankton concentrarions are 
generally low. Intentional iron fertilisation of the 
Southern Ocean to promote phytoplankton growth 
and hence the drawdown of atmospheric CO^ 
appears not to be viable for two main reasons: first, it 
would require fertilisation of 25% of the world ocean 
continuously and indefinitely, and second, if it 
worked perfectiy, it would only reduce the increase 
in atmospheric COj concentration over the next 
century by about 50 ppmv. 
• 
DMS is the principal volatile sulphur containing 
compound in the sea and the major natural source of 
sulphur to the atmosphere. In the atmosphere DMS is 
oxidised to produce aerosols which promote the 
development of clouds and thus influence climate. 
The production of D M S is a function of the 
composition and concentration of the plankton. DMS 
is removed from sea water by physical, chemical and 
biological processes. In temperate and tropical waters 
the rate of biological consumption can be more than 
ten times greater than atmospheric ventilation. A 
much better understanding of sulphur cycling in the 
surface ocean is required for quantitative assessment. 
• 
Solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation has increased as a 
consequence of stratospheric ozone depletion. UV-B 
(280-320 nm) exposure depresses primary production 
and growth of phytoplankton. As species differ in 
their tolerance to U V - B , a shift in community 
structure favouring the more tolerant would be 
expected. UV-B radiation inhibits marine bacterial 
activity and has differing effects on dissolved organic 
carbon (DOC) derived from various sources. The 
effects of UV-B on marine biogeochemical processes 
must be taken into account for a realistic assessment 
of the role of these processes in environmental 
change. 
Coupled rime-dependent general circularion models 
(GCMs) are principal tools in probing the possible 
responses of the land-atmosphere-ocean system to climate 
change. For these models to be more effective they must 
include feedback terms to account for the role of 
biogeochemical processes in modulating the production 
and degradation of radiatively active gases in the upper 
ocean. At present, models constructed to consider 
biogeochemical processes are severely limited by the 
inability to parameterize important biological activities and 
to specify the temporal and spatial variation in these 
parametrizations over scales longer than a few weeks and 
more than tens of kilometres. 
Marine Biotic Responses 
489 
10.1 Introduction 
In IPCC (1990), the role of marine biota in climate change 
was treated in a cursory manner. Since then, there has been 
increasing awareness of the likelihood of a variety of 
responses of marine biota to climate/environmental change 
and feedbacks to the climate system. The purpose of this 
chapter is to assess the manner in which these responses 
and feedbacks might occur, in preparation for the inclusion 
over the next five to ten years of ocean biogeochemical 
processes in the models used for climate change 
projections. IPCC W G II (1995) deals in detail with 
possible impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems, 
but does not consider feedbacks to the climate system. 
Several critical issues require explicit attention because 
of their demonstrated or perceived importance in terms of 
feedback to climate. They include: possible responses of 
the ocean biological pump and any resulting change in the 
rate of CO2 cycling; iron fertilisation which might speed up 
the biological pump and the draw down of atmospheric 
CO2; changes in the production by phytoplankton of 
dimethyl sulphide (DMS) which in the atmosphere may 
contribute to the production of sulphate aerosols; and 
potential consequences of increased ultraviolet radiation in 
the wavelength range 280-320 nm (UV-B) on plankton 
production and community composition. Climatic variation 
has been documented on temporal scales from sub-decadal 
(for example, the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
phenomenon) to millennia. Most projections in the IPCC 
scientific assessments have been for the years 2050 and 
2100, so we consider ENSO to century time-scales and 
regional to global spatial scales. Physical and 
biogeochemical processes, in the very heterogeneous 
continental margins especially, vary strongly on regional 
scales and must be understood on those scales in order to 
determine possible global effects. 
10.2 Ocean Processes - Biogeochemical Responses 
10.2.1 Oceanic Space and Time-scales in the Context of 
Climate Change Effects 
The physico-chemical habitat of the ocean and its 
interaction with marine biota is fundamental in determining 
biogeochemical responses and feedbacks that may arise in 
response to climate change. The range of possible space 
and time-scales over which these océanographie processes 
operate covers many orders of magnitude (Figure 10.1a). 
For physical processes, these range from dissipative 
processes, which operate at short space and time-scales, to 
scales associated with ocean gyres and the thermohaline 
circulation. However, the wide ranges of space and time-
scales associated with physical océanographie processes 
are not independent. Rather, these should be regarded as a 
cascade of scales through which information can be 
transferred from large to small scales and vice versa. 
Consequently, perturbations introduced by climate change 
can potentially affect oceanic circulation processes at a 
large number of scales. It is at the largest scales that the 
effects of environmental perturbations are often most 
dramatic. These take the form of the approximate decadal 
scale of El Nino-Southern Oscillation events to the longer 
millennial scale of modifications to the thermohaline 
circulation. However, shorter term variations associated 
with changing frequency of occurrence of oceanic eddies 
or upwelling as well as changes in the mixing environment 
of the upper ocean can be manifestations of changes to the 
environment. 
Similarly, the range of space and time-scales over which 
individual organisms and populations of organisms exist is 
large (Figure 10.1b). The population scales especially 
overlap with a wide variety of physical scales and 
consequently with physical processes. The range of sizes of 
marine biota allow for connections between physical and 
biological processes. Therefore, modifications that affect 
circulation dynamics can potentially influence a wide range 
of biological processes, and modificaflons that affect 
individual biological components have the potential of 
cascading throughout the marine food web. Most marine 
biotic responses to environmental and climate change that 
might have feedbacks to climate involve zooplankton and 
smaller organisms. From Figure 10.lb we would expect 
that their responses might occur on time-scales of less than 
decades. If, for example, the marine biota respond as a 
pulse of elevated primary production injecting (mostly as 
sinking particles) more organic carbon into the deep ocean, 
physical transport processes might then redistribute the 
anomalous deep carbon to complete the response, on time-
scales shown schematically in Figure 10.2. These processes 
might take considerably longer, especially if the largest 
scale mode, the thermohaline circulation, is involved. 
However, perturbations in temperature, fresh water 
discharge and wind strength that may arise from climate 
change can significantly alter the intensity and the depth of 
penetration of the thermohaline circulation. In fact, 
evidence from seafloor sediments indicates that the 
thermohaline circulation has varied with time-scales of 
20,000 years down to decades (e.g., Dansgaard et ai. 1993; 
GRIP Project Members, 1993), variations that are now 
being incorporated into computer models of large scale 
thermohaline circulation patterns (e.g.. Weaver et al., 1993; 
Fichefet et al., 1994; Rahmstorf, 1994; Weaver and 
490 
Marine Biotic Responses 
(a) 
DECADE-
YEAR-
MONTH 
WEEK 
DAY-
HOUR-
MIN-
104 
102 J 
2, « 10° 
E 
10-2 4 
10-4 
10-4 
Thermohaline 
Conveyor 
Circulation 
Climatic-Oceanic 
ENSO 
Fronts, Eddies, 
Upwelling, Island 
Effects 
Turbulent 
Diffusion 
Turbulent 
Mixing 
Dissipation 
mm 
—I— 
cm 
Space (m) 
108 
10m 
1 km 
100 km 
10,000 km 
(b) 
DECADE-
YEAR-
MONTH -
WEEK-
DAY-
HOUR-
MIN-
104 
102 J 
I" 10°-] 
10-2-
10-4 
Seablrds 
^ 
and Squid 
Zooplankton 
Protozoa 
/ 
Phytoplankton 
Bacterloplankton 
Viruses 
Vi 
1 
1 — 
10-10 
10-8 
10-8 
10-" 
10-2 
10° 
102 
10" 
108 
108 
T 
г 
0-2 
10' 
Space(m) 
mm 
—r— 
km 
1 
1 
10,000 km 
pm 
m 
100 m 
Organism size 
Spatial scale for 
population growth 
Figure 10.1: A schematic showing the dominant space and time-scales in the ocean for (a) physical motions and (b) biological scales. 
In (b) the left-hand overlapping boxes represent typical size ranges (on the x-axis) and typical times for population doubling (on the y-axis) 
for each type of organism; the right-hand boxes represent typical spatial ranges of each organism during their lifetime. Adapted from 
Murphy et al. (1988). 
Marine Biotic Responses 
491 
Hughes, 1994). Variations i n the thermohaline circularion 
have been i m p l i c a t e d i n glacial-interglacial changes i n the 
c a r b o n c y c l e o f t h e o c e a n a n d t h e a t m o s p h e r e 
( e . g . , 
Broecker, 1 9 9 1 ; O p p o and L e h m a n , 1993). 
T h e t r a n s f e r o f i n f o r m a t i o n b e t w e e n b i o l o g i c a l a n d 
physical processes is frequently thought o f as being i n one 
direction: physical to biological. H o w e v e r , i n some regions 
o f the ocean b i o l o g i c a l processes can p r o v i d e a feedback to 
p h y s i c a l processes. F o r e x a m p l e , the f e e d b a c k b e t w e e n 
l i g h t absorption b y m a r i n e p h y t o p l a n k t o n and heating i n 
the upper water c o l u m n can m o d i f y m i x i n g d y n a m i c s (e.g., 
S a t h y e n d r a n a t h et al., 
1 9 9 1 ) , w h i c h c a n alter 
v e r t i c a l 
structure and circulation i n surface waters. 
10.2.2 Marine Biological Production and Clitnate 
M a r i n e p r i m a r y production, through w h i c h p h y t o p l a n k t o n 
c o n v e r t c a r b o n t o o r g a n i c a n d s t r u c t u r a l 
m o l e c u l e s , 
requires l i g h t , C O , a n d d i s s o l v e d nutrients. T h e rate o f 
primary p r o d u c t i o n is not controlled by the supply o f C O 2 , 
c o n s i d e r e d to be a l m o s t a l w a y s a v a i l a b l e i n excess o f 
requirements f o r marine p r i m a r y production, but rather b y 
t h e s u p p l y o f n e w n u t r i e n t s to t h e s u n l i t l a y e r . 
T o t a l 
p r i m a r y p r o d u c t i o n can be partitioned (over l o n g enough 
t i m e - s c a l e s ) i n t o t w o f r a c t i o n s : r e c y c l e d 
p r o d u c t i o n 
supported by nutrients cycled w i t h i n the sunlit layer o f the 
o c e a n , a n d e x p o r t p r o d u c t i o n s u p p o r t e d b y n u t r i e n t s 
e n t e r i n g t h e s u n l i t l a y e r o f t h e o c e a n f r o m l a n d , t h e 
atmosphere, and p r i m a r i l y the deep ocean, that is available 
to be h a r v e s t e d or t r a n s p o r t e d v e r t i c a l l y to the o c e a n 
interior (see E p p l e y and Peterson, 1979). 
T h e " b i o l o g i c a l carbon p u m p " refers to the process b y 
w h i c h export p r o d u c t i o n removes carbon f r o m the ocean 
s u r f a c e l a y e r t o t h e o c e a n i n t e r i o r , as s i n k i n g o r g a n i c 
particles and as d i s s o l v e d organic matter transported b y 
ocean currents. E v e n t u a l l y this carbon is " r e m i n e r a l i s e d " 
by bacteria at depth into dissolved inorganic f o r m , except 
for a small fraction that is buried in the sediments. Thus, 
the b i o l o g i c a l p u m p reduces the total carbon d i o x i d e i n the 
ocean surface layer (and the atmosphere) and increases the 
total carbon content i n the deep ocean. For pre-industrial 
e q u i l i b r i u m conditions (atmospheric concentration o f 
CO^. 
- 2 8 0 p p m v ) , m o d e l s i m u l a t i o n s i n d i c a t e t h a t a f u l l y 
e f f i c i e n t b i o l o g i c a l p u m p ( u s i n g a l l a v a i l a b l e s u r f a c e 
n u t r i e n t s ) w o u l d result i n an a t m o s p h e r i c C O j l e v e l o f 
- 1 6 0 p p m v , whereas e x t i n c t i o n o f all m a r i n e p r o d u c t i o n 
w o u l d lead to a level o f - 4 5 0 p p m v (e.g.. Sarmiento and 
T o g g w e i l e r , 1984, Shaffer, 1993). H o w e v e r , the b i o l o g i c a l 
p u m p is considered to have been r o u g h l y i n steady state 
over the last century, unaffected by the increase i n C O j 
availability. 
Time-scales affecting nutrient supply and carbon transport 
(-SOOyr) 
(-30yr) 
(~10yr) 
(1yr) 
(~1wk) 
Photic 
( 
' 
\ 
( 
> 
zone 
i 
• 
>^ / 
К 
, 
Storms 
Annua 
cycle 
ENSO 
Thermohaline 
Thermociine 
circulation 
outaoppings, 
vertical mixing at 
lateral boundaries, 
S isopycnal diffusion 
Figure 10.2: Schematic showing characteristic time-scales for 
various processes of vertical exchange between the euphotic zone 
and the ocean interior. Redrawn from Denman (1993). 
T h e global pattetii o f marine p r i m a r y production (Figure 
10.3, after Berger and Wefer, 1991) shows that m u c h o f the 
highest production is associated w i t h continental margins. 
T h e regions o f enhanced p r i m a r y p r o d u c t i o n a w a y f r o m 
c o n t i n e n t a l m a r g i n s are g e n e r a l l y associated w i t h o p e n 
ocean u p w e l l i n g , such as occurs i n equatorial regions, and 
w i t h deep winter m i x i n g that entrains more nutrients into 
the upper ocean. Open-ocean p r i m a r y p r o d u c t i o n outside o f 
u p w e l l i n g regions tends to be lower, but extends over m u c h 
larger areas. The nutrients c o m i n g f r o m the ocean interior 
m u s t be s u p p l i e d b y v e r t i c a l e x c h a n g e p r o c e s s e s that 
o p e r a t e o n s h o r t e r s p a c e a n d t i m e - s c a l e s t h a n t h e 
thermohaline circulation (Figure 10.2). Berger and W e f e r 
( 1 9 9 1 ) t o o k t h e p a t t e r n o f v e r t i c a l l y e x p o r t e d p r i m a r y 
p r o d u c t i o n 
t o be i d e n t i c a l 
w i t h 
( b u t n o t 
l i n e a r l y 
proportional to) that o f total p r i m a r y production, w i t h the 
largest values f o u n d along the continental m a r g i n s ; their 
pattern is remarkably similar to the annual average pattern 
o f E k m a n u p w e l l i n g in X i e and Hsieh (1995), suggesting a 
strong dependence on w i n d - d r i v e n u p w e l l i n g . 
T h e h i g h p r i m a r y p r o d u c t i o n i n continental margins is 
usually the direct result o f coastal u p w e l l i n g and m i x i n g 
processes. T h i s p r o d u c t i o n is supported by nutrients that 
are brought into the euphotic (sunlit) zone f r o m depths o f 
200 m or less. T h e u p w e l l i n g that supplies these nutrients 
results f r o m w i n d - d r i v e n c i r c u l a t i o n processes or f r o m 
interactions o f western boundary currents w i t h shelf break 
492 
Marine Biotic Responses 
Figure 10.3: World map of primary production (PP) and export production at 100 m depth (XPJ^Q). Productivity estimated from a 
literature compilation of radiocarbon-based measurements complemented by estimates based on phosphate at 100 m depth, distance 
from land, and latitude, according to an algorithm fitted to radiocarbon measurements for areas with poor coverage. XPJQQ is rounded 
off from the expression: XPjgg = (PP)3/2/5o. From Berger and Wefer (1991). 
regions. Thus, the time-scale for nutrient supply and for 
returning carbon to the upper portion of the water column 
is shorter in these regions than in the open ocean. However, 
changes that might affect the intensity of upwelling 
(Bakun, 1990) or the location of a western boundary 
current relative to the continental margin (Atkinson, 1977) 
can alter these time-scales. For example, long-term 
variability in primary production as determined from the 
palaeorecord in the Arabian Sea has been related to 
changes in the strength and location of the monsoonal wind 
system (Prell and Van Campo, 1986; Luther and O'Brien, 
1990; Shimmield etal., 1990). 
If much of the global oceanic primary production results 
from upwelling of waters shallower than 200 m, there are 
two ramifications. First, if climate-induced changes in ocean 
circulation patterns change the supply of nutrients to the 
ocean surface layer, the time-scale involved for this and the 
biological response might be decades rather than centuries. 
This time-scale is comparable with the 2050 and 2100 
projections of interest to policymakers, and hence the 
possible response of the marine biota and potential for 
feedback to climate merit attention. Second, the contribution 
of continental margins to global estimates of total and export 
oceanic primary production, and eventual burial in the 
sediments, may not have been properly evaluated. 
Carbon is considered to be taken up by phytoplankton 
during primary production and released 
during 
remineralisation of organic matter in constant proportion to 
the major nutrients, referred to as the Redfield ratios 
(Redfield et al, 1963). The Redfield ratios between the 
elements C^^.^, N , P, and О are taken here as 103:16:l:-72 
after Takahashi et al (1985). If climate change causes 
changes in ocean circulation, or in inputs from land and the 
atmosphere, that affect the supply of new nutrients to the 
sunlit upper ocean (and the production of export carbon), 
then the rate of sequestering of carbon by the biological 
pump could change with possible feedbacks to the build-up 
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Similarly, if these 
changes cause changes in the Redfield ratios, then more or 
less carbon would be transferred by the biological pump 
for each unit of nutrient, again with possible implications 
for oceanic carbon sequestration (see Section 10.3.2.2). 
10.2.3 Direct Effects of Climate Change on Marine Biota 
Climate change can affect marine biota directly (e.g., 
increased temperature or changed solar radiation and their 
effects on the physiology or behaviour of marine 
organisms), or indirectly (e.g., changes to ocean circulation 
patterns that result in changes in distributions or 
functioning of marine communities). 
Marine Biotic Responses 
493 
Temperature influences biological production and can 
have a profound effect on growth and metabolic processes. 
Observations show that biological rates double or halve with 
a 10°C increase or decrease in temperature, respectively, 
i.e., a 
of 2. General relationships have been derived for 
predicting the effect of temperature variation on large 
phytoplankton (Eppley, 1972) and zooplankton (Huntley 
and Boyd, 1984) maximum growth rates. These 
relationships suggest that over the range of temperatures 
encountered in the ocean, -2 to 30 °C, maximum growth 
rates vary by about a factor of ten. At high latitudes where 
the temperature range is smaller, -2 to 3 °C, temperature 
changes may have a relatively larger effect (Smith and 
Sakshaug, 1990). Hence, even small changes in temperature 
could have pronounced effects on biological rates such as 
growth and development, gjg values are usually obtained 
from laboratory experiments conducted over short (days) 
time-scales. Over longer time-scales, physiological 
adaptation may occur, and the effects may be more subtie, 
consisting of changes in community composition rather than 
in altered rates of the original species. For this reason a 
direct correlation between temperature and community 
production cannot be drawn. Changes consistent with 
climate warming have been reported by Barry et al. (1995) 
in the invertebrate fauna of an intertidal community, and by 
Roemmich and McGowan (1995) in zooplankton biomass 
over the continental shelf. Temperature-induced change in 
biological rates or ecosystem structure may impact carbon 
cycling in the ocean by modifying the biological carbon 
pump. Furthermore, as shown by Figure 10.1, impacts that 
occur at one size class of organism can transfer to those 
above and below, thereby potentially affecting all 
components of the marine food web in a given region. 
The quality and quantity of radiation can also be altered 
by climate change, directly affecting marine organisms. 
Between 1930 and 1981 the total cloud amount over 
Northern Hemisphere oceans increased by 6% (Parungo et 
al, 199A), which must affect total incoming solar radiation, 
the spectral distribution of the incoming radiation, and the 
amount of outgoing radiation. Primary production by 
marine phytoplankton depends both on the amount and the 
spectral composition of the incoming solar radiation. Given 
that primary production might be linearly dependent on 
light levels much of the time when there are sufficient 
nutrients, we would expect a 6% increase in cloudiness to 
result in a decrease in primary production but somewhat 
less than that amount, perhaps a few per cent. However, the 
distinction between short term physiological response, and 
biogeochemically-significant community response remains 
unresolved. 
U V - B radiation, which has been shown to affect 
biological production and a wide variety of marine 
organisms, and which is increasing especially at high 
latitudes, will be treated in detail in Section 10.3.6. 
10.2.4 Responses to Changes in Circulation Patterns and 
Other Océanographie Processes 
Marine ecosystem structure and productivity is largely a 
function of physical processes controlling the supply of 
nutrients to the sunlit surface layer of the ocean (e.g., 
Denman and Gargett, 1995). Alteration of océanographie 
patterns from climate or environmental change may alter 
the structure of oceanic ecosystems on large scales with 
changes in the marine biotic production and/or fixation of 
radiatively active gases, primarily COj, DMS and NjO, 
with possible feedback to climate. Especially productive 
marine ecosystems are those associated with wind-driven 
upwelling in eastern boundary currents and retreating sea 
ice regions. It has been argued by Bakun (1990) that global 
warming may enhance the upwelling. Projections of greater 
warming over continents (especially the already observed 
higher minimum night-time temperatures) than over the 
adjacent ocean would strengthen the onshore temperature 
gradients that drive the equatorward winds along eastern 
boundaries of oceanic gyres. Bakun presents evidence for 
the last several decades from four major upwelling areas 
that alongshore windstress has already been increasing, but 
other possible feedbacks might explain these trends. On 
longer scales, Altabet et al. (1995) have recently found 
climate-related variations in nitrogen isotope ratios in the 
Arabian Sea, suggesting changes in denitrification within 
the sediments that may have resulted in changes in release 
of Nj, and NjO to the atmosphere. 
The largest climate anomalies are associated with 
ENSO, and effects of the ENSO phenomenon on marine 
ecosystems continue to be documented. The presence of an 
El Niño reduces the surface nitrate concentration and the 
ApC02 between the atmosphere and the surface ocean to at 
most half the normal values (Wong et al., 1993; Murray et 
al., 1994). Harris et al. (1991) documented significant 
changes in the marine ecosystem in the subtropical 
convergence zone off Tasmania associated with the La 
Niña "Cold Event" of 1988. Karl et al. (1995) have 
observed at a time-series station in the subtropical gyre 
near Hawaii a complete change in the planktonic 
ecosystem during the 1991-92 ENSO event. There was a 
significant change in the phytoplankton community 
structure - an increase in nitrogen-fixing micro-organisms 
Trichodesmium. 
This change caused a shift from a 
primarily nitrogen-limited to a primarily phosphorus-
494 
Marine Biotic Responses 
limited habitat with accompanying changes in total 
production by phytoplankton and in the amount of that 
production lost to the deep sea. Most importantly, the 
primary production supported by the nitrogen fixed by the 
Trichodesmium 
organisms removes COj from the surface 
waters without requiring upwelled nitrate which would be 
accompanied by dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC).' 
A number of climate change scenarios suggest that 
temperature changes would be greatest at high latitudes 
(see Section 6.2.2.3). Jacka and Budd (1991), for example, 
have documented the sensitivity of Antarctic sea ice to 
warming. The seasonal development and regression of sea 
ice is of substantial biological importance in addition to its 
profound role in global ocean-atmosphere exchange of 
heat, water and gases. Blooms of phytoplankton at the ice 
edge, induced by upwelling of nutrient-rich water and/or 
the stabilising effect of melting ice-water, ai-e significant at 
high latitudes in both hemispheres. Changes in the extent 
and thickness of the ice affect the timing, magnitude and 
duration of the seasonal pulse of primary production in 
polar regions, while the mode of sea ice formation 
influences the composition of the biota associated with it. 
This in turn affects the quantity and quality of food 
available to grazers and the timing and the magnitude of 
vertical flux of carbon and other elements (Eicken, 1992). 
Again, recent findings by Gloersen (1995) indicate that sea 
ice extent in both hemispheres correlates with ENSO 
cycles. 
In summary, the marine biota and their environment 
interact on a wide variety of space and time-scales. 
Especially productive areas are on continental margins and 
along the equator because of the input of new nutrients 
from land, from the atmosphere, and mostly from the ocean 
interior via upwelling. Climate change can affect marine 
biota by changing temperatures altering physiological rates 
and/or community composition, by changing radiation 
affecting biological production or damaging cells, and by 
changes to circulation patterns and other océanographie 
processes altering ecosystem structure and function. Such 
changes offer a variety of possible feedbacks to the climate 
system. 
10.2.5 Evidence from the Palaeorecord 
The glacial/interglacial record suggests a decrease of -80 
ppmv in atmospheric COj occurred during the last glacial 
period. The ocean contains more than 50 times the carbon 
1 Dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) consists of aqueous COj, 
bicarbonate and carbonate ions, i.e. DIC = COj+HCOj+CO?". 
contained in the atmosphere. During glaciation, the carbon 
stored in land biota, soil and detritus was significantly 
reduced by ice cover and a colder, drier climate. 
Therefore, the glacial-interglacial change in atmospheric 
C O T content must have been driven by changes in ocean 
chemistry and/or biology. Ignoring changes in solubility 
due to changing temperatures (too small and largely offset 
by an opposite change in salinity) and effects due to sea 
level change (compare the -150 m rise during déglaciation 
with the projection of less than 1 m over the next century), 
there still exist several hypotheses for oceanic chemical 
and/or 
biotic processes 
causing 
or 
triggering 
glacial/interglacial transitions (Broecker, 1982). Changes 
in deep ocean CaCOj dissolution or burial caused by 
changes in concentrations of deep ocean organic carbon 
may 
have 
accounted 
for 
part 
of 
the 
recent 
glacial/interglacial increase in atmospheric CO2, but again 
the time-scale would be millennia (Boyle, 1988; Archer 
and Maier-Reimer, 1994), too long for the 2050 to 2100 
IPCC interests. 
Other hypotheses to explain the glacial drawdown of 
atmospheric COj with the potential for change on decade 
to century time-scales have been simulated in an ocean 
general circulation model (GCM) by Heinze et al. (1991). 
They include increased Redfield ratios of C : N or C:P, 
increased ocean nutrient inventory causing increased 
production of particulate organic carbon (РОС), increased 
high latitude primary production, changes in the 
"ventilation" of deep waters (i.e., a shallower thermocline 
circulation), and changes in the proportion of production 
by phytoplankton of СаСОЗ relative to organic carbon. 
Heinze et al. found that their model was most sensitive to 
changes in Redfield ratios, ventilation, and changes in the 
inventories of nutrients or РОС. Qualitative consistency 
with palaeoceanographic data was greatest for changes in 
Redfield ratios and in the oceanic inventory of РОС. In the 
next sections, we will consider the potential for marine 
biotic responses in these processes, and in processes where 
there is potential for feedbacks to climate through related 
biogeochemical processes. Two examples of the latter are: 
(i) Increases in РОС on continental shelves could lead to 
increased anoxia and loss of nitrogen to the atmosphere by 
denitrification, and reduced production of РОС (e.g., 
Christensen, 1994). (ii) A shift to CaCOj-fixing 
phytoplankton (Coccolithophores) 
would increase both 
surface PCO2, the marine production of D M S (with a 
possible increase in marine cloudiness), and the near-
surface reflectance of visible light with possible increases 
in sea surface reflectance or near surface temperatures 
(e.g., Holligan, 1992). 
Marine Biotic Responses 
495 
10.3 Feedbacks: Influence of Marine Biota on CUmate 
Change 
10.3.1 Critical Issues 
We are concerned here with potential feedbacks to climate 
by environmentally induced changes to marine biota. In 
particular, how might changes in the marine biota in 
response to changing climate affect the atmospheric 
distributions of radiatively active gases? In addition to 
maintaining a reduced concentration of CO^ in the surface 
ocean (relative to the ocean interior), marine biota are a 
significant source of N-,0, another greenhouse gas, and of 
dimethyl sulphide (DMS), which when ventilated to the 
atmosphere can form cloud condensation nuclei. Several 
critical issues (COj cycling via the biological pump, the 
role of iron in sequestering carbon to the deep ocean, DMS 
production, and UV-B radiation damage) have received 
considerable attention in the scientific and public media 
and will be addressed individually. 
10.3.2 Response of the Biological Pump to Climate-
Induced Change and Possible Feedbacks 
10.3.2.1 The open ocean biological pump 
The role played by the biological pump in the ocean carbon 
cycle, discussed only briefly in IPCC, 1994 (Sections 
1.3.3.3 and 1.4.3), is expanded and updated here. 
According to our understanding of the eurent operation of 
the global carbon cycle (Figure 10.4), on average the ocean 
takes up about half of the anthropogenic input of COj to 
the atmosphere that does not remain there. This amount 
(e.g., Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993) is in the order of 2 
GtC/yr (1 Gt = 1 Pg, where P = Peta = lO'^), relative to a 
gross flux of CO2 in each direction between the ocean and 
the atmosphere in the order of 90 GtC/yr. The surface 
ocean mediates the fluxes of carbon (dioxide) between the 
atmosphere and the ocean interior and between the land 
and the ocean sediments or ocean interior. The gross flux 
in each direction between the surface ocean and the ocean 
CARBON CYCLE 1980-89 
-1.9 
о 1 
Ш 
ас 
S 
LU 
О 
5.4 
СП 
—I 
LU 
со 
из 
о 
ATMOSPHERE 
750 (+3.4 угЦ 
1.9? 
100 
f 
LAND BIOTA 
550 
50 
/ 0.6 
0.6 
^ 50 
SOIL & DETRITUS 
E^^W. 
92 
90 
SURFACE OCEAN 1.020 
(+0.4уН) 
50 
•» 4 0 
4 
91.6 
>' 
> f 
100 
INTERMEDIATES. DEEP WATERS 
38.100 (+1.6 yr^)  
Г 
0.2 
Figure 10.4: Box diagram of the global carbon cycle reservoirs and fluxes, in GtC and GtC/yr, for the decade 1980 to 1989. Annual 
changes ш reservoirs are in parentheses, and italic numbers represent those believed to have changed since pre-industrial times due to 
human activities. Adapted from Siegenthaler and Sarmiento (1993). 
496 
Marine Biotic Responses 
interior is in the order of 100 GtC/yr (a number that can 
vary considerably depending on what depth is taken as the 
base of the surface layer), and the net flux is 1-2 GtC/yr 
(estimated to be less than the flux from atmosphere to the 
surface layer to account for observations that show the 
surface-ocean total carbon concentration to be increasing 
by about 0.4 GtC/yr (Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993)). 
Globally, marine plants are responsible for more than a 
third of the total gross photosynthetic production that 
incorporates carbon from COj into organic molecules; the 
other photosynthesis is accomplished by terrestrial plants. 
On an annual basis, the gross rate of carbon fixation by 
marine algae (phytoplankton) may be as high as 50 GtC/yr, 
of which more than half is supported by nutrients recycled 
within the euphotic layer, and the rest supported by new 
nutrients introduced into the euphotic zone, primarily from 
the ocean interior, but also from the atmosphere and the 
land via runoff. From the point of view of the balance of 
CO2 between the atmosphere and ocean, the quantity of 
interest is the export production - the fraction of the 
primary production that eventually passes from the 
euphotic layer to the ocean interior, either as DOC^ 
through vertical transport by water motions, or as sinking 
РОС. This export production is estimated to be 10 GtC/yr 
(range 5-20 GtC/yr) (Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993; 
Murray et al., 1994; Ducklow, 1995). 
The approximately 50 GtC cycled annually by the ocean 
biota between living and dead material represents more 
than ten times their standing stock of 3-4 GtC (i.e., the 
standing stock is cycled approximately monthly), and 
roughly 5 times the (poorly known) amount of biogenic 
carbon that is transported downward to the ocean interior. 
To address how this biological carbon pump might respond 
to climate-related or other environmental change, and with 
what potential feedbacks to the climate system, requires a 
brief description of its workings (see Longhurst, 1991 and 
Sarmiento and Siegenthaler, 1992 for recent reviews). 
The organic carbon export from the surface ocean to the 
ocean interior (i.e., the biological pump) is equal to 
photosynthetic production minus remineralisation in the 
surface ocean. Some phytoplankton die, some are grazed 
by protozoa, zooplankton or flsh, which in turn die or are 
eaten by larger zooplankton or fish, and so on up to 
seabirds and mammals (seals, whales and humans). These 
processes generate organic matter in dissolved and 
' Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is operationally that fraction 
of particulate organic carbon (РОС) that passes through a niter of 
pore size in the order of 0.5 pm. 
particulate phases, from dying plants or animals, from 
waste products, and from messy feeding. Much of this 
material is reusable by phytoplankton, either immediately 
or after processing by bacteria. The export carbon 
production consists of РОС which sinks out of the surface 
layer, and DOC which can be transported downwards by 
subduction or convective sinking of surface waters. 
Organic matter that reaches great depths is returned mostly 
as DIG after remineraUsation or as long-lived DOC, on 
time-scales of centuries to millennia. However, most of the 
organic material is remineralised in the upper 500 m of the 
water column and is reintroduced into the euphotic zone on 
tnuch shorter time-scales through a variety of processes -
coastal and equatorial upwelling, deep winter convective 
mixing, surface outcropping of density surfaces at high 
latitudes, etc. Only a small proportion (order 1%) of the 
РОС that sinks out of the surface layer reaches the ocean 
bottom where it may eventually be buried in the sediments. 
The operation of the biological pump is depicted 
schematically in Figure 10.5. 
Related to the biological pump (or part of it depending 
on the definition) is the uptake of carbon by those marine 
algae and animals that have "hard" parts constructed of 
calcium carbonate. This CaCOj sinks out of the euphotic 
zone with the export production. Globally, 1 carbon atom 
is incorporated by calcareous phytoplankton into CaCOj 
for about every 4 carbon atoms into organic molecules 
(Broecker and Peng, 1982; Tsunogai and Noriki, 1991), but 
the ratio can be 1:1 in areas with blooms of certain 
coccolithophores (Robertson et al, 1994). The CaCOj 
particles do not remineralise during sinking; rather they 
mostly redissolve at depths of several thousands of metres 
(e.g., Tsunogai and Noriki, 1991; Anderson and Sarmiento, 
1994), although some must obviously settle on the sea 
floor, such as ocean ridges where the bottom is above the 
dissolution horizon, i.e., the depth (differing in different 
oceans) below which sinking CaCOj particles would tend 
to redissolve (Broecker and Peng, 1982). Factors 
controlling the CaCOj component of photosynthesis have 
not been well studied, but efforts are under way to develop 
a quantitative basis for assessment (e.g., Holligan et al, 
1993;Westbroekeía/., 1993). 
Conventional wisdom states that carbon availability does 
not limit marine photosynthesis. Therefore the increasing 
amount of CO, in the surface layer of the ocean is thought 
not to cause an increase in either the gross or net rate of 
operation of the biological pump, which to first order is 
thought to have been in steady state through the last 
century (e.g.. Sarmiento and Siegenthaler, 1992; 
Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 1993). Nitrogen is sufficiently 
Marine Biotic Responses 
497 
ATMOSPHERE 
CO2 uptake and release 
SC0, = C0? + HC03+ CO3 
Photosynthesis^-^ Respiration I 0-200 
Primary & secondary production; J 
microbial recycling 
Tf^ffpatria! tñDüts 
ofDoaPoU: 
DEEP OCEAN St 
Dissolved 
Slffusion 
Accumulation 
in sediments 
^ 
Benthic Processes 
Respiration & decomposition; 
transport in deep ocean 
Figure 10.5: Schematic showing the dominant biogenic fluxes of carbon in the ocean and the biological processes transforming the 
carbon into different forms. Widths of the arrows depict semi-qualitatively the relative sizes of the fluxes. Vertical transports of DIC are 
not shown (see Figure 10.4). Adapted from SCOR/JGOFS brochure "Oceans, Carbon and Climate Change", 1990. 
498 
Marine Biotic 
Responses 
scarce that it is thought to be the nutrient limiting the 
amount of carbon fixed by photosynthesis on geologically 
short time-scales. The loss rate of organic carbon (and 
nitrogen) from the surface layer to the ocean interior, the 
export production, is considered to be balanced by the 
input of new nitrogen to the surface layer - from 
freshwater runoff, from the atmosphere, and primarily by 
advective and diffusive transport of dissolved nitrate from 
the ocean interior back up into the euphotic layer. Thus 
geochemists conclude that the biological pump cannot 
react directly to the increase of CO2 in the atmosphere and 
in the upper ocean, but only indirectly in response to 
clianges in the supply of new nitrogen caused by climate or 
environmental change. This indirect response could be a 
change in the structure of the biological pump, i.e., a 
change in ecosystem structure altering (in the context of 
carbon cycling) the proportion of recycling versus loss to 
the ocean interior. Such a change might be different in 
different regions (biogeographic "provinces"); whether 
they would tend to cancel out or add to a change significant 
at the global scale is also important. 
Riebesell et al. (1993) have recently challenged this 
conventional wisdom, arguing that diatom growth can be 
limited by the supply of C O , and that the approximate 
doubling in surface water pCOj since the last glaciation 
from 180 to 355+ ppmv could have stimulated marine 
primary productivity, in such a way that the biological 
pump may already be participating in sequestering to the 
ocean interior some fraction of the atmospheric C O j 
produced by human activity. Turpin (1993), on the other 
hand, argued that COj-limited photosynthesis does not 
necessarily imply СОт-limited growth rates in the sea. 
Raven (1993) pointed out that cell-membrane-mediated 
inorganic carbon-limitation concerns the rate rather than 
the extent of production, i.e., a spring bloom might take 
longer but the annual global export production would be 
unchanged. Obviously, more thinking, if not more 
research, is required. 
The estimate in Figure 10.4 for total oceanic primary 
production of 50 GtC/yr is roughly double that of 27 
GtC/yr made by Berger (1989), with similar data and 
formulae to those used to generate the original map on 
which Figure 10.3 is based (Berger and Wefer, 1991). 
Longhurst et al. (1995) have examined primary 
productivity data from the North Atlantic to partition the 
ocean basins into four domains and four seasons according 
to the nature and intensity of physical forcing likely to 
affect phytoplankton dynamics. This classification, with 
the global satellite ocean colour data base, has been used to 
estimate the global annual oceanic primary production. 
giving a value of about 50 GtC/yr for total (recycled + 
export) production. Recent estimates of annual total or 
export production obtained from tracer studies, in situ '"'C 
incubations with "clean" techniques, and from sediment 
traps, when compared with their positions on the Berger 
and Wefer map, also support the higher global estimates 
(e.g., Jenkins and Goldman, 1985; Piatt and Harrison, 
1985; Knauer et al., 1990; Lohrenz et al., 
1992; 
Welschmeyer et al, 1993; Kari et al, 1995). There is some 
evidence, especially in the North Pacific, that primary 
production and standing stocks of phytoplankton (Venrick 
et al, 1987; Parsons and Lalli, 1988) and zooplankton 
(Brodeur and Ware, 1992) may have been increasing over 
the last two decades, although Roemmich and McGowan 
(1995) documented decreasing zooplankton biomass and 
increasing temperatures over the last 45 years in the 
California Current area. Methodological changes, e.g., in 
filters and in "clean" techniques, may account for most if 
not all of the apparent increases in open ocean 
phytoplankton primary production and standing stocks. 
Studies using the most recent methodology for DOC 
(e.g.. Sharp et al, 1995) show significant changes in DOC 
concentrations over short temporal and spatial scales 
(Carison et al, 1994; Carlson and Ducklow, 1995; Peltzer 
and Hayward, 1995). Surface values of 60 to 80 
micromolar carbon can drop to 50-60 micromolar over a 
depth range of 150-300 m below the surface; horizontal 
variations over scales of tens of kilometres and temporal 
variations from day-to-day can be seen on the order of 20 
micromolar carbon. With these observations, it is possible 
to recognise different components of DOC ranging from 
the traditional "refractory" pool (not readily usable by 
biological organisms), with a turnover time on the order of 
ocean mixing cycles, to the "very labile" pool, with a 
turnover time of hours to a day (Carlson et al., 1994). 
It is important to be able to assess whether there are 
changes in the inventory of carbon above the permanent 
thermocline when trying to understand the ocean-
atmosphere linkage. A series of model simulations 
(Toggweiler, 1989, 1990; Bacastow and Maier-Reimer, 
1991; Najjar et al, 1992; and Siegenthaler and Sarmiento, 
1993) have been able to achieve closer congruence with 
observations if vertical transports of DOC are comparable 
with vertical fluxes of sinking organic particles (РОС). 
Recent careful measurements of DOC concentrations made 
in conjunction with measurements of primary production 
and sinking particles (export production) support the model 
simulations. Along the equatorial Pacific, Murray et al. 
(1994) concluded that 60 to 90% of the new production 
was transported away from the equator by currents. 
Marine Biotic Responses 
499 
possibly as DOC. In the Sargasso Sea, Carlson et al. (1994) 
found the DOC advected downwards from the euphotic 
zone via deep mixing each winter to be greater than the 
РОС captured by sediment traps at a depth of 150 m. In the 
next few years, careful measurements of DOC with a 
common methodology should provide estimates of the 
global pool of DOC, its spatial distribution and its temporal 
dynamics within the marine foodweb. 
The Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) is cutxently 
undertaking research to increase our understanding of the 
global ocean carbon cycle, so that we might address the 
above mechanisms on a more quantitative basis. It should 
be pointed out that at the present time the global numbers 
mentioned in this discussion with regard to the ocean 
carbon cycle have uncertainties in the order of 100%. It is 
within this context of large uncertainties and tightly 
coupled physical, biological and chemical processes that 
we shall describe possible responses and feedbacks of the 
biological pump to climate change. 
10.3.2.2 The Redfield ratios - are they constant? 
Recent model simulations of ocean carbon cycle changes 
demonstrate a high sensitivity to changes in the Redfield 
ratios between carbon and the limiting nutrient (Heinze et 
ai, 1991; Shaffer, 1993). These ratios are often assumed to 
be constant in coupled analyses of the cycles of these 
elements in the ocean and have great importance in global 
biogeochemistry. If there is significant departure from 
these ratios, either in their uptake during primary 
production or in their remineralisation back to inorganic 
forms in the water column, then our understanding of how 
the oceanic carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus cycles are 
coupled needs to be revised. 
Recent observations by Sambrotto et al. (1993) suggest 
elevated levels in the uptake of carbon relative to nitrogen, 
especially during the spring bloom. Banse (1994) also 
found a decoupling of the uptake by marine phytoplankton 
of dissolved inorganic carbon and nitrate, but with C:N 
ratios lower than those of Redfield. Utilisation of nitrate is 
often converted to carbon fixation by use of a constant 
Redfield ratio. The elevated ratios of C:N fixation reported 
by Sambrotto et al. would lessen the discrepancy between 
estimated Oj utilisation rates and nitrate upwelling by 
allowing more carbon to be fixed for the same amount of 
nitrogen, and would increase the global estimate of carbon 
sequestering by export production, usually calculated from 
the ratio of new nitrate uptake to total nitrate uptake by 
marine phytoplankton. 
For remineralisation, simple models (e.g., Evans and 
Fasham, 1993; Shaffer, 1993) demonstrated that more 
rapid remineralisation of nitrogen relative to carbon in 
sinking organic particles leads to lowered surface COj 
concentrations, and Shaffer's results also demonstrated a 
significant reduction of atmospheric COj concentration in 
response to doubling of the remineralisation depth scale of 
carbon relative to that of the Umiting nutrient. Lohrenz et 
al. (1992), Honjo and Manganini (1993), and Karl et al. 
(1996) all found elevated C : N ratios in sediment trap 
samples that increased markedly with depth, indicating that 
the remineralisation depth scale for nitrogen was less than 
that for carbon, i.e., suggesting that the remineralised 
nitrogen might reach the surface layer more rapidly than 
the remineralised carbon. On the other hand, Anderson and 
Sarmiento (1994) found regenerated ratios to be in rough 
agreement with Redfield values, but with considerable 
variability. 
The widely observed departures from Redfield ratios 
indicate that past conclusions concerning operation of the 
biological pump based on adherence to Redfield ratios 
need to be reviewed. Furthermore, if the Redfield ratios (or 
their vertical gradients) change in time in response to 
changes in ocean circulation or other properties, the model 
simulations indicate that there is a larger potential for the 
biological pump to influence atmospheric C O j 
concentrations. 
10.3.2.3 Carbonate 
production 
Changes in ecosystem structure can have an additional, 
selc'om appreciated, effect on the oceanic carbon cycle. A 
shift from organic- or silica-walled organisms to carbonate 
(i.e., CaCOj) secreting organisms (e.g., coccolithophorids), 
possibly accompanying temperature changes or coastal 
eutrophication, would cause an increase in surface water 
pCO, because of the overall calcification reaction: 
Ca2+ -Ь2НСОз-^СаСоз-1-С02 + Н 2 0 
Thus, although carbonate production reduces total DIG in 
the surface layer, the reaction tends to increase the surface 
ocean PCO2 by decreasing the surface alkalinity (e.g., 
Broecker and Peng, 1982) thus driving COj from the ocean 
to the atmosphere (Frankignoulle and Gattuso, 1993). The 
released C O j constitutes roughly 60% of that fixed as 
carbonate and this fraction increases with an increase in sea 
water PCO2, thereby 
increasing this 
feedback 
(Frankignoulle and Canon, 1994). Although this fraction 
may be reduced if the C O , released intracellularly is fixed 
photosynthetically, thereby decreasing its release to sea 
water (Sikes and Fabry, 1994), observations in the North 
Atlantic during an extensive coccolithophorid bloom 
500 
Marine Biotic Responses 
(Holligan et al., 1993; Robertson et al., 1994) clearly 
showed that surface water p C O , decreased less rapidly 
than would be expected on the basis of photosynthesis 
alone, which also resulted in the undersaturation of surface 
waters being less pronounced. Palaeo-oceanographic 
evidence suggests changes in the carbonate cycle 
influenced atmospheric COj changes that accompanied 
glacial-interglacial periods. Boyle (1988) argued that 
during the last glacial maximum a shift in labile nutrients 
and metabolic 
to greater depths increased the 
dissolved CO^ raising the depth horizon below which 
СаСОз would dissolve. The increased Ca^"^ slowly raised 
the alkalinity of the whole ocean, lowering the surface 
pCOj and reducing atmospheric CO2 concentrations. 
During the last déglaciation, the change in the locus of 
carbonate production in the ocean from the deep sea 
(pelagic carbonates) to the continental shelves (coral reefs) 
following the rise in sea level (the coral reef hypothesis) 
has been suggested as a cause of the increase in the 
atmospheric pCOj level (Berger, 1982). Total atmospheric 
pCOj change due to this effect has been shown from 
modelling to approximate that observed in the Vostok ice 
core (Opdyke and Walker, 1992). However, another model, 
based on the hypothesis that a change in the relative rates 
at which organic carbon and calcium carbonate are 
deposited on the sea floor should drive a compensating 
change in ocean pH, also offers an explanation of the last 
déglaciation (Archer and Maier-Reimer, 1994). 
Thus, although the effect of carbonate production is to 
remove carbon from the sea surface in the form of settling 
carbonate skeletons, the effect on the C O j flux is the 
reverse of that occurring during the production of non 
carbonate-producing plankton. Moreover, carbonate 
production is not governed by the Redfield ratios (or their 
variation). However, the existence of competing models to 
explain the recent palaeorecord (e.g., Heinze et al., 1991; 
Westbroek ef al., 1993) suggests that a clear understanding 
of the factors controlling carbonate versus organic export 
production (Tsunogai and Noriki, 1991) is yet to emerge. 
10.3.2.4 Role of continental 
margins 
The continental margins play a major role in oceanic 
biogeochenücal cycles (Walsh, 1991) and are burial sites of 
large masses of organic carbon, derived both from ten-estrial 
sources via rivers or from local production in the coastal 
ocean (Berner, 1982). The reservoir of buried organic 
carbon in these areas is approximately six times greater than 
that in abyssal sediments (Holser et al., 1988) in spite of a 
much smaller global area of deposition. The most recent 
estimate suggests that approximately 70 TgC/yr are buried 
off deltas, and a similar amount accumulates on continental 
shelves and the upper parts of the continental slopes 
(Hedges and Keil, 1995). These two regimes account for 
more than 90% of the total amount of organic carbon buried 
on the sea floor; shallow-water carbonate platforms (4%), 
abyssal sediments (3%) and anoxic (oxygen-free) basins 
(0.5%) account for the remainder. Furthermore, the rate of 
accumulation of sediment along continental margins is 
higher by a factor of at least 100 than that in the deep ocean 
(Calvert and Pedersen, 1992), so that the deposited carbon 
is rapidly buried below the principal source of oxidants and 
the abundance maximum of bacteria at the sediment/water 
interface. In concert with adsorption of organic molecules to 
the surfaces of fine-grained sediment particles, this 
contributes to the preferential preservation of the less 
reactive organic materials (Ittekkot, 1993; Hedges and Keil, 
1995). 
Much of the material deposited on the margins is 
recycled in the benthic boundary layer, both by microbial 
activities and by the feeding of benthic animals. Dissolved 
carbon may be transported offshore into deeper waters or 
returned to the shallow water column, from where it can be 
recycled to the sea surface in these dynamic regimes on 
relatively short time-scales (Smith and Hollibaugh, 1993). 
A significant fraction is apparentiy permanently buried, as 
attested by the high organic carbon contents of many outer 
shelf and upper slope deposits of the world ocean 
(Premuzic et al., 1982), although a recent intensive study 
of the Middle Atlantic Bight of eastern North America 
found that less than 5% of new biogenic particulate 
material is exported to the adjacent slope region (Biscaye 
et al., 1994). Globally, Smith and Hollibaugh (1993) 
estimate an offshore export in the order of 0.2 GtC/yr. 
Most authors caution that a global estimate of 
(especially) net primary fixation of carbon over continental 
shelves is subject to large (cal00%) errors. A recent 
numerical analysis of the seasonal cycles of COj, DOC and 
РОС in relation to pristine nutrient conditions on Alaskan 
shelves and eutrophication in the northern Gulf of Mexico 
emphasises the complex heterogeneous nature of the 
continental margins (Walsh and Dieterle, 1994). They 
suggest that even pristine shelf areas such as the Bering 
and Chukchi Seas may have switched from being a source 
to a sink for CO2 over the last 250 years in response to 
rising atmospheric COj levels, with -50% of the present 
invasion of CO2 stored as DOC. Globally, they estimate 
that polar and temperate continental shelves currently 
sequester 1.0-1.2 GtC/yr, but that increased metabolism on 
tropical continental shelves may cause evasion of CO^ to 
the atmosphere, resulting in continental shelves being a net 
Marine Biotic 
Responses 
501 
world sink for CO2 of 0.6-0.8 GtC/yr. Studies suggest that 
anthropogenic effects have already taken place to a much 
greater extent than in the open ocean, making the 
determination of an "unperturbed" carbon budget for 
continental margins even more difficult. Kempe (1993) 
estimates that the total transport of nitrate -1- nitrite to the 
continental shelf by the Danube River increased between 
the 1950s and 1989 from 12,500 t/yr to 273,000 t/yr, a 22-
fold increase. Globally, Walsh (1989) suggested a possible 
tenfold increase of anthropogenic nitrogen loading to the 
coastal zone had already occurred by 1980, accounting for 
roughly half (0.4-0.5 GtC/yr) of the export to the 
continental slope regions, and Paerl (1993) estimated that 
atmospheric depositon of anthropogenic nitrogen 
contributes 10-50% of the total external nitrogen load to 
coastal areas. Smith and Hollibaugh (1993) argued that 
anthropogenic organic carbon loading to the coastal zone 
may have nearly doubled. Much of this organic carbon is 
oxidised, "net organic metabolism" in their terminology, 
contributing not to atmospheric carbon removal but rather 
"biotically mediated gas evasion" back to the atmosphere. 
Until we improve our understanding of the carbon and 
nitrogen dynamics in the coastal zone with sufficient 
spatial and temporal resolution (e.g., Kempe and Pegler, 
1991) to allow reasonable global estimates, we cannot 
expect such estimates to converge on consensus values. 
Christensen (1994) reported on a box-model study of the 
global carbon cycle including continental shelves, 
calibrated with atmospheric and oceanic ô'^^COj 
observations. Atmospheric C O j levels were relatively 
insensitive to most model runs except that if most of the 
global ocean denitrification (due to remineralisation of 
organic carbon in low oxygen environments) was shifted 
from open ocean intermediate depths to the waters and 
sediments of continental shelves (to simulate increasing 
eutrophication of coastal regions), the atmospheric pCOj 
increased by -10 ppmv, because shelf denitrification 
immediately removed nitrogen from the continental 
shelves, thereby reducing shelf primary production and 
utilisation of COj. On the other hand, Orr and Sarmiento 
(1992) concluded from simulated enhanced CO2 fixation in 
large areas of an ocean general circulation model that 
drawdown of atmospheric C O j would be minor on a 
century time-scale, but they did not include a feedback that 
might lead to shelf denitrification. 
10.3.2.5 Biological pump summary 
In summary, while the rate of sequestering of organic 
carbon from the surface ocean is primarily limited by the 
supply of new nitrogen, the biological pump is sufficiently 
complex that there are a number of possibilities for 
feedback to climate for which we possess inadequate 
understanding for quantitative assessment. Chief among 
them are: (1) factors controlling the Redfield ratios and 
their gradients with depth: increasing the C : N (or C:P) 
ratios will fix more carbon for each molecule of nutrient 
used; (2) the potential for changes in the proportion of 
СаСОз to organic carbon (C^^g) formed by phytoplankton: 
an increase in the ratio CaiZOyC^^^ from the current 1:4 to 
a possible 1:1 would eliminate the role of the biological 
pump in maintaining a reduced upper ocean pCO^, (3) the 
role of the continental margins on a global scale in 
sequestering carbon and how they are changing as a result 
of anthropogenic inputs. 
10.3.3 Fertilisation of Ocean Productivity - Natural and 
Anthropogenic 
10.3.3.1 Inputs of nitrogen and iron from the atmosphere 
and rivers 
The increased deposition over the oceans of atmospheric 
nitrogen from anthropogenic sources (fertilisers) over the 
last century iTiay have resulted in increased export carbon 
production. Duce et al. (1991) estimated the total 
atmospheric deposition of nutrient nitrogen to the oceans to 
be about 30 TgN/yr. Schindler and Bayley (1993) estimated 
another 21 TgN/yr from riverine input. Using a C:N atomic 
ratio of 7:1 gives an equivalent increased production of 
export carbon in the oceans of 0.31 GtC/yr, most of which 
they assumed was due to human activities. Galloway et al. 
(1995) divided these inputs into present and pre-industrial, 
estimating a nitrogen input from human activities to the 
oceans of 18 TgN/yr via atmospheric deposition and 6 
TgN/yr via rivers. A C:N atomic ratio of 7 gives (for the 
total 24 TgN/yr) an equivalent fertilised carbon production 
of 0.14 GtC/yr, only about 1% of estimated global marine 
export production. However a C:N ratio of -10 as found by 
Sambrotto et al. (1993) would yield an equivalent fertilised 
production of 0.21 GtC/yr. In the Sargasso Sea, which is 
often nitrate-depleted, nitrogen deposition is an important 
source of export production during short episodes (Owens 
et al, 1992), but for only 2% of the time is it capable of 
supporting the measured export production (Michaels et al, 
1993). Episodic deposition of anthropogenically produced 
nitrogen may then alter the functioning of regional 
ecosystems, without apparentiy having a significant effect 
on global export production. However, we point out that the 
highest estimate of human-induced fertilised export 
production, 0.21 GtC/yr, represents about 10% of 2 GtC/yr, 
believed to be the net flux from the atmosphere to the 
ocean. The key point about export production driven by 
502 
Marine Biotic Responses 
deposition oí" atmospheric nitrogen compared with that 
driven by input of new nitrogen from upwelling is that it is 
not accompanied by upwelled deep DIC at Redfield ratios: 
it potentially converts to a net flux of DIC from the surface 
to the ocean interior. 
Elemental nitrogen comprises over three-quarters of 
the atmosphere. The cyanobacterium 
Oscillatoria 
[Tricfiodesmium) can fix nitrogen for biological utilisation 
in the sea: recent estimates of total global nitrogen fixation 
of 10 TgN/yr, by Carpenter and Romans (1991), and of 40-
200 TgN/yr, by Galloway et al. (1995) (including larger 
areas), correspond (for a Redfield C:N ratio in the order of 7) 
to a rate of carbon fixaüon by photosynthesis in the range 
of about 0.06-1.2 GtC/yr. Shifts induced by climate change 
in the phytoplankton community to a greater proportion of 
Oscillatoria (as observed by Karl et al, (1995) during the 
1991 to 1992 warming event) could potentially increase the 
sequestering of anthropogenic COj by a sizeable fraction in 
less than a decade. 
Since the input of iron from the atmosphere may have 
been a factor in transitions between glacial and interglacial 
periods, estimates of current natural and anthropogenic 
inputs to the atmosphere and to the oceans are critical to 
improved understanding of the control of iron on marine 
primary production in high nutrient - low chlorophyll 
(HNLC) regions. Duce et а/. (1991) and Duce and Tindale 
(1991) estimate the global input to the oceans of iron in 
atmospheric dust to be 32 Tg/yr of which about 10% is 
(a) 
Organic carbon MAR 
(mg cm~2 kyr"") 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Core P7 
С 
MAR 
org 
Stage 1 
Stage 2 
Stage 3 
Vostok Dust 
(Revised 
Timescale) 
1 ^ AII54-25PC 
С 
MAR 
org 
(b) 
0.0 
Organic carbon MAR 
(mg cm~2 kyr"") 
10 
20 
30 
' • I ' ' ' ' I ' ' ' ' I 
• . I . • 111 • . . . 
^
- 
- 
< 
200 
400 
Dust (10-9 
600 
800 
40 
Vostok Dust 
(Revised 
Timescale) 
4? 
cm^ g-4) 
200 
400 
Vostok Dust (10-9 
600 
800 
cm3 g-1) 
Figure 10.6: Comparison of the organic carbon (С^^^.^) mass accumulation rate (MAR) from cores P7 (open circles) and AII54-25PC 
(bold line) and the Vostok dust record (thin line, plotted as volume of dust per gram of ice) as a function of time for the last 50 kyr 
(a) and the last 160 kyr (b). The correlation of the dust content in the Vostok core with the organic carbon accumulation rate in a deep 
ocean core does not necessarily indicate causation, but it does suggest the possibility of iron fertilisation in high nutrient - low 
chlorophyll (HNLC) regions during the last two periods of glaciation. The two cores were obtained from bottom depths of 3085 and 
3225 m in the Panama Basin north-east of the Galapagos Islands, an H N L C region. From Pedersen et al. (1991). 
Marine Biotic Responses 
503 
readily soluble and hence biologically usable. Riverine 
input of dissolved iron is estimated to be about a third that 
from atmospheric dust. Most of the atmospheric input 
occurs in the Northern Hemisphere, much of it east of 
China. The inputs are also highly episodic. 
Another intriguing process is the correlation of deep 
organic carbon fluxes with total mass accumulation rate, 
interpreted by Ittekkot (1993) as resulting from deposition 
of atmospheric dust acring as ballast sequestering more 
organic carbon deeper in the water column. On a time-scale 
less than decades, increased dust would by this process 
reduce atmospheric C O , levels. Increased remineralisation 
of organic carbon at depth would, according to Boyle 
(1988), redissolve more СаСОз, leading to increased ocean 
alkalinity, further reducing the atmospheric CO, but on the 
millennium time-scale required for the alkalinity increase 
to reach the surface ocean. 
10.3.3.2 Fertilisation of phytoplankton 
productivity by iron 
Early results from the Vostok ice core showed that iron 
concentrations (as inferred from aluminium concentrations) 
were high during glacial periods, coincident with minima 
in atmospheric C O 2 concentrations (Martin, 1990). 
Comparison of such information with records of burial of 
marine organic matter (e.g., Lyle et al., 1988; Pedersen et 
al., 1991) shows a striking positive correlation: organic 
carbon burial was higher in the past when the atmosphere 
was more turbid (Figure 10.6). Although this correlation 
may be spurious, it suggests there may have been an effect 
from enhanced inputs of dust-borne iron to surface waters, 
at least in the tropical Pacific region. 
Under the 
present 
climate. Southern 
Ocean 
phytoplankton productivity is assumed to be limited by 
lack of iron, since macro-nutrients in the surface layer there 
are apparently only rarely depleted (Lizotte and Sullivan, 
1992), a characteristic in common with other H N L C 
regions - the subarctic North Pacific Ocean and the eastern 
Equatorial Pacific. Thus, Martin (1990) hypothesised that 
iron could be added to the Southern Ocean to stimulate 
primary production there to use up the large supply of 
nutrients and at the same time reduce the future rate of 
increase of atmospheric C O j concentration. There are 
several unknowns in this strategy: firstly, would the 
foodweb respond as hypothesised; secondly, are the 
magnitudes sufficient and would the coupled atmosphere-
ocean system respond in such a straightforward way; and 
thirdly, would there be other unexpected responses with 
potential feedbacks to climate? 
The first question - whether the primary production by 
phytoplankton in H N L C regions would respond to iron 
fertilisation - has recently received much attention. 
Although experiments conducted in small laboratory 
containers suggest that addition of iron stimulates 
phytoplankton growth, it is difficult to apply these results 
to the ocean because the very nature of container 
experiments precludes heterotrophic grazers and mixing, 
both factors which limit productivity in the ocean (Banse, 
1991). To test this hypothesis in the ocean, acidified iron 
sulphate tagged with an inert chemical tracer was added to 
an area of 64 km^ in the equatorial Pacific Ocean in 
October 1993 (Kolber et al., 1994; Martin et al., 1994; 
Watson et ai, 1994). Early results suggest that while the 
addition of iron had an easily measurable effect on the 
marine ecosystem (with an approximate threefold increase 
in both productivity and chlorophyll concentrations), it had 
only a small effect on the carbon dioxide levels. After a 
brief disequilibrium the ecosystem apparently responded 
by recycling carbon rapidly back to the inorganic form, 
although there was evidence that the whole patch sunk out 
of the surface layer after several days A second fertilisation 
experiment was conducted in the same area in May 1995 
with more positive results, but the Equatorial Pacific is not 
a likely site for a purposeful widespread iron fertilisation 
because the surface layer is isolated from the deep ocean 
by the main thermocline (Sarmiento and Orr, 1991). 
Recently, de Baar et al. (1995) found spring blooms in the 
Polar Front of the Southern Ocean with biomass levels ten 
times those of adjacent areas. The Polar Front was 
characterised by high iron concentrations in the top 150 m 
of the ocean, as compared with lower dissolved iron in the 
remainder of the Circumpolar current where no blooms 
were found. 
The second of these questions has been addressed 
recently with 3-dimensional ocean general circulation 
models (Sarmiento and Orr, 1991; Kurz and Maier-Reimer, 
1993). The models assumed that iron fertilisation of the 
Southern Ocean would occur every year for 50 or 100 
years (a single addition would basically achieve nothing), 
the phytoplankton would utilise all nutrients in the surface 
layer (although de Baar et al. (1995) observed that 
nutrients were not exhausted in regions of elevated iron 
concentration), and the area of coverage (10 to 15% of the 
global ocean) could actually be fertilised. The rate and 
extent of fertilisation depended primarily on the rate and 
extent of vertical mixing in the Southern Ocean, whereby 
the nutrient in the surface ocean can be replenished from 
below, and on the rate of exchange of C O , between the 
atmosphere and the ocean. The simulations gave similar 
results: that the atmospheric reduction after 100 years of 
iron fertilisation would be less than 10% of total 
504 
Marine Biotic Responses 
atmospheric concentration in 2100 for the "Business as 
usual" and less than 20% for the "Constant emission" 
scenarios, as outhned in IPCC (1990). 
With regard to the third question, all model simulations 
indicated significant reduction in oxygen concentrations 
below the surface layers of the Southern Ocean due to the 
remineralisation (oxidation by bacteria) of the increased 
rain of organic matter out of the euphotic layer. Fuhrman 
and Capone (1991) reviewed potential biogeochemical 
consequences of oceanic iron fertilisation, including 
changes in DMS production and possible consequences of 
widespread subsurface decrease in oxygen concentrations. 
In fact, in the 1993 iron enrichment study, Martin et al. 
(1994) observed a significant increase within the enriched 
patch in particulate DMSP (dimethyl sulphoniopropionate), 
the precursor to DMS (see Section 10.3.4). In addition, if 
oxygen concentrations were to become severely depleted, 
anoxic bacterial processes such as denitrification, sulphate 
reduction and methanogenesis 
could increase in 
importance. Denitrification would result in loss of nitrate, 
counteracting the fertilisation, and methanogenesis could 
lead to additional release from the oceans of another 
important greenhouse gas, methane (CH4) (see Section 
10.3.5.1). The formation and release of N , 0 to the 
atmosphere 
could be increased by the increased 
remineralisation of nitrogen compounds caused by the 
increased primary production resulting from the iron 
fertilisation. Using the fact that the per molecule Global 
Wanning Potential for NjO is about 300 times that of COj 
on the 20 to 100 year time horizon (IPCC, 1994), and the 
results of the model simulations by Joos et al. (1991), 
Sarmiento and Orr (1991) and Fuhrman and Capone (1991) 
concluded that increased release of N2O could offset the 
effect of a significant fraction of the removal of 
atmospheric COj by iron fertilisation. 
In summary, there is mounting evidence, from both the 
palaeorecord and contemporary studies that iron can 
enhance phytoplankton production where macro-nutrients 
are present in excess. However, it is clear from all the 
studies conducted to date, both experimental and model 
simulations, that iron fertilisation is not a feasible 
mitigation tool, given our current knowledge of the 
potential ramifications of such a procedure. Fertilisation of 
the ocean with iron or nitrates through inputs from 
increased land runoff and atmospheric deposition can lead 
to eutrophication or increased biological production. 
Increased remineralisation of organic materials can 
increase the production of NjO, and in low oxygen 
environments (especially on continental shelves) can 
promote denitrification and thus the release of N2 and C H 4 
to the atmosphere. Removing nitrogen from the shelves can 
also reduce phytoplankton production and the sequestering 
of carbon. All three processes represent potential positive 
feedbacks to the climate system. 
103.4 DMS Production and Possible Changes to Cloud 
Condensation Nuclei 
D M S is the dominant volatile sulphur-containing 
compound in the oceans and the major natural source of 
sulphur to the atmosphere (Bates et al., 1992; Liss and 
Galloway, 1993). Rough global estimates suggest that 
DMS emissions to the atmosphere are approximately 25 
TgS/yr, compared with estimates of sulphate (from sulphur 
dioxide) of 10 TgS/yr from volcanoes and 75 TgS/yr from 
fossil fuels. Sulphur emissions in the Southern Hemisphere 
are clearly dominated by oceanic DMS. When ventilated to 
the atmosphere, D M S is oxidised to produce aerosol 
particles which affect the radiative properties of marine 
stratus clouds and thereby affect climate (Charlson et ai, 
1987). Although the magnitude of this effect is highly 
uncertain, Charison et al. calculated that a 30% increase in 
the number of particles serving as cloud condensation 
nuclei (CCN) in marine stratiform clouds would decrease 
the global-average surface temperature of the Earth by 
ЕЗ'С. Correlations between DMS and C C N have been 
observed (Ayers and Gras, 1991; Hegg et al., 1991; 
Andreae et al, 1995), although the processes controlling 
the formation and growth of particles in the marine 
boundary layer are still controversial. Furthermore, Boers 
et al. (1994) observed significant in-phase coherence in the 
seasonal cycles between 7-year records of marine boundary 
layer C C N concentrations and satellite-derived cloud 
optical depth in the vicinity of an open ocean Southern 
Hemisphere observing station. Quantifying these processes 
is a major focus of the Aerosol Characterisation 
Experiments ( A C E ) of the International 
Global 
Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Program. 
A key factor in this natural sulphur/aerosol/climate 
system is the air-sea exchange of DMS which is a function 
of the 
surface 
sea 
water 
D M S concentration. 
Unfortunately, the factors controlling oceanic DMS 
concentrations and the parameters needed to model these 
concentrations are not well characterised. Ice core 
measurements of the atmospheric DMS oxidation product, 
methane sulphonate (MSA), suggest that DMS emissions 
(and presumably oceanic DMS concentrations) may have 
changed by a factor of 6 between glacial and interglacial 
times (Legrand et al., 1991). Seasonal studies of oceanic 
DMS concentrations have shown that average surface sea 
water DMS concentrations can vary by as much as a factor 
Marine Biotic Responses 
505 
of 50 between summer and winter in the mid- and high 
latitudes. On large regional and temporal scales, DMS 
concentrations have been correlated with sea water 
chlorophyll concentrations, but in general, oceanic DMS 
distributions are poorly correlated with phytoplankton 
production or biomass (Holligan et al., 1987; Andreae, 
1990; Leek et al., 1990). Part of the difficulty in 
establishing these correlations is that the production of the 
DMS precursor, dimethyl sulphoniopropionate (DMSP), is 
highly species specific. Prymnesiophytes, including 
coccolithophorids 
and 
Phaeocystis, 
and 
some 
dinoflagellates produce orders of magnitude more DMSP 
per cell than other algae such as diatoms (Keller, 1991; 
Liss et ai, 1994). Thus, blooms of coccolithophorids in 
the relatively nutrient-poor open ocean can produce 
extremely high concentrarions of DMSP (Malin et al., 
1993) as does Phaeocystis in nutrient-rich polar and some 
coastal waters (Turner et al., 1988). Another complicating 
factor in modelling D M S concentrations is that the 
conversion of DMSP to DMS is often associated with the 
decline of a phytoplankton bloom during the senescence 
phase or during active zooplankton grazing as opposed to 
the active growth phase (Dacey and Wakeham, 1986; 
Turner et al., 1988; Leek et al., 1990). Furthermore. DMS 
is only one product of D M S P and the percentage 
conversion to DMS is dependent on the plankton cell 
density (Wolfe et al., 1994). The production of DMS in 
surface sea water is therefore a strong function of the 
species composition, the total biomass and the local 
trophic structure. Processes which affect these biological 
parameters such as eutrophication, enhanced U V - B 
radiation or changing temperature will potentially affect 
the concentration of DMS and its subsequent flux to the 
atmosphere. 
DMS is removed from sea water by various physical, 
chemical and biological pathways (Figure 10.7). Kiene and 
Bates (1990) and Bates et al. (1994) have shown that in 
tropical and temperate waters of the Pacific, DMS removal 
is principally by biological processes with microbial 
consumption removing DMS more than ten times faster 
than atmospheric ventilation. Thus it appears that DMS 
concentrations are intimately linked to both the structure 
and level of activity of the microbial food web (Belviso et 
ai, 1990). If bacterial activities are being substantially 
inhibited by present levels of U V radiation (see Section 
10.3.6), attention needs to be given to the impact of UV-B 
not only on the organisms that produce D M S and its 
precursor, but also on those other organisms involved. 
Figure 10.7: The marine biogeochemical cycle of DMS (dimethyl sulphide); production of DMSP (dimethyl sulphonioproprionate) by 
phytoplankton, ttansformation by bacteria to DMS and by bacteria or photo-oxidation to DMSO (dimethyl sulphoxide), and alternative 
utilisation pathways that may influence the quantity of DMS lost to the atmosphere. From Malin et al. (1992). 
506 
Marine Biotic Responses 
directly and indirectly in its utilisation. In addition, another 
fate of DMS in sea water is photochemical oxidation 
(Brimblecombe and Shooter, 1986). The extent to which an 
increase in UV-B flux changes the rate of photochemical 
degradation of DMS is yet to be ascertained. From these 
data it is apparent that reliable parametrizations of surface 
oceanic D M S concentrations will require a better 
understanding of the processes involved in the cycling of 
sulphur in the upper water column. It remains to be 
resolved how changes in climate will affect this cycle and 
the exchange of DMS with the atmosphere. Furthermore, in 
the Northern Hemisphere the much larger change in 
atmospheric aerosols from human activities will make 
climate-related changes in natural D M S outgassing 
difficult to detect. 
In summary, the rink between D M S production by 
phytoplankton and increased cloud condensation nuclei is 
reasonably well established. However, the biological and 
chemical processes in the ocean and the chemical processes 
in the atmosphere are complex, and are only sufficienfly 
well understood to allow their parametrization for 
incorporation into preliminary models (Gabric et al. 1993). 
10.3.5 Marine Biota and Other Greenhouse Gases 
10.3.5.1 Methane 
Although the concentration of methane in the atmosphere 
is well documented, the magnitudes of its sources and sinks 
and the processes involved are poorly understood. The 
annual input from the oceans to the atmosphere is of order 
10 Tg/yr, representing about 2% of all sources (IPCC, 
1994). Although Bange et al. (1994) estimated that -75% 
of the oceanic outgassing of methane comes from the 
continental shelves where environmental change is 
greatest, it is unlikely that changes in marine biota could 
alter the oceanic (net) contribution by more than a few 
Tg/yr, or less than 1% of the total amount emitted to the 
atmosphere annually. 
10.3.5.2 Nitrous oxide 
The atmospheric concentration of nitrous oxide (NjO) in 
1992 was 311 ppbv, increasing by around 0.25%/yr. 
Sources of atmospheric N2O and estimates of annual 
emissions are very uncertain. It is thought that the oceans 
contribute about 3 Tg/yr to a total annual input of around 
15 Tg/yr (IPCC, 1994). Production of NjO in the sea 
occurs during remineralisation/oxidation of organic matter 
in intermediate layers and at sediment interfaces (e.g., 
Elkins et al, 1978; Cohen and Gordon, 1979; Codispoti 
and Christensen, 1985; Law and Owens, 1990; Naqvi and 
Noronha, 1991; Christensen, 1994). 
10.3.5.3 Other trace gases 
Carbon monoxide, organic carbonyl sulphide (OCS) and 
non-methane hydrocarbons (NMHCs) appear indirectly 
linked to marine productivity, but the main mechanism of 
their production is photochemical breakdown of dissolved 
organic matter (DOM) in surface waters (e.g., Ratte et al., 
1993; 
Bates et al., 
1995; Weiss et al., 
1995). 
Photochemical production of trace gases in the surface 
ocean influences their ocean to atmosphere flux. Carbon 
monoxide is an impoitant atmospheric constituent because 
its reaction with the hydroxyl radical (OH) may control OH 
concentration and thus influence global biogeochemical 
processes. Oxidation of NMHCs may also influence OH 
concentrations in the atmosphere. OCS is a precursor of 
stratospheric sulphate aerosols and is thus likely to 
participate in heterogeneous reactions related to ozone 
depletion. The influence of enhanced UV-B exposure on 
the concentrations of these trace chemical species has 
received very littie attention. 
Organo-halogen gases, such as bromoform and methyl 
halides, formed by biological and/or photochemical 
processes in the oceans may have a significant effect on the 
oxidising capacity of the atmosphere, following their 
emission from sea water. For example, the decreases in 
tropospheric ozone concentrations observed at Arctic polar 
sunrise have been attributed to destruction of ozone by 
bromine species arising from marine-produced organo-
bromine compounds (Barrie et al., 1988). How such sea-to-
air fluxes might change under an altered climate is hard to 
assess, particularly in view of our lack of understanding of 
the processes by which these gases are formed in the 
oceans and broken down in the atmosphere. 
10.3.6 Effect of UV-B on Marine Plankton with Potential 
Feedback to Climate 
Over the millennia, equilibrium has been reached between 
incident sunlight, its natural variability and the components 
of the marine ecosystem. Altering this balance by suddenly 
(on evolutionary time-scales) depleting stratospheric ozone 
can have serious consequences for the organisms and their 
activities. Concern has been expressed that any diminution 
in marine primary production may lead to a positive 
feedback with respect to atmospheric CO2 that would 
exacerbate the greenhouse effect. That exposure to UV-B 
decreases primary productivity and inhibits growth of 
marine microorganisms has been well documented (e.g., 
Cullen and Lesser, 1991; Cullen et ai, 1992). Also it has 
been found that there are substantial differences between 
species in their response to UV-B exposure indicating the 
possibility of shifts in community structure which has 
Marine Biotic Responses 
507 
consequences 
for both foodweb 
dynamics 
and 
biogeochemical cycles. Marine organisms employ a range 
of responses and adaptations to minimise their U V - B 
exposure. These include the synthesis of photoprotective 
pigments, D N A repair mechanisms, and avoidance 
mechanisms (Karentz, 1994). The linkages between, and 
consequences 
of, increased U V - B exposure and 
biogeochemical reactions are at present only poorly known 
and in obvious need of investigation (Marchant, 1994). 
Inhibition of phytoplanktonic photosynthesis results 
from exposure to U V - A (wavelengths 320-400 nm) and 
PAR (photosynthetically available radiation: 400-700 nm) 
as well as UV-B. Helbling et al. (1992) reported that U V - A 
was responsible for over 50% of the photo-inhibition, with 
wavelengths shorter than 305 nm accounting for 15-20% of 
the inhibition. The action spectrum, or biological weighting 
function of U V inhibition of photosynthesis, varies with 
both the absolute amount and the ratio of U V - B : U V -
A-t-PAR but not UV:PAR (Neale et ai, 1994). Tropical 
phytoplankton exhibit substantially higher resistance to UV 
exposure 
than 
Antarctic organisms. 
However, 
phytoplankton from below the mixed layer in Antarctic 
waters appear to be more tolerant of solar radiation than 
organisms from below the mixed layer in tropical waters. 
This is likely to be due to the relative instability and deeper 
mixing in the Southern Ocean and the photo-adaptive 
processes of these organisms from surface waters. Vertical 
mixing plays a crucial role in mitigating photo-inhibition 
and UV-B exposure. 
U V - B radiation penetrates to ecologically significant 
depths of the ocean, i.e., 10% of surface UV radiation can 
penetrate to depths of 5 to 25 m (Smith and Baker, 1989). 
Incubations of phytoplankton under both natural and 
laboratory sources of U V - B radiation result in species-
specific reduced productivity, growth and reproduction, 
nitrogen metabolism and motility. As a consequence, 
changes in community structure favouring those organisms 
that are more tolerant of UV would be expected. A better 
understanding of the nature and magnitude of these 
changes requires further 
work to elucidate 
the 
photobiology of key species. In addition, the eggs and 
larval stages of invertebrates and fish have been shown to 
be sensitive to U V - B exposure (Hunter et al., 1981; 
Damkaer and Dey, 1983). 
Over the last decade our understanding of the importance 
of bacteria in marine processes has developed dramatically. 
It is now recognised that these highly abundant organisms 
play a pivotal role in biogeochemical pathways, in foodweb 
dynamics, and as well in such physical processes as light 
scattering and combining with trace metals (Cho and Azam, 
1990; Simon et al., 1992). However, only a few studies 
have been conducted on the effects of UV on bacteria, and 
much of the impact of solar U V exposure has been ascribed 
previously to UV-A. But recent investigations indicate a 
high sensitivity to U V over a broader wavelength band 
(Hemdl et al, 1993): a 30-minute exposure to solar UV-B 
resulted in a 40% reduction in bacterial activity in the top 
5 m of coastal waters. Bacterial extracellular enzymic 
activity was inhibited by around 70%. Production of 
extracellular enzymes was reduced by UV-B exposure, but 
photolysis of these enzymes in solution accounted for the 
largest diminution of activity. 
Most of the work on the impacts of UV-B on natural 
systems has concentrated on Uving organisms with only 
relatively few studies on the effect of UV photolysis on 
dissolved organic and inorganic material. Oceanic DOC is 
one of the largest reservoirs of carbon on Earth; yet the 
processes regulating the cycling of this material are not well 
understood. It is estimated that some 15% of marine DOC 
exists as humic substances, assumed to be slowly 
degradable macromolecules. However, tiie bulk of oceanic 
DOC appears to be comprised of small molecules 
(molecular weight less than 1000 daltons), relarively 
unavailable to microorganisms (Amon and Benner, 1994). 
Aquatic refractory macromolecules can be photochemically 
degraded by sunlight into biologically labile compounds 
(Kieber et al, 1989). Mopper et al. (1991) proposed that 
such photochemical degradation is the rate li/niting step for 
the removal of a large fraction of oceanic DOC, and it is 
assumed that this will increase under increased solar UV-B 
flux. Recently, this has lead to heightened interest in this 
phenomenon, although the implications of such 
photochemical degradation of organic matter in sea water 
had been discussed in the late 1970s (Duursma and 
Dawson, 1981, and papers therein). One of the difficulties 
in extrapolating trends from the work done to date in the 
world ocean is the different nature of the DOC pools 
investigated. Several studies have concentrated on coastal 
waters where terrestrially derived organic matter may be 
more susceptible to photodegradation than purely marine 
DOC (Moran and Hodson, 1994). Others have worked on 
samples from deep or oligotrophic waters, and Mopper et 
а/. (1991) proposed that the photodegradable fraction of the 
DOC might originate from sediment porewater. Data from 
productive surface waters are lacking, which is surprising 
considering the greatest amount of oceanic D O C is 
produced by planktonic organisms in this UV-influenced 
layer. Thomas and Lara (1995) have shown that algal-
derived DOC is resistant to naturally occurring levels of UV 
radiation. This finding cautions against the extrapolation of 
508 
Marine Biotic Responses 
photodegradation of poorly characterised, mixed DOC 
pools to estimates of oceanic carbon budgets. Bacteria are 
the principal consumers of labile DOC. Increased substrate 
concentrarions could plausibly sustain higher bacterial 
activity, leading to accelerated nutrient remineralisarion. 
However, as previously mentioned, elevated UV-B levels 
may also inhibit bacterial activity, resulting in a net 
accumulation of labile dissolved organic matter in surface 
waters. It is also possible that certain photolytic products 
have a toxic or adverse ecophysiological effect 
on organisms (McKnight et al., 1990). Although 
photochemical degradation of DOC dominates present 
thinking, photoreactions may even have an opposite effect, 
playing a role in the production of refractory compounds 
(Lee and Henrichs, 1993). It is clearly premature to adopt 
the scenario of increased U V - B flux causing higher 
concentrations of labile substrates, with subsequent 
increased bacterial respiration leading to enhanced 
production of COj. 
Thus we know that bacteria and phytoplankton can be 
damaged by U V - B exposure and that because of the 
differential response of various species to UV, community 
structure may be altered. We do not know yet if these 
changes will significantly alter exchanges of radiatively 
active gases with the atmosphere. Furthermore, if there are 
changes, it is not clear whether they will be of global 
consequence. At present it is unclear what the effects of a 
change in global temperature would be on ozone depletion 
and increased UV-B radiation, but Austin et al. (1992) 
predicted the regular formation of Arctic ozone holes as a 
consequence of stratospheric cooling. 
In summary, solar U V - B has increased due to 
stratospheric ozone depletion. Species-specific sensitivity 
to UV-B by phytoplankton could lead to widespread shifts 
in community structure with possible changes in the ability 
for high latitude ecosystems to sequester carbon. U V - B 
inhibits marine bacterial activity and has differing effects 
on DOC derived from different sources, both factors that 
could lead to significant alteration of ecosystem structure. 
10.4 The State of Biogeochemical Ocean Modelling 
If we are to perform realistic projections of the possible 
responses (and feedbacks) of the coupled land-atmosphere-
ocean system to climate variation and environmental 
change over the next 50 to 100 years, then it is clear that 
coupled time-dependent GCMs of these systems will play a 
key role in formulation of these projections. At present, 
published results exist for model simulations with coupled 
atmosphere-ocean models forced by an atmospheric C O 2 
concentration of 2 or 4 times the pre-industrial value (see 
Chapters 5 and 6). 
These coupled ocean-atmosphere models include only 
the physical climate system. The chemistry and biology of 
C O 2 , CaCOj, N^O, DMS and other radiatively-active gases 
that may alter the efficacy of the greenhouse effect or the 
concentration of atmospheric aerosols are not included 
explicitly in these coupled models. C O , is included only in 
terms of how its atmospheric concentration alters the 
strength of the greenhouse effect. The ocean carbon cycle 
and how it affects the C O 2 partial pressure difference 
across the air-sea boundary, and hence the air-sea transfer, 
is not included. Feedback effects, such as how increasing 
temperatures will affect the partial pressures of C O 2 in the 
atmosphere and the ocean, and hence the air-sea fluxes, are 
also yet to be included. Initial box models were successful 
at demonstrating the probable role of increased high 
latitude ocean primary production in reducing the 
atmospheric C O 2 concentrations during glacial periods 
(Knox and McElroy, 1984; Sarmiento and Toggweiler, 
1984; and Siegenthaler and Wenk, 1984). At present 
geochemical cycles have been simulated in 2- and 3-
dimensional ocean GCMs (e.g., Maier-Reimer, 1993; 
Drange, 1994; Stocker et al., 1994), and no doubt initial 
simulations with coupled models that include active 
geochemical cycling are now being undertaken. It is likely 
that contemporary limitations on computing power will 
limit sensitivity studies. This will constrain the rate of 
progress in developing coupled models that will reproduce 
an "equilibrium" climate not just of the physical cycles but 
also of the biogeochemical cycles. Most present climate 
G C M s do not include continental margins or their 
processes. These models predict that the largest physical 
changes Will occur around the model boundaries in some 
basins (e.g., the North Atlantic). The effect of these 
changes on biological processes related to global 
greenhouse gas fluxes and aerosol concentrations needs to 
be elucidated. We need to acquire sufficient understanding 
of the processes that control the vertical fluxes of climate-
related gases and biogenic particulates (e.g., Erickson, 
1993), and to develop improved models of the upper ocean 
and its upper and lower boundaries for inclusion in the 
future development of multi-disciplinary coupled ocean-
atmosphere models. At present we do not know enough 
about the processes governing the production, degradation 
and sources of light-sensitive compounds in the upper 
ocean, in particular DOC and DMS, to parameterize their 
behaviour in these models. 
The availability of models for assessment of climate 
change effects on marine biotic systems is limited to box 
Marine Biotic Responses 
509 
models of various levels of sophistication (e.g., Shaffer, 
1993; Christensen, 1994; Shaffer and Sarmiento, 1995). 
Models for investigating maiine ecosystems have focused 
on understanding or identifying important processes, that is 
they are process-oriented models. The majority of the 
existing models consider interactions between circulation 
and a truncated form of the marine ecosystem. The 
circulation component of these models ranges from simple 
prescribed conditions (e.g., Fasham et al., 1990) to large-
scale primitive equation general circulation models (e.g.. 
Sarmiento et al, 1993; Fasham et al, 1993). The marine 
ecosystem representations are generally in terms of 
aggregate dynamics, e.g., single terms representing all 
phytoplankton or all zooplankton (Wroblewski, 1977; 
Wroblewski et al, 1988). However, some attempts have 
been made to include realistic size- or stage-structured 
phytoplankton and zooplankton population dynamics 
(Hofmann, 1988; Moloney and Field, 1991). 
The current generation of models that have been 
constructed to consider biogeochemical cycling in the 
ocean are limited in application by the inability to prescribe 
adequately the temporal and spatial variation in the 
parametrizations of biological processes known to exist 
over scales of more than a few days and more than tens of 
kilometres. Consequently, most of the models consider 
regional processes and have been focused on understanding 
short-term episodic events such as coastal upwelling. The 
few attempts at larger scale applications (North Atlantic 
basin) have shown that the solutions degrade over time due 
to inadequate representation of the marine ecosystem and 
deficiencies in the simulated circulation and mixing 
patterns (Sarmiento ei a/., 1993: Slater e/л/., 1993). Efforts 
are now being focused on developing algorithms and 
parametrizations for biological processes such that they are 
valid over larger regions and over longer time-scales 
(Evans and Fasham, 1993). In addition, circulation models 
are usually constructed to aid in understanding ocean 
circulation dynamics: thus, the horizontal and vertical 
resolution of these models is usually not adequate for 
biogeochemical modelling needs. Also, circulation models 
often lack dynamics, such as mixed-layer circulation, that 
are important in regulating the flux of biogeochemical 
properties. Future advances in modelling of climate effects 
on marine systems will require that the circulation and 
biogeochemical models be developed together. 
Perhaps the strongest limitation at present is the lack of 
data that are adequate to formulate, calibrate and evaluate 
marine climate effects models. This limitation has been 
recognised for marine modelling in general and marine 
ecosystem modelling in parflcular (GLOBEC, 1993a, b). 
The need for multi-disciplinary data sets has led to 
proposals to develop integrated multi-platform data 
acquisition systems (Dickey, 1991). This in turn has 
prompted the development of marine ecosystem and 
circularion models that are capable of assimilation of a 
wide range of data sets. Unified modelling and 
observational efforts are critical for efflcient model use and 
advancement of interdisciplinary research, such as that 
required for addressing questions of climate change 
responses and feedbacks. 
As a final note of caution, in the ocean many algae, 
bacteria, viruses, protozoa and metazoa interact with the 
physico-chemical environment and with each other. There 
are interspecific differences both in responses to 
environmental conditions and in specific biogeochemical 
effects. It is from this almost infinite multiplicity of 
connections that the climatic role of the marine biota 
emerges. A further complication is that these interactions 
may span a range of time-scales from millisecond to 
millennia and beyond, as climate change affects the 
molecular biological constitution of the marine biota, and 
this in turn feeds back on climate. For an adequate 
understanding of the climate system these fundamental 
aspects cannot be ignored. The fact that the present models 
oversimpUfy the issue by emphasising bulk effects and 
responses of the marine biota further illustrates our limited 
understanding of the climate system. However, new 
generations of biogeochemical climate models are being 
developed, providing a more satisfactory representation of 
the diversity and operational range of the marine biota 
(e.g., Westbroek et al, 1993). 
In summary, coupled ocean-atmosphere models used for 
climate change projections do not presently contain any 
marine biogeochemical processes. However, component 
biogeochemical models are rapidly improving, and they 
will be incorporated into coupled ocean-atmosphere 
models over the next few years, as dictated by available 
computing power. The extent to which they can adequately 
simulate the complexities of the marine ecosystem will 
ultimately be determined by the availability of observations 
required for parameter estimation. 
References 
Altabet, M.A., R. Francois, D.W. iVfurray and W.L. Prell. 1995: 
Climate-related variations in denitrification in the Arabian Sea 
from sediment i^N/^'N ratios. Nature, 373, 506-509. 
Amon, R.lVI.W.and R. Benner, 1994: Rapid cycling of high 
molecular weight dissolved organic matter in the ocean. 
Nature, 369, 549-552. 
570 
Marine Biotic Responses 
Anderson, L . A . and J.L. Sarmiento, 1994: Redfield ratios of 
remineralization determined by nutrient data analysis. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 8, 65-80. 
Andreae, M.O., 1990: Ocean-atmosphere interactions in the 
global biogeochemical sulfur cycle. Mar. Chem., 30, 1-29. 
Andreae, M.O., W. Elbert and S.J. deMora, 1995: Biogenic 
sulfur emissions and aerosols over the tropical south Atlantic, 
3: atmospheric dimethylsulfide, aerosols and cloud 
condensation nuclei. 7. Geophys. Res., 100, 1133-11356. 
Archer, D. and E. IVIaier-Reimer, 1994: Effect of deep-sea 
sedimentary calcite preservation on atmospheric C O ^ 
concentration. Nature, 367, 260-263. 
Atkinson, L.P., 1977: Modes of Gulf Stream intrusion into the 
South Atlantic Bight shelf waters. Geophys. Res. Lett., 4, 
583-586. 
Austin, J., N . Butchart and K.P. Shine, 1992: PossibiUty of an 
Arctic ozone hole in a doubled-COj climate. Nature, 
360, 
221-225. 
Ayers, G.P. and J.L. Gras, 1991: Seasonal relationships between 
cloud condensation nuclei and aerosol methanesulphonate in 
marine air. Nature, 353, 834-835. 
Bacastow, R. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1991: Dissolved organic 
carbon in modeling oceanic new production. 
Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 5, 71-85. 
Bakun, A., 1990: Global climate change and intensification of 
coastal ocean upwelling. Science, 247, 198-201. 
Bange, H.W., U.H. Bartell, S. Rapsomanikis and M.O. Andreae, 
1994: Methane in the Baltic and North Seas and a reassessment 
of the marine emissions of methane. Global 
Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 8, 465^80. 
Banse, K., 1991: Rates of phytoplankton cell division in the field 
and in iron enrichment experiments. Limnol. Oceanogr., 36, 
1886-1898. 
Banse, K., 1994: Uptake of inorganic carbon and nitrate by 
marine plankton and the Redfield ratio. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 8, 81-84. 
Barrie, L.A., J.W. Bottenheim, R.C. Schnell, P.J. Crutzen and 
R.A. Rasmussen, 1988: Ozone destruction and photochemical 
reactions at polar sunrise in the lower Arctic atmosphere. 
Nature, 334, 138-141. 
Barry, J.P., C H . Baxter, R.D. Sagarin and S.E. Oilman, 1995: 
Climate-related, long-term faunal changes in a California rocky 
intertidal community. Science, 267, 672-675. 
Bates, T.S., B. K. Lamb, A . B . Guenther, J. Dignon and R.E. 
Stoiber, 1992: Sulfur emissions to the atmosphere from natural 
sources. J. Atmos. Chem., 14, 315-337. 
Bates, T.S., R.P. Kiene, G.V. Wolfe, P.A. Matrai, P.P. Chavez, 
K.R. Buck, B.W. Blomquist and R.L. Cuhel, 1994: The cycling 
of sulfur in surface seawater of the northeast Pacific. J. 
Geophys. Res., 99, 7835-7843. 
Bates, T. S,, K.C. Kelly, J.E. Johnson and R.H. Gammon, 1995: 
Regional and seasonal variations in the flux of oceanic carbon 
monoxide to the atmosphere. J. Geophys. 
Res., 
100, 
23093-23101. 
Belviso, S., S.K. K i m , F. Rassoulzadegan, B. Krajka, B . C . 
Nguyen, N . Mihalopoulos and P. Buat-Menard, 1990: 
Production of dimethylsulfonium propionate (DMSP) and 
dimethylsulfide (DMS) by a microbial food web. Limnol. 
Oceanogr, 35, 1810-1821. 
Berger, W . H . , 1982: Increase of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere during déglaciation: The coral reef hypothesis. 
Naturwissenschaften, 69, 87-88. 
Berger, W.H., 1989: Global maps of ocean productivity. In: 
Productivity of the Ocean: Present and Past, W.H. Berger, 
V.S. Smetacek, and G. Wefer (eds.), John Wiley and Sons, 
Chichester, pp. 429-455. 
Berger, W.H. and G. Wefer, 1991: Productivity of the glacial 
ocean: Discussion of the iron hypothesis. Limnol. Oceanogr., 
36, 1899-1918. 
Berner, R.A., 1982: Burial of organic carbon and pyrite sulphur 
in the modern ocean: its geochemical and environmental 
significance. Am. J. Sci., 282, 451^73. 
Biscaye, P.E., C.N. Flagg and P.G. Falkowski, 1994: The Shelf-
Edge Exchange Processes 
experiment, 
SEEP-II: an 
introduction to hypotheses, results and conclusions. Deep-Sea 
Res.n, 41, 231-252. 
Boers, R., G.P. Ayers and J.L. Gras, 1994: Coherence between 
seasonal variation in satellite-derived cloud optical depth and 
boundary layer C C N concentrations at a Mid-latitude Southern 
Hemisphere station. Tellus, 46B, 123-131. 
Boyle, E.A., 1988: The role of vertical chemical fractionation in 
controlling late Quaternary atmospheric carbon dioxide. J. 
Geophys. Res., 93, 15701-15714. 
Brimblecombe, P. and D. Shooter, 1986: Photo-oxidation of 
dimethylsulfide in aqueous solution. Mar. Chem., 19, 343-353. 
Brodeur, R.D. and D.M. Ware, 1992: Long-term variability in 
zooplankton biomass in the subarctic Pacific Ocean. Fish. 
Oceanogr, 1, 32-38. 
Broecker, W.S., 1982: Ocean chemistry during glacial time. 
Geochimica etCosmochimica Acta, 46, 1689-1705. 
Broecker, W.S., 1991: The Great Ocean Conveyor. 
Oceanography, 4, 79-89. 
Broecker, W.S. and T - H . Peng, 1982: Tracers in the Sea. 
Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, Columbia 
University. 
Calvert, S.E. and Т.Е. Pedersen, 1992: Organic carbon 
accumulation and preservation in marine sediments: How 
important is anoxia? In: Productivity, 
Accumulation 
and 
Preservation 
of Organic Matter in Recent and 
Ancient 
Sediments, J.K. Whelan and J.W. Farrington (eds.), Columbia 
University Press, New York, pp. 231-263. 
Carlson, C.A. and H.W. Ducklow, 1995: Dissolved organic 
carbon in the upper ocean of the central Equatorial Pacific, 
1992: Daily and finescale vertical variations. Deep-Sea Res. П, 
42, 639-656. 
Carlson, C.A., H.W. Ducklow and A.F. Michaels, 1994: Annual 
flux of dissolved organic carbon from the euphotic zone in the 
northwestern Sargasso Sea. Nature, 371, 405^08. 
Marine Biotic Responses 
511 
Carpenter, E.J. and К. Romans, 1991: Major role of the 
Cyanobacterium 
Trichodesmium. in nutrient cycling in the 
North Atlantic Ocean. Science, 254, 1356-1358. 
Charlson, R.J., J.E. Lovelock, M.O. Andreae and S.G. Wairen, 
1987: Oceanic phytoplankton, atmospheric sulfur, cloud albedo 
and climate./Уашге, 326,655-661. 
Cho, B.C. and F. Azam, 1990: Biogeochemical significance of 
bacterial biomass in the ocean's euphotic zone. Marine 
Ecology Progress Series, 63, 253-259. 
Christensen, J.P., 1994: Carbon export from continental .shelves, 
denitrification and atmospheric carbon dioxide. Continental 
Shelf Research, 14, 547-576. 
Codispoti, L . A . and J.P. Christensen, 1985: Nitrification, 
denitrification and nitrous oxide cycling in the eastern tropical 
South Pacific Ocean. Mar Chem., 16, 277-300. 
Cohen, Y. and L . l . Gordon, 1979: Nitrous oxide production in the 
ocean. J. Geophys. Res., 84, 347-353. 
CuUen, J.J. and M.P, Lesser, 1991: Inhibition of photosynthesis 
by ultraviolet radiation as a function of dose and dosage rate: 
results for a marine diatiom. Mar Biol., Ill, 183-190. 
Cullen, I.J., P.J. Neale and M.P. Lesser, 1992: Biological 
weighting function for the inhibition of phytoplankton 
photosynthesis by ultraviolet radiation. Science, 258, 646-650. 
Dacey, 
J.W.H. 
and 
S.G. Wakeham, 
1986: 
Oceanic 
dimethylsulfide: production during zooplankton grazing on 
phytoplankton. Science, 233, 1314-1316. 
Damkaer, D . M . and D . B . Dey, 1983: U V damage and 
photoreactivation potentials of larval shrimp 
Pandalus 
platyceros 
and adult euphausiids Thysanoessa 
raschii. 
Oecologia, 60, 169-175. 
Dansgaard, W., S.J. Johnsen, H.B. Clausen, D. Dahl-Jensen, 
N.S. 
Gundestrup, 
C . U . Hammer, 
C.S. Hvidberg, 
J.P. Steffensen, A . E . SveinbjOrnsdottir, J. Jouzel and 
G. Bond, 1993: Evidence for general instability of past 
climate from a 250-kyr ice-core record. Nature, 
364, 
218-220. 
de Baar, H.J., J.T. de Jong, D.G. Bakker, B M . Loscher, C. Veth, 
U. Bathmann and V. Smetacek, 1995: Importance of iron for 
plankton blooms and carbon dioxide drawdown in the Southern 
Ocean. Nature, 373, 412-415. 
Dennian, K . L . , 1993: The ocean carbon cycle and climate 
change: an analysis of interconnected scales. In: Patch 
Dynamics, S.A. Levin, T . M . Rowell and J.H. Steele (eds.). 
Springer Veriag, Beriin, pp. 213, 223. 
Denman, K . L . and A . E . Gargett, 1995; Biological-physical 
interactions in the upper ocean; the role of vertical and small 
scale transport processes. Annual Reviews of Fluid Mechanics, 
27, 225-255. 
Dickey, T.D., 1991: The emergence of concurrent high-resolution 
physical and bio-optícal measurements in the upper ocean and 
their applications. Reviews of Geophysics, 29, 383-413. 
Drange, H., 1994: An isopycnic coordinate carbon cycle model 
for the North Atlantic; and the possibility of disposing of fossil 
fuel C O j in the ocean. Dr. Sclent. Thesis, Department of 
Mathematics and Nansen Environmental and Remote Sensing 
Center, University of Bergen, Norway, 286 p. 
Duce, R.A. and N.W. Tindale, 1991; Atmospheric transport of 
iron and its deposition in the ocean. Limnol. Oceanogr., 36, 
1715-1726. 
Duce, R.A., P.S. Liss, J.T. Merril, E.L. Atias, P. Buat-Menard, 
B.B. Hicks, J . M . Miller, J . M . Prospero, R. Arimoto, T . M . 
Church, W. Ellis, J.N. Galloway, L. Hansen, T.D. Jickells, 
A . H . Knap, K . H . Reinhardt, B. Schneider, A . Soudine, J.J. 
Tokos, S. Tsunogai, R. Wollast and M . Zhou, 1991; The 
atmospheric input of trace species to the world ocean. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 5, 193-259. 
Ducklow, H.W, 1995; Ocean biogeochemical fluxes; new 
production and export of organic matter from the upper ocean. 
Reviews of Geophysics. 33, Supplement, 1271-1276. 
Duursma, E.K. and R. Dawson (eds.), 1981; Marine organic 
chemistry. Evolution, composition, interactions and chemistry 
of organic matter in seawater. Elsevier Oceanography Series, 
31,521 
Eicken, H. 1992; The role of sea ice in structuring Antarctic 
ecosystems. Polar Biology, 12, 3-13. 
Elkins, J.W., S.C. Wofsy, M.B. McElroy, C E . Kolb and W.A. 
Kaplan, 1978; Aquatic sources and sinks for nitrous oxide. 
Nature, 275, 602-606. 
Eppley, R.W., 1972; Temperature and phytoplankton growth in 
the sea. Fishery Bulletin, 70, 1063-1085. 
Eppley, R.W. and B.J. Peterson, 1979: Particulate organic matter 
flux and planktonic new production in the deep ocean. Nature, 
282, 677-680. 
Erickson, D.J., 1993; A stability dependent theory for air-sea gas 
exchange. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 8471-8488. 
Evans, G.T. and M.J. Fasham, 1993; Themes in modelling ocean 
biogeochemical processes. In: Towards a Model of Ocean 
Biogeochemical Processes, G.T. Evans and M.J. Fasham (eds.). 
Springer-Verlag, BerUn, pp. 1-19. 
Fasham, M.J.R., H.W. Ducklow and S.M. McKelvie, 1990; A 
nitrogen-based model of plankton dynamics in the oceanic 
mixed layer. /. Mar Res., 35, 357-394. 
Fasham, M.J.R., J.L. Sarmiento, R.D. Slater, H.W. Ducklow and 
R. Williams, 1993; Ecosystem behavior at Bermuda Station 
"S" and Ocean Weather Station "India"; a general circulation 
model and observational analysis. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 
7, 379^15. 
Fichefet, T., S. Hovine and J.-C. Duplessy, 1994: A model study 
of the AUantic thermohaline circulation during the last glacial 
maximum. Nature, 372, 252-255. 
Frankignoulle, M . and J.-P. Gattuso, 1993: Air-sea CO^ 
exchanges in coastal ecosystems. In; Interactions of C, N, P 
and S Biogeochemical Cycles and Global Change, R. Wollast, 
F.T. Mackenzie and L. Chou (eds.). Springer-Verlag, Beriin, 
pp. 233-248. 
Frankignoulle, M . and C. Canon, 1994: Marine calcification as a 
source of carbon dioxide: Positive feedback of increasing 
atmospheric COj. Limnol. Oceanogr., 39, 458-462. 
572 
Marine Biotic Responses 
Fuhrman, J.A. and D.G. Capone, 1991: Possible biogeochemical 
consequences of ocean fertilization, Limnol. Oceanogr., 36, 
1951-1959. 
Gabric, A., N . Murray, L. Stone and M . Kohl, 1993: Modelling 
the production of dimethylsulfide during a phytoplankton 
bloom. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 22805-22816. 
Galloway, J.N., W.H. Schlesinger, H. Levy II, A.F, Michaels, 
and J.L. Schnoor, 1995: Nitrogen fixation: Anthropogenic 
enhancement-environmental response. Global 
Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 9, 235-252. 
GLOBEC, 1993a: Report of the first meeting of the international 
GLOBEC 
working group on Sampling 
and 
Observation 
Systems. GLOBEC International Report No. 3. 
GLOBEC, 1993b: Report of the first meeting of the international 
GLOBEC working group on Numerical Modeling. G L O B E C 
International Report No. 6, 60 pp. 
Gloersen, P., 1995: Modulation of hemispheric sea-ice cover by 
ENSO events. Nature, 373, 503-506. 
GRIP Project Members, 1993: Climatic instability during the last 
interglacial period revealed in the Greenland summit ice-core. 
Nature, 364, 203-207 
Harris, G.P., E.B. Griffiths, L.A, Clementson, V. Lyne and H. 
Van der Doe, 1991: Seasonal and interannual variability in 
physical processes, nutrient cycling, and the structure of the 
food chain in Tasmanian shelf waters. Journal of Plankton 
Research, 13, Suppl., 109-131. 
Hedges, J.I. and R.G. Keil, 1995: Sedimentary organic matter 
preservation: an assessment and speculative synthesis. Mar. 
Chem., 4,9, 81-115. 
Hegg, D.A., R.J. Ferek, P.V. Hobbs and L.E. Radke, 1991: 
Dimethyl sulfide and cloud condensation nucleus correlations in 
the Northeast Pacific Ocean. J. Geophys. Res. 96, 13 189-13 191. 
Heinze, C , E. Maier-Reimer and K. Winn, 1991: Glacial / J C O 2 
reduction by the world ocean: experiments with the Hamburg 
carbon cycle model. Paleoceanography, 6, 395-430. 
Helbling, E.W., V. ViUifane, M . Ferrario and O. Holm-Hansen, 
1992: Impact of natural ultraviolet radiation on rates of 
photosynthesis and on specific marine phytoplankton species. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 80, 89-100. 
Herndl, G.J., G. Muller-Niklas and J. Frick, 1993: Major role of 
ultraviolet-B in controlling bacterloplankton growth in the 
surface layer of the ocean. Nature, 361, 717-719. 
Hofmann, E.E., 1988: Plankton dynamics on the southeastern 
U.S. continental shelf. Part III. A coupled physical-biological 
model. J. Mar Res., 46, 919-946. 
Holligan, P.M., 1992: Do marine phytoplankton influence global 
climate? In: Primary Productivity and Biogeochemical Cycles 
in the Sea, P.G. Falkowski and A.D. Woodhead (eds.). Plenum, 
New York pp. 487-501. 
Holligan, P.M., S.M. Turner and P.S. Liss, 1987: Measurements 
of dimethyl sulphide in frontal regions. Continental Shelf 
Research, 7, 213-224. 
Holligan, P.M., E. Fernández, J, Aiken, W.M. Batch, P. Boyd, 
P.H. Burkill, M . Finch, S.B. Groom, G. Malin, К. Muller, D.A. 
Purdie, C. Robinson, C.C. Trees, S.M. Turner and P. van der 
Wal, 1993: A biogeochemical study of the coccolithophore, 
Emiliania huxleyi, in the North Atlantic. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 7, 879-900. 
Holser, W.T., M . Schindlowski, F.T. MacKenzie and J.B. 
Maynard, 1988: Biogeochemical cycles of carbon and sulfur. 
In: Chemical Cycles in the Evolution of the Earth, C.B. Gregor, 
R.M. Garrets, F.T. MacKenzie and J.B. Maynard (eds.), John 
Wiley and Sons, New York, pp. 105-174. 
Honjo, S. and S.J. Manganini, 1993: Annual biogenic particle 
fluxes to the interior of the North Atlantic Ocean; studied at 
34°N 2I°W and 48°N 21°W. Deep-Sea Res. 11, 40, 587-607. 
Hunter, J.R., S.E.Kaup and J.H. Taylor, 1981: Effects of solar 
and artificial ultraviolet-B radiation on larval Northern 
Anchovy, 
Engraulis 
mordax. 
Photochemistry 
and 
Photobiology, 34, 477-486. 
Huntley, M . E. and C. Boyd, 1984: Food-limited growth of 
marine zooplankton. American Naturalist, 124, 455^78. 
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment, 
J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 365 pp. 
IPCC, 1994: Climate Change 1994: Radiative 
Forcing of 
Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC 1S92 Emission 
Scenarios, J.T. Houghton, L.G. Meira Filho, J. Bruce. Hoesung 
Lee, B. A. Callander, E.F. Haites, N . Harris and K. Maskell 
(eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
IPCC WGII, 1995: Climate Change 1995-Impacts. Adaptations 
and Mitigations 
of Climate Change: 
Scientific-Technical 
Analyses: 
The Second Assessment Report of the Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change, R.T. Watson, M.C. 
Zinyowera and R.H. Moss (eds.), Cambridge University Press, 
New York, USA. 
Ittekkot, v., 1993: The abiotically driven biological pump in the 
ocean and short-term fluctuations in atmospheric C O 2 contents. 
Global and Planetary Change, 8, 17-25. 
Jacka, Т.Н. and W.F. Budd, 1991: Detection of temperature and 
sea ice extent changes in the Antarctic and Southern Ocean. In: 
Proceedings of the International Conference on the Role of Polar 
Regions In Global Change, G. Weller, C. L. Wilson, and B.A.B 
Severin (eds.). Geophysical Institute, Fairbanks, pp. 63-70. 
Jenkins, W.J. and J.C. Goldman, 1985: Seasonal oxygen cycling and 
primary production in the Sargasso Sea, J. Mar Res., 43,465-491. 
Joos, F., J.L. Sarmiento and U . Siegenthaler, 1991: Estimates of 
the effect of Southern Ocean iron fertilization on atmospheric 
C O 2 concentrations. Nature, 349, 772-775. 
Karentz, D., 1994: Ultraviolet tolerance mechanisms in Antarctic 
marine organisms. In: Ultraviolet Radiation in Antarctica: 
Measurements and Biological Effects, C S . Weiler and P. 
Penhale, (eds.), American Geophysical Union Antarctic 
Research Series, 62, pp. 93-110. 
Karl, D.M., R. Leteller, D. Hebel, L. Tupas, J. Dore , J. Christian 
and С Winn, 1995: Ecosystem changes in the North Pacific 
subtropical gyre attributed to the 1991-92 El Niño. Nature, 373, 
230-234. 
Marine Biotic Responses 
513 
Karl, D.M., J.R, Christian, J.E. Dore, D.V. Hebel, R.M. Letaher, 
L . M . Tupas and C D . Winn, 1996, Seasonal and interannual 
variability in primary production and particle flux at station 
ALOHA. Deep-Sea Res. I, in press. 
Keller, M.D., 1991: Dimethylsulfide production and marine 
phytoplankton: the importance of species composition and cell 
size. Biol Ocean., 6, 375-382. 
Kempe, S., 1993: Are coastal systems a source of COj to the 
atmosphere? In: Proceedings of the First IGBP/LOICZ 
Core 
Project Meeting, 
T.S. Hopkins and C . A . Kinder (eds.), 
Department of Marine, Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, North 
Carolina State University, pp. 27-31. 
Kempe, S. and K. Pegler, 1991: Sinks and sources of C O , in 
coastal waters. Tellus, 43B, 224-235. 
Kieber, D.J., J. McDaniel and K. Mopper, 1989: Photochemical 
source of biological substrates in seawater: implications for 
carbon cycling. Nature, 341, 637-639. 
Kiene, R.P. and T.S. Bates, 1990: Biological removal of dimethyl 
sulphide from sea water. Nature, 345, 702-705. 
Knauer, G.A., D.G. Redalje, W.G. Harrison and D . M . Kari, 
1990: New production at the V E R T E X time-series site. Deep-
Sea Research, 37, 1121-1134. 
Knox, F, and M.B. McElroy, 1984: Changes in atmospheric CO,: 
influence of the marine biota at high latitude. J. Geophys. Res., 
89, 4629^637. 
Kolber, Z.S., R.T. Barber, K . H . Coale, S.E. Fitzwater, R . M . 
Greene, K.S. Johnson, S. Lindley and P.G. Falkowski, 1994: 
Iron limitation of phytoplankton photosynthesis in the 
equatorial Pacific Ocean. Nature, 371, 145-149. 
Kurz, K.D. and E. Maier-Reimer, 1993: Iron fertilization of the 
austral ocean - the Hamburg model assessment. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 229-244. 
Law, C.S. and N.J.P. Owens, 1990: Significant flux of 
atmospheric nitrous oxide from the northwest Indian Ocean. 
Nature, 346, 826-828. 
Leek, C , U. Larsson, L.E. Bagander, S. Johansson and S. Hajdu, 
1990: Dimethylsulfide in the Baltic Sea: annual variability in 
relation to biological activity. J. Geophys. Res., 95, 3353-3364. 
Lee, C. and S.M, Henrichs, 1993: How the nature of dissolved 
organic matter might affect the analysis of dissolved organic 
carbon. Marine Chemistry, 41, 105-120. 
Legrand, M., C. Feniet-Saigne, E.S. Saltzman, C. Germain, N.I. 
Barkov and V . N . Petrov, 1991: Ice-core record of oceanic 
emissions of dimethylsulphide during the last chmate cycle. 
Nature, 350, 144-146. 
Liss, P.S. and J.N. Galloway, 1993: Air-sea exchange of sulphur 
and nitrogen and their interaction in the marine atmosphere. In: 
Interactions of C, N, P and S Biogeochemical 
Cycles and 
Global Change, R. Wollast, F.T. Mackenzie and L. Chou 
(eds.). Springer-Veriag, Berlin, pp. 259-281. 
Liss, P.S., G. Malin, S.M. Turner and P.M. Holligan, 1994: 
Dimethyl sulphide and Phaeocystis: 
A review. J. Marine 
Systems, 5, 41-53. 
Lizotte, M.P. and C.W. Sullivan, 1992: Biochemical composition 
and photosynthate distribution in sea ice microalgae of 
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica: evidence for nutrient stress 
during the spring bloom. Antarctic Science, 4, 23-30. 
Lohrenz, S.E., G.A. Knauer, V.L. Asper, M . Tuel, A.F. Michaels 
and A.H. Knap, 1992: Seasonal and interannual variabihty in 
primary production and particle flux in the northwestern 
Sargasso Sea: U.S. JGOFS Bermuda Atlanfic Time Series. 
Deep-Sea Research, 39, 1373-1391. 
Longhurst, A.R., 1991: Role of the marine biosphere in the 
global carbon cycle. Limnol aiul Oceanogr, 36, 1507-1526. 
Longhurst, A., S. Sathyendranath, T. Piatt and C. Caverhill, 
1995: An estimate of global primary production in the ocean 
from satellite radiometer data. /. Plankton Res., 17, 1245-1271. 
Luther, M . E. and J.J. O'Brien, 1990: VariabiUty in upwelling 
fields in the northwestern Indian Ocean 1. Model experiments 
for the past 18,000 years. Paleoceanography, 5, 433^45. 
Lyle, M . , D.W. Murray, B.P. Finney, J. Dymond, J.M. Robbins 
and K . Brookforce, 1988: The record of late Pleistocene 
biogenic sedimentation in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. 
Palaeoceanography, 3, 39-60. 
Maier-Reimer, E., 1993: Geochemical cycles in an ocean general 
circulation model. Preindustrial tracer distributions. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 7, 645-677. 
Malin, G., S . M . Turner and P.S. Liss, 1992: Sulfur: the 
plankton/climate connection. J. Pliycol, 28, 590-597. 
Malin, G., S. Turner, P. Liss, P. HoUigan and D. Harbour, 1993: 
Production of dimethylsulfide and dimethylsulphonio-
propionate in the north east Atlantic during the summer 
coccolithophore bloom. Deep Sea Res. I, 40, 1487-1508. 
Marchant, H.J., 1994: Biological impacts of seasonal ozone 
depletion. In: Antarctic Science - Global Concerns, Hempel, 
G. (ed.), Springer-Veriag, Beriin. pp. 95-109. 
Martin, J., 1990: Glacial-interglacial C O j change: the iron 
hypothesis. Paleoceanography, 5, 1-13. 
Martin, J.H., K.H. Coale, K.S. Johnson, S.E. Fitzwater, R . M . 
Gordon, S.J. Tanner, C.N. Hunter, V . EIrod, J. Nowicki, T. 
Coley, R. Barber, S. Lindley, A. Watson, K. Van Scoy, C. Law, 
M . Liddicoat, R. Ling, T. Stanton, J. Stockel, C. Collins, A. 
Anderson, R. Bidigare, M . Ondrusek, M . M . Latasa, F. Millero, 
K. Lee, W. Yao, J. Zhang, G. Friederich, C. Sakamoto, F. 
Chavez, K . Buck, Z. Kolber, R. Greene, P. Falkowski, S. 
Chisholm, F. Hoge, B. Swift, S. Turner, P. Nightingale, P. Liss 
and N . Tindale, 1994: The iron hypothesis: Ecosystem tests in 
Equatorial Pacific waters. Nature, 371, 123-129. 
McKnight, D.M., P. Behmel, D.A. Franko. E.T.Gjessing, U . 
Munster, R.C. Petersen Jr., O.M. Skulberg, C.E.W. Steinberg, 
E. Tipping, S.A. Visser. P.W. Werner and R.G. Wetzel, 1990: 
Group report, how do organic acids interact with solutes, 
surfaces and organisms? In: Organic Acids In 
Aquatic 
Ecosystems, E.M. Perdue and E.T. Gjessing (eds.), Dahlem 
Workshop Reports - Life Sciences Research Report 48, John 
Wiley and Sons, pp. 223-243. 
Michaels, A.F., D.A. Siegel, R.J. Johnson, A.H. Knap and J.N. 
Galloway, 1993: Episodic inputs of atmospheric nitrogen to the 
514 
Marine Biotic Responses 
Sargasso Sea: Contributions to new production and 
phytoplankton blooms. Global Biogeociiem. Cycles, 1, 339-351. 
Moloney, C.L. and J.G. Field, 1991: The size-based dynamics of 
plankton food webs. I. A simulation model of carbon and 
nitrogen flows. ]. Plankton Res., 13, 1003-1038. 
Mopper, K., X. Zhou, R.J. Kieber, D.J. Kieber, R.J. Sikorski and 
R.D. Jones, 1991: Photochemical degradation of dissolved 
organic carbon and its impact on the oceanic carbon cycle. 
Nature, 353, 60-62. 
Moran, 
M . A . and 
R . E . Hodson, 
1994: 
Support 
of 
bacterioplankton production by dissolved humic substances 
from three marine environments. Marine Ecology 
Progress 
Series, 100, 241-247. 
Murphy, E.J., D.J. Morris, J.L. Watkins and J. Priddle, 1988: 
Scales of interaction between Antarctic krill and the 
environment. In: Antarctic Ocean and Resources Variability, 
D. Sahrhage (ed.), Springer-Veriag, Berlin, pp. 120-303. 
Murray, J.W., R.T. Barber, M.R. Roman, M.P. Bacon and R.A. 
Feely, 1994: Physical and biological controls on carbon cycling 
in the equatorial Pacific. Science, 266, 58-65. 
Najjar, R . G . , J.L. Sarmiento and J.R. Toggweiler, 1992: 
Downward transport and fate of organic matter in the ocean: 
simulations with a general circulation model. 
Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 6, 45-76. 
Naqvi, S.W. and R.J. Noronha, 1991: Nitrous oxide in the 
Arabian Sea. Deep-Sea Res., 38, 871-890. 
Neale, P . L , M . P . Lesser and J.J. Cullen, 1994: Effects of 
ultraviolet radiation on photosynthesis of phytoplankton in the 
vicinity of McMurdo Station, Antarctica. In: 
Ultraviolet 
Radiation in Antarctica: Measurements and biological effects, 
C S . Weiler and P. Penhale (eds.), American Geophysical 
Union Antarctic Research Series, 62, pp. 125-142. 
Opdyke, B.N. and J.C.G. Walker, 1992: Return of the coral reef 
hypothesis: Basin to shelf partitioning of CaCOj and its effect 
on atmospheric CO2. Geology, 20, 733-736. 
Oppo, D.W., and S.J. Lehman, 1993: Mid-depth circulation of the 
subpolar North Atlantic during the last glacial maximum. 
Science, 259, 1148-1152. 
Orr, J.C. and J.L. Sarmiento, 1992: Potential of marine 
macroalgae as a sink for COj: constraints from a 3-D general 
circulation model of the global ocean. Water, Air, and Soil 
Pollution, 64,405-421. 
Owens, N.P., J.N. Galloway and R.A. Duce, 1992: Episodic 
atmospheric nitrogen deposition to oligotrophic oceans. Nature, 
357, 397-399. 
PaerL H . , 1993: Emerging role of atmospheric nitrogen 
deposirion in coastal eutrophication: biogeochemical and 
trophic perspectives. Can. J. Fish. Aquatic Sci., 50, 2254-69. 
Parsons, T.R. and C M . Lalli, 1988: Comparative oceanic 
ecology of the plankton communities of the subarctic Atlantic 
and Pacific Oceans. Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Annu. Rev., 26, 51-68. 
Parungo, F., J.F. Boatman, H. Sievering, S.W. Wilkison and B.B. 
Hicks, 1994: Trends in global marine cloudiness and 
anthropogenic sulfur. J. Climate, 7, 434^40. 
Pedersen, Т.Е., В. Nielsen and M . Pickering, 1991: The timing of 
Late Quaternary productivity pulses in the Panama Basin and 
implicarions for atmospheric C O j . Paleoceanography, 
6, 
657-677. 
Peltzer, E.T. and N.A. Hayward, 1995: Spatial distribution and 
temporal veriability of dissolved organic carbon along 140°W 
in the Equatorial Pacific Ocean in 1992. Deep-Sea Res., in 
review. 
Piatt, T. and W.G. Harrison, 1985: Biogenic fluxes of carbon and 
oxygen in the ocean. Nature, 318, 55-58. 
Prell, W.L. and E. Van Campo, 1986: Coherent response of 
Arabian Sea upwelling and pollen transport to late Quaternary 
monsoonal winds. Nature, 323, 526-528. 
Premuzic, E.T., C M . Benkovitz, J.S. Gaffney and J.J. Walsh, 
1982: The nature and distribution of organic matter in the 
surface sediments of world oceans and seas. Org. Geochem., 4, 
63-77. 
Rahmstorf, S., 1994: Rapid cUmate transitions in a coupled 
ocean-atmosphere model. Nature, 372, 82—85. 
Ratte, M . , C. Plass-Dulmer, R. Koppmann, J. Rudolph and J. 
Denga, 1993: Production mechanisms of C2-C4 hydrocarbons 
in seawater: field measurements and experiments. Global 
Biogeochem. Cycles, 1, 369-378. 
Raven, J.A., 1993: Limits on growth rates. Nature, 361, 209-210, 
Redfield, A,C„ B.H. Ketchum and F.A. Richards, 1963: The 
influence of organisms on the composition of sea water. In: The 
Sea, Vol. 2, M . N . Hill (ed.). Interscience, New York, pp. 
26-77. 
Riebesell, U . , D . A . Wolf-Gladrow and V . Smetacek, 1993: 
Carbon dioxide limitation of marine phytoplankton growth 
rales. Nature, 361, 249-251. 
Robertson, J.E. С Robinson, D.R. Turner, P. Holligan, A.J. 
Watson, P.Boyd, E. Fernandez and M . Finch, 
1994: The 
impact of a coccolithophore bloom on oceanic carbon uptake in 
the northeast AÜantic during summer 1991. Deep-Sea Res. I, 
41,297-314. 
Roemmich, D. and J. McGowan, 1995: Climatic warming and 
the decline of zooplankton in the California Current. Science, 
267, 1324-1326. 
Sambrotto, R . N . , G. Savidge, С Robinson, P. Boyd, T. 
Takahashi, D.M. Karl, С Langdon, D. Chipman, J. Marra and 
L. Codespoti, 1993: Elevated consumption of carbon relative to 
nitrogen in the surface ocean. Nature, 363, 248-250. 
Sarmiento, J.L. and J.R. Toggweiler, 1984: A new model for the 
role of the oceans in determining atmospheric pCOj. Nature, 
308,621-624. 
Sarmiento, J.L. and J.C. Orr, 1991: Three-dimensional 
simulations of the impact of Southern Ocean nutrient depletion 
on atmospheric COj and ocean chemistry. Limnol 
Oceanogr, 
36, 1928-1950. 
Sarmiento, J.L. and U. Siegenthaler, 1992: New production and 
the global carbon cycle. In.' Primary 
Productivity 
and 
Biogeochemical Cycles in the Sea, P.G. Falkowski and A.D. 
Woodhead (eds.). Plenum, New York, pp. 317-332. 
Marine Biotic Responses 
515 
Sarmiento, J.L., R.D. Slater, M.J.R. Fasham, H.W. Ducklow, 
J.R. Toggweiler and G.T. Evans, 1993: A seasonal three-
dimensional ecosystem model of nitrogen cycling in the North 
Atlantic euphotic zone. Global Biogeochem. 
Cycles, 
7, 
417-450. 
Sathyendranath, S., A.D. Gouveia, S.R. Shetye, P. Ravindran 
and T. Plan, 1991; Biological control of surface temperature in 
the Arabian Sea. Nature, 349, 54-56. 
Schindler, D.W. and S.E. Bayley, 1993; The biosphere as an 
increasing sink for atmospheric carbon: estimates from 
increased nitrogen deposition. Global Biogeochem.Cycles, 1, 
1\1-1ЪЪ. 
Shaffer, G., 1993; Effects of the marine biota on global carbon 
cycling. In; The Global Carbon Cycle, M . Heimann (ed.). 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 431^55. 
Shaffer, G. and J.L. Sarmiento, 1995; Biogeochemical cycling in 
the global ocean 1. A new, analytical model with continuous 
vertical resolution and high-latitude dynamics. J. Geophys. 
Res., 100, 2659-2672. 
Sharp, J.H., R. Benner, L. BenneU, C.A. Carlson, S.E. Fitzwater, 
E.T. Peltzer and L . M . Tupas, 1995; Analyses of dissolved 
organic carbon in seawater: the JGOFS EqPac methods 
comparison. Mar. Chem., 48, 91-108. 
Shimmield, G.B., S.R. Mowbray and G.P. Weedon, 1990: A 350 
ky history of the Indian Southwest monsoon - evidence from 
deep-sea cores, northwest Arabian Sea. Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Edinburgh, 81, 289-299. 
Siegenthaler, U . and Th. Wenk, 1984: Rapid atmospheric COj 
variadons and ocean circulation. Nature, 308, 624-626. 
Siegenthaler, U . and J.L. Sarmiento, 1993: Atmospheric carbon 
dioxide and the ocean. Nature, 365, 119-125. 
Sikes, C.S. and V . J . Fabry, 1994; Photosynthesis, CaCOj 
deposition, coccolithophorids and the global carbon cycle. In; 
Regulation of Atmospheric 
COj and 
by 
Photosynthetic 
Carbon Metabolism, N.E. Tolbett and J. Preiss (eds.), Oxford 
University Press, New York, pp. 217-233. 
Simon, M . , B . C . Cho and F. Azam, 1992; Significance of 
bacterial biomass in lakes and the ocean; comparison to 
phytoplankton biomass and biogeochemical implications. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 86, 103-110. 
Slater, R.D., J.L. Sarmiento and M.J.R. Fasham, 1993; Some 
parametric and structural simulations with a three-dimensional 
ecosystem model of nitrogen cycling in the North Atiantic 
euphotic zone. In; Towards a Model of Ocean Biogeochemical 
Processes, G.T. Evans and M.J.R. Fasham (eds.), Springer-
Veriag, Berlin, pp. 261-294. 
Smith, R.C. and K.S. Baker, 1989: Stratospheric ozone, middle 
ultraviolet radiation and phytoplankton productivity. 
Oceanography, 2, 4-10. 
Smith, S.V. and J.T. Hollibaugh, 1993: Coastal metabolism and 
the oceanic organic carbon balance. Rev. Geophys., 31, 75-89. 
Smith, W.O. Jr. and E. Sakshaug, 1990; Polar phytoplankton. In; 
Polar Oceanography, Part В Chemistry, Biology and Geology, 
W.O. Smith, Jr. (ed.). Academic Press, pp. 477-525. 
Stocker, T.F., W.S. Broecker and D.G. Wright, 1994; Carbon 
uptake experiments with a zonally-averaged global ocean 
circulation model. Tellus, 46B, 103-122. 
Takahashi, T., W.S. Broecker and S. Langer, 1985: Redfield 
ratio based on chemical data from isopycnal surfaces. J. 
Geophys. Res., 90, 6907-6924. 
Thomas, D.N. and R.J. Lara, 1995: Photodegradation of algal 
derived dissolved organic carbon. Marine Ecology Progress 
Series, 116, 309-310. 
Toggweiler, J.R., 1989: Is the downward dissolved organic 
matter ( D O M ) flux important in carbon transport? In; 
Productivity of the Ocean: Present and Past, W.H. Berger, 
V.S. Smetacek and G. Wefer (eds.), J. Wiley and Sons, New 
York, pp. 65-85. 
Toggweiler, J.R., 1990: Bombs and ocean carbon cycles. Nature, 
347, 122-123. 
Tsunogai, S.,and S. Noriki, 1991: Particulate fluxes of carbonate 
and organic carbon in the ocean. Is the marine biological 
activity working as a sink of the atmospheric carbon? Tellus, 
43B, 256-266. 
Turner, S.M., G. Malin, P.S. Liss, D.S. Harbour and P . M . 
Holligan, 1988; The seasonal variation of dimethyl sulfide and 
dimethylsulfoniopropionate concentrations in nearshore waters. 
Limnol. Oceanogr., 33, 364-375. 
Turpin, D.H., 1993; Phytoplankton growth and CO2. Nature, 
363, 678-679. 
Venrick, E.L., J.A. McGowan, D.R, Cayan and T.L. Hayward, 
1987: Climate and chlorophyll, a: Longterm trends in the 
central North Pacific Ocean. Science, 238,10-12. 
Walsh, J.J., 1989; How much shelf production reaches the deep 
sea? In: Productivity of the Ocean: Present and Past, W.H. 
Berger, V.S. Smetacek and G. Wefer (eds), John Wiley and 
Sons, Chichester, pp. 175-191. 
Walsh, J.J., 1991; Importance of continental margins in the 
marine biogeochemical cycling of carbon and nitrogen. Nature, 
350, 53-55. 
Walsh, J.J. and D.A. Dieterie, 1994; CO^ cycling in the coastal 
ocean. I. A numerical analysis of the southeastern Bering Sea 
with applications to the Chukchi Sea and the northern Gulf of 
Mexico. Progress in Oceanography, 34, 335-392. 
Watson, A.J., C.S. Law, K.A. Van Scoy, F.J. Millero, W. Yao, G. 
Friederich. M.I. Liddicoat, R.H. Wanninkhof, R.T. Barber and 
K. Coale, 1994: Imphcations of the "Ironex" iron fertilisation 
experiment for atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. 
Nature, 371, 143-145. 
Weaver, A . J . and T.M.C. Hughes, 1994: Rapid interglacial 
climate fluctuations driven by North Atlantic ocean circulation. 
Nature, 367, 447-450. 
Weaver, A.J., J. Marotzke, P.F. Cummins and E.S. Sarachik, 
1993; Stability and variability of the thermohaline circulation. 
J. Phys. Oceanogr 23, 39-60. 
Weiss, P.S., J.E. Johnson, R.H. Gammon and T.S. Bates, 1995: A 
réévaluation of the open ocean source of carbonyl sulfide to the 
atmosphere. J. Geophys. Res., 100, 23083-23092. 
516 
Marine Biotic Responses 
Welschmeyer, N.A., S. Strom, F. Goericke, G. DiTullio, M . Belvin 
and W. Petersen, 1993: Primary production in the subarctic 
Pacific Ocean: Project SUPER. Prog. Oceanogr., 32, 101-135. 
Westbroek, P., C.W. Brown, J. van Bleijswijk, C. Brownlee, G.J. 
Brummer, M . Conte, J. Egge, E. Fernández, R. Jordan, M . 
ICnappersbusch, J. Stefels, M . Veldhuis, P. van der Wal and J. 
Young, 1993: A model system approach to biological climate 
forcing: The example of Emiliania huxleyi. Global Planetary 
Change, 8, 27-46. 
Wolfe, G.V., E.B. Sherr and B.E. Sherr. 1994: Release and 
consumption of DMSP from Emiliania huxleyi during grazing 
by Oxyrrhis marina. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 111, 
111-119. 
Wong, C.S., Y . - H . Chan, J.S. Page, G . E . Smith and R . D . 
Bellegay, 1993: Changes in equatorial COj flux and new 
production estimated from COj and nutrient levels in Pacific 
sufl-ace waters during the 1986/87 El Niño. Tellus, 45B, 64-79. 
Wroblewski, J, S., 1977: A model of phytoplankton plume 
formation during variable Oregon upwelling. J. Mar Res., 35, 
357-394. 
Wroblewski, J.S., J.L. Sarmiento and G.L. Flierl, 1988: An ocean 
basin scale model of plankton dynamics in the North Atlantic. 
1. Solutions for the climatological océanographie conditions in 
May. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 2, 199-218. 
Xie, L., and W.W. Hsieh, 1995: The global distribution of wind-
induced upwelling. Fisheries Oceanography, 4, 52-67. 
1 1 
Advancing our Understanding 
G.A. MCBEAN, P.S. LISS, S.H. SCHNEIDER 
CONTENTS 
Summary 
11.1 Introduction 
11.2 Frameworlí for Analysis 
11.3 Anthropogenic Emissions 
11.4 Atmospheric Concentrations 
11.5 Radiatíve Forcing 
11.6 Response of the Climate System 
521 
11.7 Natural Climate Variations and Detection and 
Attribution of Climate Change 
523 
524 
524 
524 
525 
526 
11.8 Impacts of Climate Change 
11.9 Cross-Cutting Issues 
11.10 International Programmes 
11.11 Research Priorities 
527 
527 
528 
529 
530 
SUMMARY 
• 
Since the 1990 Scientific Assessment significant 
progress has been made in furthering our 
understanding of climate change. The inclusion of 
radiative forcing due to aerosols, in particular their 
spatial patterns, in climate models has provided the 
means to diagnose recent climate warming and given 
growing confidence that a significant part of the 
observed climate warming can be attributed to 
human activities. The global role of aerosols in 
climate change to date has begun to be quantified and 
provides further confidence in simulations of future 
climate change. 
• 
Our understanding of the climate system typically 
advances on time-scales of 5-10 years and a co-
ordinated spectrum of approaches, ranging from 
individual research projects through to global-scale 
experiments and observational systems and 
infrastructure, is necessary. Lack of support for these 
activities will slow advances. An international frame-
work for climate studies (the international Climate 
Agenda, including WCRP, IGBP, GCOS) exists. 
• 
Complex systems, such as the climate system, can 
respond in non-linear ways and produce surprises. 
The nature of the system forces us to take a flexible 
approach in research planning and societal response 
and makes exact predictions of research advances 
impossible. Although, by definition, surprises cannot 
be anticipated, non-traditional, multi-scale, multi-
disciplinary and multi-institutional research efforts 
with supporting organisational infrastructure are the 
best means of addressing them. There is a need for 
continual re-assessment of climate change and 
variability and for means of communicating this 
information to policymakers. 
Priorities to address climate research requirements have been 
grouped below, although many of them are interconnected: 
(i) 
related to all topics 
• 
systematic and sustained global observations of key 
variables 
• 
capacity building in all nations 
(ii) 
the magnitude of global and continental scale climate 
change and of sea level rise 
• 
the factors controlling the distribution of clouds and 
their radiative characteristics 
• 
the hydrological cycle, including precipitation, 
evaporation and runoff 
• 
the distribution of aerosols and their radiative 
characteristics 
• 
the response of terrestrial and marine systems to 
climate change and their positive and negative 
feedbacks 
• 
monitoring and modelling of land ice sheets 
(iii) the rate of climate change 
• 
human activities influencing emissions (research 
priority of Working Group III) 
• 
the coupling between the atmosphere and ocean, and 
ocean circulation 
• 
the factors controlling die atmospheric concentrations 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases 
(iv) 
the detection and attribution of climate change 
• 
systematic observations of key variables and data and 
model diagnostics 
• 
relevant proxy data to construct and test palaeo-
climatic time series to describe internal variability of 
the climate system 
(v) 
regional patterns of climate change 
• 
land surface processes and their atmospheric 
hnkages 
• 
coupling between scales represented in global climate 
models and those in regional and smaller-scale models 
• 
simulations with higher resolution climate models 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
523 
11.1 Introduction 
Global climate change moved to the forefront of the 
international agenda even before the recent growing 
confidence that a significant part of the observed global 
climate change can be attributed to human activities. 
Governments have agreed on the Climate Convention 
owing to the plausibility of the scientific arguments and 
measurements showing significant increases in the 
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. Global 
climate models have been used to project how the climate 
might change, based on plausible scenarios of 
anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases through the 
next century. 
Scientific knowledge from a wide range of disciplines 
needs to be gathered and integrated to fashion scenarios of 
potential anthropogenic climatic changes over the next 
century. The process begins with projecting population 
growth, living standards and the technologies that will be 
used to achieve them. This information is used to produce 
scenarios of greenhouse gas and other chemical emissions 
such as sulphur dioxide, as well as projected land-use 
changes, which can affect the flows of energy and 
constituents between the atmosphere and the surface. This 
effort necessitates input from the natural, social and 
engineering and other applied sciences and, within the 
IPCC, is the domain of Working Group III. It provides a 
basis for model predictions of the atmospheric 
concentrations of radiatively active gases and aerosols as a 
function of time and location. Then meteorology, 
oceanography, hydrology, ecology, glaciology and other 
natural science disciplines are called upon to calculate 
potential climatic responses to concentrations derived from 
a wide range of plausible emission and land-use change 
scenarios. Review of this work is the domain of IPCC 
Working Group I and hence the subject of this report. The 
climate projections are then used to produce estimates of a 
range of plausible environmental and societal impacts (the 
domain of IPCC Working Groups II and III). In so far as 
those impacts on marine or ten-estrial ecosystems may have 
feedback effects on climate, they are treated by Working 
Group I. 
The U N Framework Convention on Climate Change has 
as its ultimate objective: 
...stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the 
atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic interference with the climate system. 
Such a level should be achieved within a time-frame 
sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to 
climate change, to ensure that food production is not 
threatened and to enable economic development to 
proceed in a sustainable manner. 
To achieve this objective, it is necessary to understand 
and be able to model adequately: the greenhouse gas cycles 
and how atmospheric 
concentrations 
relate 
to 
anthropogenic emissions; how the climate system 
responds, both temporally and spatially, to the changing 
greenhouse gas concentration; and how ecosystems and 
human activities respond to this changing climate. 
The IPCC function is to assess the state of our 
understanding and to judge the confidence with which we 
can make projections of climate change and its impacts. 
These tentative projections will aid policymakers in 
deciding on actions to mitigate or adapt to anthropogenic 
climatic change, which will need to be re-assessed on a 
regular basis. It is recognised that many remaining 
uncertainties need to be reduced in each of the above-
named disciplines, which is why IPCC projections and 
scenarios are often expressed with upper and lower limits. 
These ranges are based on the collective judgement of the 
IPCC authors and the reviewers of each chapter, but it may 
be appropriate in the future to draw on formal methods 
from the discipline of decision analysis to achieve more 
consistency in setting criteria for high and low range limits. 
In this chapter, we stress the need to narrow the wide 
range of outcomes and informal probability estimates in 
many of the subdisciplines which collectively comprise the 
assessment of human influence on the climate system. In 
addition to the requirements for each subdiscipline to 
reduce uncertainties in its speciality, there is the need to 
improve techniques for conducting the integration process 
itself, which is an overall IPCC goal. 
Chapters 1 to 10 of this report examine the state of 
knowledge and identify the uncertainties in the topic area 
of each chapter. The objective of the present chapter is to 
outline the individual research activities and national and 
internationally co-ordinated programmes needed to 
advance our understanding. It should be noted that each 
increment of better understanding may not necessarily 
reduce uncertainties, at least initially. Eventually, however, 
such increased understanding should help to narrow 
uncertainties, i.e., to move the high and low range limits 
closer together. Further, we pay attention to areas where 
currently imaginable but highly uncertain "surprise" 
outcomes may exist. One "surprise" could be that elements 
of the climate system are inherently unpredictable; 
however, evaluation exercises indicate that many 
phenomena can be predicted even if the current 
uncertainties are large. 
524 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
11.2 Framework for Analysis 
As a framework for the analysis of uncertainties, it is 
appropriate to consider a simplified model of the process of 
simulating future climate changes in response to increasing 
atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and other 
climatically-important substances and changes in land-use 
practices. Although presented in a linear fashion for 
illustrative purposes, it must be recognised that the 
problem of global climate change is complex and often 
non-linear and that the phenomena represented below as 
distinct questions are often interactive. Consider the model 
in terms of the following questions: 
(i) 
What will be the future emissions of greenhouse 
gases and other climatically-important substances 
and changes in land-use practices? 
(ii) 
What will be the future atmospheric concentrations 
of greenhouse gases and other radiatively impoitant 
substances? 
(iii) 
What will be the resulting additional radiative 
forcing? 
(iv) 
How will the climate system respond (globally and 
regionally) to this altered energy input? The tools to 
be used for climate projections are climate models. 
How good are they and how can they be improved? 
(v) 
Natural climate variations will be occurring 
simultaneously with these human-induced changes. 
How can we ascertain the causes of observed 
variability and distinguish between natural and 
human-induced changes? 
(vi) 
What will be the impacts on sea level, natural and 
managed ecosystems, and socio-economic systems? 
How 
will these impacts feed back on the 
concentrations of greenhouse gases and other 
radiatively important substances? 
11.3 Anthropogenic Emissions 
First, what will be the future concentrations of greenhouse 
gases and other climatically-important substances due to 
human activities including land-use change? Future 
emissions of greenhouse gases and other relevant 
substances are primarily being addressed by IPCC 
Working Group III. Actual emissions and land-use 
practices will depend on policy decisions and the response 
of humans to potential climate change. Humans' response 
will depend, at least in part, on their confidence that 
scientists are right in their projections. As scientific 
knowledge increases, consensus of support for any 
necessary remedial action should become stronger. 
11.4 Atmospheric Concentrations 
What will be the future atmospheric concentration of 
greenhouse gases and other radiatively important 
substances? For some greenhouse gases, such as carbon 
dioxide, anthropogenic emissions are small but 
climatologically significant perturbations superimposed on 
large natural cycles of the gases; for others, such as 
halocarbons and perhaps methane, anthropogenic 
emissions dominate. These natural cycles were in relative 
steady state for several thousand years before the marked 
increase in anthropogenic emissions began with the 
industrial revolution. Chapter 2 analyses the global cycles 
of the important radiatively active gases and the role of 
aerosols, while Chapters 9 and 10 deal with the terrestrial 
and marine biotic responses to environmental change and 
identify possible feedbacks to climate. 
For the global carbon cycle, the key question is whether 
anthropogenic emissions will remain in the atmosphere or 
be taken up by oceanic or terrestrial ecosystems. Is the 
uptake limited absolutely or will it be some continuing 
constant fraction of anthropogenic emissions? How will 
natural variability change the uptake? Will the effective 
lifetime of carbon dioxide added to the atmosphere change 
as the climate warms? These are the types of question that 
must be answered to reduce uncertainties in the 
computation of future atmospheric carbon dioxide 
concentrations for a given emission scenario. For methane, 
it is also important to understand the complex chemical 
feedbacks in order to determine the response time of a 
methane perturbation. 
Continued monitoring of the atmospheric concentrations 
of the main greenhouse gases is needed in order to identify 
long-term trends and establish annual cycles and year-to-
year variability. It is clear that changes in both tropospheric 
and stratospheric ozone play important roles in the 
radiative balance. Measurements of ozone, nitrogen oxides, 
carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons are needed to estimate 
global distributions of the short-lived hydroxyl radical, 
OH, since direct measurements are unlikely to be possible 
for some time to come. The OH radical is important for the 
destruction of methane and the conversion of sulphur 
dioxide to sulphate aerosol. 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
525 
A combination of focused process studies and model 
development, validation and application, linked to the 
continued global monitoring of gases and relevant isotopes 
is needed to better quantify the cycles of carbon dioxide 
and other greenhouse gases. Reconstruction of the regional 
teiTestrial carbon balance from the historical period through 
to present and the future, including the annual cycle, 
requires ecosystem models of the transient terrestrial 
ecosystem (Chapter 9), that include both biogeochemistry 
and vegetation redistribution. These will permit quantitative 
estimates of land-atmosphere carbon dioxide exchange and 
biophysical feedbacks to the global climate. The impacts of 
forest regrowth on the carbon cycle needs to be better 
quantified. In order to complete these reconstructions, it 
will be necessary to have an expanded soils' data base and 
maps of land cover/land-use and vegetative carbon stocks 
for historical, contemporary and future periods. Because 
nitrogen plays a major role in vegetation dynamics, 
estimates of nitrogen (both oxidised and reduced) 
depositions to regional ecosystems are needed for the 
periods of consideration. Recognising that it is impossible 
to monitor in detail the global ecosystem, it is important to 
define key indices and to establish permanent monitoring 
plots. Process studies are needed to improve representation 
of processes, both those resolved and especially those on 
sub-grid scales, through better parametrizations in models 
of the important processes of whole ecosystem C O 2 
fertilisation (alone and with simultaneous warming and 
nitrate inputs) and to understand how ecosystems respond 
to changing carbon and nitrogen inputs. 
Traditional global maps of oceanic productivity (Chapter 
10) show that the most intense primary productivity occurs 
along the continental margins. Two important scientific 
questions arise. First, the fixation of carbon from COj 
depends on the supply of nutrients, a significant fraction of 
which comes from upwelling from depths less than 500 m. 
Changes in ocean circulation that would alter the nutrient 
supply can occur on time-scales of weeks to decades. Thus, 
there is potential for significant change in the biological 
carbon pump in response to climate-induced change on 
time-scales relevant over the next century. Second, 
assessments of global scale removal of carbon from the 
surface via the biological pump concentrate on the open 
ocean, and the difficult assessment of the potentially 
significant contribution along the continental margins 
(integrated up to the global scale) had been largely ignored 
until recentiy. New estimates of the biogenic flux and the 
effect of a 10% variation (in response to oceanic 
circulation variations) suggest that the functioning of the 
biological pump requires careful quantitative assessment. 
Atmospheric aerosols (Chapter 2) also play an important 
role in the Earth's radiative budget. There are fairly reliable 
estimates of the amount of sulphur burned but these do not 
translate direcfly into number density of aerosols, for 
which the size, hygroscopic and optical properties, as well 
as their vertical, horizontal and temporal distributions, have 
not been well observed. Emissions of anthropogenic 
sulphate emissions are estimated to be larger than natural 
emissions in the Northern Hemisphere and smaller in the 
Southern Hemisphere. Biomass and industrial burning are 
also important sources of non-sulphate aerosols, such as 
those containing black carbon, which can lead to local 
heating. Over the oceans, where aerosol influences on 
clouds may be particularly important, natural emissions 
play a larger role. Quantifying the atmospheric sulphur 
budget requires accounting for dimethyl sulphide (DMS) 
generated by phytoplankton, primarily at high latitudes and 
in coastal areas. Even the direction of possible feedback 
processes are currently speculative. 
11.5 Radiative Forcing 
For a given atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases 
and aerosols, what will be the resulting additional radiative 
forcing? Computation of direct radiative forcing requires 
information on the distribution and radiative properties of 
the additional greenhouse gases and aerosols (Chapter 2). 
There is also indirect forcing due to the production or 
destruction of other greenhouse gases by chemical reaction 
or, in the case of aerosols, through effects on the radiative 
properties of clouds. Clouds themselves play a critical role 
in radiative forcing (Chapter 4); cloud feedback will be 
discussed in Section 11.6. Generally, the confidence level 
in the computation of the direct radiative forcing due to 
greenhouse gases is high. The indirect effects of 
greenhouse gases, mainly due to their influences on both 
stratospheric and tropospheric ozone, is generally small, 
but the confidence in these computations is low (more than 
50% uncertainty). Research is needed into the radiative 
properties of newly produced chemical compounds (e.g., 
hydrochloio-fluorocarbons (HCFCs) and hydrofluoro-
carbons (HFCs)) and on the chemical and dynamical 
processes that define the indirect effects of various 
greenhouse gases. The influence of solar variability is also 
thought to be small but the confidence level is very low. 
The direct radiative cooling effect of tropospheric 
aerosols is estimated to be about 20% of the direct radiative 
heating effect of greenhouse gases, with a factor of two 
uncertainty; the indirect effect, via the effect of aerosol on 
cloud properties, is much more uncertain. Thus, at present 
526 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
the uncertainty in aerosol radiative forcing is the largest 
source of uncertainty in the total radiative forcing of 
climate over the past industrial period. Since aerosols are 
very patchy in their distribution, they could create 
significant regional climate changes regardless of their 
effect on globally averaged forcing. There is an array of 
scientific issues that needs to be resolved, including the 
horizontal, vertical and temporal distributions of aerosols 
and their optical properties. Because of the short lifetimes 
of most aerosols (days relative to decades for the main 
greenhouse gases), aerosols may become a decreasingly 
important global problem in the long term if countries 
adopt policies of low sulphur emission. It is important that 
the role of aerosols, including those of volcanic origin, be 
better understood in order to determine their current and 
future role in masking climate changes due to increasing 
greenhouse gases and to understand potential regional 
effects. Finally, the effect of land-use changes on surface 
albedo and vegetation needs to be considered in the context 
of changes in the regional radiation budget and 
hydrological cycle. 
For policy considerations, the concept of a global 
warming potential (GWP) is useful in comparing the 
effects of various emission scenarios for different gases 
with lifetimes sufficiently long (2 yrs approximately) to 
become well-mixed in the atmosphere. In addition to the 
comparative radiative properties of constituents, it is 
important to know their lifetime in the atmosphere. GWPs 
have an uncertainty of about ±3 5 % . For aerosols, short-
lived gases and the indirect effects through chemical 
reactions, there is need for an approach beyond the GWP. 
11.6 Response of the Chmate System 
Given altered radiative forcing, how will the climate 
system respond to this changed energy input? Although 
feedbacks within the climate system (Chapter 1) appear to 
amplify the initial greenhouse radiative forcing, mainly due 
to interactions of radiation and the water cycle, our 
understanding of these feedbacks is relatively poor. 
Because interactions within the climate system are non-
linear, important questions surround the predictability of 
the responses and the best means of separating the signal 
(the response due to altered radiative forcing) from the 
natural variability of the system. Uncertainties (Chapters 4, 
5, 6, 9 and 10) in predictions of the magnitude of climate 
warming arise owing to the complex nature of the 
interactions of water vapour, clouds and aerosols with 
radiation, as well as from the neglect of feedbacks from 
biogeochemical systems. 
To document how global and regional climates are 
changing and to evaluate and improve models and the 
processes incorporated in models, global data sets are 
required. These should include the history of the external 
forcing of the climate system for model sensitivity and 
validation studies. Furthermore, better coverage, the use of 
model assimilation to identify key data requirements, 
improved data archaeology and rescue, and the removal of 
inhomogeneities in historical and future data are necessary. 
Finally, it is vital for long time-series data records to be 
maintained when they are relevant to the substantiation of 
global change. 
Estimates of climate sensitivity (Chapters 4, 5 and 6), 
have remained unaltered since the 1990 IPCC Assessment, 
at between 1.5 and 4.5°C. Uncertainties in modelling 
cloud-radiation interactions are the largest factor in 
determining this range. It needs to be noted that this 
estimate of warming is based on models of the physical 
climate system and does not include biogeochemical 
responses. To narrow this range will require improved 
understanding and improved models, incorporating 
improved parametrizations and numerical procedures. It 
will probably require at least a decade more of monitoring 
key 
variables, such as atmospheric and oceanic 
temperatures, precipitation, and surface solar radiation, 
both to document actual changes and to validate the models 
and the processes incorporated therein. 
Whereas the feedback processes involving the 
atmosphere and its interactions with the surface are the 
chief factors in determining the equilibrium sensitivity of 
the climate system, the ocean plays the major role in 
determining the response time of the climate system and is 
important for regional impacts of climate change. Although 
ocean modelling has advanced considerably in the past few 
years, there are still difficulties in modelling phenomena 
such as temperature and salinity in deep waters, narrow 
boundary currents, oceanic eddies and details of the 
thermohaline circulation. Because global heat transport and 
storage are essential for regional assessment of climate 
change, it is important to determine the extent to which 
these omissions affect the simulation skill. Recent 
comparisons of model simulations with new tracer data sets 
gathered as part of the World Ocean Circulation 
Experiment are exposing these deficiencies and allowing 
new parametrizations to be tested. Another concern is that 
many coupled atmosphere-ocean models use energy, salt 
and water flux adjustments to keep the models' control 
simulations closer to the present climate. Until model sub-
components are improved to the extent that flux 
adjustments are not needed, it is important to investígate 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
527 
the effects of these adjustments on simulations of cUmate 
under changing radiative forcing. 
For coupled ocean-atmosphere-land surface modelling, 
narrowing uncertainties is a process going far beyond 
direct model improvements. Dedicated climate process 
studies are needed in order to improve parametrizations. 
Models 
with 
better 
physical, 
biological 
and 
biogeochemical processes and increased resolution both in 
the horizontal and vertical are needed in order to resolve 
land-surface heterogeneity, synoptic-scale disturbances in 
the ocean and to include mesoscale feedbacks, especially 
of the tropical atmosphere. The following are priority 
research areas: 
(i) 
cloud/aerosol/radiation interaction 
(ii) 
convection and precipitation 
(iii) sea ice formation, drift and melting 
(iv) 
land-surface 
(v) 
ocean processes 
In the long run, we need to be able to use given emission 
scenarios to calculate greenhouse gas concentrations within 
Earth system (atmosphere-ocean-ice-land surface-biota) 
models and obtain time-evolving scenarios of changes. It 
should be anticipated that the behaviour of such coupled 
non-linear systems may well produce unexpected responses 
(i.e., "suфrises") that might not have been uncovered by 
studying each sub-system in isolation. For example, 
coupled atmosphere-ocean models have already revealed 
highly non-linear behaviour during the approach to 
equilibrium. Furthermore, the palaeo-climatic record 
indicates a number of very rapid climatic and trace gas 
changes, and it is important to know whether similar events 
could be triggered by anthropogenic forcing. 
11.7 Natural Climate Variations and Detection and 
Attribution of Climate Change 
It is important to understand how natural cUmate variations 
interact with human-induced changes (Chapter 8). There are 
several issues here. First, as already noted, there needs to be 
a continuing high quality global climate monitoring system 
to better estabUsh the changing state of the climate. Then, we 
must know how the climate system varies in the absence of 
anthropogenic forcing. For example, a better understanding 
of El Niño should include the factors that determine its 
variable intensity and frequency. El Niño may be affected by 
anthropogenic climate change. Through better observations, 
palaeo-reconstructions and improved knowledge and 
understanding of natural variability, it wUl be possible to detect 
the anthropogenic climate signal with greater confidence. 
To detect and attribute human-induced climatic change, 
it is necessary to account for the regional components of aU 
significant cUmatic forcings (e.g., sulphate or biomass 
burning aerosols, land-use changes and tropospheric 
ozone) since such forcings can produce unique regional 
and altitudinal climatic response patterns (i.e., 
"fingerprints"). When such fingerprints occur in both 
modelled and actual climates, increased confidence in 
cause and effect linkages is justified. It is also necessary to 
determine the likelihood that such patterns may have 
occurred by chance. 
The scientific community is now starting to use low-
frequency (decadal-to-century time-scale) internal 
variability generated by fully coupled global climate 
models to determine the probability that a trend of a given 
magnitude (such as the ~0.5°C in observed global mean 
surface temperature increase over the past 100 years; 
Chapter 3) could have been generated by natural internal 
variability alone. The issue of detection must also include 
attribution of observed variability to other known forcings, 
such as volcanoes and solar variability. Noise information 
from long control runs of coupled-models has the 
advantage of being spatially complete and available for 
virtually any climate parameter of interest. However, the 
effect of artificial corrections, such as flux adjustments, on 
the conclusions, is generally unknown. 
To build confidence in the decade-to-century time-scale 
natural variability simulated by models, there is a need to 
compare model attempts to mimic the climate of the last 
1000 years with variability estimates from palaeo-climate 
data with comparable time resolution. Reconstructions of 
the near surface temperature of the past 1000 years based 
on such proxies as tree rings, ice cores and corals are 
valuable but have their own inherent deficiencies. Further 
complications are added by the need to identify the 
forcings, for example solar, volcanoes, deforestation, that 
may have taken place over this time period. Nevertheless, 
model control runs make specific "predictions" concerning 
the variation of surface temperature on a wide range of 
space and time-scales. They imply phase lags and leads at 
very large spatial scales which are potentially testable 
given appropriate palaeo-data. 
11.8 Impacts of Climate Change 
What will be the impacts of climate change on: sea level 
(Chapter 7); natural and managed ecosystems (Chapters 9, 
10); and socio-economic systems? Climate change affects 
sea level through oceanic thermal expansion and changes 
in glaciers and ice sheets. To determine better the role of 
528 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
ocean thermal expansion requires continued support of 
both monitoring programmes and ocean modelling. There 
remain large uncertainties regarding future changes in 
global glacier volume and a combination of modelling, 
process studies and better data is needed to reduce these 
uncertainties. Possible instabilities of the major ice sheets 
need to be clarified. Chapters 9 and 10 deal with the role of 
changes in the terrestrial and marine biotic systems that 
feed back into modifying climate change. One area for 
research is the direct effects of atmospheric CO2 increases 
on plant physiology and how these effects will interact at 
ecosystem scales with climatic impacts on the vegetation. 
Large- and small-scale field experiments combined with 
micro and boundary layer scale atmospheric knowledge 
will be needed to address this research issue which is at the 
interface of ecological and atmospheric sciences. Societal 
and biological impacts, not dealt with here, are primarily 
the responsibility of Working Groups II and III. 
11.9 Cross-Cutting Issues 
It is important to develop and maintain the capability to 
diagnose the system as it evolves. There is a common need 
for observations of the climate system. The Global 
Climate Observing System, built on the base of the World 
Weather Watch and other programmes, should provide the 
basis, but the research programmes also provide 
indispensable observations. For global issues such as 
climate change, satellites can play an important role in 
providing globally consistent data sets of long duration, 
along with in-situ measurements. There is justifiable 
concern over the consistency of some data sets, which may 
need reanalysis. 
Another key strategy in understanding the climate 
system is a hierarchy of climate and Earth system models. 
These are tools for integrating information, identifying 
interfacial issues and interpreting results. A basic question 
is the extent to which climate is predictable. Predictability 
problems fall into at least two categories. First isthe 
predictability of external forcings like solar variability, 
explosive volcanic eruptions, human land-use changes and 
energy system technologies. Second, complex systems 
often allow deterministic predictability of some 
characteristics (e.g., temperature response to volcanic dust 
veils or ENSO events given a history of atmospheric 
forcings) yet do not permit skilful forecasts of other 
phenomena (e.g., the evolution of specific weather systems 
for more than a few weeks time). The Earth system 
undoubtedly possesses mixed detenninistic, stochastic and 
chaotic sub-systems, which implies that there are varying 
degrees of predictability for different aspects at different 
scales. Researchers need to be cognisant of these issues, 
especially since such complex systems may exhibit 
behaviour not expected by most analysts (more commonly 
called "surprises"). One strategy to help identify such 
potential surprises (or to narrow the probability estimates 
for imaginable but poorly understood possibilities) is to 
foster co-operative interdisciplinary research teams that 
address problems across many scales and disciplines. Such 
problem areas possess the highest potential for unexpected 
outcomes, and call for non-traditional, multi-scale, multi-
disciplinary and multi-institutional research efforts and 
supporting organisational infrastructure. 
Climatic forecasts, for example, often are given at the 
global climate model grid box scales (i.e., 200 km X 200 
km) whereas ecological field research is typically 
conducted on 20 m X 20 m plots, requiring a 10,000 fold 
interpolation. Research on techniques to "downscale" 
climatic information as well as more large-scale ecological 
studies are needed to help bridge the "scale gap" across 
these two disciplines, whose interaction is essential for 
addressing climatic changes and their biological 
consequences. 
11.10 International Programmes 
Scientific research that will contribute to advancing our 
understanding of climate change is being performed in a 
wide variety of institutions and laboratories around the 
world. Much of the research is unco-ordinated and 
independently motivated and funded. This research is 
essential and provides important input to the overall 
advancement of climate science. At the international level, 
the Climate Agenda (see Box), the framework for 
advancement in understanding the climate system and its 
interactions with the global biogeochemical cycles, is 
based on knowledge derived from both the World Climate 
Research Programme (WCRP, a component of the 
comprehensive World Climate Programme), sponsored by 
the World Meteorological Organisation, the International 
Council 
of Scientific 
Unions (ICSU) 
and 
the 
Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission of 
UNESCO, and from the International Geosphere-Biosphere 
Programme (IGBP) of ICSU. The Human Dimensions of 
Global Environmental Change Programme (HDP) of the 
International Social Sciences Council (ISSC) and recendy 
ICSU develop activities in the realm of the social sciences, 
which primarily contribute to Working Groups II and III. 
Projects on the impacts of climate variability and change 
are included within the IGBP as well as the World Climate 
Advancing 
our 
Understanding 
529 
The Climate Agenda - A Framework for the International Co-ordination of Climate Research 
The components of particular relevance to Working Group I fall within the World Climate Research Programme, the 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme and the Global Climate Observing System. Other components include 
the World Climate Monitoring and Data Programme, the World Climate Applications and Services Programme, the 
World Climate Impacts and Response-Strategies Programme, the Human Dimensions of Global Environmental 
Change Programme and the climate-related programmes of FAO and UNESCO. 
The components of the World Climate Research Programme are: 
• 
Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment (GEWEX) 
• 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE) 
• 
Climate Variability and Predictability Programme (CLIVAR) 
• 
Working Group on Numerical Experimentation (WGNE) 
• 
Arctic Climate System Study (ACSyS) 
• 
Stratospheric Processes and their Role in Climate (SPARC) 
The components of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme are: 
• 
Biospheric Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle (BAHC) 
• 
International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Project 
• 
Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE) 
• 
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) 
• 
Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone (LOICZ) 
• 
Past Global Changes (PAGES) 
• 
Data and Information System (DIS) 
• 
Global Analysis, Inteipretation and Modelling (GAIM) 
• 
Land use/cover change (LUCC-jointiy with HDP) 
The Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) is built upon the World Weather Watch and the Global Atmosphere 
Watch and includes the climate portions of the Global Ocean Observing System and the Global TeiTestrial Observing 
System. 
The System for Analysis, Research and Training (START) is co-sponsored by IGBP, WCRP and HDP. 
530 
Advancing 
our 
Understanding 
Programme; these activities are primarily of concern to 
IPCC Working Group II. For areas within the mandate of 
Working Group I and this report, basically the natural 
sciences and their role in understanding climate change, the 
IGBP and the W C R P are the principal international 
scientific research initiatives, while the Global Climate 
Observing System (GCOS) should provide the systematic 
observational basis. They provide for international 
planning and co-ordination of mainly large-scale 
endeavours, which are then funded directly by national 
sources. Working closely together, the WCRP places its 
emphasis on the physical aspects of the climate system 
while the IGBP concentrates on biogeochemical cycles. 
The IGBP and WCRP do not attempt to organise all 
climate research, but instead focus on those activities 
which require international co-operation, either because of 
their global or large regional scale or because of their large 
human, technical and financial resource requirements. Co-
operation across appropriate disciplines is fostered, and 
standardised methods and intercomparisons contribute to 
enhancing the Programmes' output. As noted, much 
essential climate research is being done, and is best done, 
by individuals or in small research groups at universities or 
governmental institutes, around the world. The WCRP, 
IGBP and GCOS function through international co-
ordination of related parts of national programmes, based 
on the premise that the co-ordinated whole will be worth 
more than the sum of the individual elements. Through 
these and related programmes, considerable progress has 
been made in understanding the climate system, through a 
balanced set of monitoring, process studies and modelling 
activities. These are not independent activities but strongly 
interact, with results or deficiencies identified in one often 
leading to design of new research studies. Through the 
System for Analysis, Research and Training (START), co-
sponsored by IGBP, WCRP and HDP, the capability of 
developing countries to address their regional climate 
change concerns and to contribute to global initiatives, is 
being addressed. 
Climate science requires effort on a range of scales, from 
individual investigators to co-ordinated international 
programmes. A l l are supported through science councils 
within countries. National participation in large internationally 
co-ordinated projects, such as the WCRP, IGBP and GCOS is 
essential to the overall co-ordinated research strategy. It needs 
to be stressed that this participation is through contributing 
national activities, not through centtally funded science. There 
is need for significant increase in resources for capacity 
building in developing countries and international co-
ordination of the scientific programmes. 
Climate science requires multi-disciplinary and cross-
institutional research. Relevant organisations need to adapt 
to facilitate the functioning of interdisciplinary teams 
addressing climate system problems. This will require the 
recruitment and training of bright young people with 
diverse backgrounds, and provision of the right 
environment to allow them to flourish. 
11.11 Research Priorities 
Since the completion of the 1990 Scientific Assessment, 
substantial progress has been made and we are confident 
that it will continue. The rate of progress will depend on 
the scale of effort and the degree of co-ordination, 
particularly for large-scale projects. Because there are 
always the elements of good fortune and scientific 
breakthroughs which are unpredictable, it is difficult to 
place with confidence a time-scale on the advancement of 
science and technology. However, the timing of major 
international programmes provides an indication. Three 
illustrative examples of the time scale for major scientific 
undertakings are: first, the completion of the 7-year field 
phase of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment in 1997 
will give oceanographers the most comprehensive data set 
for understanding ocean circulation, model development 
and validation. The subsequent scientific analyses of the 
data sets generated can be realistically expected to take 
place over 5-10 years, at least. Second, clarification of the 
impoitant questions of the role of clouds in the energetics 
of the atmosphere and testing of models on global cloud 
data sets may require global measurements that will only 
be possible by a space borne cloud radar coupled with 
extensive ground based measurements. The earliest that 
such a radar may be launched is after the turn of the 
century and scientific analysis will again span a 5-10 year 
period. Third, adequate observations to develop and test 
refined models of the oceanic carbon cycle will also take 
several years (with the successful completion of the JGOFS 
observation phase). A l l of these time lines indicate that 
advances in our knowledge of the climate system will take 
place gradually but on time-scales of 5-10 years, after 
which, depending on progress, more refined studies can be 
defined and implemented, also on similar time-scales. 
Research priorities need to be focused on the 
determination of the likely magnitude and rate of human-
induced climate change and its regional variations, the 
detection and attribution of climate change, the likely 
magnitude of sea level rise and the impacts of climate 
change on ecosystems (for areas within the purview of 
IPCC Working Group I). It needs be stressed that research 
Advancing our 
Understanding 
531 
studies to address tiiese objectives are not independent but 
very much interconnected and their grouping below should 
be considered as demonstrative, not exclusive. 
Priorities to address climate research requirements are 
listed below, although many of them are interconnected: 
(i) 
related to all topics 
• 
systematic and sustained global observations of key 
variables 
• 
capacity building in all nations 
(ii) 
the magnitude of global and continental-scale climate 
change and of sea level rise 
• 
the factors controlling the distribution of clouds and 
their radiative characteristics 
• 
the hydrological cycle, including precipitation, 
evaporation and runoff 
• 
the distribution of ozone and aerosols and their 
radiative characteristics 
• 
the response of terrestrial and marine systems to 
climate change and their positive and negative 
feedbacks 
• 
monitoring and modelling of land ice sheets 
(iii) the rate of climate change 
• 
human activities influencing emissions (research 
priority of Working Group III) 
• 
the coupling between the atmosphere and ocean, and 
ocean circulation 
• 
the factors controlling the atmospheric concentrations 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases 
iv) 
detection and attribution of climate change 
• 
systematic observations of key variables and data and 
model diagnostics 
• 
relevant proxy data to construct and test palaeo-
climatic time series to describe internal variability of 
the climate system 
v) 
regional patterns of climate change 
• 
land surface processes and their atmospheric linkages 
• 
coupling between scales represented in global 
climate models and those in regional and smaller-
scale models 
• 
simulations with higher resolution climate models 
The international framework of integrated global climate 
programmes of WCRP. IGBP, GCOS, WCP, HDP and 
related programmes provides for internarional co-
ordination but nations must undertake to support both their 
own activities and their contributions to these international 
activities. In this they should ensure that to the maximum 
extent possible, these activities and contributions are 
mutually supportive, so that progress can be made in 
responding to the needs of the Framework Convention on 
Climate Change and the needs of nations to provide 
climate services within their countries. 
Appendix 1 
Organisation of the IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change 
Chairman 
B. Bolin (Sweden) 
Secretary 
N. Sundararaman 
Working Group I 
The Science of 
Climate Change 
Co-chairmen 
J.T. Houghton (UK) 
L.G. Meira Filho (Brazil) 
Working Group II 
Impacts, Adaptation 
And Mitigation 
Co-chairmen 
R.T. Watson (USA) 
M.C. Zinyowera (Zimbabwe) 
Working Group III 
Socio-economic and 
Cross-cutting Issues 
Co-chairmen 
J. Bruce (Canada) 
Hoesung Lee (Rep of Korea) 
Appendix 2 
List of Major IPCC Reports (in English unless otherwise stated) 
Climate Change - The IPCC Scientific Assessment. The 
1990 report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working 
Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish). 
Climate Change - The IPCC Impacts Assessment. The 
1990 report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working 
Group {also in Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish) 
Climate Change - The IPCC Response Strategies. The 
1990 report of the IPCC Response Strategies Working 
Group {also in Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish) 
Emissions Scenarios. Prepared for the IPCC Response 
Strategies Working Group, 1990. 
Assessment of the Vulnerability of Coastal Areas to Sea 
Level Rise - a Common Methodology, 1991 {also in 
Arabic and French). 
Climate Change 1992 - The Supplementary Report to 
the IPCC Scientific Assessment. The 1992 report of the 
IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group. 
Climate Change 1992 - The Supplementary Report to 
the IPCC Impacts Assessment. The 1992 report of the 
IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group. 
Climate Change: The IPCC 1990 and 1992 Assessments 
- 
IPCC First Assessment Report Overview and 
Policymaker Summaries, and 1992 IPCC Supplement. 
Global Climate Change and the Rising Challenge of the 
Sea. Coastal Zone Management Subgroup of the IPCC 
Response Strategies Working Group, 1992. 
Report of the IPCC Country Studies Workshop, 1992. 
Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of 
Climate Change, 1992. 
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories (3 volumes), 1994 {also in French, 
Russian 
and Spanish). 
IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptations, 1995 {also in Arabic, 
Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish). 
Climate Change 1994 - Radiative Forcing of Climate 
Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC 1S92 Emission 
Scenarios. 
Climate Change 1995 - Impacts, Adaptations and 
Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical 
Analyses. Contribution of Working Group II to the IPCC 
Second Assessment Report. 
Climate Change 1995 - Economic and Social 
Dimensions of Climate Change. Contribution of Working 
Group III to the IPCC Second Assessment Report. 
IPCC Second Assessment Synthesis of Scientific-
Technical Information Relevant to Interpreting Article 
2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. 
Enquiries: IPCC Secretariat, c/o World Meteorological 
OrganisaUon, P О Box 2300, CH1211 Geneva 2, 
Switzerland. 
Appendix 3 
Contributors to IPCC WGI Report 
Technical Summary 
D. Albritton 
N O A A Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
B. Bolin 
IPCC Chairman, Sweden 
B. Callander 
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit, U K 
K. Denman 
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Canada 
R. Dickinson 
University of Arizona, USA 
L. Gates 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
H. Grassl 
World Meteorological Organisation, Switzerland 
M . Grubb 
Royal Institute of International Affairs, U K 
N. Harris 
European Ozone Research Co-ordinating Unit, U K 
J. Houghton 
IPCC WGI Co-Chairman, U K 
P. Jonas 
UMIST, U K 
A. Kattenberg 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), Netherlands 
K. Maskell 
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit, U K 
G. McBean 
Atmospheric Environment Canada, Canada 
M . Mcfarland 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Kenya 
G. Meira 
Agencia Espacial Brasileira, Brazil 
J. Melillo 
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution, USA 
N. Nicholls 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
L. Ogallo 
University of Nairobi, Kenya 
M Oppenheimer 
Environmental Defense Fund, USA 
M . Prather 
University of California @ Irvine, USA 
B. Santer 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
D. Schimel 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
K. Shine 
University of Reading, U K 
K. Trenberth 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
R. Wanick 
The University of Waikato, New Zealand 
R. Watson 
Office of Science and Technology Policy, USA 
J. Zillman 
Bureau of Meteorology, Australia 
538 
Appendix 3 
Chapter 1: The CUmate System; An overview 
National Center for Atmospiieric Research, USA 
Convening Lead Author 
K. Trenberth 
Lead Authors 
J. Houghton 
G. Meira 
IPCC WGI Co-Chairman, U K 
Agencia Espacial Brasileira, Brazil 
Chapter 2: Radioactive Forcing of CUmate Change 
Convening Lead Author 
D. Albritton 
P. Jonas 
M . Prather 
D. Schimel 
K. Shine 
Lead Authors 
D. Alves 
R. Charlson 
R. Derwent 
D. Ehhalt 
I. Enting 
Y. Fouquart 
P. Eraser 
M . Heimann 
I. Isaksen 
F. Joos 
M . Lai 
V. Ramaswamy 
D. Raynaud 
H. Rodhe 
S. Sadasivan 
E. Sanhueza 
S. Solomon 
J. Srinivasan 
T. Wigley 
D. Wuebbles 
X. Zhou 
Contributors 
F. Alyea 
T. Anderson 
M . Andreae 
D. Blake 
O. Boucher 
C. Brühl 
J. Butler 
D. Cunnold 
J. Dignon 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
UMIST, U K 
University of California @ Irvine, USA 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA 
University of Reading, U K 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciáis (INPE), Brazil 
University of Washington, USA 
Meteorological Office, U K 
Institut fiir Chemie der K F A Jülich GmbH, Germany 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
LOA/Université des Science & Technologie de Lille, France 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
Max-Plank Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
University of Oslo (Geophysics), Norway 
University of Bern, Switzerland 
Centre for Atmospheric Sciences, India 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
CNRS Laboratoire de Glaciologie, France 
University of Stockholm, Sweden 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, India 
Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas, Venezuela 
NOAA Aeronomy Laboratory, USA 
Langley Research Centre, USA 
Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies @ UCAR, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Academy of Meteorological Sciences, China 
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 
University of Washington, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie, Germany 
University of California @ Irvine, USA 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique du CNRS, France 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie, Germany 
NOAA, Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Lab, USA 
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Appendix 3 
E. Dlugokenchy 
NOAA ERE @ Boulder, USA 
J. Elkins 
NOAA ERE @ Boulder, USA 
I. Fung 
University of Victoria, Canada 
M . Geller 
New York State University, USA 
D. Hauglustaine 
Service d'Aeronomie du CNRS, France 
J. Haywood 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
J. Heintzenberg 
Institut fur Tropospharenforschung, Germany 
D.Jacob 
Harvard University, USA 
A. Jain 
University of Illinois, USA 
C. Keeling 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
S. Khmelevtsov 
Institute of Experimental Meteorology, Russian Federation 
J. Lelieveld 
University of Wageningen, Netherlands 
H. Le Treut 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique du CNRS, France 
L Levin 
Universitat Heidelberg, Germany 
M . Maiss 
Universitat Heidelberg, Germany 
G. Marland 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA 
S. Marshall 
University of Washington, USA 
P. Midgley 
M+D Consulting, Germany 
B. Miller 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
J. Mitchell 
Meteorological Office, U K 
S. Montzka 
NOAA/CMDL, USA 
H. Nakane 
National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan 
P. Novelli 
NOAA, Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Lab, USA 
B. O'Neill 
Environmental Defense Fund, USA 
D. Oram 
University of East Anglia, U K 
S. Penkett 
University of East Anglia, U K 
J. Penner 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
S. Prinn 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
P. Quay 
University of Washington, USA 
A. Robock 
University of Maryland, USA 
S. Schwartz 
Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA 
P. Simmonds 
Bristol University, U K 
S. Singh 
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology 
A. Slingo 
Meteorological Office, U K 
F. Stordal 
Norwegian Institute for Air Research, Norway 
E. Sulzman 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
P. Tans 
NOAA,Climate Monitoring & Diagnostics Lab, USA 
R. Weiss 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
A. Wharner 
Institut fur Chemie der KFA Jiilich GmbH, Germany 
T. Whorf 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
Chapter 3: Observed Climate Variability and Change 
Convening Lead Author 
N. Nicholls 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
Lead Authors 
G. Gruza 
Institute for Global Climate and Ecology, Russian Federation 
J. Jouzel 
LMCE/DSM, France 
T. Karl 
NOAA National Climate Data Center, USA 
540 
Appendix 3 
L. Ogallo 
D. Parker 
Contributors 
J. Angelí 
S. Anjian 
P. Arkin 
R. Balling Jr 
M . Bardin 
R. Barry 
W. Bomin 
R. Bradley 
K. Briffa 
A. Carleton 
D. Cayan 
F. Chiew 
J. Christy 
J. Churo, 
E. Cook 
T. Crowley 
N. Datsenko 
R. Davis 
B. Dey 
H. Diaz 
W. Drosdowsky 
M . Duarte 
J. Duplessy 
D. Easterling 
J. Eischeid 
W. Elliott 
B. Findlay 
H. Flohn 
C. Folland 
R. Franke 
P. Frich 
D. Gaffen 
V. Georgievsky 
T. Ginsburg 
W. Gould 
P. Groisman 
D. Gullet 
W. Haeberli 
S. Hastenrath 
A. Henderson-Sellers 
M . Hoelzle 
W. Hogg 
G. Holland 
L. Hopkins 
M . Hulme 
N. Ivachtchenko 
University of Nairobi, Kenya 
Meteorological Office, U K 
N O A A ERE @ Silver Springs, USA 
National Meteorological Centre, China 
NWS W/NMC, USA 
Arizona State University, USA 
Institute for Global Climate and Ecology, Russian Federation 
University of Colorado, USA 
National Meteorological Centre, China 
University of Massachusetts, USA 
University of East Anglia, U K 
Indiana University, USA 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
University of Melbourne, Australia 
University of Alabama @ Huntsville, USA 
CSIRO Division of Oceanography, Australia 
Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, USA 
Texas A & M University, USA 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russian Federation 
University of Virginia, USA 
Howard University, USA 
NOAA ERE @ Boulder, USA 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
Ciudad Universitaria, Argentina 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivités, France 
National Climatic Data Center, USA 
University of Colorado, USA 
N O A A ERL @ Silver Springs, USA 
Environment Canada, Canada 
Universitat Bonn, Germany 
Meteorological Office, U K 
Deutscher Wetterdienst Seewetteramt, Germany 
Danish Meteorological Institute, Denmark 
NOAA ERL @ Silver Springs, USA 
State Hydrological Institute, Russian Federation 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russian Federation 
Institute of Océanographie Sciences, U K 
State Hydrological Institute, Russian Federation 
Environment Canada, Canada 
Verschanstalt fur Wasserbau Institut, Switzerland 
University of Wisconsin @ Madison, USA 
Macquarie University, Austtalia 
Verschanstalt fur Wasserbau Institut, Switzerland 
Environment Canada, Canada 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
Climatic Research Unit (UFA), U K 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russian Federation 
Appendix 3 
541 
P. Jones 
Chmatic Research Unit (UEA), U K 
R. Katz 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
B. Kininmonth 
Bureau of Meteorology, Australia 
R. Knight 
NOAA National Climate Data Center, USA 
N. Kononova 
Russian Agricultural Academy, Russian Federation 
L. Korovkina 
Institute for Global Climate & Ecology, Russian Federation 
G. Kukla 
Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory, USA 
K. Kumar 
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, India 
P. Lamb 
University of Oklahoma, USA 
C. Landsea 
Colorado State University, USA 
S. Levitus 
NOAA/NODC (E/OC23), USA 
T. Lewis 
Pacific Geoscience Centre, Canada 
H. Lins 
US Geological Survey (WGII Liaison Gip), USA 
J. Lough 
Australian Institute of Marine Science, Australia 
L. Malone 
Environment Canada, Canada 
J. Marengo 
CPTEC-INPE, Brazil 
T. McMahon 
University of Melbourne, Australia 
E. Mekis 
Environment Canada, Canada 
A. Meshcherskya 
Main Geophysical Observatory, Russian Federation 
P. Michaels 
University of Virginia, USA 
S. Nicholson 
Florida State University, USA 
J. Oerlemans 
University of Utrecht, Netherlands 
G. Ohring 
NOAA/NESDIS, USA 
G. Pant 
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, India 
N. Plummer 
National Climate Centre, Australia 
F. Quinn 
Great Lakes Environmental Research Lab, USA 
E. Ran'kova 
Institute for Global Climate and Ecology, Russian Federation 
E.V. Rocheva 
Institute for Global Climate and Ecology, Russian Federation 
C. Ropelewski 
Climate Analysis Center, USA 
B. Santer 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
H. Schmidt 
Deutscher Wetterdienst Seewetteramt, Germany 
E. Semenyuk 
Institute for Global Climate and Ecology, Russia 
I. Shiklomanov 
State Hydrological Institute, Russian Federation 
M . Shinoda 
University of Tokyo, Japan 
N. Sidorenkov 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russian Federation 
I. Soldatova 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russian Federation 
D. Sonechkin 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia, Russian Federation 
R. Spencer 
Marshall Space Flight Center, USA 
N. Speranskaya 
State Hydrological Institute, Russian Federation 
K. Trenberth 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
C. Tsay 
Central Weather Bureau, Taiwan 
J. Walsh 
University of Illinois @ Urbana-Champaign, USA 
K. Wang 
Pacific Geoscience Centre, Canada 
N. Ward 
IMGA-CNR, Italy 
S. Warren 
University of Washington, USA 
T. Yasunari 
University of Tsukuba, Japan 
Q. Zu 
Jiangsu Meteorological Institute, China 
542 
Appendix 3 
Chapter 4: CUmate Processes 
Convening Lead Author 
R. Dickinson 
Lead Authors 
V. Meleshko 
D. Randall 
E. Sarachik 
P. Silva-Dias 
A. Slingo 
Contributors 
A. BaiTos 
O. Boucher 
R. Cess 
A. Del Genio 
L. Dumenil 
R. Fu 
P. Gleckler 
J. Hansen 
R. Lindzen 
E. Maier-Reimer 
K. McNaughton 
J..McWilliams 
G. Meehl 
M . Miller 
D. Neelin 
E. Olaguer 
T. Palmer 
C. Penland 
R. Pinker 
V. Ramaswamy 
D. Rind 
A. Robock 
M . Salby 
M . Schlessinger 
H. Schmid 
C. Senior 
Q. Shao 
K. Shine 
H. Sundquist 
A. Vogelmann 
A. Weaver 
University of Arizona, USA 
Voeikov Main Geophysical Observatory, Russian Federation 
Colorado State University, USA 
University of Washington, USA 
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Meteorological Office, U K 
Pennsylvania State University, USA 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique du CNRS, France 
University of New York State, USA 
GISS, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
University of Arizona, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
Hort Research, New Zealand 
UCLA, USA 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA 
ECMWF, U K 
University of California, USA 
Dow Chemical Co., USA 
ECMWF, U K 
University of Colorado, USA 
University of Maryland, USA 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
Goddard Institute of Space Studies, USA 
University of Maryland, USA 
University of Colorado, USA 
University of IlUnois at Urbana-Champaign, USA 
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland 
Meteorological Office, U K 
University of Arizona, USA 
University of Reading, U K 
University of Stockholm, Sweden 
University of Arizona, USA 
University of Victoria, Canada 
Appendix 3 
543 
Chapter 5: CHmate Models - Evaluation 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Convening Lead Author 
W. Gates 
Lead Authors 
G. Boer 
A. Henderson-Sellers 
C. Folland 
A. Kitoh 
B. McAvaney 
F. Semazzi 
N. Smith 
A. Weaver 
Q. Zeng 
Contributors 
J. Boyle 
R. Cess 
T. Chen 
J. Christy 
C. Covey 
T. Crowley 
U. Cubasch 
J. Davies 
M . Fiorino 
G. Flato 
С. Fredericksen 
F. Giorgi 
P. Gleckler 
J. Hack 
J. Hansen 
G. Hegerl 
R. Huang 
P. Irannejad 
T. Johns 
J. Kiehl 
H. Koide 
R. Koster 
J. Kutzbach 
S. Lambert 
R. Latif 
N. Lau 
P. Lemke 
R. Livezey 
P. Love 
N. McFarlane 
K. McGuffie 
G. Meehl 
I. Mokhov 
Canadian Centre for CUmate Modelling & Analysis, Canada 
Macquarie University, Australia 
Meteorological Office, U K 
Japan Meteorological Agency, Japan 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
NortU Carolina State University, USA 
Bureau of Meterology Research Centre, Australia 
University of Victoria, Canada 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, China 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
University of New York State, USA 
Macquarie University, Australia 
University of Alabama @ HuntsviUe, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Texas A & M University, USA 
Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum, Germany 
Meteorological Office, U K 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling & Analysis, Canada 
BMRC, Australia 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
NCAR, USA 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution, USA 
Macquarie University, Australia 
Meteorological Office, U K 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Meteorological Research Institute, Japan 
University of Maryland, USA 
University of Wisconsin @ Madison, USA 
University of Victoria, Canada 
Max-Planck Instimt fur Météorologie, Germany 
NOAA, USA 
Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar & Marine Research, Germany 
NOAA, USA 
Macquarie University, Australia 
Canadian Climate Centre, Canada 
University of Technology, USA 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Russia 
544 
Appendix 3 
A. Noda 
Japan Meteorological Agency,Japan 
B. Otto-Bliesner 
University of Texas, USA 
T. Palmer 
ECMWF, U K 
T. Phillips 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
A. Pitman 
Macquarie University, Australia 
J. Polcher 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique du CNRS, France 
G. Potter 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
S.B. Power 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
D. Randall 
Colorado State University, USA 
P. Rasch 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
A. Robock 
University of Maryland, USA 
B. Santer 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
E. Sarachik 
University of Washington, USA 
N. Sato 
Japan Meteorological Agency, Japan 
A. Semtner Jr 
Naval Postgraduate School, USA 
J. Slingo 
University of Reading, U K 
I. Smith 
lEA Coal Research, London, U K 
K. Sperber 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
R. Stouffer 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
M . Sugi 
National Research Institute for Earth Science & Disaster Prevention, Japan 
J. Syktus 
CSIRO, Austraha 
K. Taylor 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , USA 
S. Tett 
Meteorological Office, U K 
S. Tibaidi 
University of Bologna, Italy 
W. Wang 
State University of New York @ Albany, USA 
W. Washington 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
B. Weare 
University of California, USA 
D. Williamson 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
T. Yamagata 
University of Tokyo, Japan 
Z. Yang 
University of Arizona, USA 
R. Zhang 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, China 
M . Zhang 
State University of New York @ Stony Brook, USA 
F. Zwiers 
Canadian Climate Centre, Canada 
Chapter 6: CUmate Models - Projections of Future Climate 
Convening Lead Author 
A. Kattenberg 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), Netherlands 
Lead Authors 
F. Giorgi 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA 
H. Grassl 
World Meteorological Organisation, Switzerland 
G. Meehl 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA 
J. Mitchell 
Meteorological Office, U K 
R. Stoufer 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
T. Tokioka 
Japan Meteorological Agency, Japan 
A. Weaver 
University of Victoria, Canada 
T. Wigley 
Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies @ UCAR, USA 
Appendix 3 
545 
Contributors 
A. Barros 
Pennsylvania State University, USA 
M . Beniston 
ETH Institute of Geography, Switzerland 
G. Boer 
Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling & Analysis, Canada 
T. Buishand 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), Netherlands 
J. Christensen 
Danish Meteorological Institute, Denmark 
R. Colman 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
J. Copeland 
Colorado State University, USA 
P. Cox 
Meteorological Office, U K 
A. Cress 
Deutscher Wetterdienst Zentralamt, Germany 
U. Cubasch 
Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum, Germany 
M . Deque 
Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques, France 
G. Flato 
Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling & Analysis, Canada 
С. Fu 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics, China 
I. Fung 
University of Victoria, Canada 
J. GaiTatt 
CSIRO, Australia 
S. Ghan 
Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratories, USA 
H. Gordon 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
J. Gregory 
Meteorological Office, U K 
P. Си110ф 
University of Washington, USA 
A. Henderson-Sellers 
Macquarie University, Australia 
K. Hennessy 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
H. Hirakuchi 
CRIEPI, Japan 
G. Holland 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
B. Horton 
Meteorological Office, U K 
T. Johns 
Meteorological Office, U K 
R. Jones 
Meteorological Office, U K 
M . Kanamitsu 
W / N M C 2 , USA 
T. Kai-1 
NOAA National Climate Data Center, USA 
D. Karoly 
Monash University, Australia 
A. Keen 
Meteorological Office, U K 
T. Kittel 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
T. Knutson 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
T. Koide 
Meteorological Research Institute, Japan 
G. Konnen 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), Netherlands 
JVl. Lal 
Centre for Atmospheric Sciences, India 
R. Laprise 
University of Quebec at Montreal, Canada 
R. Leung 
Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratory, USA 
A. Lupo 
Purdue University, USA 
A. Lync 
University of Tasmania, Australia 
C. Ma 
University of California, USA 
B. Machenhauer 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
E. Maier-Reimer 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
M . Marinucci 
NCAR, USA 
B. McAvaney 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
J. McGregor 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
L. Mearns 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
N. Miller 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
J. Murphy 
Meteorological Office, U K 
A. Noda 
Japan Meteorological Agency, Japan 
546 
Appendix 3 
M . Noguer 
Meteorological Office, U K 
J. Oberhuber 
Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum, Germany 
S. Parey 
Electricité de France, France 
H. Pleym 
Telemark College of Engineering, Norway 
J. Raisanen 
University of Helsinki, Finland 
D. Randall 
Colorado State University, USA 
S. Raper 
Climatic Research Unit (UEA), U K 
P. Rayner 
Princeton University, USA 
J. Roads 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, USA 
E. Roeckner 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
G. Russell 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
H. Sasaki 
Meteorological Research Institute, Japan 
F. Semazzi 
North Carolina State University, USA 
C. Senior 
Meteorological Office, U K 
C. Skelly 
James Cook University, Australia 
K. Sperber 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
K.Taylor 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
S. Tett 
Meteorological Office, U K 
H. von Storch 
Max- Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
K. Walsh 
CSIRO, Australia 
P. Whetton 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Australia 
D. Wilks 
Cornell University, USA 
I. Woodward 
University of Sheffield, U K 
E. Zwiers 
Canadian Climate Centre, Canada 
Chapter 7: Changes in Sea Level 
Convening Lead Author 
D. Warrick 
The University of Waikato, New Zealand 
Lead Authors 
C. Le Provost 
M . Meier 
J. Oerlemans 
P. Woodworth 
Institute de Mécanique de Grenoble, France 
Institute of Artie & Alpine Research, USA 
University of Utrecht, Netherlands 
Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level (PSMSL), U K 
Contributors 
R. Alley 
C. Bentley 
R. Bindschadler 
R. Braithwaite 
B. Douglas 
M . Dyurgerov 
N. Flemming 
C. Genthon 
V. Gornitz 
J. Gregory 
W. Haeberli 
P. Huybrechts 
T. Jóhannesson 
Pennsylvania State University, USA 
University of Wisconsin @ Madison, USA 
Goddard Space Flight Center, USA 
University of Manchester, U K 
NOAA/NODC, USA 
Institute of Geography, Russia 
Institute of Océanographie Sciences Deacon Labotatory, U K 
Laboratoire de Glaciologie, CNRS, France 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
Meteorological Office, U K 
Verschanstalt fur Wasserbau Institut, Switzerland 
Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar & Marine Research, Germany 
Orkustofnun (National Energy Authority), Iceland 
Appendix 3 
547 
и. Mikolajewicz 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
S. Raper 
Climatic Research Unit (UEA), U K 
D. Sahagian 
University of New Hampshire, USA 
T. Wigley 
OIES @ UCAR, USA 
J. de Wolde 
University of Utrecht, Netherlands 
Chapter 8: Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes 
Convening Lead Author 
B. Santer 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
Lead Authors 
E. Anyamba 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA 
T. Barnett 
Scripps Institute Of Oceanography, USA 
T. Wigley 
OIES @ UCAR, USA 
Contributors 
P. Bloomfield 
Merrill Lynch Derivative Products, USA 
E. Cook 
Lamont-Doheity Earth Observatory, USA 
C. Covey 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
T. Crowley 
Texas A & M University, USA 
T. Delworth 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, USA 
L. Gates 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
N. Graham 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, USA 
J. Gregory 
Meteorological Office, U K 
J. Hansen 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies, USA 
K. Hasselmann 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
G. Hegerl 
Max- Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
T.Johns 
Meteorological Office, U K 
P. Jones 
Climatic Research Unit (UEA), U K 
T. Karl 
NOAA National Climate Data Center, USA 
D. Karoly 
Monash University, AustraUa 
H. Kheshgi 
E X X O N , USA 
M . MacCracken 
Office of the USGCRP, USA 
K. Maskell 
IPCC WGI Technical Support Unit, U K 
G. Meehl 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research, USA 
J. Mitchell 
Meteorological Office, U K 
J. Murphy 
Meteorological Office, U K 
N. Nicholls 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
G. North 
Texas A & M University, USA 
M . Oppenheimer 
Environmental Defense Fund, USA 
J. Penner 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
S. Power 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre, Australia 
A. Robock 
University of Maryland, USA 
C. Senior 
Meteorological Office, U K 
K. Taylor 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
S. Tett 
Meteorological Office, U K 
F. Zwiers 
Canadian Climate Centre, Canada 
548 
Appendix 3 
Chapter 9: Terrestial Biotic Responses to Environmental Change and Feedbacks to Climate 
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution, USA 
Convening Lead Author 
J. MeUUo 
Lead Authors 
G. Farquhar 
C. Prentice 
O. Sala 
E. SchuIze 
Contributors 
P. Bartiein 
F. Bazzaz 
R. Bradshaw 
J. Clark 
M . Claussen 
G. Collatz 
M . Coughenour 
C. Field 
J. Foley 
A Friend 
B. Huntley 
C. Korner 
W. Kurz 
R. Leemans 
J. Lloyd 
P. Martin 
K. McNaughton 
A. McGuire 
R. Neilson 
W. Oechel 
J. Overpeck 
W. Parton 
L. Pitelka 
D. Rind 
S. Running 
D. Schimel 
T. Smith 
T. Webb 
C. Whitiock 
Australian National University, Australia 
Lund University, Sweden 
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina 
Bayreuth University, Germany 
University of Oregon, USA 
Harvard University, USA 
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden 
Duke University, USA 
Max Planck Institut fur Météorologie, Germany 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, USA 
Colorado State University, USA 
Carnegie Institute of Washington, USA 
James Cook University, Australia 
Institute of Terrestrial Ecology, U K 
University of Durham, U K 
University of Basel, Switzerland 
ESSA Ltd, Canada 
RIVM, Netherlands 
Australian National University, Australia 
European Commision, Italy 
Hort Research, New Zealand 
University of Alaska-Fairbanks, USA 
US Dept of Agriculture, USA 
San Diego State University, USA 
NOAA/National Geophysical Data Center, USA 
Colorado State University, USA 
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), USA 
Goddard Institute of Space Studies, USA 
University of Montana. USA 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, USA 
University of Virginia, USA 
Brown University, USA 
University of Oregon, USA 
Appendix 3 
549 
Chapter 10: Marine Biotic Responses to Environmental Change and Feedbacks to Climate 
Convening Lead Author 
K. Denman 
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Canada 
Lead Authors 
E. Hofmann 
Crittenton Hall Old Dominion University, USA 
H. Marchant 
DEST, Australia 
Contributors 
M . Abbott 
Oregon State University, USA 
T. Bates 
NOAA, USA 
S. Calvert 
University of British Columbia, Canada 
M . Fasham 
James Rennell Centre (NERC), U K 
R. Jahnke 
Skidaway Institution of Oceanography, USA 
S. Kempe 
University of Hamburg, Germany 
R. Lara 
Alfred-Wegener Institute for Polar & Marine Research, Germany 
C. Law 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory, U K 
P. Liss 
University of East Anglia, U K 
A. Michaels 
Bermuda Biological Research Station, Bermuda 
T. Pederson 
University of British Columbia, Canada 
M . Peña 
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Canada 
T. Piatt 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography, Canada 
К. Van Scoy 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory, U K 
J. Sharp 
University of Delaware, USA 
D. Thomas 
The Interuniversity Institute for Marine Sciences, Israel 
J. Walsh 
University of South Florida, USA 
A. Watson 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory, U K 
Chapter 11: Advancing our Understanding 
Convening Lead Author 
G. McBean 
Atmospheric Environment Canada, Canada 
Lead Authors 
P. Liss 
S. Schneider 
University of East Anglia, U K 
Stanford University, USA 
Appendix 4 
Reviewers of the IPCC WGI Reporti 
Albania 
E. Demiraj 
Hydrometeorological Institute 
Australia 
R. Allan 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
I. Allison 
University of Tasmania 
P. Baines 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
S. Barren 
Bureau of Meteorology 
N. Bindoff 
University of Tasmania 
W. Bouma 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
H. Bridgman 
University of Newcasde 
J. Bye 
The Flinders University of South Australia 
R. Byron-Scott 
The Flinders University of South Australia 
F. Chiew 
University of Melbourne 
J. Church 
CSIRO Division of Oceanography 
K. Colls 
Bureau of Meteorology 
R. Colman 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
В. Curran 
Dept of Primary Industries & Energy 
M . Dix 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
В. Dixon 
Bureau of Meteorology 
M . England 
University of New South Wales 
I. Enting 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
D. Etheridge 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
G. Farquhar 
Australian National University 
P. Eraser 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
C. Fredericksen 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
I. Galbally 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
J. Garratt 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
T. Gibson 
University of Tasmania 
R. Gifford 
CSIRO Division of Plant Industry 
1 The list may not include some experts who contributed to the peer review only through their governments. 
552 
Appendix 4 
L. Glover 
A. Gordon 
G. Harris 
A. Henderson-Sellers 
K. Hennessy 
J. Jakka 
J. Jensen 
B. Kininmonth 
M . Kirschbaum 
R. Kleeman 
J. Lloyd 
J. Lough 
M . Mantón 
H. Marchant 
B. McAvaney 
T. McDougall 
J. McGregor 
C. Mitchell 
N. Nicholls 
S. O'Farrell 
G. Paltridge 
J. Parslow 
G. Pearman 
A. Pitman 
N. Plummer 
S. Power 
P. Rhines 
L. Rikus 
S. Rintoul 
G. Rumantir 
B. Ryan 
P. Schwerdtfeger 
C. Skelly 
N. Smith 
L Smith 
G. Stephens 
В. Tucker 
Y. 'Wang 
L Watterson 
T. Weir 
P. Whetton 
M . Williams 
B. Wright 
C. Zammit 
J. Zillman 
Department of the Environment, Sports & Territories 
Flinders University 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Macquarie University 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
University of Tasmania 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Bureau of Meteorology 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
Australian National University 
Australian Institute of Marine Science 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
Department of the Environment, Sports & Territories 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
University of Tasmania 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Macquarie University 
National Climate Centre 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Macquarie University 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
The Flinders University of South Australia 
James Cook University 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
CRC For Southern Hemisphere Meteorology 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
Department of Primary Industries & Energy 
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research 
University Of Adelaide 
National Climate Centre 
Department of Foreign Affairs & Trade 
Bureau of Meteorology 
Austria 
H. Hojesky 
Federal Ministry for Environment 
Appendix 4 
553 
Barbados 
L. Nurse 
Coastal Conservation Project Unit 
Belguim 
A. Berger 
Université Catholique de Louvain 
Benin 
E. Ahlonsou 
Service Météorologique 
Brazil 
P. Fearnside 
National Institute of Research on the Amazon 
Canada 
G. Boer 
Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling & Analysis 
H. Boyd 
Environment Canada 
G. Brunet 
Environment Canada 
R. Allyn Clarke 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
R. Daley 
Environment Canada 
K. Denman 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
M.Pe 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
L. Dupigny-Giroux 
McGill University 
A. Dyke 
Geological Survey of Canada 
P. Egginton 
Geological Survey of Canada 
G. Evans 
DFO Science Branch 
B. Findlay 
Environment Canada 
G. Flato 
Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling & Analysis 
I. Fung 
University of Victoria 
R. Grant 
University of Alberta 
D. Gullett 
Environment Canada 
H. Hengeveld 
Canadian Climate Centre 
K. Higuchi 
Atmospheric Environment Service 
W. Hogg 
Environment Canada 
J. Jerome 
McGill University 
H. Jette 
Geological Survey of Canada 
В.Johnson 
Dalhousie University 
M . Johnston 
Lakehead University 
A.Judge 
Geological Survey of Canada 
R. Koerner 
Geological Survey of Canada 
S. Lambert 
University of Victoria 
L. Malone 
Environment Canada 
C. McElroy 
Atmospheric Environment Service (ARQX) 
P. Merilees 
Environment Canada 
P. Mudie 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
L. Mysak 
McGill University 
I. Perry 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
554 
Appendix 4 
N. Roulet 
J. Shaw 
J. Stone 
A. Weaver 
D. Whelpdale 
F. Zwiers 
York University 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
Canadian Climate Centre 
University of Victoria 
Environment Canada 
Canadian Climate Centre 
Chile 
H. Antolini 
H. Fuenzalida 
I. González 
J. Gutiérrez 
О. Jara 
M . Manzur 
J. Searle 
R. Serra 
Servicio Hidrográfico y Oceanógrafico de la Armada 
Universidad de Chile 
Dirección General de Tenitorio Marítimo y Marina 
Universidad de la Serena 
Instituto de Fomento Pesquero 
CODEFF 
Comisión Nacional del Medio Ambiente 
Instituto de Fomento Pesquero 
China 
S. Anjian 
National Meteorological Centre 
D. Yihui 
Academy of Meteorological Sciences 
M . Dong 
National Climate Centre 
W. Futang 
Academy of Meteorological Sciences 
G. Shi 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
S. Wang 
Beijing University 
L. Yong 
National Climate Centre 
Z. Zhao 
National Cliinate Centre 
Colombia 
P. Leyva 
E. Rangel 
N. Sabogal 
Instituto de Hidrología 
Instituto de Hidrología 
Institute of Colombia 
Denmark 
J. Christensen 
E. Friis-Christensen 
J. Gundermann 
A. J0rgensen 
E. Kaas 
P. Laut 
N. Reeh 
G. Shaffer 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Energy Agency 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Danish Meteorological Institute 
Engineering Academy of Denmark 
Danish Polar Centre 
University of Copenhagen 
Finland 
R. Heino 
E. Holopainen 
Finnish Meteorological Institute 
University of Helsinki 
Appendix 4 
555 
I. Savolainen 
J. Sinisalo 
VTT-Energy 
VTT-Energy 
France 
M . Deque 
J. Guiot 
J. Jouzel 
H. Le Treut 
P. Monfray 
V. Moron 
C. Nadine 
E. Nesme-Ribes 
C. Waelbroeck 
Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques 
Labo Botanique Historique 
LMCE,/DS 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique du CNRS 
Centre des Faibles Radioactivités 
Université de Bourgogne 
CNRS 
Observatoire de Paris 
L M C E C E A Saclay 
Germany 
К. Arpe 
E. Augstein 
U. Bôhn 
M . Claussen 
R. Conrad 
W. Cramer 
P. Crutzen 
U. Cubasch 
K. Dehne 
L. Dumenil 
H. Flohn 
A. Ganopolski 
J. Heintzenberg 
K. Koltermann 
K. Lange 
R. Lara 
B. Machenhauer 
E. Raschke 
P. Sachs 
H. Schellnhuber 
C. Schonwiese 
V. Smetacek 
J. Thiede 
V. Vent-Schmidt 
G. Wefer 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie 
Alfred Wegener Institut 
Potsdam Institut 
Max Planck Institut fur Météorologie 
Universitat Marburg 
Potsdam Institut 
Max-Planck Institut fur Chemie 
Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum 
Meteorologisches Observatorium Potsdam 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie 
Universitat Bonn 
Potsdam Institut 
Institut fur Tropospharenforschung 
Federal Maritime and Hydrographie Agency 
Federal Ministry for the Environment 
Alfred Wegener Institut 
Max-Planck Institut fur Météorologie 
GKSS-Forschungszentrum 
GEOMAR-Forschungszentrum 
Potsdam Institut 
Universitat J W Goethe 
Alfred Wegener Institut 
GEOMAR 
Deutscher Wetterdienst Zentralamt 
Universitat Bremen 
Hungary 
P. Ambrózy 
E. Antal 
J. Bartholy 
T. Faragó 
Z.Iványi 
Hungarian Meteorological Society 
University for Agricultural Sciences 
Euotvos Loránd University 
Ministry for Environment &. Regional Policy 
Eotvos Loránd University 
556 
Appendix 4 
G. Koppány 
J. Mika 
T. Pálvolgyi 
József Attila University 
Hungarian Meteorological Service 
Ministry for Environment & Regional Policy 
Iceland 
T. Jóhannesson 
Orkustofnun (National Energy Authority) 
India 
M . Lal 
S. Sadasivan 
Centre for Atmospheric Sciences 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre 
Iran 
M . Abduli 
University of Tehran 
Israel 
D. Thomas 
The Inter-university Institute for Marine Sciences 
Italy 
G. Visconti 
Università Degli Studi dell'Aquila 
Jamaica 
S. McGill 
Meteorological Service 
Japan 
S. Asano 
M . Hirota 
H. Inoue 
T. Ito 
M . Kmoto 
A. Kitoh 
I. Koike 
S. Kusunoki 
K. Mabuchi 
T. Matsuno 
S. Nakagawa 
H. Nakane 
T. Nitta 
A. Noda 
T. Okita 
N. Ono 
M . Shinoda 
K. Shuto 
M . Sugi 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Meteorological Research Institute JMA 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
University of Tokyo 
Environment Agency 
Meteorological Research Instimte JMA 
University of Hokkaido 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
University of Tokyo 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
Ohobirin University 
National Institute of Polar Research 
University of Tokyo 
Meteorological Research Institute JMA 
National Research Institute for Earth Science & Disaster Prevention 
Appendix 4 
557 
A. Sumi 
University of Tokyo 
T. Takeda 
Nagoya University 
T. Tokioka 
Japan Meteorological Agency 
S. Tsunogai 
University of Hokkaido 
R. Yamamoto 
Kyoto University 
T. Yasunari 
University of Tsukuba 
Kenya 
M . Indeje 
Kenya Meteorological Department 
W. Kimani 
Kenya Meteorolgical Department 
M . Kinyanjui 
Pennanent Mission of Kenya, Geneva 
G. Mailu 
Ministry of Research, Technical Training & Technology 
F. Mutua 
University of Nairobi 
H. Muturi 
Ministry of Research, Technical Training & Technology 
R. Mwangi 
University of Nairobi 
J. Ng'ang'a 
University of Nairobi 
N. Njau 
Kenya Meteorological Department 
J. Njihia 
Kenya Meteorological Department 
W. Nyakwada 
Kenya Meteorological Department 
R. Odingo 
University of Nairobi 
L. Ogallo 
University of Nairobi 
A. Owino 
Kenya Meteorological Department 
Morocco 
M . Abderrahmane 
Direction de Météorologie Nationale 
S. Larbi 
Direction de Météorologie Nationale 
Netherlands 
H. de Baar 
Netherlands Institute for Sea Research 
A. Baede 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
J. Beck 
Air Research Laboratory 
J. Beersma 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
P. Builtjes 
University of Utrecht 
T. Buisliand 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
G. Burgers 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
H. de Bruin 
Wageningen Agricultural University 
S. Drijfhout 
Royal Netheriands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
R. Guicherit 
TNOЯMW 
L. Janssen 
RIVM, Netherlands Institute for Public Health & Environment 
W. Kieskamp 
Netheriands Energy Research Foundation ECN 
G. Komen 
Royal Netheriands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
G. Konnen 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
R. Leemans 
RIVM, Netheriands Institute for Public Health & Environment 
G. Mohren 
IBN-DLO 
J. Oerlemans 
University of Utrecht 
J. Opsteegh 
Royal Netheriands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
M . Roemer 
TNOЛMW 
558 
Appendix 4 
С. Schuurmans 
A. Sterl 
H. ten Brink 
H. Tennekes 
H. The 
A. van Ulden 
A. van Amstel 
R. van Borland 
G. Velders 
H. Visser 
С. Vreugdenhil 
H. Vugts 
P. Westbroek 
University of Utrecht 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
Netherland Energy Research Foundation 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
RIVM, Netherlands Institute for Public Health & Environment 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
RIVM, Netherlands Institute for Public Health & Environment 
Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) 
RIVM, Netherlands Institute for Public Health & Environment 
K E M A 
University of Utrecht 
Institute for Planetary Sciences 
University of Leiden 
New Zealand 
B. Campbell 
A. Garran 
P. Clinton 
C. de Freitas 
J. Grieve 
J. Hall 
J. Hannah 
M . Harvey 
J. Kidson 
B. Kirk 
B. Liley 
D. Lowe 
M . Manning 
M . McGlone 
R. McKenzie 
K. McNaughton 
B. Mullan 
L. Phillips 
H. Plume 
M . Salinger 
A. Sturman 
K. Tate 
D. Whitehead 
D. Wratt 
P. Whiteford 
NZ Pastoral Agriculture Research Institute 
NZ Pastoral Agricultural Research Institute 
New Zealand Forest Research Institute 
The University of Auckland 
NIWA 
NIWA 
Otago University 
Nat Institute of Water & Atmospheric Research Ltd 
NIWA 
University of Canterbury 
NIWA 
NIWA 
National Institute of Water & Atmospheric Research 
Landcare Research 
Nat Institute of Water & Atmospheric Research Ltd 
Hort Research Institute 
New Zealand Meteorological Service 
University of Canterbury 
Ministry for the Environment 
NIWA - CLIMATE 
University of Canterbury 
Landcare Research NZ Ltd 
Landcare Research NZ Ltd 
NIWA 
Institute of Geological & Nuclear Sciences 
Norway 
T. Martinsen 
State Pollution Control Authority 
F. Stordal 
Norwegian Institute for Air Research 
Appendix 4 
559 
Poland 
W. Andrzej 
Institute of Oceanology, PAS 
E. Bulewicz 
Institute of Chemistry and Technology 
B. Jakubiak 
Institute of Meteorology & Water Management 
M . Mietus 
Institute of Meteorolgy & Water Management 
M . Sadowski 
Institute of Environmental Protection 
P. Sowinski 
Plant Breeding & Acclimatization Institute 
Russian Federation 
G. Golitsyn 
Institute of Atmospheric Physics 
P. Groisman 
State Hydrological Institute 
G. Gruza 
Institute for Global Climate and Ecology 
I. Karol 
Main Geophysical Observatory 
V. Meleshko 
Main Geophysical Observatory 
D. Sonechkin 
Hydrometeorological Research Centre of Russia 
Spain 
L. Balairon 
National Meteorological Institute 
A. Labajo 
National Meteorological Institute 
Sri Lanka 
J. Ratnasiri 
Ministry of Environment and Parliamentary Affairs 
Sweden 
B. Bolin 
University of Stockholm, IPCC Chairman 
S. Craig 
University of Stockholm 
T. Hedlund 
Swedish Commission on Climate Change 
A.Johansson 
Swedish Meteorological & Hydrological Institute 
W. Josefsson 
Swedish Meteorological & Hydrological Institute 
C. Prentice 
Lund University 
H. Rodhe 
University of Stockholm 
Switzerland 
A. Niederberger 
Office Fédéral de l'Environnement 
J. Beer 
E A W A G 
W. Haeberli 
Verschanstalt fur Wasserbau Institut 
M . Hoelzle 
Verschanstalt fur Wasserbau Institut 
D. Imboden 
E A W A G 
J. Innes 
Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, Snow & Landscape Research 
P. Joos 
University of Bern 
P. Francis 
Office Fédéral de l'Environnement 
H. Oeschger 
University of Bern 
B. Sevruk 
ETH Institute of Geography 
J. Staehelin 
ETH Atmospheric Physics Laboratory 
560 
Appendix 4 
Tanzania 
D. Mussa 
B. Nyenzi 
Tliailand 
J. Boonjawat 
M . Brikshavana 
S. Piamphongsant 
Trinidad & Tobago 
E. Henry 
V. Mendez-Charles 
P. Atherley-Rowe 
E. Caesar 
F. Campayne 
B. Chatoor 
C. O'Brian 
R. Maysingh 
R. Ramdin 
P. Samuel 
A. Wharton 
H. Wilson 
United Kingdom 
T. Anderson 
H. Bryden 
D. Cushing 
C. Folland 
W. Gould 
J. Grove 
T. Guymer 
G. Jenkins 
C. Johnson 
P. Jones 
M . Kelly 
K. Law 
P. Liss 
P. Mallaburn 
J. Mitchell 
N. Owens 
T. Palmer 
D. Parker 
D. Pugh 
S. Raper 
D. Roberts 
P. Rowntree 
Directorate of Meteorology 
Directorate of Meteorology 
Chulalongkom University 
Meteorolgical Department 
Office of Environmental Policy and Planning 
Meteorological Services Unit 
Town & Country Planning Division 
Ministry of Health 
Tobago House of Assembly 
University of the West Indies 
University of the West Indies 
Delpesh Institute of Marine Affairs 
Ministry of Works & Transport 
Water Resources Agency 
Ministry of Planning & Development 
University of the West Indies 
Ministry of Agriculture, Land & Marine Resources 
James Rennell Centre (NERC) 
James Rennell Centre (NERC) 
Retired (MAFF) 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
Institute of Océanographie Sciences 
University of Cambridge 
James Rennell Centre (NERC) 
Meteorological Office! Hadley Centre 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
Climatic Research Unit (UEA) 
University of East Anglia 
University of Cambridge 
University of East Anglia 
Department of the Environment 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory 
ECMWE 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
Southampton Oceanography Centre 
Climatic Research Unit (UEA) 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
Appendix 4 
561 
К. Shine 
University of Reading 
P. Smithson 
University of Sheffield 
S. Tett 
Meteorological Office, Hadley Centre 
S. Tudhope 
University of Edinburgh 
A. Watson 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory 
D. Webb 
Institute of Océanographie Sciences 
T. Wigley 
OIES @ UCAR, USA 
United States of America 
J. Aber 
University of New Hampshire 
R. Alley 
Pennsylvania State University 
A. Ameko 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
T. Anderson 
University of Washington 
J. Angelí 
NOAA E R L @ Silver Springs 
E. Anyamba 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
J. Arnold 
USDA/ARS 
T. Barnett 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
A. Barros 
Pennsylvania State University 
T. Bates 
NOAA 
J. Bates 
NOAA Department of Commerce 
R. Beardsley 
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution 
C. Bentley 
University of Wisconsin @ Madison 
R. Birdsey 
US Forest Service/USDA 
G. Branstator 
NCAR 
K. Bryan 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
T. Charlock 
NASA 
R. Charlson 
University of Washington 
J. Christy 
University of Alabama @ Huntsville 
T. Crowley 
Texas A & M University 
R. Dahlman 
US Department of Energy 
E. Davidson 
Woods Hole Research Center 
R. Davis 
University of Virginia 
A. Del Genio 
GISS 
R. Dickinson 
University of Arizona 
P. Dirmeyer 
IGES 
H. Ducklow 
Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences 
J. Dutton 
Pennsylvania State University 
W. Elliott 
NOAA E R L @ Silver Springs 
H. EUsaesser 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
J. Evans 
Pennsylvania State University 
G. Evans 
US Dept of Agriculture 
C. Eield 
Carnegie Institute of Washington 
D. Gaffen 
NOAA E R L @ Silver Springs 
J. Gavin 
Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory 
E. Gorham 
University of Minnesota 
J. Hansen 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
J. Hanson 
USDA/ARS 
L. Нафег 
USDA/ARS 
S. Hastenrath 
University of Wisconsin @ Madison 
562 
Appendix 4 
T. Hayward 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
W. Heilman 
US Forest Service/USDA 
J. Horn 
US Forest Service/USDA 
R. Houghton 
Woods Hole Research Center 
T. Hughes 
University of Maine 
J. Hunter 
NOAA/ National Marine Fisheries Service 
C. Jackman 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
D.Jacob 
Harvard University 
S.Jacobs 
Columbia University 
R.Jahnke 
Skidaway Institution of Oceanography 
A. Jenkins 
Columbia University 
G.Johnson 
USDA/ARS 
T. Joyce 
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution 
C. Jim Kao 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
R. Katz 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
C. Keeling 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
J. Kiehl 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
B. Kimball 
US Water Conservation Laboratory 
T. Knutson 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
R. Koster 
University of Maryland 
G. Kukla 
Lamont-Doherty Geological Laboratory 
Y. Kushnir 
Columbia University 
A. Lacis 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
M . Landry 
University of Hawaii 
С. Landsea 
Colarado State University 
D. Latham 
US Forest Service/USDA 
R. Lindzen 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
C. Loehle 
Argonne National Laboratory 
J. Logan 
Harvard University 
M . Lupo 
Purdue University 
D. Macayeal 
University of Chicago 
M . MacCracken 
Office of the USGCRP 
R. Madden 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
J. Mahlman 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
}. Мак 
State University of New York @ Stony Brook 
T. Malone 
North Carolina State University 
S. Manabe 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
P. Mayewski 
University of New Hampshire 
J..McWilliams 
U C L A 
C. Mechoso 
U C L A 
G. Meehl 
National Centre for Atmospheric Research 
P. Michaels 
University of Virginia 
C. Miller 
Oregon State University 
C. Milly . 
US Geological Survey 
R. Neilson 
US Department of Agriculture 
A. Nicks 
USDA/ARS/SPA 
W. Nierenberg 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography 
R. Norby 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
J. Penner 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
R. Pinkel 
University of California @ San Diego 
Appendix 4 
563 
W. Porch 
L. Porter 
C. Potter 
M . Prather 
R. Prinn 
D. Randall 
A. Ravishankara 
R. Reck 
C. Richardson 
B. Ridley 
M . Rienecker 
J. Roads 
D. Robinson 
A. Robock 
G. Russell 
P. Russell 
B. Santer 
J. Sarmiento 
S. Schwartz 
T. Smith 
W. Smith 
A. Solomon 
A. Solow 
P. Stone 
R. Stouffer 
Y. Sud 
E. Sundquist 
K. Taylor 
A. Thompson 
K. Trenberth 
C. van der Veen 
J..Wahr 
M . Wallace 
J. Walsh 
W. Wang 
W. Washington 
B. Weare 
T. Webb 
J. White 
D. Winstanley 
G. Woodwell 
Z. Yang 
X. Zeng 
M . Zhang 
H. Zwally 
Venezuela 
L. Hidalgo 
Los Alamos National Laboratory 
USDA/ARS 
Ames Research Center 
University of California @ Irvine 
Massachusetts Insütute of Technology 
Colorado State University 
N O A A Aeronomy Laboratory 
Argonne National Laboratory 
lUSDA/ARS 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Goddard Space Flight Center 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
Rutgers University 
University of Maryland 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
NASA Ames Research Center 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
Brookhaven National Laboratory 
University of Virginia 
Yale University 
Oregon State University 
Woods Hole Océanographie Institution 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
US Geological Survey 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Ohio State University 
Department of Physics, University of Colorado 
University of Washington 
University of Illinois @ Urbana Champaign 
State University of New York @ Albany 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
University of California 
Brown University 
University of Colorado 
US Department of Energy 
Woods Hole Research Center 
University of Arizona 
University of Atizona 
State University of New York @ Stony Brook 
NASA 
University of Venezuela 
564 
Appendix 4 
United Nations Organisations and Specialised Agencies 
J. van de Vate 
International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna 
M . Cheatle 
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi 
R. Christ 
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi 
M . Mcfarland 
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi 
H. Grassl 
World Meteorological Organisation, Geneva 
Non-Governmental Organisations 
B. Kuemmel 
A. McCulloch 
S. Nishininomiya 
K. Gregory 
R. Whitney 
W. Hennesey 
V. Grey 
E. Olaguer 
J. Kinsman 
W. Guyker 
J. Kennedy 
L. Pitelka 
S. Parey 
J. Hales 
M . Oppenheimer 
S. Japar 
B. Gardner 
W. Hare 
E.Jackson 
B. Flannery 
T. Murray 
L. Paul 
D. Lashof 
J. LeCornu 
V. Narayanan 
M . Jefferson 
2morrows Climate and Environment 
АЕЕАЗЯС! C&P, U K 
CRIEPI 
Centre for Business and the Environment 
Coal Research Association of New Zealand 
Coal Research Association of New Zealand 
Coal Research Association of New Zealand 
Dow Chemical Co. 
Edison Electtric Institute, USA 
Edison Electric Institute, USA 
Edison Electric Institute, USA 
Electric Power Research Institute(EPRI) 
Electricité de France 
Envair 
Environmental Defense Fund, USA 
Ford Motor Company 
Global Climate Coalition 
Greenpeace International, Amsterdam 
Greenpeace International, Australia 
IPIECA & Exxon, USA 
M A E Fisheries 
M A F Fisheries 
Natural Resources Defense Council, USA 
Shell 
Technical Resources International Inc. 
World Energy Council, London 
Appendix 5 
Acronyms 
A C E 
Aerosol Characterisation Experiments 
ACSyS 
Arctic Climate System Study 
AFEAS 
Alternative Fluorocarbons Environmental Acceptability Study 
A G A G E 
Atmospheric Lifetime Experiment/Global Atmospheric Gases Experiment 
AMIP 
Atmospheric Model Intercomparison Project 
A O G C M 
Atmosphere-Ocean General Circulation Model 
BAHC 
Biospheric Aspects of the Hydrological Cycle 
BATS 
Biosphere-Atmosphere Transfer Scheme 
BMRC 
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre (Australia) 
CCC 
Canadian Centre for Climate 
C C M 
Community Climate Model 
C C N 
Cloud Condensation Nuclei 
CGCMs 
Coupled General Circulation Models 
CLIVAR 
Climate Variability and Predictability Programme 
C M D L 
CUmate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory (NOAA) 
CNRM 
Centre National de Recherches Météorologiques (France) 
COADS 
Comprehensive Ocean Air Data Set 
COHMAP 
Co-operative Holocene Mapping Programme 
COLA 
Center for Ocean, Land and Atmosphere 
CRF 
Cloud Radiative Forcing 
CSIRO 
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (Australia) 
CSU 
Colorado State University (USA) 
DIG 
Dissolved Inorganic Carbon 
DIS 
Data and Information System 
DOC 
Dissolved Organic Carbon 
D O L Y 
Dynamic Global Photogeography Model 
DOM 
Dissolved Organic Matter 
DTR 
Diumal Temperature Range 
E B M 
Energy Balance Models 
E C H A M 
European Centre/Hamburg Model (ECMWF/MPI) 
ECMWF 
European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts 
EGIG 
International Glaciological expedition to Greenland 
EOF 
Empirical Orthogonal Function 
ERBE 
Earth Radiation Budget Experiment 
566 
Appendix 5 
ET 
Evapotranspiration 
PAO 
Food and Agriculture Organization (of the UN) 
FIFE 
First ISLCP Field Experiment 
FIRE 
First ISCCP Regional Experiment 
F R A M 
Fine Resolution Antarctic Model 
G A I M 
Global Analysis, Interpretation and Modelling 
G C E M 
Goddard Cumulus Ensemble Model 
G C M 
General Circulation Model 
GCOS 
Global Climate Observing System 
GCRI 
Greenhouse Climate Response Index 
GCTE 
Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystems 
GEWEX 
Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment 
GFDL 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
G H C N 
Global Historical Climate Network 
GISP 
Greenland Ice Sheet Project 
GISS 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies 
GLOSS 
Global Sea Level Observing System 
GOOS 
Global Ocean Observing System 
GPS 
Global Positioning System 
GRIP 
Greenland Icecore Project 
GST 
Ground Surface Temperature 
GWP 
Global Warming Potential 
HDP 
Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change Programme 
HNLC 
High Nutrient-Low Chlorophyll 
HRC 
Highly Reflective Clouds 
lAHS 
International Association of Hydrological Science 
lASH 
International Association of Scientific Hydrology 
ICE 
International Cirrus Experiment 
ICSI 
International Commission on Snow and Ice 
ICSU 
International Council of Scientific Unions 
lERS 
International Earth Rotation Service 
IGAC 
International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Project 
IGBP 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
IMAGE 
Integrated Model for Assessment of the Greenhouse Effect 
INPE 
Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciáis, Brazil 
IOC 
Intergovernmental Océanographie Commission 
ISCCP 
International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project 
ISLCP 
International Satellite Land-surface Climatology Project 
ISSC 
International Social Sciences Council 
ITRF 
International Terrestrial Reference Frame 
JGOFS 
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study 
LAI 
Leaf Area Index 
L A N L 
Los Alamos National Laboratory (USA) 
L G M 
Last Glacial Maximum 
L L N L 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
L M D 
Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique du CNRS (France) 
LOICZ 
Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone 
LSW 
Labrador Seawater 
L S X 
Land Surface Transfer 
MAST 
Monterey Area Ship Track experiment 
Appendix 5 
567 
M E C C A 
Model Evaluation Consortium for Climate Assessment 
MGO 
Main Geophysical Observatory (Russia) 
MJO 
Madden-Julian Oscillation 
MOGUNTIA 
Model of the General Universal Tracer transport In the Atmosphere 
MPI 
Max-Planck Institute for Meteorology (Germany) 
MRI 
Meteorological Research Institute (Japan) 
MSLP 
Mean Sea Level Pressure 
M S U 
Microwave Sounding Unit 
N A D W 
North Atlantic Deep Water 
NASA 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (USA) 
NCAR 
National Center for Atmospheric Research (USA) 
N M A T 
Night Marine Air Temperature 
NOAA 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (USA) 
NRC 
National Research Council (USA) 
NWP 
Numerical Weather Prediction 
O C C A M 
Ocean Circulation and Climate Advanced ModelHng (UK) 
OLR 
Outgoing Long-wave Radiation 
OSU/IAP 
Oregon State University Яnstitute of Atmospheric Physics (USA) 
PAGES 
Past Global Changes 
PAR 
Photosynthetically Available Radiation 
PBL 
Planetary Boundary Layer 
PGR 
Post-glacial Rebound 
PILPS 
Project for Intercomparison of Land-surface Parametrization Schemes 
PMIP 
Palaeoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project 
РОС 
Particulate Organic Carbon 
PSMSL 
Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level 
SLR 
Satellite Laser Ranging 
SOI 
Southem Oscillation Index 
SPARC 
Stratospheric Processes and their Role in Climate 
SSA 
Singular Spectrum Analysis 
SSTs 
Sea Surface Temperatures 
START 
System for Analysis, Research and Training 
SVATs 
Soil Vegetation Atmosphere Transfer Schemes 
ТЕМ 
Terrestrial Ecosystem Model 
TOGA 
Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere 
TOPEX/POSEIDON 
US/French Ocean Topography Satellite Altimeter Experiment 
UD-EBM 
Upwelling Diffusion-Energy Balance Model 
U G A M P 
University Global Atmospheric Modelling Project (Reading, UK) 
U K M O 
United Kingdom Meteorological Office 
UNEP 
United Nations Environment Programme 
UNESCO 
United Nations Education, Cultural and Scientific Organisation 
V E M A P 
Vegetation/Ecosystem Modelling and Analysis Project 
VLBI 
Very Long Baseline Interferometry 
WAIS 
West Antarctic Ice Sheet 
WCRP 
World Climate Research Programme 
WGNE 
Working Group on Numerical Experimentation 
WMO 
World Meteorological Organisation 
WOCE 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment 
Appendix 6 
Units 
SI (Système Internationale) Units: 
Physical Quantity 
Name of Unit 
Symbol 
length 
metre 
m 
mass 
kilogram 
kg 
time 
second 
s 
thermodynamic temperature 
kelvin 
К 
amount of substance 
mole 
mol 
Fraction 
Prefix 
Symbol 
Multiple 
Prefix 
Symbol 
10-1 
deci 
d 
10 
deca 
da 
10-2 
cent 
с 
102 
hecto 
h 
10-3 
milli 
m 
103 
kilo 
к 
10-6 
micro 
И 
106 
mega 
M 
10-5 
nano 
n 
109 
giga 
G 
10~I2 
pico 
P 
1012 
tera 
T 
10-15 
femto 
f 
1015 
peta 
P 
atto 
a 
570 
Special Names and Symbols for Certain Si-Derived Units: 
Appendix 6 
Physical Quantity 
Name of SI Unit 
Symbol for SI Unit 
Definition of Unit 
force 
newton 
N 
kg m s ^ 
pressure 
pascal 
Pa 
kg m-is"2(=N m-^) 
energy 
joule 
J 
kg m^s"^ 
power 
watt 
W 
kg m2s-3(=J s-i) 
frequency 
hertz 
Hz 
s~'(cycles per second) 
Decimal Fractions and Multiples of SI Units Having Special Names: 
Physical Quantity 
Name of Unit 
Symbol for Unit 
Definition of Unit 
length 
angstrom 
Â 
10-10 m = 10-8 
length 
micron 
pm 
10-6 m 
area 
hectare 
ha 
lO^^m^ 
force 
dyne 
dyn 
10-5 N 
pressure 
bar 
bar 
105Nm-2= 105 Pa 
pressure 
millibar 
mb 
102Nm-2= 1 hPa 
weight 
tonne 
t 
103 kg 
Non-SI Units: 
°C 
degrees Celsius (0 °C = 273 К approximately) 
Temperature differences are also given in °C (=K) 
rather than the more correct fonn of "Celsius degrees". 
ppmv 
parts per million (10^) by volume 
ppbv 
parts per billion (10^) by volume 
pptv 
parts per trillion (lO'^) by volume 
bp 
(years) before present 
kpb 
thousands of years before present 
mbp 
millions of years before present 
The units of mass adopted in this report are generally those which have come 
into common usage, and have deliberately not been harmonised, e.g.. 
kt 
kilotonnes 
GtC 
gigatonnes of carbon (1 GtC = 3.7 Gt carbon dioxide) 
PgC 
petagrams of carbon (IPgC = 1 GtC) 
MtN 
mégatonnes of nitrogen 
TgC 
teragrams of carbon (ITgC = 1 MtC) 
TgN 
teragrams of nitrogen 
TgS 
teragrams of sulphur 
Appendix 7 
Some Chemical Symbols 
02 
molecular oxygen 
03 
ozone 
N2 
molecular nitrogen 
N20 
nitrous oxide 
NO 
nitric oxide 
NO2 
nitrogen dioxide 
NO3 
nitrate radical 
NO^ 
the sum of NO and N O 2 
NO3 
nitrate ion 
HNO3 
nitric acid 
NH3 
ammonia 
N H ; 
ammonium ion 
Щ 
molecular hydrogen 
ЩО 
water 
OH 
hydroxyl 
HO2 
hydroperoxyl 
HO^ 
the sum of OH and HOj 
с 
carbon: there are 3 isotopes: ^^C, ^^C, i^C 
CO 
carbon monoxide 
CO2 
carbon dioxide 
F2 
molecular fluorine 
CI2 
molecular chlorine 
ВГ2 
molecular bromine 
CFC 
chlorofluorocarbon 
CFC-11 
CFCI3, or equivalenfly CCI3F 
(trichlorofluoromethane) 
CFC-12 
CF.Clj, or equivalenfly CCI2F2 
(di¿hlorodifluoromethane) 
CFC-113 
C2F3CI3, C C I 2 F C C I F 2 
(trichlorotrifluoroethane) 
CFC-114 
C2F4CI2, C C I F 2 C C I F 2 
(dichlorotetrafluoroethane) 
CFC-115 
C2F5CI 
(chloropentafluoroethane) 
HFC 
hydrofluorocarbon 
HbC-23 
CHF3 
HFC-32 
C H 2 F 2 
HFC-41 
C H 3 F 
HFC-43-100 mee 
HFC-125 
C2HF5 
HFC-134 
C H F 2 C H F 2 
HFC-134a 
CH2FCF3 
572 
Appendix 7 
HFC-143 
CHF2CH2F 
HFC-143a 
CF3CH3 
HFC-152a 
C2H4F2 
HFC 227ea 
C3HF7 
HFC-236fa 
C3H2Fg 
HFC-245ca 
C3H3F5 
HFC-272ca 
C3HgF2 
HCFC 
hydrochlorofluorocarbon 
HCFC-22 
CF2HCI 
(chlorodifluoromethane) 
HCFC-123 
C2F3HCI2 
HCFC-124 
C2F4HCI 
HCFC-141b 
C2FH3CI2 
HCFC-142b 
C2F2H3CI 
HCFC 225ca 
C3F5HCI2 
HCFC 225cb 
C3F5HCI2 
halon 1211 
CF2BrCl (СВгС1р2) 
(bromodichloromethane) 
halon 1301 
CFjBr (СВгЕз) 
(bromotrifluoromethane) 
halon 2402 
СВгр2СВгр2 
(dibromotetrafluoroethane) 
CH4 
methane 
NMHC 
non-methane hydrocarbon 
VOC 
volatile organic compound 
S 
atomic sulphur 
SO2 
sulphur dioxide 
S O f 
sulphate ion 
H2SO4 
sulphuric acid 
SFg 
sulphur hexafluoride 
(CHjjjS 
dimethyl sulphide (DMS) 
OCS 
organic carbonyl sulphide 
Ca 
calcium 
СаСОз 
calcium carbonate 
222Rn 
radon (1 isotope of) 
CCI4 
carbon tetrachloride 
CH3CI 
methylchloride 
CH3CCI3 
methylchloroform 
CH2CI2 
dichloromethane/ methylene chloride 
CHCI3 
chloroform, trichloromethane 
С Н 3 В Г 
methylbromide 
C F 3 I 
trifluoroiodomethane 
PFC 
perfluorocarbon 
CF4 
perfluoromethane 
CjFg 
hexiifluoroethane/perfluoroethane 
C 3 F 8 
perfluoropropane 
C4F10 
perfluorobutane 
c-C^Fg 
perfluorocyclobutane 
C5F12 
perfluoropentane 
CgFi4 
perfluorohexane 
