 
Climate Cliange 1992 
The supplementary report to the IPCC Impacts Assessment 
 
Climate Change 1992 
The supplementary report to the IPCC Impacts Assessment 
Edited by W J McG Tegart and G W Sheldon 
Australian Government Publishing Service 
Canberra 
© Commonwealth of Australia 1993 
ISBN 0 644 25150 6 
This work is copyright. Apart from any use as permitted under the 
Copyright Act 1968, no part may be reproduced by any process without 
prior written permission from the Australian Government Publishing 
Service. Requests and inquiries concerning reproduction and rights should be 
add|ressed to the Manager, Commonwealth Information Services, Australian 
Government Publishing Service, GPO Box 84, Canberra ACT 2601. 
Published for the Department of the Arts, Sport, the Environment and 
Territories by the Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra 
Cover illustration: Island in the Maldives (courtesy of Austral International, 
Sydney) 
Printed on 100 per cent recycled paper 
Printed in Australia by A. J. L A W , Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Climate Change 1992 
The Supplementary Report to the 
IPCC Impacts Assessment 
Report prepared for IPCC by Working Group II 
Chairman: 
Professor Yu A Izrael (Russia) 
Co-Vice-chairmen: 
Professor O Canziani (Argentina), Dr Hashimoto (Japan), 
Professor O S Odingo (Kenya), Dr W J McG Tegart (Australia) 
 
Contents 
Preface by Professor G O P Obasi (WMO) and Dr M K Tolba (UNEP) 
ix 
Preface by Professor Bert Bolin, Chairman, IPCC 
x 
Preface by Professor Yu A Izrael, Chairman, Working Group II . 
xi 
Executive summary 
; . . . 
1 
Task A 
Prediction of the regional distribution of climate change, 
including model validation studies 
9 
I 
Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
10 
Introduction 
• • • H 
Potential impacts of climate change , 
; 
H 
Exiisting systemic observation programs 
11 
Recommendations 
• • • 
12 
n 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climale change 
16 
Objectives 
• • • 17 
Definition of the problem 
IV 
Selection of the method 
18 
Testing the method 
20 
Selection of the scenarios 
20 
Assessment of the impacts 
26 
Evaluation of adjustments 
27 
Consideration of policy options 
• 27 
Task B 
Energy and industry-related 
issues 
29 
m 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industrial sectors; human health; air quality; 
effects of ultiaviolet-B radiation 
30 
Energy 
31 
Human settlement 
, 
33 
Industry and transport 
34 
Health 
J5 
Ultraviolet radiation and health 
36 
Air quality 
36 
Effects of ultraviolet-B radiation 
37 
Task C 
Agriculture and forest-related 
issues 
43 
rV 
Agriculture and forestry 
• 
44 
I 
Agriculture 
. 
• 
• • • • 
45 
Climatic scenarios 
45 
Assumptions concerning technology and management 
45 
Potential impacts on agriculture and land use 
46 
Direct effects of elevated C O 2 and'other greenhouse gases 
46 
Multiple stresses 
47 
Effects of climate change on soil properties 
47 
Effects of climate change on the distribution of agricultural pests and diseases 
48 
Research on regional impacts 
• 48 
vii 
Europe 
4^ 
Africa 
51 
Asia 
51 
Australia/Oceania 
51 
Global assessments 
51 
Adaptation 
52 
Gaps in research and monitoring 
53 
Recommendations and conclusions 
. 5 3 
n 
The managed forest and the forest sector . 
• 58 
Scope of the issue 
58 
Progress since the IPCC Impacts As.sessment in 1990 
58 
Socioeconomic importance of forests 
58 
Reforestation/afforestation and more managed forests 
58 
Tropical deforestation 
58 
Research and monitoring gaps 
59 
Recommendations and conclusions 
60 
V 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
63 
Background 
• • • 
64 
Progress since the IPCC Impacts A.ssessmcnt 
. 
64 
Uncertainties and knowledge gaps 
65 
Addressing the uncertainties and knowledge gaps 
66 
Fundamental ecological processes 
67 
Identifying the linkages with climate change and greenhouse gas concentrations 
68 
Identifying social and economic consequences 
68 
Conclusions 
• . 
69 
VI 
Hydrology and water resources 
VI 
Introduction 
; .- 
72 
Overview of new information 
. ; 
73 
Case study summaries 
75 
Water resources management impacts 
79 
Conclusions 
80 
Task D 
Vulnerability to sea-level rise 
85 
Vn World oceans and coastal zones: ecological effects 
86 
Regional ecological impacts of climate change 
87 
Impacts of rises in temperature 
87 
Impacts of sea-level rise 
89 
Case study aieas in progress 
90 
Recent findings and updates 
90 
Research and monitoring needs 
91 
Recommendations 
92 
Vin 
Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
94 
Background 
95 
Progress since the IPCC Impacts A.ssessment in 1990 
95 
Information and data gaps . 
97 
Responses to close information and data gaps 
98 
Appendix A: 
Analysis of current activity on regional impacts of climate change 
103 
Appendix B: 
Organisation of IPCC and Working Group II 
113 
Glossary of acronyms 
115 
viii 
Preface by Professor G O P Obasi (WMO) and Dr M K Tolba (UNEP) 
The Intergoveramental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
was jointly established by the World Meteorological 
Organization and the United Nations Environment Prog-
ramme in 1988 under the Chairmanship of Professor Bert 
Bplin. The Panel formed three Working Groups: 
to assess the available scientific evidence on climate 
change (Working Group I); 
to assess the environmental and socioeconomic impacts 
of climate change (Working Group II); and . 
to formulate response strategies (Working Group III), 
and a Special Committee on the Participation of Devel-
oping Countries to promote the participation of those 
countries in its activities. 
The IPCC First Assessment Report was completed in 
August 1990 and consists of the Overview, IPCC Scientific 
Assessment, the IPCC Impacts Assessment, the IPCC 
Response Strategies (the last three including the respective 
Policymakers' Summary) and the Policymakers' Summary 
of the IPCC Special Committee. The Report has 
now 
become a standard work of reference, widely used by 
policymakers, scientists and other experts, and encompass-
es a remarkable coordinated effort by hundreds of special-
ists from all over the world. 
In March 1991, anticipating a continuing need for the 
most up-to-date information on climate change and the 
United Nations Conference on Environment and Devel-
opment (Rio de Janeiro, June 1992), the Panel requested 
its three Working Groups to produce updates to their 1990 
Reports. The result is the 1992 IPCC Supplement which 
was completed in February 1992. This volume contains the 
contribution of Working Group II to support the conclu-
sions in its update of the IPCC Impacts Assessment. 
As in 1990, success in producing this Supplement has 
depended upon the enthusiasm and cooperation of scientists 
and other experts worldwide. We are grateful for their 
commitment. We express especial gratitude to Professor 
Bolin for his very able leadership of the IPCC and once 
again congratulate Professor Y u A Izrael, Chairman of the 
Working Group, and his Co-Vice Chairmen (Dr W J McG 
Tegart, Dr S Nishioka, Professor R S Odingo and Profes-
sor O Canziani) for another job well done. 
be 
1 
Preface by Professor Bert Bolin, Chairman, IPCC 
IPCC Working Group II, charged with the assessment of 
the environmental and socioeconomic impacts of climate 
change, completed its first report, the IPCC Impacts 
Assessment, in August 1990. Based on that report and the 
corresponding reports from Working Groups I and III and 
its Special Committee on the Participation of Developing 
Countries, the IPCC last that year agreed on a set of 
conclusions (Fourth Session, Sundsvall, Sweden, 27-31 
August 1990) which were forwarded to the U N General 
Assembly. Subsequently, an Intergovernmental Negotiating 
Committee (INC) was established by the General Assembly 
with the specific .charge to negotiate a climate convention 
to be ready for signature at the United Nations Conference 
on Environment and Development (UNCED) at Rio de 
Janeiro in June 1992. In March 1991, the IPCC agreed 
that a supplement to its 1990 report be prepared to assist 
the INC further in its task. 
Analyses of the impacts of climate change are obvi-
ously needed as a basis for negotiating measures for 
prevention or mitigation of the effects of climate change. 
However, such analyses cannot be successfully carried out 
until more precise climate change scenarios 
become 
available. The prevailing uncertainties in the prediction of 
likely future changes of climate, particularly on regional 
scales, therefore represent a major difficulty in pursuit of 
the task given to Working Group II. 
The wide-ranging work done so far by the scientists 
and other specialists was brought together in the form of 
detailed analyses by key researchers in the field. On the 
basis of these analyses, Working Group II prepared its 
contribution to the 1992 IPCC Supplement which is being 
presented in this volume together with the underlying 
supporting material. The latter, however, has undergone 
full peer review. Even though the findings and conclusions 
presented in the volume remain qualitative in most in-
stances, they nevertheless provide an important basis for 
the further scientific work that is required. 
The Working Group has also initiated methodological 
studies which should assist in the further pursuit of its 
task. The development of methods for sensitivity analysis 
is of particular importance in this context. This volume 
also reports on the methodological work. 
As Chairman of the IPCC, I am pleased to acknow-
ledge the large amount of work that has gone into the 
production of the present volume. M y particular thanks go 
to the Chairman of the Working Group, Professor Yu A 
Izrael, and his Co-Vice-Chairmen (Dr W J McG Tegart, 
Dr S Nishioka representing Dr M Hashimoto, Dr O 
Canziani and Professor R S Odingo). The report is the 
result of the work of a large group of scientists and other 
experts who have devoted much of their professional time 
to make this assessment possible. I am very grateful for 
their efforts and contributions. M y thanks are also extend-
ed to the IPCC central secretariat at the World Meteoro-
logical Organization in Geneva under the direction of Dr 
N 
Sundararaman, 
who has carried out the important 
function of coordinating the parallel efforts of the three 
working groups under the constraints of a very tight 
schedule. 
It is most important that the kind of cooperative efforts 
represented by the work of the IPCC be continued in order 
to provide the basic information needed to transform the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
signed at the UNCED into an effective international 
instrument for the protection of the global climate for the 
coming generations of humankind. 
Stockholm 
July 1992 
X 
Preface by Professor Yu A Izrael, Chairman, IPCC Working Group II 
The first IPCC Impacts Assessment prepared by Working 
Group II (WGII) of the I P C C was published in 19901 The 
report was a comprehensive statement of the state of 
knowledge concerning impacts of climate change and 
resulted from almost two years' work by over two hundred 
scientists worldwide. The report was prepared under the 
leadership of the WGII Chairman, Professor Y u A Izrael 
(Russia) and Vice-Chairmen, Dr W J M c G Tegart 
(Australia) and Dr M Hashimoto (Japan). 
In the eighteen months since then, scientific activity 
has continued to focus on the impacts of climate change 
and progress has been made in a number of important 
areas. The purpose of this Supplement is to update the 
1990 Report, paying particular attention to its key con-
clusions and to new issues which have appeared in the 
scientific debate. The Supplement should be read in 
conjunction with the earlier report. 
The conclusions presented in the Supplement are based 
on the supporting scientific material published here, which 
has been prepared by leading scientists and exposed to a 
widespread peer review. It can therefore be considered as 
a statement of the contemporary views of the international 
scientific conununity. 
It is clear from the Supplement that comprehensive 
estimates of the physical and biological effects at the 
regional level are still difficult to make. Confidence in 
regional estimates of critical climate factors presented by 
Working Group I is still low, particularly precipitation and 
soil moisture. Continued research is necessary to refine the 
estimates of potential impacts. 
The estimates already available suggest that if con-
tinued emission of greenhouse gases persisted through 
the next century and, in particular, if CO^ in the atmos-
phere doubled, there would not be a global catastrophe due 
to climate change. However, there would be severe im-
pacts in those regions of the world least able to adapt and 
substantial response measures would need to be taken. 
I am pleased to acknowledge the contributions of so 
many, in particular the Lead Authors who have given so 
freely of their expertise and time in the preparation of this 
Report. I am grateful to my Co-Vice-Chairmen, Dr W J 
McG Tegart (Australia), Dr S Nishioka (Japan), Professor 
R S Odingo (Kenya) and Professor O Canziani (Argentina) 
for overseeing the reviewing and publication of the 
Supplement. Financial support for editing and publication 
was provided by the Department of the Arts, Sport, the 
Environment and Territories, Australia, and thanks are due 
to the staff of that Department for their assistance in 
compilation and editing of the Supplement, in particular, 
Ms J Hellyer and Ms M Kimber. 
Thanks are also due to all the members of the IPCC 
central secretariat at W M O , Geneva, under the direction of 
Dr N Sundararaman, for their friendly and tireless assist-
ance and coordination with the other IPCC Working 
Groups. 
I am confident that this 1992 Supplement will assist 
further in building the firm scientific foundation necessary 
for the formulation of a rational and comprehensive 
response by humankind to the impacts of climate change. 
Moscow 
June 1992 
1. Organisational details of IPCC and Working Group II are shown in Appendix B. 
2. Climate Change. The IPCC Impacts Assessment. WJ McG Tegart, GW Sheldon and D C Griffiths (Eds), 
Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra, Australia, 1990. 
xi 
 
Executive summary 
Introduction 
Working Group II has examined aspects of four of the 
tasks approved at the fifth plenary session of IPCC in 
March 1991. These tasks were: 
• 
prediction of the regional distributions of climate 
change and associated impacts studies, including 
model validation studies; 
• 
energy and industry related issues; 
• 
agriculture and forestry-related issues; 
• 
vulnerability to sea-level rise. 
From the stimulus provided by the publication in 1990 of 
the IPCC Impacts Assessment, many regional studies have 
been carried out on assessment of impacts of climate 
change. A questioimaire circulated by Working Group II 
in June 1991 was valuable in revealing new information 
and in defining areas of common concern to many count-
ries (see Appendix A). Thus, roughly 50% of the respons-
es highlighted the impacts of climate change on hydrology 
and water resources, emphasising the importance of water 
in most countries. Other topics of priority interest, particu-
larly for developing countries, were agriculture and 
forestry, and the world's oceans and coastal zones. Both 
reflect the apprehension of countries over availability of 
food supplies from land and sea sources. 
Additional areas of concern identified in the ques-
tionnaire were desertification (particularly Africa and 
Asia), cyclones and other extreme events (particularly their 
economic impacts), and climate variability associated with 
the El-Niiio Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, 
prolonged droughts and extreme events. The national 
responses showed concern that changes in climate variabi-
lity as a consequence of climate change may create 
increased risks, especially in those parts of the world 
where climate variability is known to have significant 
social and economic impacts. It is important to note that 
many countries, particularly in the Southern Hemisphere, 
also identified increases in UV-B radiation as a significant 
area of concern. 
Working Group 11's activities focused only on the 
portions of the four tasks noted above that directly related 
to the impacts of climate change and the report should be 
read in association with the reports of Working Groups I 
and III. These activities built on the earlier work reported 
in the first IPCC Impacts Assessment The previous format 
of subgroups dealing with specific topics was maintained 
and task forces were set up to deal with monitoring and 
guidelines for assessment of impact. 
In view of the extreme concern expressed over impacts 
of climate change on hydrology and water resources and 
on changes in UV-B radiation in the responses to the 
questionnaire, additional work was carried out on those 
topics although they were not identified in the tasks 
approved at the fifth IPCC plenary session. Further work 
was also carried out on the cryosphere in view of its 
importance to global climate change. 
Tlie findings of the subgroups and task forces are 
reported under the four tasks as: 
• 
prediction of the regional distributions of climate 
change; this includes: 
Systematic observations to identify climate change 
consequences; 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of 
climate change. 
• 
energy and industry-related studies; this includes: 
Energy; 
human settlement; 
transport and 
industrial sectors; 
human health; 
air quality; 
effects of ultraviolet B radiation. 
• 
agriculture and forest-related issues; this includes: 
Agriculture and forestry; 
natural terrestrial 
ecosystems; hydrology and water resources. 
• 
vulnerability to sea-level rise; this includes: 
World oceans 
and coastal zones—ecological 
effects; terrestrial component of the cryosphere. 
Although all the studies reported here have served to 
extend our knowledge of the potential impacts of climate 
change and, to some extent, reduce the uncertainties, they 
do not radically alter the conclusions of the IPCC Impacts 
Assessment. Thus, as stated there: 
Any predicted effects of climate change must be 
viewed in the context of our present dynamic and 
changing world. Large-scale natural events such as El 
Nino can cause significant impacts on agricultural and 
human settlements. The predicted population increase 
will produce severe impacts on land use and on the 
demands for energy, fresh water, food and housing, 
which will vary from region to region according to 
national incomes and rates of development. In many 
cases, , the impacts will be felt more severely in 
2 
Executive summary 
regions already under stress, mainly the developing 
countries. Human-induced climate change due to 
continued uncontrolled emissions [of greenhouse 
gases] will accentuate these impacts. . . The severity 
of the impacts will depend to a large degree on the 
rate of climate change. 
Prediction of the r^ional distributions of climate 
change and associated impact studies, including 
model validation studies 
Regional climate change prediction 
The precise prediction of climate change at regional level 
is subject to great uncertainty. Prediction of precipitation 
changes is particularly uncertain, although the changes are 
of great practical significance. Progress in the development 
of global circulation models (GCMs) is urgently needed, 
particularly in terms of improving their capability for 
regional prediction and.to understand changes in arid and 
semi-arid regions. Work on improving regional predictions 
using the palaeo-analog method continues in Russia and 
other countries. In the further work of the IPCC, all 
methods of regional climate prediction should be reviewed 
and assessed together. . 
Guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
Working Group II has prepared guidelines to assess the 
socioeconomic and environmental impacts of potential 
climate change. These guidelines outline a framework for 
the study of climate-environment-society interactions and 
the estimation of the impacts of climate change which will 
allow comparisons and integration of impacts across 
various geographical areas and economic sectors. Further 
work will continue as a long-term task. 
Impact assessments involve several steps: 
• 
definition of the problem; 
• 
selection of analytical methods; 
• 
testing the method; 
• 
development of climatic and socioeconomic scenarios; 
• 
assessment of potential impacts: 
• 
evaluation of technical adjustments; and 
• 
consideration of policy options. 
Definition of the problem includes identifying the specific 
goals of the assessment, the sector(s) and geographical 
area(s) of interest, the time horizon of the study, the data 
needs and the wider context of the work. 
Selection of analytical method(s) depends upon the 
availability of resources, models and data. Impact assess-
ment analyses could range from the qualitative and descrip-
tive to the quantitative and prognostic. Thoroughly testing 
the method(s), including model validation and sensitivity 
studies, before undertaking the full assessment is necessary 
to ensure credibility. 
Development of the climatic and socioeconomic 
scenarios involves several steps. First, the current and 
projected climatic, socioeconomic and environmental 
conditions expected to exist over the study period in the 
absence of climate change should be established. Second, 
scenarios of regional climate change over the study time 
frame must also be developed. Third, biophysical and 
environmental effects should be projected under the altered 
climate. These projections should then be used, preferably 
in integrated environment-economic models, to calculate 
the socioeconomic effects under the altered climate. 
Assessment of potential impacts of the sector(s) or area(s) 
of interest involves estimating the differences in environ-
mental and socioeconomic conditions projected to Occur 
with and without climate change. 
Projections of effects with and without climate change 
should incorporate 'automatic' adjustments. However, the 
impact assessment should seek to evaluate the additional 
technical adjustments resulting from application of existing 
and new technologies or practices that may be available 
over the study period, assuming no change in the current 
legal and institutional framework. 
The costs and benefits of climate change should be 
assessed, to the extent possible, using a common measure 
and discounted to net present value. Alternatively, costs 
and benefits should be described qualitatively. The above 
general framework would also allow consideration of 
policy options and their socioeconomic and environmental 
impacts. 
Monitoring to identify climate change consequences 
There is a need to increase the available information and 
data to support impact studies, particularly in developing 
countries. This need.can be met through enhancing and, 
where appropriate, 
establishing integrated monitoring 
programs including biological, chemical, physical and 
climatological parameters, as well as constructing con-
current social and economic assessments, at the national, 
regional and global levels to identify climate change 
consequences. Data quality needs to be assured and data 
analyses and their interpretation need to be carried out 
carefully. The use of common protocols for collection and 
analysis processes, including Geographical Information 
Systems (GIS), and for equipment will aid in assuring 
Executive summary 
3 
intercomparability and further encourage international 
cooperation. The development of the preliminary IPCC 
guidelines for assessing the impacts of climate change is an 
important contribution to this end. 
Monitoring of sensitive terrestrial and marine eco-
systems,including the cryosphere, and component species 
should be given priority as they could provide early 
detection/warning of climate change and its impacts. Also 
to be given priority are those species and ecosystems 
which have significant (locally/regionally defined) social 
and/or economic values. The classic ground station ap-
proach (including points, plots and transects) should 
provide the basic building blocks of monitoring programs; 
however, these should also be supplemented with remotely 
sensed observations (eg satellite, radar and photogram-
metry). Advantage should also be taken of automatic data 
transmission and processing systems. 
At present, international organisations such as UNEP, 
W M O and IOC are implementing monitoring programs to 
help identify ecological and socioeconomic consequences 
of climate change. UNEP has an initial program for 
observing terrestrial ecosystems with observations extend-
ing on either side of the present boundaries of plant zones 
for early detection of possible shifts of these boundaries. 
W M O and IOC, among their many monitoring activities, 
have designed a satellite observing system for climatic and 
ocean parameters. Current planning of the Global Climate 
Observing System (GCOS) and the Global Ocean Observ-
ing System (GOOS) should consider the value of including 
the monitoring of terrestrial and marine ecological impacts 
of climate change. These can provide an early indication 
of the integrated effect of climate change. 
Energy and industry-related issues 
Energy, human settlement, transport and industrial 
sectors, human health, air quality and effects of ultra-
violet-B radiation 
In terms of human settlement, recent studies for the 
Maldives and for the Pacific island states including Tuvalu, 
Kiribati, Tokelau and the Marshall Islands have recon-
firmed that small low-lying island states and large popula-
tions living in low-lying coastal areas will be increasingly 
vulnerable to the combination of sea-level rise, storm 
surges and coastal 
flooding, particularly if adaptive 
measures are inadequate. 
The high dependency on biomass and hydro-electric 
energy in many developing countries indicates that these 
countries are quite sensitive to the impacts of climate 
change. Biomass production, on which developing count-
ries depend for much of their energy needs, could be 
altered by climate change. 
On the other hand, there has been little work that has 
shed new light on the question of socioeconomic impacts 
in the areas of energy, human settlement, transport and 
industrial sectors, human health and air quality. 
A U K study shows that soil shrinkage as a result of 
climate change in clay-rich areas has major implications 
for the construction and insurance industries and for human 
setflement. 
Water-dependent 
industries such as food 
processing, paper making and power generation could be 
affected by hydrological changes under changed climate 
conditions. 
Knowledge of climate change on human health has 
extended and confirmed the previously reported results 
with greater understanding of potential shifts in disease 
vector habitats with global warming, particularly in New 
Zealand and Australia. Diseases such as malaria, lymphatic 
filariasis, 
schistosomiasis, leishmaniasis," onchocerciasis 
(river blindness), dengue fever, and Australian and 
Japanese encephalitis could increase or be reintroduced in 
many countries as a consequence of global warming. 
Regarding the impact of UV-B radiation on health, recent 
studies have linked UV-B radiation to additional effects 
that had not been proposed previously, such as those 
affecting the human immunosuppression system and vision. 
Agriculture and forest-related issues 
Agriculture and forestry 
New studies, such as those in the European Community, 
North America, and Southeast Asia, highlight the con-
clusions of the IPCC Impacts Assessment that impacts will 
vary greatly, depending on the extent of climate change 
and on the type of agriculture. These findings largely 
amplify, but do not radically alter, the conclusions made 
in the first IPCC Impacts Assessment. They do, however, 
confirm that the impact of global warming on agriculture 
may be serious if warming is at the upper end of the range 
projected by the IPCC Working Group I. 
Recent studies have reinforced concern that drought is 
the area in which climate change poses the greatest risk for 
agriculture, and consequently arid and semi-arid regions 
are likely to be most vulnerable to climate change. 
Other recent studies confirm the earlier conclusion that 
climate change may benefit ecological conditions for insect 
growth and abundance, which is likely to have a negative 
effect on crop, livestock and forest production in some 
regions. 
Research continues to address the relative importance 
of direct and indirect effects of COj, in combination with 
4 
Executive summary 
a rise in temperatures, on future crop production. While 
some scientists emphasise enhanced photosynthesis and 
more efficient water use as seen in controlled settings, 
others are sceptical that these benefits will arise in farmers' 
fields under changing climate conditions. 
The effects on plant growth may result in the main-
tenance of present-day soil conditions in some regions, as 
greater soil organic matter and denser ground cover may 
counter the effects of soil erosion caused by increased 
rainfall intensities and oxidation rates of organic matter in 
soils caused by higher temperatures. 
Adaptation to climate change by the existing 
agricultural production system should be possible, and the 
worldwide systems of agricultural research should be able 
to provide new crop cultivars that maintain high yields and 
nutritional quality. However, efforts will be needed to 
make such developments available to small farmers in 
developing countries in time to respond to changes in local 
climate conditions. 
New analyses support the conclusion of the IPCC 
Impacts Assessment that the impacts of climate change on 
forests could have significant socioeconomic consequences. 
This is especially important for those countries and regions 
where economic and social welfare, and economic develop-
ment are highly dependent on the forest sector. 
Key uncertainties require continued data collection and 
research for policy development and decision making. 
These include: 
• 
the extent of managed and natural forests, their spatial 
and temporal variation and their roles in the global 
carbon cycle; 
• 
genetics and physiology of tree species and the rela-
tionships among subordinate and competitive species; 
• 
regional impacts; and 
• 
the linkages among the regional impacts, socioeco-
nomic structures, and the thresholds and critical limits 
where Changes take place. 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
Analyses subsequent to those included in the IPCC Impacts 
Assessment reinforce the conclusion that natural terrestrial 
ecosystems could face significant environmental impacts as 
a result of the global increases in atmospheric concen-
trations of greenhouse gases and associated climatic 
changes. In particular, these studies continue to suggest 
that the rate of these changes will be the major factor in 
determining the type and degree of impacts, with a variety 
of responses expected for different regions and for differ-
ent communities within ecosystems. Current climatic 
projections continue to suggest that rates of change are 
likely to be faster than the ability of some component 
species to respond, and that the responses of species and 
ecosystems may be sudden, potentially leading to eco-
system destabilisation or degradation. 
The promotion of heightened public awareness of the 
general values of natural terrestrial ecosystems is essential 
to gaining public support for sustaining these ecosystems 
in a changing climate. Particular emphasis should be 
placed on involving ecosystem managers and local people 
in the assessment of the impacts, consequences and 
response strategies. 
One of the major issues regarding the impacts of 
climate change on terrestrial ecosystems is water availab-
ility, with recent studies suggesting that while water use 
efficiency of vegetation could increase in an enriched COj 
atmosphere, the same amount of water per unit soil area 
may be necessary because of increased leaf area ratios due 
to greater biomass produced in that enriched atmosphere. 
Projected climate changes are expected to result in an 
accelerated reduction of tropical' forest on the African 
continent and an encroachment of the Sahel syndrome into 
the savannas. These changes could worsen the already 
precarious production systems in the affected regions of 
Africa, further stressing the associated natural ecosystems 
and component species. Degradation of wetlands and 
shallow lakes (eg within savanna ecosystems in Africa and 
within the Great Plains of North America) as a result of 
projected decreases in rainfall or soil moisture could 
adversely impact on resident animals and migratory 
species. 
With projected climate change, profound impacts, both 
beneficial and destructive, can be expected for the 
distribution and productivity of valuable fisheries and the 
industries associated with them. The added stresses to 
freshwater ecosystems as a result of climate change can be 
expected to reduce species numbers and genetic diversity 
within freshwater populations in the short term. By 
contrast, with warming, a longer growing season could 
lead to greater fish productivity where temperature is 
currently a limiting factor. 
Uncertainties and gaps in the knowledge base continue 
to exist in terms of our understanding of the environmental 
impacts and associated socioeconomic consequences of 
climate changes. National, regional and global efforts need 
to be cooperatively concentrated on reducing these defi-
ciencies, which primarily exist as a result of the lack of 
sufficient information and data on: 
• 
fundamental ecological processes; 
• 
the links between climate and atmospheric chemistry 
on the one hand and the response of natural terrestrial 
ecosystems andtheir component species on the other; 
. and 
Executive summary 
5 
• 
the links between natural terrestrial ecosystem changes 
and social and economic welfare under a changing 
climate. 
In particular, there is a lack of information on the sensi-
tivity of these ecosystems and their component species to 
climate change, the vulnerability of social and economic 
systems to ecosystem changes, and thresholds/critical 
levels for these ecosystems and associated social and 
economic systems. Existing international programs such as 
GEMS and M A B can provide one means of examining 
these deficiencies. 
Hydrology and water resources 
Since the publication of the IPCC Impacts Assessment, 
several studies on impacts of climate change on hydrology 
and water resources have been-conducted. Unfortunately, 
there is not yet adequate information on regions affected 
by aridity and desertification; efforts should be made to 
fill that gap. The new studies expanded on the geographic 
scale of the original surveys and confirmed many previous 
conclusions, but few new insights were offered on hydro-
logic sensitivities and vulnerability of existing water 
resources management systems. 
The principal conclusions suggested by, the new studies 
are: 
• 
Significant progress has been made in hydrologic 
sensitivity analyses in developed countries, yet large 
gaps exist in the information base regarding the 
implications of climate change for less developed 
nations; 
• 
Comparative sensitivity analyses that rely on existing 
GCMs offer generic insights regarding the physical 
hydrologic effects and water resources management 
impacts, but the differences in the outputs of the 
GCMs coupled with large differences in hydrologic 
sensitivity analyses make it difficult to offer region-
specific impact assessments; 
• 
Temporal streamflow characteristics in virtually all 
regions exhibited greater variability and amplification 
of extremes, with larger flood volumes and peak flows 
as well as increased low flow episodes and a shift in 
the turning of the seasonal runoff; 
• 
The higher the degree of water control, regulation and 
management of sectoral water demands, the smaller 
the expected adverse effects of global warming. 
Conversely, unregulated hydrologic systems are more 
vulnerable to potential hydrologic alterations. 
The principal recommendations are: 
• 
Increased variability of floods and droughts will 
require a re-examination of engineering design as-
sumptions, operating rules, system optimisation, and 
contingency plaiming for existing and planned water 
management systems; 
• 
More studies on hydrologic sensitivity and the vul-
nerability of water resource management need to be 
focused in arid and semi-arid regions and small island 
states; 
• 
A uniform approach to the analyses of hydrologic 
sensitivity to climate change needs to be developed for 
comparability of results. 
Vulnerability to sea-level rise 
World oceans and coastal zones: ecological effects 
Since the first IPCC Impacts Assessment, new studies 
reconfirm that rising sea-level is of more concern in low-
lying coastal ecosystems than rising water temperatures. 
However, the combination of sea-level rise and tempera-
ture rise, along with changes in precipitation and UV-B 
radiation, are expected to have strong impacts on marine 
ecosystems, including redistributions and changes in biotic 
production. 
The impact of sea-level rise depends on the total net 
rise resulting from the relative vertical movements of the 
land and of the sea. In areas undergoing natural eustatic 
uplifting of the land due to tectonic plate movement, 
glacial rebound, and vulcanism, there will be little relative 
rise of sea-level. In land areas that are naturally falling, as 
in the south-eastern USA, because of tectonic and compac-
tion forces, impacts of sea-level rise will be more import-
ant. 
A new study of the Bering Sea indicates that in areas 
without natural land uplift, there could be important 
impacts where there is a high density of marine organisms 
dependent on certain types of onshore and near-shore 
marine environments that may be affected by sea-level 
change. Nevertheless, sea-level rise is of far less conse-
quence in northern areas than are other impacts of climate 
change to northern ecosystems and to global carbon 
cycling. These regions are very important in the global 
carbon cycle and a small temperature rise may cause 
significant increases in bioprodiictivity and in carbon flux 
to the oceans. 
Coral organisms grow 1-20 cm/year and reef growth 
rates as a whole are known to be up to 1. 5 cm/year. Not 
all' reefs accumulate at these rates, but most should keep 
pace with the expected rise in sea-level if other factors do 
6 
Executive summary 
not alter growth conditions. Stress on the reefs from other 
variables 
(storms, 
sedimentation, 
disease, 
rainfall, 
radiation, turbidity, overfishing, mass mortality in algal 
grazers etc) may prevent some reefs from keeping pace 
with rising sea-level, resulting in changes to near-shore 
hydrodynamics. 
With respect to temperature rise, marine organisms in 
the tropics live closer to their maximum thermal tolerance 
than those in more temperate climates. Although a 1-2 °C 
temperature rise would raise summertime mean tempera-
ture to over 30°C over much of the tropical/subtropical 
region, most migratory organisms are expected to be able 
to tolerate such a change. Temperature rise may trigger 
bleaching events in some corals, but it is expected that the 
other stresses mentioned above will be more important. 
Intertidal plants, such as mangroves, can withstand 
high temperature and, unless a rise in temperature affects 
reproduction, it is unlikely to have any effect. Because 
mangroves grow best in moderately saline environments, 
mangroves can probably keep pace with sea-level rise in 
rain-fed humid areas, but may be over-stepped and aban-
doned in more arid areas, particularly if inland retreat is 
not possible. Thus, future changes in patterns of rain and 
runoff and of overcutting may be more important than sea-
level rise. With respect to marshes, new studies indicate 
that mid-latitude plants seem to tolerate salinity better and 
are more productive under elevated COj. 
New findings of WMO/UNEP indicate that UV-B 
radiation reaching oceanic and coastal zone environments 
will increase faster than expected when the first IPCC 
Impacts Assessment was written. Since so many marine 
resources spend all or substantial parts of their lives near 
the water surface, there is a significant threat to some 
fisheries. The first assessment expressed concern about 
leaching of contaminants during sea-level rise from coastal 
waste disposal sites. There are also bacteria and viral 
agents in such sites and in coastal septic sewerage systems 
which could be increasingly released into coastal waters. 
There are potential impacts on coastal resources, but the 
primary concern is for the humans who consume them and 
the loss of commerce owing to the closure of fish and 
shellfish areasby health authorities. Lastly, potential 
changes in storm frequency or intensity could have import-
ant ecological consequences to coastal resources. 
Cryosphere 
Analyses continue to support the conclusion that projected 
changes in climate associated with enhanced atmospheric 
concentrations of greenhouse gases are expected to reduce 
substantially the areal extent and volume of seasonal snow 
cover, mountain glaciers, terrestrial ice sheets and frozen 
ground including permafrost and seasonally frozen ground. 
Recent analyses have shed some further light on the 
potential impacts for these elements of the terrestrial 
cryosphere: 
• 
analysis of satellite-derived data on snow cover has 
shown the extent of snow in the Northern Hemisphere 
to be at record low levels since the middle of 1987, 
with the largest negative anomalies occurring in the 
spring; 
• 
above normal temperatures throughout much of the 
Northern Hemisphere in 1989 led to the initiation of 
extensive active layer detachment slides within per-
mafrost in some regions of the Canadian and Russian 
Arctic with damming and degradation of water quality 
in affected streams and further failures initiated; 
• 
emissions of methane from hydrates in Arctic regions 
as a result of permafrost degradation may have been 
underestimated; 
• 
there is some evidence to suggest that glaciers in the 
Northern Hemisphere polar and subpolar regions are 
receding at a slowerrate than previously suggested 
with some having advanced in the past thirty years. 
Although the Southern Hemisphere record is not as 
detailed, records for several New Zealand glaciers 
showthat they have retreated since the mid 1800s, with 
the suggestion that this has been the result of an 
increase intemperature and an accompanying decrease 
in precipitation. 
Key 
uncertainties are associated with understanding 
fundamental cryological processes, the relationship among 
these elements (eg impacts of changes in snow cover on 
permafrost and glacier dynamics), the impacts of climate 
change on these elements of the cryosphere, the interde-
pendency of associated ecosystems (eg soil erosion and 
stability changes associated with permafrost degradation) 
and human systems (eg structures, transportation, transmis-
sion lines), and the role of the cryosphere in local, regional 
and global climate and climate change. 
Summary of issues for further consideration 
Regional climate predictions 
IPCC has continued to stress that research leading to 
information on likely regional climate change (and its 
association with global change) is of the highest priority, 
and has noted that there are certain aspects of regional 
climate change that are particularly important in some 
areas. Among these are tropical cyclones and the tidal 
surges associated with such storms. Guidance on likely 
Executive summary 
7 
changes in frequency, intensity and distribution of such 
events, as a result of climate change, is urgently needed in 
states in and bordering the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic 
Oceans. Special attention should be given to the needs of 
small island states which are particularly vulnerable to 
climate change. Prediction of regional precipitation is 
another area of particular concern. Further, the connec-
tions between local, regional and global pollution require 
further study. 
The question of the validity of the technique of palaeo-
analog for the prediction of regional climate change needs 
further debate. Although palaeo-data concerning past 
cliiiiates are of great value, clear analogs from the past 
which can be applied to future climate changes have not 
yet been identified. In the further work of the IPCC, all 
methods of regional climate prediction should be reviewed 
and assessed on a continuing basis. 
Country studies and methodologies 
IPCC has recognised the valuable work on methodologies 
for country studies—such as that for national inventories of 
greenhouse gas emissions and sinks—which were being 
carried out by the three Working Groups and elsewhere. It 
has acknowledged that this is a cross-cutting issue. It has 
recognised the utility of further work on methodologies for 
both limitation and adaptation and, in particular, their 
integration into a broader framework. 
Priority should be given to assessing the work in pro-
gress and to the development of coherent guidelines for 
country studies, keeping in mind the circumstances of 
different countries and the evolving nature and pattern of 
their use of natural resources. The next step in this process 
should be the convening of a workshop, possibly before 
the eighth session of IPCC, with a report to be reviewed 
at that time. 
Dissemination of IPCC information 
With financial support provided by some countries, the 
IPCC has conducted a series of information exchange 
seminars in several developing countries, and the IPCC 
Impacts Assessment and some other IPCC reports have 
been translated into several languages. Non-government 
organisations are also contributing significantly to the 
dissemination of information on climate change. The 
seminars have attracted participation from all levels of 
society, including heads of state and government ministers, 
specialists, experts, non-government organisations and the 
public. They have contributed significantly to the under-
standing of the various aspects of the climate change issue. 
Further seminars in developing countries should be 
undertaken in response to requests, but are dependent on 
the availability of financial and human resources. 
Resource issues 
"ITie IPCC assessments are critically dependent on research 
and development carried out under international programs 
and by national research teams. The need to increase these 
research efforts has become obvious in the course of the 
IPCC work. At all levels of society, there is insufficient 
knowledge and understanding of both the climate change 
issue itself, as well as all the socioeconomic impacts and 
further societal implications. The IPCC strongly urges that 
greater means be made available for these activities and 
that the major international global programs be given 
adequate resources. It is particularly important that means 
are made available to permit developing countries to 
become genuine partners in this global research effort. The 
progress of our understanding is dependent upon dealing 
with the global environment in its entirety. 
 
A 
Prediction of the regional distribution of climate 
change and associated impact studies, including 
model validation studies 
The work carried out under this task is discussed under the headings of: 
Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
I Systematic observations to identify climate change conse-
quences 
Authors: 
Yu A Izrael (Russia) 
I Nazarov (Russia) 
I Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
1 Introduction 
In accordance with the decision of the IPCC (Fifth Ses-
sion, Geneva, 13-15 March 1991), IPCC Working Group 
II was given the task of identifying the regional/national 
components of systematic observation programs which 
could be used for climate change impact studies. An 
Expert Group, chaired by Professor Yu Izxael with 
representatives from Argentina, Canada, France, India, 
Japan and Norway, was established at the fourth session of 
WGII to carry out this task. 
This report records the preliminary findings of this 
Expert Group. It comprises a summary of potential impacts 
of climate change as identified by the IPCC (providing the 
framework for required systematic observations) and a 
preliminary assessment of the required elements of system-
atic observation programs to support research on the 
environmental impacts and socioeconomic consequences of 
climate change. 
2 Potential impacts of climate change 
Working Group I of the IPCC has prepared an authorita-
tive and strongly supported statement on climate change. 
The IPCC Scientific Assessment identifies those aspects of 
climate change issues of which the scientific community is 
relatively certain and also those for which uncertainties still 
exist. Uncertainties in the predictions of climate change, 
particularly those concerning timing, magnitude and 
regional patterns of climate change, are associated with 
imperfect knowledge of: 
• 
future rates of man-made emissions; 
• 
how these will change the atmospheric concentrations 
of greenhouse gases (GHG); and 
• 
the response of climate to these changed concentra-
tions. 
It is clear from the IPCC Impacts Assessment, however, 
that the potential implications of climate change, under 
doubled COj scenarios, are likely to be far-reaching. 
Climate change is likely to result in: 
• 
changes in the amount of precipitation and in soil 
moisture; 
• 
changes in the boundary zones of vegetation, particu-
larly in northern, high-latitude areas (tundra and 
boreal forest areas may be significantly reduced); 
• 
a significantly altered hydrological regime; 
• 
increased annual runoff at high latitudes; 
• 
altered agricultural potential, both for areal extent of 
arable land and the crop types; 
• 
changes in the aerial extent and mass of glaciers; 
• 
decreases in glaciers over Antarctica, Greenland and 
the Arctic islands; 
• 
reduced volume of high-mountain glaciers; 
• 
degradation of permafrost; 
• 
sea-level rise, with implications for coastal and island 
ecosystems and structures; and 
• 
hydrophysical, hydrochemical and biological process 
of the oceans and seas such as ice regime, intensity of 
bioproduction, redistribution of productive ocean 
zones, and changes in the formation of commercial, 
fish stock. 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment concluded that these 
impacts will not necessarily be steady, that surprises 
cannot be ruled out, and that the severity of the impacts 
will depend to a large degree on the rate of climate 
change. 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment also concluded that 
uncertainties exist in our knowledge of the environmental 
impacts and socioeconomic consequences 
of climate 
change, particularly at the regional level and in areas most 
vulnerable to climate change. These uncertainties are to a 
large extent related to a lack of available supportive data 
and information at the regional level. To deal with these 
deficiencies, national, regional and international efforts 
directed at initiating and maintaining integrated systematic 
observation programs for terrestrial and marine (managed 
and unmanaged) ecosystems are required. 
Tables 1 and 2 list physical, chemical and biological 
elements which should be included in systematic observa-
tion programs directed at providing an integrated set of 
data and information for impact assessments. 
3 Existing systematic observation programs 
At present, international organisations such as UNEP, 
WMO, IOC and UNESCO have a number of programs to 
monitor physical, chemical and biological elements. Some 
of these, such as UNEP's Global Environmental Monitor-
ing System (GEMS) were developed in the mid 1970s, 
with a number of improvements having taken place since. 
The Climate System Monitoring (CSM) Project of the 
World Climate Data Programme (WCDP) was initiated in 
1984 and has been designed to provide information on the 
state of the climate system and diagnostic insights into 
significant large-scale anomalies of regional and global 
consequence. 
The Second World Climate Conference (1990) stressed 
the urgent need to develop a Global Climate Observing 
System (GCOS), which would provide comprehensive 
information on the total climate system, involving a multi-
12 
A.I 
Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
disciplinary range of physical, chemical and biological 
properties 
and 
atmospheric, 
oceanic, 
hydrologic, 
cryospheric, and terrestrial processes. GCOS is intended 
to meet the needs for: 
• 
climate system monitoring; 
• 
climate change detection and systematic observations 
of the responses to climate change, especially in 
terrestrial ecosystems and mean sea-level; 
• 
. data for application to national economic development; 
and 
• 
research towards improved understanding, modelling 
and prediction of the climate system. 
GCOS will build, as far as possible, on existing operation-
al and scientific observation, data management 
and 
information distribution systems, and on further enhance-
ment of these systems. GCOS is to be based upon im-
proved World Weather Watch systems and the Integrated 
Global Ocean Services System, data communication and 
other infrastructures necessary to support operational 
climate forecasting and the establishment of a Global 
Ocean Observing System for physical, chemical and 
biological measurements. In addition, it will require the 
maintenance and enhancement of programs systematically 
observing other key components of the climate system, 
such as the distribution of important atmospheric constitu-
ents (eg the Global Atmospheric Watch which includes 
BAPMoN and G0305), terrestrial ecosystems (including 
the International Geosphere-Bioshpere Programme), as 
well as clouds, the hydrological cycle, the earth's radiation 
budget, ice sheets and precipitation over the oceans 
(including the World Climate Research Programme). 
The Climate Change Detection Project is a recent 
initiative; begun in 1,991, its primary objective is to 
provide regularly updated estimates of climate change on 
a global and regional basis, and an assessment of the 
relative importance of these changes. In time, it is hoped 
that the assessments will enable the delineation of any 
climate change signal from the background noise of natural 
climate variability. 
There is a number of international organisations 
implementing systematic observation programs that could 
be used to support efforts directed at identifying ecological 
impacts and socioeconomic consequences of climate 
change, including: 
• 
an initial UNEP program for observing terrestrial 
ecosystems with observations extending on either side 
of the present boundaries of plant zones for early 
detection of possible shifts of these boundaries; 
• 
the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme 
(AMAP), now under development, which will monitor 
and assess background pollution of all major arctic 
environments, and includes systematic observations of 
COj and other radiatively active gases; A M A P will 
also assess fluctuations of the ozone layer, and com-
pare variations in regional climates with those global-
• 
a Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) which is 
being developed to meet the needs of global climate 
research, monitoring and prediction; it will be based 
on long-term systematic observations of physical, 
chemical and biological processes of the World Ocean; 
implementation will be phased-in over the next decade 
or two, and will provide for the description of, for 
example, the global circulation of heat and water in 
the ocean, and their exchange with the atmosphere. 
Other international systematic 
observation programs 
include those of the Long Term Ecological Reserves and 
the Biospheric Reserves of the Man and the Biosphere 
(MAB) programme. National environmental systematic 
observation programs (related to wider international 
efforts) such as the U K Environmental Change Network 
(ECN), Chinese Ecological Research Network (CERN) and 
Scandinavian networks also exist. These programs, while 
not geared specifically to climate change impacts, contain 
some elements which are relevant to that purpose. 
4 Recommendations 
In spite of recent improvements, present programs for 
systematic observations of the atmosphere, land surfaces 
and oceans are, for the most part, insufficient to meet the 
requirements of data to support research directed at 
identifying environmental impacts and socioeconomic 
consequences of climate change. They are also insufficient 
to support efforts directed at achieving sustainable national 
economic and social development and to support research 
towards improved understanding, modelling and prediction 
of the climate system (eg WCRP and IGBP). Future 
enhancements of these programs should be directed at 
increasing their effectiveness and efficiency. These en-
hancements, therefore, will need to include an appropriate 
mix of both traditional (on-site) and remote sensing 
technologies. In particular, an enhanced satellite observa-
tion system will be essential to observe large and remote 
areas systematically, including the oceans, as well as 
sparsely populated arid and semi-arid areas of the world. 
The existing programs identified above are but a few 
examples that can provide the required data for the 
assessment of regional climates and ecosystems. Notable 
deficiencies in areal coverage of these programs include 
tropical forests, savanna, oceans, polar, mountainous 
AI 
Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
13 
(particularly in developing countries) and arid and semi-
arid regions of the globe. The terrestrial areas where gaps 
exist are largely unmanaged ecosystems and many of these 
are undergoing major upheaval and changes as a conse-
quence of human interference and growing populations. 
Data information that could be used to increase understand-
ing of the implications of climate change for these eco-
systems and associated human systems is of particular 
importance. 
There are two strategies that could be adopted for 
systematic observation programs directed at providing the 
data and information required for identifying environmental 
impacts and socioeconomic consequences: 
long-term 
integrated systematic observations of the state of terrestrial 
and marine (managed and unmanaged) ecosystems along 
with associated social and economic parameters; 
or 
systematic observations of individual physical, biological 
and ecological parameters as well as associated social and 
economic parameters. 
In developing the appropriate strategy, use should be 
made of indices which clearly are indicative of changes in 
climatic factors, for example, changes in the spatial or 
temporal boundaries of vegetation, species distribution, and 
snow or ice cover, and changes in the level of the oceans. 
The establishment and maintenance of supportive data 
and information systems (including the necessary archives) 
at the national, regional and international levels will be 
major undertakings. There are deficiencies in the state of 
systematic observational systems and related data manage-
ment and analyses capabilities in many countries; these 
deficiencies are particularly acute within developing 
countries. The deficiencies can be met by upgrading 
networks and equipment, and the skills of technicians and 
scientists. 
The availability of coincident and supportive social and 
economic data and information is essential for climate 
change impact assessments. Climate change can have both 
direct impacts and indirect impacts (eg biological or 
physical responses to climate change which, in turn, lead 
to socioeconomic impacts on affected human systems). To 
identify a broader understanding of these impacts, it is 
important that in addition to and coincident with physical 
and biological observations, that social and economic 
parameters/indices also be collected and archived. Having 
available data and information on the responses of social 
and economic systems to climatic changes and/or depend-
ent physical and biological changes will enhance under-
standing and quantification of the interaction processes and 
will thereby provide a sounder basis for formulating 
meaningful national response strategies, including adapta-
tion strategies. Table 3 is a preliminary attempt to present 
the relationships between the required data elements. 
Future work in defining the data and information 
needs to support environmental impacts and socioeconomic 
consequences activities should be undertaken by the IPCC 
based on this preliminary analysis and IPCC development 
of guidelines for climate change impact assessments. 
Means and modalities of implementation through which 
efficiency of supportive systematic observation programs 
can be increased (eg sharing among relevant international 
and national networks) need to be examined further and, 
therefore, should be an essential component for subsequent 
work. Subsequent assessments should also include idenfify-
ing general principles to guide systematic observation 
program development so that the resulting programs could 
support research on environmental impacts and socioecono-
mic consequences of climate change. 
14 
A.I 
Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
Table 1. Provisional listing of climatic system elements 
***** 
***** 
** 
* 
*** 
*** 
***• 
Climate system state 
characteristics 
Priority 
1. Atmosphere 
1.1. Surface atmosphere 
- surface air temperature 
(SAT) 
- precipitation over land 
- precipitation over ocean 
- air humidity 
- sea-level pressure 
1.2. Free atmosphere 
- air temperature 
- humidity 
- wind 
- isobaric surface geopotential 
1.3. Circulation and synoptic-
climatic systems 
- energy 
- heat, moisture and momentum 
transport 
- atmosphere action centres 
(AAC) 
- circumpolar vortex 
- altitude frontal zone 
- cyclones and anticyclones 
- circulation indices 
- blocking indices 
- monsoons 
- tropical cyclones 
- intratropical convergence zone, 
tropical shower 
- El-Nino/southem oscillation 
- telecommunication indices 
- quasibiannual cycling in the 
equatorial stratosphere 
- stratospheric warming 
- intraseasonal 30-60 day-
variations 
1.4. Extreme events 
- droughts and supermoisture 
periods 
- severe winters 
- floods 
*** 
**** 
**** 
**** 
**** 
**** 
* 
*** 
** 
**** 
**** 
* 
1.5. Atmosphere composition 
- GHG concentrations (CO2 etc) 
**** 
- aerosol 
*** 
- ozone 
*** 
Climate system state 
characteristics 
Priority 
**** 
**** 
**** 
**** 
*** 
*** 
*** 
**** 
** 
** 
* 
*** 
1.6. Radiation and cloudiness 
- cloudiness 
- albedo 
atmosphere transparency 
- direct solar radiation 
- scattered radiation 
total radiation 
- radiation balance 
- outgoing long-wave radiation 
2. Atmosphere-ocean interface 
- sea surface temperature 
- salinity 
- heat, moisture and momentum 
fluxes 
- wind velocity 
- wave information 
- sea-level 
3. Atmosphere-land interface 
- soil temperature 
- soil moisture 
- heat, moisture and momentum 
fluxes 
- lakes (inland waterbodies) 
4. Abyssal ocean 
- water temperature 
- salinity 
- current 
5. Cryosphere 
- isnow cover 
- continental ice 
- permafrost 
- sea ice 
- soil moisture 
6 Biosphere, ecological effects 
- biomass 
- desertification, deforestation 
- yield 
- phenological parameters 
7. Geophysical and astronomic factors 
- Earth's rotation rate 
*** 
- poles movement 
- solar and geomagnetic activity 
- volcanoes 
**** 
*** 
* 
**** 
*** 
* 
**** 
**** 
Priorities denoted through: 
***** 
highest: basic compo-
nent of observation 
program; 
should be component 
of initial observing 
program; 
should be included at 
the subsequent stages 
of development; 
*** 
possible element for 
inclusion to improve 
the observation pro-
gram; 
other author's refer-
ence; 
need for further assess-
ment to determine 
priority. 
A.I Systematic observations to identify climate change consequences 
15 
Table 2. Provisional list of 
elements 
1. Impact of increased atmospheric COj 
and climate change on terrestrial 
ecosystems. 
1.1. Plant response to increased CO2 
carbon budget. 
Carbon budget 
Interaction between COj and 
temperature and natural environ-
ment stress 
Plant-plant interaction 
Vegetation-animal interaction 
Ecosystem response to increased 
COj 
1.2. Ecosystem response to changed 
temperature and humidity 
Carbon budget 
Phenology and aging 
Biological diversity 
Health and productivity 
Vegetative community compo-
sition 
Models of ecosystems response to 
climate change 
Modelling of global response 
based on vegetation-climate 
interaction 
Palaeo-ecological evidence 
2. Impact of changed terrestrial eco-
systems on climate system 
Deforestation 
Afforestation and reforestation 
Eutrophication and pollution 
Reforestation/afforestation as means 
of reducing atmospheric CO2 con-
centrations 
3. Methane and nitrous oxide fluxes 
4. Ecosystem change and regional 
. hydrological cycles 
5. Marine ecosystems 
Community responses 
Land-ocean interactions 
Atmosphere-ocean interactions 
Carbon system and biological pump 
Table 3. Provisional list of elements to be included in systematic 
observation programs to support environmental impacts and socioecono-
mic consequences research 
Emission of carbon dioxide and 
methane as a result of perma-
frost degradation. 
Environmental impacts 
Socioeconomic consequences 
Observational elements 
I. Changes in the boundaries of natural 
climatic zones 
1. Changes in the structure of agri-
culture productivity; 
Areas under various agricultural 
crops; 
Areas of grazing; 
Areas of desertification; 
Yield and incomes associated 
with different crops; 
Disease and pest occurrences; 
Rural vs Urban populations and 
incomes (trends); 
Emissions and sinks of GHGs due 
to the loss and accumulation of 
carbon in soils, methane emis-
sions by livestock, decomposi-
tion of nitrogen fertilisers. 
2. Changes in the structure of forest-
ry 
Productivity and health of forests; 
Areas under various forest spe-
cies; 
Fire, pest and disease occurrence; 
Demographic and income trends 
for forest communities; 
Emissions and sinks of GHG due 
to accumulation of carbon in 
soils and forest management 
practices. 
3. Changes in the structure of terri-
tories and human activities as a 
result of permafrost degradation 
Areas with permafrost; 
Areas of water occurring within 
permafrost zones; 
Areas affected by permafrost 
degradation, 
Changes in areas used as natural 
habitats; 
Disruption of human settlements, 
infrastructure, and oil and gas 
pipelines; 
Costs of refurbishing or reloca-
tion of human structures; 
4. Changes in the structure of 
natural ecosystems impact on 
biological diversity 
Productivity and health of 
natural ecosystems and their 
component species; 
Areas occupied by plant and 
animal species; 
Economic implications (eg 
recreation, tourism and 
indigenous crafts). 
II. Sea-level rise 
1. Changes in human settlements and 
related infrastructure 
Areas of island and coastal flood-
ing; 
Disruption of human settlements; 
Disruption of transport and other 
infrastructure; 
Productive area of land loss; 
Number.of people relocated and 
associated costs; 
Costs of relocating, protection 
and refurbishing of water, sew-
age and transport systems. 
2. Changes in associated natural 
ecosystems 
Area and number of beach areas 
impact; 
Area and number of coastal 
ecosystems impacted; 
Areas lost and/or associated 
protection costs. 
II Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate 
change 
Expert Group for Guidelines of IPCC 
Co-chairmen 
S Nishioka (Japan) 
M L Parry (UK) 
Authors 
T R Carter (UK) ^ 
M L Parry (UK) 
H Harasawa (Japan) 
S Nishioka (Japan) 
Experts 
Dr O F Canziani (Argentina) 
Dr W J McG Tegart (Australia) 
H Kolb (Austria) 
R B Street- (Canada) 
M Sanwal (India) 
T Morita (Japan) 
A M Lopez (Peru) 
L Amadore (Philippines) 
A Yakovlev (Russia) 
A J Al-Saati (Saudi Arabia) 
M Beniston (Switzerland) 
S Prasith-rathsint(Thailand) 
I M Goklany (USA) 
J Schefter (USA) 
J D Scheraga (USA) 
E Z Stakhiv (USA) 
N Thi Loc (Vietnam) 
W Soambroek (FAO) 
Bo R Doos (IIASA) 
II Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate 
change 
1 Objectives 
1.1 Purpose of this report 
In August 1991, Working Group II, in its Fourth Plenary, 
agreed on the importance of developing guidelines for 
assessing the impacts of climate change. This report is a 
preliminary statement on approaches to climate impact 
assessment, with particular emphasis on assessing the 
possible impacts of future change in climate due to the 
enhanced greenhouse effect. There is little experience with 
evaluating the social and economic impacts of climate 
change, so the report deals with these only cursorily. It is 
desirable that future versions address these topics in more 
detail. The report does not aim to prescribe a single pre-
ferred method, but provides an analytical outline that 
comprises a number of steps. A range of methods is identi-
fied at each step. Where possible, the merits and draw-
backs of different methods are briefly discussed, with some 
suggestions on their selection and use., 
1.2 Purpose of climate impact assessment 
There are many reasons for conducting climate impact 
assessments, but the ultimate objective of such assessments 
is to provide the public and policy makers with estimates 
of the extent to which climate change may affect the 
environment and human activities and result in changes in 
social and economic welfare. The role of assessments is to 
assist in the development and evaluation of altemafive 
strategies for managing human activities under changeable 
climatic conditions. 
1.3 Methods of assessment 
A general framework for conducting a climate impact 
assessment is shown in Figure 1. It consists of the follow-
ing steps: 
• 
definition of the problem; 
• 
selection of the method; 
• 
testing the method; 
• 
selection of scenarios; 
• 
assessment of impacts; 
• 
evaluation of adjustments; and 
• 
consideration of policy options. 
The first five steps can be regarded as common to most 
assessments. The last two steps may be included in some 
studies. The steps are consecutive (single arrows), but the 
framework also allows for the redefinition and repetition 
of some steps (double arrows). At each step, a range of 
study methods is available. These are described and 
evaluated in the following sections. For reasons of brevity, 
however, only the essence of each method is introduced, 
along with references to sources of further information. 
2 Definition of the problem 
A necessary first step in undertaking a climate impact 
assessment is to define precisely the nature and scope of 
the problem to be investigated. This usually involves 
identifying the goals of the assessment, the sector(s) of 
interest, the spatial and temporal scope of the study, the 
data needs, and the wider context of the work. 
O?'? 
0??1 
DEFINE P R O B L E M 
I?'<0?' 
o?">? 
2 
SELECT METHOD 
I?'<0?' 
o?'>? 
3 
TEST METHOD/SENSITIVITY 
I?'<0?' 
0?">i? 
,i?4 
SELECT SCENARIOS 
I?'<<0?' 
0 ? 0 ? ' 
0?">? 
ASSESS BIOPHYSICAL IMPACTS 
ASSESS SOCIOECONOMIC IMPACTS 
I?'<0?" 
0?">? 
I?'?6 
E V A L U A T E ADJUSTMENTS 
ir<or 
0?">? 
I?'?7 
POLICY OPTIONS 
I?'0?' 
Figure 1: Seven steps of climate impact assessment 
2.1 Goals of the assessment 
Some general reasons for conducting an assessment were 
outlined in Section 1.2. Once the general goals are clearly 
defined, it is important to be precise about the specific 
1 
18 
A.II 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
objectives of a study, as these will affect the conduct of the 
investigation. For example, an assessment of the hydro-
logical impacts of future climatic change in a river catch-
ment would have quite different requirements for data and 
expertise if the goal is to estimate the capacity for power 
generation, from those required to predict changes in 
agricultural income as a result of changes in the availabili-
ty of water for irrigation. 
2.2 Sector to be studied 
The sector(s) to be assessed determine, to a large degree, 
the type of researchers who will conduct the assessment, 
the methods to be employed and the data required. Studies 
can focus on a single sector or activity (eg agriculture, 
forestry, energy production or water resources), several 
sectors in parallel but separatelyj or several sectors 
interactively. 
2.3 Study area 
The selection of a study area is guided by the goals of the 
study and by the constraints on available data. Some 
options are reasonably well defined, including government-
al units, geographical units, ecolojgical zones, and climatic 
zones. Other options requiring more subje<;tive selection 
criteria include sensitive regions and representative units. 
Sensitive regions (eg tree line, coastal zones, ecological 
niche, marginal community) are selected because of their 
inherent sensitivity to external forcing such as climate 
change, and are where changes in climate are likely to be 
felt first and with the greatest effect. Representative units 
may be chosen according to any of the above criteria, but 
in addition are selected to be representative of that regional 
type and thus amenable to generalisation. For instance, a 
single river catchment may serve as a useful integrating 
unit for considering impacts of climate on water resources, 
agriculture, forestry, recreation, natural vegetation, soil 
erosion and hydro-electric power generation. Information 
from this type of study may then be applicable to other 
similar catchments in a region. 
2.4 Time frame 
The selection of a time horizon for study is also influenced 
by the goals of the assessment. For example, in studies of 
industrial impacts the planning horizons may be 5-10 
years, investigations of tree growth may require a 100-year 
perspective, while considerations of nuclear waste disposal 
may accommodate time spans of well over 1000 years. 
However, as the time horizon widens, the ability to project 
future trends accurately declines rapidly. Most climate 
projections rely on general circulation models (GCMs), 
and are subject to great uncertainties over all projection 
periods. The only prediction horizon of proven reliability 
is that provided by weather forecast models extending for 
days or, at most, weeks into the future. In general, few 
credible projections of socioeconomic factors such as 
population, economic development and technological 
change can be made for periods exceeding 15-20 years. 
2.5 Data needs 
The availability of data is probably the major limitation in 
most impact studies. The collection of new data is an 
important element of some studies, but most rely on 
existing sources. Thus, before embarking on a detailed 
assessment, it is important to identify the main features of 
the data requirements, namely the variables for which data 
are needed, the time period, spatial coverage and resolu-
tion of the required data, the sources and format of the 
data and their quantity and quality, and the data availabili-
ty, cost and delivery time, 
2.6 Wider context of the work 
Although the goals of the research may be quite specific, 
it is still important to place the study in context with 
respect to, first, similar or parallel studies that have been 
completed or are in progress; second, the political, 
economic and social system of the study region; and third, 
other social, economical and environmental changes 
occurring in the study region. Consideration of these 
aspects may assist policy makers in evaluating the wider 
significance of individual studies. 
3 Selection of the method 
A variety of analytical methods can be adopted in climate 
impact assessment, ranging from qualitative descriptive 
studies, through more diagnostic and semi-quantitative 
assessments, to quantitative and prognostic analyses. Any 
single impact assessment may contain elements of one or 
more of these types. Four general methods can be identi-
fied: experimentation, impact projections, empirical analog 
studies and expert judgment. 
ji^,U Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
19 
3.1 Experimentation 
In the physical sciences, a standard method of testing 
hypotheses or of evaluating processes of cause and effect 
is through direct experimentation. A n example is the 
behaviour of plant species under controlled conditions of 
climate and atmospheric composition. In the context of 
climate impact assessment, however, experimentation has 
only a limited application. Clearly it is not possible 
physically to simulate large-scale systems such as the 
global, climate, nor is it feasible to conduct controlled 
experiments to observe interactions involving climate and 
human-related activities. Only where the scale of impact is 
manageable, the exposure unit (ie anything exposed to a 
given climate event) measurable, and the environment 
controllable, can experiments be usefully conducted. 
The information obtained from experiments, while 
useful in its own right, is also invaluable for calibrating 
models which are to be used in projecting impacts of 
climatic change (see below). 
3.2 Impact projections 
One of the major goals of climate impact assessment, 
especially concerning aspects of future climatic change, is 
the prediction of future impacts. A growing number of 
model projections has become available on how global 
climate may change in the future as a result of increases in 
greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations (eg see IPCC 
1990a). A main focus of much recent work has been on 
impact projections, using an array of mathematical models 
to extrapolate into the future. In order to distinguish them 
from 'climate models', which are used to project future 
climate, the term 'impact model' has now received wide 
currency. First-order effects of climate are usually assessed 
using biophysical models, second- and higher-order effects 
using a range of biophysical, economic and qualitative 
models. Finally, attempts have also been made at compre-
hensive assessments using integrated systems models. 
3.2.1 Biophysical models 
Biophysical models may be used to evaluate the physical 
interactions between climate and an exposure unit. There 
are two main types: empirical-statistical models and 
simulation models. Empirical-statistical models are based 
on the statistical relationships between climate and the 
exposure unit. Simulation models make use of established 
physical laws and theories to express the dynamics of the 
interactions between climate and an exposure unit. The use 
of these in evaluating ftiture impacts is probably best 
documented for the agricultural sector (eg see W M O 1985) 
and the hydrological aspects of water resources (eg W M O 
1988) but the principles can easily be extended to other 
sectors. 
3.2.2 Economic models 
Economic models of several types can be employed to 
evaluate the implications of first-order impacts for local 
and regional economies. Although their application in 
climate impact assessment has been advocated for many 
years, few have actually been used. The main classes of 
models are microsimulafion models, market models and 
economy-wide models. 
3.2.3 Integrated systems models 
Integrated systems models represent an attempt to combine 
elements of the modelling approaches described above into 
a comprehensive model of a given regionally or sectorally 
bounded system. No fully integrated systems model has yet 
been developed, but a partially integrated approach has 
been achieved in a few recent studies (eg Rosenberg and 
Crosson 1991). A l l of these involved the linking of 
individual models. A general equilibrium modelling 
approach to environmental and economic interactions is 
necessary for assessments of the direct and indirect effects 
and benefits and costs of potential climate. Research to 
develop such models has become a priority in some 
regions. 
3.3 Empirical analog studies 
Observations of the interactions of climate and society in 
a region can be of value in anticipating future impacts. The 
most common method employed involves the transfer of 
information from a different time or place to an area of 
interest to serve as an analogy. 
Three types of analogy can be identified: historical 
analogies, regional analogies of present climate and 
regional analogies of fiiture climate. Historical analogies 
use information from the past as an analog of possible 
future conditions. Regional analogies of present climate 
refer to regions having a similar present-day climate to the 
study region, where the impacts of climate on society are 
judged also likely to be similar. If these conditions are 
fulfilled, then it may be possible to conduct assessments 
whereby a target case is compared with a control case, the 
target area experiencing abnormal weather but the control 
normal conditions. 
20 
A.H 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
Regional analogies of future climate work on the same 
principle as analogies for present-day climate, except that 
here the analyst attempts to identify regions having a 
climate today which is similar to that projected for the 
study region in the future. The analog region may thus 
provide indicators of how the landscape and human 
activities might change in the study region in the future. 
3.4 Expert judgment 
A usefiil method of obtaining a rapid assessment of the 
state of knowledge concerning the effects of climate on 
given exposure units is to solicit the judgment and opinions 
of experts in the field. Literature is reviewed, comparable 
studies identified, and experience and judgment used in 
applying all available information to the current problem. 
The use of expert judgment can also be formalised into a 
quantitative assessment method by classifying and then 
aggregating the responses of different experts to a range of 
questions requiring evaluation. Probability judgments from 
experts have been used to assess climatic change and its 
possible impacts (NDU 1978, 1980), but there have been 
problems of questionnaire design and delivery, selection of 
representative saihples of experts, and the analysis of 
experts' responses (Stewart and Glantz 1985). 
4 Testing the method 
Following the selection of the assessment methods, it is 
important that these are thoroughly tested in preparation 
for the main evaluation tasks. There are many examples of 
studies where inadequate preparation has resulted in long 
delays in obtaining results. Three types of analysis may be 
useful in evaluating the methods: feasibility studies, data 
acquisition and compilation, and model testing. 
4.1 Feasibility studies 
Feasibility studies usually focus on a subset of the study 
region or sector to be assessed. Such case studies can 
provide information on the effectiveness of alternative 
approaches, of models, of data acquisition and monitoring, 
and of research collaboration. 
4.2 Data acquisition and compilation 
Data must be acquired both to describe the temporal and 
spatial patterns of climate change and their impacts and to 
develop, test and calibrate predictive models. Data collec-
tion may rely on existing information obtained and com-
piled from different sources, or require the acquisition of 
primary data, through survey methods, direct measurement 
or monitoring. 
4.3 Model testing 
The testing of predictive models is, arguably, the most 
critical stage of an impact assessment. Most studies rely 
almost exclusively on the use of models to estimate future 
impacts. Thus, it is crucial for the credibility of the 
research that model performance is tested rigorously. 
Standard procedures should be used to evaluate models, 
but these may need to be modified to accommodate climate 
change. Two main procedures are recommended: sensitivi-
ty analysis and validation. Sensitivity analysis evaluates the 
effects on model performance of altering its structure, 
parameter values, or values of its input variables. Extend-
ing these principles to climatic change requires that the 
climatic input variables to a model be altered systematical-
ly to represent the range of climatic conditions likely to 
occur in a region. Validation involves the comparison of 
model predictions with real world observations to test 
model performance. The validation procedures adopted 
depend to some extent on the type of model being tested. 
For example, the validity of a simple regression model of 
the relationship between temperature and grass yield would 
ideally be tested on data from additional years not used in 
the regression. Here, the success of the model is judged by 
its outputs, namely the ability to predict grass yield. 
Conversely, a simulation model might estimate grass yield 
based on basic growth processes, which are affected by 
climate, including temperature. Here, the different internal 
components of the model (such as plant development and 
water use) as well as predicted final yield each need to be 
compared with measurements. 
An additional problem in considering climate change 
concerns the requirement in many models to extrapolate 
model relationships outside their normal range of applica-
tion. Model validation and sensitivity analysis should serve 
to define the level of confidence that can be attached to 
such extrapolations. 
5 Selection of the scenarios 
Impacts are estimated as the differences between two 
states: environmental and socioeconomic conditions 
expected to exist over the period of analysis in the absence 
of climate change and those expected to exist with climate 
change. It is important to recognise that the environment, 
society and economy are not static. Environmental, societal 
/^JI Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
21 
and economic change will continue, even in the absence of 
climate change. In order to estimate accurately the environ-
niental and socioeconomic effects of climate change, it is 
necessary to separate them from unrelated, independent, 
environmental and socioeconomic changes occurring in the 
study area. Thus, it is necessary first to develop baselines 
that describe current climatological, environmental and 
socioeconomic conditions. Then it is necessary to project 
environmental and socioeconomic conditions over the study 
period in the absence of climate change. These baseline 
conditions are then compared, after impact projections, 
with environmental and socioeconomic conditions under 
climate change. Thus, development of baselines accurately 
representing current and projected conditions in the 
absence of climate change is a key and fundamental step in 
assessment. 
5.1 Establishing the present situation 
In order to provide reference points with which to compare 
future projections, three types of'baseline' conditions need 
to be specified: the climatological, environmental and 
socioeconomic baselines. 
5.1.1 Climatological baseline 
The climatological baseline is usually selected according to 
the following criteria: 
• 
the representativeness of the present-day or recent 
average climate in the study region. 
• 
the duration to be long enough to encompass a range 
of climatic variations, including a number of signifi-
cant weather anomalies (eg a severe drought or an 
extremely cool season). Such events are of particular 
use as inputs to impact models, providing a means to 
evaluate the impacts of the extreme range of climatic 
variability experienced at the present day. 
• 
the period covered to have adequate local climato-
logical data available, in terms both of the number of 
different variables represented and of the geographical 
coverage of source stations. 
• 
the date employed to be of sufficient quality for use in 
evaluating impacts. 
A popular climatological baseline is a 30-year 'normal' 
period as defined by the World Meteorological Organiza-
hon (WMO). The current standard W M O normal period is 
1961-90. While it would be desirable to provide some 
consistency between impact studies by recommending this 
2s an appropriate baseline period to select in future 
assessments, there are also difficulties in doing so. Several 
points illustrate this. 
First, this period coincides conveniently with the start 
of the projection period commonly employed in estimating 
future global climate (for example, the IPCC projections 
begin at 1990 (IPCC 1990a)). On the other hand, most 
GCMs providing regional estimates of climate are initial-
ised using observed climatologies taken from earlier 
periods. Second, the availability of observed climatological 
data, particularly computer-coded daily data, varies 
considerably from country to country, thus influencing the 
practical selection of a baseline period. Third, it is often 
desirable to compare future impacts with the current rather 
than some past condition. However, while it can be 
justifiably assumed in some studies that present-day human 
or natural systems subject to possible future climate change 
are reasonably well adapted to the'current climate, in other 
assessments this will not be the case. Finally, there is the 
problem that the more recent periods (particularly during 
the 1980s) may already include a significant global warm-
ing 'signal', although this signal is likely to vary consider-
ably between regions and be absent from some. 
Climatological data from the baseline period are used 
to describe the present chmate of the study region and 
provide inputs for impact models. In the latter case, 
several methods are used. Some models produce estimates 
for periods of a year or less (eg crop growth models). 
These can generally use the original climatological station 
data for years within the baseline period. 
Other models run over long periods of decades or 
centuries (eg soil erosion models). One option here is to 
select a long baseline period, but lack of data usually 
precludes this. An alternative is to use the baseline data on 
a repeating basis. For example, year 1 in a 30-year 
baseline could be used as years 1, 31, 61 and 91 of a 100-
year simulation. One problem with this method is that 
chance trends or cycles in the baseline climate are then 
repeated in a manner that may be unrealistic over the long 
term. 
To overcome some of the problems of data sparsity 
and of long-term cycles, some modelling studies now 
employ weather generators. These simulate daily weather 
at a site randomly, based on the statistical features of the 
observed climate. Once developed, they can produce time 
series of climatological data having the same statistical 
description as the baseline climate, but extending for as 
long a period as is required (see Hutchinson 1987). 
5.1.2 Environmental baseline 
The environmental baseline refers to the present state of 
other, non-climatic environmental factors, that affect the 
22 
A.II 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
exposure unit. It can be defined in terms of fixed or 
variable quantities. A fixed baseline is often used to 
describe the average state of an environmental attribute at 
a particular point in time. Examples include: mean atmos-
pheric concentration of carbon dioxide in a given year, 
mean soil pH at a site, or location of natural wetlands. A 
notable case is the mean sea-level, which is expected to 
rise as a result of future climate change. Furthermore, a 
fixed baseline is also required for specifying the 'control' 
in field experiments (eg of COj effects on plant growth). 
A representation of variability in the baseline may be 
required for considering the spatial and temporal fluctu-
ations of environmental factors and their interactions with 
climate. For example, in studies of the effects of ozone 
and climate on, plant growth, it is important to have 
information both on the mean and on peak concentrations 
of ozone under present conditions. 
5.1.3 Socioeconomic baseline 
The socioeconomic baseline describes the present state of 
all the non-environmental factors that influence the expo-
sure unit. The factors may be geographical (eg land use, 
communications), technological (eg pollution control, crop 
cultivation), managerial (eg forest rotation, fertiliser use), 
legislative (eg water use quotas, air quality standards), 
economic (eg commodity prices, labour costs), social (eg 
population, diet), or political (eg land set aside, land 
tenure). A l l of these are liable to change in the future, so 
it is important that baseline conditions of the most relevant 
factors are noted. 
5.2 Time frame of projections 
A critical consideration for conducting impact experiments 
is the time horizon over which estimates are to be made. 
Three elements influence the time horizon selected: the 
limits of predictability, the compatibility of projections and 
whether the assessment is continuous or considers discrete 
points in time. 
5.2.1 Limits of predictability 
The time horizon selected depends primarily on the goals 
of the assessment. However, there are obvious limits to the 
ability to project into the future. Climate projections, since 
they are a key element of climate impact studies, define 
the outer limit on impact projections. G C M estimates 
seldom extend beyond about 100 years, owing to the large 
uncertainties attached to such long-term projections and to 
constraints on computational resources. This fixes an outer 
horizon at about 2100. Many climate projections are for a •
radiative forcing of the atmosphere equivalent to a doub-
ling of CO2 relative to pre-industrial levels. This could 
occur as early as 2020 (IPCC 1990a), which could be used 
as a mid-term projection horizon. 
Of course, long time-scale projection periods may be 
wholly unrealistic for considering some impacts (eg in 
many economic assessments). On the other hand, if the 
projection period is too short, then the estimated changes 
in climate and their impacts may not be easily detectable, 
making it difficult to evaluate policy responses. 
5.2.2 Compatibility of projections 
It is important to ensure that future climate, environment 
and socioeconomic projections are mutually consistent over 
space and time. A common area of confusion concerns the 
relative timing of CO2 increase and climate change. Thus, 
it should be noted that an equivalent 2xC02 atmosphere 
does not coincide in time with a 2xC02 atmosphere, and 
there are time lags in the climate response to both of these. 
5.2.3 Point in time or continuous assessment 
A distinction can be drawn between considering impacts at 
discrete points in time in the future and examining continu-
ous or time-dependent impacts. The former are character-
istic of many climate impact assessments based on 2xC02 
scenarios. These consider impacts occurring at the time 
specified by the scenario climate (a time that is often not 
easy to define and which usually varies from place to 
place). They ignore any effects occurring during the 
interim period that might influence the final impacts. They 
also make it very difficult to assess rates of change and 
thus to evaluate adaptation strategies. 
In contrast, transient climatic scenarios allow time-
dependent phenomena and dynamic feedback mechanisms 
to be examined and socioeconomic adjustments to be con-
sidered. Nevertheless, in order to present results of impact 
studies based on transient scenarios, it is customary to 
select 'time slices' at key points in time during the 
projection period. 
5.3 Projecting environmental trends in the absence
climate change 
The 
development of a baseline describing conditions 
without climate change is crucial, for it is this baseline 
against which all projected impacts are measured. It is 
A.II Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
23 
highly probable that future changes in other environmental 
factors will occur even in the absence of climate change, 
which may be of importance for an exposure unit. Exam-
ples include deforestation, change in grazing pressure, 
changes in groundwater level and changes in air, water and 
soil pollution. Official projections may exist to describe 
trends in some of these (eg groundwater level), but for 
others it may be necessary to use expert judgment or 
simply to extrapolate past trends. Most factors are related 
to, and projections should be consistent with, trends in 
socioeconomic factors (see Section 5.4, below). GHG 
concentrations may also change, but these would usually be 
linked to climate (which is assumed unchanged here). 
5.4 Projecting socioeconomic trends in the absence of 
climate change 
Global climate change is projected to occur over time 
periods that are relatively long in socioeconomic terms. 
Over that period it is certain that the economy and society 
will change, even in the absence of climate change. One of 
the most difficult aspects of establishing trends in socioeco-
nomic conditions without climate change over the period of 
analysis is the forecasting of future demands on resources 
of interest. Simple extrapolation of historical trends 
without regard for changes in prices, technology or 
population, will often provide an inaccurate base against 
which to measure impacts. 
Official projections exist for some of these changes, as 
they are required for plaiming purposes. These vary in 
their time horizon from several years (eg economic 
growth, unemployment), through decades (eg urbanisation, 
industrial development, agricultural production), to a 
century or longer (eg population). Reputable sources of 
such projections include the United Nations (eg United 
Nations 1991), Organization of Economic Cooperation and 
Development (eg OECD 1990), World Bank (eg World 
Bank 1990), International Monetary Fund and national 
governments. 
5.5 Projecting future climate 
In order to conduct experiments to assess the impacts of 
climate change, it is first necessary to obtain a quantitative 
representation of the changes in climate themselves. No 
method yet exists of providing confident predictions of 
future climate. Instead, it is customary to specify a number 
of plausible future climates. These are referred to as 
'climatic scenarios' and they are selected to provide 
cUmatic data that are spatially compatible, mutually 
consistent, freely available or easily derived from, and 
suitable as inputs to impact models. 
There are four basic types of scenario of future 
climate: historical instrumentally based scenarios, palaeo-
climatic analog scenarios, arbitrary adjustments 
and 
scenarios from GCMs. 
5.5.7 Historical instrumentally based scenarios 
An obvious source of climatological data for scenario 
development is past instrumental records. These are known 
to be spatially compatible and mutually consistent because 
they have actually been observed, and are available for the 
recent past over a reasonably dense network of land-based 
stations worldwide. Such scenarios can be based upon: 
• 
Historical-anomalies, focusing on weather anomalies 
that can have significant short-term impacts (such as 
droughts, floods and cold spells). A change in future 
climate could mean a change in the frequency of such 
events. They are selected from the instrumental record 
as individual years or periods of years during which 
anomalous weather was observed (eg Parry and Carter 
1988). 
• 
Historical-analogs, which focus on past periods of 
global-scale warmth as potential analogs of a GHG-
induced warmer world. They are usually developed on 
the basis of global-scale temperatures during past 
warm and cold periods, and consist of regional 
composites of the differences in climate between the 
two periods (eg Lough et al. 1983). 
• 
Historical-correlations, which represent a variation of 
the analog approach, involving the estimation of linear 
• relationships between the historical record of global 
surface air temperatures and records over the same 
period of local climatic variables. For a given vari-
ation in global temperature, it is then possible to 
estimate from these relationships expected variations 
in local climate (eg Vinnikov and Groisman 1979). 
• 
Circulation-patterns, which are designed for cases 
where input data for impact models cannot be provid-
ed by conventional scenarios (eg wind fields for air 
pollution studies). The approach also uses linear 
relationships, this time between past global mean 
temperatures and regional atmospheric circulation 
patterns. Individual seasons are then identified in the 
historical record having circulation types resembling 
those found to be correlated with global warmth (eg 
Pitovranov 1988). 
There is a number of difficulties associated with the use of 
instrumental'scenarios: 
24 
A.II 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
• 
They are based on temperature changes during the past 
century that are much smaller than those possible in 
the future. Thus, they may not be applicable to 
conditions outside the range of past variations. 
• 
The causes of past variations in global temperature 
may have been different from those responsible for a 
future GHG-induced change in temperature. 
• 
The strength of the relationships between past changes 
. in temperature and changes in other climatic variables 
is usually rather weak. 
• 
The nature of the relationships between variables may 
be different in the future than those occurring in the 
past. It is also known that relationships established for 
the past Can themselves vary, depending on the time 
period selected. 
5.5.2 Palaeoclimatic analog scenarios 
Palaeoclimatic scenarios are based on reconstructions of 
past climate from fossil evidence. Features of the past 
temperature and moisture regime in a region (usually at a 
seasonal time resolution) can often be inferred by assem-
bling the different types of evidence. If absolute dating 
methods are available, and the spatial coverage.of evidence 
issufficient, maps can be constructed for particular time 
periods in the past. 
In the context of future climatic warming, palaeo-
climatic scenarios for warm periods in the past have been 
adopted in several climate impact assessment studies as 
analogs of possible future climate. They have been used 
extensively in Russia, where three periods have been 
selected to represent progressively warmer conditions in 
the northern hemisphere (Budyko 1989; IPCC 1990a): the 
Mid-Holocene (5-6000 years Before Present), when 
northern hemisphere temperatures are estimated to have 
been about 1°C warmer than today, the Last (Eemiari) 
Interglacial (125 000 BP) with temperatures about 2''C 
warmer than today, and the Pliocene (3-4 million BP) 
when temperatures were about 3-4°C warmer than today. 
If the evidence upon which they are based is of good 
quality, palaeoclimatic scenarios can provide a reasonable 
representation of past climate, which is consistent in space 
and time. Moreover, they have an advantage over instru-
mental scenarios in that the level of global warmth is much 
greater than that experienced in the past century, and more 
closely analogous to the magnitude of warming expected 
during the next century. 
There are some serious reservations,- however, in 
using these reconstructions as scenarios of future climate: 
• 
Boundary conditions of the climate system (eg sea 
level, ice volume, land cover) were not the same in 
the past as they are today. Thus, even if the radiative 
forcing were the same, the climate response might 
differ in the future from that in the past. 
• 
It is probable that some periods of past warmth 
resulted from different forcing factors than the future 
GHG forcing (eg orbital variations). 
• 
There are large uncertainties about the qualify of the 
palaeoclimatic reconstructions. None is geographically 
comprehensive, some may be biased in favour of 
climatic conditions that preserved the evidence upon 
which they are based, and the dating of material (espe-
cially in the mOre distant past) may not be precise. 
. • 
They represent the average conditions prevailing in the 
past. It is rare for them to yield concrete information 
on the variability of climate or frequency of extreme 
events. 
J. 5.3 Arbitrary adjustments 
A simple method of specifying a future climate is to adjust 
the baseline climate in a systematic, though essentially 
arbitrary manner. Adjustments might include, for example, 
changes in mean annual temperature of + 1°, 2°, 3°C... 
etc, or changes in annual precipitation of ± 5%, 10%, 
15% ... etc relative to the baseline climate. Adjustments 
can be made independently or in combination. 
These types of adjustments are of use for testing the 
robustness of impact models, and for studying sensitivity 
to climatic variations (see Section 4.3). This is also the 
preferred method of altering climate and/or atmospheric 
composition when conducting climatic change experiments 
in the field or laboratory. Furthermore, the approach can 
be useful for expressing expert estimates of future climate, 
in the absence of more detailed projections. 
Perhaps the most valuable function of arbitrary adjust-
ments, however, is as a diagnostic tool to be used before 
conducting scenario studies. In this way information can be 
obtained on: 
• 
Thresholds or discontinuities of response that might 
occur under a given magnitude or rate of change. 
These may represent levels of change above which the 
nature of the response alters (eg warming may pro-
mote plant growth, but very high temperatures cause 
heat stress), or responses which have a critical impact 
on the system (eg v/ind speeds, above which structural 
damage may occur to buildings). 
• 
Tolerable climate change, which refers to the magni-
tude or rate of climate change that a modelled system 
can tolerate without major disruptive effects (some-
times termed the 'critical load'). This type of measure 
is potentially of value for policy, as it can assist in 
A.II Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
25 
defining specific goals or targets for limiting future 
climate change. 
One of the main drawbacks of the approach is that adjust-
ments to combinations of variables are unlikely to be 
physically plausible or internally consistent. Thus, this 
approach should normally only be used for sensitivity 
analysis. 
5.5.4 Scenarios from GCMs 
GCMs are the most sophisticated tools currently available 
for estimating the likely future effects of increasing GHG 
concentrations on climate. They simulate the major mecha-
nisms affecting the global climate system according to the 
laws of physics, producing estimates of climatic variables 
for a regular network of grid points across the globe. 
Results from about ten GCMs have been reported to date 
(eg see IPCC 1990a). 
GCMs are not yet sufficiently realistic to provide 
reliable predictions of climatic change at the regional level, 
and even at the global level model estimates are subject to 
considerable uncertainties. Thus, G C M outputs represent, 
at best, broad-scale sets of possible future climatic condi-
tions and should not be regarded as predictions. 
GCMs have been used to conduct two types of experi-
ment for estimating future climate: equilibrium-response 
and transient-forcing experiments. 
The majority of experiments have been conducted to 
evaluate the equilibrium response of the global climate to 
an abrupt increase (commonly, a doubling) of atmospheric 
concentrations of COj. Clearly, such a step change in 
atmospheric composition is unrealistic, as increases in 
GHG concentrations (including COj) are occurring contin-
ually and are unlikely to stabilise in the foreseeable future. 
Moreover, since different parts of the global climate 
system have different thermal inertias, they will approach 
equilibrium at different rates and may never approximate 
the composite equilibrium condition modelled in these 
simulations. This also results in difficulties in estimating 
the simultaneous effects of increasing COj and climate 
change. 
Recent work has focused on fashioning more realistic 
experiments with GCMs, specifically, simulations of the 
response of climate to a transient forcing. These simula-
tions offer several advantages over equilibrium-response 
experiments. First, the specifications of the atmospheric 
perturbation are more realistic, involving a continuous 
(transient) change over time in GHG concentrations. 
Second, the representation of the oceans is more realistic, 
the most recent simulations coupling atmospheric models 
to dynamic ocean models. Finally, transient simulations 
provide information on the rate as well as the magnitude 
of climate change, which is of considerable value for 
impact studies. 
Information from GCMs is usually made available to, 
impact analysts as surface or near-surface climatic vari-
ables for model grid boxes characteristically spaced at 
intervals of several hundred kilometres around the globe, 
and most commonly at a monthly time resolution. G C M 
projections of changes in climate under GHG-forcing 
relative to the control simulation are usually applied as 
adjustments (expressed as differences or ratios) to the 
observed baseline climate. Several techniques have been 
used to apply transient response outputs to the baseline 
climate (eg Croley 1990) and to provide data at a different 
time resolution from those obtained from GCMs (eg Bultot 
et al. 1988). One of the major problems faced in applying 
G C M projections to regional impact assessments is the 
coarse spatial scale of the estimates. Several methods have 
been adopted for developing regional GCM-based scenarios 
at sub-grid-scale, including assignment of the nearest grid 
box estimate (eg Croley 1990), objective interpolation (eg 
Parry and Carter 1988; Cohen 1991), statistical analysis of 
local climatic fields (eg Wilks 1988) and merging of 
several scenarios based on expert judgment (eg Pearman 
1988) or averaging (eg Department of the Environment 
1991). 
There have been objections to the concept of using 
GCMs for developing climate change scenarios for region-
al 
impact studies, owing to uncertainties that prevent 
accurate 
regional-scale simulations. However, these 
scenarios are often beyond the design criteria of various 
facilities or resource systems, and it seeins prudent to 
begin to test the sensitivities of these systems under various 
scenarios directly or indirectly based on G C M outputs to 
provide an indication of uncertainly in regional terms. 
Many G C M simulations have been conducted in recent 
years, and it is not easy to choose suitable examples for 
use in impact assessments. In general, the more recent 
simulations are likely to be more reliable as they are based 
on recent knowledge, and they tend to be of a higher 
spatial resolution than earlier model runs. It is strongly 
recommended that recent reviews of GCMs be consulted 
before selection. The National Center of Atmospheric 
Research, Boulder, Colorado, USA, has been acting as a 
clearing house for G C M data from different modelling 
groups. 
Finally, it has become common to use simple climate 
models rather than GCMs to estimate the effects on future 
global temperatures of alternative GHG emission scenarios 
(IPCC 1990a). Their attractiveness as policy tools makes 
it desirable to use these scenarios in impact studies. 
However, since only global estimates are provided they 
cannot be used directly in regional assessments. A method 
1
26 
A.II 
Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
of 
overcoming this problem makes 
use of G C M 
information in conjunction with the global estimates, 
whereby the G C M estimates of regional changes are scaled 
.according to the ratio between the G C M estimate of global 
temperature change and that provided in the simple 
scenario (for example, for a doubling of COj). 
5.6 Projecting environmental trends with climate 
change 
Projections must be made for each of the environmental 
variables or characteristics of interest in the study and 
included in the description of environmental trends in the 
absence of climate change. These projections are made 
using the climate projections and the biophysical models 
selected for the study (as described in Section 3.2.1). 
Because all changes in environmental conditions not due to 
climatic factors should already have been incorporated in 
the development of the environmental trends in the absence 
of climate change, the only changes in these trends to be 
incorporated here are those due solely to climate change. 
The two factors most commonly required in assessments 
are GHG concentrations and sea-level rise. Future changes 
in these are still under discussion, but the estimates 
reported by the IPCC may serve as a useful basis for 
constructing scenarios (IPCC 1990a). Other factors that are 
directly affected by climate (such as river flows, runoff, 
erosion) would probably require full impact assessments 
of their own, although some might be incorporated as 
'automatic adjustments' in projections. 
5.7 Projecting socioeconomic trends with climate 
change 
The changes in environmental conditions that are attribu-
table solely to climate change serve as inputs to the 
economic modelling that projects the changes in socioeco-
nomic conditions due to climate change over the study 
period. All other changes in socioeconomic conditions over 
the period of analysis are attributable to non-climatic 
factors and should have been included in the estimation of 
socioeconomic changes in the absence of climate change. 
It is not known how climate change might affect some 
important socioeconoinic factors (eg population growth) 
and trends estimated in the absence of climate change 
would probably suffice. Other factors can be estimated, 
however (eg winter electricity demand in relation to future 
warming). Moreover, some human responses to climate 
change are predictable enough to be factored-in to future 
projections. These are often accounted for in model 
simulations as feedbacks or 'automatic adjustments' to 
climate change (eg altering crop sowing dates to account 
for a shift in the timing of rainfall). 
6 Assessment of impacts 
Impacts are estimated as the differences over the study 
period between the environmental and socioeconomic 
conditions projected to exist without climate change and 
those that are projected with climate change. The impacts 
provide the basis for the assessment of impacts. Assess-
ments may include: 
• 
Geographical analysis of the impacts. Impacts vary 
over space, and this pattern of variation is of concern 
to policy makers operating at regional, national or 
international scales, because these spatial differences 
may have consequent policy and planning implicafions. 
The geographical depiction of climate change, present-
ed as maps, is one method of describing impacts. Geo-
graphical information systems (GIS) may be used to 
depict patterns of climate change, evaluate the regional 
potential for different activities using simple indices, 
map changes in the pattern of potential induced by a 
given climate change, identify regions of particular 
sensitivity to climate change, and display the impact of 
climate on different activities within a given geo-
graphical region. 
• 
Compliance to standards, 
which may provide a 
reference or an objective against which to measure the 
impacts of climate change. For example, the effect on 
water quality could be gauged by reference to current 
water quality standards. 
• 
Qualitative description, which may be used to evaluate 
the impacts of climate change. The success of this 
method rests on the experience and interpretive skills 
of the analyst, especially the analyst's ability to 
consider all factors of importance and their interrela-
tionships. 
• 
Costs and benefits, which should be estimated quanti-
tatively to the extent possible and discounted to net 
present value. This approach makes explicit the 
expectation that a change in resources and resource 
allocation due to climate change is likely to yield 
benefits as well as costs, and can also examine the 
'waiting' costs or benefits of doing nothing to mitigate 
potential climate change. The choice of discount rate 
used to discount benefits and costs will vary from 
nation to nation, depending upon the economic and 
social circumstances of each. Some costs and benefits 
are difficult to assess in monetary terms, and will have 
to be considered in descriptive terms. 
yl.// Preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
27 
Finally, the assessment should also take into account the 
uncertainties resulting from choices of assumptions and 
modelling techniques, as well as incomplete knowledge of 
biophysical, social and economic processes and the long 
time horizons over which projections are to be made. 
7 Evaluation of adjustments 
Impact experiments are usually conducted to evaluate the 
effects of climate change on an exposure unit in the 
absence of any adjustments which might prevent, mitigate 
or exploit them, and are not already automatic or built in 
to future projections. It is these adjustments which form 
the basis of measures to cope with climate change. Two 
types are described here: feedbacks to climate and tested 
adjustments at the enterprise level. A third type, policy 
responses, is considered in Section 8. 
7.1 Feedbacks to climate 
The global climate system is influenced, in part, by 
interactions with the surface biosphere. To date, projec-
tions of fiiture climate have assumed that the biosphere 
remains unchanged, but this is clearly unrealistic. As 
chmate changes, so the pattern of vegetation and of other 
important organisms such as oceanic plankton, which 
feedback to climate, are likely to shift geographically. 
Impact models can identify these possible shifts, but they 
have not yet been linked effectively to climate models for 
simulating feedbacks to climate. 
7.2 Tested adjustments at the enterprise level 
Tested adjustments are experiments that can be conducted 
with impact models to evaluate alternative options for 
adjusting to climate change at the level of individual enter^ 
prises. To illustrate, a climatic scenario may indicate that 
the water requirements of a crop are no longer satisfied 
under a changed rainfall regime. In this case an adjustment 
that could be tested using a crop growth model might be 
the substitution of less demanding, short-season crop 
variety. Here, the adjustment 
is chosen by expert 
judgment, but evaluated using the model. 
When analysing potential adjustments, it is useful to 
distinguish between two types: anticipatory and reactive. 
Anticipatory adjustments are put into place in prospect of 
impacts occurring (eg the breeding of drought resistant 
crop varieties). Reactive adjustments are implemented after 
impacts have occurred (eg the adoption of drought resistant 
varieties). In many cases, adjustment experiments can 
assist in evaluating different options so that anticipatory, 
rather than reactive adjustments can be put in place. 
Of course, not all adjustments can be tested. For 
some, an accurate evaluation may not be possible, and for 
others the required technology may not yet be available. 
8 Consideration of policy options 
Another method of responding to climatic change is 
through policy decisions. Apart from purely qualitative 
assessments, two methods of policy evaluation can be 
identified: policy simulation and policy exercises. 
8.1 Policy simulation 
In some assessments it is possible to simulate the effective-
ness of alternative policy adjustments using impact models. 
Two types of policy response to climatic change are com-
monly simulated: mitigation and adaptive. 
Mitigation policies refer to actions that attempt to prevent 
or to reduce changes in climate by altering the emission 
rates of GHGs. These effects can be estimated and the 
costs evaluated using a range of models. Impact assess-
ments can assist in identifying targets for mitigation policy 
with respect to minimising the effects of climate change 
(see Section 5.5.3). 
Adaptive policies recognise that climate changes will occur 
and that it is necessary to accommodate them in policy. 
For instance, the lifting of government subsidies on some 
food crops might be one policy method of offsetting 
overproduction due to a more favourable climate. Such a 
policy would rely on economic factors (ie reduced incen-
tive) to bring about farm-level adjustments such as a switch 
to alternative crops giving a higher return. 
8.2 Policy exercises 
A second possible method of evaluating policy adjustments 
is policy exercises. These combine elements of a modelling 
approach with expert judgment, and were originally 
advocated as a means of improving the interaction between 
scientists and policy makers. Senior figures in government, 
industry and finance are encouraged to participate with 
senior scientists in 'exercises' (often based on the princi-
ples of gaming), whereby they are asked to judge appropri-
ate policy responses to a number of given climatic scen-
arios. Their decisions are then evaluated using impact 
models (Brewer 1986; Parry et al. 1992). 
28 
A.II 
Preliminaiy guidelines for assessing impacts of climate change 
References 
Brewer, G. D. 1986. 'Methods for synthesis: policy 
exercises', Ch.l7 in W.C.Clark and R.E.Munn (eds), 
Sustainable Development of the Biosphere, pp. 455-473, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Budyko, M.I. 1989. 'Empirical estimates of imminent 
climadc changes', Soviet Meteorology and Hydrology, 
No.lO, 1-8. 
Bultot, F., A. Coppens, G.L.Dupriez, D.Gellens and 
F.Meulenberghs 1988. 'Repercussions of a CO2 doubling 
on the water cycle and on the water balance - a case 
study for Belgium', Jo«r«a/ of Hydrology, 99, 319-347. 
Cohen, S.J. 1991. 'Possible impacts of climatic warming 
scenarios on water resources in the Saskatchewan River 
sub-basin, Canada', Climatic Change, 19, 291-317. 
Croley, T.E., II 1990. 'Laurentian Great Lakes double-CO^ 
climate change hydrological impacts'. Climatic Change, 
17, 27-47. 
Department of the Environment 1991. The Potential Effects 
of Climate Change in the United Kingdom, United 
Kingdom Climate Change Impacts Review Group, 
HMSO, London, 124 pp. 
Hutchinson, M.F. 1987. 'Methods of generating weather 
sequences', in A.H.Bunting (Ed.) Agricultural Environ-
ments: Characterization, Classification and Mapping, 
CAB International, Wallingford, UK, pp. 149-157. 
IPCC 1990a. Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assess-
ment. Report of Working Group I of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University 
Press, 364 pp. 
Lough, J.M., Wigley, T.M.L. and Palutikof, J.P. 1983. 
'Climate and climate impact scenarios for Europe in a 
warmer world', J. CUm.Appl. Meteorol. ,22, 1673-16 84. 
National Defence University (NDU) 1978. Climate Change 
in the Year 2000, Washington, D.C., Fort Lesley J. 
McNair. 
National Defence University (NDU) 1980. Crop Yields and 
Qimate Change to the Year 2000. Vol.1, Washington, 
D.C., Fort Lesley J. McNair. 
OECD 
1990. Main 
Economic Indicators—Historical 
Statistics, 1969-1988, 766 pp. 
Parry, M . L . and Carter, T.R. 1988. 'The assessment of 
effects of climatic variations on agriculture: 
aims, 
. methods and summary of results', in M.L.Parry, 
T.R.Carter and N.T.Konijn (eds). The Impact of Climatic 
Variations on Agriculture. Volume 1. Assessments in 
Cool Temperate and Cold Regions, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands, 11-95. 
Parry, M . L . , Blantran de Rozari, M . , Chong, A.L. and 
Panich, S. (eds) 1992. The Potential Socio-Economic Ef-
fects of Qimate Change in South-East Asia, United 
Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, 126 pp. 
Pearman (ed.) 1988. Greenhouse: Planning for Climate 
Change, CSIRO, Melbourne. 
Pitovranov, S.E. 1988. 'The assessment of impacts of 
possible climate changes on the results of the IIASA 
RAINS sulfur deposition model in Europe', Water, Air, 
and Soil Pollution, AQ, 95-119. 
Rosenberg, N.J. and Crosson, P.J. 1991. Processes for Iden-
tifying Regional Influences and Responses to Increasing
Atmospheric CO2 and Climate Change—The Minlc •
Project.An Overview. United States Department of 
Energy, DOE/RL/01830T-H5, Washington, D . C , 35 
pp. 
Stewart, T.R. and Glantz, M . H . 1985. 'Expert judgement 
and climate forecasting: A methodological critique of 
"Climate Change to the Year 2000"', Climatic Change, 
7, 159-183. 
United Nations 1991. World Population Prospects, 1991. 
Vinnikov, K. Ya.and Groisman, P.Ya. 1979. 'An empirical 
model 
of 
present-day 
climatic 
changes', 
Meteorol.Gidrolog., 1979, No.3, 25-36 (in Russian). 
Wilks, D.S. 1988. 'Estimating the consequences of CO^-
induced climatic change on North American grain 
agriculture using general circulation model information', 
aimatic Change, 13, v?A9-42. 
WMO 1985. Report of the 
WMO/UNEP/ICSU-SCOPE 
Expert Meeting on the Reliability of Crop-Climate Models 
for Assessing the Impacts of Climatic Change and 
Variability, WCP-90, World Meteorological Organi-
zation, Geneva, 31 pp. 
WMO 1988. Water Resources and Climatic Change: Sensi-
tivity of Water Resource Systems to Climate Change an
Variability, WCAP-4, Geneva. 
World Bank 1990. World Tables 1989-90 Edition, Johns 
Hopkins University Press, Baltimore and London. 
General references 
EPA 1988. The Potential Effect of Climate Change on the 
United States. Volume 1: Regional Studies. Draft Report
to Congress, United States Environmental Protection 
Agency, 91 pp. 
IPCC 1990b. Climate Change: The IPCC Impacts Assess-
ment, Report prepared for IPCC by Working Group II, 
Australian Government Publishing Service. 
OECD Environmental Committee 1991. Climate Change: 
Evaluating the Socio-Economic Impacts, 109 pp. 
Riebsame, W.E. 1988. Assessing the Social Implications of 
Climate Fluctuations: 
A Guide to Climate Impact 
Studies. United Nations Environment Programme, 
Nairobi, 82 pp. 
B 
Energy and industry-related issues 
The work carried out under this task is discussed under the heading: 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industrial sectors; human health; air 
quality; effects of ultraviolet-B radiation 
Ill Energy; human settlement; transport and industrial 
sectors; human health; air quality; effects of ultraviolet-B 
radiation 
Co-chairmen: 
S Nishioka (Japan) 
I Nazarov (Russia) 
Lead Authors: 
M Ando (Japan) 
K Hanaki (Japan) 
H Harasawa (Japan) 
H Kurosaka (Japan) 
K Masuda (Japan) 
S Nishinomiya (Japan) 
T Okita (Japan) 
R H Ball (USA) 
W Breed (USA) 
DHobbie(USA) 
J Topping Jr (USA) 
I Nazarov (Russia) 
Contributors: 
K Bentley (Australia) 
C Ewan (Australia) 
R J Foster (Australia) 
B Pittock (Australia) 
A R Magalhaes (Brazil) 
W J Maunder (Canada) 
G McBoyle (Canada) 
M Sanderson (Canada) 
J Fenger (Denmark) 
P Aittoniemi (Finland) 
M Domroes (Germany) 
P D Hader (Germany) 
E Jauregui O (Mexico) 
J T Steiner.(New Zealand) 
D Wratt (New Zealand) 
B Slettemark (Norway) 
M Davidson (USA) 
T E Graedel (USA) 
G M Hidy (USA) 
J Hoffman (USA) 
S P Leatherman (USA) 
S D Lee (USA) 
D Liverman (UK) 
J B Longstreth (USA) 
M L Parry (UK) 
V D Phillips (USA) 
M S Spranger (USA) 
J H Sullivan (USA) 
A Teramura (USA) 
B Denness (UK) 
A Haines (UK) 
W R Keatinge (UK) 
P M Kelly (UK) 
L I Boltneva (Russia) 
J I Breslav (Russia) 
M A Styrikovich (Russia) 
A F Yakovlev (Russia) 
Ill 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industrial sectors; 
human health; air quality; and effects of ultraviolet-B 
radiation 
This supplementary report covers changes in knowledge of 
and insight into the impact of climate change on human 
settlement, energy, transport and industrial sectors, human 
health and air quality. The report also covers recent 
discoveries concerning the impacts of increased ultraviolet 
radiation from stratospheric ozone loss. 
There have been many new studies reported in the last 
eighteen months. In human settlement, there has been more 
work on the implications of sea-level rise, and some 
important new findings have been made on the implications 
of soil shrinkage and swelling in the United Kingdom. In 
the energy area, there have been numerous studies both on 
demand and supply. New regional studies have also added 
depth to the understanding of potential variations in 
impacts. Apart from analysis of how industry might be 
affected by response strategies, however, there has been 
relatively little research On the direct impacts of climate 
change on industry or transport; the most important results 
come from a United Kingdom country study. 
Knowledge of climate change on human health has 
been extended and confirmed with greater understanding of 
potential increases in disease during 'heat wave' and 
potential shifts in disease vector habitats with global 
warming, particularly in New Zealand and Australia. 
Diseases such as malaria, Chagas disease (trypanosomia-
sis), lymphatic filariasis, schistosomiasis, leishmaniasis, 
onchocerciasis (river blindness), dengue fever, 
and 
Australian and Japanese encephalitis could increase or be 
reintroduced m many countries as a consequence of global 
warming (WMO 1990). There is greater understanding of 
the mechanisms of the effect of temperature on air pollu-
tants. Finally, recent studies have linked ultraviolet-B 
radiation (UV-B) to additional effects that had not been 
proposed previously. Immunosuppression has been demon-
strated in peoples regardless of pigmentation, and new 
types of damage to the eye, deformations of the anterior 
lens and presbyopia, have also been linked to UV-B. 
Strong impacts on marine organisms from conditions 
stimulating reduced ozone (ie enhanced UV-B) have been 
demonstrated in the laboratory. In the Antarctic, enhanced 
UV-B has been linked to a reduction of primary production 
rates of 6 % to 12 % from decreased photosynthesis. Studies 
were also undertaken on the biochemical and photochemi-
cal characterisation of representative 
species of the 
bacterioplankton in the southernmost region of Argentina 
(Ushaia, Beagle Chaimel, Lapataia and three lakes in 
Tierra del Fuego—Orce (1990)) New laboratory studies 
have expanded knowledge about which terrestrial plants are 
seiisitive to increased U V - B . 
Regional studies, including country impact studies of 
New Zealand (1990), the United Kingdom (1991), Mexico 
(1990) and Russia (1991), as well as a number of country 
studies prepared for the Asian-Pacific Seminar on Climate 
Change (Nagoya 1991) and a United States Department of 
Energy study covering four states in the.interior of the US 
(MINK) have been released smce the last IPCC WGII 
report. A summary of the UNEP impacts report covering 
five countries in the developing world (Brazil, Thailand, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, and Vietnam) is available now, and 
the full report should be available shortly. 
1 Energy 
Energy demands in lower latitudes are expected to in-
crease, particularly in developing countries, as access to 
and need for air-conditioning grows. Higher latitude 
industrial countries can expect slight decreases in energy 
demand from decreased space heating. However, the 
overall cost of energy in some countries may rise consider-
ably because of increased production costs as a result of 
climate change and permafrost thaw. Projections for 
Northern Russia indicate an increase of 20 % in the 
calculated price of natural gas and oil resulting from a 2°C 
warming, although hydro-electric production could grow 
by 7-10% between 2000-2020 owing to increased river 
run-off (Yakovlev 1991). Biomass production, upon which 
developing countries depend for much of their energy 
needs, could be altered by clim.ate change; better regional 
forecasts are needed to assess impacts on specific regions. 
1.2 Energy consumption 
Space heating/cooling of buildings is one of the most 
climate-sensitive uses of energy, especially the use of 
electricity for residential and commercial air-conditioning 
and electricity plus other fuels for spaCe heating. Two key 
questions are, first, the potential increases in the ownership 
and use of air-conditioning and how climate change might 
influence them and, second, the potential impact of climate 
change on availability of traditional biomass fuels and 
consequent changes in energy use. Studies in Argentina on 
the comfort requirements of local representative biotypes 
suggest a reduction in energy requirements for air-condi-
tioning could result. Although usually smaller in total 
magnitude of energy demand, the use of electricity and 
fuels for irrigation pumping and use of fuels for drying of 
32 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
agricultural crops also can be significant weather-sensitive 
demands in some regions. Climate change has negligible 
direct effect on vehicle performance; however, transpor-
tation is sensitive to immediate impacts due to weather and 
may be indirectly sensitive to gradual shifts in activities in 
response to climate change and to greenhouse gas response 
strategies. Substantial impacts on traditional uses of energy 
in developing countries, such as cooking, are likely in 
response to shortages of supply. 
1.3 Energy supply systems 
The main impact on supply discussed earlier was the 
potential for changes in hydro-electric power generation 
due to changes in water runoff. There are relatively few 
studies of most other potential impacts on supply. 
The lifetimes of many energy supply facilities and of 
energy-using systems are comparable to or shorter than the 
time-scale for substantial changes in climate (UKDOE 
1991). Changes in demand due to climate change appear to 
be small compared with potential changes due to other 
factors, such as economic and population growth, lifestyle 
and technology changes etc. Hence, adjustments in the 
energy supply system and in energy-using equipment to 
accommodate climate changes often can be made in the 
course of normal replacement. Adjustments in supply 
system planning to accommodate climate change should be 
feasible; costs will usually be small-to-moderate if the 
impacts of climate change and other determinants of 
demand are anticipated (Linder et al. 1989). However, the 
overall cost of energy in some countries may rise consider-
ably due to increased production costs as a result of 
climate change and permafrost thaw. Projections for 
Northern Russia indicate an increase of 20% in the 
calculated price of natural gas and oil resulting from a 2°C 
warming (Yakovlev 1991). 
Climate change could affect steam and nuclear electric 
power plants. They are vulnerable to curtailments of water 
supply for cooling and are moderately sensitive to increas-
es in wet-bulb air temperature or water temperature, 
depending on the type of cooling system. Anticipation of 
climate extremes when designing plants can avoid many of 
the problems, but water supply during extreme drought 
depends on the overall water management situation in each 
basin. An example of potential problems with both steam 
electric and hydro-electric systems during drought was the 
event in the summer of 1988 in the eastern US. Water 
runoff shortages caused decreases in hydro-power and in 
available steam electric power coincident with increased air 
conditioning loads. However, the electric system was able 
to handle the situation without curtailment of power. 
Some renewable energy systems such as solar, wind 
energy, and biomass are directly sensitive to climate 
change. Central solar thermal electric systems and many 
geothermal systems are similar to steam electric plants in 
terms of cooling requirements, although there are differ-
ences in sensitivity due to their steam temperature. Bio-
mass energy systems are similar to agriculture and forestry 
in sensitivity to climate change, except for differences in 
management 
practices. 
Intensively managed 
biomass 
systems may be able adapt to changes subject to availabili-
ty of water resources. 
1.4 Developing countries 
Developing countries tend to have different mixes of 
energy technologies and are often at different stages of 
development of their energy-using and supply systems than 
developed countries. Since drought conditions tend to 
diminish both hydro and traditional biomass sources 
simultaneously, countries with a relatively high dependence 
on those sources are more vulnerable. Africa, non-OECD 
Asia and Latin America are particularly high in depend-
ence on biomass energy, ranging from as high as 100% in 
one country and above 90% in a number of African and 
Asian countries. Latin America and non-OECD Asia also 
are particularly high in dependence on hydro-power. Semi-
arid countries usually are most vulnerable to natural 
fluctuations in precipitation, even without global climate 
change. Tropical developing countries represent a poten-
tially large source of increased demand for electricity for 
air-conditioning. Demand may grow both with improved 
economic conditions and with higher temperatures. 
1.5 Regional studies 
Since the first IPCC assessment of the impact of climate 
change on the energy sector, several regional or utility-
specific studies have been published. These studies exam-
ine changes in energy supply and demand simultaneously 
for the specific regional energy scheme. The methods and 
magnitude of impact vary, but together these studies serve 
to illustrate the importance of specific regional impact 
studies, especially for long-range plans which may already 
be in progress. Regional studies, the results of which are 
discussed below, are from the US, Finland, New Zealand, 
Great Britain, Japan and the former USSR. 
Climate sensitivity in the energy sector and in energy 
use varies greatly from region to region. Hydro-electric 
power is sensitive to temperature and precipitation; in 
some regions, because of evaporative losses, even in-
creased precipitation does not lead to increased streamflow. 
B.III Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
33 
Thermal plants are moderately sensitive to increases in air 
and water temperature, but water supply problems can lead 
to power interruption. Areas in which seasonal demand is 
highest in the winter may have significarttly lowered total 
aimual energy needs. In contrast, regions with high or 
increasing air-conditioning demand may have a significant 
increase in summer daily peaking, with substantial costs 
for additional peaking capacity, but only moderate addi-
tional energy costs. 
2 Human settlement 
Among the most significant of all the potential impacts of 
climate change are the possible effects on human settle-
ments, a broad term meant to encompass a) housing or 
shelter, b) the surrounding village, neighbourhood or 
relevant social unit in which individuals live, c) the 
supporting physical infrastructure (eg water services, 
communication links, transportation) and d) social and 
cultural services (eg health services, education, police 
protection, recreational services, parks and so on). 
The Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-Kansas (USDOE 1991) 
study sponsored by the US Department of Energy uses a 
new and sophisticated methodology. It incorporates 
historical analogies from a period in which the weather 
was close to projected changes in climate, analysis of 
contemporary systems such- as hydrological regimes and 
the networks that comprise the economy of the MINK 
area, and impositions of expected climate change both on 
the present natural and economic situation and on what the 
area will be like in 2030. Although the study is thorough 
throughout, its strength is in a study of the interconnections 
and relative importance of various parts of the economy on 
a small scale, using the US Forest Service's I M P L A N 
input-output model. This allows for a very complex 
understanding of the impacts that changes in sectors 
sensitive to climate would have on the larger economy of 
this highly developed region. 
The projected economic impact of climate change 
(corresponding to an increase of 100 parts per million in 
CO2, or a 0.65-0.9°C rise by 2030) on this agriculturally 
oriented part of the United States, according to the authors 
of this study, would be negligible except in a worst-case 
scenario. They conclude that agriculture would be nega-
tively affected, but also that adjustments for on-farm 
adaptations and CO2 enrichment of crops drop the impact 
below the level required to affect significantly the economy 
as a whole. The relative importance of manufacturing-
even in this relatively specialised agricultural area—would, 
in effect, cushion the economy at large from possible 
damage. It is worth noting, however, that the temperature 
rise used in this analysis is below that which the IPCC 
Working Group I is predicting for the earth as a whole 
(1°C), and that all models are predicting greater warming 
in the interior of continents and in decades subsequent to 
the 2030s. 
It is likely that consequential impacts of climate 
change can be more reliably projected on developing 
societies than on highly industrialised nations; there is 
abundant evidence that the former are already tackling 
formidable problems caused by climatic variability and 
human actions. Tropical cyclones such as the one that 
ravaged Bangladesh in May 1991, the recent flood in south 
China that left over a million homeless, and the drought-
induced famine that has plagued Sudano-Sahelian Africa 
over the past decade (Oguntoyinbo 1991) are all manifesta-
tions of the extraordinary present vulnerabihty of the 
populations of developing countries to extreme climatic 
events. 
The economic and social viability of such island 
nations as Tuvalu, Tokelau, Kiribati, the Marshall Islands 
and the Maldives could be imperilled by a rise in the mid 
range of current sea-level rise projections (Roy and 
Connell 1991). A rise of one metre (at the upper range of 
sea-level rise projections for 2100) co\ild also displace 
20-25 million people in Bangladesh (Asaduzzaman 1991) 
and flood delta regions in China, Egypt and India (Tickell 
1989). Sea-level rise appears to be the most dangerous 
potential effect of global climate change on human 
settlement. 
The study of Mexico (Liverman 1991) and the discus-
sion of Brazil in the executive summary of the five-country 
U N Environment program study (Parry 1991) both em-
phasise that vulnerability to future climate change can in 
part be extrapolated from contemporary ecological and 
social reactions to climatic variability. 
In Mexico, intense local conflicts over water rights 
between different types of farmers, and also with urban-
dwellers, combined with large regional losses of crops to 
drought, illustrate the vulnerability of Mexico to changes 
in precipitation. Disasters can also point out this vulnera-
bility; in Brazil, intense rainfall in Rio de Janeiro in 
February 1988 caused 300 deaths and $1000 million in 
economic losses. A very high (evidently too high) dens'ity 
of population and economic activity was largely respon-
sible in this case. 
In Northeast Brazil, where losses froni drought are 
associated with the problem of poverty, a study found that 
'social and economic consequences 
of droughts are 
explained by local factors such as social organisation, 
education and technological level as much as by weather 
variation' (Parry 1991 p.9). Thus, as shown in infant 
mortality statistics, government action in the form of 
public works projects may be able to offset the malnutri-
tion caused by drought for the first few years, but as the 
1
34 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transpi 
drought continues and deepens, children die more frequent-
ly. The study concludes that more frequent 
extreme 
drought would greatly increase the impact on the rural 
poor (Parry 1991). Drought is also not necessarily wholly 
derived from factors external to the area in question. In 
Northeast Brazil, for example, it is in part attributable to 
extensive deforestation (Parry 1991). 
The Brazilian and Mexican studies found that human 
activity both reveals and occasionally even causes vulnera-
bility to climate variation, which can be indicative of 
vulnerability to climate change. Vulnerability, socioecono-
mic or biophysical, can indicate areas or populations where 
ameliorative or preventive action can be of use now as 
well as in possible fiiture climates, especially where both 
the people and the place they live in are vulnerable to 
climate change. 
Various studies have highlighted the potential signifi-
cance of changes in the El Nifio/Southera Oscillation 
phenomenon (ENSO) that might accompany global warm-
ing. It is estimated that the El Niiio of 1982-83 caused 
losses of $US3 billion in the Southeast Pacific owing to 
disruptions in agriculture, destruction of infrastructure, and 
declines in fisheries production (Sotelo 1991). In Vietnam, 
highly productive fisheries (at the edge of upwelling and 
downwelling regions) have shifted during El Niiio events 
and, as a result, overall production has declined sharply 
(Parry 1991). ENSO amplifies climate variability, imposes 
a specific temporal pattern to drought and heavy rainfall 
periods, and allows some predictability of these variations 
in Southeast Asia. If this variability is enhanced under a 
changed climate, then sustainable development could be 
made much more difficult (Nicholls 1991). Changes in 
atmospheric circulation that may occur under conditions of 
global warming could alter, by changing the connections 
between low and middle latitudes, the impacts of ENSO, 
even if the phenomenon itself remains unchanged (NichoUs 
1991). At this point, however, the direction and potential 
magnitude of changes in ENSO under conditions of climate 
change is uncertain, so it is impossible to make projections 
of likely impacts of changes in ENSO. 
Drought has a differential impact on farmers, depend-
on their economic and social circumstances. In 
Mexico, it has had a different impact on different segments 
and sociopolitical types of farmers. Ninety per cent of 
losses from natural hazards are from drought in Mexico; 
Ejidos or communally held farms, however, have consis-
tendy suffered more losses (to a maximum of twice as 
much in 1970) from drought than privately owned farms. 
This is partly explainable by the 'biophysical marginality' 
of these lands, but also by a lack of access to irrigation, 
credit and other resources. Liverman (1991) goes on to 
conclude that land reform and level of agricultural mod-
ernisation affect the degree of vulnerability to climate 
-/ and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
variation. These factors would also potentially affect 
vulnerability to global warming. 
Climate change could alter the in-country urban to 
rural population .(balance. Parry (1991) states that reduc-
tions in rubber production (extrapolated from the GISS 
2xC02 climate scenario) in Malaysia could increase the 
current tendency of rubber smallholders to sell out to 
larger estates and move to cities. A similar urban exodus 
was caused in Bangladesh by massive floods from 1974-
81; fully 1% of the population shifted to the cities as a 
result of those disasters (Asaduzzaman 1991). Sea-level 
rise and continued subsidence of the delta is expected to 
increase flooding in Bangladesh, so this type of shift can 
be expected to continue. 
Sea-level rise along with flooding and drought may be 
the source of a potential international environmental 
refugee problem, with many persons fleeing their home-
lands to other countries. Such a refugee problem has 
become acute in the Horn of Africa because of a combina-
tion of drought, famine and civil war and it is likely that 
sea-level rise will become a force for inter-country 
movement. New Zealand is already considering the 
possibility of taking in refugees from South Pacific island 
populations who may face the loss of their homelands 
(New Zealand 1990). 
Along with the prospect of a new immigration. New 
Zealand has also identified a potentially severe cultural 
impact resulting from possible displacement of the Maori. 
The Maori do not recognise themselves as separate from 
their land, and many live in low-lying areas prone to 
floods and possibly vulnerable to sea-leyel rise. 
3 Industry and transport 
Recent impact studies covering transportation only involve 
developed countries such as Canada, New Zealand and the 
US. It should be noted that the impact of transportation on 
climate change is very great (UK 1991) and that policies 
implemented to alter climate change may change the world 
transportation network a great deal. 
Generally higher temperatures would mean lower 
maintenance costs, especially with a reduction in freeze-
thaw cycles and if climate change produces less snow 
(Parry and Read 1988). The annual costs of winter mainte-
nance in the U K is now about £120 million (Perry and 
Symons 1991), but new technologies in ice detection and 
in forecasting minimum road temperature could decrease 
these costs. Salt could be reduced by 209^, resulting in 
savings in direct costs as well as from reduced damage to 
cars, trucks, and road infrastructure. Savings to the Great 
Lakes region are estimated at $4.5 million annually in 
snow and ice control costs and $700 000 a year in de-
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
35 
creased frost damage to roads and bridges (Jones and Frith 
1989) . 
A decline in weather-related accidents could be 
expected, although the relationship of accidents to weather 
is not linear. Of fatal accidents in New Zealand, 3.8 % can 
be attributed to weather (Steiner 1990), and in the U K , 
£300 million (out of five billion) of damage from road 
accidents could be attributed to weather (Palutikof 1991, 
1990) . The severity and frequency of accidents is measur-
ably sensitive to weather, and changes in climate could 
possibly change human and economic losses. 
In the Great Lakes system and on inland waterways in 
the U K , lower water levels from increased evaporation 
would lead to lower lake levels and a decreased cargo 
capacity, 13 % in the Great Lakes under the GISS scenario 
(McBoyle and Wall, in press). Arctic shipping, however, 
would have a significantly lengthened season. 
Water-based industries will receive the most direct 
impacts from climate change. Industries needing water, 
such as paper making, food processing, and power genera-
tion could be affected by changes in supplies in a hydro-
logically different world. The US MINK study reports that 
industrial production would be reduced by 'a few billion 
dollars-maybe 2 or 3...' (VI, p. .26, USDOE 1991). This 
reduction would not however have a significant impact on 
industry or the economy as whole unless agricultural 
production dropped by more than 10%. 
Since a large proportion of industry is established near 
coasts and waterways for easier access to transportation, 
cooling, energy, and waste removal, it could be endan-
gered by sea-level rise. In the UK, 40% of the industrial 
sector is located in coastal and estuarine areas. The value 
of property protected by the Thames barrier alone is 
estimated at £10-20 billion (UK 1991). The threat is 
common to both industrialised and developing countries 
alike as. civilisation has historically developed near coastal 
areas and waterways. Oguntoyinbo (1991) warns that the 
transportation, housing and industrial infrastructures of 
many West and Central African coastal cities could be at 
risk from sea-level rise. 
A study of climate's present and future influence on 
the economy of Europe enumerates many possible implica-
tions of changes in climate and ultra-violet radiation for the 
construction and insurance industries. Design parameters 
for construction are currently based on historical climate 
conditions, particularly the extreme values of temperatures, 
wind speed, groundwater levels and rainfall. Some of these 
values will change with climate change; others are expect-
ed to, although the magnitude and direction of change are 
still in doubt. The study recommends that future design 
take account of possible changes in climate from green-
house gas forcing. Another parameter that will change in 
the future is the future level of ultraviolet radiation (from 
destruction 
of stratospheric 
ozone—see 
Section 6). 
Synthetic materials already sensitive to U V - B such as 
plastic polymers (used in paints, window frames, and roof 
coverings) could degrade more quickly with enhanced U V -
B. 
In the insurance industry, risk estimates in areas such 
as damage from storms have been based on historic loss 
statistics. This may not be as viable an approach in the 
future, especially given that damage from extreme events 
tends to rise rapidly with small increases in, for instance, 
maximum wind speed. Changing climatic baselines could 
alter the probability of such high-loss events; the authors 
of the study suspect in fact that human activity already has. 
4 Health 
Global warming may indirectly affect morbidity, mortality 
and human health. For example, in temperate regions, 
mortality for pneumonia and bronchitis, and cardiovas-
cular, cerebrovascular and heart diseases achieve a winter 
maximum and a summer minimum (Momiyama and 
Katayama 1972). Mortality of infectious diseases other 
than pneumonia and bronchitis is also seasonal, but 
increases both in winter and in summer (Ando 1991). As 
a result of global warming, the mortality rates may be 
reduced in winter and increased in summer (Iriki and 
Tanaka 1987). 
Global warming should affect human hazards such as 
parasites and pathogens, as well as those deriving from 
chemical pollutants. It could also affect hupian health by 
producing changes in air and water quality (Pearman 1988; 
Ewan 1990; Smith 1991; Breslav et al. 1991). Sea-level 
rise and acceleration of drought conditions could produce 
large numbers of environmental refugees with concomitant 
health problems. 
Health problems may increase in cities as the already 
sizeable 'heat island' effect, which has been proven to 
raise temperatures in cities, is added to raised temperatures 
associated with global warming (Sugandhy 1991). 
Estimating the pathophysiological mechanisms of the 
adverse effects of heat stress on human health requires 
experimental studies using model animals. Heat stress in 
laboratory animals significantly induces lipid peroxidation 
in the liver (Ando 1991). Heat stress has significant 
physiological and epidemiological impacts, and increased 
heat stress from climate change could lead to increased 
mortality in certain countries. The degree of acclimatisa-
tion (adaptation) to rising temperatures is expected to be 
extremely important in determining the extent of expected 
increases in mortality (Kalkstein 1989). 
Multi-year observations of the runoff and chemistry of 
168 Russian rivers show that a runoff reduction of 
36 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
30-50 mm (that would result from a temperature increase 
of 1.2° C) would increase river pollution. The concentra-
tions of a number of pollutants in river water would exceed 
national water quality standards in a territory of over 1.2 
million km^. This would render the water unsuitable, 
without pre-treatment, as a potable water supply for human 
settlement (Breslav, Boltneva, and Nazarov 1991). The 
solubility of many pollutants in water is also expected to 
rise with increased temperature. 
Global warming may modify the incidence and range 
of vector-borne diseases. If global warming changes 
rainfall and temperature patterns, the seasonal and geo-
graphical abundance of the major vector species could 
change. Since some vector-borne diseases are well knovm 
to show apparent seasonal changes, the diseases seem to be 
very sensitive to climate, and thus could be sensitive to 
global warming. Diseases such as malaria, Chagas disease 
(trypanosomiasis) schistosomiasis, lymphatic 
filariasis, 
onchocerciasis (river blindness) leishmaniases, dengue 
fever, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis (WHO 1990), 
and Australian encephalitis (Ewan 1990) could potentially 
increase or be reintroduced in many countries as a conse-
quence of global warming. 
More specifically, a recent New Zealand study 
concludes that global warming could increase the possibili-
ty that many medically important pest species currently not 
present in New Zealand could become established there. 
One species, the dengue-bearing Aedes albopictus, has 
recently arrived in Fiji, and is poised to enter New 
Zealand. The islands of Tokelau are also at risk from the 
pest, with sea-leyel rise potentially creating more brackish 
water in which it could breed. Aedes aegypti, which also 
carries dengue and dengue haemorrhagic fever, has only 
been kept out of New Zealand by a few degrees of cold, 
and warming could thus easily change this situation. The 
mosquito that is most important medically in New Zealand 
(Culex quinquefasciatus) could also expand its range with 
increased temperature (New Zealand 1990). 
5 Ultraviolet radiation and health 
One supposition about impacts of UV-B on health that has 
been confirmed is that UV-B induces immunosuppression 
in humans. This was found to affect humans regardless of 
pigmentation, and could lead to greater incidence or 
severity of infectious diseases including (but not limited to) 
the viruses involved in herpes, papilloma, and acquired 
immunodeficiency disease. Previous speculation had been 
that peoples with dark pigmentation might not be at risk, 
but this new discovery indicates that all the world's 
population is at risk from UV-B induced immunosuppres-
sion (UNEP 1991). 
Although U V had been associated with damage to the 
lens, retina and cornea, including the formation of two 
kinds of cataracts, two new conditions have been related to 
U V exposure. These are presbyopia, often called age-
related near-sightedness, and deformations of the anterior 
lens capsule (UNEP 1991). 
Exposure to UV-B is known to be associated with 
increased skin cancers ranging from basal cell and squa-
mous cell carcinomas (BCC and SCC) to more dangerous 
melanomas. Research within the last two years has con-
firmed this further, but has slightly reduced projections of 
incidence from a decrease in ozone. A change in the 
radiation amplification factor for non-melanoma skin 
cancers has reduced projections of incidence increase from 
2.7% (BCC) and 4.6% (SCC) per 1% ozone reduction to 
2.0% and 3.5%, respectively (de Gruijl et al. to be 
published). This has been supported by Moan (1991) m 
estimations of SCC and BCC incidence in the Norwegian 
population. The most up-to-date estimate of skin cancers 
caused by decreased ozone (a 10% decrease lasting two to 
four decades) after three to four decades is 300 000 
additional cases of non-melanoma cancer and 4500 addi-
tional cases of melanoma (UNEP 1991). Recent reports 
also indicate that salivary gland cancer (which is a non-
skin cancer) may be associated with UV-B exposure (Spitz 
1988, 1990). 
6 Air quality 
Global warming would accelerate the photochemical 
reaction rates among chemical pollutants in the atmos-
phere, 
increasing 
oxidants 
in 
many 
urban 
areas 
(Hatakeyama et al. 1991). In the summer, high concentra-
tions of oxidants are already observed in the major metro-
politan area. Predicted global warming may increase the 
ozone concentration in this and other metropolitan areas 
and increase the extent of this pollution as well (Ando 
1991). 
Climate changes could be a major factor on long-term 
trends in acid deposition, air pollution in urban areas, and 
levels of radon emitted from soils (Nazarov 1991). 
The main pollutants derived from photochemical 
reactions are ozone and peroxyacetyl nitrates. There is a 
great deal of evidence associating these photochemical 
oxidants with acute effects on human health. Gas-particle 
partitioning coefficients and gas-phase reaction rates with 
ROj, OH, and O3 are temperature dependent (Pankow and 
Bidleman 1991; Atkinson 1990). 
Biogenic emission of NO and VOC such as isoprene 
would be increased with the increase of air temperature 
(Williams et al. 1987; Junti and Atkinson 1990; De Leeun 
et al. 1990). An increase of 5°C could lead to an almost 
B.III Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
37 
50% increase in tlie total source strength of CH^ (Hameed 
and Cess 1983). A 2°C increase in temperature could be 
associated with a 10-30% increase in tropospheric HjO 
levels, implying a few per cent increase in OH and other 
HO^ family members(Thompson et al. 1989). 
The RTM-lII model was run using an increased 
temperature scenario (a uniform 4°C with an increase in 
water vapour concentration assuming constant specific 
humidity). Peak daily ozone concentrations in the warmer 
model increased by 3 % to 20% (mean increase of 9 %). In 
the midwestem and southeastern United States, the changes 
in ozone ranged front -2.4% to 8.0%, with a mean value 
of 3.4% (Morris et al. 1989). The model suggests that 
approximately three times as many people in central 
California and 60% more people in the midwestem/ 
southeastern modelling domain would be exposed to ozone 
concentrations in excess of US air quality standards as a 
result of the 4°C increase. 
All the other model calculations lead to similar 
tendencies of increase in urban oxidant formation with the 
increase in air temperature (Dodge 1989; Permer et al. 
1989). A decrease in column ozone of 20% would lead to 
an OH increase of roughly 15% over continental areas 
(Thompson et al. 1989; Liu and Trainer 1988)'. The 
concentrations of H N O 3 , P A N and H^Oj would be in-
creased for reduction in overhead ozone (Frank et al. 
1991). 
However, recent information indicates that much of 
the warming would occur at night. Generally that will not 
affect photochemical oxidation because of the absence of 
sunlight during that period. Moreover, warming may cause 
both increased cloudiness and more instances of rainfall: 
both factors would tend to reduce oxidation and encourage 
cleansing of the atmosphere. Thus, the net effect on the 
ambient air quality due to climate change is uncertain in 
both direction and magnitude. 
7 Effects of ultraviolet-B radiation 
7.1 General results 
The effects of U V - B radiation on approximately 300 
species and varieties of plants have now been studied. Of 
those studied, nearly one-half showed physiological 
damage and/or growth in response to UV-B radiation 
(Teramura and Sullivan 1991). A sununary of studies 
conducted on soybean shows that 26 of 41 cultivars tested 
•were sensitive (growth reductions exceeding 5%) to UV-B 
radiation in field or greenhouse studies (Teramura and 
Sullivan 1991). 
It is now widely known that plants grown in growth 
chambers appear to be more sensitive to a given U V dose 
than field-grown plants: The basis for this difference in 
sensitivity comes from the fact that in artificial environ-
ments only a single factor is manipulated; all other factors 
are either kept constant or are optimised for growth. Such 
single factor stresses are rarely experienced by plants 
outdoors (Teramura and Sullivan 1991). 
A general response to drought, nutrient limitations and 
high irradiance (visible and UV) is the accumulation of 
flavonoids in epidermal tissues. These compounds absorb 
strongly in the U V - A and UV-B spectra and their accumu-
lation in the epidermis has been shown to reduce epidermal 
transmittance of U V . It has now been established that the 
synthesis of several of the key enzymes in the flavonoid 
biosynthetic pathway are induced by UV-B (Teramura and 
Sullivan 1991). 
A study of the comparative and cumulative effects of 
UV-B on wheat, rice and soybean seed yields and total 
biomass revealed that UV-B in combination with CO2 
eliminated the latter's enrichment effects in either seed 
yield or biomass for wheat and rice, but yields and 
biomass increased or were maintained in soybeans 
(Teramura 1990). Solar radiation bleaches cellular pig-
ments of freshwater and marine phytoplankton and also 
impairs motility and photomovement of the plankton. 
These effects 
seem to be caused by solar UV-B 
(Eggersdorfer and Hader 1991; Hader and Hader 1989a, 
b; 1990a, b; Hader and Worrest 1991). In the paraflagellar 
body, UV-B radiation has been found to affect the proteins 
that carry the photoreceptor chromophores, flavins, and 
pterins. In addition, the chromophores are affected by the 
radiation. 
Recent measurements in Antarctic waters have indicat-
ed a reduction in photosynthesis rates of 6% to 12% for 
total water column productivity at times and locations 
when increased UV-B was experienced (Smith et al. 1992). 
The photosynthetic pigments are affected and consequently 
the production of energy and reduction equivalents decreas-
es, which in turn hampers CO2 incorporation in organic 
material (Hader and Worrest 1991). UV-B has been found 
to have an effect as far down in the oceans as 37 metres 
(UNEP 1991). 
Marine invertebrates differ greatly in their sensitivity 
to UV-B radiation. Small crustacean and larval shrimp are 
particularly sensitive to UV-B radiation. There is evidence 
that a decrease in column ozone abundance could diminish 
the near-surface 
season 
of invertebrate 
zooplankton 
populations. For some zooplankton, the time spent at or 
near the surface is critical for food gathering and breeding 
(Hader and Worrest 1991). 
The marine phytoplankton communities represent by 
far the largest ecosystem on earth. Therefore, even a small 
percentage decrease in population would result in enor-
mous losses in the biomass productivity of the ocean. 
38 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
which would have dramatic effects both for the intricate 
ecosystem itself and for humans, who depend on this 
system in many ways (Hader et al. 1989). 
There may be considerable differences in sensitivity to 
UV-B radiation between phytoplankton species (Kelly 
1986; U.S. EPA 1987). Increased U V may lead to a 
pronounced shift in the species composition of the primary 
producers a^ well as of the consumers. Indirect, effects may 
also occur ih the form of altered patterns of predation, 
competition, diversity, and trophic dynamics if species 
resistant to UV-B were to replace sensitive species (Hader 
1991). 
Any decrease in the phytoplankton populations will 
decrease the sink capacity for atmospheric COj. A popula-
tion decrease of 10 % would equal the net COj increase due 
to fossil ftjel burning. This is not yet accounted for by the 
current climate change models (Hader 1991). 
7.2 Determination of sensitivities 
Given a 16% ozone decrease over temperate pelagic 
waters, UV-B radiation levels at a depth of 1 meter would 
reach a lethal (50% mortality) cumulative radiation dose in 
fewer than 5 sununer days for about half the zooplanktoh 
species examined. Perhaps even more important, the 
threshold levels of UV-B exposure would occur earlier in 
the year than has been the case, a time when these species 
are normally found near the surface (Damkaer et al. 1981; 
Dey et al. 1988). 
On the North American Pacific coastal shelf, anchovy 
larvae are restricted to the upper 0.5 metres, and therefore 
a 16% ozone reduction could lead to large increases in 
larval mortality (Hunter et al. 1982). Experiments have 
shown that larvae 2, 4, and 12 days old would have 50, 
82, and 100% mortality (Hader and Worrest 1991). 
For the sensitive soybean cultivar, a 25% ozone 
reduction reduced overall yield by 19-25% during four of 
the six years. In contrast, yield increased from 5 to 22% 
in five of the six years for the UV-B resistant cultivar 
(Teramura and Sullivan 1991). After three years of 
supplemental irradiation of UV-B simulated those that 
would be anticipated with stratospheric ozone reductions of 
16 % and 25 %, plant biomass was reduced by 12 % to 20 % 
at the highest simulated ozone depletion (Sullivan and 
Teramura 1991). 
7.3 Study tasks for the near future in aquatic eco-
systems 
The molecular mechanisms for UV-B damage need to be 
determined for many zoo- and phytoplankton species. 
especially those that are ecologically important. The 
question remains whether the gene pool within plankton 
species is variable enough to adapt during the relatively 
gradual changes anticipated for UV-B radiation exposure. 
The combined effects of direct (larval mortality) and 
indirect (food web) losses cannot as yet be predicted, nor 
have assessments been made of adaptive strategies or 
genetic selections that could minimise population or 
ecosystem effects. 
The problems of extrapolating laboratory findings to 
the open sea, and the nearly complete absence of data of 
the long-term effects and ecosystem responses make it 
difficult to assess the possible long-term impacts of 
increased U V radiation. 
The interaction between UV-B dose and microclimate 
variation needs further evaluation. Studies extending over 
several growing seasons and an evaluation of the metabolic 
or energetic costs of producing and maintaining high 
flavonoid concentration will be necessary to determine the 
effects of increasing solar UV-B radiation on overall tree 
productivity. 
UV-tolerant plants do possess various types of U V -
protective and repair processes, 
which suggests that 
increased U V resistance in crops might be achieved via 
breeding programs. But we currently lack information on 
the genetic basis and heritability of U V resistance to 
estimate the feasibility of such crop improvement pro-
grams. 
We know very little about potential indirect effects of 
UV-B radiation changes on competitive ability or resistance 
to insects and pathogens. 
References 
Ando, M . 1991. 'Risk Evaluation of Global Warming on 
Health', International Conference on Climate Impacts on 
the Environment and Society, pp. 49-54, WMO and 
University of Tsukuba, Japan. 
Asaduzzamann, M . 1991. 'The Climatic Changes in 
Bangladesh and their Impact', in: Proceedings of the 
Asia-Pacific Seminar on Climate Change. Published by 
the Environment Agency of Japan, Nagoya, 23-26 
January 1991. 
Atkinson, A. 1990. 'Gas-phase tropospheric chemistry of 
organic compounds: A review', Atmos. Environ., 24A, 
' 
pp.1-41. 
Bird, Eric C.F. 1986. 'Potential effects of sea-level rise on 
the coasts of Australia, Africa, and Asia', in: Effects of 
Changes in Statospheric Ozone and Global Climate. J.G. 
Titus (ed.). Vol. 4: Sea-level Rise, US EPA and UN 
Environment Program, October 1986. 
BRE 1990. 'Climate Change and Construction costs in the 
Plymouth area', BRE/CR 
35/90. Building Research 
B.IU 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
39 
Establishment, Watford; as quoted in U.K. 1991 (see 
below). 
Breslav, J.I., Boltneva, L.I. and Nazarov, I.M. 1991. 
'Additions to Chapter 5 on the issue of climate change 
impact on water surface quality', USSR expert proposal, 
unpublished, Moscow. 
Chaterjee, K. 1991. 'India's Country Paper', in: Proceed-
ings of the Asia-Pacific Seminar on Climate Change. 
Published by the Environment Agency of Japan, Nagoya, 
Japan 23-26 January 1991. 
Carcavallo R. and Martinez A. 1985. Biology, Ecology and 
Geographical Distribution of american tiiotomines, 
Chapter XTV: Biological, Ecological and Geographical 
Factors in the Oiagas Disease, Pan-American Health 
Office. Editors: Carcavallo R., Ravinovich J and Term 
Robert. 
Commonwealth Secretariat 1989. Qimate Change, Meeting 
the Challenge. September 1989. 
Damkaer, D . M . , Dey, D.B. and Heron, D.A. 1981. 
'Dose/dose-rate responses of shrimp larvae to UV-B 
radiation', Oecolcgia, 48, pp. 178-182. 
De Gruyl, F.R. and J.C. van der Leun 1991. 'Acdon Spectra 
for Carcinogenesis', Contribution to Proceedings of the 
Symposium on the Biologic Effects of UVA Radiation, 
San Antonio, 27-28 June 1991. in: UNEP (1991) 
Environmental Effects of Ozone Depletion, van der Leun 
and Tevini (eds.). 
Debrah, Lt. Col. Christine 1989. Address to the Conference 
on Implications of Climate Change for Africa, Howard 
University, Washington, D.C., 5 May 1989. 
Dennis, K.C., Nicholls, R.J. and Leatherman, S.P. 1991. 
Technical Reports Attachment—'Case Studies on Vul-
nerability Analysis Assessments on Sea-level Rise'; US 
EPA Coastal Land Loss Studies. 
Dey, D.B., Damkaer, D . M . and Heron, D.A. 1988. 'V-B 
dose/dose-rate responses of seasonally abundant copepods 
of Puget Sound', Oecologia, 76, pp.321- 329. 
De Leeuw, F . A . A . M . , Van Rheineck Leyssius, H.J. and 
Builtjes, P.J.H. 1990. 'Calculation of long-term averaged 
ground level ozone concentrations', Atmos. Environ., 
24A, pp. 185-193. 
Dodge, M.C. 1989. ' A comparison of three photochemical 
oxidant mechanisms', J. 
Geophys. Res., 94, D4, 
pp.5121-5236. 
Eggersdorfer, B. and Hader, D.P. 1991. 'Photoaxis, 
Gravitaxis and Vertical Migrations in the Marine 
Dinoflagellate Prorocentrum micans', FEMS Micro-
biology Ecology, 85, pp. 319-326. 
Emanuel, K,A. 1987. 'TheDependenceof Hurricane Intensi-
ty on Climate', A^afwre 326, pp.483-485. 
Environment Agency of Japan 1991. Proceedings of the 
Asia-Pacific Seminar on Climate Change. Nagoya, 23-26 
January 1991. 
Ewan, C , Bentley, K. and Foster, R.V. (eds.) 1990. Impacts 
on Human Health of Climate Change. National Health 
and Medical Council in Australia. 
French, H. 1989. Presentation to Climate Instimte Sympo-
sium on the Arctic and Global Change. Ottawa, Canada, 
26 October 1989. 
Golitsyn, G.S. 1989; 'Climate Changes and Related issues'. 
Presentation at Symposium on Global Climate, Sundance, 
Utah 24 August 1989. 
Granger, Orman E. 1989. 'Implications for Caribbean 
Societies of Climate Change, Sea-level Rise, and Shifts 
in Storm Patterns', in: Coping with Climate Change. 
John C. Topping (ed.),. Climate Institute, Washington, 
D.C., USA. 
Hader, D.p. 1991. 'Effects of Enhanced Solar Ultraviolet 
Radiation on Aquatic Ecosystems', Biophysics of 
Photoreceptors and Photomovements in Microorganisms. 
Edited by F. Lenci et al., Plenum Press, NY. pp. 157-
172. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader, M . 1989a. 'Effects of Solar 
Radiationon Photoorientation, Motility, and Piginentation 
in a Freshwater Cryptomonas', Botanica Acta, 102, 
pp.236-240. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader, M . 1989b. 'Effects of Solar 
Radiationon Photoorientation,Motility, and Pigmentation 
in Cyanophoraparadoxa',/lrc/! Microbiol., 152, pp.454-
457. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader, M . 1990a. 'Effects of Solar 
RadiationonPhotoorientation,Motility, and Pigmentation 
in a Freshwater Cryptomonas', Journ. Photochemistry 
and Photobiology, B: Biology, 5, pp.105- 114. 
Hader, D.P. and Hader, M . 1990b. 'Effects of Solar 
Radiation on Photporientation,Motility, and Pigmentation 
in Two Strains of the Cyanobacteria uncmm'. Acta ^ 
Protozoologica, 29, pp.291-230. 
Hader, D.P. and Liu, S.M. 1990. 'Effects of artificial and 
solar UV-B Radiation on the Gravitactic Orientation of 
the Dinoflagellate, Peridinium gatunense', FEMS Micro-
biology Ecology, 13, p^.331-33%. 
Hader, D.P. and Worrest, R.C. 1991. 'Effects of Enhanced 
Solar Ultraviolet Radiation on Aquatic Ecosystems', 
Photochemistry and Photobiology, 53, pp.717-725. 
Hameed, S. and Cess, R.D. and Whitten, G.Z. 1987. 
'Tropospheric ultra-violet radiation assessment of existing 
data and effect on ozone formation', SYSAPP-87/191. 
Hansen, J., Rind, D., Del Genio, A., Lacis, A., Lebedeff, 
S., Prather, M . , Ruedy, R. and Karl, T. 1989. 'Regional 
Greenhouse Climate Effects', in: Coping with Climate 
Change, John C. Topping (ed.), Climate Institute, 
Washington, D.C., USA. 
Hatakeyama, S., Akimoto, H. and Washida, N . 1991. 
'Effect of temperature on the Formation of Photochemi-
. cal Oxidants—Potential Impact of Global Warming on 
Air Quality', International Conference on Climatic 
Impacts on the Environment and Society, pp. 85-90, 
WMO and University of Tsukuba, Japan, January 1990. 
Hobn-Hansen, O. 1990. 'UV Radiation in Antarctic Waters: 
Effect on Rates of Primary Production', in: Proc. 
Workshop on 'Response of Marine Phytoplankton to 
Natural Variations in UV-B Flux', at Scripps Institution 
of Oceanography. 
40 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
Hunter, J.R., Kaupp, S.E. and Taylor, J.H. 1982. 'Assess-
ment of Effects of U V Radiation on Marine Fish 
Larvae', in: The Role of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation on 
Marine Fish Larvae, J. Caulkins(ed.), pp.459-497. 
Plenum, New York. 
Iriki, M . and Tanaka, M . 1987. 'Accidental Hypothermia in 
Japan', in: Clirrmte and Human Health, World Climate 
Programme 
Applications, 
World 
Meteorological 
Organization. 
Jacobsen, Jodi E. 1989. 'Abandoning Homelands', in: State 
of the World, WorldWatch Institute, Washington D . C , 
USA. 
Jones, W.R. and Frith, W.J. 1989. Road Safety Patterns and 
Trends in New Zealand 1980-1987. Safety Policy 
Branch, Land Transport, Ministry of Transport pp.3-17. 
Junti, S., Arey, J. and Atkinson, R. 1990. 'Monoterpene 
emission rate measurements from a monterey pine', J. 
Ceophys. Res., 95, D6, pp.7515-7519. 
Kalkstein, L.S. 1989. 'The Impact of CO^ and Trace Gas-
induced Climate Changes Upon Human Mortality', in: 
The Potential Effects of Global Qimate Change on the 
United States: Appendix G—Health, Smith, J.B. and 
Tirpak, D.A. (eds.), prepared by EPA for the U.S. 
Congress. 
Kelly, J.R. 1986. 'How might Enhanced Levels of Solar UV-
B Radiation Affect Marine Ecosystems?' in: Proceedings 
of EPA/UNEP International Conference on Health and 
Environmental Effects of Ozone Modification and 
Climate Change, July 1986. 
Leatherman, Stephen P. 1989. 'Beach response strategies to 
accelerated sea-ieve! rise', in: Coping with Qimate 
Change, 
J.C 
Topping (ed.). 
Climate 
Institute, 
Washington, D . C , USA. 
Lee, J. A. 1985. Tlie Environment, Public Health and Human 
Ecology, Considerations for Economic Development. 
World Bank Publications, John Hopkins University 
Press. 
Liu, S.C and Trainer, M . 1988. 'Response of the tropo-
spheric ozone and odd hydrogen radicals to column ozone 
change',/. Atmos. Chem., 6, pp.221-233. 
Liverman, Diana 1991. The Regional Impacts of Global 
Warming in Mexico: Uncertainty, Vulnerability and 
Response. Winning paper in the 1991 Woodlands 
conference and Mitchell prize competition. 
Linder, K.P., Gibbs, M.J. and Inglis, M.R. 1989. Potential 
Impacts of Qimate Change on Electric Utilities. Electric 
Power Research Institute, report EN-6249. 
McBoyle, G. and Wall, G. 1992. Global Warming and its 
Effect on the Great Lakes Region, (in press) 
Miller, T.R. 1989. 'Impacts of Global Climate Change on 
Metropolitan Infrastructure', in: Coping with Climate 
Change, 
J.C. 
Topping (ed.). 
Climate 
Institute, 
Washington, D . C , USA. 
Ministry of Construction of Japan 1989. 'Tasks for River 
Administration in Relation to the Global Environmental 
Issues', Unpublished manuscript • (in Japanese), in: 
Hanaki, K. (1991); Effects of Global Warming on Human 
Settlement—Review of Researches Conducted in Japan 
(unpublished manuscript). 
Miyazaki, S. and Tohyama D. 1991. 'Effects of Sea-level 
Rise on the Japanese Coastal Area', 
Environmental 
System Research 19, pp.22-27 (in Japanese), in: Hanaki, 
K. (1991); Effects of Global Warming on Human 
Settlement—Review of Researches Conducted in Japan 
(unpublished manuscript). 
Moan, J. 1991. 'Ozone Hole and Biological Consequences', 
/. 
of Photochem. Photobiol., 9, pp.244- 247. in: 
UNEP(1991) Environmental Effects of Ozone Depletion, 
van der Leun and Tevini, (eds.). 
Momiyama, M . and Katayama, K. 1972. 'Deseasonalization 
of Mortality in the World', InternationalJ. Biomet., 16, 
pp.329-342. 
Morris, R.E., Gery, M.W., Liu, M . K . , Moore, G.E., Daly, 
C , Greenfield, S.M. 1989. 'Sensitivity of a Regional 
Oxidant Model to Variations in Climate Parameters', in: 
The Potential Effects of Global Qimate Change on the 
United States; Appendix F—Air Quality, Smith, J .B. (ed.). 
Nazarov, I. 1991. Submission to IPCC Working Group n by 
panel of experts. 
New Zealand Ministry of the Environment 1990. Climate 
Change: Impacts on New Zealand prepared by the New 
Zealand Climate Change Program, M.P. Mosely, chair. 
Ngu, Due Ngyuen and Heiu, Trong Ngyuen 1991. 'A Review 
of Climate Change in Vietnam During the Last 100 
Years', in: Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Seminar on 
Climate Change, Environment Agency of Japan, Nagoya, 
Japan 23-26 January 1991, pp. 186- 190. 
Nicholls, N . 1991. Summary of UNEP-sponsored Working 
Group on the Societal Impacts of El Niiio-Southern 
Oscillation Events, Bangkok, 4-7 November 1991. 
Nicholls, R.J., Dennis, and Leatherman, S.P. 1991. Techni-
cal Reports Attachment—Ca.?e Studies on Vulnerability 
Analysis Assessments on Sea level Rise, US EPA Coastal 
Land Loss Studies. 
Oguntoyinbo, J.S. 1991. 'Climate Impacts on Environment 
and Society in the Sudano-Sahelian Zone of West 
Africa', in: Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Climate Impacts on the Environment and Society. 
Tsukuba, 27 January-1 February 1991. 
Orce L . 1990. Radiacion Ultravioleta y Ozone Atmosferico, 
Cincia Hoy, Vol. 2 No 9. 
Palutikof, J. 1991. Weather and Road Accidents, Parry, 
A.H. and Symons, L . (ed.). Highway Meteorology. 
Spon. Limited (in press). 
Pankow, J.F. and Bidleman, T.F. 1991. 'Effects of tempera-
ture, TSP and percent non-exchangeable material in 
determining the gas-particle partitioning of organic 
compounds', ^rmo.y. Environ., 25A, pp.2241- 2249. 
Parry, M . L . , Magalhaes, A.R. and N.H. Ninh 1991. The 
Potential Socio-Economic Effects of Qimate Change. A 
summary of three regional assessments. United Nations 
Environmental Programme. 
Parry, M . L . and Read, N.J. 1988. The Impact of Qimate 
Oiange on UK Industry, Atmospheric Impacts Group, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham UK. 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
41 
Pearman, G.I. (ed.) 1988. Greenhouse: Planning for Qimate 
Change CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia. 
Penner, J.E., Connell, P.S., Wuebbles, D.J. and Covery, 
C.C. 1989. 'Climate change and its interactions with air 
chemistry: Perspective and research needs', in: The 
Potential Effects of Global Qimate Change on the United 
States: Appendix F-Air Quality, Ed. by Smith, J.B. and 
Tirpak., D.A., EPA 230-05-89-056, pp.1-1-1078. 
Perry and Symons 1991. 'The Potential Effects of Climate 
Change in the United Kingdom',—First Report of the 
Climate Change Impacts Review Group, January 1991 
(M.L. Parry, Chairman). 
Rahman, A. Atiq and Huq, Saleemul 1989. 'Greenhouse 
effect 
and Bangladesh: a conceptual 
framework', 
pp.23-37 in The Greenhouse Effect and Coastal Area of 
Bangladesh, Coastal Area Resource Development and 
Management 
Association; eds. 
Moudud, Rashid, 
Rahman, Hossain, Proceedings of an international 
conference held in Dhaka, Bangladesh, 5 March 1989 
Rosenberg, N.J. 1989, 'The increasing CO2 concentration in 
the atmosphere and its implicationon agricultural produc-
tivity, n. Effects through COj induced climate change', 
Qimatic Change, 4, pp.239-254. 
Roy, P. and Connell, J. 1991. 'Climatic Change and the 
Future of Atoll States', Journal of Coastal Research, 1, 
pp. 1057-1075. 
Safiullah, Syed 1989. 'Disaster - Percepdon Cycle', Re-
marks presented at IPCC Section 5 WGII meeting, 
Tsukuba, Japan, 18-21 September 1989. 
Smith, R.C., Prezelin, R.B. and 11 others 1992. 'Ozone 
Depletion: Ultraviolet Radiation and Phytoplankton 
Biology in Antarctic Waters'. In: Science, 21 February, 
Vol 255 No. 5047, pp.952-959. 
Smith, J.B. et al. 1991. 'The potential international impacts 
of climate change: Preliminary Results for the U.S. EPA 
Studies', in: CIES: International Conference on Climatic 
Impacts on the Environment and Society—Proceedings, 
Tsukuba, 27 January - 1 February 1991. 
Smith, J.B., Benioff, R., Titus, J.G., Dennis, K.C., 
Nicholls, R., Leatherman,S.P., Rosenzweig, C , Smith, 
T.M., Riebsame, W.E. and Kalkstein, L.S. 1991. 'The 
Potential International Impacts of Climate Change: 
Preliminary Results from the US EPA Studies', 
International Conference on Climatic Impacts on the 
Environment and Society, pp.61-66, 
WMO and 
University of Tsukuba. 
Sotelo, Romula Jordan 1991. 'Summary of the impact of El 
Nino in the Southeast Pacific and References on global 
warming', presented at the November 1991 UNEP 
Conference on El Nirio. 
Spitz, M.R., Sider, J.G. Newell, G.R. and Batsakis, J.G. 
1988. 'Incidence of salivary gland cancer in the United 
States relative to ultraviolet radiation exposure'. Head 
Neck Surgery. 10, pp. 305-308, in: UNEP(1991) Envi-
ronmental Effects of Ozone Depletion, van der Leun and 
Tevini (eds.). 
Steiner, J.T.1990. 'Transport', in: New Zealand Ministry of 
the Environment (1990) Climate Change Impacts on New 
Zealand; Implications for the Environment, Economy, 
and Society, prepared by the New Zealand Climate 
Change Program, J.P. Mosley, chair. 
Sugandhy, Aca 1989. 'Preliminary findings on potential 
impact of climate change in Indonesia', 
Remarks 
presented at IPCC Section 5 WGII meeting, Tsukuba, 
Japan, 18-21 September 1989. 
Sugandhy, Aca 1991. 'Policy on Climate Change: Indonesian 
Response Strategies to Sustain Development and Environ-
ment', Paper presented at Global Climate Change: 
National Response Strategies, Kartika Plaza Hotel, 
Jakarta, Indonesia, 8-9 November 1991, p.6. 
Sullivan, J.H. and Teramura, A.H. 1991. The effects of 
ultra-violet-B radiation on loblolly pine. 2. Growth of 
field-grown seedhngs. Trees Structure and Function, (in 
press) 
Tebicke, Haile Lul 1989. Personal communication. 
Teramura, A.H. 1990. 'Implications of Stratospheric Ozone 
Depletion Upon Plant Production', Hart Science, 25, 
pp. 1557-1560. 
Teramura, A.H. and Sullivan, J.H. 1991. 'Potential Impacts 
of Increased Solar U V - B on Global Plant Productivity', 
Photobiology, edited by E. Riklis, Plenum Press, NY, 
pp.625-634. 
Tickell, Sir Crispin 
1989. 'Environmental Refugees', 
National Environment Research Council Annual Lecture, 
at the Royal Society, London, 5 June 1989. 
Timmerman, Peter 1989. 'Everything else will not remain 
equal; the challenge of social science research in the face 
of a global climate warming', in: Impacts of Climate 
Change on the Great Lakes, US National Climate 
Program Office and Canadian Climate Centre, January 
1989. 
Titus J. 1991. 'Greenhouse Effect and Coastal WeUand 
Policy: How Americans Could Abandon an Area die Size 
of Massachusetts at Minimum Cost', Environmental 
Management, 15, No.l, pp.39-58. 
Thompson, A . M . , Stewart, R.W., Owens, M . A . and 
Herwehe,J.A. 1988. 'Sensitivity of tropospheric oxidants 
to global chemical and climate change',/4fmc's. Environ., 
23, pp.519-532. 
UK Department of Environment 1991. 'The Potential 
Effects of Climate Change in the United Kingdom' -
First Report of the Climate Change Impacts Review 
Groiip. 
UNEP 1991. Draft: 'Environmental Effects of Ozone Deple-
tion', Van der Leun and Tevini,(eds.). 
US DOE 1991. 'Processes for Identifying Regional Influences 
of and Responses to Increasing Atmospheric CO2 and 
Climate Change—The MINK Project'. 
US EPA 1987. 'An assessment of the effects of UV-B 
radiation on aquatic organisms', in: Assessing the Risks 
of Trace Gases that Can Modify the Stratosphere, EPA 
400/l-87/001C,pp.(12)l. 
Williams, E.J., Parrish, D.D. and Fehsenfeld, F.C. 1987. 
'Determination of nitrogen oxide emissions from soil: 
Results from a grassland site in Colorado, United States', 
J. Geophys. Res., 92, D2, pp.2173-2179. 
42 
B.III 
Energy; human settlement; transport and industry; human health; air quality; UV-B radiation 
World Health Organisation Task Group 1990. Potential 
ment', Unpublished paper prepared for the National Environ-
Heahh Effects of Climate Change. 
mental Protection Agency, People's Republic of China, 
Yakovlev, A. 1991. Submission to IPCC Working Group n 
May 21. 
Portions published 
in Proceedings of 
the 
by panel of experts. 
Asia-Pacific Seminar on Climate Change, Environment 
Ye, Ruqui 1991. 'An assessment of the impact of climate 
Agency of Japan, Nagoya, Japan, 23-26 January 1991. 
change caused by human activities on China's environ 
c 
Agriculture and forestry-related issues 
The work carried out under this task is discussed under the headings of: 
Agriculture and forestry 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
Hydrology and water resources 
IV Agriculture and forestry 
Senior author: C Rosenzweig (USA) 
Authors 
D Maclver (Canada) 
P Hall (Canada) 
M Parry (UK) 
O Sirotenko (Russia) 
J Burgos (Argentina) 
IV Agriculture and forestry 
I Agriculture 
Progress since 1990 
Since the publication of the first IPCC Impacts Assess-
ment, progress in the study of agricultural impacts of 
climate change has continued on many fronts. In this 
update, we have adopted the structure of the original IPCC 
report on agriculture and forestry and for each section of 
the original report,we identify first, what, if any, new 
work has been done and second, whether this new work 
leads to any different conclusions from the 1990 report. 
New sections are added where necessary. 
1 Climatic scenarios 
While assumptions about climatic scenarios have not 
changed for the purposes of the ongoing IPCC assessment, 
it is important to note that improvements in methods for 
generating climate change scenarios are under develop-
ment. One such method is the nesting of meso-scale 
meteorological models within general circulation models 
(GCMs) to improve regional climate change prediction 
(Giorgi and Meams 1991). Another method is the use of 
stochastic weather generation models to generate synthetic 
daily time series with changes in variance, as well as 
means (Wilks 1991; Meams et al. 1992). This is helpful 
because most impact studies so far have been limited to the 
mvestigation of the effects of mean changes in climate 
variables. 
Some studies have begun to investigate the effect of 
potential changes in climate variance on the variability of 
crop yields, a key factor of agricultural stability. The 
question of agricultural sensitivity to climatic variability 
has been researched by superimposing past variations on 
altered average conditions to assess impacts for crop 
yields, farm returns and risks, and regional production in 
Ontario, Canada (Brklacich and Smit 1992), and the 
American midwest (Easterling et al. 1991). The effects of 
a range of temperature and precipitation variance changes, 
as well as future changes in variance predicted by one 
GCM, on simulated wheat yields in Kansas have been 
analysed by Meams et al. (1992). Further investigation of 
climate and crop yield variabilities should be encouraged. 
Improved prediction of potential future hydrological 
regimes (including estimates of changes in soil moisture 
and groundwater availability) continues to be a critical 
need for agricultural impact studies. Recent work on 
climate change scenarios suggests that the frequency of 
heavy rainfall events at almost all latitudes may increase 
with global warming, while the numbers of raindays in 
mid latitudes may decrease (Pittock et al. 1991; Whetton 
and Pittock 1991). These changes may bring a nearly 
global increase in flood and high runoff events, leading to 
soil degradation and flood control problems, as well as 
reductions in the return period of droughts. Observations 
of hydrological variables, such as the recently published 
soil moisture dataset by Vinnikov and Yeserkepova (1991), 
should be useful in testing understanding of current and 
projected hydrological relationships. Still critically needed 
is the development of improved regional scenarios for 
monsoonal areas (Yoshino 1991). 
Another key point which is emerging is that the 
emphasis of previous climate change studies on the 
arbitrary doubling of atmospheric CO2 levels (or their 
equivalent) may be limiting estimation of impacts (Cline 
1992). Atmospheric CO^ concentration is projected to 
increase beyond doubling to 1600 ppm by the year 2250 
(Sundquist 1990) and G C M simulations have shown large 
warming effects of COj at such levels (Manabe and Bryan 
1985). Greater warming beyond the equivalent doubled 
CO2 level has implications for projections of agricultural 
impacts, because higher temperatures may lead to earlier 
maturity and lower yields of determinate 
crops in 
temperate regions, higher levels of potential evapo-
transpiration and water stress, and possible high tempera-
ture damage to yield quality (Wang and Hennessey 1991). 
While the climatic effects of CO2 may negatively affect 
agricultural production at concentrations higher than 
doubled, the beneficial direct effects of COj on crop 
growth may level off at higher COj concentrations, as seen 
in experimental work on leaf photosynthetic rates (Akita 
and Moss 1973), leading to potentially greater negative 
impacts later. 
2 Assumptions concerning technology and manage-
ment 
Since the publication of the first IPCC Impacts Assess-
ment, there has been a growing emphasis on the need for 
'moving' pictures of how agriculture may respond to 
transient climate changes over time. Research has begun to 
grapple with how such transient projections of agricultural 
technology should be estimated (Rosenberg and Crosson 
1991). For example, conventional plant breeding and 
biotechnology are each expected to improve yields on the 
order of 1-2%/year (Pimentel et al. 1992) and such esti-
mates should be factored into projections of future impacts 
of climate change. Other probable future changes in 
agriculture include higher fossil fuel prices and greater use 
of crops for fuel and paper fibre. 
The vulnerability of crops to climate change may be 
either increased (by design) or diminished (inadvertently) 
by fiiture technological changes. If technological advances 
46 
narrow the optimal range of input conditions for 
agricultural production (eg need for high levels of fertilis-
er), and if climate change results in increased variability 
such as increases in frequency of droughts as well, produc-
tion risks may also be expected to increase. 
3 Potential impacts on agriculture and land use 
3.1 Critical types of climatic change 
In the area of direct climatic effects on crop growth, recent 
work shows that continued concern for future agricultural 
production appears warranted, a confirmation of the IPCC 
conclusions. Drought frequency may indeed increase in 
low and mid latitudes owing to increases in the demand of 
the atmosphere for water (potential evapotranspiration) 
over the supply (precipitation) (Rind et al. 1990) and to 
higher frequency of occurrence of dry spells (Pittock et al. 
1991), although direction of change in climate variability 
of temperature and precipitation overall is still uncertain 
(Meams et al. 1992). 
Other critical types of newly identified climate effects 
are slight amounts of warming in the early stages of the 
projected climate change or increases in variability. These 
types of climate change may increase frost damage to 
crops (demonstrated 
by simulating wheat growth in 
Kansas), as slight warming or augmented variability 
actually lessens winter hardiness while not eliminating hard 
frosts altogether in some regions (Meams et al. 1992). 
3.2 Regions of risk 
Conferences since the advent of the IPCC have echoed the 
concept of regions at risk, based on preliininary projections 
of adverse climate change and present-day resource ability 
to support existing populations. More detailed descriptions 
of vulnerable regions and methodologies for integrated 
regional assessment of the potential effects of climate 
change have been brought forward, with emphasis on 
sensitive regions where farmers lack financial resources, 
fertile land, irrigation, drought-tolerant seeds, alternative 
employment options, or reasonable prices for inputs and 
products (Houston Advanced Research Center 1991). Jodha 
(1989) has shown that traditional farming systems encom-
pass a wide range of adjustments to loss and advocates the 
preparation of an inventory of current fanning practices 
available for transfer to regions with changing climates. 
However, Jodha also cautions that unequal social structures 
and international positions, as well as unequal land tenure, 
high numbers of landless rural dwellers, low incomes and 
CIV 
Agriculture and forestry 
high national debts may increase vulnerability to climate 
change. 
4 Direct effects of elevated COj and other greenhouse 
gases 
4.1 Combined effects of climatic and direct effects of 
CO, 
A fundamental question that remains despite continued 
research since the publication of the initial IPCC assess-
ment is the overall relative importance of direct and 
indirect effects of COj on future crop production. On an 
individual cultivar and crop basis these effects have been 
shown to vary considerably, depending on plant physiology 
and the coincident levels of COj, temperature and water 
availability. Some scientists weight the beneficial effects of 
CO2 as the dominant factor, while others are sceptical that 
the large benefits seen in experimental settings will be seen 
in farmers' fields under changing climate conditions. Free 
air release of CO2 experiments on cotton are continuing in 
Phoenix, Arizona (Hendrey et al. 1992), and other free air 
release experiments are under way elsewhere (Miglietta 
1991). 
While the separate effects of atmospheric CO2 concen-
tration and temperature on specific plant processes have 
been studied extensively, the interactive effects of tempera-
ture and atmospheric COj concentration over the entire 
growing season continue to be less well understood. 
Combined studies of direct and indirect effects of CO2 on 
crops have intensified to provide clarification. A recently 
published review of these experiments showed that as 
temperature increased (levels not given), relative increases 
in plant growth and photosynthesis were greater under CO2 
enrichment (Allen et al. 1990). The extent of the tempera-
ture-COj interaction differed considerably among species: 
C4 species were less responsive (as they have been shown 
to be to CO2 increases alone) than C3 crops, and sorghum 
showed no response. The relative decrease in stomatal con-
ductance to water vapour due to CO2 was greater (as much 
as 25%) as temperaUires rose. 
There is a further need for studies of temperature and 
COj interactions on crops and cultivars from diverse 
agricultural systems. These studies should be designed to 
test a wide range of levels of both factors and to quantify 
a full complement of crop physiological and phenological 
responses. Preliminary work suggests that potential crop 
responses to combined higher CO2 and higher temperature 
may counter, at least in part, negative effects of climate 
change through gains in water use efficiency. From a 
regional perspective, however, water consumption per unit 
of land area may not change significantly due to plants 
CIV 
Agriculture and forestry 
47 
with larger biomass (Eamus 1991). Furthermore, given the 
trajectories for projected increases in greenhouse gases 
(GHGs) other than CO2, greater warming may occur with 
lower amounts of CO2 and thus lower levels of COj 
fertilisation (Clme 1992). 
Because experimental settings are limited and costly, 
crop growth models are required tools for simulating the 
combined responses of crops to elevated COj and climate 
change, especially at scales beyond one or several plants. 
Some of the efforts under way are described in Hesketh 
and Aim (1992) and Reynolds et al. (1992). Simulation 
models for wheat growth have demonstrated that higher 
temperatures cause earlier maturation, which can cancel 
out any gain in yield from higher CO2, and that only 
cultivars adapted to high temperatures may do well in a 
warmer 
and COj-enriched environment 
(Wang and 
Hennessy 1991). These authors also cite experimental work 
showing that wheat quality can be significantly reduced by 
spells of high temperature above 35 °C. 
4.2 Competition 
A review of the implications of increasing CO2 and climate 
change on competition in agricultural ecosystems has 
confirmed the original IPCC conclusion that differential 
growth responses to both CO, concentration and climate 
change will affect future competitive ability and fitness of 
plants (Patterson and Flint 1990). The relative importance 
of various weed species in agro-ecosystems may change, 
but selection of adapted crop varieties and management 
methods may minimise negative impacts. Weedy species 
with broad ecological amplitudes are likely to prosper at 
the expense of endemic species or those already in margin-
al habitats. In the tropics, important C 4 crops such as 
maize and sugarcane, which are adapted to hot, dry 
conditions, may experience yield reductions because of the 
improved performance of C3 weeds (Bazzaz and Fajer 
1992). 
4.3 Pest interactions 
While experiments have tested some isolated aspects of 
pest infestations at elevated COj concentrations, it is still 
hard to project future pest-COj interactions. Some experi-
ments have shown that some insect populations may 
decline owing to lower nutritional quality of leaves; this 
could lead to reconfiguration of many ecological interac-
tions. Other experimental work has shown that insects 
consume more leaves in order to compensate for lower 
nutritional quality; this could work to negate benefits in 
crop yields caused by higher CO2 levels (Bazzaz and Fajer 
1992). 
5 Multiple stresses 
It is important to emphasise that the future is projected to 
bring simultaneous multiple stresses, such as elevated U V -
B radiation and augmented tropospheric ozone, in combi-
nation with high COj, and that these may negate the 
beneficial physiological effects in some crops. Higher 
levels of CO2 may partially offset damage from tropo-
spheric ozone, sulfiir dioxide and other pollutants, through 
stomatal closure (Allen 1990). Experiments reported by 
Teramura et al. (1990) show that no increase in wheat or 
rice grain yield, occurred under conditions ,of combined 
elevated UV-B and COj. Soybeans, on the other hand, 
produced more yield under the same conditions. A review 
of experimental literature has shown that susceptibility to 
plant pathogens may increase with higher UV-B radiation 
(Pimentel et al. 1992). 
6 Effects of climate change on soil properties 
New work has improved knowledge of the soil as a source 
of GHGs and of the potential impacts of climate change on 
soils (Buol et al. 1990; Bouwman 1990; Scharpenseel et al. 
1990; 
US National Science Foundation 1992). Global 
climate change will affect soils primarily through changes 
in soil moisture, soil temperature and soil organic matter. 
Higher air temperatures will cause greater potential 
evapotranspiration and higher soil temperatures, which 
should increase solution chemical reaction rates and 
diffiision-controlled reactions. Solubilities of soil and 
gaseous components may either increase or decrease, but 
the consequences of these changes may take many years to 
become significant. 
A study.of potential land degradation in New South 
Wales, Australia, predicted significant increases in soil 
erosion, sedimentation and salinity if rainfall intensities 
increase (Aveyard 1988), while a study of soil erosion 
potential in the US using the Universal Soil Loss Equation 
found that national average sheet and rill erosion changes 
are projected to range from about -5% to 16% (Phillips et 
al. 1991). 
Higher temperatures will accelerate the decay of soil 
organic matter, resulting in release of COj to the atmo-
sphere and decrease in carbon/nitrogen ratios, although 
these two effects should be offset somewhat by the greater 
root biomass and crop residues resulting from plant 
responses to higher COj. The tendency of increased 
temperature to increase decomposition may also be offset 
48 
C.rV 
Agriculture and forestry 
by the negative impact of increased carbon/ nitrogen ratios 
on decomposition, and the negative impact of drought on 
decomposition, if droughts become more frequent in a 
warmer climate. Higher temperatures could also increase 
mineralisation rates, improving availability of phosphorous 
and potassium and speeding colloid formation. 
7 Effects of climate change on the distribution of 
agricultural pests and diseases 
Recent reviews echo the earlier IPCC conclusion that 
ecological conditions for insect growth and abundance are 
expected to improve overall through lengthening of 
breeding seasons and extension of ranges (Porter et al. 
1991; Pimentel et al. 1992), but also suggest that drier 
conditions may decrease pest damage in some regions. 
Porter et al. (1991) investigated the impact of one G C M 
climate change scenario on the European com borer 
(Ostrinia nubilalis) in Europe, finding northward shifts in 
potential distribution of up to 1220 km, and an additional 
generation in nearly all regions where the insect is current-
ly known to occur. 
Pimentel et al. (1992) considered the effects of a 2°C 
temperature rise in the US and Africa and found that, if 
North America becomes warmer and drier, crop losses due 
to plant diseases are expected to decline as much as 30 % 
below current levels. If Africa becomes warmer and 
wetter, crop losses to diseases will increase up to 133% 
above current levels for some crops. High percentages of 
crop losses to pests are expected to be sustained in Africa 
because effective pest control technologies are not exten-
sively in use, nor are they expected to improve appreciably 
in the future. US crop losses to weeds are estimated to rise 
between 5% and 50% (depending on the crop), because of 
intensified competition from weeds, which are often better 
adapted to arid conditions than are crops. Herbicidal 
controls tend to be less effective under hot/dry conditions 
than they are under the more cool/wet current conditions 
(Pimentel et al. 1990). 
8 Research on regional impacts 
Note: the following section summarises recent research on 
both 'Potential effects on crop yields and livestock produc-
tivity' and on 'Effects on regional and national produc-
tion,' determining if the research upholds previous IPCC 
findings or indicates new conclusions. 
Another focus of substantial amounts of research 
activity since the first IPCC synthesis has been regional 
assessment. Some of the regional assessments have been 
conducted or are under way in the E C (Carter et al. 1991a, 
1991b; Parry et al. 1992a), Rhine basin (Wolf and van 
Diepen 1991), US (Adams et al. 1990), US midwest 
(Rosenberg and Crosson 1991; Easterling et al. 1991), 
agricultural regions in Canada (Cohen 1991; Singh and 
Stewart 1991), East Asia (Yoshino 1991), Southeast Asia 
(Parry et al. 1992b), Caribbean region (Granger 1991), 
and Mexico (Liverman 1992; Liverman and O'Brien 
1991). Fewer national assessments have been published, 
some exceptions being Hungary (Farago et al. 1990 and 
1991), Ireland (McWilliams 1991), U K (UK Department 
of the Environment 1991), and New Zealand (Salinger et 
al. 1990; Martin et al. 1990). 
As these regional studies come forward, they highlight 
the IPCC conclusion that impacts will vary greatly accord-
ing to types of climate change and types of agriculture. 
Both beneficial and detrimental effects of climatic change 
are projected, although these will not be evenly distributed 
over the world. In particular, it appears more certain now 
that cool and temperate climatic zones may benefit, but in 
the tropics a further increase in temperature will be 
undesirable. At mid and high latitudes, increased tempera-
tures can benefit crops presently limited by Cold tempera-
tures and short growing seasons. In the tropics, crops may 
be subjected to growing season temperatures higher than 
optima, and continue to suffer from nutrient shortages, 
which impair the potential to utilise the beneficial direct 
effects of increased CO2 (Goudriaan and Unsworth 1990). 
Newly published agricultural impact studies continue 
to emphasise the uncertainties inherent in such research as 
long as regional climate change scenarios remain unreli-
able. Other key uncertainties are projections of future 
technology and adaptation strategies. Methodological 
improvements are slowly accruing in dealing with such 
factors as direct COj effects, pests and pathogens, increas-
ing fuel costs and resource substitution, but many studies 
neglect one or more of these possibly key factors. Given 
these considerable caveats, researchers concur that regional 
impact studies should continue to be regarded as sensitivity 
studies only. 
8.1 North America 
8.1.1 United States 
Further results from the US EPA national study published 
since the IPCC Impacts Assessment imply a range of 
possible outcomes for US agriculture, depending on the 
severity of climate change and the compensating effects of 
CO2 on crop yields (Adams et al. 1990). Simulations 
combining results from climate, crop and economic models 
indicate that the role of the US in agricultiaral export 
markets may change, regional patterns of agriculture are 
C.rV Agriculture and forestry 
49 
likely to shift, and demand for irrigation water is likely to 
increase. 
An integrated research project on the US midwest 
region (Missouri, Iowa, Nebraska and Kansas) used the 
1930s climate (1.1 °C increase in temperature) as a warmer 
and drier analog. Methodology included a crop simulation 
model and its use for evaluation of both available and 
induced adaptations; inclusion of technological change; 
analysis of climate variability effects on crop yield varia-
bility; and integration of impacts on multiple sectors 
including agriculture, forestry, water resources, 
and 
energy. The research found that impacts on agriculture 
overall would be small given adaptation (Rosenberg and 
Crosson 1991; Easterling et al. 1991). Relating these 
results to the IPCC best estimate of 2.5°C warming 
implies agricultural losses of about 10% for equilibrium 
warming of doubling of COj equivalent (Cline 1992). 
However, at the margins of the region losses could be 
considerable with a shift in irrigation from west to east. 
Effective adjustments to the 1930s climate change scenario 
in the US niidwest were earlier planting combined with 
longer season varieties of annuals and shorter season 
varieties in pereimials, and the use of furrow dyking in 
warm season crops. Wheat benefited from reduction of 
cold stress and earlier break in dormancy. 
Other recent research that used a simple relationship 
between yield and COj and temperature reports similar 
yield declines for the US Great Plains (up to 42-45''N) 
(Okamoto et al. 1991). In summer, wanning caused by in-
creases in atmospheric COj appears to be undesirable for 
spring wheat, soybean and com even if positive effects of 
COj are taken into account. Several CO2 emissions rates 
were tested. 
These studies support the IPCC conclusion that US 
grain production would decline with global warming. 
Another simulation with a mechanistic crop growth model 
with a soil water component found that grain yields at one 
site in Illinois increased, or decreased only slightly with 
temperature increases, except when the climate change was 
assumed to result in severely decreased rainfall (Muchow 
and Sinclair 1991). 
For the southern US, research using a climate model, 
a crop growth model, and a field level pesticide transport 
mode] studied the impacts of climate change on various 
aspects of maize production (Cooler 1990). The results 
suggest that substantial changes in agricultural production 
and management practices may be needed to respond to the 
climate changes expected to occur in this region. These 
changes include the need for heat tolerance as the control-
hng factor in the introduction of new varieties, decrease in 
use of existing pesticides because of excessive loss on 
mtensively cropped, rapidly leaching soils and an increase 
in the potential risk of aquifer contiimination by long-lived 
agricultural chemicals. Irrigation did not appear to be a 
viable solution to heat-stress-related maize yield losses in 
Texas and Oklahoma. 
8.1.2 Canada 
Research on potential agricultural climate change impacts 
in Quebec indicates that for one G C M (Goddard Institute 
for Space Studies (GISS)) climate change scenario, yields 
of com, soybeans, potatoes, phaseolus beans and sorghum 
would increase and yields of cereal and oilseed crops, ie 
wheat,. barley, oats, sunflowers and rapeseed would 
decrease (Singh and Stewart 1991). Apple and grape 
production might be enhanced and the northern part of the 
province would benefit most. However, even if climatic 
conditions in Quebec Were to improve, limitations of soil 
fertility would still effectively constrain the significant 
expansion of the agricultural land base. 
8.2 Central and South America 
Several conferences have echoed the IPCC projections of 
possible negative impacts of global warming in Central and 
South America (Fundacion Universo Veinteuno 1990; 
Universidad de Sao Paulo 1990). Liverman (1991) and 
Liverman and O'Brien (1991) have used G C M output to 
project declines in moisture availability and maize yields at 
several sites in Mexico, following on from earlier studies 
cited in the initial IPCC Impacts Assessment. In contrast, 
a study of the implications for climate change and direct 
CO2 effects in the Caribbean region found that agriculture 
and food supply should benefit, although more intense 
hurricanes and higher storm surges could bring added 
damage to low-lying coastal areas (Granger 1991). 
9 Europe 
9.1 European Community 
Ongoing work for the European region, with a focus on 
the E C countries, is using a combination of techniques 
including large-scale mapping of agricultural potential, 
crop-climate simulation modelling and laboratory experi-
mentation, to evaluate the possible effects of climate 
change on agricultural and horticultural production. Early 
results for grain maize, sunflower and soybean, all of 
which are constrained by low temperatures in northern 
Europe, indicated that northward shifts in crop suitability 
of 200-335 km per 1°C warming could be expected, with 
50 
C.N 
Agriculture and forestry 
these estimates varying locally by a factor of two owing to 
terrain and regional climate (Carter et al. 1991b). 
For different G C M estimates of an equilibrium climate 
response to equivalent COj doubling, estimates of north-
ward shifts in potential due to warming varied from 700 to 
1900 km. Rates of northward shift depend critically on the 
rate of warming. Regional estimates by the GISS G C M of 
transient climate response to low, middle and high emis-
sions scenarios in Europe give shifts varying from 10 km 
per decade to well over 100 km per decade up to the 2050s 
(Carter et al. 1991a,b). 
Further mapping work is examining the thermal arid 
moisture constraints on grain maize production at a 
European scale. Crop yields are being estimated at individ-
ual sites, including winter wheat (different E C countries 
and four different crop models), cauliflower (ten locations 
in northern Europe), and soybean (France). COj enrich-
ment and temperature experiments with lettuce and carrot 
are also under way (Parry et al. 1992a). 
9.2 Commonwealth of Independent States 
Since the first IPCC Impacts Assessment, additional work 
has been conducted in Russia based on outputs from 
several GCM-based 2xC02 climate experiments. These 
indicate that the agricultural production level in Russia is 
expected to drop by 5-15% without direct physiological 
effects of CO2 on crop growth and water use (Sirotenko 
1991). In contrast, predictions based on palaeoclimate 
analogs show a significant rise in productivity in Russia for 
a doubling of atmospheric COj (Sirotenko et al. 1990), 
especially when direct COj effects are taken into account 
(Menzhulin 1992). A crop modelling investigation of 
winter and spring wheat yields with G C M scenarios 
combined with direct CO2 effects has shown that winter 
wheat may respond more favourably to climate change 
than spring wheat (Menzhulin et al., 1992). 
A review published since the IPCC assessment 
summarises 
research 
on climate change agricultural 
impacts in Russia with similar conclusions to those cited by 
the original IPCC (MacCracken et al. 1990). 
9.3 Hungary 
The Hungarian Meteorological Service of the Hungarian 
Ministry for Environment and Regional Policy has pub-
lished several studies on climate change and its potential 
socioeconomic impacts. These volumes consider specific 
potential effects on Hungarian agriculture (Emanuel and 
Starosolszky 1990; Farago et al. 1990; Farago et al. 
1991). 
9.4 Ireland 
The agricultural production potential of Ireland may be 
enhanced with climate change (McWilliams 1991). Produc-
tion options could increase, new crops could be cultivated, 
and the overall costs of agricultural production could likely 
be less than at present. While cereal crops may have little 
or no increase in yields, yields of other crops like sugar 
beet and potatoes could increase by up to 20%. Crop 
regions could extend northward and new crops, such as 
maize, sunflower, and flax, may become viable over much 
of the south. Vegetable crops and fruit crops could be 
grown over wider areas than is currently the case, because 
warming should bring a reduction in the frequency of late 
spring frosts. 
9.5 United Kingdom 
In the UK, higher temperatures would decrease cereal crop 
yields, and increase yields of such crops as potatoes, sugar 
beet and forest trees (UK Department of the Environment 
1991). Viability of grassland, animal production and 
forestry in the uplands would improve, but might require 
considerable investment. New crops and tree species could 
be introduced into the U K . Maize and sunflower might be 
grown for their grain yield as well as for fodder. Horti-
cultural crops may benefit from warmer winters and 
reduced glasshouse heating costs. However, soils are likely 
to be seriously affected by climate change which encom-
passes variations in moisture, because cultivation may 
become more difficult under drier conditions, and because 
soil shrinkage could lead to more cracking with conse-
quences for moisture balance, efficiency of fertilisers, 
herbicides and pesticides, and groundwater pollution. Land 
use policy for agriculture and agro-forestry may need to be 
reviewed in light of climate change effects. 
9.6 Rhine Basin 
Wolf and van Diepen (1991) estimated the effects of one 
climate change scenario ( + 3°C with seasonally varying 
precipitation changes) and doubled. levels of atmospheric 
CO2 on crop production and agricultural land use in the 
Rhine basin. Using a crop growth model, they found that 
the climate change and COj scenario tested had generally 
positive effects on simulated crop production in the Rhine 
basin. Average grain production of winter wheat increased 
by 35%, average production of permanent grassland by 
53 %, while silage maize production decreased. Changes in 
land use induced by climate change projected on the basis 
of a literature review included an increase in area of 
C.rV Agriculture and forestry 
51 
permanent crops, especially for vineyards; decrease in area 
of permanent grassland; decrease in areas cultivated with 
root crops, oats, rye, rape and turnip rape; and increase in 
areas cultivated with grain maize, sunflower and soybean. 
10 Africa 
Downing (1991) has presented a methodology for research 
on the potential impact of climate change in Africa that 
focuses on vulnerability to hunger (or food security), 
combining sensitivity to climatic variations with the 
multiple dimensions of regional and household food 
security. Downing et al. (1992) assessed the relative 
vulnerability of food production and needs to arbitrary 
climate change scenarios in several African countries. In 
Senegal, a 4°C warming would reduce crop yields by 30% 
by the middle of next century, which could leave an 
additional one to two million people without domestically 
produced cereals. In Zimbabwe, under a 2°C warming, 
yields that are currently achieved in seven out of ten years 
would be reached in only two to four out of ten years. In 
Kenya, climate change could increase total potential 
national production, while exacerbating food shortages in 
semi-arid areas. 
A analysis of current crop yields and potential crop 
yield changes due to changes in temperature, moisture, 
UV-B radiation, COj, pests, improved technology and 
losses to pests in Africa concluded that, if rainfall increas-
es 10%, crop yields will improve to a limited extent 
(Pimentel et al. 1992). Water shortages may well persist, 
however, as well as serious crop losses to pests. The 
potential impacts of the greenhouse effect on Africa are a 
subject of regional concern (Suliman 1990). 
11 Asia 
A review paper on the climatic impacts on agriculture in 
East Asia suggests that year-to-year fluctuation of rice 
yields may become bigger, even though average yield may 
be greater (Yoshino 1991). This is based on statistical 
analysis of historical rice yields in Japan, which suggests 
that the fluctuation of yields is affected not only by 
climatic variability, but by step-wise development of 
technological and socioeconomic development as well. 
A climate change agricultural impacts study in South-
east Asia has been completed which used a climate change 
scenario developed from the GISS G C M and crop model-
ling techniques (Parry et al. 1992b). In Indonesia, average 
nee, soybean, and maize yields are projected to decrease 
about 4%,. 10% and 50% respectively. In Malaysia, 
simulated rice yields decreased from 12% to 22%, while 
demand for irrigation increased 15%. The east coast of 
Peninsular Malaysia may become too wet for rubber 
cultivation. Additional adverse effects on agriculture were 
estimated to occur in both Indonesia and Malaysia, and 
Thailand as well, as a result of land losses due to sea-level 
rise.. 
12 Australia/Oceania 
12.1 New Zealand 
In New Zealand, higher temperatures may result in 
substantial shifts in agricultural potential, with temperate 
crops, especially cereals, being grown 200 km further 
south and 200 metres higher for each 1°C temperature in-
crease. At the same time, the potential range of these crops 
could contract southward if winter chilling requirements 
are not fulfilled (Salinger et al. 1990). The main horticul-
tural crops (apples and kiwifruit) face displacement south 
of the present day main production areas. This could have 
serious implications for kiwifruit production, given the 
assumed climate change scenarios. Viticulture may expand 
south into the South Island with a change to red winegra-
pes in northern areas. Citrus and subtropical production 
mjght undergo expansion particularly in northern New 
Zealand. Animal industries could show substantial changes 
reflecting the change in the quantity and quality of seasonal 
pasture production and changes in pests and diseases. 
Dairying may decline in the far north, but could increase 
in the far south with temperature increases, resulting in an 
overall increase in production. At the same time, sheep 
numbers might show an overall decline, except in southern 
New Zealand. Beef cattle numbers are projected to 
increase in many areas of New Zealand with climate 
change. 
13 Global assessments 
The US Department of Agriculture has conducted studies 
of the sensitivity of world agriculture to potential climate 
changes (Kane et al. 1991, 1992). Preliminary results of 
these studies were presented in the first IPCC Impacts 
Assessment; recent results continue to indicate that the 
overall effect of moderate climate change on world and 
domestic economies may be small as reduced production 
in some areas is balanced by gains in others. However, 
further accumulation of GHGs could intensify the climate 
effects. 
A recent global study of climate change and crop yield 
changes has estimated changes in yields of world crops in 
both major production areas and vulnerable regions caused 
52 
C.rV 
Agriculture and forestry 
by G C M climate change scenarios and the associated direct 
effects of increasing levels of COj (Rosenzweig and 
Iglesias 1992). Yield changes were estimated by crop 
specialists in 18 individual countries using compatible crop 
growth models and common climate change scenarios. 
Adaptations to the possible climate changes were also 
tested at two levels of effort. Preliminary results appear to 
amplify the IPCC conclusion that agriculture in lower 
latitude regions may be more vulnerable to the projected 
changes, even with adaptation efforts, because simulated 
yield declines tend to be greater in these areas in contrast 
to less negative or even positive yield changes at mid and 
high latitudes. When the economic consequences of the 
yield changes were projected in a world food trade model, 
results showed that cereal prices and the number of people 
at risk of hunger could increase with climate change 
(Rosenzweig and Parry 1992). 
14 Adaptation 
While some recent reviews and studies have emphasised 
the possibilities of adaptation to climate change especially 
in developed countries (US National Academy of Sciences 
1991; Rosenberg and Crosson 1991), conference state-
ments and studies in the last eighteen months also suggest 
that it is important to remember that adaptation may not be 
complete and that some adaptive measures may have 
detrimental impacts of their own (Second World Climate 
Conference 1990; Smit 1991, 1992; Bazzaz and Fajer 
1992). For example, changes in planting schedules and 
readily available cultivars may be easily adopted to 
minimise impacts on agricultural incomes, but modifying 
the types of crops, grown does not guarantee equal levels 
or nutritional quality of food production or equal profits 
for farmers. 
Similarly, irrigation is beginning to be perceived as a 
limited option for regions with increasing aridity caused by 
climate change. The integrated US midwest study found 
that agriculture may be less able to compete for surface 
water and that declining groundwater supplies would hasten 
the abandonment of irrigation in the western portions of 
the region (Rosenberg and Crosson 1991). Excessive 
overdraft of groundwater, soil salinisation, waterlogging, 
and potential increased demand from competing sectors 
may limit the viability of irrigation as an adaptation to 
climate change. However, studies continue to show that the 
need for irrigation is likely to increase with global warm-
ing, as was concluded in the first IPCC assessment. In the 
US, irrigation has been predicted to increase for a variety 
of climate change scenarios with higher temperature 
(Peterson and Keller 1990). 
Regarding nutrient applications, Buol et al. (1990) 
project differing regional fertiliser use, as did the first 
IPCC Impacts Assessment. In temperate countries where 
crops are already heavily fertilised, there will probably be 
no major changes in fertilisation practices, but alterations 
in timing and application method (eg careful adjustment of 
side-dress applications of nitrogen during vegetative crop 
growth) are expected with changes in temperature and 
precipitafion regimes. Fertilisation rates may need to be 
raised to utilise the beneficial direct effects of increased 
CO2 (Goudriaan and Unsworth 1991). In tropical countries, 
where currently recommended fertiliser application rates 
are not always applied, augmentation of fertiliser applica-
tions will be needed in any case. 
Adaptation to more intense pest infestations by 
increasing application of chemical control may increase 
chemical loadings in agricultural regions and may not be 
efficacious in regions where effective pest control tech-
nologies are not extensively in use nor expected to improve 
appreciably in the future. Therefore, high percentages of 
crop losses to pests may be sustained in such regions. 
Research has continued on the process by which farmers 
adapt, taking into account that imperfect information on 
climate change will be translated into incomplete and 
imprecise reactions by farmers (Yohe 1992). In this work, 
a utility-based decision model is used to test how farmers 
in the US midwest may decide to switch crops, or at least 
their mix of crops in response to growing evidence that the 
climate appears to be changing. Yohe suggests that 
consistent integration of these imprecise decisions over 
larger systems could add a sense of transition to static 
portraits of potential futures. 
Kaiser et al. (1992) have similarly studied the process 
of economic adjustment in the US midwest to synthetic 
climate scenarios consistent with G C M predictions. This 
work finds that farmers in southern Minnesota can make 
some adjustments to mildly changing climate that may 
significantly moderate initial negative effects. This was due 
primarily to excellent water-holding capacity of the soil in 
the region tested. 
Adaptation in agricultural policy is emerging as a 
necessary focus. Inertia and current policy structures may 
actually inhibit agricultural adaptation to climate change 
and variability (Smit 1991, 1992). Another study suggests 
that current US commodity programs may well slow 
adaptation to climate change by providing financial incen-
tives for farmers to remain with existing cropping systems, 
rather than to switch to more climatically appropriate ones 
(Lewandrowski and Brazee 1992). 
C.rV 
Agriculture and forestry 
53 
15 Gaps in research and monitoring 
Critical research and monitoring gaps that remain to be 
fdled include: 
• 
Further experimental studies of temperature and COj 
interactions over the full growing period on crops and 
cultivars from diverse agricultural systems are needed. 
These studies should be designed to test a wide range 
of levels of both factors, at varying water-stress 
levels, and to quantify a full complement of crop 
physiological and phenological responses and their 
effects on both biomass productivity and grain produc-
tion. Studies should also be conducted on the interac-
tions of CO2, high temperature, and other stresses 
such as elevated UV-B radiation and tropospheric 
ozone. 
• 
Initial studies of changed climatic variability should be 
amplified by many more research efforts. The ability 
to test changes in climate variance is a needed advance 
in impact 
studies on agriculture, particularly for 
investigation of the effect of changes in climatic 
variances on variability of crop yields, farm retums 
and risks, regional production and key 
factors of 
agricultural stability. 
• 
The viability of a wide variety of adaptation options 
(both biophysical and socioeconomic) needs to be 
tested for differing agricultural environments and 
systems. Research should be expanded in identifying 
the range of adaptability that exists within current crop 
species, in tracking the expansion of crop production 
into new environments, and in determining the physio-
logical mechanisms whereby limits to production in 
stressful environments have been reduced so that the 
climatic range of successful production has been 
expanded. Research initiatives should continue to 
emphasise the processes by which farmers and institu-
tions (both public and private) adapt, taking into 
account that imperfect information on climate change 
will be translated into incomplete and imprecise 
reactions by farmers, agricultural organisations and 
government agencies. Both economic and environ-
mental costs and benefits of proposed adaptations 
should be evaluated. 
• 
A needed focus is a better understanding of the 
linkages between climate impacts and socioeconomic 
structures and the critical thresholds where significant 
change takes place. Regions suffering from food 
poverty today need to be evaluated for vulnerability to 
the potential for increased stress from climate change. 
Much can be done to study ways to enhance resilience 
of agricultural activities to climate variability. Devel-
opment of improved analytical models either generic 
or specific to different agricultural systems in different 
regions of the world should be encouraged. 
• 
While the agricultural sector (especially in regard to 
productivity) is probably among the most monitored of 
human activities, much could be done to analyse 
current and historical data for climate and COj sensi-
tivity. These types of studies can investigate, for 
example, how crop production regions have shifted 
geographically in the past, if they shifting now, and 
whether shifts are climate-related. 
16 Recommendations and conclusions 
Since the publication of the first IPCC Impacts Assess-
ment, study of agricultural impacts of climate change has 
continued in many areas. The findings of these studies 
reinforce the conclusion of the IPCC Assessment Report 
that, globally, climate change should not compromise our 
ability to produce sufficient food. These findings also 
indicate that previous work may have overestimated 
negative, and underestimated positive, impacts due to 
climate change. However, there is a need for improved 
regional climate models and the extension of G C M simula-
tions beyond the equivalent COj doubling point, as well as 
a need for projecting how our agricultural systems will be 
configured in the future. 
The available studies suggest, however, that the impact 
of global warming on agriculture may be significant, 
especially if warming is at the upper end of the range 
projected by Working Group I. Impacts of climate change 
must be considered in the context of the necessity for 
continuing increases in regional agricultural production as 
the world's population grows from 5 billion to a projected 
8.5 billion by 2025. The following points summarise the 
contributions that recent studies have made to the field of 
agricultural climate change impacts. 
Present studies have focused attention on how transient 
projections of agricultural technology should be estimated. 
For example, conventional plant breeding and biotechnol-
ogy are each expected to improve yields on the order of 
1-2%/year, and such estimates should be factored into 
projections of future impacts of climate change. Evaluation 
of a wide variety of adaptation options is needed for 
differing agricultural environments and systems. 
Many regional assessments have been conducted since 
the IPCC, or are under way in the EC, Russia, the US 
midwest and agricultural regions of Canada, Southeast 
Asia and Mexico. Additional national assessments have 
been published by the Hungarian Ministry for Environment 
and Regional Policy, the Ireland Department of the 
Environment, U K Department of the Environment, and the 
New Zealand Ministry for the Environment. Additional 
54 
CIV 
Agriculture and forestry 
integrated regional impact studies linking biological, 
physical and socioeconoinic factors should be,carried out 
wherever possible. 
As these regional and national studies come forward, 
they highlight the IPCC conclusion that impacts will vary 
greatly according to types of climate change and types of 
agriculture. Beneficial and detrimental effects of climafic 
change will not be evenly distributed over the world. In 
particular, it appears more certain now that cool and 
temperate climatic zones may benefit, but in the tropics a 
further increase in temperature will be undesirable. 
Research continues to address the relative importance 
of direct and indirect effects of COj on future crop produc-
tion. Some scientists weigh the beneficial effects as the 
dominant factor, while some are sceptical that the large 
benefits seen in experimental settings will be seen in 
farmers' fields under changing climate conditions. Com-
bined studies of direct and indirect effects of CO2 on crops 
have been intensified to provide clarification. A key point 
which is emerging is that the wanning effects of CO2 are 
projected to increase beyond doubling point, but direct 
physiological effects may level off. The future is also 
projected to bring simultaneous multiple stresses, such as 
elevated UV-B radiation and increased tropospheric ozone, 
in combination with high COj, and these may negate some 
of the beneficial physiological effects in some crops. 
Recent studies have reinforced the concern for in-
creased incidence of both droughts and floods, and on 
water resources for agricultural in general. Changes in 
water resource availability (both in timing and quantity) 
pose the greatest risks to agriculture resulting from climate 
change. Thus, water resource management for food and 
fibre production (in relation to water needs for other 
sectors as well) is a crucial task. 
Current reviews confirm the earlier conclusion of the 
IPCC that ecological conditions for insect growth and 
abundance are expected to improve overall. 
References 
Adams, R.M., C. Rosenzweig, R.M. Peart, J.T. Ritchie, 
B.A. McCarl, J.D. Glyer, R.B. Curry, J.W. Jones, K.J. 
Boote and L . H . Allen, Jr. 1990. 'Global climate change 
and US agriculmre', A'arwre 345:219-224. 
Akita, S. and D.N. Moss 1973. 'Photosynthetic responses to 
CO2 and light by maize and wheat leaves adjusted for 
constant stomatal apertures', Crop Science 13:234-237. 
Allen, Jr., L . H . 1990. 'Plant responses to rising carbon 
dioxide and potential interactions with air pollutants', J. 
Environ. Qual. 19(l):15-34. 
Allen, S.G., S.B. Idso, B.A. Kimball, J.T. Baker, L . H . 
Allen, Jr., J.R. Mauney, J.W. Radin and M.G. Ander-
• son, April 1990. Effects of Air Temperature on Atmo-
spheric C02-Plant Growth Relationships. US Dept. of 
Energy and US Dept. of Agriculture. DOE/ ER-0450T. 
61 pp. 
Aveyard, J.M. 1988. Climatic Change Implications for Land 
Degradation in New South Wales. Dept. of Conservation 
and Land Management, Chatswood, New South Wales. 
Bazzaz, F.A. and E.D. Fajer 1992. 'Plant life in a COj-rich 
world', Scientific American. January 68-74. 
Bouwman, A.F. (ed.) 1990. Soils and the Greenhouse Effect. 
John Wiley and Sons. 575 pp. 
Brklacich, M . and B. Smit 1992. 'Implications of changes in 
climatic averages and variability on food production op-
portunities in Ontario, Canada', Climatic Change 20(1): 
1-21. 
Buol, S.W., P.A. Sanchez, J.M. Kimble and S.B. Weed 
1990. 'Predicted impact of climate warming on soil 
prpperties and use', in: Kimball, B.A., N.J. Rosenberg, 
L . H . Allen Jr. (eds.) Impact of Carbon dioxide, Trace 
Gases, and Oimate Change on Global Agriculture. ASA 
Special Publication Number 53. American Society of 
Agronomy, pp. 71-82. 
Carter, T.R., M . L . Parry and J.R. Porter 1991a. 'Climatic 
change and fumre agroclimatic potential in Europe', Int. 
J. Climatol., 11:251-269. 
Carter, T.R., J.*R. Porter and M . L . Parry 1991b. 'Chmatic 
warming and crop potential in Europe: Prospects and un-
certainties'. Global Environmental Change 1:291-312. 
Cline, W. 1992. The Economics of Global Warming. Institute 
for International Economics. Washington, D.C. 
Cohen, S.J. 1991. 'Regional impacts of projected global 
warming: A research proposal for the Mackenzie Basin', 
in: Second Symposium on Global Change Studies (Pre-
prints). American Meteorological Society. Boston, pp. 
• 
74-77. 
Cooter, E.J. 1990. 'The impact of climate change on continu-
ous corn production in the southern U.S.A',. Climatic 
Cliange 16:53-S2. 
Downing, T.E. 1991. 'Vulnerability to hunger and coping 
with climate change in Africa', Global Environmental 
Change 1(5):(in press). 
Downing, T.E. et al. 1992. Implications of Climate Change 
for 
International Agriculture: 
Vulnerable Regions. 
Environmental Change Unit. University of Oxford. 
Oxford, UK. (in press). 
Eamus, D. 1991. The interaction of rising COj and temper-
ature with water use efficiency. Plant, Cell, and Envi-
ronment 14:843-852. 
Easterling, W.E., M . McKenney, N.J. Rosenberg and K. 
Lemon 1991. /I Farm-Level Simulation of the Effects of 
Qimate Qiange on Crop Productivity in the MINK Re-
gion. Resources for the Future. Dept. of Energy 
DOE/RL/01830T-H5. Washington, D.C. 
Emanuel, A. and O. Starosolszky 1990. Role of the Qimate 
and Climate Change in the Life of Hungary. Hungarian 
Meteorological Service. Hungarian Ministry for Environ-
ment and Regional Policy. 42 pp. (In English). 
Farago, T., Zs. Ivanyi and S. Szalai 1990. Climate Variabili-
ty and Change (I): Causes. Processes, Regional Impacts 
C.JV Agriculture and forestry 
55 
with Special Emphasis on the Socio-economic Impacts 
and the Tasks Related to the International Cooperation. 
Hungarian Meteorological Service. Hungarian Ministry 
for Environment and Regional Policy. lOO pp. (In Hun-
garian with English summaries). 
Farago, T., Zs. Ivanyi and S. Szalai 1991. Qimate Variabili-
ty and Change (II); Qianges in Composition of Atmos-
phere and in the Climatic Characteristics, Detection, 
Modelling, Scenarios and Impacts of the Regional Chan-
ges. Hungarian Meteorological Service. Hungarian 
Ministry for Environment and Regional Policy. 210 pp. 
(In Hungarian with English summaries). 
Fundacion Universe Veinteuno 1990. Memoria del Semin-
ario Internacional sobre Calentamiento Global: Una 
Vision Latinoamericana. Fundacion Universe Veinteuno. 
Mexico D.F. 
Giorgi, F. and L.O. Mearns 1991. 'Approaches to the simu-
lation of regional climate change: A review', Reviews of 
Geophysics 2%2):\9\-2\e. 
Goudriaan, J. and M . H . Unsworth 1990. 'Implications of 
increasing carbon dioxide and climate change for 
agricultural productivity and water resources'. In; 
Kimball, B.A., N.J Rosenberg, L . H . Allen Jr, (eds.) 
Impact of Carbon dioxide, Trace Gases, and Climate 
Change on Global Agriculture. ASA Special Publication 
Number 53. American Society of Agronomy, Inc. pp.' 
71-82. 
Granger, O. 1991. 'Climate change interactions in the 
-.^ Gvts.i&rC&nhh^&v',The Environmental Professional 13: 
43-58. 
Hendrey, G.H., K.F. Lewin and J. Nagy 1992. 'Free air 
carbon dioxide enrichment: Development, progress, 
results', Vegetatio. (in press). 
Hesketh, J.D. and D . M . Aim 1992. 'Synthesis: Modelling 
field-crop ecosystems and issues for the future', in: C.J. 
Pearson (ed.). Field Crop Ecosystems. Elsevier. Amster-
dam, pp. 519-536. 
Houston Advanced Research Center 1991. 77?^ Regions and 
Global Warming. Woodlands Conference Statement. 
HARC. Houston, TX. 
Jodha, N.S. 1989. 'Potential strategies for adapting to 
greenhouse warming: Perspectives from the developing 
world', in: N.J. Rosenberg, W.E. Easterling, P.R. 
Crosson, and J. Darmstadter (eds.). Greenhouse Warm-
ing: Abatement and Adaptation. Resources for the Future. 
Washington, D.C. pp. 147-158. 
Kaiser, H . M . , S.J. Riha, D.G. Rossiter and D.S. Wilks 
(1992). 'Agronomic and economic impacts of gradual 
global warming: A preliminary analysis of midwestem 
crop farming', in: J. Reilly and M . Anderson (eds.). 
Economic Issues in Global Climate Change: Agriculture, 
Forestry, and Natural Resources. Westview Press. 
Boulder, CO. pp. 91-116. 
Kane, S., J. Reilly and J. Tobey 1991. Climate Change: 
Economic Implications for World Agriculture. US Depart-
ment of Agriculture. Economic Research Service. AER-? 
647. 21 pp. 
Kane, S., J. Reilly and J. Tobey 1992. 'An empirical study 
of the economic effects of climate change on world agri-
culture', aimatic Change. 21:17-36. 
Lewandrowski, J.K. and R.J. Brazee 1992. 'Government 
farm programs and climate change: a first look', in: J. 
Reilly and M . Anderson (eds.). Economic Issues in 
Global Climate Orange: Agriculture, Forestry, and 
Natural Resources. Westview Press. Boulder, CO. 
Liverman, D . M . 1992. 'The potential impacts of global 
warming in Mexico: some preliminary results', in: J. 
Reilly and M . Anderson (eds.). Economic Issues in 
Global Qimate Change: Agriculture, Forestry, and 
Natural Resources. Westview Press. Boulder, CO. 
Liverman, D . M . and K. O'Brien 1991. 'The impacts of 
global warming in Mexico', Global Environmental 
Change. 1:351-364. 
MacCracken, M . C , M . l . Budyko, A.D. Hecht, and Y.A. 
Izrael 1990. Prospects for Future Climate. A Special 
US/USSR Report on Climate and Climate Change. 
Chapter 7. Impacts of Climate Change on Water Re-
sources and Agriculture, pp. 185-224. 
Manabe, S. and K. Bryan, Jr. 1985. 'COj-induced change in 
a coupled ocean-atmosphere model and its paleoclimatic 
implications', J. of Geophysical Research 90(C6): 11, 
689-11,707. 
Martin, R.J., M.J. Salinger and W . M . Williams 1990. 
'Agricultural Industries', in: Climate Change: Impacts on 
New Zealand. Ministry for the Environment. Wellington, 
pp. 165-173. 
McWilliams, B.E. 1991. Climate Cliange: Studies on the 
Implications for Ireland. Department of the Environment. 
Dublin. 
Mearns, L.O., C. Rosenzweig and R. Goldberg (1992). 'The 
effect of changes in interannual climatic variability on 
CERES-Wheat yields: sensitivity and 2xC02 GCM 
studies', J. ofAg. and For, Meteor, (in press). 
Menzhulin, G.V. 1992. 'The impact of expected climate 
changes on crop yields: Estimates for Europe, the USSR, 
and North America based on paleoanalogue scenarios', 
in: J. Reilly and M . Anderson (eds.). Economic Issues in 
Global Climate Change: Agriculture, Forestry, and 
Natural Resources. Westview Press. Boulder, CO. 
Menzhulin, G.V., L . A . Koval and A . L . Badenko 1992. 
'Potential effects of global warming and atmospheric CO^ 
on wheat production in the USSR', in: Rosenzweig, C. 
and A. Iglesias (eds.). Implications of climate change for 
international agriculture: Crop modeling study. US 
Environmental Protection Agency. Washington, D.C. (in 
press). 
Miglietta, F., A. Raschi, R. Resti and G. Zipoli 1991. 'Dry 
matter production, yield and photosynthesis of soybean 
grown in natural COj enriched environment', Agronomy 
Abstracts. American Society of Agronomy. Madison, 
WI. p. 22. 
Muchow, R . C , and T.R. Sinclair 1991. 'Water deficit 
effects on maize yields modeled under current and 
"greenhouse" climates',/t^ron. y. 83:1052-1059. 
56 
CIV 
Agriculture and forestry 
Okamoto, K., T. Ogiwara, T. Yoshizumi and Y . Watanabe 
1991. 'Influence of the greenhouse effect on yields of 
wheat, soybean and corn in the United States for differ-
ent energy scenarios', Qimatic Qiange 18:397-424. 
Parry, M . L . , T.R. Carter, J.R. Porter, G.J. Kenny and P.A. 
Harrison 1992a. Qimate 
Change and Agricultural 
Suitability in Europe. Environmental Change Unit. 
University of Oxford. Report 1. Oxford, UK. 
Parry, M . L . , M . Blantran de Rozari, A.L. Chong and S. 
Panich (eds.) 1992b. The Potential Socio-Economic 
Impacts of Climate Change in South-East Asia. United 
Nations Environment Program. Nairobi. 
Patterson, D.T. and E.P. Flint 1990. 'Implications of 
increasing carbon dioxide and climate change for plant 
communities and competition in natural and managed 
ecosystems', in: Kimball, B.A., N.J Rosenberg, L . H . 
Allen Jr. (eds.) Impact of Carbon dioxide. Trace Cases, 
and Qimate Qiange on Global Agriculture. ASA Special 
Publication Number 53. American Society of Agronomy, 
Inc. pp. 83-110. 
Peterson, D.F. and A. Keller 1990. 'Irrigation', in: P.E. 
Waggoner (ed.). Qimate Change and US Water Re-
sources. Report of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science Panel on Climatic Variability, 
Climate change and the Planning and Management of US 
Water Resources. John Wiley & Sons. New York. pp. 
269-306. 
Phillips, D.L., D. White and C.B. Johnson 1991. Qimate 
Change and Soil Erosion in the United States. US 
Environmental Protection Agency. Corvallis, OR. 
Pimentel, D., N . Brown, F. Vecchio, V. La Capra, S. 
Hausman, O. Lee, A. Diaz, J. Williams, S. Cooper and 
E. Newburger 1992. 'Ethical issues concerning global 
warming on food production', J. of Ag. and Environ. 
Ethics, (in press). 
Pimentel, D., L . .McLaughlin, A. Zepp, B. Lakitan, T. 
Kraus, P. Kleinman, F. Vancini, W.J. Roach, E. Graap, 
W.S. Keeton and G. Selig 1990. 'Environmental and 
economic impacts of reducing US agricultural pesticide 
use', in: D. Pimentel (ed.). Handbook on Pest Manage-
ment in Agriculture. CRC Press. Boca Raton, FL. 
Pittock, A.B., A . M . Fowler and P.H. Whetton 1991. 
'Probable changes in rainfall regimes due to the enhanced 
greenhouse effect'. International Hydrology & Water Re-
sources Symposium. Perth, pp. 182-186 
Reynolds, J.F., D.W. Hilbert, J.-L. Chen, P.C. Harley, 
P.R. Kemp and P.W. Leadley 1992. Modeling the Re-
sponse of Plants and Ecosystems to Elevated CO, and 
Qimate Change. US Department of Energy. DOE/ER-
60490T-H1. Washington, D.C. 
Rind, D., R. Goldberg, J. Hansen, C. Rosenzweig and R. 
Ruedy 1990. 'Potential evapotranspiration and the likeli-
hood of future drought', J. Geophys. Res. 95(D7): 
9983-10,004. 
Rosenberg, N.J. and P.R. Crosson 1991. Processes for 
Identifying Regional Influences of and Responses to 
Increasing Atmospheric CO, and Qimate Change: the 
MINK Project, An Overview. Resources for the Future. 
Dept. of Energy DOE/RL/01830T-H5. Washington, 
D.C. 35 pp. 
Rosenzweig, C. and A. Iglesias (eds.). with B. Baer, W. 
Baethgen, M . Brklacich, T.-Y. Chou, R.B. Curry, R. 
Dellecolle, H . M . Eid, C.R. Escano, J. Jones, Z. Karim, 
L. Koval, D. Liverman, G.V. Menzhulin, W.S. Meyer, 
P. Muchena, A. Qureshi, G. Rao, J.T. Ritchie, O. Sala, 
H. Seino, O.J.F. de Siqueira, M.L.C. Tongyai and J. 
Zhiqing 1992. Implications of Qimate Change for In-
ternational Agriculture: Crop Modeling Study. US En-
vironmental Protection Agency. Washington, D.C. (in 
press). 
Rosenzweig, C. and M . L . Parry 1992. Qimate Change and 
World Food Supply. Environmental Change Unit. 
University of Oxford. Oxford, UK. (in press). 
Salinger, M.J., M.W. Williams, J.M. Williams and R.J. 
Martin 1990. 'Agricultural Resources', in: Qimate 
Qiange: Impacts on New Zealand. Ministry for the Envi-
ronment. Wellington, pp. 108-132. 
Scharpenseel, H.W., M . Schomaker and A. Ayoub (eds.) 
1990. Soils on a Warmer Earth. Elsevier Scientific Pub-
lishers. Amsterdam. (Proceedings of an International 
Workshop on Effects of Expected Climate Change on 
Soil Processes in the Tropics and Subtropics, Nairobi, 
Kenya, February 1990). 
Second World Climate Conference 1990. Conference 
Proceedings. 
World 
Meteorological Organization. 
Geneva. 
Singh, B. and R.B. Stewart 1991. 'Potential impacts of a 
C02-induced climate change using the GISS scenario on 
agriculture in Quebec, Canada', Agriculture, Ecosystems 
and Environment 35:327-347. 
Sirotenko, O.D., A . A . Velichko, V.A. Dolgy-Trach and 
V.A. Klimanov 1990. 'Global warming and future agro-
climate resources of the Russian plains', Priroda Journal 
3:83-88. (In Russian). 
Sirotenko, O.D. 1991. 'Soviet CLIMATE-YIELD simulation 
system'. Meteorology and Hydrology Journal 4:67-73. 
(In Russian). 
Smit, B. 1991. 'Potential future impacts of climate change on 
the Great Plains', in: G. Wall (ed.). Symposium on the 
Impacts of Qimatic Change and Variability on the Great 
Plains. (Occ. Paper 12, Geography, Univ. of Waterloo, 
Canada), pp. 81-91. 
Smit, B. 1992. 'Decisions in agriculture in the face of 
uncertainty: Role of climate impact assessment', in: P. 
Dzikowski (compiler) Proceedings of a Symposium/-
Workshop on Changing Climate in Relation to Sustain-
able AgricuUure. Alberta Agriculture, Edmonton, pp. 
33-42. 
Suliman, M . (ed.) 1990. Greenhouse Effect and Its Impact on 
Africa. Institute for African Alternatives. London. 90 pp. 
Sundquist, E.T. 1990. 'Longterm Aspects of Future Atmo-
spheric COj and Sea-Level Changes', in: Roger R. 
Revelle et al., Sea-Level Change. National Research 
Council and National Academy Press. Washington, D.C. 
pp. 193-207. 
C.rV 
Agriculture and forestry 
Teramura, A . H . , J.H. Sullivan and L . H . Ziska (1990). 'The 
interaction of elevated UV-B radiation and CO2 on 
productivity and photosynthetic characteristics in wheat, 
rice, and soybean'. Plant Physiology 94:470-4 75. 
United Kingdom Climate Change Impacts Review Group 
1991. The Potential Effects of Climate Change in the 
United Kingdom. HMSO. London, pp. 124. 
Universidad de Sao Paulo and Woods Hole Research Cen-
ter 1990. Regional Conference on Global Warming and 
Sustainable Development. Sao Paulo, Brazil. 18-20 June 
1990. Conference Statement. 
US National Academy of Sciences 1991. Report on Adap-
tation to Climate Change. Committee on Science, 
Engineering, and Public Policy. National Academy Press. 
Washington, D.C. 
US National Science Foundation 1992. Soil-Warming Ex-
periments in Global Change Research. Report of a Work-
shop held in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, September 
27-28 1991. US National Science Foundation, Ecosystem 
Studies Program. Washington, D.C. 
Vinnikov, K.Ya. and I.B. Yeserkepova 1991. 'Soil moisUire: 
empirical data and model results', J. of Qimate 4:66-79. 
Wang, Y.P. and K.J. Hennessy 1991. 'Predicted greenhouse 
effect on wheat quality and production', Australian 
Grain. August-September, pp. 26-27. 
57 
Whetton, P. and B. Pittock 1991. 'Toward regional climate 
change scenarios: How far can we go'? Proceedings of 
Global Climate Change: Its Mitigation through Improved 
Production and Use of Energy. Los Alamos, New Mexi-
co. 
Wilks, D.S. 1991. 'Adapting stochastic weather generation 
algorithms for climate change studies', Qimatic Change 
(in press). 
Wolf, J. and C.A. van Diepen 1991. Effects of Qimate Ch-
ange on Crop Production in the Rhine Basin. DLO-The 
Winand Staring Centre. Rijkswaterstaat RIZA Wagenin-
gen. Lelystad, The Netherlands. 
Yohe, G.W. 1992. 'Imbedding dynamic responses with 
imperfect information into static portraits of the regional 
impact of climate change', in: J. Reilly and M . Anderson 
(eds.). Economic Issues in Global Qimate Change: 
Agriculture, Forestry, and Natural Resources. Westview 
Press. Boulder, CO. pp. 200-214. 
Yoshino, M . 1991. 'Impact of climatic change on agriculture 
from the viewpoint of East Asia', in: K. Takasuchi and 
M . Yoshino (eds.). The Global Environment. Springer-
Verlag. Berlin, pp. 16-41. 
1
II The managed forest and the forest sector 
Scope of the issue 
For the purposes of this report, the managed forest 
includes all forests in which some harvest takes place, with 
particular emphasis on forests where there is some degree 
of management. The majority of these managed forests are 
still of natural origin. This classification excludes forest 
parks/reserves and wilderness areas. 
Projected changes to forest ecosystems suggest chang-
es in the geographic distribution of forest species and 
changes in the growth rates with the most significant 
changes likely in the temperate and boreal areas. New 
information available mdicates that the productivity of the 
forest sector due to increased greenhouse gas concen-
trations and associated climate change may have been 
imderestimated. However, the socioeconomic consequences 
of climate change for the forest sector could be significant 
in regions where economic and social welfare and develop-
ment is highly dependent on the forest sector. The global 
ability of the forest sector to cope with climate-induced 
changes will depend on the near-term acquisition of 
knowledge through focused research and assessment and 
on prudent, fimely and proactive forest management poli-
cies and strategies. 
Progress since the IPCC Impacts Assessment in 1990 
1 Socioeconomic importance of forests 
Clearly, the dependence and the importance of forests to 
the national economies has not diminished. This was 
demonstrated in the previous assessment and the updates in 
Tables 1 and 2 serve to reinforce this statement. Likewise, 
management strategies are urgently needed for the adapta-
tion, mitigation and protection of the forest sector. 
Countries must continue to address the socioeconomic 
issues related to forests in their response to the impacts of 
global and climate change. For example, the Sao Paulo 
Conference in 1990 stated clearly that 'The warming of the 
earth ia clear evidence that current patterns of economic 
activity are not sustainable.'. The conference identified the 
vulnerability of a number of patterns of activity for the 
developing countries. 
2 Reforestation/afforestation and more managed 
forests 
The need for reforestation/afforestation is a global issue 
that must involve all countries. 
A recent report from the USA states that 'Except for 
CO2 scrubbing, which is not a proven technology at this 
fime, reforestafion is the only known post-combustion 
carbon abatement measure.' (Sanghi and Michael 1991). 
Various options for reforestation/afforestation explore the 
methods for the establishment of a variety of species and 
the potential increase in productivity. (Schroeder and Ladd 
1991). The data are based on experiences in a developed 
country, but the approach has potential application in many 
countries, with different species, economic and forest 
sector infrastructures. 
Data from the IPCC Impacts Assessment demonstrated 
the benefits associated with increasing levels of manage-
ment and recent reports have continued to emphasis the 
need for precise costing of all options and the accounting 
of the multiple benefits of environmental, human, spiritual, 
ethical and economic values associated with forests. 
There is an important and unpredictable, human com-
ponent involved in the questions of impacts and subsequent 
responses concerning species and vegetation conservation. 
This is further compounded by the lack of change in the 
sociological and economic sciences to calculate the multiple 
benefits with any degree of certainty. For example, there 
has been no improvement on 'the regional scale, of the 
science, either in climate change or in the putative re-
sponse since the publicafion of the IPCC Impacts Assess-
ment (1990) although efforts in this field continue (Wood-
ward and McKee 1991). 
The human population must be seen as both a part of 
the solution (ability to respond) and part.of the problem 
(population growth). Within this context, Forestry Canada, 
as part of Canada's 'Green Plan' (Anon 1991), has begun 
a community tree-planting program designed to encourage 
the planting of up to 325 million trees in urban and rural 
areas across Canada. By the year 2000, this will result in 
the absorption of some 5.2 million tonnes of CO^, thus 
helping to offset futiare carbon emissions by including the 
involvement of the public at large in this issue. In addition 
to Canada's Green Plan, the US has the Global Releaf 
Program of the American Forestry Association. 
Recent public opinion polls indicate that, at least in 
developed countries, people are willing to pay for carbon 
sequestration via reforestation, although this will not 
address the whole problem. The potential willingness of 
society to exceed the costs associated with the desired level 
of sequestration would 'make possible even larger refores-
tation benefits.' (Sanghi and Michael 1991). 
3 Tropical deforestation 
The rate of deforestation has increased by 90 % during the 
1980s, mainly by shifting cultivators, and is expected to 
continue to increase during the foreseeable future (Myer 
1991). Most efforts to reduce deforestation have con-
J 
CrV 
Agriculture and forestry 
59 
centrated on commercial enterprises, such as loggers/ 
ranchers, but they account for only 40% of all current 
'^'deforestation. 
Further work is needed to liberalise current economic 
theories to account for the human demands and behavioural 
shifts within society. For example, current studies indicate 
that the greatest impact on atmospheric carbon can be 
realised by halting deforestation compared to promoting 
reforestation. However, the former solution may not be 
realistic as 'the depletive pressure is likely to increase if 
only through growing human numbers and growing human 
demands.' (Houghton 1991). In addition, the IPCC Impacts 
Assessment (1990) summarised the substantial potential 
that exists to increase the growth performance of managed 
tropical stands with rates of carbon sequestration that are 
more than twice the rates of managed forests in temperate 
or boreal regions. 
4 Research and monitoring gaps 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment (1990) listed many items 
worthy of support in relation to forest ecosystems in 
general. These were echoed in more detail in the Bangkok 
Forestry Conference report (June 1991): 'There was a need 
for better information on the extent of forests, including 
fiirther effort to ensure that appropriate definitions were 
used for each forest type and objective.'. Other problems 
cited included the use of various nomenclature and the 
failure to include tree crops associated with agriculture and 
agroforestry in discussions of forest responses. Numerous 
urgent data needs are becoming increasingly apparent, 
including (but not limited to): 
• 
the need for regional climate change impact studies 
(Graham et al. 1990, Overpeck et al. 1990, Smith et 
al. 1990). 
• 
an improved understanding of the genetics/physiology 
of tree species. 
• 
the identification of critical points within the carbon 
cycle such as soil carbon contributions and the re-
sponse of plants to elevated CO2 and climate change 
(Reynolds et al. 1992). 
• 
a better understanding of the linkages between climate 
impacts and socioeconomic structures and the thresh-
olds where change takes place. The Bangkok Techni-
cal Workshop to Explore Forestry Options (April 
1991) stated explicitly that 'better information on the 
cost effectiveness of the social and economic basis for 
different options for global forest management, and on 
quantifying the multiple roles of forests, was an urgent 
research priority'. All results since then would seem 
to confirm the urgency of this statement. For example, 
the Bangkok Forestry Conference (June 1991) recom-
mended that the nations of the world should be 'living 
off the interest and not drawing down the principal of 
the earth's ecological capital (and this should be 
accomplished by) integrating economics and the 
environment into decision-making.'. This attitude, also 
stated at the Sao Paulo Conference (Sao Paulo 1990) 
and elsewhere (Woodward and McKee 1991; Schroe-
der and Ladd 1991) reflects a universal concem and 
the need for action. 
Forest health monitoring programs, including forest 
climate observations above and within forests, need to be 
established to detect damage to forest trees and soils that 
may have been caused by anthropogenic causes by isolating 
damage not attributable to natural causes or management 
practices (Hall and Addison 1991, Miller 1991). Integrated 
monitoring systems based on observed or proxy climate 
data sources should also include changes in vegetation and 
soils attributable to other impacts on representative forest 
ecosystems. These health monitoring systems need to be 
flexible and adaptable to allow for their transfer to other 
countries withm the global community. The ability to close 
this research and monitoring gap can be immediately and 
highly successful given the demonstrated state of science 
and technology for electronic climate and biological 
monitoring systems. 
-
Forests are a most significant renewable resource of 
biomass, timber, and fibre. Due to their extent forests have 
a large effect on the global carbon cycle. They are at the 
same time sinks, sources and reservoirs of carbon. The 
role of forests to the global carbon cycle is universally 
recognised as a sink for carbon, especially in the temperate 
and boreal regions (Sedjo 1992, Kauppi et al. 1992), but 
forests also provide valuable benefits as resources in the 
short term and in the long term to biodiversity. However, 
there needs to be an increased effort to quantify the global 
carbon estimates and the socioeconomic benefits. This 
includes the development of analytical models that account 
for the exchanges of carbon within the ecosystem and the 
relative contribution of forests, under different assumptions 
such as species types, soil conditions and various land use 
patterns etc. Robust estimates of the costs of carbon 
sequestered 
through afforestation are needed. 
These 
science-based models would have wide applicability in 
other countries as a shared resource and should not be 
restricted by proprietary rights. The universality of this 
type of scientific transfer should be encouraged to facilitate 
changes in policy. 
60 
CIV 
Agriculture and forestry 
5 Recommendations/conclusions 
• 
The data on resources reinforces the vulnerability of 
the forest in all countries. Climate change will im-
pinge on the social and economic sustainability of 
these forests. Results since the 1990 IPCC Impact 
Assessment reinforce the political and economic 
urgency in this sector. 
• 
More reforestation and afforestation programs are 
recommended. The major goal is to sequester carbon 
but other benefits must not be neglected. Policies must 
take a holistic view and consider the cumulative 
benefits of forests. 
• 
Research needs must centre on regional impacts 
studies, process studies, and the establishment and 
definition of the socioeconomic linkages. 
• 
Forest monitoring and development of analytical 
models are essential, and must be widely applicable, 
acceptable and consistent for all countries. 
• 
Research leading up to the IPCC Impacts Assessment 
and subsequent work, has amply demonstrated the 
continuing need for intensive and accurate technical 
and financial cooperation to optimise the management 
of our global forest. This assumes that there are or 
will be programs in place that take advantage of local 
and regional opportunities, particularly, and wherever 
possible within institutional infrastructures. 
References 
Anon 1991. The State of Forestry in Canada: 1990 Report to 
Parliament. Corporate and Public Affairs, Ottawa. 80pp. 
Bangkok, April 1991. Technical Workshop to Explore 
Forestry Options. Report prepared by H. Volz, W. 
Kriebitzsch and T.Schneider, Germany, IPCC Forestry 
AFOS Working Group. 39pp. 
Bangkok, June 1991. Conference Statement. International 
Conference on Global Warming and Sustainable Devel-
opment: An Agenda for the 90s. Organised by the 
Thailand development research Institute, Bangkok, 
Thailand, The Instimte for Research on Public Policy, 
Ottawa, Canada and The Woods Hole Research Centre, 
Woods Hole Massachusetts, USA Bangkok, Thailand. 
Hall, J.P. and P. A. Addison 1991. Response to Air Pollution: 
ARNEWS Assesses the Health of Canada's Forests. 
Forestry Canada, Science and Sustainable Development 
Directorate, Inform. Rep. DPC-X-34. 42pp. 
Graham, R.L., M . G . Turner andV.H. Dale 1990. 'How 
increasing COj and climate change affect forests'. Biosci-
ence, 40(8):575-587. 
Houghton, R.A. 1991. 'Tropical deforestation and atmos-
pheric carbon dioxide'. Climate Change 19:99-118. 
Kauppi, P.E., K. Mielikainen and K. Kuusela 1992. 'Bio-
mass and carbon budget of European forests 1971 to 
199Q\ Science, 256:70-14. 
n»CC 1990. Qimate Change: The IPCC Impacts Assessment. 
Edited by W.J.McG. Tegart, G.W. Sheldon and D.C. 
Griffiths, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
WMO and UNEP, Australia. 
Myers, N . 1991. 'Tropical forests: present status and future 
outlook.' Qimate Change 19:3-32. 
Overpeck, J.T., D. Rind and R. Goldberg 1990. 'Climate 
induced changes in forest disturbance and vegetation'. 
Nature, 343(4):51-53. 
Miller, G. D. 1991. 'Forest health: where does it hurt'? 
American Forests, 97:46-48. 
Reynolds, J.F., D.W. Hilbert, J.-L. Chen, P.C. Harley, 
P.R. Kemp, and P.W. Leadley 1992. Modeling the Re-
sponse of Plants and Ecosystems to Elevated CO, and 
Qimate Change. US Department of Energy. DOE/ER-
60490T-H1. Washington, D.C. 
Sanghi, A.K. and K.S. Michael 1991. Carbon Sequestration 
Through Reforestation: Cost and Potential for New York. 
Air and Waste Management Association. Paper presented 
at the 84th Annual Meeting and Exhibition, Vancouver, 
B.C, Canada. 14pp. 
Sao Paulo 1991. Regional Conference on Global Warming 
and Sustainable Development, Sao Paulo Conference, 
Organised by the University of Sao Paulo, Brazil, and 
The Woods Hole Research Centre, Woods Hole Mass., 
USA. 
Schroeder, P. and L . Ladd 1991. 'Slowing the increase of 
atrnospheric carbon dioxide: a biological approach', 
Qimatic Qiange 19:283-290 
Sedjo R. 1992. 'Temperate forest ecosystems in the global 
carbon cycle', Ambio (in press) 
Smith, W.H. 1990. 'The health of North American forests: 
stress and risk assessment', J. of Forestry, 88:32-35. 
Woodward, F.I. and I.E. McKee 1991. 'Vegetation and 
climate'. Environment International 17:535-546. 
C.rV Agriculture and forestry 
61 
TABLE lA. Summary of forest resources and forest management species (1987) 
Canada 
USA 
Austria 
FRG 
Productive Forest Land 
(million ha.) 
Impact of Forestry GNP on 
Economy 
(SbillionCdn) 
Managed Species: 
Canada: 
USA: 
Austria: • 
Fed. Rep. of Germany: 
Import 
Export 
244 
506 
1.59 
16.87 
210 
415 000 
15.44 
8.73 
3.0 
95 
1.1 
2.48 
7.3 
244 
506 
4.98 
Picea spp., Pinus spp., Abies balsamea, Populus 
Picea spp., Pinus spp., Quercus, Carya, Acer, Fagus Betula, Populus, Abies, 
Larix, Pseudo Tsuga, Tsuga, Juglanis 
Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, Larix decidua, Abiel alba, Fagus sylvatica 
Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, Abies alba, Pseudotsuga menziesii, Larix decidua, 
Fagus sylvatica, Quercus robur 
TABLE IB. Summary of forest resources and forest management species (1987) 
Indonesia 
China 
India 
Brazil 
Productive Forest Land 
(million ha.) 
Impact of Forestry GNP on 
Economy 
($billion Cdn) 
Managed species: 
Indonesia: 
China: 
India: 
Brazil: 
Import 
Export 
45 
85 
0.22 
2.00 
122 
260 
3.38 
0.68 
45 
246 
0.22 
0.2 
350 
250 
0 
1.22 
Meranti romin, Tectonia grandis, Pinus merkusii, Pterocarpus indicus. Eucalyptus 
deglupta. Acacia decurrens 
Dawn redwood, Cathaya, Golden Larch, Chinese swamp cypress, fokienia cedar, 
larches, Chinese fir, Korean pine 
Dipterocarpus spp., Shorea robusta, Cedrus deodara, Pinus roxburghii, Abies densa, 
Picea smithiana 
Eucalyptus spp,, Tectona grandis, Khaya spp., Swietenia macrophylla 
62 
CIV Agriculture and forestry 
TABLE IC. Summary of Forest Resources and Forest Management Species (1987) 
New 
Kenya 
Zambia 
Finland 
Zealand 
Chile 
Productive Forest Land 
(million ha.) 
1.1 
4.1 
18.2 
2.8 
4.7 
Impact of Forestry GNP 
on Economy 
1.7 
2.1 • 
96.9 
23.2 
16.4 
(Sbillion Cdn) 
Import 
0.02 
0.09 
0.4 
0.16 
0.16 
Export 
0.004 
0 
7.15 
0.55 
0.48 
Managed species: 
Kenya: 
Ocotea spp., Myrica salicifolia,, Acapia labai. Acacia abyssinica, Podocarpus gracilior. 
Juniperus procera 
Zambia: 
Brachystegia spp., Jubernardia angolensis. Eucalyptus grandis, Pinus kesiya 
Finland: 
Picea abies, Pinus sylvestris, Bemla pendula 
New Zealand: 
Pinus radiata, Podocarpus totara, Rimu cupressinum, Kamaki, Rata 
Chile: 
Pinus radiata. Eucalyptus spp., Populus, Pinus 
TABLE 2A. Roundwood production, imports, exports and their value (1989*) 
Indonesia 
China 
India 
Brazil 
Roundwood production (thousand m') 
175 730 
274 590 
269 451 
255 455 
Roundwood imports (thousand m') 
0 
13 383 
902 
26 
Value (Cdn$000)** 
0 
1 435 171 
104 260 
6 574 
Roundwood export(thousand m3) 
1 131 
21 
76 
46 
Value (Cdn$000) 
38 910 
21 749 
1 032 
4 525 
Kenya 
Zambia 
Finland 
New Zealand 
Roundwood production (thousand m') 
35 650 
12 204 
46 262 
10 557 
Roundwood imports (thousand m') 
0 
0 
6 784 
5 
Value (Cdn$000) 
0 
0 
307 774 
3 383 
Roundwood exports (thousand m') 
0 
0 
1 047 
2 470 
Value (Cdn$000) 
0 
0 
97 825 
138 254 
TABLE 2B. Roundwood production, imports, exports and their value (1989*) 
Chile 
Canada 
USA 
Austria 
FRG 
Roundwood production (thousand m') 
16 864 
176 976 
533 168 
16 086 
35 332 
Roundwood imports (thousand m') 
0 
4 268 
3 471 
4 832 
3 909 
value (Cdn$000) 
0 
223 542 
149 221 
298 007 
445 675 
Roundwood exports (thousand m') 
4 679 
5 093 
28 232 
1 722 
5 489 
value (Cdn$000) 
188 362 
424 400 
3 348 651 
93 118 
366 181 
* 
FAO Yearbook Forest Products 1989—PubHshed in 1991 
** Exchange Rate 1 CDN$ = 1.183432 US$ 
V 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
Lead authors: 
R B Street (Canada) 
S M Semenov (USSR) 
C H D Magadza (Zimbabwe) 
Contributors: 
T V Callaghan (UK) 
R Christ (Austria) 
A W Diamond (Canada) 
G R Evans (USA) 
J T Everett (USA) 
R S de Groot (The Netherlands) 
A Fischlin (Switzerland) 
J I Holten (Norway) 
L Mortsch (Canada) 
O J Olaniran (Nigeria) 
S D Sastrapradja (Indonesia) 
R R Vaghjee (Mauritius) 
N Vygodskaya (USSR) 
V 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
1 Background 
As identified in the IPCC Impacts Assessment (1990), 
natural terrestrial ecosystems could face significant envi-
ronmental impacts as a result of the global increases in the 
atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases and the 
associated climatic changes, as well as from the increasing 
UV-B radiation due to the atmospheric ozone depletion and 
the combined effect of biospheric oxidants and acidic 
depositions. The rate of these changes will be the major 
factor determining the type and degree of impacts. The 
type of disturbances resulting from climate change will be 
unique for each ecosystem and the community within, as 
each responds to the added pressure of a changing environ-
ment. Adding to the complexity of assessing these changes 
is that they could occur as a series of 'jumps' rather than 
in a uniform manner across an area like a 'moving wave' 
(Holten and Carey 1991). 
The social and economic consequences of these 
impacts will be significant, especially for those regions of 
the globe where societies and related economies are 
dependent on natural terrestrial ecosystems for their social 
and economic welfare. Projected changes within natural 
terrestrial ecosystems suggest that changes in the availabili-
ty of food, fuel, medicine, fibre, construction materials 
and income are possible. 
2 Progress since the IPCC Impacts Assessment 
One of the major issues arising from the impacts of climate 
change on terrestrial ecosystems is water availability. This 
will be of increasing concern as populations increase and 
the need for water for drinking and economic activity (eg 
irrigation) increase concomitantly. Recent studies suggest 
that while water use efficiency should be increased in a 
higher COj atmosphere, the same amount of water could 
be used per unit area because of increased leaf area ratios 
due to greater biomass produced through CO2 fertilisation. 
Furthermore, any benefits accruing from the more efficient 
use by plants of soil water would be lost if wasteful 
irrigation technologies, such as flood irrigation, persist. 
There is evidence (Holten and Carey 1991) suggesting 
that: 
• 
in boreal, alpine and arctic regions, mesic and hygric 
plant communities will in general be more sensitive to 
climate change than the xeric communities; 
• 
in temperate and southern to middle boreal regions in 
Europe, 
major floristic and faunistic changes may 
take place in some of the thermophilous deciduous 
forests as a result of projected improved conditions for 
Dutch elm disease; 
• 
rare and mainly middle and high alpine species may 
be 
threatened with extinction (direcUy or indirectly) 
by climate change; and 
• 
migration barriers, both natural and anthropogenic, 
could 
prevent or delay dispersal of more temperate 
plant and animal species into Scandinavia. 
The process of reduction of tropical forest on the African 
continent, first noted in the tropical rain forest areas of 
Zaire and Uganda about 9000 BP (Livingston 1975) with 
the arrival of humans, will continue unabated and even be 
reinforced by global warming, resulting in an accelerated 
reduction of tropical forest and the expansion of the arid 
zones of Africa (Magadza 1990). Projected cliinatic change 
is likely to lead to an encroachment of the Sahel syndrome 
into the savannas. This region supports approximately 200 
million people and any adverse effects of climate warming 
could result in the worsening of already precarious produc-
tion systems in the area. 
The degradation of the savanna ecosystems has a 
further implication for animals and migratory birds. Many 
animal and bird species utilise savanna weflands and 
shallow lakes, such as Lake Abiata in Ethiopia, Lake 
Turkana in northern Kenya and other rift valley lakes, the 
Kafue flats of Zambia and, in West Africa, the flood plains 
of the Niger and Senegal rivers, Lake Chad and several 
other water bodies. Decreased rainfall or soil moisture as 
projected by several climate models for the African 
savanna ecosystems suggests that large-bodied animals, 
such as the elephant, hippopotamus and the large bovines, 
are liable to be affected more adversely than smaller 
species. Many migratory bird species utilise seasonal 
wetlands, locally known as dambos, vleis or bugas in 
eastern and southern Africa. Songbirds (eg common 
whitethroat, sedge warbler) breeding in Europe and 
wintering in the Sahel have declined in years following 
droughts in the Sahel, apparently owing to reduced habitat 
and survival in the wintering grounds. Projected climate 
change of the order anticipated by several climate models 
will probably result in the reduction of many such habitats 
(Magadza 1990) and, therefore, could negatively impact on 
these animals and migratory birds. 
Seasonal wetlands are also critical to waterfowl and 
other migratory birds in the Great Plains region of North 
America (Diamond 1990; Diamond and Brace 1991). 
In sub-humid savannas, climate change projections 
suggest increased aridity. It is therefore likely that rivers 
in these regions that show marked seasonality in flow 
would have reduced flows during periods of drought. 
Furthermore, many shallow water bodies, such as Lake 
Chad, could experience complete aridity during extended 
drought periods, or experience very high salinity levels. 
Such episodes would result in eventual extinction of the 
C.V Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
65 
fish species in those water bodies. Since many river basins 
display some degree of endemicity, such species decima-
tion could lead to reduction in species diversity, where 
only those types, such as the Claridae, which can readily 
migrate between river basins, would have the potential to 
survive. 
Projected climate change may be one of the most 
important factors affecting fisheries now and in the next 
few hundred years. The level of the impact could vary 
widely and may depend on attributes of the species as well 
as on their regional specificity. Freshwater fish populations 
are contained within the bonds of their watershed and in 
most cases carmot migrate, but must endure (Shuter and 
Post 1990), adapt, suffer population declines or become 
extinct (Coutant 1990) when their environment deterio-
rates. 
The added stresses to the freshwater 
ecosystems 
accompanying projected climate changes can be expected, 
in the short term, to reduce species number and genetic 
diversity within freshwater populations (Everett, in press). 
Species that survive a changing environment will likely be 
the ones with adequate existing genetic variation to allow 
survival and selection of at least some individuals. Whether 
the projected rate of climate change is within the capability 
of freshwater species to adapt genetically will depend on 
the existing genetic variability and on the rapidity of 
change (Mathews and Simmerman 1990). 
With projected climate change, profound impacts, both 
beneficial and destructive, can be expeyted for the 
distribution and productivity of valuable fisheries and the 
industries associated with them (Healey 1990; Hill and 
Magnuson 1990; Johnson and Evans 1990). Among the 
first fish populations responding to climate change will 
probably be those in streams (a high rate of heat transfer 
from the air) on the warm or cold margins of their species' 
native ranges (Holmes 1990). With warming, a longer 
growing season is expected which should lead to greater 
fish productivity where temperature is currently a limiting 
factor, such as in high latitude lakes and reservoirs 
(Schlesinger and McCombie 1983). Species whose current 
distribution is confined to cool waters may be eliminated 
from parts of their range, leading to reduced fisheries, in 
spite of higher growth rates of the species that can tolerate 
warmer water. 
Photosynthesis in plants grown at elevated concentra-
tions of carbon dioxide is often reported to be reduced 
after a few days or weeks exposure. This reduction is often 
attributed to acclimation of carbon metabolism. Some 
studies of photosynthesis response to elevated CO2, 
however, show either an increase or no reduction in 
photosynthesis capacity. For example, data collected over 
four growing seasons on two monospecific stands: one 
dominated by a C3 sedge and the other by a C4 grass (in 
a mesohaline salt marsh on the Chesapeake Bay) exposed 
to twice normal COj concentrations showed increased 
carbon accumulation of 88% and 40% respectively. 
Callaghan and Carlsson (in press) showed that high 
productivity is not necessarily commensurate with success-
ful reproduction and greater fitness. This is particularly 
true in short growing seasons (eg due to temperature 
limitations in the tundra or aridity in the tropics) when 
climate conditions within the growing season allow high 
productivity, but the shortness of the growing season 
restricts successful reproductive development. Climate 
change projections suggest that in tundra areas, the 
growing season may lengthen as a result of warming; 
however, in other areas, increased aridity may shorten the 
growing seasons. This suggests the importance of con-
sidering population dynamics of plants as well as produc-
tivity. Such approaches also consider age-related processes 
and show that long-lived plants (eg trees), and those 
reproducing sporadically (eg many high-latitude and high-
altitude plants), are threatened more by climate change 
than short-lived plants (eg annuals) because of the limita-
tions on adaptive responses within each generation. 
The report 'Arctic Interactions: Recommendations for 
an Arctic Component in the International Geosphere-
Biosphere Programme' (1988) stresses the point that 
estimates suggest that 200-400 GT (109 metric tons) of 
non-oxidised carbon is stored in circumpolar peatlands 
(mostly in the boreal zones of Canada, the USSR and 
Fennoscandia). If a major part of this carbon were released 
because of changes in surface temperature and moisture—a 
physical possibility under projected climate changes over 
a few decades or centi^ries-then northern regions could 
emit a substantial additional amount of carbon to the 
atmosphere (potential positive feedback). 
In their draft map of ecoclimatic sensitivity regions, 
Holten and Carey (1991) have suggested that within 
Norway, mountain and subalpine environments are the 
most sensitive to climate change, through climate-induced 
changes in snow cover (depth and duration) and hydrology. 
The arctic and flat river valley regions appear to be as 
sensitive as the alpine and subalpine environments. 
3 Uncertainties and knowledge gaps 
Uncertainties and gaps in the knowledge base exist in 
terms of our understanding of the environmental impacts 
for natural terrestrial ecosystems and associated socioeco-
nomic consequences of climate changes. These uncertain-
ties and gaps exist as a result of deficiencies in our 
theoretical knowledge of: 
66 
C.V Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
• 
Fundamental ecological process: effects of a changing 
set of interactive environmental parameters on plant 
net primary productivity and water use, ecosystem 
carbon and nutrient budgets, vegetation structure, 
species composition, forage quality, plant-animal and 
vegetation-soil interactions; population dynamics of 
major species and vegetation types as well as of pests 
and noxious species; and migration rates and mecha-
nisms for species dispersal and settlement including 
the impacts of barriers and corridors. 
• 
Linkages between climate and atmospheric chemistry 
changes (ie elevated levels of atmospheric pollutants 
such as SOj, NOx etc and atmospheric fertilisers) on 
the one hand and population and ecosystem dynamics 
(including implications for competitiveness, reproduc-
tion and productivity) on the other, can provide an 
assessment of the sensitivity (including buffering 
capacity, plasticity and resilience) of key species, 
communities or ecosystems. 
• 
Linkages between ecosystem dynamics and human 
social and economic development and welfare under a 
changing climate can provide an assessment of the 
vulnerability of social and economic systems to 
changes in natural terrestrial ecosystems. 
The significance of the environmental impacts and socio-
economic consequences as a result of climate change 
(IPCC Impacts Assessment 1990) and the need to develop 
viable and effective response strategies warrants the 
allocation of sufficient resources to tackle these deficien-
cies through climate impacts research, 
management, 
awareness raising, national and international cooperation 
etc. 
Within many developing countries, most of the climate 
change impacts activities (and for the environment in 
general) are orchestrated by outside agencies with Uttle 
input from local scientific/technical experts. The capability 
of developing countries of taking long-term views and to 
initiate programs on climate change impacts is hampered 
by lack of the necessary institutional framework. In 
addition, the monitoring networks within many developing 
countries are either too sparsely distributed or unservice-
able to allow for a worthwhile assessment of the impacts 
of, and responses to, climate change at the regional level. 
The most urgent need is for fundamental research on 
the sensitivity and likely response of key physical and 
biological constituents of critical ecosystems (including 
those locally defmed) to climatic variability and change. 
This research should also include wildlife and freshwater 
fish populations for which currently there is very little 
information available. 
There is also a need for more attention on the implica-
tions of climate change for heritage sites and reserves. It 
has been estimated that 25-60% of the present heritage 
sites and reserves could be unfit for the current species/ 
communities they protect under projected changes in 
climate. This suggests that areas of adaptation will be 
required and that management strategies (ie in relation to 
dessication and pest/disease control), adjustment of policies 
on selection/siting of protected areas and the development 
of specific stijdies and protective measures, should be 
required for 'transferral' of threatened plants and animals 
to suitable habitats. 
The correlative relationships between climate and plant 
and animal species need to be experimentally evaluated to 
establish causal relationships and the relative impacts of 
changes in climate compared to other controlling factors. 
This comparative analysis is essential as there are other 
factors that can and are contributing to ecosystem disap-
pearance and degradation (eg urbanisation, atmospheric 
pollutants, land conversion, agricultural land management 
practices, water course alterations). This requires that 
fundamental ecological research be done in parallel with 
research on socioeconomic responses (eg development of 
impact models that bridge the gap between environmental 
impacts and social and economic consequences) as ecologi-
cal response may well be determined as much by socioeco-
nomic reactions to climate change as by climate change 
itself 
4 Addressing the uncertainties and knowledge gaps 
To reduce these uncertainties and gaps in our knowledge, 
integrated national, regional and global programs and 
networks of research and systematic observations are 
required. These should include the improvement and 
further develpment of the global network of research and 
integrated systematic observation sites (eg Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Monitoring and Assessment (TEMA) of UNEP, 
Global Change and Terrestrial Ecosystem or using previ-
ous IBP research sites) with the aim of examining the 
linkages and relationships essential to defining environ-
mental impacts and identifying where and what action is 
necessary. Also essential is the need to increase the skills 
of human resources and level of supportive funding 
available for participation in global programs and net-
works, especially for developing countries. 
Integrated, 
representative, 
long-term 
systematic 
observation programs including biophysical, hydrological 
and meteorological parameters on a regional, national and 
global basis, as well as coincident economic and social 
(including health) data are a necessary building block 
towards reducing the uncertainties. These observation 
programs should combine relatively coarse data based on 
remote sensing with ground-based sampling over transects 
C.V Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
67 
on carefully chosen terrain covering the latitudinal/ 
altitudinal extent of selected ecotones and ecotypes. 
Systematic observations of population dynamics and 
ecosystem responses should support and be supported by 
field experimentation and modelling. Specific attention 
should be paid to vulnerable and critical (including those 
locally defined) habitats, typical ecotonal areas (eg Holten 
and Carey 1991) and species along steep climate gradients 
including margins and isolated populations, and coastal and 
island ecosystems as well as concentrating in transects 
across 
ecotones 
(desert-steppe/forest, 
savanna-steppe/ 
forest, alpine timberline, forest-steppe and forest-tundra). 
These data should be archived in such a manner that they 
could be readily accessible. Heritage sites and reserves are 
excellent benchmarks against which to monitor the impacts 
of climate change and, therefore, should be considered as 
a priority when establishing a network of benchmark sites. 
Monitoring of more sensitive ecosystems and species 
should be given priority since they would provide early 
indication of impact of climatic change. 
Remote sensing (satellite and radar, and the use of 
GIS) can be extremely useful for some aspects of monitor-
ing ecosystem status and dynamics (eg geographic boun-
daries of vegetation zones). Ground-based or field obser-
vation, however, is also essential as a means of ground-
tmthing the remotely sensed data and for monitoring the 
subtleties in ecosystem and species responses which cannot 
be measured remotely. 
Considerable progress could be made in a relatively 
short time by assembling and analysing existing data on 
interactions among climate, ecosystem and species dynam-
ics, and social and economic parameters with the objective 
of identifying likely sensitivities and responses. The initial 
focus should be on ecosystems and regions considered 
most likely to be affected in the short term. 
5 Fundamental ecological processes 
An essential step in climate impacts assessments is to 
establish a consistent baseline of resources at risk through 
assembling relevant inventories of species and ecosystems 
on a national, regional and global basis. This will require 
development and acceptance of consistent protocols for 
identiiying and making inventories of the boundaries, 
extent and dynamics of plant and animal populations 
(including disease and pest infestations) supported by field 
8nd laboratory manuals. Existing protocols should be 
evaluated for their sensitivity to the identification of the 
impacts of climate change, including whether or not they 
provide observation across current ecosystem boundaries 
3nd include vulnerable species/communities. 
A comprehensive observation program designed to 
improve understanding of fundamental ecological processes 
should include two elements: 
• 
broad-scale, low intensity, randomly or regularly dis-
persed sampling units (transects, plots, or points)to 
detect regional scale changes in the distribution and 
abundance of biota and distribution and integrity of 
ecological zones; and 
• 
site-specific integrated monitoring projects located in 
sensitive ecosystems. These intensively monitored sites 
would also contribute to the understanding of 
cause/effect 
relationships between climate change, 
biota and ecosystems that is necessary to interpret the 
changes detected through the element noted above. 
Peat dynamics is a key element in the prediction of future 
climate change. Studies of thermal and hydric regimes of 
peatlands should have high priority for research and 
systematic observation. In order to quantify the emission 
and storage of carbon by northern peat-rich ecosystems, 
refinement is needed of their present extent and carbon 
content. 
Long-term ecological research sites should be present 
in each major ecological zone. Where possible, use should 
be made of existing sites where long-term information is 
already available. Strengthening the international agree-
ments on ecosystem monitoring such as the US, USSR, 
Canada ecological transect in the northern latitudes should 
be promoted as a key component of the required research 
and monitoring program. Other monitoring programs, 
including the Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Reserves and 
UNEP/TEMA's Global network, should be instituted 
through appropriate agreements to develp a global stand-
ardised dataset. These long-term ecological research and 
monitoring sites would provide opportunities for intensive 
process-oriented research in addition to monitoring of 
effects. 
Research efforts should include model development 
and assessment (both correlative and dynamic) and suppor-
tive controlled environment experiments and field experi-
ments. Field manipulation techniques, at different levels 
within the ecosystem (ie at species, population or plant 
conununity level) are an essential component in addressmg 
the uncertainties in understanding ecosystem processes and 
functions. 
More field programs should focus on natural terrestrial 
ecosystem process research (eg what are the key climatic, 
hydrologic, geomorphological, biological and chemical 
processes that occur within these ecosystems and their 
interactions in determining ecosystem responses). Research 
topics to be addressed at the intra-specific level include 
physiology, phenology, regeneration and reproduction. 
68 
C.y 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
dispersal and migration. At the inter-specific level, 
research should focus on changes in plant-animal interac-
tion (eg pollination), predation and competition, decompo-
sition, and pest and disease dynamics. 
With regard to entire life communities and vegetation 
complexes, research questions to be considered include 
changes in surface covering, vegetation structure, species 
composition, biomass, diversity and succession patterns. 
Experimental work on specific interactions or specific 
variables are also required to understand cause and effect 
because of the complex interactions between environmental 
variables in nature. The International Tundra Experiment 
(ITEX) being developed for arctic studies, which includes 
basic systematic observations and environmental manipula-
tions is one example of the type of program required. 
6 Identifying the linkages with climate change and 
greenhouse gas concentrations 
A focus for systematic observations of natural terrestrial 
ecosystems should be the identification of a set of wildlife 
and vegetation indicator species which could be used for 
detecting climate-induced ecosystem changes and to assist 
in quantifying vegetation, wildlife and freshwater 
fish 
sensitivity to climate and possible responses to climate 
change. Rather than trying to predict what will happen 
when climate changes, focus should be placed on assessing 
the sensitivity of species for climate change (thresholds/ 
limits) in order to select indicator species which may be 
used to detect effects of climate change 'in the field'. In 
selecting indicator species consideration should be given to 
species which are expected to expand their range of 
distribution (horizontally and/or vertically), species which 
are expected to retreat or become extinct, and species 
which have a wide distribution with many ecotypes which 
may increase or decrease in abundance within the present 
range of distribution (Ketner and de Groot, in press). 
Once identified, the distribution of indicator species 
should be systematically mapped using a grid system that 
lends itself to various modelling approaches, including 
computer-based models. 
Related research should focus on identifying the 
cause/effect relationships between climate, ecosystems 
processes 
(eg biophysical, biochemical, geochemical 
processes), functions (eg habitat, water quantity and 
quality), distribution and productivity and associated 
wildlife and freshwater resources. Such research programs 
should be interdisciplinary by nature and not only assess 
the impacts of direct changes in climate, but also the 
effects of associated changes in soils, water regimes, and 
landscape structure and functions. 
7 Identifying social and economic consequences 
To identify and assess the social and economic conse-
quences of climate change there is a need for directed 
monitoring and research programs at the national, regional 
and global levels. These programs should be multi-disci-
plinary, involving not only physical and biological scien-
tists, but also representatives from the social sciences, 
including economics. National and international research 
funding should be capable of recognising and supporting 
this type of research. 
These research programs should explicitly address 
impacts and consequences in the context of changes in non-
climatic factors (eg population changes, economic growth, 
land use changes, lifestyle changes). Also included is the 
need to develop more realistic projections of supply, 
demand and use of natural resources 50 to 100 years from 
now, 
and to develop methods for characterising non-
economic values of natural terrestrial ecosystems, such as 
scenic vistas, recreation, wildlife habitat and biodiversity. 
Of particular interest when undertaking this type of 
research is information on the combined effect of both 
direct and indirect impacts on species and ecosystems. 
Examining the impact of a particular variable on a static 
environment and society, although interesting, is limited in 
its applicability. It would be more realistic to examine the 
impacts and consequences with fixed societal and environ-
mental changes or, better still, with a responsive society 
and environment. These types of stiadies would lead to the 
identification of thresholds within both the natural terrestri-
al ecosystems and associated social economic structures. 
Essential to these programs is the need to combine 
biological monitoring that can identify the ecological 
consequences of climate change with coincident data and 
information on associated social and economic systems. As 
a first step, existing databases comprising coincident 
physical and biological data, as well as social and econom-
ic information, should be identified. Assembling these 
databases will provide a means of undertaking the required 
impacts research and assist in refining the definition of the 
required research and monitoring programs. 
To facilitate implementation of research and monitor-
ing programs directed at identifying and assessing social 
and economic consequences of climate change, national 
and regional teams of experts representing the physical, 
biological and social scientific and economics communities 
should be assembled to undertake impact studies in an 
integrated fashion. This Can be accomplished through 
strengthening existing programs at the global and regional 
levels. At the global level, the World Climate Programme 
and in particular, its World Climate Impacts and Response 
Strategies Programme should be encouraged to play a more 
active role in stimulating and facilitating regional assess-
C. V Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
69 
ments. The estabUshment of regional programs such as the 
Landscape-Ecological Impact of Climate Change (LICC) 
program for Europe should be encouraged. 
8 Conclusions 
Promotion of the high and irreplaceable values of natural 
terrestrial ecosystems is essential in gaining public support 
for sustaining them in a changing climate. Action is also 
necessary to increase public awareness and to encourage 
support in their defence, as well as for enhancing the 
transcending importance of climate change impact studies 
and the assessment of their consequences and of the 
response options. 
Managers, decision makers and local people need to 
be aware that policies and practices should be flexible to 
accommodate the implications of climate change and the 
dynamics of this change. 
In the near term, the identification of sensitive species, 
conununities and ecosystems should be one of the most 
important tasks undertaken. This sensitivity should be 
defined not only from an environmental perspective, but 
should also consider social and economic implications. As 
far as possible, the scale at which sensitivities are defined 
should be consistent with that at which decision can be 
made. 
On the basis of these identified sensitivities, appropri-
ate response strategies should be developed and implement-
ed for those species, communities and ecosystems which 
face the most deleterious impacts (eg semi-arid and arid 
regions and tundra regions). Humans must be prepared to 
intervene where vital ecosystems or species are in jeopar-
dy. In developing and implementing response strategies, 
consideration should be given to a wide range of response 
options, the specific local environmental; social and 
economic circumstances and the degree of uncertainties 
and risks. 
Consideration should also be given to reducing major 
human-caused stresses such as pollution and those resulting 
from the impacts of other human activities such as logging 
and the grazing of domestic animals at subsistence level. 
These stresses may originate outside the boundaries of the 
affected ecosystem but often, once they are reduced, the 
elasticity of that ecosystem increases, possibly decreasing 
the impacts of climate change. 
References 
Bardecki, M . 1991. 'Wetlands and Climate Change: 
A 
Speculative Review,' Can. Water Res. J.. 16(l):9-22. 
Callaghan, T.V. and Carlsson, B.A. in press. 'Plant popula-
tion dynamics in a changing climate at high latitudes,' in: 
K . M . Peterson and D. LinviU (eds) Oimate change: the 
biological 
implications. 
NATO/ARW 
Symposium, 
Clemson, South Carolina. NATO Advanced Studies 
Series. 
Coutant, C.C. 1990. 'Temperature-oxygen habitat for 
freshwater and coastal striped bass in a changing 
climate,' Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 
119:240-253. 
Diamond, A.W. 1990. 'Wildlife as biological indicators for 
assessing impacts of climate change,' in: G. Wall and M 
Sanderson (eds.). Climate Change impUcationsfor water 
and ecological resources. Tit^t. Geog Pub. Series, Occ. 
Pap No. 11, University of Waterloo, pp. 225-233 
Diamond, A.W. and R. K. Brace. 1991. 'Climate and 
waterfowl populations,' in: G. Wall (ed.) Symposium on 
the impacts of climatic change arul variability on the 
Great Plains. Dept. Geog.Pub. Series, Occ. Pap No. 12, 
University of Waterloo, pp. 245-257 
Everett, J.T., in press. 'Impacts of CUmate Change on 
Living Aquatic Resources of the World,' prepared for: 
World Fisheries Congress, Athens, May 1992. 
Healey,M.C. 1990. 'Implications of climate change for 
fishery management policy,' 
Transactions of the 
American Fisheries Society 119: 366-373. 
Hill, D.K. and J.J. Magnuson 1990. 'Potential effects of 
global climate warming on the growth and prey consump-
tion of Great Lakes fish,' Transactions of the American 
Fisheries Society 119:265-275. 
Holmes, J.A. 1990. 'Sea lamprey as an early responder to 
climate change in the Great Lakes basin,' Transactions of 
the American Fisheries Society 119: 292-300. 
Holten, J.L and P.D. Carey 1991. 'Responses of climate 
change on natural terrestrial ecosystems in Norway,' 
Draft report. Norwegian Institute for Nature Research. 
n*CC Impacts Assessment 1990 
Johnson, T.B. and D.O. Evans 1990. 'Size-dependent winter 
mortality of young-of-the-year white perch: climatic 
warming and invasion of the Laurendan Great Lakes,' 
Transactions of the American Fisheries Society 119: 301-
313. 
Ketner, P. and R.S. de Groot, in press. 'The use of 
bioindicators to detect climate change in N.W. European 
Ecotones,' Paper submitted to: Ecological Applications, 
based on a manuscript prepared for the SCOPE Work-
shop 'Ecotones in a changing environment: a workshop 
on ecotones and global change', April 26-29 1991, 
Michigan, USA 
Koshida, G. and L. Mortsch 1991. Climate change and water 
level impacts on wetlands: a bibliography. Downsview: 
Canadian Climate Centre, Atmospheric Environment 
Service, CLI-1-91, 50p. 
Livingston, D.A. 1975. 'The late quaternary climatic changes 
in Africa,' Annual review of ecology and systematics. 6: 
249-2. 
Magadza, C.H.D. 1990. 'Some possible impacts of climate 
change on African Ecosystems,' in: Proceedings of the 
Second World Qimate Conference pp 385-390. 
70 
Mathews, W.J. and E.G. Zimmerman 1990. 'Potential 
effects of global warming on native fishes of the southern-
great plains and the southwest,' Fisheries 15, No.6: 
26-32. 
, 
Mortsch, L . 1990. 'Climatic change and variability: the 
effects of an altered water regime on the Great Lakes 
coastal wetlands,' in: Climate change: implications for 
water and ecological resources, G. Wall and M . 
Sanderson, eds. University of Waterloo, Dept. of Ge-
ography Publication Series, Occasional Paper No., 11, p. 
217-224. 
Osterreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften 1991. 
AnthropogeneKlimaanderungen:Moglicheauswirkungen 
auf osterreich—mogliche massnahmen in Osterreich 
C.V Natural terrestrial ecosystems ^ 
Schlesinger, D.A. and A . M . McCombie 1983. 'An evalu-
ation of climatic morphoedaphie, and effort data as 
predictors of yields from Ontario sport fisheries,' Ontario 
Fisheries Technical Report Series No. 10. Ministry of 
Natural Resources, Ontario, Canada. 
Shuter, B.J. and J.R. Post 1990. 'Climate, population 
viability, and the Zoogeography of temperate fishes,' 
Transaction of American Fisheries Society 119:314-336. 
Wiersma, G.B. 1991. Feasibility Study of a Global Network^ 
of Integrated Monitoring Sites. Idaho National Engineer-
ing laboratory, Idaho Falls, Idaho. Sept. 
Wiersma, G.B. 1991. Scientific Advisory Committee on 
Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring (SACTEMA), Work-
ing Group, Evaluation. UNEP/GEMS. Sept. 
VI Hydrology and water resources 
Co-chairmen and lead authors: 
E Stakhiv (USA) 
HLins(USA) 
I Shiklomanov (Russia) 
VI 
Hydrology and water resources 
1 Introduction 
Since the IPCC Climate Change Impacts Assessment report 
(1990b), a substantial number of studies have been under-
taken that deal with the hydrologic effects and water 
resources 
management 
impacts of global warming. 
Although the body of information is growing rapidly, espe-
cially the proliferation of case studies of hydrologic 
impacts, few new insights have been offered by these stud-
ies, especially for water resources management impacts. 
This is due largely to the reality that the analyses are based 
on General Circulation Model (GCM) outputs which sim-
ply do not provide the information required for such 
analyses, nor are the results compatible with one another 
for the five GCMs most frequently cited (US National 
Academy of Sciences 1992). 
Overall, the recent studies 
have confirmed the findings and conclusions of the 1990 
Impacts Assessment, albeit with nuances and refinements 
that were not explicitly considered then. 
Among the difficulties in trying to interpret and 
compare the findings was that a great majority of studies 
were conducted without regard to conventional impact 
assessment and evaluation principles, while also ignoring 
IPCC global warming scenarios. 
This diminished their 
direct value in trying to understand the hydrologic response 
sensitivity, not to mention the comparative value in 
examining cross-regional impacts of global change on the 
vulnerability of comparably managed water resources. The 
impacts of climate change on watershed response and the 
vulnerability of managed systems presents a greater degree 
of evaluation difficulty; the few studies that have attempted 
to deal with these issues should be viewed in the context of 
an evolving yet tenuous methodology. 
Even though evidence for global warming and its long-
range impacts is becoming more compelling with each new 
report, like it or not, there is still considerable disagree-
ment about the foreseeable regional hydrologic effects of 
global warming, not to mention the more complex socio-
economic and environmental impacts associated with water 
resources management. The reality is that generic global 
warming scenarios do not lend themselves to simple cause-
and-effect extrapolations..There are countless simultaneous 
positive and negative feedback mechanisms to consider just 
to account for hydrologic processes alone. 
Water re-
sources management impacts add an additional level of 
complexity. 
The hydrological cycle has emerged as the central 
element in studies of climate change 
yet 
at present a full 'systems view' of climate and the 
hydrological cycle has yet to emerge . . . . 
Climate 
models have yet to be developed which account for the 
full hydrological cycle and its interactions with the 
atmosphere, oceans and land. 
(Chahme 1992). 
Water resources management, by its nature, is intend-
ed and has served to ameliorate the extremes in climate 
variability. It stands to reason, then, that managed water-
sheds, ie those under some form of water control and 
distribution, are apt to experience less dramatic water re-
sources impacts than those without such water management 
systems even though the natural hydrologic response may 
be similar. However, specific regional changes in precipi-
tation and runoff are as yet impossible to predict with any 
degree of confidence (US National Academy of Sciences 
1992; Chahine 1992). For hydrologic studies, precipitation 
is the variable of greatest interest, but G C M simulations of 
precipitation for present climate conditions are notoriously 
poor (Wood et al. 1992). Much attention has been focused 
on decreases in mean annual runoff, but some areas may 
well experience increased runoff, at least during the 
traditional seasonal peak flood period. Most model results 
do seem to forecast increased spring runoff for all the 
major rivers, although a comparative analysis by Kuhl and 
Miller (1992) and Miller and Russell (1992) suggest the 
reason may be that at least when considering the GISS 
G C M , that model uniformly overestimates mean annual 
streamflow and peak spring runoff when compared to 
historical records. 
Thus far, the numerous impact studies are largely 
suggestive in nature, serving to prompt planners and policy 
analysts to search for worthwhile ways by which to 
account explicitiy for and deal with potential changes in 
average runoff and a greater variability in climate in the 
foreseeable future. Water resources impacts are consid-
ered to be among the most significant consequences of 
climate change, along with ecological impacts, affecting 
especially the all-important agricultural sector. Hence, a 
degree of educated guessing is warranted as a way of 
better preparing for the uncertainties that lie ahead, at least 
in terms of preparing robust national strategies for coping 
with uncertainty. 
Potential effects in the agricultural, 
forestry and urban sectors, although of justifiable concern 
to warrant separate inquiries, are actiially derivative prob-
lems stemming from the fundamental effects of climate, 
change on water availability (quantity, quality, distribution 
and timing); and we must not forget that while the long-
term implications of global warming have focused on water 
deficits and droughts, there is reason to believe that 
climate variability could also increase considerably, so that 
C.VI Hydrology and water resources 
73 
societies must contend with large uncertainties at both ends 
of the hydrologic spectrum — floods as well as droughts. 
Since the first assessment of the IPCG (1990a,b,c), 
scientists participating in the Impacts Assessment Working 
Group II realised that producing an estimate for water re-
sources availability and other conditions extant within a 
climate that may exist 50 or 100 years hence, could be 
misleading at best, and completely imrealistic at worst. 
The reason is that the first step of analysing the cumulative 
consequences of global warming requires that the physical 
changes of hydrologic effects associated with climate 
change be differentiated from 'normal' climate variability 
as derived from historic records. 
Second, future water 
resources management impacts (Water use, availability, 
distribution, operation and maintenance etc) should be 
viewed only as an increment (or decrement) to the water 
supply and use trends that are likely to occur under the 
'baseline' or 'without' climate change scenario. 
The 
indicators of water use that reflect the baseline condition, 
projected over a period of 50 to 100 years will, in all 
Ukelihood, be dominated by population growth, economic 
growth, and patterns of land use and settlemerit. These 
socioeconomic changes would severely stress existing 
water management systems even under a benign climate 
scenario. 
Clearly, climate change could exacerbate an increas-
ingly complex resource management problem. Yet, the 
expectation is that, despite all the large uncertainties that 
infuse this issue, water resources management opportuni-
ties for adapting to climate change are perhaps better 
understood and offer more realistic promise to mitigate 
whatever adverse consequences that may materialise than 
our collective ability to predict, understand and manage 
fiiture socioeconomic changes. 
This theme had been 
emphasised first in the IPCC (1990c) Response Strategies 
report and in subsequent reports by the US National 
Research Council (NRG 1991), the US National Academy 
of Sciences (NAS 1992), American Association for the Ad-
vancement of Science (Waggoner (ed.) 1990), and a con-
ference of practising US federal water resources agencies 
and water utility managers (Ballentine and Stakhiv (eds) 
1992). 
The task of predicting regional hydrologic and water 
management consequences of climate change is a formid-
able one. At present, we can offer Only a semblance of 
consensus on insights about how certain managed and 
uncontrolled watersheds could respond under a variety of 
climate change scenarios. 
Using the GCMs currently 
available, it is not possible even to replicate accurately 
current average climate conditions, much less forecast 
regional climatic conditions over annual and decadal time 
scales (Lins et al. 1990; Kuhl and Miller 1992; Chahine 
1992). 
The inability to forecast precipitation, runoff and 
evapotranspiration accurately should not be used as an 
argument to negate the application of GCMs to river basm 
level assessments, nor to diminish the value of undertaking 
hydrologic sensitivity analyses of the various postulated 
climate change scenarios. Rather, the caveats are intended 
to be cautionary in tenor - as a way of recognising that 
much too little is 'known' with certainty and spurious 
conclusions are drawn too often from information that is, 
at best, suggestive in nature. Towards this end, the focus 
of future IPCC efforts should be to develop a more uniform 
methodology for impact assessments as part of a continuing 
effort of targeting regional river basin and country studies 
in order to obtain a reasonably comparable basis for 
evaluation. 
Hence, this update and assessment of recently avail-
able information is presented in the spirit of simply 
compiling the latest information, without a rigorous 
comparative analysis and evaluation, for it is simply too 
difficult to judge the relative merit of various inquiries 
inasmuch as a formal and consistent evaluative framework 
is yet to be formulated. 
There are no accepted standards 
for analysis. 
However, a number of principles and 
preliminary guidelines for assessing impacts of climate 
change were developed by an expert group assembled by 
the IPCC (1992d), but they have yet to be applied. 
2 Overview of new information 
This supplement to the first IPCC Impacts Assessment re-
port summarises recent materials (1990-1992) that were 
solicited and received from many countries (Australia, Bel-
gium, Venezuela, Canada, Indonesia, Israel, New Zealand, 
Norway, Peru, Switzerland, Poland, Romania, Senegal, 
USSR, USA, Uruguay, Finland, France, Chile, Japan), 
international organisations (WMO, UNESCO, 
IIASA, 
Commission on Mekong). Proceedings of international 
and national symposia and meetings on this problem held 
during the period 1991-92 in Japan,Denmark, Australia, 
Iceland, Uruguay, USA and Indonesia are also included, 
as are selected papers from conferences held on the subject 
and supplemented by published literature. 
The studies and analyses that were made available 
subsequent to the IPCC Impacts Assessment which 
assessed the hydrologic and water resources management 
consequences of climate change reflected the range of ap-
proaches that have been pursued in the past by scientists, 
hydrologists and water resources engineers. These include: 
water balance methods; use of GCMs to obtain estimates 
of changes in climatic and hydrologic characteristics; use 
of deterministic hydrologic models; statistical analysis of 
long-term records; use of palaeo-analogues; and a combi-
74 
C. VI Hydrology and water resources 
nation of the aforementioned approaches. It is recognised 
that since the publication of the first IPCC Impacts Asess-
ment, many studies have been initiated that rely on a 
comparison of GCMs but, with few exceptions, the final 
results were not yet available for this report. 
Similarly, 
many recent publications delve into better understanding of 
historical climate changes as an implicit analog or baseline 
for extrapolating future changes (eg studies of the E l Nino 
phenomenon or the Sahelian drought). These studies were 
not included as they did not explicitly deal with evidence 
of hydrologic changes induced by anthropogenic global 
warming. 
Most studies focused on understanding the 
sensitivity of hydrologic response to climatic perturbations. 
Far fewer studies attempted to take on the more compli-
cated problem of directly analysing the relationship 
between hydrologic watershed sensitivity and the vulnera-
bility of managed water systems. 
Methodological approaches varied widely, so it would 
be inappropriate to infer that the studies portray distin-
guishable patterns of regional or geographic response, 
despite the fact that the recent suite of water-resources-
related climate studies cover a much larger and diverse 
geographic area. It is impossible to. draw'any specific in-
sights or conclusions about regional, river basin or water-
shed-level impacts because of wide differences among the 
GCMs and different analytical approaches that were used 
in these studies. In other words, the impacts will depend 
on the characteristics of the river basin, the G C M selected, 
and on the particular analytical method pursued. Given the 
large uncertamties associated with G C M outputs, it is 
premature to use them for predictive purposes. At best, 
they may have a heuristic value for setting the stage for the 
next phase of detailed hydrologic impact studies. 
Nevertheless, there are several recent noteworthy 
studies that shed some new light on the difficulties of 
conducting hydrologic sensitivity studies and potential 
water management responses, and which serve as caution-
ary reminders of a few principles and insights that may 
serve future endeavours. For example, Kuhl and Miller 
(1992) compared the GISS G C M hindcasts with observed 
runoff of the 20 largest rivers in the world and found 
systematic overestimation of the mean annual runoff. 
Furthermore, for several of the rivers (Mississippi, Amur, 
Colorado, Indus, Murray) the model's spring maximum 
runoff was significantly larger than observed, and the 
minimum summer and autumn runoff was too low. 
Nash and Gleick (1991) studied the hydrologic re-
sponse of the Colorado River (US) and compared their re-
sults, using a well-calibrated water balance accounting 
model, with several previous statistical studies for the same 
river. 
The authors concluded that the previous studies 
overestimated the decreases in runoff for the various 
scenarios involving increasing temperatures and that: 
conceptual models of arid and semiarid basins suggest 
that streamflow is less sensitive to climate change than 
previous statistical models have indicated. . . 
Furthermore, they conceded that changes in runoff to be 
expected under the selected range of temperature changes 
(up to ±4°C) would: 
not be statistically different from the historical record 
unless precipitation changed by more than 10%. This 
confirmed a pathbreaking study by Klemes (1985) that 
had long been neglected by many analysts. 
A critical aspect of water resources management is an 
understanding of the statistical properties of climate and 
weather-driven events, such as floods and droughts. For 
it is the extremes of precipitation and runoff that influence 
design criteria and management strategies. Little research 
has been done linking climate change with frequency of 
flood or drought, although several earlier attempts were 
made to place the implications of climate change and 
variability within the context of water resources system 
yield reliability using methods based on stochastic hydro-
logic analysis (Lettenmaier and Surges 1978; Matalas and 
Fiering 1977; Nemec and Schaake 1982; Klemes 1985; 
Fiering and Rogers 1989). A recent study by Wood etal. 
(1992) laid out a procedure for assessing the impact of 
climate change on the flood frequency distribution for a 
river basin and tested the methods for CO, doubling 
scenarios produced by the G F D L G C M . First, the authors 
note that the G F D L G C M failed to reproduce the historical 
climate characteristics for all seasons, uniformly underes-
timating precipitation for the two watersheds in the State 
of Washington in north-westem US In fact, the differ-
ences between historical precipitation and the present G C M 
climate simulations were larger than the differences 
predicted between the GCM IxCO, scenario (present) and 
the IxCO, scenario. Hence, the authors caution that while 
the effect of G C M model biases on their approach may be 
diminished by making relative comparisons, one could not 
be entirely certain because the models are highly nonlinear. 
Notwithstanding the caveats, the authors concluded on the -
basis of their test that stochastic transfer models offer a 
quantitative means of linking large-scale circulation condi-
tions, as inferred from GCMs to local surface meteorolog-
ical conditions, and can provide information for evaluating 
climate change impacts on flood frequencies. 
A study conducted for a large semi-arid agricultural 
area in the US, the Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-Kansas 
(MINK) area, was important for several innovative 
approaches and implications for water management (DOE 
1991). The study approach was to postulate a recurrence 
of the most severe drought of record (1931-40) under 
C.VI Hydrology and water resources 
75 
conditions of a doubled COj climate in the year 2030, both 
with and without adjustments (such as water conservation, 
pricing, technological innovation etc). Detailed sectoral 
water uses, demands and projections were developed. For 
the M I N K area, irrigation withdrawals were projected to 
increase by 14% and consumptive uses by 23% without 
employing rational adjustments. Crop yields would decline 
from 10 to 25% in the absence of adjustments, and plant 
requirements for irrigation water would increase by about 
20%. However, as a compensating factor, it is expected 
that the direct effects of increasing CO2 concentration from 
350 to 450 ppm would reduce irrigation requirements by 
10% (Easterling et al. 1991). Wollock and Homberger 
(1991) examined changes in assumptions about the effects 
of plant stomatal resistance changes due to the CO2 enrich-
ment effect on the sensitivity of catchment runoff. They 
found that lack of good information led to large variability 
in the projections of runoff response. Most importantly, 
perhaps, is that despite all the uncertainties, the adverse re-
gional economic impacts of such a drastic drought condi-
tion was found to be small, in the order of several percent-
age points reduction in total regional production (DOE 
1991, p27). 
A somewhat different approach to/ analysing the 
hydrologic effects of climate change was undertaken by 
McCabe et al. (1990). The authors examined the response 
of the Thomthwaite moisture index to climate change 
scenarios generated by three GCMs (GISS, GFDL, OSU). 
Their reasoning was that the Thomthwaite moisture index 
is a useful and early measurable indicator of water supply 
(precipitation) relative to its demand (potential evapotran-
spiration). Results showed that all three GCMs (steady 
state CO2 doubling) predicted drier conditions for most of 
the US, although the amount of decrease depends on the 
G C M climate scenario selected. Results also suggested 
that changes in the moisture index are related mainly to 
changes in the mean annual potential evapotranspiration as 
a result in changes in the mean annual temperature, rather 
than to changes in the mean annual precipitation. 
The greatest decrease in the index is expected to occur 
in the northem US, especially in the Great Lakes region, 
but only small decreases in the moisture index will occur 
in the already dry areas of the south-west US. 
It is 
important to note at this point that the parameterisation of 
continental evaporation in many atmospheric general circu-
lation models is demonstrably inconsistent with observed 
conditions. In the turbulent transfer relation for potential 
evaporation, GCMs use the modelled actual temperature to 
evaluate the saturated surface humidity, whereas the 
consistent temperature is the one reflecting cooling by the 
hypothetical potential evaporation. Milly (1992) demon-
strated that in G C M experiments where soil moisture is 
limited the models produce rates of potential evaporation 
that exceed, by a factor of two or more, the rates that 
would be yielded by use of the more realistic consistent 
temperature. 
This explains why most GCMs have pro-
duced excessively low values of summer soil moisture and 
raises further questions conceming the results of studies of 
soil-moisture changes induced by an increase in greenhouse 
gases. 
Finally, in one of the few available studies of the 
vulnerability of managed urban water resources systems, 
Kirshen and Fennessey (1992) analysed the potential 
impacts of climate change on the water supply of the 
Boston metropolitan area, which represents a large, well-
managed urban water supply system. The study included 
a hydrologic analysis of various climate change scenarios, 
comparing the outputs of several G C M models (GISS, 
GFDL, U K M O and OSU) and an associated analysis of 
water management impacts, including financial and eco-
nomic Consequences and potential responses. The authors 
showed that the GISS and G F D L models generally predict-
ed decreased watershed yield whereas the OSU and 
U K M O G C M scenarios indicated increases in runoff and 
increases in system safe yield. 
As a result of these 
contradictory outcomes, the Massachusetts Water Re-
sources Authority (MWRA) is taking a 'wait and see' 
response similar to that of other urban US water utility 
managers (Schwarz andDillard 1990) because they believe 
that the impacts of climate change are too uncertain arui 
the costs of action are too high to warrant such actions. 
However, the M W R A has engaged in an aggressive 
program of cost-effective demand management and water 
conservation actions that, in effect, represent the founda-
tion of a sensible anticipatory adaptive strategy. 
Similar 
institutional responses are expected in most urban metro-
politan regions, whether the cause is growth in water 
demand or in water shortages caused by droughts or global 
climate change (Rhodes, Miller and MacDonnell 1992; 
Frederick 1992; Rogers 1992; and Stakhiv 1992). 
3 Case study summaries 
Studies have been carried out for the river basins and 
regions located in various natural climatic zones (tem-
perate, high and middle latitudes, arid and semi-arid and 
humid tropical) as well as by using palaeoclimatic scen-
arios for the continents of the Earth as a whole. 
Temperate zones are most comprehensively presented in 
the studies on European countries for the river basins 
where most of the annual runoff is formed as a result of 
snowmelt in spring. 
In Finland, a COj doubling scenario generated by the 
GISS G C M model was used to estimate changes in runoff 
for 12 watersheds of 600 km^ to 33 500 km^ Temperature 
76 
C.VI Hydrology and water resources 
increases of 2 to 6°C and monthly precipitation increases 
of 10 to 30 mm were produced by the GISS model. The 
results showed 20 to 50 % increases in mean annual runoff 
for individual watersheds, and a more stable interannual 
monthly runoff pattern for most watersheds (Vehvilainen 
and Lohvansuu 1991). Maximum spring discharges were 
foimd to decrease considerably (up to 55 %) and minimum 
monthly flows to rise dramatically (up to 100 to 300%). 
Hydrologic sensitivity studies in Norway relied on a 
comparison of two assumed (non-GCM) scenarios for CO, 
doubling by the year 2030. According to the first scen-
ario, winter temperature would rise by 3.0 to 3.2°C, 
summer by 1.5 to 2.0°C and armual precipitation by 5 to 
15%. 
According to the second scenario, by 3.5 to 5.0°C 
and 15 to 20%, respectively. The changes in runoff for 
seven regions in Norway were calculated by usmg an 
existing simplified conceptual hydrological model for a 30-
year historic period and the two climate scenarios 
(Saelthun et al. 1990). The results show that annual runoff 
increased somewhat (up to 10 to 15%) in the mountainous 
regions and in the regions with large annual precipitation. 
In low forested areas, it decreased slightly. 
Seasonal 
runoff changes significantly: spring floods decrease; winter 
runoff increases 
substantially, while summer runoff 
decreases. The frequency of floods increases in autumn 
and winter (Saelthun et al. 1990). 
Kaczmarek and Krasuski (1991) obtained very similar 
results for one of Poland's largest rivers, Varty (area is 
54 530 km^, using CO, doubling scenarios generated by 
the G F D L model coupled with a monthly water balance 
hydrological model. 
With global warming the annual 
runoff of this river changes, but slightly. However, winter 
runoff rises (21%) and summer runoff decreases (24%). 
Similar results have been obtained for small and medium-
sized watersheds in Belgium and Switzerland. 
Studies 
were conducted by Bultot et al. (1991) and Gellens 
(1991a; 1991b) who applied G C M scenarios with the 
conceptual hydrological model of the Royal Meteorological 
Institute of Belgium with a diurnal time interval. For 
example, comprehensive studies of an experimental basin 
in Switzerland reveal relatively insignificant changes in 
annual runoff with increasing winter runoff by 10% and 
decreasing the summer one by 11% (Bultot et al. 1991) 
For the nations of the former USSR, a set of improved 
scenarios of future climate with a 1°C and 2°C global 
warming based on palaeoclimatic analogues was developed 
in 1991 by a group of climatologists guided by Professor 
M I Budyko. 
These scenarios were used to obtain ap-
proximate estimates of potential changes in annual and 
seasonal runoff of main river watersheds. Methodo-
logically, these computations are based on water balance 
methods (for average annual runoff) and hydrological mod-
els of river watersheds with 10-day time intervals. They 
show that there are no statistically discemable changes in 
annual river runoff in the basins of Volga, Dnieper, Don, 
Ural, Zapadnaya, Dvina and Neman with a l''C warming. 
There is an expectation of increased annual runoff (by 5 to 
10%) on the rivers of the Caucusus and West and East 
Siberia. 
Somewhat larger increases are expected in the 
mountain rivers in Central Asia. However, the estimates 
obtained for mountainous regions are very crude because 
of great uncertainty of palaeoclimatic scenarios. 
With a 2°C global warming, annual runoff in the 
major river basins of the former USSR increases more 
significantly. 
In particular, in the Volga basin annual 
runoff increases by 5 to 7%; in the Dnieper, Don, 
Dniester basins as well as in the Baltic River basins by 20 
to 25%; in Siberia and the Far East by 10 to 20%. This 
trend also occurs in the mountain rivers in the Caucasus 
and Central Asia. 
As to changes in monthly and seasonal runoff, the 
most, detailed reconstructions have been made for the three 
largest rivers of the European part of Russia: the Volga, 
Dnieper and Don. Proxy records indicate considerable 
potential change in seasonal runoff Winter runoff increas-
es dramatically and spring runoff decreases significantly 
(Shiklomanov and Lins 1991), ostensibly in response to a 
shift in the snowmelt season from spring to late winter as 
temperature rises. 
For most of Canada, global warming would increase 
annual river runoff and its intra-annual distribution except 
for the Great Lakes basin, where according to all the G C M 
scenarios, an increase in air temperature and decrease in 
river runoff are most probable. This could result not only 
in a changed water balance and lake level, but also in 
serious economic and ecological consequences (Hartmann 
1990; Croley 1991; Quinn 1992). 
The impacts of climate change on groundwater has 
received little attention, although a recent evaluation of 
Australia's major aquifers represents an awakening to the 
importance that groundwater recharge and management has 
in the overall scheme for water resources management. 
Ghassemi et al. (1991) have noted that precipitation trends 
have changed markedly in this century over Australia and 
they expect trends and patterns to continue with global 
warming. Overall, they conclude that for a large area of 
Australia, especially the populated south-eastern quadrant, 
where groundwater is already overdrafted, groundwater 
recharge will increase. The shallow aquifers in the arid 
and semi-arid zones of Australia (eg the Amadeus basin) 
will also benefit from increased precipitation and recharge. 
However, global warming will likely be detrimental for a 
number of major regional aquifers in south-western 
Australia, in the Perth basin and Murray basin, because of 
decreased rainfall. 
C.VI Hydrology and water resources 
77 
Considering the qualitative results of the various 
studies of global warming effects on annual and seasonal 
river runoff in the northern and temperate zone of the 
Northern Hemisphere, it would appear that in the regions 
where a considerable part of annual runoff is formed 
during the spring flood, the intra-year runoff distribution 
appears to be more sensitive to air temperature changes 
than to annual precipitation. In this connection, projec-
tions of variations of seasonal runoff in these regions could 
be more reliable than of the absolute magnitude of annual 
runoff because the G C M temperature forecasts are thought 
to be more reliable than precipitation. Yet, research by 
Karl and Riebsame (1989) contradict that impression by 
showing that hydrologic (runoff) variability is almost 
entirely controlled by precipitation variability. 
Estimates of global warming effects on hydrology in 
arid and semi-arid regions have been made for the southern 
area of the European part of the former USSR, Australia, 
some regions of the US, South America and Africa 
including Sahel (Nash and Gleick 1991; Urbiztondo et al. 
1991; Australian Bureau of Meteorology 1991; Sirculon 
1990; Vannitsem and Demaree 1991). The most recent 
case studies provide mixed and often contradictory implica-
tions, most likely stemming from the diverse methods 
applied and the divergence among G C M scenarios. 
However, there are indications that the earlier conclusions 
about the sensitivity of watersheds in arid and semi-arid 
regions to even small changes in climatic characteristics 
may be overstated (Nash and Gleick 1991). Nevertheless, 
it is apparent that annual runoff appears to be more 
sensitive to changes in precipitation than in air temperature 
for arid areas. 
' 
Analysing the hydrological implications of global 
warming in arid regions, the problem of the Sahelian zone 
should be emphasised, as a severe drought of the past 
decades caused disastrous consequences in many countries. 
The comprehensive analysis of climate change impacts on 
water resources of Sahel is presented in a study by 
Sirculon (1990) who emphasises a strong sensitivity of 
river systems to changes in climatic characteristics and 
consequent vulnerability of the water management system. 
As for the future of water resources in Sahel, there is a 
large amount of uncertainty because of contradictory data 
on future climate obtained by G C M computations and from 
palaeoclimatic analogs. Palaeoclimatic analog information 
suggests that global warming should lead to a large 
increase in precipitation in this region with relatively small 
increases in temperature, 
resulting in a considerable 
increase in runoff However, according to the outputs of 
three types of GCMs (IPCC 1990a) which show that the 
air temperature in the Sahelian region rises by 1 to 2°C, 
with a doubling of CO,, the models show winter precipi-
tation decreases of 5 to 10%, whereas summer precipita-
tion increases up to 5%. With this scenario, it is unlikely 
that runoff will increase because evapotranspiration will re-
sult in a net reduction in runoff. 
In wet tropical regions, the assessment of global 
wanning effects on water resources has been done for two 
river basins of Venezuela (Andressen and Rincon 1991); 
for the basin of the Uruguay River in Uruguay (Tucci and 
Damiani 1991; the Lower Mekong River basin (Mekong 
Secretariat 1990); the Ellagawa catchment area in the cen-
tral part of Sri Lanka (Nophadol and Hemantha 1992) and 
Indonesia (Rozari et al. 1990). 
In these studies, the 
scenarios used are those inherent in the selected G C M , 
with CO, doubling and hydrological implications estimated 
by using a variety of conceptual, deterministic simulation 
models of river basins. 
In the Sri Lanka study, Nophadol and Hemantha 
(1992) chose to compare three GCMs (GISS, U K M O and 
GFDL) with respect to their ability to replicate historic 
temperature and precipitation conditions. They concluded 
that for Sri Lanka the G F D L was least compatible and 
chose to continue analysis with the GISS and U K M O 
models. The authors concluded that under a doubling of 
CO2, the mean monthly and daily precipitation would in-
crease during the peak rainy season, although no sig-
nificant change in mean armual precipitation would occur. 
The peak precipitation period would shift from April-July 
to September-November. However, low flows would 
increase, as would severity of droughts. 
The study by Rozari et al. (1990) relied solely on the 
GISS G C M transifionalCOj doubling scenario. 
The 
authors selected this model because it generated rainfall 
results that best reflected the situation in Indonesia, 
according to their judgment. 
The study analysed the 
overall impacts on hydrologic sensitivity for Indonesia and 
then focused on three catchment areas in Java. Based on 
a general water balance analysis for the three watersheds, 
the analysis showed that, in general, the periods of water 
deficits are shortened by at least a month, with significant 
increases on monthly runoff for all months in all three 
watersheds. An associated study (Rozari 1991) analyses in 
greater detail the agricultural impacts of increased precipi-
tafion and runoff citing increased erosion rates, reduction 
of soil productivity with consequent reduction in crop 
yields of up to 9 %. Although the three watersheds are 
regulated by large reservoirs for flood control, hydro-
electric power irrigation, municipal and industrial water 
supply and inland water fisheries, no analyses on water 
management impacts were conducted. 
Andressen and Rincon, in a personal communication 
(1991), provide preliminary results of a study of climate 
change on the hydrology of three drainage basins in 
western Venezuela, ranging from 1000 to 25 000 km^. A 
relatively simple (6-parameter) monthly hydrologic simula-
78 
C. VI Hydrology and water resources 
tion model was used in conjunction with a Thomthwaite 
water-balance model. Three different (non-GCM gener-
ated) climatic scenarios were developed: 
(1) a low sensitivity scenario with no precipitation change 
and a +2°C increase; 
(2) a medium sensitivity scenario with a 20 % precipitation 
increase and a +3°C increase; and 
(3) a high sensitivity scenario with a 40% precipitation 
increase and +4°C increase. 
Based on these hypothesised scenarios, the authors con-
clude that the streamflow peaks will not shift; that average 
annual streamflow will increase for the low and medium 
scenarios, but decrease slightly for the high sensitivity 
scenario. 
In perhaps the best existing suite of comparative water 
management studies available, the US Environmental 
Protection Agency (1990) initiated a comparison of five 
complex river basin management schemes of the La 
Plata/Uruguay, Mekong, Indus, Zambezi and Nile Rivers. 
Only preliminary analyses of the Mekong, Uruguay and 
Zambezi Rivers were available for this assessment. 
A 
similar effort, undertaken by the United National Environ-
ment Programme (Parry, Magalhaes and Ninh (eds) 1991) 
compared impacts for Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia and 
Thailand, although the analysis for Brazil examined only 
the impacts of current climate variability and drought on 
agriculture. Overall, the analysis for Southeast Asia was 
conducted by comparing three GCMs (GISS, GFDL, and 
OSU). COj-doubling analyses for Indonesia were focused 
on agricultural impacts, showing higher levels of precip-
itation, which increased the area of potential agriculture, 
but also increased soil erosion and loss of productivity. In 
Malaysia, there did not appear to be a significant change 
in the seasonal pattern in rainfall. 
Rice yields were 
expected to decrease because of an increase in temperature . 
and decrease in solar radiation due to increased cloudiness. 
Results of COj-doubling for Thailand (GISS model) shows 
a warming of 3 to 6°C, and a significant reduction in 
precipitation. Northern Thailand would be drier in most 
months, which would be a benefit to agriculture in that 
area. Overall, the methods used were not comparable, and 
the results presented in these studies were inconsistent and 
highly variable among the three countries, as they were 
conducted by different groups. 
The Mekong River is among the largest rivers in the 
world, with almost three-quarters of the watershed lying 
within the tropical zone; its climate is controlled largely by 
seasonal monsoons. In a study conducted by the Mekong 
Secretariat (1990), equilibrium scenario outputs of three 
GCMs (GISS, G F D L , UKMO) were compared for water 
resources impacts analysis, along with two transient 
scenarios (exponential and arithmetic growth of COj). For 
all the hydrologic stations analysed, all the climate scenario' 
forecasts showed longer dry periods and wet periods. 
Also, the pattems of monthly rainfall generally shifted one 
to two months earlier in the monsoon season, along with 
the time of occurrence of the driest and wettest months. 
Generally, rainfall increased significantly m the wet 
months, while the decrease in the dry months was smaller, 
although the duration of rainfall-deficient months in-
creased. 
Reservoir operations would have to change to 
accommodate the greater variability in peak flows and low-
flow periods. 
Hydro-electric power production will be 
affected, but irrigation releases would not be affected. The 
authors concluded that new reservoir operation rules would 
mitigate many of the potential adverse effects. 
In the study of the Uruguay River (Tucci and Damiani 
1991), which was part of the triad of studies conducted for 
the US Environmental Agency, the authors generally 
followed the same approach as for the Mekong River. 
They compared three GCMs (GISS, GFDL, UKMO) with 
both equilibrium and transient COj- doubling scenarios. 
They found that all the models underestimate total historic 
rainfall, but that the GISS model performed the best in 
terms of replicating modem historic conditions. A hydro-
logic model was used to estimate flows in the Uruguay 
River from the precipitation generated by the GCMs. The 
predicted flows indicated an 11.7 % decrease with the GISS 
model; a 21.5% increase with the G F D L and a 6.4% 
decrease with the U K M O model. 
The GISS transient 
model also showed an 11.7% reduction in mean flows. 
All the G C M models predicted lower dry-season flows 
for the Uruguay River, but the models differed widely on 
the inter-annual variation of flows and on the magnitude of 
peak flows. The study did focus on water management 
impacts, as the basin is developed and managed for hydro-
electric power, flood control, irrigation and water supply. 
Much more hydro-electric power is planned for the basin, 
hence the impacts on hydro-electric production was 
considered very important. However, the different models 
generated contradictory results. For example, the U K M O 
and GISS models predicted a decrease in hydro-electric 
power output of 2.5 to 4.75%, whereas the G F D L model 
showed an increase of 17.3%. Three of the four model 
scenarios predict smaller and fewer floods, resulting in 
flood damage avoidance benefits. However, reduction in 
low flows and lengthening of low flow duration was 
forecast, showing decreases of 3 to 18%. This implies a 
greater frequency of failure and water rationing, especially 
for irrigation withdrawals. 
Analysis of the impacts of climate change on water 
resources management of the Zambezi River was con-
ducted by Urbiztondo et al. (1991) for the US Environ-
mental Protection Agency (1990). Preliminary results of 
C.VI Hydrology and water resources 
79 
a rainfall runoff simulation analysis and comparison of 
G C M scenarios generated by the GFDL, U K M O and GISS 
models showed that runoff based on G F D L and GISS 
steady-state CO^ doubling was consistently lower than the 
base scenario, representing current climate. The U K M O 
scenario projects an increase in river flow. 
The GISS 
Transient A and Transient B scenarios show decadal varia-
tions in precipitation, with decades of increases and de-
creases. 
The Middle Zambezi River is regulated by the 
Kariba Reservoir, a large multipurpose storage dam. A 
highly simplified reservoir optimisation model was used to 
examine the impacts that GCM-generated inflows would 
have on hydro-electric power generation.' 
Kariba 
Reservoir generates up to 70% of Zimbabwe's electricity, 
so that any pronounced reduction in runoff or changed 
seasonality Of flows would have a major adverse economic 
impact on that country. However, the simulation and com-
parison of various G C M scenarios, both stationary and 
transient, showed that annual target energy demands, based 
on a plant load factor of 65 % and an efficiency of 95 %, 
would be met under virtually all scenarios. Nevertheless, 
the impacts, during dry years would be severe, as is the 
situation under present climate conditions, 
4 Water resources management impacts 
Global warming is expected to catalyse changes in water 
mapagement in many regions of the world. The quality 
and quantity of groundwater; the structure and character of 
water consumption might alter; the conflicts and contradic-
tions among individual water users and consumers would 
heighten; and design and operational changes would need 
to be re-examined. A l l these issues have been treated, to 
varymg degrees, for several river, basins with prescribed 
climate scenarios both in the Northern and Southern Hemi-
spheres. 
Climate uncertainty and water management was the . 
topic of two recent conferences in the United States (NRC 
1991; Ballentine and Stakhiv (eds) 1992). Rogers (1992) 
addressed the role that uncertainty of climate change 
information played in decision making related to water 
management issues. 
Rogers essentially concluded that 
even if the G C M models were scientifically well grounded 
and their prediction considered perfect, the information 
provided is largely peripheral to practical engineering 
decisions. The reason is that hydrology and availability of 
water is only one among several important factors in water 
management decisions, which include economic, political, 
sociological, technological and demographic consideration. 
There are three categories of decisions in water resources 
planning and management: plaiming and design that goes 
into new investments; those dealing with the operation and 
maintenance of existing systems; and those that modify the 
operational capacity of existing systems. There are many 
uncertainties faced by water managers and planners, not 
the least of which is future population and demand. 
Hydrologic uncertainty, ironically, may be among the less 
important considerations. 
Sheer (1991), Fiering (1992), and Stakhiv (1992) 
make similar points in that planning water resources 
systems involves making many interrelated design and 
operating decisions under uncertainty. These decisions are 
made continuously and focus on the extremes and variabili-
ty of the present climate. 
Various levels of buffering 
capacity, redundancy and resilience are built into individual 
design criteria and components of a water management 
project and its operation within a larger system as an 
inherent hedge against an unforeseeable event. 
Hence, 
managed water systems, while not entirely fail-safe, are 
designed to be robust enough to guarantee a high degree of 
reliability for rare or extreme events within the historic 
record. These rare events may become more frequent as 
part of a potential shift in the climate mean and variability. 
But planners and designers are constantly adjusting their 
design criteria and, in effect, are anticipating subtle chang-
es in the statistical properties of the evolving record of 
precipitation and streamflow. In addition, new and more 
sophisticated techniques are employed to optimise the 
capacity, operating rules and economic efficiency of the 
upgraded water management systems. 
Furthermore, water resources management is a highly 
dynamic and adaptive endeavour in the sense that new 
technologies, economic instruments, institutional and legal 
changes, and demand management measures are constantly 
being introduced, tested and employed as water scarcity 
becomes a chronic problem (Frederick 1992). Hence, the 
various strategies outlined in the Resource Use and 
Management Subgroup of the IPCC Response Strategies 
Working Group III (1990c) are largely in place or are 
being implemented in most of the developed countries. 
For a number of existing water management systems, 
comprehensive estimates have been developed, as examples 
of potential climate change effects on water consumption 
and use, socioeconomic and ecological consequences of 
global warming and changes in hydrological characterist-
ics. Few comprehensive and detailed water management 
studies (as opposed to hydrologic sensitivity analysis) have 
been conducted, employing the full range and hierarchy of 
models required for such an undertaking. 
Among the 
better studies are those of Kirshen and Fennessey (1992); 
Lettenmaier and Gan (1990); Lettenmaier et al. (1990); 
Lettenmaier and Sheer (1991) and Fiering and Rogers 
(1989). 
Two studies (Lettenmaier and Gan 1990; Lettenmaier 
and Sheer 1991) explicitiy modelled large managed river 
80 
C.VI Hydrology and water resources 
basins in California, wherein hydrologic simulation models 
were coupled with snowmelt and soil moisture accounting 
models developed by the US National Weather Service. 
The studies used G C M outputs and stochastically created 
100 years of rainfall and, temperature records from 30 
years of historic data. Snow accumulation, ablation and 
runoff were the primary variables of concern. 
The 
response of all four catchments to changed climate condi-
tions were dominated by temperature-related changes in 
snowmelt and were relatively unaffected by GCM-predict-
ed rainfall changes. Reservoir system performance for the 
Sacramento-San Joaquin River basin was analysed using 
the hydrologic information. While the average annual 
runoff did not change markedly, the shift in seasonal 
runoff to the winter months had a large impact on the 
reliability of water deliveries to the various water supply 
users and on the flood control capabilities of the system. 
Two conceptual studies for sizing the optimal capacity 
and developing ideal operating rules for the design of 
hypothetical reservoirs under climate uncertainty were 
undertaken by Fiering and Rogers (1989) and Lettenmaier 
et al. (1990). Both studies attempted better to understand 
the vulnerability, resilience and robustness of reservoirs 
and managed systems imder climate uncertainty as a way 
of improving the design of new systems and operation of 
existing systems. 
Essentially both studies confirmed an 
intuitive notion, that water supply performance, ie the 
minimisation of shortages or failures (or maximisation of 
reliability) is controlled more by reservoir storage capacity 
than by any variation in operating policy. 
Lettenmaier 
and Gan (1990) varied reservoir capacity from 0.25 to 
0.50 of mean annual runoff. Fiering and Rogers (1989) 
showed that reservoir reliability did not change much with 
changes in the climate-induced variation in runoff if the 
reservoir capacity was larger than 0.5 of the mean armual 
runoff 
As a whole, the studies on water resources and water 
management effects of climate change allow the corrobo-
ration of the following inference: under the condition of 
global warming and a great uncertainty of local climate 
variability, large water management systems are capable of 
greater flexibility in adapting to changes in timing and 
magnitude of runoff. In this connection, the watersheds 
with a large degree of control over river runoff under 
global warming would have considerable advantages for 
redistributing the available water supply and flood control 
compared to the regions with natural unregulated runoff 
regimes. 
5 Conclusions 
Since the publication of the IPCC First Assessment Report, 
several studies on impacts of climate change on hydrology 
and water resources have been conducted. Unfortunately, 
there is not yet adequate information on regions affected 
by aridity and desertification and an effort should be 
undertaken to fill that gap. The new studies expanded the 
geographic scope of the original surveys, while confirming 
many previous conclusions; but few new insights were 
offered on hydrologic sensitivities and vulnerability of 
existing water resources management systems. 
The principal conclusions suggested by the new studies 
are: 
• 
Significant progress has been made in hydrologic 
sensitivity analyses in developed countries, yet large 
gaps exist in the information base regarding the 
implications of climate change for less developed 
nations; 
• 
Comparative sensitivity analyses that rely on existing 
GCMs offer generic insights regarding the physical 
hydrologic effects and water resources management 
impacts, but the differences in the outputs of the 
GCMs coupled with large differences in hydrologic 
sensitivity analyses makes it difficult to offer region-
specific impact assessments; 
• 
Temporal streamflow characteristics in virtually all 
regions exhibited greater variability and amplification 
of extremes, with larger flood volumes and peak flows 
as well as increased flow episodes and a shift in the 
turning of the seasonal runoff; 
• 
The higher the degree of water control, regulation and 
management of sectoral water demands, the smaller 
the anticipated adverse effects of global warming. 
Conversely, unregulated hydrologic systems are more 
vulnerable to potential hydrologic alterations. 
The principal recommendations are: 
• 
Increased variability of floods and droughts will 
require a re-examination of engineering design as-
sumptions, operating rules, system optimisation and 
contingency planning for existing and planned water 
management systems; 
• 
More studies on hydrologic sensitivity and water re-
source management vulnerability need to be directed 
towards arid and semi-arid regions and small island 
states. 
• 
A uniform approach to tlie climate change hydrologic 
sensitivity analyses needs to be developed for com-
parability of results. 
C. VI Hydrology and water resources 
81 
References 
Andressen, R. and B. Rincon 1991. 'Preliminary Assessment 
of the Impacts of Climatic Changes on the Hydrological 
Regimes of Three Basins in Western Venezuela'. Center 
for Tropical Climatology, University of Los Andes, 
Venezuela, (Personal Communication). 
Australian Bureau of Meteorology 1991. 37!^ Impacts of 
Climate Change on Hydrology and Water Resources. 
Climate Change Impacts Workshop, June, 1991, 
Melbourne, 76 pp. 
Ballentine, T. and E.Z. Stakhiv (eds) 1992. Climate Change 
and Water Resources Management. Proceedings of a US 
Interagency Conference on Climate Change and Water 
Resources Management, US Army Institute for Water 
Resources, Fort Belvoir, VA. 
Bultot F., D. Gellens, M . Spreafico and B. Schadler 1991. 
'Repercussions of a CO2 Doubling on the Water Balance: 
A Case Study in Switzerland,' Draft Report of the Swiss 
National Hydrological and Geological Survey, Berne, 
Switzerland. 
Chahine, M.T. 1992. 
'The Hydrological Cycle and Its 
Influence on Climate'. Nature, (359), 373-380. 
. Croley, T.E. 1990. 'Laurentian Great Lakes Double CO^ 
Climate Change Hydrologicallmpacts'. Climatic Change, 
Department of Energy 1991. 'Process for Identifying 
Regional Influence of and Responses to Increasing 
Atmospheric CO2 and Climate Change—the MINK Pro-
ject: An Overview,' Report TR052A. 
Easterling, W.E., M . McKenney, N.J. Rosenberg and K. 
Leman 1991. 'A Farm Level Simulation of the Effects of 
Climate Change on Crop Productivity in the MINK 
Region,' Department of Energy, Working Paper 11-13. 
Fiering, M . B . 1992. 'Runoff to Management', in: T. 
Ballentine and E.Z. Stakhiv (eds). Climate Change and 
Water Resources Management, Proc. US Interagency 
Conference on Climate Change and Water Resources \ 
Mgmt., US Army Institute for Water Resources, Fort 
Belvoir, VA. 
Fiering, M.B. and P. Rogers 1989. 'Climate Change and 
Water Resources Planning Under Uncertainty', Draft 
Report to the US Army Engineer Institute for Water 
Resources, Fort Belvoir, VA. 
Fiering, M.B., and P. Rogers 1990. Climate Change and 
Water-Resource Planning, in: Y.Y. Haimes and E.Z. 
Stakhiv (eds), Proc. Fourth Engineering Foundation 
Conference on Risk-Based Decisionmaking in Water 
Resources, American Society of Civil Engineers, New 
York, pp91-97. 
Frederick, K. 1992. 'Adaptive Responses to Climate Change: 
Demand Management', in: T. Ballentine and E.Z. 
Stakhiv (eds), Qimate Change arul Water Resources 
Management, Proc. US Interagency Conference on Cli-
mate Change and Water Resources Management, US 
Army Instimte for Water Resources, Fort Belvoir, VA. 
Gellens, D. 1991(a). 'Impact of a COj-Induced Climatic 
Change on River Flow Variability in Three Rivers in 
Belgium,' Draft Paper, Royal Meteorologic Institute of 
Belgium. 
Gellens, D. 1991(b). 'Sensitivity of die Streamflow and of the 
Sizing of Flood and Low Flow Control Reservoirs to the 
2XCO2 Climate Change and Related Hypotheses: Study of 
Two Catchments in Belgium,' 17 pp. 
Ghassemi, F., G. Jacobsen and A.J. Jakeman 1991. Major 
Australian Aquifers: Potential Climatic" Change Impacts. 
IWRA Water International, 16(1) 38-44. 
Hartmann, H.C. 1990. 'Climate Change Impacts on 
Laurentian Great Lakes Levels,' Qinmtic Change, 17, 
49-67. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1990(a). 
Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment, J.T. 
Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephramms (eds), Cam-
bridge University Press, 365 pp. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Clunate Change 1990(b). 
Qimate Change: The IPCC Impacts Assessment, W.J. 
McG. Tegart, G.W. Sheldon and D.C. Griffidi (eds), 
Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1990(c). The 
IPCC Response Strategies, Response Strategies Working 
Group i n . World Meteorological Organization and the 
United Nations Environment Program, 270 pp. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1990(d). 
Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts for Qimate 
Change. T.R. Carter, M . L . Parry, S. Nishioka, and H. 
Harasawa (eds). WMO/UNEP, 28 pp. 
Kaczmarek Z., and D. Krasuski 1991. 'Sensitivity of Water 
Balance to Qimate Change and Variability,' IIASA 
Working Paper. 
Karl, T.R. and W.E. Riebsame 1989. 'The Impact of 
Decadal Fluctuations in Mean Precipitation and Tempera-
ture on Runoff: A Sensitivity Study Over the United 
States', Qimatic Change, (15) 423-447. 
Kirshen, P.H., andN.M. Fennessey 1992. 'PotentialImpacts 
of Climate Change Upon the Water Supply of the Boston 
Metropolitan Area', Draft Report to US Environmental 
Protection Agency, 66 pp. 
Klemes, V. 1985. 'Sensitivity of Water Resource Systems to 
Climate Variations', World Chmate Applications Pro-
gramme Publication No. WCP-98, World Meteorological 
Organization, Geneva, 17 pp. (and 5 appendices). 
Kuhl, S.C. and J.R. Miller 1992. 'Seasonal River Runoff 
Calculated from a Global Atmospheric Model,' Water 
Resources Research, 28(8) 2029-2039. 
Lettenmaier, D.P. and S.J. Burges 1978. 'Climate Change: 
Detection and Its Impact on Hydrologic Design'. Water 
Resources Research, 14(4), 679-687. 
Lettenmaier, D.P., K . L . Brettman and L . Vail 1990. 
'Robustness of a Multiple-Use Reservoir to Seasonal 
'1
82 
Runoff Shifts. Associated with Climatic Change', 
pp91-97, in: Y . Y . Haimes and E.Z. Stakhiv (eds), Risk-
Based Decisionmaking in Water Resources. 
Proc. 
Engineering Found. Conf., ASCE, New York, NY. 
Lettenmaier, D.P. and T.Y. Gan 1990. 'Hydrologic Sensi-
tivities of the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Basin of 
California, to Global Warming'. Water Resources Res., 
26(1) 69-86. 
Lettenmaier, D.P. and D.P. Sheer 1991. 'Climatic Sensitivi-
ty of California Water Resources'. ASCE J. Water Re-
sources Planning and Mgmt., 117(1) 108-125. 
Lins, H.F., L A . Shiklomanov and E. Stakhiv 1990. Impacts 
on Hydrology and Water Resources, Jaeger, J. and H.L. 
Ferguson (eds), Qimate Oiange: Science, Impacts and 
Policy, Proc. Second World Climate Conference, 
CambridgeUniversity Press, pp. 87-97. 
Matalas, N.C. and M.B. Fiering 1977. Studies in Geophys-
ics, in: Qimate, Qimate Qiange and Water Supply. 
National Academy Press, Washington, DC. 
Mekong Secretariat 1990. 'A Study, on Impacts of Climate 
Change on Water Resources in the Lower Mekong 
Basin', Prepared by University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO for US Environmental Protection Agency, 134. 
McCabe, G.J., D . M . Wollock, L.E. Hay and M . A . Ayers 
1990. 'Effects of Climatic Change on the Thornthwaite 
Moisture Index', Water Resources Bulletin, 26(4) 633-
643, J. American Water Resources Association. 
Miller, J.R., and G.C. Russell 1992. 'The Impact of Global 
Warming on River Runoff, Geopliys. Res., 97, 2757-
2764. 
Milly, P.C.D. 1992. 'Potential Evaporation and Soil Moisture 
in General Circulation Models'. J. Qimate 5(209-226) 
Nash, L . L . and P.H. Gleick 1991. 'Sensitivity of Streamflow 
in the Colorado Basin to Climatic Changes', Hydrology, 
125, 221-241. 
Nemec, J. and J. Schaake 1982. 'Sensitivity of Water Re-
source Systems to Climate Variation'. Hydrological 
Sciences, 27, pp. 327-343. 
Nophadol, I., and E.J. Hemiantha 1992. 'Impact Assessment 
of Global Warming on Rainfall-Runoff Characteristics in 
a Tropical Region (Sri Lanka),' in: R. Herrmann (ed.) 
AWR Symposium Managing Water Resources During 
Global Change, pp547-556. 
Parry, M . , A.R. Magalhaes and N.H. Ninh (eds) 1991. 'The 
Potential Socioeconomic Effects of Climate Change; A 
Summary of Three Regional Assessments', United Na-
tions Environment Programme. 
Quinn, P . M . 1992. 'The Sensitivity of Water Resources 
Management to Climate Change: A Great Lakes Case 
Smdy.' in: T. Ballantine and E.Z. Stakhiv (eds), Qimate 
Change and Water Resources Management, Proc, US 
Interagency Conf on Climate Change and Water Re-
sources Management, US Army Institute for Water 
Resources. 
C.VI 
Hydrology and water resources 
Rhodes, S.K., K . A . Miller and L.J. MacDonnell 1992. 
'Institutional Response to Chmate Change: Water Provid-
er Organizations in the Denver Metropolitan Region,' 
Water Resources Research, 2S(l)n-l%. 
Rogers, P. 1992. 'What Water Managers and Planners Need 
to Know About Climate Chaiige and Water Resources 
Management,' in: T. Ballentine and E.Z. Stakhiv (eds), 
Qimate Change and Water Resources Management, 
Proc, US Interagency Conf on Climate Change and 
Water Resources Management, US Army Institute for 
Water Resources. 
Rozari, M.B. 1991. 'Study on Socioeconomic Impacts and 
Policy Response Resulting from Climate Change: A Case 
Study in Three Districts of West Java's Northern Coastal 
Plain', Presented at Seminar on Global Climate Change -
National Response Strategies, 8-9 Nov. 1991, Jakarta, 
Indonesia. 
Rozari, M.B. etal. 1990. 'Socioeconomiclmpacts of Climate 
Change: Indonesian Report', Report Submitted to United 
Nations Environment Programme, 53 pp. 
Saelthun, N.R. et al. 1990. 'Climate Change Impact on 
Norwegian Water Resources,' Norwegian Water Re-
sources and Energy Administration, v. 42, 41 pp. 
Schwarz, H.E. and L-A. Dillard 1990. 'Urban Water,' in: 
P.E. Waggoner (ed.), Oimate Change and US Water Re-
sources, pp341-366. J, Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Sheer, D. 1991. 'Creative Water Management', in: 'Manag-
ing Water Resources in the West Under Conditions of 
Climate Uncertainty'. Proc. Colloquium of the National 
Research Council. National Academy Press, Washington, 
DC, pp290-295. 
Shiklomanov, I.A. and H. Lins 1991. 'Climate Change 
Impact 
on Hydrology and 
Water 
Management'. 
Meteorologia and Gidrologia. No.4, pp51-66, 
Sirculon, I. 1990. 'Impact Possible des Changement Qlima-
tiques a Venir Sur les Resources in Eau des Regione 
Aridos et Semiarides,' WMO/TD-N, 380. 
Stakhiv, E.Z. 1992. 'Water Resources Planning and Manage- 
-
ment Under Climate Uncertainty', in: T. Ballentine and 
E.Z. Stakhiv (eds), Qimate Change and Water Resources 
Management. Proc, US Interagency Conference on 
Climatic Change and Water Resources Management, US 
Army Institute for Water Resources. 
Tucci, C.E.M. and A. Damiani 1991. 'International SUidies 
on Climate Change Impacts: Uruguay River Basin', 
Presented in Proceedings of a Workshop on Analysis of 
Potential Climate Changes in the Uruguay River Basin, 
Hydrologic Publication 25, Institute of Hydraulic Re-
search, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil-
Urbiztondo, B.I., W.R. Rose and P. Restrepo 1991. 'Poten-
tial Climate Change Impacts in die Middle Zambezi 
River Basin. Report', Prepared for US Environmental 
Protection Agency, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO, 33 pp. 
J 
C.VI 
Hydrology and water resources 
US Environmental Protection Agency 1990. 'Progress 
Reports in International Studies of Climate Change 
Impacts'. Draft Report to the US EPA, University of 
Colorado, 
US National Research Council 1991. 'Managing Water 
Resources in the West Under Conditions of Climate 
Uncertainty'. Proc. of a Colloquium. National Academy 
Press, Washington, DC, 344 pp. 
US National Academy of Sciences 1992. Policy Implications 
of Greenhouse Warming—Mitigation, Adaptation and the 
Science Base. National Academy Press, Washington, 
DC, 918 pp. 
Vannitsem, S., and G.R. Demaree 1991. 'Detection et 
Modelication des Secheresses au Sahel: Proposition d'une 
Nouvelle Methogologique,' IRMB, Bruxelles. 
83 
Vehvilainen, R. and T. Lohvansuu 1991. 'The Effects of 
Climate Change in Discharges and Snowcover in Fin-
land,' Hydrological Sciences Journ., 36(2)4, ppl09-121. 
Waggoner, P,E. (ed.) 1990. Climate Change and US Water 
Resources, Report of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. J. Wiley & Sons, New York, 
496 pp. 
Wollock, D . M . and G.M. Hornberger 1991. 'Hydrological 
Effects of Changes in Levels of Atmospheric Carbon 
Dioxide', i . Forecasting, 10:105-116. 
Wood, E.F., J.P. Hughes and D.P. Lettenmaier 1992. 'An 
Approach for Assessing the Sensitivity of Flood to 
Regional Climate Change'. Presented at MIT Sympo-
sium, The World at Risk: Natural Hazards and Climate 
Change. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
D 
Vulnerability to sea-level rise 
The work carried out under this task is discussed under the headings of: 
World oceans and coastal zones: ecological effects 
Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
VII World oceans and coastal zones: ecological effects 
Co-Chairs and Lead Authors 
A Tsyban (Russia) 
J Everett (USA) 
M Perdomo (Venezuela) 
Contributors 
D Albritton (USA) 
A Bakun (USA) 
T Bigford (USA) 
M Cole (USA) 
D Dey (USA) 
D Dow (USA) 
B Glebov (Russia) 
P Kaplin* (Russia) 
M Korsak (Russia) 
A Kulikov (Russia) 
V Mamaev (Russia) 
G Maul* (USA) 
D Mountain (USA) 
G Panov (Russia) 
C Peterson (USA) 
J Scheraga (USA) 
R Reed (USA) 
K Trenberth (USA) 
J Whitledge (USA) 
S Zeeman (USA) 
* Special recognition 
VII World oceans and coastal zones: ecological effects 
1 Regional ecological impacts of climate change 
Since the IPCC Impacts Assessment (IPCC 1990a) new 
information has become available that allows existing ideas 
about regional features and ecological consequences of 
climate change to be worked out in greater detail. Because 
of their contrasting natures, the effect of rises in tempera-
ture on arctic/subarctic ecosystems are discussed first, 
emphasising the Bering Sea and the wider Caribbean 
region as examples. The impacts of s6a-level rise on these 
and Southeast Asian marine ecosystems are then discussed, 
followed by a summary of the new findings on UV-B, 
leaching, storm frequency impacts, coastal structures and 
carbon flux. Finally, there are recommendations for future 
research, 
monitoring, database management 
and for 
procedural actions. It is noted at the outset that the marine 
environment and ecosystems are very complex. There are 
many self-regulating mechanisms that render it difficult to 
make definitive statements about impacts. Also, from the 
human point of view, there will be both positive and 
negative impacts. 
2 Impacts of rises in temperature 
2.1 Arctic and subarctic region 
The earlier IPCC Impact Assessment provided information 
on expected physical changes in arctic and subarctic region 
systems. More physical and biological information is now 
available. Even the IPCC scenario for climate warming 
and the attendant reduction in the ocean ice cover may 
cause a more than tenfold increase of carbon influx in the 
Eurasian and Canadian basins of the Arctic Ocean to 
1.4x10' kg C/year. This can be compared with the general 
anthropogenic emission of COj to the atmosphere of Sxltf* 
kg C/year. In the Bering Sea, for example, the IPCC 
scenario, along with the intensification of continental and 
shelf ice melting, will lead to significant increases in river 
inflow, an average salinity decrease by 0.5-1.0 part per 
thousand (with greatest reductions in nearshore Alaskan 
waters), increased turbidity with more suspended particles, 
a shift northward of surface isotherm of more than 50 km 
per 0.5°C rise in temperature, and an alteration of the 
oceanic current system as a result of changes in river 
flows. 
An increase of the vegetative season duration by 1-2 
weeks should lead to an annual primary production 
increase of 5-10%, with an increase of 1.2% in secondary 
production, elimination of 8-12% more organic matter 
from the photic layer through biosedimentation, and 
bacterial decomposition of organic matter will increase. It 
is estimated that the minimal increase in absorption of 
atmospheric COj by the Bering Sea each year will grow 
from about 50x10' kg C/year to about 62x10' kg C/year. 
A temperature rise of 1.5-2.0°C in the deep water part 
of the Bering Sea will not result in a significant rise in the 
phytoplankton photosynthesis rate, but the intensity of 
microbiological processes and the organic matter decompo-
sition rate may increase significantiy. As a result, the 
production-destruction, coefficient (P/D) is expected to 
decrease, especially during late spring and sununer. 
The combined effect of temperature rise, pH decrease, 
pollutant concentration increase, and the strengthening of 
imbalance of organic compounds production and destruc-
tion between different ocean regions, will lead to changes 
in marine ecosystems. The ice regime plays an important 
role in the life cycles of the inhabitants of the sea begin-
ning with rnicro-algae and finishing with the great whales. 
Ice cover reduces light in the Bering Sea, the biomass of 
micro-algae directly under the ice is two to three times less 
than in waters free of ice. After ice thawing, mass devel-
opment ('blooms') of phytoplankton begins in surface 
water layers, followed by rapid population increases of 
zooplankton which serve as food for some fish, birds and 
mammals. 
A shift of the main oceanic currents should be expect-
ed even with a relatively small change in the mean tem-
perature of the order of 2-4°C and river inflow increases. 
It is obvious that in this case the system of circulation, to 
which the life cycles of commercial species of fish and 
invertebrates inhabiting the coastal and especially seamount 
regions are 'tuned', will be disturbed. In these cases, 
decreases in reproduction and even disappearance of 
specific populations can be expected. Different species may 
eventually move into these areas and the mix of species 
may be different. These changes occur under natural 
climate variability, but could be accelerated or become 
more intense under the IPCC scenarios. 
Changes in transparency, water colour, current speed 
and direction, and other parameters will affect the function 
of ecosystems. For instance, enrichment of coastal waters 
in biogenic elements will lead to an increase in the primary 
production of phytoplankton and macrophytes, while 
increased water turbidity may caiise a reduction in the 
depth of the photic layer and therefore a loss in productive 
water volume. Water warming and enrichment with 
organic matter will increase the activity of microbial 
populations and will intensify the decomposition of organic 
matter. Climate change will have different impacts on fish 
species, depending on their ecological features. The most 
vulnerable species are those fish and invertebrates dwelling 
in the coastal waters. However, the species dwelling in the 
seamount regions of the open ocean may also be strongly 
affected. 
88 
D.VII 
World oceans arid coastal zones 
The larval stage is the most vulnerable in the develop-
ment of fish (Bemal 1991). Larvae of oceanic species are 
less subject to negative consequences than those of coastal 
species, although slight changes in temperature and salinity 
may widen or limit the regions where successful survival 
of larvae is possible. A change in salinity will strongly 
affect the larval stages of coastal species, for instance, of 
valuable commercial species. Some cases of increased 
mortality of marine organisms resulting from sea-water 
freshening have been noted. Further, it is not clear how 
recent findings of increasing UV-B irradiance will affect 
high-latitude marine ecosystems, but there are potential 
negative impacts on near-surface plant and animals and 
particularly on fish eggs and larvae. 
A change in ice conditions will affect the dynamics of 
populations of high-latitude fish species. Earlier melting of 
ice will lead to the lengthening of growing periods and 
ultimately, to an increase in the biomass of populations. 
Further, a shift of some borealic fish species northward is 
expected, following the ice edge, where accumulations of 
such species as cod are observed. 
2.2 Tropical/subtropical regions 
Temperature change is only one aspect of the climate that 
will affect terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Hanson and 
Maul (1992) find no evidence for changes in precipitation 
in Florida during the last 101 years; similarly Aparicio 
(1992) finds none along the southern Caribbean. In the 
central Caribbean region. Gray (1992) finds decreased 
rainfall in the last 20 years, which he associates with 
decreased hurricane activity. An increase of 1.5°C in sea 
surface temperature could increase the number of hurri-
canes by as much as 40% (Shapiro 1988), and the maxi-
mum wind speed by 8%, all other things being equal. 
Shapiro is quick to point out a considerable uncertainty in 
these figures (40% increase means on average -1-1.6 ±1.2 
hurricanes/year). Many other factors are important in 
hurricane analysis, and it may be that the storm formation 
location and track are more important than changes in 
strength or frequency. 
In the sense that Lamb (1987) develops climate change 
scenarios as plausible future events. Gray (1992) argues 
for the following likely effects (cf Gallegos et al. 1992; 
Aparicio 1992; Wigley and Santer 1992): rainfall will 
continue to decrease, air temperatures will continue to rise, 
surface wind speed will continue to increase, and evapora-
tion will increase. Caution must be exercised in interpret-
ing these changes as anything other than 'persistence 
forecasting'. It is not known, for example, if the decreased 
frequency of large hurricanes over the last two decades is 
really a long-term trend or part of some cycle as yet not 
understood. Hurricanes are an important contributor of 
rainfall; is the decrease in precipitation merely a reflection 
of fewer large storms? Increased temperature may affect 
the drag of wind on water, but Mercado et al. (1992) and 
Hendry (1992) see no clear indication of significant change 
in storm surges or waves associated with elevated tempera-
ture. 
In the tropics, marine organisms live closer to their 
maximum thermal tolerance than those in more temperate 
cHmates (Vincente et al. 1992). Although the 1.5°C 
temperature rise scenario would raise the summertime 
mean temperature to 30.5°C over much of the tropi-
cal/subtropical region, most migratory organisms are 
expected to be able to tolerate such a change. Some corals 
will be affected (viz the 1983 and 1987 bleaching events), 
but it is expected that other environmental stresses will be 
more important (Milliman 1992). Intertidal plants and 
animals, such as mangroves, are adapted to withstand high 
temperature, and unless the 1.5''C increase affects repro-
duction, the rise in temperahire will probably cause 
unmeasurable results (Snedaker 1992). Similarly, only 
seagrass beds already located in thermal stress situations 
(ie in shallow lagoons or near power plant effluent) are 
expected to become negatively affected by the projected 
IPCC (1990b) temperahire rise. 
The blue, clear waters of tropical/subtropical regions 
are relatively poor in nutrient. It is not expected that a 
modest increase in temperature will significantly affect the 
fisheries except in some shallow lagoons where salinity 
may affect productivity, particularly if juvenile organisms 
have a critical dependence on salinity or temperature. 
Increased alongshore winds, however, could lead to 
increased coastal upwelling along some continental coasts 
(Aparicio 1992), or to other oceanic circulation changes, 
(Gallegos et al. 1992), and thus to increased productivity 
(cf Vicente et al. 1992). 
Tropical fish eggs hatch very quickly (12-18 hours), 
and development is associated with temperature. Just as 
'cold snaps' can be devastating, so can 'hot snaps', 
particularly during early juvenile stages. Extremes in 
temperature are usually averaged out in climate analysis, 
but with increased temperature, the likelihood of 'hot 
snaps' increases; the 1987 Caribbean coral bleaching event 
is attributed by some researchers (Williams et al. 1987) to 
'hot snaps'. The complexities of the ecosystems could be 
greatly affected by slight temperahire changes. It is not 
known, for example, why fish stocks either decline or 
increase by orders of magnitude, other than owing to early 
life history events caused directly by the physical environ-
ment or indirecfly through complex chains in ecosystems 
dynamics. Temperahire effects on tropical fisheries, as for 
those in other latitudes, remains an important and un-
answered question, although there is some evidence of fish 
migration associated with increased coastal temperatures. 
D. VII 
World oceans and coastal zones 
89 
3 Impacts of sea-level rise 
3.1 Bering Sea 
One of the most important aspects of climate change is the 
impact of the predicted (IPCC 1990b) sea-level rise on 
coastal and marine ecosystems. The ecological situation 
will change, the life cycle of many organisms will be 
disturbed, and a decrease in the habitat of sea animals 
and/or their redistribution will occur. 
The predicted rise in sea-level will result in moderate 
impacts by 2050, growing to serious impacts in 2100 and 
beyond. The projected sea-level rise will change the 
ecology in many areas of the Bering Sea. The most 
significant effects will be in areas where there are high 
densities 
of animals 
and 
a 
strong 
tendency 
for 
transformation of the shore. The consequences for the 
Bering Sea, one of the high-production regions of the 
World Oceans, may be very important. Numerous marine 
mammals and birds are located on seashores—narrow 
coastal land bands, lower islands and individual rock 
debris. The nursery areas of some valuable fish species are 
located in the shallow water deltas of the Bering Sea 
rivers. Sea-level rise will reduce the size of the habitat of 
numerous birds, mammals and fish. The sea-level rise will 
also affect the distribution of plant life along the Bering 
Sea shores, particularly the Fucus type algae inhabiting the 
depth down to 0.5 m. These algae will partially or com-
pletely die off or be replaced by others. 
3.2 Caribbean/Gulf of Mexico/Bahamas region 
Relative sea-level rise is the net effect of tectonic uplift or 
subsidence, eustatic change due to continental ice melt, 
winds and ocean currents, plus expansion or contraction of 
the water column. During the Holocene (last 10 000 years) 
in Jamaica, for example (Hendry 1992), maximum sea-
level rise is- 0.27 cm/year, or less than half the 0.6 
cm/year implied by the IPCC. (1990b); in the last 3000 
years sea-level rise has been almost nil. A l l other things 
being equal, 0.6 cm/year (35 cm between 1990 and 2050) 
is expected to place an unusual stress on coastal eco-
systems. Climate change involves much more than sea-
level rise and temperature increase; precipitation, evapora-
tion, humidity, wind velocity, hurricanes, cloudiness, solar 
irradiance, ocean currents, waves, mixing, riverine input 
etc, are all important variables. If precipitation changes 
(for example) are markedly underesfimated, the impact on 
agriculture and coastal ecosystems could be far more 
important than sea-level and/or temperature rise. 
The second largest coral reef system in the world 
dominates the offshore area of the westem Caribbean Sea 
(Milliman 1992), and all but the northern Gulf of Mexico 
coast has extensive reef systems. Growth of individual 
coral organisms is estimated between 1-20 cm/year 
(Vicente et al. 1992) and reef growth rates as a whole are 
known to be up to 1.5 cm/year (Hendry 1992). Not all 
reefs accumulate at these rates but, if they did, they could 
keep pace with the rise in sea-level of 35 cm by 2050 if 
other factors do not alter growth conditions. Environmental 
stress on the reefs from other variables (storms, sedi-
mentation, disease, rainfall, radiation, turbidity, overfish-
ing, mass mortality in algal grazers etc) may prevent some 
from keeping pace with rising sea-level, resulting in 
alteration of the nearshore hydrodynamics. The issue is 
further complicated by consideration of the type of reef, 
coastal geomorphology, reef depth and ecological state of 
the reef in question. Accurate predictions on the effect of 
sea-level rise may be possible in reefs that have already 
been physically and biologically monitored, such as in 
Panama, Jamaica and Puerto Rico. 
Mangrove forests are a unique feature of protected 
coastal shorelines of the tropics and subtropics; their root 
systems (prop roots and pneumatophores) stabilise the 
sediment, dampen wave energy, provide habitat shelter for 
numerous organisms and form the basis for the nearshore 
marine food web (Vicente et al. 1992). The five species 
comprising the mangrove flora of the Caribbean/Gulf of 
Mexico/Bahamas region occupy an area of approximately 
3.2 million hectares, or some 15% of the estimated world 
area of mangrove of 22 million hectares. The best devel-
oped mangrove forests are associated with areas of high 
precipitation and upstream runoff Thus, in terms of global 
climate change, future changes in patterns of precipitation 
and runoff will have impacts on mangroves (Snedaker 
1992). Mangroves grow best in moderately saline environ-
ments where the rate of peat production exceeds the 
anaerobic decomposition of peat by marine sulphate 
reducing micro-organisms, and by this process, low-island 
mangroves could keep up with sea-level rise of up to 12 
cm/100 years. Mangroves of high islands and continents 
also accumulate sediment from river discharge, hence can 
keep up with higher rates of sea-level rise (Ellison and 
Stoddart 
1991). The current high rate of regional 
mangrove loss by overcutting, land clearing and habitat 
conversion suggests that global climate change is a minor 
factor • in considerations of the fate of this regionally 
important coastal habitat. 
Seagrasses are a benthic environment throughout the 
tropical and subtropical regions that are important in 
stabilising bottom sediments, serve as nurseries for juvenile 
organisms and provide surfaces upon which many organ-
isms attach. A 35 cm sea-level rise per se is not expected 
to affect seriously the six common 
Caribbean region 
species (Vicente et al. 1992), but if there are other chan-
ges, such as in the quality of light, influence of herbivores. 
90 
D.VII 
World oceans and coastal zones 
substrate, wave energy, or bottom slope, the seagrass beds 
may be impacted. 
The impact of sea-level rise on fisheries is not expect-
ed to be great unless mrbidity increases due to erosion 
from higher water or river runoff. Turbidity increase could 
have a negative impact on fisheries particularly during the 
early life history stage (W Richards, N O A A / 
NMFS, 
personal communication). Estuarine-dependent species in 
areas such as Mississippi, the Florida Everglades, Guyana 
and the Orinoco Delta, may be particularly vulnerable to 
sea-level rise, especially if salinity changes are involved. 
3.3 Southeast Asia region 
Parry et al. (1991) reported on potential effects of clim.ate 
change 
for 
Brazil, 
Malaysia/Thailand/lndonesia and 
Vietaam, but did not discuss sea-level rise for Brazil. 
Much of the area of Malaysia/Thailand/lndonesia is 
characterised by low-lying coastal plain where a 35 cm rise 
in mean sea-level will lead to a shoreward advance of 
seawater of almost 1 km. On sandy beach coasts, sea-level 
rise would tend to initiate beach erosion or accelerate it 
where it is already taking place. There are large areas of 
swampy lowland in Southeast Asia, especially on the 
shores of deltas, where sea-level rise will tend to curb the 
accreting coasts. 
The natural vegetation associated with the coastal 
lowlands of Southeast Asia is mangrove swamp backed by 
marshes and areas of freshwater forest. In many areas this 
vegetation has been profoundly modified by drainage and 
land reclamation. Extensive areas of mangroves have also 
been converted to ponds for the production of fish or 
prawns. Where mangroves have been converted to maricul-
ture, sea-level rise will threaten to breach the enclosing 
banks and submerge the mariculture ponds. Coral reefs on 
the other hand have growth rates (as with the Caribbean) 
that can keep up with sea-level rise, except fringing reefs, 
which are less likely to survive than outlying reefs, 
because of increased turbidity in coastal waters. 
As with all of Southeast Asia, Vietnam (Parry et al. 
1991) has experienced erosion of mangrove forests where 
their advance inland has been prevented by agricultural 
development. On balance, Vietnam has experienced an 
increase in the production of mangroves due to sea-level 
rise. Fisheries on the other hand are mostly influenced by 
areas of coastal upwelling, and climate change may act 
more to displace these traditional fisheries rather than to 
change their productivity. The potential effect of possible 
increases in typhoons and the prolongation otthe typhoon 
season is perhaps the severest uncertainty affecting the 
coastal region of Vietnam with climate change. 
3.4 Summary 
We .summarise the effects of sea-level rise for three 
regions in Table 1. These levels of vulnerability reflect 
only the IPCC (1990b) climate scenario, and must be 
considered as issues that exacerbate other problems such as 
population pressure, pollution, subsidence, coastal erosion, 
construction, warfare etc and is presented to open discus-
sion on identifying the most vulnerable ecosystems. 
We also note that a healthy environment is a prerequi-
site for coral reefs, mangroves and sea grasses to keep 
pace with a rising sea and to continue their coastal protec-
tion benefits. 
4 Case study areas in progress 
Some 29 country studies have been completed or are in 
progress for Africa (5), Asia (10), Australia (1), North and 
South America (9) and Europe (4) regarding vulnerability 
to sea-level rise, including ecological impacts. For exam-
ple, using video-mapping techniques to capmre the natural 
and human dimensions of the coastal zone in Senegal, 
scientists have projected a loss of 6000 km^ of wetlands 
and dry land. Similar studies using this technique have 
been completed or are in progress in Argentina, Nigeria, 
Uruguay, Brazil and Venezuela (Dennis, et al. 1991). Six 
regional studies on Implications of Climate Change have 
been organised by UNEP: the Mediterranean, Southeast 
Pacific, South Pacific, East Asian Seas, South Asian Seas 
and the Wider Caribbean Region. Each area has unique 
problems, but each shares the common concern of chan-
ging air and water circulation, coastal geomorphology, 
coastal ecosystems, soil degradation, freshwater resources, 
precipitafion patterns, 
terrestrial ecosystems, 
coastal 
industries and settlements, and littoral zone population 
dynamics. The underlying thread often emphasises negative 
aspects of climate change; this is not necessarily universal. 
Whenever established pattems are disturbed, vested 
interests tend to exhibit a concem. Rising sea-level is 
probably of more concem than rising temperature, but it is 
too eariy to be definitive; this is the dilemma that any 
forecaster must confront. 
5 Recent findings and updates 
5.1 Ultraviolet (UV-B) radiation 
The IPCC Impacts Assessment expressed concem about 
the possible effects of increasing irradiance of UV-B on 
marine ecosystems. New findings of. the WMO/UNEP 
(1991) indicate that UV-B radiation reaching oceanic and 
coastal zone environments will increase faster than expect-
b. VII 
World oceans and coastal zones 
91 
ed. Since so many marine resources spend all (or vulnera-
ble parts) of their Hves near the water surface, the urgency 
of our concem over genetic changes and direct harm to 
plant and animal life is heightened accordingly. 
Solar 
radiation 
bleaches 
cellular pigments 
of 
freshwater and marine phytoplankton and also impairs 
motility and photomovement of the plankton. The marine 
phytoplankton communities represent by far the largest 
ecosystem on earth. Therefore, even a small percentage 
decrease in population would result in important losses in 
the biomass productivity of the ocean. Any decrease in the 
phytoplankton populations will decrease the sink capacity 
for atmospheric CO^ and will change the carbon biogeo-
chemical cycling in the marine environment. 
5.2 Coastal contamination 
The 1990 assessment also expressed concem about the 
leaching during sea-level rise of contaminants from coastal 
sewerage and toxic waste disposal sites in nearby human 
population centres and agricultural regions. It has been 
brought to our attention that there are also bacterial and 
viral agents in such sites and in coastal septic sewerage 
systems which could be increasingly released into coastal 
waters. While there are potential impacts on coastal 
resources (including nutrient loading of confined water 
bodies, (Valiela and Costa 1988)), the primary concern is 
for the human populations who consume the resources and 
the loss of commerce caused by the closure of fish and 
shellfish areas by health authorities. 
J.J Storm intensity/frequency 
In regions of small tidal range such as the Gulf of Mexico, 
there are wetlands that are found above the high-tide line 
which become inundated by meteorological forcing (storm 
surge/frontal 
passage) or far 
field 
oceanic forcing 
(Swenson and Chuang 1983). These high intertidal wet-
lands are important in supporting marine resources. In the 
Gulf of Mexico, moving inland from the coast, the tidal 
signal gets damped more effectively than does the meteoro-
logical/far field signal. These interior inundation events 
can impact shrimp harvests (Childers et al. 1990). Depend-
ing on the particular site, changes in storm frequency or 
intensity could have positive or negative impacts on marine 
resources. 
5.4 Coastal structures 
The assessment that most wetiand loss accompanying sea-
level rise would be due to inundation and not to protective 
coastal structures is reaffirmed; it is also recognised that 
much of the inundation effect could be an indirect result of 
structures built to combat coastal sea-level rise (Hendry 
1992; Parry et al. 1991). For example, the construction of 
weirs to prevent saltwater intrusion into wetiands, or the 
construction of levees along rivers/wetland boundaries to 
prevent 
flooding, can lead to impounding of water, 
development of anaerobic conditions and sulphide build-up 
in marsh soil which can be accompanied by the death of 
the wetiand vegetation and land loss (Mendelssohn and 
McKee 1988). The weirs accomplish this by directiy 
controlling water levels, while the levies can achieve the 
same result from backwater flooding. Weirs can also 
prevent the movement of living marine resources from, 
wetland nurseries into the adjacent coastal waters (Knudsen 
et al. 1989). 
6 Research and monitoring needs 
Several important research needs were identified during the 
preparation of this report. These are discussed below, by 
subject areas, to help guide the setting of research priori-
ties. 
6.1 Monitoring 
Develop a global scale, coordinated program of monitoring 
and analysis and use retrospective records to understand 
past environmental changes and their effects on coastal 
communities. This is needed to identify and understand 
synergetic stress factors and to use these measurements as 
potential indicators of climate change. In particular, 
support the lOC/WMO/UNEP co-sponsored Global Ocean 
Observing System (GOOS) by active participation in the 
program. 
6.2 Methods 
• 
Develop methods to build a framework of modules, 
integrating physical, biological, and human dimen-
sions, which will lead to better understanding of the 
ecological consequences of climate change. 
• 
Prepare regional maps with a classification scheme 
showing areas and ecosystems most vulnerable to 
climate change. 
6.3 Ultraviolet-B radiation 
• 
Determine the susceptibility of marine organisms to 
increasing amounts of UV-B radiation and the quanti-
92 
D. VII World oceans and coastal zones 
tative impacts of tiiese effects on marine ecology, on 
fisheries and on marine carbon cycling; 
• 
Monitor UV-B at ecologically important sites at all 
latitudes. 
6.4 Modelling 
• 
In order to strengthen quantitative information transfer 
to states, regional climate models nested in coupled 
ocean-atmosphere 
global circulation models 
are 
needed. This effort must include a vigorous, stable, 
long-term in situ verification program (such as 
GOOS), coupled with an active multi-disciplinary 
research effort, which should include examination of 
the historical, geological, and archaeological records. 
• 
Numerical socioeconomic model development, valida-
tion, transfer and use training should be initiated. This 
new class of models require customisation for individ-
ual nations/regions. Adequate database development 
must progress in parallel with the model development. 
Coastal zone managers will require modest training 
and this should be given high priority within IOC/ 
WMO/UNEP education programs. 
6.5 International programs 
• 
National and regional research institutions are urged to 
combine forces in order to develop comprehensive 
studies of the interactions of marine biological com-
munities with their environment and to determine how 
these relationships will change with a changing world. 
It is noted that several such studies are under way 
(regional, north-south, centres for global change 
research, for example.) 
6.6 Ecological research 
• 
Undertake sufficient research on trophic pathways and 
carbon 
cycling 
to 
understand 
predator/prey, 
plant/animal, 
chemical/physical, 
and 
organism/ 
environment interaction as a foundation for under-
standing the effects of global change on the marine 
environment and vice versa. 
• 
Study the linkages of climate dependent sea surface 
momentum and energy exchanges to marine ecosystem 
processes and populations of economic or cultural 
interest. 
7 Recommendations 
• 
Implement the research/monitoring needs in the above 
section. 
• 
Strengthen interaction of this working group with the 
Coastal Zone Management Subgroup of IPCC Work-
ing Group III—Response Strategies. 
• 
Response Strategies (WGIII) should fully consider the 
impact of coastal structures on inland retreat and on 
flushing action required by coastal ecosystems. 
• 
Add Climate and Global Change to the agendas of 
appropriate future meetings of regional scientific and 
coordinating bodies such as IOC, W M O , UNEO, 
UNDP, F A O , IMO and others; appoint a regional 
IPCC coordinator responsible to the Secretariat. 
• 
Coastal planners and owners of coastal properties and 
infrastructure 
should carefully consider projected 
relative sea-level changes when evaluating new or 
reconstruction projects. 
• 
Coastal planners and environmental decision makers 
should consider that a healthy environment is a 
prerequisite for coral reefs, mangroves and sea grasses 
to keep pace with a rising sea and to continue their 
coastal protection benefits. 
Table 1. Effect of 35 cm sea-level rise by 2050 AD* 
(L) = Low impact 
(M) = Medium impact 
(H) = High impact 
(-) 
Not applicable 
Ecosystems 
Tropical/ 
Mid-
Polar/ 
Subtropical 
Latilude 
Subpolar 
Deltas 
H 
H 
H 
Estuaries 
M 
M 
M 
Wetlands 
M 
M 
M 
Coastal plains 
M 
M 
L 
Coral reefs 
L 
H 
Lagoons 
M 
M 
M 
Mangroves 
H 
-
-
Ice margin 
-
L 
M 
Seagrass beds 
M 
M 
L 
Fisheries 
M 
M 
L 
Rivers 
L 
L 
L 
Coastal lakes 
L 
L 
M 
Beaches 
H 
H 
H 
* This table only considers the rise in sea-level and is not 
intended to include the numerous environmental stresses that 
these ecosystems are experiencing from other local anthropo-
genic effects. 
D.VII 
World oceans and coastal zones 
93 
References 
Aparicio, R. 1992. 'Meteorologicaland oceanographiccondi-
tions along the southern coastal boundary of the 
Caribbean Sea', Chapter 3.2, in: Qimatic changes in the 
Intra-American Sea, G.A. Maul (ed.), Edward Arnold 
Publishers (in press). 
Bernal, P. H . 1991. 'Consequences of Global Change for 
Oceans: A Review', Qimatic Qiange 18: 339-359. 
Childers, D.L., Day Jr., J.W. and Muller, R.A. 1990. 
'Relating climatological forcing to coastal water levels in 
Louisiana estuaries and the potential importance of El 
Niiio-Southern Oscillation events', Qimate Research 1: 
31-42 
Dennis, K.C., Nicholls, R.J. and Leatherman, S.P. 1991. 
Coastal Land Loss Studies: Reconnaissance Level Survey. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Ellison, J.C. and Stoddart, D.R. 1991. 'Mangrove ecosystem 
collapse during predicted sea-level rise: Hologene 
analogues and implications', 7. Coastal Res., 7(1): 151-
165. 
Gallegos, A., Czitron, S., Zavala, J. and Fernandez, A. 
1992. 'Scenario modelling of climate change on the 
ocean circulation of the Intra-American Sea', Chapter 2.2 
in G.A. Maul (ed.), op. cit. 
Gray, C.R.., 1992. 'Regional meteorology and hurricanes', 
Chapter 3.1 in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Hanson, K. and Maul, G.A. 1992. 'Analysis of temperature, 
precipitation and sea level variability with concentration 
on Key West, Rorida for evidence of trace-gas induced 
climate change'. Chapter 3.5 in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Hendry, M . 1992. 'Sea level movements and shoreline 
changes'. Chapter 3.3 in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
IPCC, 1990a. Qimate Change: The IPCC Impacts Assess-
ment, Australian Government Publishing Service, 268 p. 
IPCC, 1990b. Qimate Oiange, The IPCC Scientific Assess-
ment, Cambridge University Press, 339 p. 
Knudsen, E.E., Paille, R.A., Rogers, B.D., Herke, W.H. 
and Geaghan, J.P. 1989. 'Effects of a fixed-crest weir on 
brown shrimp Penaeus aztecus growth, mortality and 
emigration in a Louisiana coastal marsh'. North Amer. 
Jour. Fish. Manage., 9: 411-419. 
Lamb, P.J. 1987. 'On the development of regional climatic 
scenarios for policy-oriented climate-impact assessment'. 
Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc, 68(9): 1116-1123. 
Mendelssohn, I.A. and McKee, K . L . 1988. 'Spartina 
alterniflora dieback in Louisiana: time-course investiga-
tion of soil waterlogging effects', Jour. Ecology, 76: 
509-521. 
Mercado, A., Thompson, J. D. and Evans, J.E. 1992. 'Re-
quirements for modelling of future storm surge and ocean 
circulation'. Chapter 2.3 in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Milliman, J.D. 1992. 'Impact on coral reefs'. Chapter 4.4 in 
G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Muller-Karger, F.E. 1992. 'River discharge variability 
including satellite-observed plume dispersal patterns'. 
Chapter 3.4 in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Parry, M . L . , Magalhaes, A.R., and Ninh, N.H. (eds.) 1991. 
The potential socio-economic effects of climate change, 
UNEP, Nairobi, 26 pages + appendices. 
Shapiro, L.J. 1988. 'Impact of climate change on hurri-
canes', in: Implications of climatic changes in the Wider 
Caribbean Region, UNEP(OCA)/CAR WG.l/ INF.3,187 
pages. 
Snedaker, S.C. 1992. 'Impact on mangroves'. Chapter 4.3 
in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Swenson, E.M. and W.S. Chuang 1983. 'Tidal and subtidal 
water volume exchange in an estuarine system', Estua-
rine. Coastal and Shelf Science, 16: 229-240. 
Valiela, I. and Costa, J.E. 1988. 'Eutrophicadon of Butter-
milk Bay, a Cape Cod coastal erabayment: concentrations 
of nutrients and watershed nutrient budgets'. Environ. 
Manag, 12: 539-553. 
Vincente, V.P., Singh, N . C , andBotello, A.V. 1992. 'Eco-
logical implications of potential climate change and sea 
level rise'. Chapter 4.2 in G.A. Maul (ed.) op. cit. 
Wigley, T.M.L, and Santer, B.D. 1992. 'Future climate of 
the Caribbean Basin from Global Circulation Models', 
Chapter 2.1 in G.A.Maui (ed.) op. cit. 
Williams, E.H., Jr., Goenaga, C , and Vicente, V. 1987. 
'Mass bleaching on Atlantic coral reefs'. Science, 
877-878. 
WMO/UNEP (1991) Scientific Assessment of Ozone Deple-
tion. 
VIII 
Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
Lead Authors: 
P A Melnikov (USSR) 
R B Street (Canada) 
Expert Contributors: 
R G Barry (USA) 
M Bmgman (Canada) 
N Grave (USSR) 
Cheng Guodong (China) 
A E Corte (Argentina) 
T H Jacka (Australia) 
A S Judge (Canada) 
R M Koemer (Canada) 
E A Koster (The Netherlands) 
V J Lunardini (USA) 
D A Robinson (USA) 
V Volgina (USSR) 
VIII Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
1 Background 
The terrestrial component of the cryosphere includes the 
seasonal snow cover, mountain glaciers, terrestrial ice 
sheets, frozen groimd including permafrost (ground that 
remains frozen for more than one year) and seasonally 
frozen ground. In conjunction with projected changes in 
climate associated with enhanced atmospheric concentra-
tions of greenhouse gases, the global areal extent and 
volume of these elements of the terrestrial cryosphere are 
expected to be substantially reduced (Climate Change: The 
IPCC Impacts Assessment, 1990). These reductions, when 
reflected regionally, could have significant impacts on 
related ecosystems (both natural and managed) and on 
social and economic activities. For example, the projected 
reductions in the area and volume of seasonal snow cover 
(including changes in the length of the season) and the 
recession of glacial ice sheets will impact on local and 
regional water resources. In the case of permafrost, 
projected increases in the thickness of the freeze-thaw layer 
above the permafrost and recession of permafrost to higher 
latitudes and altitudes could lead to increases in terrain 
instability, erosion and landslides in those areas which 
currently contain permafrost. These changes could alter 
overlying ecosystems and affect existing human settlements 
(structures) and development opportunities. 
The study of the impacts of climate change on the 
terrestrial components of the cryosphere is in its infancy 
and there are many uncertainties regarding the relation-
ships and sensitivities of snow and ice masses to climate 
and climate changes especially at the local and regional 
levels. 
Limitations also exist in terms of our imderstanding of 
the environmental impacts (Koster 1991) and of socioeco-
nomic consequences of changes in snow and ice masses. 
Addressing these uncertainties and limitations is essential 
to the development and implementation of appropriate 
response strategies. 
2 Progress since the IPCC linpacts Assessment in 
1990 
2.1 Snow cover 
Recent analyses (Cess et al. 1991) of the differences in the 
behaviour of General Circulation Models (GCMs) suggest 
that snow feedbacks include both the simple, direct positive 
feedback and indirect negative affects. The positive 
feedback hypothesis suggests that a decrease in snow cover 
makes the earth less reflective, causing it to warm as it 
absorbs more solar radiation and reflects less back out to 
space. Recent analyses reveal that some models suggest 
that clouds could redistribute themselves to cover those 
areas which were covered with snow thus reducing to some 
degree the positive feedback. Some of the models also 
suggest that decreases in snow cover could increase the 
amount of long-wave radiation emitted at the top of the 
atmosphere, which would lead to cooling of the Earth. 
Robinson and Dewey (1991) examined a 20-year data 
set of satellite derived snow cover and found the extent of 
northern hemisphere snow to be at record low levels since 
the middle of 1987. The largest negative snow anomalies 
of late are occurring in the Spring. 
Meteorological data gathered along the Mackenzie 
Valley in Canada over the past 50 years shows a long-term 
warming trend of up to 1°C (Stuart et al. 1991). Analysis 
of this data shows that along with this increase in air 
temperatures, snow cover has decreased in the Mackenzie 
Valley. Under this combination of climatic changes 
permafrost could grow, not diminish, in this region (Stuart 
and Judge 1992). 
2.2 Permafrost 
The raising of mean aimual air temperatures by 2°C is 
projected to result in a shift of the southern boundary of 
permafrost areas in Russia approximately 250-300 km to 
the north and northeast. A warming of this magnitude is 
also expected to cause the receding of permafrost areas on 
the plateaus of Tjyan Shan and the vanishing of those in 
Pamir with only spotty discontinuous areas remaining. 
Based on mathematical models, permafrost could lose 
2-6% of its 'cold reserves' during the period 1990-2040 
as a result of projected global warming. 
The above normal temperatures throughout much of 
the Northem Hemisphere in 1989 led to the initiation of 
extensive active layer detachment • slides in Ellesmere 
Island, Canada, and in the Yamal Peninsula in the Russian 
Arctic. A thicker active layer intersected the top of 
massive ice triggering the failures which are continuing to 
spread in these areas. This condition, at least in the Yamal 
Peninsula, has led to the damming of streams, increased 
sediment loads in streams, and has initiated ongoing thaw 
and fiirther failures. 
Allen et al. (1988) have identified the growth and 
decay of permafrost in the Mackenzie Delta, Canada, over 
the past 75 000 years based on deep temperature records 
and the palaeoclimatic history. Rozenberg et al. (1985) 
have documented multilayered permafrost in the Mackenzie 
Delta, and Collett et al. (1988) have shown a similar 
structure over several thousand km^ on the North Slope of 
Alaska. 
Anisimov and Nelson (1990) and Stuart and Judge 
(1992) have used the frost index model to examine the 
96 
D.VIII Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
circumpolar distribution of permafrost and to compare it 
for Eurasia and Amerasia. The advantage of the frost index 
is that it accounts for and couples both temperature and 
precipitation (snow cover). Further calculations have 
examined the change as predicted by the various GCMs. 
Field studies usmg deep temperature records from 
boreholes (Taylor et al. 1989 and Taylor 1991) have 
demonstrated that recent sea-level changes in the arctic are 
preserved in these temperature records and that these 
temperatures can be used to estimate the retreat or advan-
ces of shorelines. 
Studies of the isotope chemistry of carbon in the 
atmosphere suggests that up to 30% derives from old 
carbon (or earth) sources. In the tundra and northern taiga 
ecosystems there is an abundant reserve of carbon stored 
in moss, peat, and soil duff. The potential release of this 
carbon as a result of global warming and the associated 
increase in soil temperatures, increasing depth of the 
seasonal thaw layer, and improved drainage suggest 
increases in CO2 emissions from these regions as a result 
of global warming. Currently, CO, data from global 
systematic observations identifies a maximum of armual 
mean CO2 concentrations over the tundra and northern 
taiga regions around 70 °N latitude and not between 
20-60°N where the greatest majority of the emissions from 
human activities occurs. 
Recent experiments indicate that a sharp increase in 
CO2 emissions from deep freezing soil monolits occurs by 
warming them 4°C. This conclusion is supported by the 
increase in emissions that is observed in April as the 
temperature of the upper horizon of frozen deposits 
increases from -8°C to -4°C. 
Emissions of methane from the earth's surface are 
currently estimated at 540x1012 g/year including 35x1012 
g/year from mndra areas (Khalil and Rasmussen 1990 and 
Melnikov 1991). The annual flow rate of methane into the 
atmosphere from present-day sources within permafrost 
regions in Russia are estimated to be 9.2x107 m' or 
6.1x104 tonnes (Glotov, in press). 
The amount of methane within permafrost has not 
been extensively studied (examples of some studies, 
Archangelov and Novgoroda 1991 and Kvenvolden et al. 
1992) with the majority of studies having been carried out 
in oil and gas fields for which methane is the target 
indicator. 
Recent 
investigations in Kolimo-Indigirka 
lowland area, have found methane in borehole samples at 
concentrations from 3.2 to 63.7 ml/dm^ with the greatest 
concentrations in the turl-organic horizons. It appears that 
the stable zone of gas hydrate deposits in permafrost lies 
more than 100 metres below the surface where the tem-
peratijre are between -10°C to -12°C. 
In some regions of the arctic there is evidence which 
suggests that the continental shelves are warming as 
permafrost 
degrades. In the Canadian Beaufort Sea, 
shallow sediments are very gassy and several plumes 
emerging from the Russian shelves have been attributed to 
sudden emissions of methane due to hydrate degradation. 
Such emissions may themselves contribute to climate 
change in the short term and may indicate a trend towards 
accelerating hydrate decomposition on northem shelves. 
Climate warming accompanied by shelf warming as a 
consequence of increased meltwater input will accelerate 
this decomposition (Neave et al. 1978; Clarke et al. 1986; 
and Nisbet 1990). 
2.3 Ice sheets 
Some glacier-mass budget record lengths are now sufficient 
to be useful as a climate change indicator tool, having 
reached or exceeded the 'thirty-year norm' criteria. They 
can therefore serve as a background to test the climate 
change projections over broad areas. For example, there is 
good evidence now (Koeraer and Brugman 1991) that 
glaciers in the Northem Hemisphere polar and subpolar 
regions are receding at a slower rate than previously 
suggested. In addition, all glaciers measured in Iceland 
between 1930 and 1960 were receding. Between 1960 and 
1990, however, 25% have advanced. 
The longest glacier record from northern Sweden 
identified only eight positive balance years between 1946 
and 1980. In the ten years since then, six years have 
shown a positive balance. In the Canadian high Arctic 
(Koeraer and Brugman 1991), thirty years of mass balance 
on two ice sheets show slightly negative balances with no 
significant trends. This evidence, which is substantial, is 
the opposite to that found from two years of similar 
measurements taken earlier—one in the 1970s and the other 
in the 1980s. 
Observations 
from 
Kasakhstan 
(High Mountain 
Geocryological Laboratory) indicate that between 1955-
1979 the glaciated area reduced by 13.7%, the number of 
glaciers diminished by 15.2% and the general volume of 
ice in glaciers reduced by 10.8%. During the same period, 
the volume of water flow from the glaciers increased from 
295 to 340 billions m' annually (ie 15% increase). Con-
tinuing this rate of glacial ablation would suggest that the 
glaciers in Zailiisky Alatau would vanish over the next 200 
years. 
Although the Southern Hemisphere record is not as 
detailed as that for the Northern Hemisphere, work by 
Ruddell (1990) has shown that several New Zealand 
glaciers have retreated since the mid 1800s. In particular, 
a decrease in the volume of the Tasman Glacier is attribut-
ed to a warming in the order of 0.75°C, accompanied by 
D.VIII 
Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
97 
a decrease in precipitation of about 10% since the middle 
of the last century. 
3 Information and data gaps 
In addition to those uncertainties associated with climate 
change (IPCC 1990), the limited state of knowledge and 
understanding of the sensitivity of polar and high-altitude 
regions, especially with respect to climate change, is 
restricting our capabilities to estimate the environmental 
impacts and therefore, socioeconomic consequences, of 
climate change as a result of changes in these components 
of the terrestrial cryosphere. Despite the large volume of 
literature, there is a limited number of accessible relevant 
datasets for scientific research. Future systematic observa-
tions and associated research should give priority to 
designing and implementing programs to provide the 
necessary data and, thereby, to increase our understanding 
of: 
• 
basic cryospheric processes and phenomena; 
• 
slope processes and mass movements; 
• 
the emission and storage of carbon by polar and high-
altitude ecosystems; and 
• 
the associated changes in vegetation and wildlife 
community structures and functions. 
With respect to permafrost, causes of changes in ground 
temperature profiles need further theoretical and field study 
to provide greater insight into when permafrost degradation 
will begin, at what rate it will occur and to what depth. 
GCMs do not adequately incorporate atmospheric and 
cryospheric energy fluxes for polar regions encompassing 
vegetative terrain, snow cover, and ice sheets, with the 
complicafions of freeze/thaw. The coupling between the 
atmosphere and the cryosphere is therefore not well 
represented, leading to uncertainty in projecting the 
location, timing (including rate) and extent of snow cover 
disappearance, ice sheet ablation, soil temperahire and 
moisture profiles, soil moisture movement and permafrost 
degradation. 
Current efforts towards systematic observations and 
examining impacts of global change within the terrestrial 
cryosphere are not always undertaken in a coordmated 
fashion. The Arctic, for example, is largely omitted from 
the IGBP Plaiming Documents despite the enormous heat 
storage and release capabilities of the cryosphere. There 
are programs, however, which deal with many of these 
shortcomings. For example, WCRP is developing an 
Arctic Climate System Study (ACSYS) program and 
efforts are being made by lASC and the US NSF (Arctic 
System Science). These efforts and those with similar goals 
need to be encouraged and strengthened. 
The number and areal coverage of long-term systemat-
ic observation sites in high-latitude and high-altitiide 
regions are insufficient to provide more than qualitative 
and theoretical assessments of components of the terrestrial 
cryosphere and the impacts of climate change on them 
individually and together. Some such systematic observa-
tional efforts have been undertaken for permafrost (eg 
Mackay in the Mackenzie Delta of Canada, Pewe in the 
Fairbanks, Alaska, area and research by Pavlov and 
Melnikov in Russia). Existing observation programs need 
to be maintained and, where necessary, enhanced to 
provide the required long-term observation records. 
Additional' sites, however, are required throughout the 
high-latitude and high-altitude regions. Particular emphasis 
should be given to addressing data gaps within priority 
areas, including the main population centres and transpor-
tation routes, providing areal coverage to encompass a 
linear transect through the discontinuous and continuous 
permafrost, and including areas in which there are major 
sheets and adjacent terrestrial and marine environments. 
Every attempt should be made to encourage the operation 
of these types of programs in a manner that promotes 
international cooperation and involvement, thereby provid-
ing the opportunity for intercomparison. 
Comprehensive spatial data that will allow analysis of 
trends and spatial distribution of elements of the terrestrial 
cryosphere are especially limited. Remotely sensed data, 
although not yet fully developed, ultimately should provide 
the best approach to assessing responses and identifying 
potential risks over large areas quickly and frequently. A 
regional example of this type of program is the CRYSYS 
program developed by U S A and Canada. The CRYSYS 
program has been conceived as a part of the Earth Obser-
vation Satellite Programme designed specifically to evalu-
ate the impact of global change on the cryosphere. 
As pointed out under the previous section, an import-
ant factor in the relationship between climate change and 
permafrost degradation appears to be the decomposition of 
marine gas hydrates, which results in the release of 
radiatively important gases to the ocean and atmosphere. 
Littie is currently known about their distribution, chemistry 
and kinematics. 
Uncertainties exist in our understanding of the rela-
tionship between glacier mass balance and climatological 
conditions. These uncertainties must be resolved to 
improve estimates of ice sheet ablation contributions to 
sea-level change and to local/regional hydrological regimes 
(especially important for those areas which depend on 
meltwater from the terrestrial cryosphere). 
Our knowledge of the effects of the major ice masses 
on changing sea-level in the event of global warming, is 
98 
D.VIII 
Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
limited as a result of the uncertainties regarding the mass 
balance of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. In fact, 
changes in the mass balance of the Greenland and 
Antarctic ice sheets are not certain even as to sign. A 
recent compilation of data concerning the Antarctic mass 
• budget (areas of the Antarctic Peninsula have not been 
included in these calculations) by Bentley and Giovinetto 
(1991) has, however, concluded that the ice sheet currently 
exhibits a positive balance (ie an excess mass input) of 80 
to 400 Gt/year, contributing a drop of 0.2 to 1.1 mm/year 
to sea-level change. 
With respect to Antarctica, major deficiencies in the 
knowledge base can be attributed to lack of knowledge of 
the accumulation rate over most of Antarctica, the basal 
melting rate of the ice shelves, and the ice calving rate 
along the entire margin of Antarctica. For the Greenland 
ice sheet, insufficient information is available about the 
ablation rate (currently restricted to a few years of meas-
urements at a few points) and the calving rates at the fast 
moving outlet glaciers (eg Jakobsavn). 
These deficiencies make it virtually impossible to 
relate changes in the global glacier mass balance to sea-
level change, either in the past or in the near future. 
Modelling cannot answer these questions until annual-to-
decadal data on the surface profile of both Greenland and 
Antarctica are available. This data requirement will be 
realised only i f and when the new generation of satellite 
altimeters are put into orbit some time in the next century. 
For Antarctica there is an additional need to improve the 
information available on snow accumulation rates and how 
they relate to synoptic weather pattems each year.. 
Historical accumulation data obtained retrospectively 
from ice cores can provide the perspective on natural 
accumulation rate variability which is needed to assess the 
significance of more recent changes. An essential aspect of 
this as well as other sampling or systematic observation 
programs, however, is communication of the resulting data 
or information. One notable shortcoming in this area for 
Antarctica is that accumulation rates for stations occupied 
since 1957 still remain unpublished (Jacka 1991, personal 
communication). 
4 Responses to close information and data gaps 
The collection, through internationally coordinated pro-
grams, of basic data on snow cover extent and volume, 
glacier behaviour, and permafrost temperatures, ice content 
and thickness is of utmost importance to improve our 
understanding and to improve models of climate-cryo-
sphere relationships. Where possible, existing time-series 
of observations should be compared with recent and 
historical climate records to study the cryospheric respons-
es to recent warming and specific climatological condi-
tions. Current observational programs should be continued, 
Vvhile the extension of the global network with observations 
at new locations (particularly in the Southern Hemisphere) 
and by remote sensing (eg satellite, radar and photogram-
metry) is strongly recommended. 
Integrated research should be carried out on the side 
effects of fluctuations in snow cover, glacier size, and 
permafrost dynamics on, for example, the stability of 
slopes, runoff, the supply and transport of sediment, 
timberline ecotones, food chains, and on wildlife migra-
tion. 
4.1 Snow cover 
The natural variability and trends, if any, of continental 
snow cover changes is poorly known because of the short 
length of comprehensive data records (ie satellite observa-
tions from the 1970s to the present). To enhance these 
records, appropriate protocol to integrate surface observa-
tions with recent satellite data is needed to expand the 
temporal coverage. This is required not only for snow 
cover, but also for the other components of the terrestrial 
cryosphere. 
Specific efforts should be directed at collecting the re-
quired data to help identify areal and altitudinal snow cover 
change trends. The required observation programs include 
continued systematic observations of snow extent and 
duration both by field observations and remote sensing, 
improved observation of snow depth/volume and water 
equivalent, and collection of data on mountain snow pack 
characteristics. 
Work must also continue on assembling and analysing 
historic station-based observations of snow cover in order 
to provide a greater historic perspective to recent snow 
behaviour without having to wait decades to assemble a 
satellite set of suitable length. Of course, this can be 
accomplished only on a regional scale, but even on this 
scale the work would prove useful. 
For 
remote sensing of snow cover extent and 
depth/volume, the hope is that microwave satellite data will 
provide the necessary information. This technique currently 
shows some promise but still requires some 'tuning' before 
reliable snow cover volumes can be obtained (eg in boreal 
forests and over tundra). 
Another approach which should be applied to future 
snow observations employs geographic information systems 
techniques. These permit the amalgamation of remotely 
sensed data with traditional ground-based station observa-
tions, topographic data, vegetation information etc. 
Further research towards understanding the impacts of 
climate change on regional and hemispheric snow covers 
D.VIII 
Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
99 
is needed; research is also needed on the impacts of a 
changed snow cover on the climate system. Relationships 
between snow cover, surface and upper atmospheric 
temperature, precipitation, air mass characteristics and 
atmospheric circulation need further exploring with lengthy 
and spatially extensive datasets. Modelling efforts are also 
needed, with equilibrium and transient runs analysed for 
snow dynamics and additional runs geared specifically 
towards snow cover issues. 
Snow cover research should examine the regional 
impacts of heat islands and land use on snow cover extent 
and duration. This information would be useful in the 
assessment of regional climate impacts, as well as estab-
lishing the stability of sites when it comes to analysing 
long-term records of snow. 
Research is also needed to determine how variations 
in snow cover thickness and duration affect plant growth, 
food chains and wildlife migration. 
4.2 Permafrost 
Most, if not all, of the research gaps in permafrost and 
permafrost processes can be filled through implementation 
of internationally conceived and managed programs of 
geocryological systematic observations designed to provide 
the necessary data. Such programs should involve the full 
spectrum of support of international programs and agencies 
(eg International Permafrost Association, W M O and IGBP) 
as well as national agencies. The required observation 
program should allow for the collection of the data neces-
sary to calibrate permafrost/atmospheric temperature and 
energy flux models, indicate something of the scale of 
permafrost changes, both temporally and aerially, and 
allow climate change projections to be verified. . 
The required observation program should comprise 
three basic components with observations distributed 
throughout the major permafrost areas of the globe 
including continuous, discontinuous, margmal and marine 
permafrost zones, as well as alpine permafrost areas in 
both the northem and southern hemispheres: 
• 
a number of first order sites (primary nodes) similar 
to the current sites m Canada, the Gydan, Yamal site 
of VSEGINGEO and the stations of the Permafrost 
Instimte in the USSR; 
• 
second order sites which would help generalise obser-
vations at the primary nodes; and 
• 
remotely sensed data to provide a more comprehensive 
picture (although this data has the lowest level of 
accuracy and resolution, it does provide the broadest 
areal coverage). 
The objective of this program should be to provide the data 
necessary to answer questions concerning basic permafrost 
processes and the depth, rate and extent of permafrost 
changes that can be expected as a result of projected 
climate change. 
Early in the international collaboration, common 
protocols for systematic observational processes and 
equipment need to be established for all three, components 
of this observation program to allow for intercomparison 
of observations. Procedural guidelines for analysis and 
establishing quality and reliability wifl also be needed. 
Data collected should be reasonably accessible. 
The observation program at the 'primary node' sites 
should consist of year-round meteorological observations 
of air temperature, precipitation, snow cover and surface 
radiative, sensible, latent energy fluxes, widespread 
observations of ground temperature, active layer depth, 
soils, vegetation, hydrology and ground ice characteristics. 
Within the context of global change and the permafrost 
regions, it will be necessary to maintain systematic 
observation at the sites for at least ten years (preferably 20 
years), depending on the data taken and the scale of the 
changes observed. 
Widespread observations at 'second order' sites are 
needed to generalise the observations taken at the 'primary 
node' sites. Integral to the observation programs at these 
sites are frost-tubes which can measure the greatest depth 
of active layer development and thus provide an indication 
of the amount of energy absorbed by the near surface over 
a season. Boreholes drilled to a depth of 60-100 m should 
also be included as part of the observation program at 
these sites. Data from these boreholes can provide 
information on the historical characteristics of any ice 
present, on how the ground temperatures have changed 
over the past century and determine the presence and 
distribution of ice (especially when coupled with ground 
probing radar surveys). 
With respect to the third component of the observation 
program—remote sensing—the use of surface geophysical 
methods such as electromagnetic soundings and ground 
probing radar are begirming to provide knowledge of the 
local continuity of permafrost and ground-ice conditions. 
Several recent papers have demonstrated this capability 
(Rozenberg et al. 1985; LaFleche et al. 19S7; and Todd et 
al. 1992). Repeated surveys with such equipment can 
provide early warning of changes in the subsurface, espe-
cially in the vicinity of structures (Judge et al 1991). 
Both the primary and secondary component sites of the 
suggested observation program can also provide the 
ground-truthing for airborne and satellite-borae observa-
tions of landscape, snow, ground temperature, vegetation 
and shallow permafrost conditions. 
100 
D. VIII Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
Systematically observing the temperature, geometry 
and creep of permafrost at selected sites in alpine regions 
is a necessary component. Internationally coordinated 
systematic observation programs should be developed in 
various mountain areas of the world, especially with 
respect to borehole data and rock glacier photogrammetry. 
National, regional and international integrated research 
programs should be directed at examining the processes 
and dynamic changes and interaction between the atmos-
phere, the biosphere and the cryosphere. This research 
should include modelling the heat and energy balance of 
permafrost; conducting integrated.research on the impact 
of permafrost changes on terrestrial and coastal ecosystems 
(ie on the interrelations in the atmosphere - buffer zone -
permafrost system); identifying processes causing changes 
in ground temperature profiles; and improving methodolo-
gies to observe changes systematically in permafrost extent 
and thickness, to determine ice content of permafrost 
(globally) and to determine the chemical characteristics of 
ground ice/permafrost areas. 
Attempts to measure and model the heat and energy 
balance of mountain permafrost must accompany systemat-
ic observational activities in order to reach a better under-
standing and interpretation of the collected data. Sensitivity 
studies concerning the thermal and mechanical reaction of 
ice-rich permafrost on slopes in relation to reasonable 
scenarios of projected climate change will be possible in 
the near future. Such an approach requires systematic 
collection of the increasing amount of information on 
permafrost 
occurrence, and the design of computer-
compatible 
algorithms 
for 
predicting 
permafrost 
distribution in mountain areas using digital terrain models 
in combinations with geographic information systems and— 
preferably infra-red—aerial photography. The same models 
would be able to show where anticipated warming trends 
could lead to rapid active layer thickening or even com-
plete 
permafrost 
degradation. 
The 
corresponding 
information would form an important basis for directing 
attention towards especially sensitive areas and for improv-
ing systematic observation programs as a whole. 
For 
impacts, research 
studies, efforts should be 
directed towards systematic observations of structures 
(Imear and buildings) within permafrost areas and the 
impacts of changes in the underlying permafrost on the 
stability of those structures. Research should be intensified 
on environmental factors and physical processes (eg soil 
temperature, thermal conductivity of soil layers, soil-
moisture balance, active layer dynamics, thermokarst 
erosion) and their impacts on the accumulation and decom-
position of peat, and the production of carbon dioxide and 
methane. This includes controlled experiments in the field 
as well as analysis of permafrost and peat cores. 
In the case of permafrost, 
analyses indicate that 
changes in its characteristics are primarily determined by 
changes in climate and vegetative cover. The ability to 
separate the influences on permafrost temperature of 
changes in vegetative cover from those caused by changes 
in climate suggests that permafrost temperahire can be a 
reliable indicator of climate change and can be used to 
reconstruct past climates. Collaboration among scientists 
working on climate change detection and those working on 
permafrost dynamics is essential to tapping, this potential. 
4.3 Ice sheets 
More statistical work is needed on the existing glacier data 
(two separate components of accumulation and ablation) to 
improve our knowledge of recent and projected climate 
changes, especially in the polar regions where data from 
other disciplines is especially sparse. Glacier-mass budget 
data must also be tied in with that derived from ice-core 
data to extend our knowledge of past climate change and 
place the present changes into true perspective (eg a recent 
study of ice cores from Wilkes Land, Antarctica, (Morgan 
et al. 1991) indicates increased snow accumulation since 
1960, compatible with the mass input increase reported by 
Bentiey and Giovinetto (1991)). The present warm period 
in the Canadian high Arctic is still considerably cooler than 
the chmate there for over half the interglacial period 
beginning 10 000 years ago. The ice core record also 
shows that the short period immediately preceding the 
present warm one was the coldest for several thousand 
years. It appears that the present glacial recession is from 
major advances that took place during that cold period 
(Koeraer and Fisher 1990). Seen in that context the present 
warming trend is not unusual. 
Presently, the accurate measurement of the mass 
balance of Antarctica and Greenland is unattainable. The 
measurement of mass balance on small glaciers and ice 
sheets forms a powerful tool for detecting early signs of 
climate change of the nature projected by climate models 
as it represents an integration of the total energy flux over 
each glacier or ice cap. The tyvo components of glacier 
balance—ie accumulation and ablation (ice or snow loss)— 
constitute measures of two separate parameters of the 
projected climate change (ie change in precipitation rate -
substantially higher in the polar regions) and measurable 
higher ice/snow melt rates in summer. This is particularly 
important in polar glaciers as they are located in areas 
where the maximum climate change is projected to occur. 
To improve their effectiveness as indicators, it will be 
necessary to identify those changes resulting from local 
catchment characteristics and microclimate which can 
dominate climate change for many decades. 
D. VIII Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
101 
Changes of area and thickness on parts of dynamic 
glaciers are difficult to relate directly to climate change 
unless the response time of the glaciers is well known. 
Increasing thickness in the accumulation areas of southern 
Greenland (Zwally et al. 1989) contrast with decreasing 
thickness in the ablation zone below this (Lingle et al., in 
press). In the Canadian Arctic the accumulation areas of 
those ice sheets measured during the past 30 years show no 
evidence of changing elevation. Some glaciers, however, 
show a surface lowering in the ablation zone (Koeraer 
1989). Such measurements, when repeated, indicate 
whether precipitation and/or summer melting rates are 
changing. They complement mass balance observations. 
It is still questionable, however, whether satellite 
measurements provide the desirable accuracy to detect 
surface elevation changes, particularly on small ice sheets 
where the required resolution could limit the usefulness of 
satellite- derived observations. Modem geodetic techniques 
or repeated precision-gravity measurements, coupled with 
GPS should be used to provide overlap with future satellite 
mapping using improved satellite sensors. 
The gravity/GPS technique is presentiy being used on 
ice sheets in the Canadian Arctic and at seasonal Antarctic 
sites to detect elevation changes at the tops of ice sheet 
summits. Vertical (elevation) resolution also limits the use 
of satellite, and GPS in areas where accumulation rates are 
low (ie <20 g cm2y-l) as changes in both the accumula-
tion rate and elevation will be even lower. 
To improve understanding of ice sheet and glacial 
changes and the impacts thereof, it is essential that existing 
long-term systematic observations programs be continued 
and that programs for representative glacier mass balance 
changes and associated climatic and hydrologic variables 
be expanded to provide a truly global network. This data 
should be supplemented with data derived from ice sheet 
elevation surveys by satellite (laser) altimetry such as that 
on the EOS/ERS series. Efforts should also be directed at 
improving systematic observations and assessments of 
iceberg calving from the Antarctic and Greenland ice 
sheets. 
Enhanced integrated research programs at the national, 
regional and international levels should be directed towards 
examining the effects of glacier size fluctuations on the 
upper and lower drainage basin dynamics and continuing 
studies on the frequency and intensity of mass movements 
in relation to extreme meteorological events. Particular 
emphasis should placed on promoting research in the 
slopes of high mountain regions aimed at better hazard 
(flooding, slope failure) appraisal. 
The means of encouraging and, where necessary, 
facilitating the required support for these activities should 
be the subject of intemational dialogue. Specific require-
ments, reconraiendations, priorities and their implications 
(globally and regionally) including considering both the 
needs and resource (human and monetary) requirements 
should be the subject of this dialogue. 
References 
Allen, D . M . , Michel, F.A. and Judge, A.S. 1988. 'The 
permafrost regime in the Mackenzie Delta, Beaufort Sea 
Region, NWT and its significance to the reconstruction 
of paleoclimatic history', Jowrna/ of Quaternary Science, 
3,pp.3-13 
Anisimov, A.O. and F.E. Nelson 1990. 'Applications of 
mathematical models to investigate climate-permafrost', 
Meteorlogiyai Gidrologiya 10 pp.13-20. 
Archangelov, A.A. and Novgoroda, E.V. 1991. 'Genesis of 
marine ice at "Ice Mountain", Yenesei River; according 
to gas anayses'. Permafrost and Periglacial Processes 2. 
pp. 167-190. 
Barry, R.G. 1990. 'Changes in mountain climate and glacio-
hydrological 
response'. 
Mountain 
Res. 
Devel., 
10:pp.161-170 
Barry, R.G. 1991. 'Observational evidence in global snow 
and ice cover', in: M.E. Schlesinger (ed.) Greenhouse-
gas-induced climatic changes: A critical appraisal of 
simulations arui observations. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 
320-345 
Bentley, C.R. and Giovinetto, M.B. 1991. 'Mass balance of 
Antarctica and sea level change', in: Proceedings of 
International Conference on the Role of Polar Regions in 
Global Change. Fairbanks, Alaska, June 1990 (Arctic 
Consortium of the United States) 
Cess, R.D., G.L. Potter, M.-H. Zhang, J.-P. Blanchet, S. 
Chalita, R. Colman, D.A. Dazlich, A.D. Del Genio, V. 
Dymnikov, V. Galin, D. Jerrett, E. Keup, A.A. Lacis, 
H. Le Trent, X . -Z. Liang, J.-F. Mahfouf, B.J. 
McAcaney, V.P. Meleshko, J.F.B. Mitchell, J.-J. 
Morcrette, P.M. Norris, D.A. randall, L. Rikus, E. 
Roeckner, J.-F. Royer, U . Schlese, D.A. Sheinin, J. M . 
Slingo, A.P. Sokolov, K.E. Taylor, W . M . Washington, 
R.T.Wetherald, and I. Yagai. 1991. Interpretation of 
snow-climate feedback as produced by 17 general 
circulation models. Science, Vol.253 pp. 888-892 
Clark, J.W., Armand P., and Matson M . 1986. 'Possible 
causes of plumes from Bennet Island, Soviet Far Arctic', 
American Association Petroleum Geologists Bulletin, 70, 
PP 574. 
Collett, T.S., Bird K.J., Pkvenvolden K.A. and Magoon 
L.B. 1988. 'Geological interrelations relative to gas 
hydrates within the North Slope of Alaska', USGS Open-
File Report 88-389, Menlo Park, California. 
Glotov, V.E. in press. 'Permafrost and northern (peaty) 
lands: the source and place of accumulation of gases 
which cause the "greenhouse effect" (within the USSR 
land)'. Contribution to: Permafrost and Periglacial 
Processes. 
102 
D. VIII Terrestrial component of the cryosphere 
IPCC 1990. aimate Change: Vie IPCC Impacts Assessment. 
(WJ McG Tegart, GW Sheldon, DC Griffiths, eds) 
Australian Government Publishing Service. Canberra. 
268pp. 
Judge A.S., Tucker C M . Pilon J.A., Moorman B.J. 1991 
'Remote Sensing of Permafrost by Ground Penetrating 
Radar at Two airports in Arctic Canada', Arctic pp.40-
48. 
Khalil, M . A . K . and Rasmussen, R.A. 1990. 'Atmospheric 
mediane: recent global trends'. Environmental Science 
and Technology. 24. pp.619-634. 
Koerner, R.M. 1989. 'Queen Elizabedi Island Glaciers', in: 
Chapter 6, Quaternary 
Geology of Canada and 
Greenland, ed. R.J. Fulton, Geological Survey of 
Canada, Geology of Canada, Volume k-1, p.464-477 
Koerner, R . M . and Fisher,D.A. 1990. ' A record of 
Holocene summer climate firom a Canadian High Arctic 
ice 
, Nature, 343:6259, pp. 630-631 
Koerner, R . M . and Brugman, M . M . 1991. 'Mass balance 
trends in the Canadian High Arctic and Western Cordil-
leran Glaciers over the past three decades'. Paper 
presented 
LAMAP 
symposium 
'Climate-dependent 
dynamics, energy and mass balance of polar glaciers and 
ice sheets', Vienna, August 1991. Abstract 
Koster E.A. 1991. 'Assessment of climate change impact in 
high-latitudinal regions'. Terra 103, pp. 3-13. 
Kvenvolden, K . A . , Lorenson, T.D. and Reeburgh, W.S. 
1992. 'Mediane in permafrost—Preliminary Studies at 
CRREL Permafrost Tunnel near Fox, Alaska', EOS 
pp 119 (Abstract volume, AGU). 
LaFleche P.T., Judge A.S., and Taylor A.E. 1987.'Applica-
tions of Geophysical Methods to Resource Development 
in Nordiern Canada', CIM Bulletin, 80, pp.78-87. 
Lingle, C.S., Brenner, A . C , Zwally, H.J., and DiMarzio, 
J.P. in press. 'Multi-year elevation changes near the 
western margin of the Greenland Ice Sheet from satellite 
radar altimetry', in: proceedings of the 'International 
Conference on the role of the Polar Regions in Global 
Change', University of Fairbanks, Alaska, August 1990. 
Melnikov, P.L 1991. A Brief Report of the 6ai Subgroup of 
the Second Working Group IPCC: The Climate Warming 
and Permafrost. 3pp. 
Morgan, V.I., Goodwin. I.D., Etheridge, D . M . and 
Wookey, C W . 1.991. 'Evidence from Antarctic ice cores 
for recent increases in snow accumulation'. Nature 354 
(6348): pp 58-60. 
Neave K.G., Judge A.S., Hunter J.A., and MacAuley H.A. 
1978. 'Offshore permafrost distribution in the Beaufort 
Sea as determined from temperature and seismic observa-
tions'. Geological Survey of Canada Paper 78-lC, 
pp.13-18. 
Nisbet E. 1990. 'Climate change and methane', Nature 347, 
pp.23. 
Robinson, D.A. and Dewey. K.F. 1991. 'Recent variations 
in Northern Hemisphere snow cover', in: Proceedings of 
the 15th Annual Climate Diagnostics Workshop, NOAA. 
Robinson, D.A., Keimig, F.T. and Dewey, K.F. 1991. 
'Recent variations in northern hemisphere Snow cover', 
in: Proc. Fifteenth Annual Climate Diagnostics Work-
shop, NOAA pp. 219T224. 
Rozenberg G., Henderson J.D., Sartorelli A . N . , and Judge 
A.S. 1985. 'Some aspects of transient electromagnetic 
sounding for permafrost delineation'. Workshop on 
Permafrost Geophysics, US Army CRREL Special 
Report 85-5, 118p. 
Ruddell, A.R. 1990. 'The glaciers of New Zealand's 
Southern Alps: A century of retreat', paper presented at 
ANZAAS Congress. Hobart, February 1990. 
Stuart R.A., Etkin D.A. and Judge A.S. 1991. 'Recent 
observations of air temperamre and snow depth in the 
Mackenzie Valley area and the implications on the 
stability of permafrost layers', Canadian Qimate Centre 
Report 91-2, 178pp. 
Stuart R.A. and Judge A.S. 1992. 'On die applicability of 
G C M estimates to scenarios of global warming in the 
Mackenzie Valley area', Qimatological Bulletin IS 
pp.148-169. 
Taylor A.E. 1991. 'Marine transgression, shoreline emer-
gence: evidence in sea-bed and terrestrial ground tem-
peratures of changing relative sea-levels, Arctic Canada', 
Journal of Geophysical Research 96B4, pp. 6893-6909 
Taylor A.E., Judge A.S. and Allen V. 1989. 'The automatic 
well temperature measuring system installed at Cape 
Allison C-47, offshore well, Arctic Islands of Canada. 
Part 2r-data retrieval and analysis of the ttiermal 
regime'. Journal of Canadian Petroleum Geology, 28 
pp.95-101. 
Todd et al. 1992 Zwally, H.J., Brenner, A . C , Major, J.A., 
Bindschadler, R.A. and Marsh, J.G. 1989. 'Growth of 
the Greenland Ice Sheet: Measurement', Science, 246, p. 
1587-1589 
Appendix A. Analysis of current activity on regional impacts of 
climate change 
steering Group: 
Dr S Zwerva (Netherlands) 
Dr W J McG Tegart (Australia) 
Dr Adejokun (Nigeria) 
Dr I Nazarov (Russia) 
Expert Consultants: 
Ms J Hellyer (Australia) 
Dr J Smit (Netherlands) 
Appendix A. Analysis of current activity on regional impacts of 
climate change 
1 Introduction 
During tlie preparation of the First Assessment Report, it 
became clear that there were considerable gaps in our 
understanding of the potential impacts of climate change, 
particularly in the developing countries. As a result of the 
mterest stimulated by the IPCC process and the activities 
of the World Climate Impact Studies Program, many 
coimtry studies were initiated to remedy the deficiencies. 
The Asia-Pacific Seminar on climate change held in 
Nagoya in Japan on 23-26 January 1991 brought together 
a number of new studies in countries in the region and 
provided an extremely useful supplementary data source. 
Before proceeding with any further, studies under the 
auspices of the IPCC, it was decided to survey the IPCC 
participating countries to assess the level of current activity 
and, in particular, identify regions where work was needed 
and issues which had not been identified in the six Tasks 
set by the IPCC Plenary. Accordingly, in June 1991, the 
Chairman of Working Group II circulated a questionnaire 
to all IPCC participating nations seeking their responses. 
Thirty-eight countries and eleven international organisa-
tions responded. 
2 Methodology of ass^sment of responses 
The responses were distributed through the IPCC Secre-
tariat to members of the Steering Group set up at the 
Working Group II meeting in Geneva. Three members of 
the Steering Group, namely Dr Zwerva, Dr Tegart and Dr 
Nazarov, carried out analyses of the available responses. 
These analyses were discussed at a meeting in Amsterdam 
on 28 October 1991. Somewhat different approaches were 
used by the three groups in the presentation of the data, 
however, the conclusions reached were essentially similar 
with regard to the areas needing attention. 
Attempts were made to increase the sample size by 
seeking further responses 
at the IPCC Plenary in 
November 1991. A few more countries responded follow-
ing that meeting. 
3 Results of the survey 
Thirty-eight countries and eleven international NGOs 
responded to the survey. There was a particularly low level 
of response from Asian, North and Central American and 
South Pacific island countries. While there was a good 
response from developed countries, there were notable 
exceptions, including the United States and Germany. 
The countries which responded were allocated to the 
six regions used by W M O (see Table 1) while the 
international organisations that responded are listed in 
Table 2. 
4 Issues arising from the responses 
Areas of activity 
The most extensive amount of work has been undertaken 
in OECD countries, where impacts research has been 
undertaken across all sectors listed in the questionnaire. 
In developing regions the amount of research activity 
varies widely. In the eleven African countries which 
responded, although there had often been extensive 
consultation, only two countries were undertaking any 
activity at all (these being Senegal and Cote DTvoire 
which are undertaking a wide range of work on impacts). 
This and the lack of overall response would indicate that 
little substantial work has been done in this region on 
impacts. 
In contrast, research activity in some South American 
and Asian countries, notably Chile, China, Saudia Arabia, 
Vietnam and Venezuela cover quite a range of sectors. 
However, the other countries which responded had a 
smaller range of activity, and given the low level of 
response from these regions, it is not possible to extrapo-
late from such a small sample. 
Several of the intemational NGOs which replied, 
particularly United Nations bodies, are carrying out 
impacts research in a range of sectors. It would appear that 
much of this work is being undertaken in developing 
countries. 
Several countries have also undertaken work in a 
number of areas of activity outside the IPCC Working 
Group II sectors, including impacts on: 
social issues 
tourism 
UV-B radiation 
economic issues 
recreation 
population 
desertification. 
Priority areas 
Of the sectors listed in the questionnaire, sectors a, b, c, 
d and e were all identified as priority areas for future 
action. Areas a, c and d were the sectors most often 
Appendix A 
105 
emphasised in the developing countries. A few island 
countries also identified cyclones and extreme climate 
events. Sectors outside the ones identified by the IPCC 
include: 
economic issues 
cyclones and other extreme events 
desertification 
recreation and tourism. 
Areas for future attention by IPCC 
All regions suggested sectoral areas, other than those listed 
in the questionnaire, which require further attention by the 
IPCC. In part;icular, African and Asian countries suggested 
more activity on desertification. The suggested areas are: 
desertification 
global security 
UV-B radiation 
cyclones and other extreme events 
the ionosphere 
recreation and tourism 
fishing 
aquatic ecosystems 
migration 
social and economic issues 
mountam regions 
biological adaptations. 
Assistance required 
Only developing countries identified a need for assistance, 
generally in the form of grants, expert advice, training and 
international seminars. Two developed countries indicated 
that grants could be utilised. 
Table 1: 
Countries which responded (by WMO region) 
I Africa 
11 Asia 
Cote d'lvoire 
Gambia 
Guinea 
Malawi 
Mauritius 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Tunisia 
Uganda 
Zimbabwe 
in South America 
China 
Japan 
Pakistan 
Saudi Arabia 
Vietnam 
rV North and Central America 
Argentina 
Bahamas 
Bolivia* 
Canada 
Chile* 
Cuba 
Paraguay* 
Uruguay* 
Venezuela* 
*information on impact studies only 
V South-West Pacific 
VI Europe 
Australia 
Denmark 
New Zealand 
Finland 
Papua New Guinea 
France 
Philippines 
Ireland 
The Netherlands 
Norway 
Poland 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
Russia 
106 
Table 2: 
International organisations which responded 
FAO 
Food and Agriculture Organisation 
FOE 
Friends of die Earth (UK) 
GEMS 
Global Environment Monitoring System 
(UNEP) 
ICSU 
International Council of Scientific 
Unions 
IHP 
International Hydrological Program 
(UNESCO) 
HASA 
International Institute for Applied Sys-
tems Analysis 
ILO 
International Labour office 
IOC 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission 
OECD 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development 
UNESCO 
United Nations Educational, Scientific 
and Culmral Organisation 
WCI 
World Coal Institute 
Activity areas and degree of consultation 
Activity areas 
a) 
Agriculture and forestry 
b) 
Natural terrestrial ecosystems 
c) 
Hydrology and water resources 
d) 
Energy, industry, transportation, human settle-
ments, health and air quality 
e) 
World's oceans and coastal zones 
f) 
Cryosphere including the special problems of 
permafrost 
I 
Africa 
Country 
Consultation 
Activity areas 
Cote D'lvoire 
extensive 
a, b, c, d 
Gambia 
extensive 
none 
Guinea 
limited 
none 
Malawi 
limited 
none 
Mauritius 
extensive 
available in future 
Rwanda 
extensive 
none 
Senegal 
limited 
a, b, c, d, e 
Seychelles 
none 
none 
Tunisia 
not given 
not given 
Uganda 
extensive 
none 
Zimbabwe 
not given 
none 
Appendix A 
107 
II Asia 
China 
Japan 
Indonesia 
Pakistan 
Saudi Arabia 
Vietaam 
extensive 
limited 
limited 
limited 
limited 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
social & economic impacts 
e 
no specific areas, 
general study only 
c, d, e 
desertification 
a, b, c, d, e 
III South America 
Argentina 
Bolivia 
Chile 
Paraguay 
Uruguay 
Venezuela 
limited 
extensive 
a, b, c, d 
none 
a, b, b, d, e 
unsure 
unsure 
a, b, c, d, e 
IV North and Central America 
Bahamas 
not given 
Canada 
extensive 
Cuba 
limited 
none 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
socioeconomic impacts 
recreation, population 
a, b, c, d (human settle), e 
V South-West Pacific 
Australia 
New Zealand 
Papua New Guinea 
Philippines 
extensive 
limited 
limited 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
UV-B radiation 
a, b, c, e, f 
d, e 
a, c 
VI Europe 
Denmark 
Finland 
France 
Ireland 
The Netherlands 
Norway 
Poland 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
Russia 
limited 
extensive 
extensive 
limited 
limited 
extensive 
extensive 
extensive 
extensive 
extensive 
a, b, c, d, e 
tourism 
economy 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
a, b, c 
a, b, c, d, e 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
a, b, c, e 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
a, b, c, d, e, f 
a, b, c, d, e 
108 
Appendix A 
Highest priority areas 
Country 
I Africa 
Cote DTvoire 
Gambia 
Guinea 
Malawi 
Mauritius 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Tunisia 
Uganda 
Zimbabwe 
Priority areas 
a, b, c 
a, b, c, d (human settlements & health); 
e (Coastal zones) 
a, b, c 
estimates of regional ecological and socioeconomic impacts and baseline conditions; 
case studies of the above; 
preparation of a synthesis report 
c 
. 
sea-level rise & impacts on coastal zone; 
agriculture, sugarcane; 
increased, cyclone impact on coastal areas 
a, c, d 
a, c, d 
coastal erosion; 
impact on ocean environment within EEZ; 
extreme events, eg tropical cyclones and storm surges 
a, c 
ecosystems affected by desertification 
a, c, d 
a, c, d 
tourism & recreation 
II Asia 
China 
Japan 
Pakistan 
Saudi Arabia 
Vietnam 
a, c, d 
no priorities set 
a, c, d 
c 
desertification; 
sea-level rise; 
increased frequency of extreme weather events 
a, b, c, e 
III South America 
Argentina 
Venezuela 
a, c, d 
a, c 
energy, industry, transportation, air quality, precipitation pattems 
Country 
Priority areas 
IV North and Central America 
Bahamas 
Canada 
Cuba 
none given 
a, b, c, f 
a, c, e 
Appendix A 
V South-West Pacific 
Australia 
New Zealand 
Papua New Guinea 
Philippines 
a, c 
natural ecosystems (including marine); 
energy and industry 
coastal, agricultural, indigenous ecosystems 
e 
impact of extreme events such as cyclones 
a, d 
energy, industry, human settlements 
VI Europe 
Denniark 
Finland 
France 
Ireland 
The Netherlands 
Norway 
Poland 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
Russia 
a, b, c, d, e 
tourism 
economy 
boreal forest/ forestry/ peatlands 
hydrology/ freshwater ecosystems/ water resources 
Baltic Sea 
Forests, soils and grasslands 
a, b, c, d, e 
coastal zone management 
socioeconomic consequences & long-term sustainable development 
ecosystems 
How fast ecosystems can change before irreversible damage; 
Gulf Stream; 
effect of climate change on other environmental monitoring programs; 
economic consequences of climate change; 
a, b, c 
energy supply; 
mountain areas; 
agriculture; 
critical sensitivities (soil, water, flora, fauna); 
hydrology; 
coastal and estuarine zones 
agriculture and forestry; 
hydrology and water resources; 
energy, industry and transportation; 
cryosphere 
Areas for future IPCC attention 
I Africa 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Tunisia 
desertification 
drought and desertification 
fisheries; 
tourism 
desertification 
110 
Appendix A 
11 Asia 
China 
Saudi Arabia 
desertificatipn; 
extreme events 
desertification 
III South America 
Argentina 
Venezuela 
interrelations between upper and middle atmosphere (ionosphere) 
aquatic ecosystems 
IV North and Central America 
Canada 
Cuba 
global security 
tourism 
V 
South-West Pacific 
Australia 
New Zealand 
fisheries — marine and inland; 
recreation and tourism; 
ihigration; 
aquaculture; 
social stracture; 
economy; 
integrated socioeconomic issues 
pastures 
Papua New Guinea impact of extreme events such as cyclones 
VI Europe 
The Netherlands 
Norway 
Switzerland 
United Kingdom 
impact of UV-B radiation on health; crops and ecosystems; 
socioeconomic impacts 
Ecoiiomic consequences 
Mountain regions; 
human perception of climate change problems; 
risk analysis 
Biological adaptations 
Assistance required 
. I Africa 
Cote d'lvoire 
Gambia 
Guinea 
subsidise research and framing at specialised centres; 
assist with information and publicity 
national seminar series; 
consultancy mission to identify needs; 
grants, expertise and training; 
technical and financial assistance in cooperation of an industrialised countiy 
external training; 
provision of experts 
Appendix A 
111 
provision of experts; 
training schemes at overseas centres 
grants, expert advice, seminars 
provision of grants and experts 
training at overseas centres 
equipment for surveillance systems 
international association of national experts; 
provision of experts for short periods in case of emergency; 
IPCC mformation exchange seminars; 
vulnerabihty to SLR case study for the Seychelles; 
grants or equipment for data acquisition 
grants; 
training within the country or at centres overseas 
grants, expert advice, training 
none 
II Asia 
none 
grants 
training, provision of experts 
none 
III South America 
Argentina 
assistance will be required but not specified - IV WGII session will analyse this matter 
• 
Venezuela 
grants 
IV North and Central America 
• 
provision of equipment from EEC 
provision of computers and software and training; 
provision of methodology for impact assessment 
V South-West Pacific 
although no assistance specifically required there is further research that could be undertaken if 
additional funds were available 
provision of experts 
training, participation in international fora 
VI Europe 
France 
possibly grants 
All other participating countries gave a nil response. 
Malawi 
Mauritius 
Rwanda 
Senegal 
Seychelles 
Tunisia 
Uganda 
Zimbabwe 
Chma 
Pakistan 
Saudi Arabia 
Vietnam 
Bahamas 
Cuba 
Australia 
Papua New Guinea 
Philippines 
112 
Appendix A 
Responses from international non-government organisations 
Organisation 
Activity areas 
Int'l Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
a, b, c, d 
International Labour Office 
d — employment 
Friends of the Earth (UK) 
World Coal Institute 
Global Environment Monitoring System 
(UNEP) 
OECD 
International Oceanographic Commission 
International Council of Scientific Unions 
methodology for climate impact 
assessment, especially re a and d 
socioeconomic impacts 
work re e and f, with linkages 
to b,c and d 
IGBP Project re b 
Proposed project re e 
Priority areas 
a — water resources 
b — biological diversity 
e — sea-level rise 
- investigating historical data 
- quantifying impacts at pres-
sure points 
- physical and economic im-
pacts over a longer time 
horizon 
- connecting physical impacts 
with economic and social im-
pacts 
Food and Agricultural Organisation 
a, c, e 
UNESCO 
- International Hydrological Programme 
c 
- Working Group on Mean Sea-Level 
Rise and its influence on the Coastal Zone 
e 
Appendix B. Organisation of IPCC and Working Group II 
W M O 
UNEP 
IIMTERGOVERNMEIMTAL PANEL ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
Prof. B. Bolin (Sweden) 
WORKING GROUP I 
SCIEIMCE 
Sir J o h n H o u g h t o n (UK) 
WORKING GROUP II 
IMPACTS 
Prof. Y . Izrael (Russia) 
WORKING GROUP 111 
RESPONSE 
Dr R. Reinstein ( U S A ) 
IPCC 
Chairman: 
Vice Chairman: 
Rapporteur: 
Secretary: 
Professor B BoUn (Sweden) 
Dr A Algain (Saudi Arabia) 
Dr J A Adejokun (Nigeria) 
Dr N Sundararaman (WMO) 
Working Group II 
Chairman: 
Vice Chairmen: 
Professor Yu A Izrael (Russia) 
Professor 0 Canziani (Argentina) 
Dr S Nishioka (Japan) 
Professor R S Odingo (Kenya) 
Dr W J McG Tegart (Australia) 
Glossary of acronyms 
AAC 
Atmospheric Action Centres 
ACSYS 
Arctic Climate System Study 
AMAP 
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme 
BCC 
Basal Cell Carcinoma 
BRE 
Building Research Establishment (Watford, UK) 
CERN 
Chinese Ecological Research Network 
CSM 
Climate System Monitoring (Project) 
ECN 
Environmental Change Network (UK) 
ENSO 
El Nino/Soudiern Oscillation 
FAO 
Food and Agriculmre Organisation 
FOE 
Friends of the Earth 
GCM 
General Circulation Model 
GCOS 
Global Climate Observing System 
GEMS 
Global Environmental Monitoring System 
GHG 
Greenhouse Gas(es) 
GIS 
Global Information System 
GISS 
Goddard Institute of Space Studies 
GOOS 
Global Ocean Observing System 
IBP 
International Biological Programme 
ICSU 
• International Council of Scientific Unions 
IGBP 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 
IGOSS 
Integrated Global Ocean Services System 
IHP 
International Hydrological Program 
n A A S A 
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis 
ILO 
International Labour Office 
INC 
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee 
IOC 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
IOC 
International Ozone Commission 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
LICC 
Landscape-ecological Impact of Climate Change 
MAB 
Man and the Bioshphere 
. 
MINK 
Missouri-Iowa-Nebraska-Kansas 
OECD 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
SAT 
Surface Air Temperature 
see 
Squamous Cell Carcinoma 
TEMA 
Terrestrial Ecosystem Monitoring and Assessment 
UNCED 
United Nations 
UNEP 
United Nations Environment Programme 
UNESCO 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
USDOE . 
United States Department of the Environment 
US EPA 
United States Environmental Protection Authority 
US NSF 
United States 
WCDP 
World Climate Date Programme 
WCI 
World Coal Institute 
WCRP 
World Climate Research Programme 
WMO 
World Meteorological Organization 
