 
Annexes
541
AI
Coordinating Editor: 
J.B. Robin Matthews (France/UK)
Editorial Team:
Mustafa Babiker (Sudan), Heleen de Coninck (Netherlands/EU), Sarah Connors (France/UK), Renée 
van Diemen (UK/Netherlands), Riyanti Djalante (Japan/Indonesia), Kristie L. Ebi (USA), Neville 
Ellis (Australia), Andreas Fischlin (Switzerland), Tania Guillén Bolaños (Germany/Nicaragua), 
Kiane de Kleijne (Netherlands/EU), Valérie Masson-Delmotte (France), Richard Millar (UK), Elvira 
S. Poloczanska (Germany/UK), Hans-Otto Pörtner (Germany), Andy Reisinger (New Zealand), Joeri 
Rogelj (Austria/Belgium), Sonia I. Seneviratne (Switzerland), Chandni Singh (India), Petra Tschakert 
(Australia/Austria), Nora M. Weyer (Germany)
 
 
Notes: 
Note that subterms are in italics beneath main terms.
This glossary defines some specific terms as the Lead Authors intend them to be interpreted in the 
context of this report. Blue, italicized words indicate that the term is defined in the Glossary.
This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2018: Annex I: Glossary [Matthews, J.B.R. (ed.)]. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on 
the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable 
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, 
P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, 
M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK 
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 541-562. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157940.008.
 
Annex I: Glossary
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
542
1.5°C pathway See Pathways.
1.5°C warmer worlds Projected worlds in which global warming 
has reached and, unless otherwise indicated, been limited to 1.5°C 
above pre-industrial levels. There is no single 1.5°C warmer world, 
and projections of 1.5°C warmer worlds look different depending on 
whether it is considered on a near-term transient trajectory or at climate 
equilibrium after several millennia, and, in both cases, if it occurs with or 
without overshoot. Within the 21st century, several aspects play a role 
for the assessment of risk and potential impacts in 1.5°C warmer worlds: 
the possible occurrence, magnitude and duration of an overshoot; the 
way in which emissions reductions are achieved; the ways in which 
policies might be able to influence the resilience of human and natural 
systems; and the nature of the regional and sub-regional risks. Beyond 
the 21st century, several elements of the climate system would continue 
to change even if the global mean temperatures remain stable, including 
further increases of sea level. 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development A UN resolution 
in September 2015 adopting a plan of action for people, planet and 
prosperity in a new global development framework anchored in 17 
Sustainable Development Goals (UN, 2015). See also Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs).
Acceptability of policy or system change The extent to which 
a policy or system change is evaluated unfavourably or favourably, 
or rejected or supported, by members of the general public (public 
acceptability) or politicians or governments (political acceptability). 
Acceptability may vary from totally unacceptable/fully rejected to totally 
acceptable/fully supported; individuals may differ in how acceptable 
policies or system changes are believed to be.
Adaptability See Adaptive capacity.
Adaptation In human systems, the process of adjustment to actual 
or expected climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm or exploit 
beneficial opportunities. In natural systems, the process of adjustment 
to actual climate and its effects; human intervention may facilitate 
adjustment to expected climate and its effects. 
Incremental adaptation
Adaptation that maintains the essence and integrity of a system or 
process at a given scale. In some cases, incremental adaptation can 
accrue to result in transformational adaptation (Termeer et al., 2017; 
Tàbara et al., 2018). 
Transformational adaptation
Adaptation that changes the fundamental attributes of a socio-
ecological system in anticipation of climate change and its impacts.
Adaptation limits 
The point at which an actor’s objectives (or system needs) cannot be 
secured from intolerable risks through adaptive actions. 
• Hard adaptation limit: No adaptive actions are possible to avoid  
 intolerable risks. 
• Soft adaptation limit: Options are currently not available to avoid  
 intolerable risks through adaptive action.
See also Adaptation options, Adaptive capacity and Maladaptive 
actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Adaptation limits  See Adaptation.
Adaptation options The array of strategies and measures that are 
available and appropriate for addressing adaptation. They include a 
wide range of actions that can be categorized as structural, institutional, 
ecological or behavioural. See also Adaptation, Adaptive capacity and 
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation pathways See Pathways.
Adaptive capacity The ability of systems, institutions, humans and 
other organisms to adjust to potential damage, to take advantage of 
opportunities, or to respond to consequences. This glossary entry builds 
from definitions used in previous IPCC reports and the Millennium 
Ecosystem Assessment (MEA, 2005). See also Adaptation, Adaptation 
options and Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptive governance See Governance.
Aerosol A suspension of airborne solid or liquid particles, with a 
typical size between a few nanometres and 10 μm that reside in the 
atmosphere for at least several hours. The term aerosol, which includes 
both the particles and the suspending gas, is often used in this report 
in its plural form to mean aerosol particles. Aerosols may be of either 
natural or anthropogenic origin. Aerosols may influence climate in 
several ways: through both interactions that scatter and/or absorb 
radiation and through interactions with cloud microphysics and other 
cloud properties, or upon deposition on snow- or ice-covered surfaces 
thereby altering their albedo and contributing to climate feedback. 
Atmospheric aerosols, whether natural or anthropogenic, originate from 
two different pathways: emissions of primary particulate matter (PM), 
and formation of secondary PM from gaseous precursors. The bulk of 
aerosols are of natural origin. Some scientists use group labels that refer 
to the chemical composition, namely: sea salt, organic carbon, black 
carbon (BC), mineral species (mainly desert dust), sulphate, nitrate, and 
ammonium. These labels are, however, imperfect as aerosols combine 
particles to create complex mixtures. See also Short-lived climate forcers 
(SLCF) and Black carbon (BC).
Afforestation Planting of new forests on lands that historically have 
not contained forests. For a discussion of the term forest and related 
terms such as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC 
Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000), 
information provided by the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2013) and the report on Definitions and 
Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-
induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of Other Vegetation 
Types (IPCC, 2003). See also Reforestation, Deforestation, and Reducing 
Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Agreement In this report, the degree of agreement within the 
scientific body of knowledge on a particular finding is assessed based on 
multiple lines of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding, theory, data, 
models, expert judgement) and expressed qualitatively (Mastrandrea et 
al., 2010). See also Evidence, Confidence, Likelihood and Uncertainty.
Air pollution Degradation of air quality with negative effects 
on human health or the natural or built environment due to the 
introduction, by natural processes or human activity, into the atmosphere 
of substances (gases, aerosols) which have a direct (primary pollutants) 
or indirect (secondary pollutants) harmful effect. See also Aerosol and 
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Albedo The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or 
object, often expressed as a percentage. Snow-covered surfaces have a 
high albedo, the surface albedo of soils ranges from high to low, and 
vegetation-covered surfaces and the oceans have a low albedo. The 
Earth’s planetary albedo changes mainly through varying cloudiness and 
changes in snow, ice, leaf area and land cover.
Ambient persuasive technology Technological systems and 
environments that are designed to change human cognitive processing, 
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
543
attitudes and behaviours without the need for the user’s conscious 
attention.
Anomaly The deviation of a variable from its value averaged over a 
reference period.
Anthropocene The ‘Anthropocene’ is a proposed new geological 
epoch resulting from significant human-driven changes to the structure 
and functioning of the Earth System, including the climate system. 
Originally proposed in the Earth System science community in 2000, the 
proposed new epoch is undergoing a formalization process within the 
geological community based on the stratigraphic evidence that human 
activities have changed the Earth System to the extent of forming 
geological deposits with a signature that is distinct from those of the 
Holocene, and which will remain in the geological record. Both the 
stratigraphic and Earth System approaches to defining the Anthropocene 
consider the mid-20th Century to be the most appropriate starting date, 
although others have been proposed and continue to be discussed. The 
Anthropocene concept has been taken up by a diversity of disciplines 
and the public to denote the substantive influence humans have had on 
the state, dynamics and future of the Earth System. See also Holocene.
Anthropogenic Resulting from or produced by human activities. See 
also Anthropogenic emissions and Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic emissions Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs), 
precursors of GHGs and aerosols caused by human activities. These 
activities include the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, land use 
and land-use changes (LULUC), livestock production, fertilisation, waste 
management and industrial processes. See also Anthropogenic and 
Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic removals Anthropogenic removals refer to the 
withdrawal of GHGs from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate 
human activities. These include enhancing biological sinks of CO2 and 
using chemical engineering to achieve long-term removal and storage. 
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related 
sources, which alone does not remove CO2 in the atmosphere, can reduce 
atmospheric CO2 if it is combined with bioenergy production (BECCS). See 
also Anthropogenic emissions, Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture 
and storage (BECCS) and Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS).
Artificial intelligence (AI) Computer systems able to perform tasks 
normally requiring human intelligence, such as visual perception and 
speech recognition.
Atmosphere The gaseous envelope surrounding the earth, divided 
into five layers – the troposphere which contains half of the Earth’s 
atmosphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the thermosphere, 
and the exosphere, which is the outer limit of the atmosphere. The dry 
atmosphere consists almost entirely of nitrogen (78.1% volume mixing 
ratio) and oxygen (20.9% volume mixing ratio), together with a number 
of trace gases, such as argon (0.93 % volume mixing ratio), helium and 
radiatively active greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as carbon dioxide (CO2) 
(0.04% volume mixing ratio) and ozone (O3). In addition, the atmosphere 
contains the GHG water vapour (H2O), whose amounts are highly 
variable but typically around 1% volume mixing ratio. The atmosphere 
also contains clouds and aerosols. See also Troposphere, Stratosphere, 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) and Hydrological cycle.
Atmosphere–ocean general circulation model (AOGCM) See 
Climate model.
Attribution See Detection and attribution.
Baseline scenario In much of the literature the term is also 
synonymous with the term business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, although 
the term BAU has fallen out of favour because the idea of business as 
usual in century-long socio-economic projections is hard to fathom. In 
the context of transformation pathways, the term baseline scenarios 
refers to scenarios that are based on the assumption that no mitigation 
policies or measures will be implemented beyond those that are already 
in force and/or are legislated or planned to be adopted. Baseline 
scenarios are not intended to be predictions of the future, but rather 
counterfactual constructions that can serve to highlight the level of 
emissions that would occur without further policy effort. Typically, 
baseline scenarios are then compared to mitigation scenarios that are 
constructed to meet different goals for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, 
atmospheric concentrations or temperature change. The term baseline 
scenario is often used interchangeably with reference scenario and no 
policy scenario. See also Emission scenario and Mitigation scenario.
Battery electric vehicle (BEV) See Electric vehicle (EV).
Biochar Stable, carbon-rich material produced by heating biomass 
in an oxygen-limited environment. Biochar may be added to soils to 
improve soil functions and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 
biomass and soils, and for carbon sequestration. This definition builds 
from IBI (2018).
Biodiversity Biological diversity means the variability among living 
organisms from all sources, including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and 
other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they 
are part; this includes diversity within species, between species and of 
ecosystems (UN, 1992).
Bioenergy Energy derived from any form of biomass or its metabolic 
by-products. See also Biomass and Biofuel.
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage 
(BECCS) Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) technology applied 
to a bioenergy facility. Note that depending on the total emissions of 
the BECCS supply chain, carbon dioxide (CO2) can be removed from the 
atmosphere. See also Bioenergy and Carbon dioxide capture and storage 
(CCS).
Biofuel A fuel, generally in liquid form, produced from biomass. 
Biofuels currently include bioethanol from sugarcane or maize, biodiesel 
from canola or soybeans, and black liquor from the paper-manufacturing 
process. See also Biomass and Bioenergy.
Biomass  Living or recently dead organic material. See also Bioenergy 
and Biofuel.
Biophilic urbanism Designing cities with green roofs, green walls 
and green balconies to bring nature into the densest parts of cities in 
order to provide green infrastructure and human health benefits. See also 
Green infrastructure.
Black carbon (BC) Operationally defined aerosol species based on 
measurement of light absorption and chemical reactivity and/or thermal 
stability. It is sometimes referred to as soot. BC is mostly formed by the 
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, biofuels and biomass but it also 
occurs naturally. It stays in the atmosphere only for days or weeks. It is 
the most strongly light-absorbing component of particulate matter (PM) 
and has a warming effect by absorbing heat into the atmosphere and 
reducing the albedo when deposited on snow or ice. See also Aerosol.
Blue carbon Blue carbon is the carbon captured by living organisms 
in coastal (e.g., mangroves, salt marshes, seagrasses) and marine 
ecosystems, and stored in biomass and sediments.
Burden sharing (also referred to as Effort sharing)  In the 
context of mitigation, burden sharing refers to sharing the effort of 
reducing the sources or enhancing the sinks of greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
544
from historical or projected levels, usually allocated by some criteria, as 
well as sharing the cost burden across countries.
Business as usual (BAU) See Baseline scenario.
Carbon budget This term refers to three concepts in the literature: 
(1) an assessment of carbon cycle sources and sinks on a global level, 
through the synthesis of evidence for fossil fuel and cement emissions, 
land-use change emissions, ocean and land CO2 sinks, and the resulting 
atmospheric CO2 growth rate. This is referred to as the global carbon 
budget; (2) the estimated cumulative amount of global carbon dioxide 
emissions that that is estimated to limit global surface temperature 
to a given level above a reference period, taking into account global 
surface temperature contributions of other GHGs and climate forcers; (3) 
the distribution of the carbon budget defined under (2) to the regional, 
national, or sub-national level based on considerations of equity, costs or 
efficiency. See also Remaining carbon budget.
Carbon cycle The term used to describe the flow of carbon (in 
various forms, e.g., as carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon in biomass, and 
carbon dissolved in the ocean as carbonate and bicarbonate) through 
the atmosphere, hydrosphere, terrestrial and marine biosphere and 
lithosphere. In this report, the reference unit for the global carbon cycle 
is GtCO2 or GtC (Gigatonne of carbon = 1 GtC = 1015 grams of carbon. 
This corresponds to 3.667 GtCO2).
Carbon dioxide (CO2) A naturally occurring gas, CO2 is also a 
by-product of burning fossil fuels (such as oil, gas and coal), of burning 
biomass, of land-use changes (LUC) and of industrial processes (e.g., 
cement production). It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas 
(GHG) that affects the Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas 
against which other GHGs are measured and therefore has a global 
warming potential (GWP) of 1. See also Greenhouse gas (GHG).
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) A process in which 
a relatively pure stream of carbon dioxide (CO2) from industrial and 
energy-related sources is separated (captured), conditioned, compressed 
and transported to a storage location for long-term isolation from the 
atmosphere. Sometimes referred to as Carbon capture and storage. See 
also Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU), Bioenergy with carbon 
dioxide capture and storage (BECCS) and Uptake.
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU) A process in which 
CO2 is captured and then used to produce a new product. If the CO2 is 
stored in a product for a climate-relevant time horizon, this is referred 
to as carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS). Only then, 
and only combined with CO2 recently removed from the atmosphere, can 
CCUS lead to carbon dioxide removal. CCU is sometimes referred to as 
carbon dioxide capture and use. See also Carbon dioxide capture and 
storage (CCS).
Carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) See 
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU).
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) Anthropogenic activities removing 
CO2 from the atmosphere and durably storing it in geological, terrestrial, 
or ocean reservoirs, or in products. It includes existing and potential 
anthropogenic enhancement of biological or geochemical sinks and 
direct air capture and storage, but excludes natural CO2 uptake not 
directly caused by human activities. See also Mitigation (of climate 
change), Greenhouse gas removal (GGR), Negative emissions, Direct air 
carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS) and Sink.
Carbon intensity The amount of emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
released per unit of another variable such as gross domestic product 
(GDP), output energy use or transport.
Carbon neutrality See Net zero CO2 emissions.
Carbon price The price for avoided or released carbon dioxide (CO2) 
or CO2-equivalent emissions. This may refer to the rate of a carbon tax, 
or the price of emission permits. In many models that are used to assess 
the economic costs of mitigation, carbon prices are used as a proxy to 
represent the level of effort in mitigation policies.
Carbon sequestration The process of storing carbon in a carbon 
pool. See also Blue carbon, Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS), 
Uptake and Sink.
Carbon sink See Sink.
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) A mechanism defined 
under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol through which investors 
(governments or companies) from developed (Annex B) countries may 
finance greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction or removal projects 
in developing countries (Non-Annex B), and receive Certified Emission 
Reduction Units (CERs) for doing so. The CERs can be credited towards the 
commitments of the respective developed countries. The CDM is intended 
to facilitate the two objectives of promoting sustainable development 
(SD) in developing countries and of helping industrialised countries to 
reach their emissions commitments in a cost-effective way. 
Climate Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the average 
weather, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in terms of 
the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period of time 
ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The classical 
period for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined by the World 
Meteorological Organization. The relevant quantities are most often 
surface variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind. Climate 
in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical description, of the 
climate system.
Climate change Climate change refers to a change in the state of the 
climate that can be identified (e.g., by using statistical tests) by changes 
in the mean and/or the variability of its properties and that persists for an 
extended period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due 
to natural internal processes or external forcings such as modulations 
of the solar cycles, volcanic eruptions and persistent anthropogenic 
changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that 
the Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in its Article 
1, defines climate change as: ‘a change of climate which is attributed 
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the 
global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability 
observed over comparable time periods.’ The UNFCCC thus makes a 
distinction between climate change attributable to human activities 
altering the atmospheric composition and climate variability attributable 
to natural causes. See also Climate variability, Global warming, Ocean 
acidification (OA) and Detection and attribution.
Climate change commitment Climate change commitment is 
defined as the unavoidable future climate change resulting from inertia 
in the geophysical and socio-economic systems. Different types of climate 
change commitment are discussed in the literature (see subterms). 
Climate change commitment is usually quantified in terms of the further 
change in temperature, but it includes other future changes, for example 
in the hydrological cycle, in extreme weather events, in extreme climate 
events, and in sea level.
Constant composition commitment 
The constant composition commitment is the remaining climate change 
that would result if atmospheric composition, and hence radiative forcing, 
were held fixed at a given value. It results from the thermal inertia of the 
ocean and slow processes in the cryosphere and land surface.
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
545
Constant emissions commitment 
The constant emissions commitment is the committed climate change 
that would result from keeping anthropogenic emissions constant.
Zero emissions commitment 
The zero emissions commitment is the climate change commitment 
that would result from setting anthropogenic emissions to zero. It is 
determined by both inertia in physical climate system components 
(ocean, cryosphere, land surface) and carbon cycle inertia. 
Feasible scenario commitment 
The feasible scenario commitment is the climate change that corresponds 
to the lowest emission scenario judged feasible.
Infrastructure commitment
The infrastructure commitment is the climate change that would result 
if existing greenhouse gas and aerosol emitting infrastructure were used 
until the end of its expected lifetime. 
Climate-compatible development (CCD) A form of development 
building on climate strategies that embrace development goals and 
development strategies that integrate climate risk management, 
adaptation and mitigation. This definition builds from Mitchell and 
Maxwell (2010).
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event) The 
occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above (or below) a 
threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the range of observed 
values of the variable. For simplicity, both extreme weather events and 
extreme climate events are referred to collectively as ‘climate extremes’. 
See also Extreme weather event.
Climate feedback An interaction in which a perturbation in one 
climate quantity causes a change in a second and the change in the 
second quantity ultimately leads to an additional change in the first. A 
negative feedback is one in which the initial perturbation is weakened 
by the changes it causes; a positive feedback is one in which the initial 
perturbation is enhanced. The initial perturbation can either be externally 
forced or arise as part of internal variability.
Climate governance See Governance.
Climate justice See Justice.
Climate model A numerical representation of the climate system 
based on the physical, chemical and biological properties of its 
components, their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting 
for some of its known properties. The climate system can be represented 
by models of varying complexity; that is, for any one component or 
combination of components a spectrum or hierarchy of models can be 
identified, differing in such aspects as the number of spatial dimensions, 
the extent to which physical, chemical or biological processes are 
explicitly represented, or the level at which empirical parametrizations 
are involved. There is an evolution towards more complex models 
with interactive chemistry and biology. Climate models are applied as 
a research tool to study and simulate the climate and for operational 
purposes, including monthly, seasonal and interannual climate 
predictions. See also Earth system model (ESM).
Climate neutrality Concept of a state in which human activities 
result in no net effect on the climate system. Achieving such a state would 
require balancing of residual emissions with emission (carbon dioxide) 
removal as well as accounting for regional or local biogeophysical effects 
of human activities that, for example, affect surface albedo or local 
climate. See also Net zero CO2 emissions.
Climate projection A climate projection is the simulated response 
of the climate system to a scenario of future emission or concentration of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols, generally derived using climate 
models. Climate projections are distinguished from climate predictions 
by their dependence on the emission/concentration/radiative forcing 
scenario used, which is in turn based on assumptions concerning, for 
example, future socioeconomic and technological developments that 
may or may not be realized.
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) Trajectories 
that strengthen sustainable development and efforts to eradicate 
poverty and reduce inequalities while promoting fair and cross-scalar 
adaptation to and resilience in a changing climate. They raise the ethics, 
equity and feasibility aspects of the deep societal transformation needed 
to drastically reduce emissions to limit global warming (e.g., to 1.5°C) 
and achieve desirable and liveable futures and well-being for all.
Climate-resilient pathways Iterative processes for managing 
change within complex systems in order to reduce disruptions and 
enhance opportunities associated with climate change. See also 
Development pathways (under Pathways), Transformation pathways 
(under Pathways), and Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs).
Climate sensitivity Climate sensitivity refers to the change in the 
annual global mean surface temperature in response to a change in the 
atmospheric CO2 concentration or other radiative forcing.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity
Refers to the equilibrium (steady state) change in the annual global 
mean surface temperature following a doubling of the atmospheric 
carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration. As a true equilibrium is challenging 
to define in climate models with dynamic oceans, the equilibrium climate 
sensitivity is often estimated through experiments in AOGCMs where CO2 
levels are either quadrupled or doubled from pre-industrial levels and 
which are integrated for 100-200 years. The climate sensitivity parameter 
(units: °C (W m–2)–1) refers to the equilibrium change in the annual global 
mean surface temperature following a unit change in radiative forcing.
Effective climate sensitivity
An estimate of the global mean surface temperature response to a 
doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration that is 
evaluated from model output or observations for evolving non-equilibrium 
conditions. It is a measure of the strengths of the climate feedbacks at a 
particular time and may vary with forcing history and climate state, and 
therefore may differ from equilibrium climate sensitivity.
Transient climate response
The change in the global mean surface temperature, averaged over a 
20-year period, centered at the time of atmospheric CO2 doubling, in a 
climate model simulation in which CO2 increases at 1% yr-1 from pre-
industrial. It is a measure of the strength of climate feedbacks and the 
timescale of ocean heat uptake.
Climate services Climate services refers to information and products 
that enhance users’ knowledge and understanding about the impacts of 
climate change and/or climate variability so as to aid decision-making of 
individuals and organizations and enable preparedness and early climate 
change action. Products can include climate data products.
Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) 
is an approach that helps to guide actions needed to transform and 
reorient agricultural systems to effectively support development and 
ensure food security in a changing climate. CSA aims to tackle three main 
objectives: sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes, 
adapting and building resilience to climate change, and reducing and/or 
removing greenhouse gas emissions, where possible (FAO, 2018).
Climate system The climate system is the highly complex system 
consisting of five major components: the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, 
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
546
the cryosphere, the lithosphere and the biosphere and the interactions 
between them. The climate system evolves in time under the influence 
of its own internal dynamics and because of external forcings such as 
volcanic eruptions, solar variations and anthropogenic forcings such as 
the changing composition of the atmosphere and land-use change.
Climate target Climate target refers to a temperature limit, 
concentration level, or emissions reduction goal used towards the aim of 
avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. 
For example, national climate targets may aim to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by a certain amount over a given time horizon, for example 
those under the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate variability Climate variability refers to variations in 
the mean state and other statistics (such as standard deviations, the 
occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the climate on all spatial and temporal 
scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability may be due to 
natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability), 
or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external 
variability). See also Climate change.
CO2 equivalent (CO2-eq) emission The amount of carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emission that would cause the same integrated radiative forcing 
or temperature change, over a given time horizon, as an emitted amount 
of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a mixture of GHGs. There are a number 
of ways to compute such equivalent emissions and choose appropriate 
time horizons. Most typically, the CO2-equivalent emission is obtained by 
multiplying the emission of a GHG by its global warming potential (GWP) 
for a 100-year time horizon. For a mix of GHGs it is obtained by summing 
the CO2-equivalent emissions of each gas. CO2-equivalent emission is 
a common scale for comparing emissions of different GHGs but does 
not imply equivalence of the corresponding climate change responses. 
There is generally no connection between CO2-equivalent emissions and 
resulting CO2-equivalent concentrations.
Co-benefits The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed at 
one objective might have on other objectives, thereby increasing the total 
benefits for society or the environment. Co-benefits are often subject 
to uncertainty and depend on local circumstances and implementation 
practices, among other factors. Co-benefits are also referred to as 
ancillary benefits.
Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective 
Capabilities (CBDR-RC) Common but Differentiated Responsibilities 
and Respective Capabilities (CBDR–RC) is a key principle in the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that 
recognises the different capabilities and differing responsibilities of 
individual countries in tacking climate change. The principle of CBDR–
RC is embedded in the 1992 UNFCCC treaty. The convention states: 
“… the global nature of climate change calls for the widest possible 
cooperation by all countries and their participation in an effective and 
appropriate international response, in accordance with their common but 
differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities and their social 
and economic conditions.” Since then the CBDR-RC principle has guided 
the UN climate negotiations. 
Conference of the Parties (COP) The supreme body of UN 
conventions, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising parties with a right to vote that 
have ratified or acceded to the convention. See also United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Confidence The robustness of a finding based on the type, amount, 
quality and consistency of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding, 
theory, data, models, expert judgment) and on the degree of agreement 
across multiple lines of evidence. In this report, confidence is expressed 
qualitatively (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See Section 1.6 for the list of 
confidence levels used. See also Agreement, Evidence, Likelihood and 
Uncertainty.
Conservation agriculture A coherent group of agronomic and soil 
management practices that reduce the disruption of soil structure and 
biota. 
Constant 
composition 
commitment See Climate change 
commitment.
Constant emissions commitment See Climate change commitment.
Coping capacity The ability of people, institutions, organizations, 
and systems, using available skills, values, beliefs, resources, and 
opportunities, to address, manage, and overcome adverse conditions in 
the short to medium term. This glossary entry builds from the definition 
used in UNISDR (2009) and IPCC (2012a). See also Resilience.
Cost–benefit analysis Monetary assessment of all negative and 
positive impacts associated with a given action. Cost–benefit analysis 
enables comparison of different interventions, investments or strategies 
and reveals how a given investment or policy effort pays off for a particular 
person, company or country. Cost–benefit analyses representing society’s 
point of view are important for climate change decision-making, but 
there are difficulties in aggregating costs and benefits across different 
actors and across timescales. See also Discounting.
Cost-effectiveness A measure of the cost at which policy goal or 
outcome is achieved. The lower the cost the greater the cost-effectiveness. 
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) The Coupled 
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) is a climate modelling activity 
from the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP) which coordinates 
and archives climate model simulations based on shared model inputs by 
modelling groups from around the world. The CMIP3 multimodel data set 
includes projections using SRES scenarios. The CMIP5 data set includes 
projections using the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The 
CMIP6 phase involves a suite of common model experiments as well as 
an ensemble of CMIP-endorsed model intercomparison projects (MIPs).
Cumulative emissions The total amount of emissions released over 
a specified period of time. See also Carbon budget, and Transient climate 
response to cumulative CO2 emissions (TCRE).
Decarbonization The process by which countries, individuals or 
other entities aim to achieve zero fossil carbon existence. Typically 
refers to a reduction of the carbon emissions associated with electricity, 
industry and transport.
Decoupling Decoupling (in relation to climate change) is where 
economic growth is no longer strongly associated with consumption of 
fossil fuels. Relative decoupling is where both grow but at different rates. 
Absolute decoupling is where economic growth happens but fossil fuels 
decline.
Deforestation Conversion of forest to non-forest. For a discussion 
of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, reforestation 
and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use 
Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000). See also information provided by the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 
2013) and the report on Definitions and Methodological Options to 
Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests 
and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003). See also 
Afforestation, Reforestation and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation 
and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Deliberative governance See Governance.
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
547
Demand- and supply-side measures 
Demand-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing the demand for goods and/
or services. In the energy sector, demand-side management aims at 
reducing the demand for electricity and other forms of energy required 
to deliver energy services.
Supply-side measures
Policies and programmes for influencing how a certain demand for 
goods and/or services is met. In the energy sector, for example, supply-
side mitigation measures aim at reducing the amount of greenhouse gas 
emissions emitted per unit of energy produced.
See also Mitigation measures. 
Demand-side measures See Demand- and supply-side measures.
Detection See Detection and attribution.
Detection and attribution Detection of change is defined as the 
process of demonstrating that climate or a system affected by climate 
has changed in some defined statistical sense, without providing a 
reason for that change. An identified change is detected in observations 
if its likelihood of occurrence by chance due to internal variability alone is 
determined to be small, for example, <10%. Attribution is defined as the 
process of evaluating the relative contributions of multiple causal factors 
to a change or event with a formal assessment of confidence.
Development pathways See Pathways.
Direct air carbon dioxide capture and storage (DACCS) Chemical 
process by which CO2 is captured directly from the ambient air, with 
subsequent storage. Also known as direct air capture and storage (DACS).
Disaster Severe alterations in the normal functioning of a community 
or a society due to hazardous physical events interacting with vulnerable 
social conditions, leading to widespread adverse human, material, 
economic or environmental effects that require immediate emergency 
response to satisfy critical human needs and that may require external 
support for recovery. See also Hazard and Vulnerability.
Disaster risk management (DRM) Processes for designing, 
implementing, and evaluating strategies, policies, and measures to 
improve the understanding of disaster risk, foster disaster risk reduction 
and transfer, and promote continuous improvement in disaster 
preparedness, response, and recovery practices, with the explicit purpose 
of increasing human security, well-being, quality of life, and sustainable 
development.
Discount rate See Discounting.
Discounting A mathematical operation that aims to make monetary 
(or other) amounts received or expended at different times (years) 
comparable across time. The discounter uses a fixed or possibly time-
varying discount rate from year to year that makes future value worth 
less today (if the discount rate is positive). The choice of discount rate(s) 
is debated as it is a judgement based on hidden and/or explicit values.
(Internal) Displacement Internal displacement refers to the forced 
movement of people within the country they live in. Internally displaced 
persons (IDPs) are ‘Persons or groups of persons who have been forced or 
obliged to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in 
particular as a result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, 
situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural 
or human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally 
recognized State border.’ (UN, 1998). See also Migration.
Disruptive innovation Disruptive innovation is demand-led 
technological change that leads to significant system change and is 
characterized by strong exponential growth.
Distributive equity See Equity.
Distributive justice See Justice.
Double dividend The extent to which revenues generated by policy 
instruments, such as carbon taxes or auctioned (tradeable) emission 
permits can (1) contribute to mitigation and (2) offset part of the 
potential welfare losses of climate policies through recycling the revenue 
in the economy by reducing other distortionary taxes.
Downscaling  Downscaling is a method that derives local- to 
regional-scale (up to 100 km) information from larger-scale models or 
data analyses. Two main methods exist: dynamical downscaling and 
empirical/statistical downscaling. The dynamical method uses the output 
of regional climate models, global models with variable spatial resolution, 
or high-resolution global models. The empirical/statistical methods are 
based on observations and develop statistical relationships that link the 
large-scale atmospheric variables with local/regional climate variables. In 
all cases, the quality of the driving model remains an important limitation 
on quality of the downscaled information. The two methods can be 
combined, e.g., applying empirical/statistical downscaling to the output 
of a regional climate model, consisting of a dynamical downscaling of a 
global climate model.
Drought A period of abnormally dry weather long enough to cause a 
serious hydrological imbalance. Drought is a relative term, therefore any 
discussion in terms of precipitation deficit must refer to the particular 
precipitation-related activity that is under discussion. For example, 
shortage of precipitation during the growing season impinges on crop 
production or ecosystem function in general (due to soil moisture drought, 
also termed agricultural drought), and during the runoff and percolation 
season primarily affects water supplies (hydrological drought). Storage 
changes in soil moisture and groundwater are also affected by increases 
in actual evapotranspiration in addition to reductions in precipitation. 
A period with an abnormal precipitation deficit is defined as a 
meteorological drought. See also Soil moisture.
Megadrought 
A megadrought is a very lengthy and pervasive drought, lasting much 
longer than normal, usually a decade or more.
Early warning systems (EWS) The set of technical, financial and 
institutional capacities needed to generate and disseminate timely and 
meaningful warning information to enable individuals, communities and 
organizations threatened by a hazard to prepare to act promptly and 
appropriately to reduce the possibility of harm or loss. Dependent upon 
context, EWS may draw upon scientific and/or Indigenous knowledge. 
EWS are also considered for ecological applications e.g., conservation, 
where the organization itself is not threatened by hazard but the 
ecosystem under conservation is (an example is coral bleaching alerts), 
in agriculture (for example, warnings of ground frost, hailstorms) and in 
fisheries (storm and tsunami warnings). This glossary entry builds from 
the definitions used in UNISDR (2009) and IPCC (2012a).
Earth system feedbacks See Climate feedback.
Earth system model (ESM) A coupled atmosphere–ocean general 
circulation model in which a representation of the carbon cycle is 
included, allowing for interactive calculation of atmospheric CO2 
or compatible emissions. Additional components (e.g., atmospheric 
chemistry, ice sheets, dynamic vegetation, nitrogen cycle, but also urban 
or crop models) may be included. See also Climate model.
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
548
Ecosystem An ecosystem is a functional unit consisting of living 
organisms, their non-living environment and the interactions within and 
between them. The components included in a given ecosystem and its 
spatial boundaries depend on the purpose for which the ecosystem is 
defined: in some cases they are relatively sharp, while in others they 
are diffuse. Ecosystem boundaries can change over time. Ecosystems 
are nested within other ecosystems and their scale can range from very 
small to the entire biosphere. In the current era, most ecosystems either 
contain people as key organisms, or are influenced by the effects of 
human activities in their environment. See also Ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services Ecological processes or functions having 
monetary or non-monetary value to individuals or society at large. These 
are frequently classified as (1) supporting services such as productivity 
or biodiversity maintenance, (2) provisioning services such as food 
or fibre, (3) regulating services such as climate regulation or carbon 
sequestration, and (4) cultural services such as tourism or spiritual and 
aesthetic appreciation.
Effective climate sensitivity See Climate sensitivity.
Effective radiative forcing See Radiative forcing.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) The term El Niño was 
initially used to describe a warm-water current that periodically flows 
along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the local fishery. It has 
since become identified with warming of the tropical Pacific Ocean east 
of the dateline. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation of 
a global-scale tropical and subtropical surface pressure pattern called 
the Southern Oscillation. This coupled atmosphere–ocean phenomenon, 
with preferred time scales of two to about seven years, is known as the 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). It is often measured by the surface 
pressure anomaly difference between Tahiti and Darwin and/or the sea 
surface temperatures in the central and eastern equatorial Pacific. During 
an ENSO event, the prevailing trade winds weaken, reducing upwelling 
and altering ocean currents such that the sea surface temperatures 
warm, further weakening the trade winds. This phenomenon has a great 
impact on the wind, sea surface temperature and precipitation patterns 
in the tropical Pacific. It has climatic effects throughout the Pacific region 
and in many other parts of the world, through global teleconnections. The 
cold phase of ENSO is called La Niña.
Electric vehicle (EV) A vehicle whose propulsion is powered fully or 
mostly by electricity. 
Battery electric vehicle (BEV)
A vehicle whose propulsion is entirely electric without any internal 
combustion engine.
Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV)
A vehicle whose propulsion is mostly electric with batteries re-charged 
from an electric source but extra power and distance are provided by a 
hybrid internal combustion engine.
Emission pathways See Pathways.
Emission scenario A plausible representation of the future 
development of emissions of substances that are radiatively active (e.g., 
greenhouse gases (GHGs), aerosols) based on a coherent and internally 
consistent set of assumptions about driving forces (such as demographic 
and socio-economic development, technological change, energy and land 
use) and their key relationships. Concentration scenarios, derived from 
emission scenarios, are often used as input to a climate model to compute 
climate projections. See also Baseline scenario, Mitigation scenario, 
Socio-economic scenario, Scenario, Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCPs) (under Pathways), Shared Socio-economic Pathways 
(SSPs) (under Pathways) and Transformation pathways (under Pathways).
Emission trajectories A projected development in time of the 
emission of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or group of GHGs, aerosols, and 
GHG precursors. See also Emission pathways (under Pathways).
Emissions trading A market-based instrument aiming at meeting 
a mitigation objective in an efficient way. A cap on GHG emissions is 
divided in tradeable emission permits that are allocated by a combination 
of auctioning and handing out free allowances to entities within the 
jurisdiction of the trading scheme. Entities need to surrender emission 
permits equal to the amount of their emissions (e.g., tonnes of CO2). 
An entity may sell excess permits to entities that can avoid the same 
amount of emissions in a cheaper way. Trading schemes may occur at 
the intra-company, domestic, or international level (e.g., the flexibility 
mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol and the EU-ETS) and may apply 
to carbon dioxide (CO2), other greenhouse gases (GHGs), or other 
substances. 
Enabling conditions Conditions that affect the feasibility of 
adaptation and mitigation options, and can accelerate and scale-up 
systemic transitions that would limit temperature increase to 1.5°C and 
enhance capacities of systems and societies to adapt to the associated 
climate change, while achieving sustainable development, eradicating 
poverty and reducing inequalities. Enabling conditions include finance, 
technological innovation, strengthening policy instruments, institutional 
capacity, multilevel governance, and changes in human behaviour 
and lifestyles. They also include inclusive processes, attention to 
power asymmetries and unequal opportunities for development and 
reconsideration of values. See also Feasibility.
Energy efficiency The ratio of output or useful energy or energy 
services or other useful physical outputs obtained from a system, 
conversion process, transmission or storage activity to the input of energy 
(measured as kWh kWh-1, tonnes kWh-1 or any other physical measure 
of useful output like tonne-km transported). Energy efficiency is often 
described by energy intensity. In economics, energy intensity describes 
the ratio of economic output to energy input. Most commonly energy 
efficiency is measured as input energy over a physical or economic unit, 
i.e., kWh USD-1 (energy intensity), kWh tonne-1. For buildings, it is often 
measured as kWh m-2, and for vehicles as km liter-1 or liter km-1. Very often 
in policy ‘energy efficiency’ is intended as the measures to reduce energy 
demand through technological options such as insulating buildings, more 
efficient appliances, efficient lighting, efficient vehicles, etc.
Energy security The goal of a given country, or the global community 
as a whole, to maintain an adequate, stable and predictable energy supply. 
Measures encompass safeguarding the sufficiency of energy resources to 
meet national energy demand at competitive and stable prices and the 
resilience of the energy supply; enabling development and deployment 
of technologies; building sufficient infrastructure to generate, store and 
transmit energy supplies; and ensuring enforceable contracts of delivery.
Enhanced weathering Enhancing the removal of carbon dioxide 
(CO2) from the atmosphere through dissolution of silicate and carbonate 
rocks by grinding these minerals to small particles and actively applying 
them to soils, coasts or oceans.
(Model) Ensemble A group of parallel model simulations 
characterising historical climate conditions, climate predictions, or 
climate projections. Variation of the results across the ensemble members 
may give an estimate of modelling-based uncertainty. Ensembles made 
with the same model but different initial conditions only characterize 
the uncertainty associated with internal climate variability, whereas 
multimodel ensembles including simulations by several models 
also include the impact of model differences. Perturbed parameter 
ensembles, in which model parameters are varied in a systematic 
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
549
manner, aim to assess the uncertainty resulting from internal model 
specifications within a single model. Remaining sources of uncertainty 
unaddressed with model ensembles are related to systematic model 
errors or biases, which may be assessed from systematic comparisons 
of model simulations with observations wherever available. See also 
Climate projection.
Equality A principle that ascribes equal worth to all human beings, 
including equal opportunities, rights, and obligations, irrespective of origins.
Inequality 
Uneven opportunities and social positions, and processes of discrimination 
within a group or society, based on gender, class, ethnicity, age, and (dis)
ability, often produced by uneven development. Income inequality refers 
to gaps between highest and lowest income earners within a country 
and between countries. See also Equity, Ethics and Fairness.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity See Climate sensitivity.
Equity Equity is the principle of fairness in burden sharing and is a 
basis for understanding how the impacts and responses to climate 
change, including costs and benefits, are distributed in and by society in 
more or less equal ways. It is often aligned with ideas of equality, fairness 
and justice and applied with respect to equity in the responsibility for, and 
distribution of, climate impacts and policies across society, generations, 
and gender, and in the sense of who participates and controls the 
processes of decision-making.
Distributive equity 
Equity in the consequences, outcomes, costs and benefits of actions or 
policies. In the case of climate change or climate policies for different 
people, places and countries, including equity aspects of sharing burdens 
and benefits for mitigation and adaptation.
Gender equity 
Ensuring equity in that women and men have the same rights, resources 
and opportunities. In the case of climate change gender equity recognizes 
that women are often more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change 
and may be disadvantaged in the process and outcomes of climate 
policy. 
Inter-generational equity 
Equity between generations that acknowledges that the effects of past 
and present emissions, vulnerabilities and policies impose costs and 
benefits for people in the future and of different age groups.
Procedural equity 
Equity in the process of decision-making, including recognition and 
inclusiveness in participation, equal representation, bargaining power, 
voice and equitable access to knowledge and resources to participate.
See also Equality, Ethics and Fairness.
Ethics Ethics involves questions of justice and value. Justice is 
concerned with right and wrong, equity and fairness, and, in general, 
with the rights to which people and living beings are entitled. Value is a 
matter of worth, benefit, or good. See also Equality, Equity and Fairness.
Evidence Data and information used in the scientific process to 
establish findings. In this report, the degree of evidence reflects the 
amount, quality and consistency of scientific/technical information on 
which the Lead Authors are basing their findings. See also Agreement, 
Confidence, Likelihood and Uncertainty.
Exposure The presence of people; livelihoods; species or ecosystems; 
environmental functions, services, and resources; infrastructure; or 
economic, social, or cultural assets in places and settings that could be 
adversely affected. See also Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability.
Extratropical cyclone Any cyclonic-scale storm that is not a tropical 
cyclone. Usually refers to a middle- or high-latitude migratory storm system 
formed in regions of large horizontal temperature variations. Sometimes 
called extratropical storm or extratropical low. See also Tropical cyclone.
Extreme weather event An extreme weather event is an event that 
is rare at a particular place and time of year. Definitions of rare vary, but 
an extreme weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 
10th or 90th percentile of a probability density function estimated from 
observations. By definition, the characteristics of what is called extreme 
weather may vary from place to place in an absolute sense. When a 
pattern of extreme weather persists for some time, such as a season, 
it may be classed as an extreme climate event, especially if it yields an 
average or total that is itself extreme (e.g., drought or heavy rainfall over 
a season). See also Heatwave and Climate extreme (extreme weather or 
climate event).
Extreme weather or climate event See Climate extreme (extreme 
weather or climate event).
Fairness Impartial and just treatment without favouritism or 
discrimination in which each person is considered of equal worth with 
equal opportunity. See also Equity, Equality and Ethics.
Feasibility The degree to which climate goals and response options 
are considered possible and/or desirable. Feasibility depends on 
geophysical, ecological, technological, economic, social and institutional 
conditions for change. Conditions underpinning feasibility are dynamic, 
spatially variable, and may vary between different groups. See also 
Enabling conditions.
Feasible scenario commitment See Climate change commitment.
Feedback See Climate feedback.
Flexible governance See Governance.
Flood The overflowing of the normal confines of a stream or other 
body of water, or the accumulation of water over areas that are not 
normally submerged. Floods include river (fluvial) floods, flash floods, 
urban floods, pluvial floods, sewer floods, coastal floods, and glacial lake 
outburst floods.
Food security A situation that exists when all people, at all times, 
have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and 
nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for 
an active and healthy life (FAO, 2001). 
Food wastage Food wastage encompasses food loss (the loss of 
food during production and transportation) and food waste (the waste of 
food by the consumer) (FAO, 2013). 
Forcing See Radiative forcing.
Forest A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many definitions of the 
term forest are in use throughout the world, reflecting wide differences in 
biogeophysical conditions, social structure and economics. For a discussion 
of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, reforestation 
and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use 
Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000). See also information provided by the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 
2013) and the Report on Definitions and Methodological Options to 
Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests 
and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003). See also 
Afforestation, Deforestation and Reforestation.
Fossil fuels Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits, 
including coal, oil, and natural gas.
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
550
Framework Convention on Climate Change See United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Gender equity See Equity.
General purpose technologies (GPT) General purpose technologies 
can be or are used pervasively in a wide range of sectors in ways that 
fundamentally change the modes of operation of those sectors (Helpman, 
1998). Examples include the steam engine, power generator and motor, 
ICT, and biotechnology.
Geoengineering In this report, separate consideration is given to 
the two main approaches considered as ‘geoengineering’ in some of the 
literature: solar radiation modification (SRM) and carbon dioxide removal 
(CDR). Because of this separation, the term ‘geoengineering’ is not used 
in this report. See also Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) and Solar radiation 
modification (SRM).
Glacier A perennial mass of ice, and possibly firn and snow, 
originating on the land surface by the recrystallisation of snow and 
showing evidence of past or present flow. A glacier typically gains mass 
by accumulation of snow, and loses mass by melting and ice discharge 
into the sea or a lake if the glacier terminates in a body of water. Land ice 
masses of continental size (>50,000 km2) are referred to as ice sheets. 
See also Ice sheet.
Global climate model (also referred to as general circulation 
model, both abbreviated as GCM) See Climate model.
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) Estimated global 
average of near-surface air temperatures over land and sea-ice, and 
sea surface temperatures over ice-free ocean regions, with changes 
normally expressed as departures from a value over a specified reference 
period. When estimating changes in GMST, near-surface air temperature 
over both land and oceans are also used.1 See also Land surface air 
temperature, Sea surface temperature (SST) and Global mean surface air 
temperature (GSAT).
Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT) Global average of 
near-surface air temperatures over land and oceans. Changes in GSAT are 
often used as a measure of global temperature change in climate models 
but are not observed directly. See also Global mean surface temperature 
(GMST) and Land surface air temperature.
Global warming The estimated increase in global mean surface 
temperature (GMST) averaged over a 30-year period, or the 30-year 
period centered on a particular year or decade, expressed relative to 
pre-industrial levels unless otherwise specified. For 30-year periods that 
span past and future years, the current multi-decadal warming trend is 
assumed to continue. See also Climate change and Climate variability.
Governance A comprehensive and inclusive concept of the full range 
of means for deciding, managing, implementing and monitoring policies 
and measures. Whereas government is defined strictly in terms of the 
nation-state, the more inclusive concept of governance recognizes the 
contributions of various levels of government (global, international, 
regional, sub-national and local) and the contributing roles of the private 
sector, of nongovernmental actors, and of civil society to addressing the 
many types of issues facing the global community.
Adaptive governance
An emerging term in the literature for the evolution of formal and 
informal institutions of governance that prioritize social learning in 
planning, implementation and evaluation of policy through iterative 
social learning to steer the use and protection of natural resources, 
ecosystem services and common pool natural resources, particularly in 
situations of complexity and uncertainty.
Climate governance
Purposeful mechanisms and measures aimed at steering social systems 
towards preventing, mitigating, or adapting to the risks posed by climate 
change (Jagers and Stripple, 2003).
Deliberative governance
Deliberative governance involves decision-making through inclusive 
public conversation, which allows opportunity for developing policy 
options through public discussion rather than collating individual 
preferences through voting or referenda (although the latter governance 
mechanisms can also be proceeded and legitimated by public deliberation 
processes).
Flexible governance
Strategies of governance at various levels, which prioritize the use 
of social learning and rapid feedback mechanisms in planning and 
policy making, often through incremental, experimental and iterative 
management processes.
Governance capacity
The ability of governance institutions, leaders, and non-state and civil 
society to plan, co-ordinate, fund, implement, evaluate and adjust 
policies and measures over the short, medium and long term, adjusting 
for uncertainty, rapid change and wide-ranging impacts and multiple 
actors and demands.
Multilevel governance
Multilevel governance refers to negotiated, non-hierarchical exchanges 
between institutions at the transnational, national, regional and local 
levels. Multilevel governance identifies relationships among governance 
processes at these different levels. Multilevel governance does include 
negotiated relationships among institutions at different institutional 
levels and also a vertical ‘layering’ of governance processes at 
different levels. Institutional relationships take place directly between 
transnational, regional and local levels, thus bypassing the state level 
(Peters and Pierre, 2001)
Participatory governance
A governance system that enables direct public engagement in decision-
making using a variety of techniques for example, referenda, community 
deliberation, citizen juries or participatory budgeting. The approach can be 
applied in formal and informal institutional contexts from national to local, 
but is usually associated with devolved decision-making. This definition 
builds from Fung and Wright (2003) and Sarmiento and Tilly (2018).
Governance capacity See Governance.
Green infrastructure The interconnected set of natural and 
constructed ecological systems, green spaces and other landscape 
features. It includes planted and indigenous trees, wetlands, parks, 
green open spaces and original grassland and woodlands, as well as 
possible building and street-level design interventions that incorporate 
vegetation. Green infrastructure provides services and functions in the 
same way as conventional infrastructure. This definition builds from 
Culwick and Bobbins (2016).
Greenhouse gas (GHG) Greenhouse gases are those gaseous 
constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that 
absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of 
terrestrial radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself 
and by clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour 
(H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and 
1 
Past IPCC reports, reflecting the literature, have used a variety of approximately equivalent metrics of GMST change.
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
551
ozone (O3) are the primary GHGs in the Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, 
there are a number of entirely human-made GHGs in the atmosphere, 
such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing 
substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Beside CO2, N2O and 
CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the GHGs sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). See also Carbon 
dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), Nitrous oxide (N2O) and Ozone (O3).
Greenhouse gas removal (GGR) Withdrawal of a GHG and/or 
a precursor from the atmosphere by a sink. See also Carbon dioxide 
removal (CDR) and Negative emissions. 
Gross domestic product (GDP) The sum of gross value added, 
at purchasers’ prices, by all resident and non-resident producers in the 
economy, plus any taxes and minus any subsidies not included in the 
value of the products in a country or a geographic region for a given 
period, normally one year. GDP is calculated without deducting for 
depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation of natural 
resources.
Gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) One component of the GDP 
that corresponds to the total value of acquisitions, minus disposals of 
fixed assets during one year by the business sector, governments and 
households, plus certain additions to the value of non-produced assets 
(such as subsoil assets or major improvements in the quantity, quality or 
productivity of land).
Halocarbons A collective term for the group of partially halogenated 
organic species, which includes the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), halons, 
methyl chloride and methyl bromide. Many of the halocarbons have 
large global warming potentials. The chlorine and bromine-containing 
halocarbons are also involved in the depletion of the ozone layer.
Hazard The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced 
physical event or trend that may cause loss of life, injury, or other 
health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, 
livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems and environmental resources. 
See also Disaster, Exposure, Risk, and Vulnerability.
Heatwave A period of abnormally hot weather. Heatwaves and warm 
spells have various and in some cases overlapping definitions. See also 
Extreme weather event.
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) Heating, 
ventilation and air conditioning technology is used to control temperature 
and humidity in an indoor environment, be it in buildings or in vehicles, 
providing thermal comfort and healthy air quality to the occupants. HVAC 
systems can be designed for an isolated space, an individual building or 
a distributed heating and cooling network within a building structure or 
a district heating system. The latter provides economies of scale and also 
scope for integration with solar heat, natural seasonal cooling/heating etc.
Holocene The Holocene is the current interglacial geological epoch, 
the second of two epochs within the Quaternary period, the preceding 
being the Pleistocene. The International Commission on Stratigraphy 
defines the start of the Holocene at 11,650 years before 1950. See also 
Anthropocene.
Human behaviour The way in which a person acts in response to a 
particular situation or stimulus. Human actions are relevant at different 
levels, from international, national, and sub-national actors, to NGO, firm-
level actors, and communities, households, and individual actions.
Adaptation behaviour 
Human actions that directly or indirectly affect the risks of climate 
change impacts.
Mitigation behaviour 
Human actions that directly or indirectly influence mitigation. 
Human behavioural change A transformation or modification of 
human actions. Behaviour change efforts can be planned in ways that 
mitigate climate change and/or reduce negative consequences of climate 
change impacts.
Human rights Rights that are inherent to all human beings, universal, 
inalienable, and indivisible, typically expressed and guaranteed by law. 
They include the right to life; economic, social, and cultural rights; 
and the right to development and self-determination. Based upon the 
definition by the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(UNOHCHR, 2018).
Procedural rights 
Rights to a legal procedure to enforce substantive rights.
Substantive rights 
Basic human rights, including the right to the substance of being human 
such as life itself, liberty and happiness.
Human security A condition that is met when the vital core of human 
lives is protected, and when people have the freedom and capacity to live 
with dignity. In the context of climate change, the vital core of human 
lives includes the universal and culturally specific, material and non-
material elements necessary for people to act on behalf of their interests 
and to live with dignity.
Human system Any system in which human organizations and 
institutions play a major role. Often, but not always, the term is 
synonymous with society or social system. Systems such as agricultural 
systems, urban systems, political systems, technological systems and 
economic systems are all human systems in the sense applied in this 
report.
Hydrological cycle The cycle in which water evaporates from the 
oceans and the land surface, is carried over the earth in atmospheric 
circulation as water vapour, condenses to form clouds, precipitates as 
rain or snow, which on land can be intercepted by trees and vegetation, 
potentially accumulates as snow or ice, provides runoff on the land 
surface, infiltrates into soils, recharges groundwater, discharges into 
streams, flows out into the oceans, and ultimately evaporates again 
from the ocean or land surface. The various systems involved in the 
hydrological cycle are usually referred to as hydrological systems.
Ice sheet A mass of land ice of continental size that is sufficiently 
thick to cover most of the underlying bed, so that its shape is mainly 
determined by its dynamics (the flow of the ice as it deforms internally 
and/or slides at its base). An ice sheet flows outward from a high central 
ice plateau with a small average surface slope. The margins usually slope 
more steeply, and most ice is discharged through fast flowing ice streams 
or outlet glaciers, in some cases into the sea or into ice shelves floating 
on the sea. There are only two ice sheets in the modern world, one on 
Greenland and one on Antarctica. During glacial periods there were 
others. See also Glacier.
(climate change) Impact assessment The practice of identifying 
and evaluating, in monetary and/or non-monetary terms, the effects of 
climate change on natural and human systems.
Impacts 
(consequences, 
outcomes) The consequences of 
realized risks on natural and human systems, where risks result from 
the interactions of climate-related hazards (including extreme weather 
and climate events), exposure, and vulnerability. Impacts generally 
refer to effects on lives; livelihoods; health and well-being; ecosystems 
and species; economic, social and cultural assets; services (including 
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
552
ecosystem services); and infrastructure. Impacts may be referred to 
as consequences or outcomes, and can be adverse or beneficial. See 
also Adaptation, Exposure, Hazard, Loss and Damage, and losses and 
damages, and Vulnerability.
Incremental adaptation See Adaptation.
Indigenous knowledge Indigenous knowledge refers to the 
understandings, skills and philosophies developed by societies with 
long histories of interaction with their natural surroundings. For many 
Indigenous peoples, Indigenous knowledge informs decision-making 
about fundamental aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer 
term actions. This knowledge is integral to cultural complexes, which also 
encompass language, systems of classification, resource use practices, 
social interactions, values, ritual and spirituality. These distinctive ways 
of knowing are important facets of the world’s cultural diversity. This 
definition builds on UNESCO (2018).
Indirect land-use change (iLUC) See Land-use change (LUC).
Industrial revolution A period of rapid industrial growth with far-
reaching social and economic consequences, beginning in Britain during 
the second half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe and later to 
other countries, including the United States. The invention of the steam 
engine was an important trigger of this development. The industrial 
revolution marks the beginning of a strong increase in the use of fossil 
fuels, initially coal, and hence emission of carbon dioxide (CO2). See also 
Pre-industrial.
Industrialized/developed/developing countries There are a 
diversity of approaches for categorizing countries on the basis of their 
level of development, and for defining terms such as industrialized, 
developed, or developing. Several categorizations are used in this report. 
(1) In the United Nations system, there is no established convention for 
designation of developed and developing countries or areas. (2) The 
United Nations Statistics Division specifies developed and developing 
regions based on common practice. In addition, specific countries are 
designated as Least Developed Countries (LDC), landlocked developing 
countries, small island developing states, and transition economies. Many 
countries appear in more than one of these categories. (3) The World 
Bank uses income as the main criterion for classifying countries as low, 
lower middle, upper middle and high income. (4) The UNDP aggregates 
indicators for life expectancy, educational attainment, and income into a 
single composite Human Development Index (HDI) to classify countries 
as low, medium, high or very high human development.
Inequality See Equality.
Information and communication technology (ICT) An umbrella 
term that includes any information and communication device or 
application, encompassing: computer systems, network hardware and 
software, cell phones, etc.
Infrastructure commitment See Climate change commitment.
Institution Institutions are rules and norms held in common by social 
actors that guide, constrain and shape human interaction. Institutions 
can be formal, such as laws and policies, or informal, such as norms and 
conventions. Organizations – such as parliaments, regulatory agencies, 
private firms and community bodies – develop and act in response to 
institutional frameworks and the incentives they frame. Institutions can 
guide, constrain and shape human interaction through direct control, 
through incentives, and through processes of socialization. See also 
Institutional capacity.
Institutional capacity Institutional capacity comprises building 
and strengthening individual organizations and providing technical 
and management training to support integrated planning and decision-
making processes between organizations and people, as well as 
empowerment, social capital, and an enabling environment, including 
the culture, values and power relations (Willems and Baumert, 2003). 
Integrated assessment A method of analysis that combines results 
and models from the physical, biological, economic and social sciences 
and the interactions among these components in a consistent framework 
to evaluate the status and the consequences of environmental change 
and the policy responses to it. See also Integrated assessment model 
(IAM).
Integrated assessment model (IAM) Integrated assessment 
models (IAMs) integrate knowledge from two or more domains into 
a single framework. They are one of the main tools for undertaking 
integrated assessments.
One class of IAM used in respect of climate change mitigation may 
include representations of: multiple sectors of the economy, such as 
energy, land use and land-use change; interactions between sectors; the 
economy as a whole; associated GHG emissions and sinks; and reduced 
representations of the climate system. This class of model is used to assess 
linkages between economic, social and technological development and 
the evolution of the climate system. 
Another class of IAM additionally includes representations of the costs 
associated with climate change impacts, but includes less detailed 
representations of economic systems. These can be used to assess 
impacts and mitigation in a cost–benefit framework and have been used 
to estimate the social cost of carbon.
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) A process 
which promotes the coordinated development and management of 
water, land and related resources in order to maximize economic and 
social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the 
sustainability of vital ecosystems.
Inter-generational equity See Equity.
Inter-generational justice See Justice.
Internal variability See Climate variability.
Internet of Things (IoT) The network of computing devices 
embedded in everyday objects such as cars, phones and computers, 
connected via the internet, enabling them to send and receive data.
Iron fertilization See Ocean fertilization.
Irreversibility A perturbed state of a dynamical system is defined as 
irreversible on a given timescale, if the recovery time scale from this state 
due to natural processes is substantially longer than the time it takes for 
the system to reach this perturbed state. See also Tipping point.
Justice Justice is concerned with ensuring that people get what is due 
to them, setting out the moral or legal principles of fairness and equity in 
the way people are treated, often based on the ethics and values of society.
Climate justice 
Justice that links development and human rights to achieve a human-
centred approach to addressing climate change, safeguarding the rights 
of the most vulnerable people and sharing the burdens and benefits of 
climate change and its impacts equitably and fairly. This definition builds 
upon the one used by the Mary Robinson Foundation – Climate Justice 
(MRFCJ, 2018).
Distributive justice 
Justice in the allocation of economic and non-economic costs and 
benefits across society.
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
553
Inter-generational justice 
Justice in the distribution of economic and non-economic costs and 
benefits across generations.
Procedural justice 
Justice in the way outcomes are brought about including who participates 
and is heard in the processes of decision-making.
Social justice 
Just or fair relations within society that seek to address the distribution 
of wealth, access to resources, opportunity, and support according to 
principles of justice and fairness.
See also Equity, Ethics, Fairness, and Human rights.
Kyoto Protocol The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is an international treaty 
adopted in December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, at the Third Session of the 
Conference of the Parties (COP3) to the UNFCCC. It contains legally 
binding commitments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC. 
Countries included in Annex B of the Protocol (mostly OECD countries 
and countries with economies in transition) agreed to reduce their 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (carbon dioxide 
(CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 
perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6)) by at least 5% 
below 1990 levels in the first commitment period (2008–2012). The 
Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16 February 2005 and as of May 
2018 had 192 Parties (191 States and the European Union). A second 
commitment period was agreed in December 2012 at COP18, known as 
the Doha Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in which a new set of Parties 
committed to reduce GHG emissions by at least 18% below 1990 levels 
in the period from 2013 to 2020. However, as of May 2018, the Doha 
Amendment had not received sufficient ratifications to enter into force. 
See also United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and Paris Agreement.
Land surface air temperature The near-surface air temperature 
over land, typically measured at 1.25–2 m above the ground using 
standard meteorological equipment.
Land use Land use refers to the total of arrangements, activities and 
inputs undertaken in a certain land cover type (a set of human actions). 
The term land use is also used in the sense of the social and economic 
purposes for which land is managed (e.g., grazing, timber extraction, 
conservation and city dwelling). In national greenhouse gas inventories, 
land use is classified according to the IPCC land use categories of forest 
land, cropland, grassland, wetland, settlements, other. See also Land-use 
change (LUC).
Land-use change (LUC) Land-use change involves a change from 
one land use category to another. 
Indirect land-use change (iLUC)
Refers to market-mediated or policy-driven shifts in land use that cannot 
be directly attributed to land-use management decisions of individuals 
or groups. For example, if agricultural land is diverted to fuel production, 
forest clearance may occur elsewhere to replace the former agricultural 
production.
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF)
In the context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the 
UNFCCC, LULUCF is a GHG inventory sector that covers anthropogenic 
emissions and removals of GHG from carbon pools in managed lands, 
excluding non-CO2 agricultural emissions. Following the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines for National GHG Inventories, ‘anthropogenic’ land-related 
GHG fluxes are defined as all those occurring on ‘managed land’, i.e., 
‘where human interventions and practices have been applied to perform 
production, ecological or social functions’. Since managed land may 
include CO2 removals not considered as ‘anthropogenic’ in some of the 
scientific literature assessed in this report (e.g., removals associated with 
CO2 fertilization and N deposition), the land-related net GHG emission 
estimates included in this report are not necessarily directly comparable 
with LULUCF estimates in National GHG Inventories. 
See also Afforestation, Deforestation, Reforestation, and the IPCC Special 
Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000).
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) See Land-use 
change (LUC).
Life cycle assessment (LCA) Compilation and evaluation of the 
inputs, outputs and the potential environmental impacts of a product or 
service throughout its life cycle. This definition builds from ISO (2018). 
Likelihood The chance of a specific outcome occurring, where this 
might be estimated probabilistically. Likelihood is expressed in this report 
using a standard terminology (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See Section 1.6 
for the list of likelihood qualifiers used. See also Agreement, Evidence, 
Confidence and Uncertainty.
Livelihood The resources used and the activities undertaken in order 
to live. Livelihoods are usually determined by the entitlements and assets 
to which people have access. Such assets can be categorised as human, 
social, natural, physical or financial.
Local knowledge Local knowledge refers to the understandings 
and skills developed by individuals and populations, specific to the 
places where they live. Local knowledge informs decision-making about 
fundamental aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer-term 
actions. This knowledge is a key element of the social and cultural systems 
which influence observations of, and responses to climate change; it also 
informs governance decisions. This definition builds on UNESCO (2018).
Lock-in A situation in which the future development of a system, 
including infrastructure, technologies, investments, institutions, and 
behavioural norms, is determined or constrained (‘locked in’) by historic 
developments.
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF) Long-lived climate forcers refer 
to a set of well-mixed greenhouse gases with long atmospheric lifetimes. 
This set of compounds includes carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous oxide 
(N2O), together with some fluorinated gases. They have a warming effect 
on climate. These compounds accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal 
to centennial time scales, and their effect on climate hence persists for 
decades to centuries after their emission. On time scales of decades to 
a century, already emitted emissions of long-lived climate forcers can 
only be abated by greenhouse gas removal (GGR). See also Short-lived 
climate forcers (SLCF).
Loss and Damage, and losses and damages Research has taken 
Loss and Damage (capitalized letters) to refer to political debate under 
the UNFCCC following the establishment of the Warsaw Mechanism 
on Loss and Damage in 2013, which is to ‘address loss and damage 
associated with impacts of climate change, including extreme events 
and slow onset events, in developing countries that are particularly 
vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.’ Lowercase letters 
(losses and damages) have been taken to refer broadly to harm from 
(observed) impacts and (projected) risks (see Mechler et al., in press). 
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation) Actions that may lead 
to increased risk of adverse climate-related outcomes, including via 
increased GHG emissions, increased vulnerability to climate change, or 
diminished welfare, now or in the future. Maladaptation is usually an 
unintended consequence.
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
554
Market exchange rate (MER) The rate at which a currency of 
one country can be exchanged with the currency of another country. In 
most economies such rates evolve daily while in others there are official 
conversion rates that are adjusted periodically. See also Purchasing 
power parity (PPP).
Market failure When private decisions are based on market prices 
that do not reflect the real scarcity of goods and services but rather 
reflect market distortions, they do not generate an efficient allocation 
of resources but cause welfare losses. A market distortion is any event 
in which a market reaches a market clearing price that is substantially 
different from the price that a market would achieve while operating 
under conditions of perfect competition and state enforcement of legal 
contracts and the ownership of private property. Examples of factors 
causing market prices to deviate from real economic scarcity are 
environmental externalities, public goods, monopoly power, information 
asymmetry, transaction costs and non-rational behaviour.
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) 
Measurement
‘Processes of data collection over time, providing basic datasets, including 
associated accuracy and precision, for the range of relevant variables. 
Possible data sources are field measurements, field observations, 
detection through remote sensing and interviews.’ (UN-REDD, 2009).
Reporting
‘The process of formal reporting of assessment results to the UNFCCC, 
according to predetermined formats and according to established 
standards, especially the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change] Guidelines and GPG [Good Practice Guidance].’ (UN-REDD, 
2009) 
Verification
‘The process of formal verification of reports, for example the established 
approach to verify national communications and national inventory 
reports to the UNFCCC.’ (UN-REDD, 2009)
Megadrought See Drought.
Methane (CH4) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be 
mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol and is the major component of 
natural gas and associated with all hydrocarbon fuels. Significant 
emissions occur as a result of animal husbandry and agriculture, and 
their management represents a major mitigation option.
Migrant See Migration.
Migration The International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
defines migration as ‘The movement of a person or a group of persons, 
either across an international border, or within a State. It is a population 
movement, encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever 
its length, composition and causes; it includes migration of refugees, 
displaced persons, economic migrants, and persons moving for other 
purposes, including family reunification.’ (IOM, 2018).
Migrant 
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) defines a migrant 
as ‘any person who is moving or has moved across an international 
border or within a State away from his/her habitual place of residence, 
regardless of (1) the person’s legal status; (2) whether the movement is 
voluntary or involuntary; (3) what the causes for the movement are; or 
(4) what the length of the stay is.’ (IOM, 2018).
See also (Internal) Displacement.
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) A set of eight time-
bound and measurable goals for combating poverty, hunger, disease, 
illiteracy, discrimination against women and environmental degradation. 
These goals were agreed at the UN Millennium Summit in 2000 together 
with an action plan to reach the goals by 2015.
Mitigation (of climate change) A human intervention to reduce 
emissions or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.
Mitigation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Mitigation measures In climate policy, mitigation measures are 
technologies, processes or practices that contribute to mitigation, for 
example, renewable energy (RE) technologies, waste minimization 
processes and public transport commuting practices. See also Mitigation 
option, and Policies (for climate change mitigation and adaptation).
Mitigation option A technology or practice that reduces GHG 
emissions or enhances sinks. 
Mitigation pathways See Pathways.
Mitigation scenario A plausible description of the future that 
describes how the (studied) system responds to the implementation of 
mitigation policies and measures. See also Emission scenario, Pathways, 
Socio-economic scenario and Stabilization (of GHG or CO2-equivalent 
concentration).
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) Monitoring and evaluation 
refers to mechanisms put in place at national to local scales to respectively 
monitor and evaluate efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and/
or adapt to the impacts of climate change with the aim of systematically 
identifying, characterizing and assessing progress over time. 
Motivation (of an individual) An individual’s reason or reasons for 
acting in a particular way; individuals may consider various consequences 
of actions, including financial, social, affective and environmental 
consequences. Motivation can come from outside (extrinsic) or from 
inside (intrinsic) the individual.
Multilevel governance See Governance.
Narratives Qualitative descriptions of plausible future world 
evolutions, describing the characteristics, general logic and developments 
underlying a particular quantitative set of scenarios. Narratives are also 
referred to in the literature as ‘storylines’. See also Scenario, Scenario 
storyline and Pathways.
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) A term used under 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
whereby a country that has joined the Paris Agreement outlines its plans 
for reducing its emissions. Some countries’ NDCs also address how 
they will adapt to climate change impacts, and what support they need 
from, or will provide to, other countries to adopt low-carbon pathways 
and to build climate resilience. According to Article 4 paragraph 2 
of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall prepare, communicate and 
maintain successive NDCs that it intends to achieve. In the lead up to 
21st Conference of the Parties in Paris in 2015, countries submitted 
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs). As countries join 
the Paris Agreement, unless they decide otherwise, this INDC becomes 
their first Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC). See also United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Paris 
Agreement.
Negative emissions Removal of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from 
the atmosphere by deliberate human activities, i.e., in addition to the 
removal that would occur via natural carbon cycle processes. See also 
Net negative emissions, Net zero emissions, Carbon dioxide removal 
(CDR) and Greenhouse gas removal (GGR). 
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
555
Net negative emissions A situation of net negative emissions is 
achieved when, as result of human activities, more greenhouse gases 
are removed from the atmosphere than are emitted into it. Where 
multiple greenhouse gases are involved, the quantification of negative 
emissions depends on the climate metric chosen to compare emissions 
of different gases (such as global warming potential, global temperature 
change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). See 
also Negative emissions, Net zero emissions and Net zero CO2 emissions.
Net zero CO2 emissions Net zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions 
are achieved when anthropogenic CO2 emissions are balanced globally 
by anthropogenic CO2 removals over a specified period. Net zero CO2 
emissions are also referred to as carbon neutrality. See also Net zero 
emissions and Net negative emissions.
Net zero emissions Net zero emissions are achieved when 
anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere are 
balanced by anthropogenic removals over a specified period. Where 
multiple greenhouse gases are involved, the quantification of net zero 
emissions depends on the climate metric chosen to compare emissions 
of different gases (such as global warming potential, global temperature 
change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). See 
also Net zero CO2 emissions, Negative emissions and Net negative 
emissions.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be 
mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol. The main anthropogenic source of 
N2O is agriculture (soil and animal manure management), but important 
contributions also come from sewage treatment, fossil fuel combustion, 
and chemical industrial processes. N2O is also produced naturally from a 
wide variety of biological sources in soil and water, particularly microbial 
action in wet tropical forests.
Non-CO2 emissions and radiative forcing Non-CO2 emissions 
included in this report are all anthropogenic emissions other than CO2 
that result in radiative forcing. These include short-lived climate forcers, 
such as methane (CH4), some fluorinated gases, ozone (O3) precursors, 
aerosols or aerosol precursors, such as black carbon and sulphur dioxide, 
respectively, as well as long-lived greenhouse gases, such as nitrous 
oxide (N2O) or other fluorinated gases. The radiative forcing associated 
with non-CO2 emissions and changes in surface albedo is referred to as 
non-CO2 radiative forcing.
Non-overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Ocean acidification (OA) Ocean acidification refers to a reduction 
in the pH of the ocean over an extended period, typically decades or 
longer, which is caused primarily by uptake of carbon dioxide (CO2) from 
the atmosphere, but can also be caused by other chemical additions or 
subtractions from the ocean. Anthropogenic ocean acidification refers to 
the component of pH reduction that is caused by human activity (IPCC, 
2011, p. 37). 
Ocean fertilization Deliberate increase of nutrient supply to 
the near-surface ocean in order to enhance biological production 
through which additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere is 
sequestered. This can be achieved by the addition of micro-nutrients or 
macro-nutrients. Ocean fertilization is regulated by the London Protocol.
Overshoot See Temperature overshoot.
Overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Ozone (O3) Ozone, the triatomic form of oxygen (O3), is a gaseous 
atmospheric constituent. In the troposphere, it is created both naturally 
and by photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human 
activities (smog). Tropospheric ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the 
stratosphere, it is created by the interaction between solar ultraviolet 
radiation and molecular oxygen (O2). Stratospheric ozone plays a 
dominant role in the stratospheric radiative balance. Its concentration is 
highest in the ozone layer.
Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted on 
December 2015 in Paris, France, at the 21st session of the Conference 
of the Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC. The agreement, adopted by 196 
Parties to the UNFCCC, entered into force on 4 November 2016 and as 
of May 2018 had 195 Signatories and was ratified by 177 Parties. One 
of the goals of the Paris Agreement is ‘Holding the increase in the global 
average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels 
and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above 
pre-industrial levels’, recognising that this would significantly reduce 
the risks and impacts of climate change. Additionally, the Agreement 
aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with the impacts 
of climate change. The Paris Agreement is intended to become fully 
effective in 2020. See also United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), Kyoto Protocol and Nationally Determined 
Contributions (NDCs).
Participatory governance See Governance.
Pathways The temporal evolution of natural and/or human systems 
towards a future state. Pathway concepts range from sets of quantitative 
and qualitative scenarios or narratives of potential futures to solution-
oriented decision-making processes to achieve desirable societal goals. 
Pathway approaches typically focus on biophysical, techno-economic, 
and/or socio-behavioural trajectories and involve various dynamics, goals 
and actors across different scales.
1.5°C pathway
A pathway of emissions of greenhouse gases and other climate forcers 
that provides an approximately one-in-two to two-in-three chance, given 
current knowledge of the climate response, of global warming either 
remaining below 1.5°C or returning to 1.5°C by around 2100 following 
an overshoot. See also Temperature overshoot.
Adaptation pathways
A series of adaptation choices involving trade-offs between short-term 
and long-term goals and values. These are processes of deliberation to 
identify solutions that are meaningful to people in the context of their 
daily lives and to avoid potential maladaptation. 
Development pathways
Development pathways are trajectories based on an array of social, 
economic, cultural, technological, institutional and biophysical features 
that characterise the interactions between human and natural systems 
and outline visions for the future, at a particular scale. 
Emission pathways
Modelled trajectories of global anthropogenic emissions over the 21st 
century are termed emission pathways. 
Mitigation pathways 
A mitigation pathway is a temporal evolution of a set of mitigation 
scenario features, such as greenhouse gas emissions and socio-economic 
development.
Overshoot pathways
Pathways that exceed the stabilization level (concentration, forcing, or 
temperature) before the end of a time horizon of interest (e.g., before 
2100) and then decline towards that level by that time. Once the target 
level is exceeded, removal by sinks of greenhouse gases is required. See 
also Temperature overshoot.
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
556
Non-overshoot pathways
Pathways that stay below the stabilization level (concentration, forcing, 
or temperature) during the time horizon of interest (e.g., until 2100).
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)
Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concentrations of 
the full suite of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols and chemically 
active gases, as well as land use/land cover (Moss et al., 2008). The 
word representative signifies that each RCP provides only one of many 
possible scenarios that would lead to the specific radiative forcing 
characteristics. The term pathway emphasizes the fact that not only the 
long-term concentration levels but also the trajectory taken over time to 
reach that outcome are of interest (Moss et al., 2010). RCPs were used to 
develop climate projections in CMIP5.
• RCP2.6: One pathway where radiative forcing peaks at  
 approximately 3 W m-2 and then declines to be limited at 2.6 W m-2 
 in 2100 (the corresponding Extended Concentration Pathway, or  
 ECP, has constant emissions after 2100).
• RCP4.5 and RCP6.0: Two intermediate stabilization pathways  
 in which radiative forcing is limited at approximately 4.5 W m-2 
 and 6.0 W m-2 in 2100 (the corresponding ECPs have constant  
 concentrations after 2150).
• RCP8.5: One high pathway which leads to >8.5 W m-2 in 2100  
 (the corresponding ECP has constant emissions after 2100 until  
 2150 and constant concentrations after 2250).
See also Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) and Shared 
Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs).
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) 
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) were developed to complement 
the RCPs with varying socio-economic challenges to adaptation and 
mitigation (O’Neill et al., 2014). Based on five narratives, the SSPs 
describe alternative socio-economic futures in the absence of climate 
policy intervention, comprising sustainable development (SSP1), regional 
rivalry (SSP3), inequality (SSP4), fossil–fuelled development (SSP5) and 
middle-of-the-road development (SSP2) (O’Neill, 2000; O’Neill et al., 
2017; Riahi et al., 2017). The combination of SSP-based socio-economic 
scenarios and Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)-based 
climate projections provides an integrative frame for climate impact and 
policy analysis.
Transformation pathways
Trajectories describing consistent sets of possible futures of greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions, atmospheric concentrations, or global mean 
surface temperatures implied from mitigation and adaptation actions 
associated with a set of broad and irreversible economic, technological, 
societal and behavioural changes. This can encompass changes in the 
way energy and infrastructure are used and produced, natural resources 
are managed and institutions are set up and in the pace and direction of 
technological change.
See also Scenario, Scenario storyline, Emission scenario, Mitigation 
scenario, Baseline scenario, Stabilization (of GHG or CO2-equivalent 
concentration) and Narratives.
Peri-urban areas Peri-urban areas are those parts of a city that 
appear to be quite rural but are in reality strongly linked functionally to 
the city in its daily activities.
Permafrost Ground (soil or rock and included ice and organic 
material) that remains at or below 0°C for at least two consecutive years.
pH pH is a dimensionless measure of the acidity of a solution given by 
its concentration of hydrogen ions ([H+]). pH is measured on a logarithmic 
scale where pH = -log10[H+]. Thus, a pH decrease of 1 unit corresponds to 
a 10-fold increase in the concentration of H+, or acidity.
Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) See Electric vehicle (EV).
Policies (for climate change mitigation and adaptation)  
Policies are taken and/or mandated by a government – often in conjunction 
with business and industry within a single country, or collectively with other 
countries – to accelerate mitigation and adaptation measures. Examples of 
policies are support mechanisms for renewable energy supplies, carbon or 
energy taxes, fuel efficiency standards for automobiles, etc.
Political economy The set of interlinked relationships between 
people, the state, society and markets as defined by law, politics, 
economics, customs and power that determine the outcome of trade and 
transactions and the distribution of wealth in a country or economy. 
Poverty Poverty is a complex concept with several definitions 
stemming from different schools of thought. It can refer to material 
circumstances (such as need, pattern of deprivation or limited resources), 
economic conditions (such as standard of living, inequality or economic 
position) and/or social relationships (such as social class, dependency, 
exclusion, lack of basic security or lack of entitlement). See also Poverty 
eradication.
Poverty eradication A set of measures to end poverty in all its 
forms everywhere. See also Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Precursors Atmospheric compounds that are not greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) or aerosols, but that have an effect on GHG or aerosol 
concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical processes regulating 
their production or destruction rates. See also Aerosol and Greenhouse 
gas (GHG).
Pre-industrial The multi-century period prior to the onset of large-
scale industrial activity around 1750. The reference period 1850–1900 
is used to approximate pre-industrial global mean surface temperature 
(GMST). See also Industrial revolution.
Procedural equity See Equity.
Procedural justice See Justice.
Procedural rights See Human rights.
Projection A projection is a potential future evolution of a quantity 
or set of quantities, often computed with the aid of a model. Unlike 
predictions, projections are conditional on assumptions concerning, for 
example, future socio-economic and technological developments that 
may or may not be realized. See also Climate projection, Scenario and 
Pathways.
Purchasing power parity (PPP) The purchasing power of a currency 
is expressed using a basket of goods and services that can be bought 
with a given amount in the home country. International comparison of, 
for example, gross domestic products (GDPs) of countries can be based 
on the purchasing power of currencies rather than on current exchange 
rates. PPP estimates tend to lower the gap between the per capita GDP in 
industrialized and developing countries. See also Market exchange rate 
(MER).
Radiative forcing Radiative forcing is the change in the net, 
downward minus upward, radiative flux (expressed in W m-2) at the 
tropopause or top of atmosphere due to a change in a driver of climate 
change, such as a change in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) 
or the output of the Sun. The traditional radiative forcing is computed 
with all tropospheric properties held fixed at their unperturbed values, 
and after allowing for stratospheric temperatures, if perturbed, to 
readjust to radiative-dynamical equilibrium. Radiative forcing is called 
instantaneous if no change in stratospheric temperature is accounted for. 
The radiative forcing once rapid adjustments are accounted for is termed 
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
557
the effective radiative forcing. Radiative forcing is not to be confused 
with cloud radiative forcing, which describes an unrelated measure of 
the impact of clouds on the radiative flux at the top of the atmosphere.
Reasons for Concern (RFCs) Elements of a classification 
framework, first developed in the IPCC Third Assessment Report, which 
aims to facilitate judgments about what level of climate change may be 
dangerous (in the language of Article 2 of the UNFCCC) by aggregating 
risks from various sectors, considering hazards, exposures, vulnerabilities, 
capacities to adapt, and the resulting impacts.
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation 
(REDD+) An effort to create financial value for the carbon stored in 
forests, offering incentives for developing countries to reduce emissions 
from forested lands and invest in low-carbon paths to sustainable 
development (SD). It is therefore a mechanism for mitigation that results 
from avoiding deforestation. REDD+ goes beyond deforestation and 
forest degradation, and includes the role of conservation, sustainable 
management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks. 
The concept was first introduced in 2005 in the 11th Session of the 
Conference of the Parties (COP) in Montreal and later given greater 
recognition in the 13th Session of the COP in 2007 at Bali and inclusion 
in the Bali Action Plan, which called for ‘policy approaches and positive 
incentives on issues relating to reducing emissions from deforestation 
and forest degradation in developing countries (REDD) and the role of 
conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement 
of forest carbon stock in developing countries.’ Since then, support for 
REDD has increased and has slowly become a framework for action 
supported by a number of countries.
Reference period The period relative to which anomalies are 
computed. See also Anomaly.
Reference scenario See Baseline scenario.
Reforestation Planting of forests on lands that have previously 
contained forests but that have been converted to some other use. For 
a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, 
reforestation and deforestation, see the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, 
Land-Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000), information provided by 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 
2013), the report on Definitions and Methodological Options to 
Inventory Emissions from Direct Human-induced Degradation of Forests 
and Devegetation of Other Vegetation Types (IPCC, 2003). See also 
Deforestation, Afforestation and Reducing Emissions from Deforestation 
and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Region A region is a relatively large-scale land or ocean area 
characterized by specific geographical and climatological features. The 
climate of a land-based region is affected by regional and local scale 
features like topography, land use characteristics and large water 
bodies, as well as remote influences from other regions, in addition to 
global climate conditions. The IPCC defines a set of standard regions for 
analyses of observed climate trends and climate model projections (see 
Figure 3.2; AR5, SREX).
Remaining carbon budget Estimated cumulative net global 
anthropogenic CO2 emissions from the start of 2018 to the time that 
anthropogenic CO2 emissions reach net zero that would result, at some 
probability, in limiting global warming to a given level, accounting for the 
impact of other anthropogenic emissions.
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) See Pathways.
Resilience The capacity of social, economic and environmental 
systems to cope with a hazardous event or trend or disturbance, 
responding or reorganizing in ways that maintain their essential function, 
identity and structure while also maintaining the capacity for adaptation, 
learning and transformation. This definition builds from the definition 
used by Arctic Council (2013). See also Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability.
Risk The potential for adverse consequences where something of 
value is at stake and where the occurrence and degree of an outcome 
is uncertain. In the context of the assessment of climate impacts, the 
term risk is often used to refer to the potential for adverse consequences 
of a climate-related hazard, or of adaptation or mitigation responses to 
such a hazard, on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, ecosystems 
and species, economic, social and cultural assets, services (including 
ecosystem services), and infrastructure. Risk results from the interaction 
of vulnerability (of the affected system), its exposure over time (to the 
hazard), as well as the (climate-related) hazard and the likelihood of its 
occurrence. 
Risk assessment The qualitative and/or quantitative scientific 
estimation of risks. See also Risk, Risk management and Risk perception.
Risk management Plans, actions, strategies or policies to reduce the 
likelihood and/or consequences of risks or to respond to consequences. 
See also Risk, Risk assessment and Risk perception.
Risk perception The subjective judgment that people make about 
the characteristics and severity of a risk. See also Risk, Risk assessment 
and Risk management.
Runoff The flow of water over the surface or through the subsurface, 
which typically originates from the part of liquid precipitation and/or 
snow/ice melt that does not evaporate or refreeze, and is not transpired. 
See also Hydrological cycle.
Scenario A plausible description of how the future may develop 
based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions 
about key driving forces (e.g., rate of technological change, prices) and 
relationships. Note that scenarios are neither predictions nor forecasts, 
but are used to provide a view of the implications of developments 
and actions. See also Baseline scenario, Emission scenario, Mitigation 
scenario and Pathways.
Scenario storyline A narrative description of a scenario (or family of 
scenarios), highlighting the main scenario characteristics, relationships 
between key driving forces and the dynamics of their evolution. Also 
referred to as ‘narratives’ in the scenario literature. See also Narratives.
SDG-interaction score A seven-point scale (Nilsson et al., 2016) 
used to rate interactions between mitigation options and the SDGs. 
Scores range from +3 (indivisible) to −3 (cancelling), with a zero score 
indicating ‘consistent’ but with neither a positive or negative interaction. 
The scale, as applied in this report, also includes direction (whether the 
interaction is uni- or bi-directional) and confidence as assessed per IPCC 
guidelines. 
Sea ice Ice found at the sea surface that has originated from the freezing 
of seawater. Sea ice may be discontinuous pieces (ice floes) moved on the 
ocean surface by wind and currents (pack ice), or a motionless sheet 
attached to the coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice concentration is the fraction 
of the ocean covered by ice. Sea ice less than one year old is called first-
year ice. Perennial ice is sea ice that survives at least one summer. It may 
be subdivided into second-year ice and multi-year ice, where multi-year 
ice has survived at least two summers.
Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall) Sea level can 
change, both globally and locally (relative sea level change) due to (1) a 
change in ocean volume as a result of a change in the mass of water in 
the ocean, (2) changes in ocean volume as a result of changes in ocean 
water density, (3) changes in the shape of the ocean basins and changes 
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
558
in the Earth’s gravitational and rotational fields, and (4) local subsidence 
or uplift of the land. Global mean sea level change resulting from change 
in the mass of the ocean is called barystatic. The amount of barystatic 
sea level change due to the addition or removal of a mass of water is 
called its sea level equivalent (SLE). Sea level changes, both globally and 
locally, resulting from changes in water density are called steric. Density 
changes induced by temperature changes only are called thermosteric, 
while density changes induced by salinity changes are called halosteric. 
Barystatic and steric sea level changes do not include the effect of 
changes in the shape of ocean basins induced by the change in the ocean 
mass and its distribution.
Sea surface temperature (SST) The sea surface temperature is 
the subsurface bulk temperature in the top few meters of the ocean, 
measured by ships, buoys, and drifters. From ships, measurements of 
water samples in buckets were mostly switched in the 1940s to samples 
from engine intake water. Satellite measurements of skin temperature 
(uppermost layer; a fraction of a millimeter thick) in the infrared or 
the top centimeter or so in the microwave are also used, but must be 
adjusted to be compatible with the bulk temperature.
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction The Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 outlines seven clear 
targets and four priorities for action to prevent new, and to reduce 
existing, disaster risks. The voluntary, non-binding agreement recognizes 
that the State has the primary role to reduce disaster risk but that 
responsibility should be shared with other stakeholders, including local 
government and the private sector. Its aim is to achieve ‘substantial 
reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods and health and 
in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of 
persons, businesses, communities and countries.’
Sequestration See Uptake.
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) See Pathways.
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) Short-lived climate forcers 
refers to a set of compounds that are primarily composed of those with 
short lifetimes in the atmosphere compared to well-mixed greenhouse 
gases, and are also referred to as near-term climate forcers. This set 
of compounds includes methane (CH4), which is also a well-mixed 
greenhouse gas, as well as ozone (O3) and aerosols, or their precursors, 
and some halogenated species that are not well-mixed greenhouse gases. 
These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal to 
centennial time scales, and so their effect on climate is predominantly 
in the first decade after their emission, although their changes can still 
induce long-term climate effects such as sea level change. Their effect 
can be cooling or warming. A subset of exclusively warming short-lived 
climate forcers is referred to as short-lived climate pollutants. See also 
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF).
Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) See Short-lived climate 
forcers (SLCF).
Sink A reservoir (natural or human, in soil, ocean, and plants) where a 
greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas is stored. 
Note that UNFCCC Article 1.8 refers to a sink as any process, activity or 
mechanism which removes a greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor 
of a greenhouse gas from the atmosphere. See also Uptake.
Small island developing states (SIDS) Small island developing 
states (SIDS), as recognised by the United Nations OHRLLS (Office of 
the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked 
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States), are a distinct 
group of developing countries facing specific social, economic and 
environmental vulnerabilities (UN-OHRLLS, 2011). They were recognized 
as a special case both for their environment and development at the 
Rio Earth Summit in Brazil in 1992. Fifty-eight countries and territories 
are presently classified as SIDS by the UN OHRLLS, with 38 being UN 
member states and 20 being Non-UN Members or Associate Members of 
the Regional Commissions (UN-OHRLLS, 2018). 
Social cost of carbon (SCC) The net present value of aggregate 
climate damages (with overall harmful damages expressed as a number 
with positive sign) from one more tonne of carbon in the form of carbon 
dioxide (CO2), conditional on a global emissions trajectory over time.
Social costs The full costs of an action in terms of social welfare 
losses, including external costs associated with the impacts of this action 
on the environment, the economy (GDP, employment) and on the society 
as a whole.
Social-ecological systems An integrated system that includes 
human societies and ecosystems, in which humans are part of nature. 
The functions of such a system arise from the interactions and 
interdependence of the social and ecological subsystems. The system’s 
structure is characterized by reciprocal feedbacks, emphasising that 
humans must be seen as a part of, not apart from, nature. This definition 
builds from Arctic Council (2016) and Berkes and Folke (1998).
Social inclusion A process of improving the terms of participation 
in society, particularly for people who are disadvantaged, through 
enhancing opportunities, access to resources, and respect for rights (UN 
DESA, 2016). 
Social justice See Justice.
Social learning A process of social interaction through which people 
learn new behaviours, capacities, values and attitudes.
Social value of mitigation activities (SVMA) Social, economic 
and environmental value of mitigation activities that include, in addition 
to their climate benefits, their co-benefits to adaptation and sustainable 
development objectives.
Societal (social) transformation See Transformation.
Socio-economic scenario A scenario that describes a possible 
future in terms of population, gross domestic product (GDP), and other 
socio-economic factors relevant to understanding the implications of 
climate change. See also Baseline scenario, Emission scenario, Mitigation 
scenario and Pathways.
Socio-technical transitions Socio-technical transitions are where 
technological change is associated with social systems and the two are 
inextricably linked.
Soil carbon sequestration (SCS) Land management changes 
which increase the soil organic carbon content, resulting in a net removal 
of CO2 from the atmosphere.
Soil moisture Water stored in the soil in liquid or frozen form. Root-
zone soil moisture is of most relevance for plant activity.
Solar radiation management See Solar radiation modification (SRM).
Solar radiation modification (SRM) Solar radiation modification 
refers to the intentional modification of the Earth’s shortwave radiative 
budget with the aim of reducing warming. Artificial injection of 
stratospheric aerosols, marine cloud brightening and land surface albedo 
modification are examples of proposed SRM methods. SRM does not 
fall within the definitions of mitigation and adaptation (IPCC, 2012b, p. 
2). Note that in the literature SRM is also referred to as solar radiation 
management or albedo enhancement.
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
559
Stabilization (of GHG or CO2-equivalent concentration) A 
state in which the atmospheric concentrations of one greenhouse gas 
(GHG) (e.g., carbon dioxide) or of a CO2-equivalent basket of GHGs (or a 
combination of GHGs and aerosols) remains constant over time.
Stranded assets Assets exposed to devaluations or conversion to 
‘liabilities’ because of unanticipated changes in their initially expected 
revenues due to innovations and/or evolutions of the business context, 
including changes in public regulations at the domestic and international 
levels.
Stratosphere The highly stratified region of the atmosphere above 
the troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9 km at high 
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50 km altitude. See 
also Atmosphere, and Troposphere.
Sub-national actor Sub-national actors include state/provincial, 
regional, metropolitan and local/municipal governments as well as non-
party stakeholders, such as civil society, the private sector, cities and other 
sub-national authorities, local communities and indigenous peoples. 
Substantive rights See Human rights.
Supply-side measures See Demand- and supply-side measures.
Surface temperature See Global mean surface temperature (GMST), 
Land surface air temperature, Global mean surface air temperature 
(GSAT) and Sea surface temperature (SST).
Sustainability A dynamic process that guarantees the persistence of 
natural and human systems in an equitable manner.
Sustainable development (SD) Development that meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs (WCED, 1987) and balances social, economic and 
environmental concerns. See also Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
and Development pathways (under Pathways).
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The 17 global goals 
for development for all countries established by the United Nations 
through a participatory process and elaborated in the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, including ending poverty and hunger; ensuring 
health and well-being, education, gender equality, clean water and 
energy, and decent work; building and ensuring resilient and sustainable 
infrastructure, cities and consumption; reducing inequalities; protecting 
land and water ecosystems; promoting peace, justice and partnerships; 
and taking urgent action on climate change. See also Sustainable 
development (SD).
Technology transfer The exchange of knowledge, hardware and 
associated software, money and goods among stakeholders, which 
leads to the spread of technology for adaptation or mitigation. The 
term encompasses both diffusion of technologies and technological 
cooperation across and within countries.
Temperature overshoot The temporary exceedance of a specified 
level of global warming, such as 1.5°C. Overshoot implies a peak followed 
by a decline in global warming, achieved through anthropogenic removal 
of CO2 exceeding remaining CO2 emissions globally. See also Overshoot 
pathways and Non-overshoot pathways (both under Pathways).
Tipping point A level of change in system properties beyond which 
a system reorganizes, often abruptly, and does not return to the initial 
state even if the drivers of the change are abated. For the climate system, 
it refers to a critical threshold when global or regional climate changes 
from one stable state to another stable state. See also Irreversibility.
Transformation A change in the fundamental attributes of natural 
and human systems.
Societal (social) transformation 
A profound and often deliberate shift initiated by communities toward 
sustainability, facilitated by changes in individual and collective values 
and behaviours, and a fairer balance of political, cultural, and institutional 
power in society.
Transformation pathways See Pathways.
Transformational adaptation See Adaptation.
Transformative change A system-wide change that requires more 
than technological change through consideration of social and economic 
factors that, with technology, can bring about rapid change at scale.
Transient climate response See Climate sensitivity.
Transient climate response to cumulative CO2 emissions 
(TCRE) The transient global average surface temperature change per 
unit cumulative CO2 emissions, usually 1000 GtC. TCRE combines both 
information on the airborne fraction of cumulative CO2 emissions (the 
fraction of the total CO2 emitted that remains in the atmosphere, which 
is determined by carbon cycle processes) and on the transient climate 
response (TCR). See also Transient climate response (under Climate 
sensitivity).
Transit-oriented development (TOD) An approach to urban 
development that maximizes the amount of residential, business and 
leisure space within walking distance of efficient public transport, so as 
to enhance mobility of citizens, the viability of public transport and the 
value of urban land in mutually supporting ways.
Transition The process of changing from one state or condition 
to another in a given period of time. Transition can be in individuals, 
firms, cities, regions and nations, and can be based on incremental or 
transformative change.
Tropical cyclone The general term for a strong, cyclonic-scale 
disturbance that originates over tropical oceans. Distinguished from 
weaker systems (often named tropical disturbances or depressions) by 
exceeding a threshold wind speed. A tropical storm is a tropical cyclone 
with one-minute average surface winds between 18 and 32 m s-1. Beyond 
32 m s-1, a tropical cyclone is called a hurricane, typhoon, or cyclone, 
depending on geographic location. See also Extratropical cyclone.
Troposphere The lowest part of the atmosphere, from the surface 
to about 10 km in altitude at mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km at high 
latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average), where clouds and weather 
phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures generally decrease 
with height. See also Atmosphere and Stratosphere.
Uncertainty A state of incomplete knowledge that can result from 
a lack of information or from disagreement about what is known or 
even knowable. It may have many types of sources, from imprecision in 
the data to ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, incomplete 
understanding of critical processes, or uncertain projections of human 
behaviour. Uncertainty can therefore be represented by quantitative 
measures (e.g., a probability density function) or by qualitative 
statements (e.g., reflecting the judgment of a team of experts) (see Moss 
and Schneider, 2000; IPCC, 2004; Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See also 
Confidence and Likelihood.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) The UNFCCC was adopted in May 1992 and opened for 
signature at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. It entered into force 
in March 1994 and as of May 2018 had 197 Parties (196 States and the 
European Union). The Convention’s ultimate objective is the ‘stabilisation 
of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that 
would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
560
system.’ The provisions of the Convention are pursued and implemented 
by two treaties: the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. See also 
Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement.
Uptake The addition of a substance of concern to a reservoir. See also 
Carbon sequestration and Sink.
Vulnerability The propensity or predisposition to be adversely 
affected. Vulnerability encompasses a variety of concepts and elements 
including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of capacity to cope 
and adapt. See also Exposure, Hazard and Risk.
Water cycle See Hydrological cycle.
Well-being A state of existence that fulfils various human needs, 
including material living conditions and quality of life, as well as the 
ability to pursue one’s goals, to thrive, and feel satisfied with one’s life. 
Ecosystem well-being refers to the ability of ecosystems to maintain their 
diversity and quality.
Zero emissions commitment See Climate change commitment.
Glossary 
Annex I
AI
561
Arctic Council, 2013: Glossary of terms. In: Arctic Resilience Interim Report 2013. 
Stockholm Environment Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, 
Sweden, pp. viii.
Carson, M. and G. Peterson (eds.), 2016: Arctic Resilience Report 2016. Stockholm Envi-
ronment Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, Sweden, 218 pp.
Berkes, F. and C. Folke, 1998: Linking Social and Ecological Systems: Management 
Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 459 pp.
Culwick, C. and K. Bobbins, 2016: A Framework for a Green Infrastructure Planning 
Approach in the Gauteng City–Region. GCRO Research Report No. 04, Gauteng 
City–Region Observatory (GRCO), Johannesburg, South Africa, 127 pp.
FAO, 2001: Glossary. In: The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2001. Food and 
Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, pp. 49–50.
FAO, 2013: Food wastage footprint: Impacts on natural resources. Summary report. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 
63 pp.
FAO, 2018: Climate–Smart Agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO). Retrieved from: www.fao.org/climate–smart–agriculture.
Fung, A. and E.O. Wright (eds.), 2003: Deepening Democracy: Institutional Innova-
tions in Empowered Participatory Governance. Verso, London, UK, 312 pp.
Helpman, E. (ed.), 1998: General Purpose Technologies and Economic Growth. MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 315 pp.
IBI, 2018: Frequently Asked Questions About Biochar: What is biochar? International 
Biochar Initiative (IBI). Retrieved from: https://biochar–international.org/faqs.
IOM, 2018: Key Migration Terms. International Organization for Migration (IOM). 
Retrieved from: www.iom.int/key–migration–terms.
IPCC, 2000: Land Use, Land–Use Change, and Forestry: A Special Report of the 
IPCC. [Watson, R.T., I.R. Noble, B. Bolin, N.H. Ravindranath, D.J. Verardo, and D.J. 
Dokken (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 375 pp.
IPCC, 2003: Definitions and Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions from 
Direct Human–induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of Other 
Vegetation Types. [Penman, J., M. Gytarsky, T. Hiraishi, T. Krug, D. Kruger, R. Pipatti, 
L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, K. Tanabe, and F. Wagner (eds.)]. Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES), Hayama, Kanagawa, Japan, 32 pp.
IPCC, 2004: IPCC Workshop on Describing Scientific Uncertainties in Climate Change 
to Support Analysis of Risk of Options. Workshop Report. Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 138 pp.
IPCC, 2011: Workshop Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Workshop on Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Marine Biology and Eco-
systems. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, K.J. Mach, G.–K. Plattner, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, M. Tignor, and K.L. Ebi (eds.)]. IPCC Working Group II Tech-
nical Support Unit, Carnegie Institution, Stanford, California, United States of 
America, 164 pp.
IPCC, 2012a: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance 
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). [Field, C.B., V. Barros, 
T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.–K. 
Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.
IPCC, 2012b: Meeting Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
Expert Meeting on Geoengineering. IPCC Working Group III Technical Support 
Unit, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, Potsdam, Germany, 99 pp.
ISO, 2018: ISO 14044:2006. Environmental management – Life cycle assessment 
– Requirements and guidelines. International Standards Organisation (ISO). 
Retrieved from: www.iso.org/standard/38498.html.
Jagers, S.C. and J. Stripple, 2003: Climate Governance Beyond the State. Global 
Governance, 9(3), 385–399, www.jstor.org/stable/27800489.
Mastrandrea, M.D. et al., 2010: Guidance Note for Lead Authors of the IPCC Fifth 
Assessment Report on Consistent Treatment of Uncertainties. Intergovern- 
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 6 pp.
MEA, 2005: Appendix D: Glossary. In: Ecosystems and Human Well–being: 
Current States and Trends. Findings of the Condition and Trends Working Group 
[Hassan, R., R. Scholes, and N. Ash (eds.)]. Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 
(MEA). Island Press, Washington DC, USA, pp. 893–900.
Mechler, R., L.M. Bouwer, T. Schinko, S. Surminski, and J. Linnerooth–Bayer (eds.), in 
press: Loss and Damage from Climate Change: Concepts, Methods and Policy 
Options. Springer International Publishing, 561 pp.
Mitchell, T. and S. Maxwell, 2010: Defining climate compatible development. CDKN 
ODI Policy Brief November 2010/A, Climate & Development Knowledge 
Network (CDKN), 6 pp.
Moss, R.H. and S.H. Schneider, 2000: Uncertainties in the IPCC TAR: Recommenda-
tions to Lead Authors for More Consistent Assessment and Reporting. In: Guid-
ance Papers on the Cross Cutting Issues of the Third Assessment Report of the 
IPCC [Pachauri, R., T. Taniguchi, and K. Tanaka (eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 33–51.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2008: Towards New Scenarios for Analysis of Emissions, Climate 
Change, Impacts, and Response Strategies. Technical Summary. Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 25 pp.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2010: The next generation of scenarios for climate change research 
and assessment. Nature, 463(7282), 747–756, doi:10.1038/nature08823.
MRFCJ, 2018: Principles of Climate Justice. Mary Robinson Foundation For Climate 
Justice (MRFCJ). Retrieved from: www.mrfcj.org/principles–of–climate–justice.
Nilsson, M., D. Griggs, and M. Visbeck, 2016: Policy: Map the interactions between Sus-
tainable Development Goals. Nature, 534(7607), 320–322, doi:10.1038/534320a.
O’Neill, B.C., 2000: The Jury is Still Out on Global Warming Potentials. Climatic 
Change, 44(4), 427–443, doi:10.1023/A:1005582929198.
O’Neill, B.C. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change research: 
the concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 122(3), 387–
400, doi:10.1007/s10584–013–0905–2.
O’Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic 
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental 
Change, 42, 169–180, doi:10.1016j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
Peters, B.G. and J. Pierre, 2001: Developments in intergovernmental relations: 
towards multi–level governance. Policy & Politics, 29(2), 131–135,
 
doi:10.1332/0305573012501251.
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their energy, land 
use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global Environ- 
mental Change, 42, 153–168, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Sarmiento, H. and C. Tilly, 2018: Governance Lessons from Urban Informality. Politics 
and Governance, 6(1), 199–202, doi:10.17645/pag.v6i1.1169.
Tàbara, J.D., J. Jäger, D. Mangalagiu, and M. Grasso, 2018: Defining transformative 
climate science to address high–end climate change. Regional Environmental 
Change, 1–12, doi:10.1007/s10113–018–1288–8.
Termeer, C.J.A.M., A. Dewulf, and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational change: 
governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a continuous 
change perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 
60(4), 558–576, doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
UN, 1992: Article 2: Use of Terms. In: Convention on Biological Diversity. United 
Nations (UN), pp. 3–4.
UN, 1998: Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, 
United Nations (UN) Economic and Social Council, 14 pp.
UN, 2015: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A/
RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New York, NY, USA, 35 pp.
UN DESA, 2016: Identifying social inclusion and exclusion. In: Leaving no one behind: 
the imperative of inclusive development. Report on the World Social Situation 
2016. ST/ESA/362, United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UN DESA), New York, NY, USA, pp. 17–31.
UNESCO, 2018: Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems. United Nations Educa-
tional, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). 
 
Retrieved 
from: 
www.unesco.org/new/en/natural–sciences/priority–areas/
links/related–information/what–is–local–and–indigenous–knowledge.
UNFCCC, 2013: Reporting and accounting of LULUCF activities under the Kyoto Proto-
col. United Nations Framework Convention on Climatic Change (UNFCCC), Bonn, 
Germany. Retrieved from: http://unfccc.int/methods/lulucf/items/4129.php.
UNISDR, 2009: 2009 UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. United 
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva, 
Switzerland, 30 pp.
UNOHCHR, 2018: What are Human rights? UN Office of the High Commissioner for 
Human Rights (UNOHCHR). Retrieved from: 
 
www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Pages/whatarehumanrights.aspx.
UN–OHRLLS, 2011: Small Island Developing States: Small Islands Big(ger) Stakes. 
Office for the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Land-
locked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN–OHRLLS), 
New York, NY, USA, 32 pp.
References
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
562
UN–OHRLLS, 2018: Small Island Developing States: Country profiles. Office for the 
High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing 
Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN–OHRLLS). Retrieved from: 
http://unohrlls.org/about–sids/country–profiles.
UN–REDD, 2009: Measurement, Assessment, Reporting and Verification (MARV): 
Issues and Options for REDD. Draft Discussion Paper, United Nations Collabora-
tive Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degra-
dation in Developing Countries (UN–REDD), Geneva, Switzerland, 12 pp.
WCED, 1987: Our Common Future. World Commission on Environment and Develop-
ment (WCED), Geneva, Switzerland, 400 pp., doi:10.2307/2621529.
Willems, S. and K. Baumert, 2003: Institutional Capacity and Climate Actions. COM/
ENV/EPOC/IEA/SLT(2003)5, Organisation for Economic Co–operation and 
Development (OECD) International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 50 pp.
