801
Annexes
AI
Annex I: Glossary
This annex should be cited as:
IPCC, 2019: Annex I: Glossary [van Diemen, R. (ed.)]. In: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate 
change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in 
terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, 
R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. 
Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157988.010
Coordinating Editor:
Renée van Diemen (The Netherlands/United Kingdom)
Editorial Team:
Tim Benton (United Kingdom), Eduardo Calvo (Peru), Annette Cowie (Australia), Valérie 
Masson-Delmotte (France), Aziz Elbehri (Morocco), Karlheinz Erb (Italy), Giacomo Grassi (Italy/
European Union), J.B. Robin Matthews (United Kingdom), Hans-Otto Pörtner (Germany), Andy 
Reisinger (New Zealand), Debra Roberts (South Africa), Priyadarshi Shukla (India), Andrey Sirin 
(The Russian Federation), Jim Skea (United Kingdom), Murat Türkeş (Turkey), Nora M. Weyer 
(Germany), Sumaya Zakieldeen (Sudan), Panmao Zhai (China) 
Notes:
Note that subterms are in italics beneath main terms.
This glossary defines some specific terms as the Lead Authors intend them to be interpreted in 
the context of this report. Blue, italicised words indicate that the term is defined in the Glossary.
803
804
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
1.5°C pathway See Pathways.  
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development A UN resolution 
in September 2015 adopting a plan of action for people, planet and 
prosperity in a new global development framework anchored in 17 
Sustainable Development Goals (UN, 2015). 
Acceptability of policy or system change The extent to 
which a policy or system change is evaluated unfavourably or 
favourably, or rejected or supported, by members of the general 
public (public acceptability) or politicians or governments (political 
acceptability). Acceptability may vary from totally unacceptable/fully 
rejected to totally acceptable/fully supported; individuals may differ 
in how acceptable policies or system changes are believed to be.
Acclimatisation A change in functional or morphological traits 
occurring once or repeatedly (e.g., seasonally) during the lifetime 
of an individual organism in its natural environment. Through 
acclimatisation the individual maintains performance across a range 
of environmental conditions. For a clear differentiation between 
findings in laboratory and field studies, the term acclimation is used 
in ecophysiology for the respective phenomena when observed in 
well-defined experimental settings. The term (adaptive) plasticity 
characterises the generally limited scope of changes in phenotype 
that an individual can reach through the process of acclimatisation.
Activity A practice or ensemble of practices that take place on 
a delineated area over a given period of time.
Activity data Data on the magnitude of a human activity resulting 
in emissions or removals taking place during a given period of time. In 
the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) sector, data on 
area of different land uses, management systems, animal numbers, 
lime and fertiliser use are examples of activity data.
Adaptability See Adaptive capacity.
Adaptation In human systems, the process of adjustment to 
actual or expected climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm 
or exploit beneficial opportunities. In natural systems, the process of 
adjustment to actual climate and its effects; human intervention may 
facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its effects.
Incremental adaptation 
Adaptation that maintains the essence and integrity of a system or 
process at a given scale (Park et al., 2012).
Transformational adaptation
Adaptation that changes the fundamental attributes of a social-
ecological system in anticipation of climate change and its impacts.
Adaptation limits
The point at which an actor’s objectives (or system needs) cannot be 
secured from intolerable risks through adaptive actions. 
•  Hard adaptation limit: No adaptive actions are possible to avoid 
intolerable risks.
•  Soft adaptation limit: Options are currently not available to 
avoid intolerable risks through adaptive action.
See also Adaptation options, Adaptive capacity and Maladaptive 
actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Adaptation limits See Adaptation.
Adaptation options The array of strategies and measures 
that are available and appropriate for addressing adaptation. They 
include a wide range of actions that can be categorised as structural, 
institutional, ecological or behavioural. See also  Adaptive capacity, 
and Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptation pathways See Pathways 
Adaptive capacity The ability of systems, institutions, humans 
and other organisms to adjust to potential damage, to take advantage 
of opportunities, or to respond to consequences (IPCC, 2014; MA, 
2005). See also Adaptation, Adaptation options, and Maladaptive 
actions (Maladaptation).
Adaptive governance See Governance. 
Adverse side-effect The negative effects that a policy or 
measure aimed at one objective might have on other objectives, 
without yet evaluating the net effect on overall social welfare. 
Adverse side-effects are often subject to uncertainty and depend on, 
among others, local circumstances and implementation practices. See 
also Co-benefits and Risk.
Aerosol A suspension of airborne solid or liquid particles, with 
a typical size between a few nanometres and 10 μm that reside in the 
atmosphere for at least several hours. The term aerosol, which includes 
both the particles and the suspending gas, is often used in this report 
in its plural form to mean aerosol particles. Aerosols may be of either 
natural or anthropogenic origin. Aerosols may influence climate in 
several ways: through both interactions that scatter and/or absorb 
radiation and through interactions with cloud microphysics and other 
cloud properties, or upon deposition on snow or ice covered surfaces 
thereby altering their albedo and contributing to climate feedback. 
Atmospheric aerosols, whether natural or anthropogenic, originate 
from two different pathways: emissions of primary particulate matter 
(PM), and formation of secondary PM from gaseous precursors. The 
bulk of aerosols are of natural origin. Some scientists use group 
labels that refer to the chemical composition, namely: sea salt, 
organic carbon, black carbon (BC), mineral species (mainly desert 
dust), sulphate, nitrate, and ammonium. These labels are, however, 
imperfect as aerosols combine particles to create complex mixtures. 
See also Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Afforestation Conversion to forest of land that historically has 
not contained forests. [Note: For a discussion of the term forest and 
related terms such as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation, in 
the context of reporting and accounting Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities 
under the Kyoto Protocol, see 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods 
and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol.] See 
also Reforestation, Deforestation, Forest and Reducing Emissions 
from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Agreement In this report, the degree of agreement within the 
scientific body of knowledge on a particular finding is assessed 
based on multiple lines of evidence (e.g., mechanistic understanding, 
theory, data, models, expert judgement) and expressed qualitatively 
(Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See also Confidence, Likelihood, 
and Uncertainty.
805
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) In the 
context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the 
United Nations Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), AFOLU is 
the sum of the GHG inventory sectors Agriculture and Land Use, Land-
Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF); see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
for National GHG Inventories for details. Given the difference in 
estimating the ‘anthropogenic’ carbon dioxide (CO2) removals 
between countries and the global modelling community, the land-
related net GHG emissions from global models included in this report 
are not necessarily directly comparable with LULUCF estimates in 
national GHG Inventories.
FOLU (Forestry and Other Land Use) – also referred to as LULUCF
The subset of AFOLU emissions and removals of greenhouse gases 
(GHGs) resulting from direct human-induced land use, land-use 
change, and forestry activities excluding agricultural emissions. 
See also Land-Use Change (LUC) and Land Use, Land-Use Change and 
Forestry (LULUCF).
Agrobiodiversity ‘The variety and variability of animals, plants 
and micro-organisms that are used directly or indirectly for food 
and agriculture, including crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries. 
It comprises the diversity of genetic resources (varieties, breeds) 
and species used for food, fodder, fibre, fuel and pharmaceuticals. 
It also includes the diversity of non-harvested species that support 
production (soil micro-organisms, predators, pollinators), and those 
in the wider environment that support agro-ecosystems (agricultural, 
pastoral, forest and aquatic) as well as the diversity of the agro-
ecosystems’ (FAO, 2005).
Agroecology ‘The science and practice of applying ecological 
concepts, principles and knowledge (i.e., the interactions of, and 
explanations for, the diversity, abundance and activities of organisms) 
to the study, design and management of sustainable agroecosystems. 
It includes the roles of human beings as a central organism in 
agroecology by way of social and economic processes in farming 
systems. Agroecology examines the roles and interactions among 
all relevant biophysical, technical and socioeconomic components of 
farming systems and their surrounding landscapes’ (IPBES, 2019).
Agroforestry Collective name for land-use systems and 
technologies where woody perennials (trees, shrubs, palms, 
bamboos, etc.) are deliberately used on the same land-management 
units as agricultural crops and/or animals, in some form of spatial 
arrangement or temporal sequence. In agroforestry systems there 
are both ecological and economical interactions between the 
different components. Agroforestry can also be defined as a dynamic, 
ecologically based, natural resource management system that, 
through the integration of trees on farms and in the agricultural 
landscape, diversifies and sustains production for increased social, 
economic and environmental benefits for land users at all levels 
(FAO, 2015a).
Air pollution Degradation of air quality with negative effects 
on human health, the natural or built environment, due to the 
introduction by natural processes or human activity in the atmosphere 
of substances (gases, aerosols) which have a direct (primary 
pollutants) or indirect (secondary pollutants) harmful effect. See also 
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Albedo The proportion of sunlight (solar radiation) reflected by 
a surface or object, often expressed as a percentage. Clouds, snow 
and ice usually have high albedo; soil surfaces cover the albedo range 
from high to low; vegetation in the dry season and/or in arid zones 
can have high albedo, whereas photosynthetically active vegetation 
and the ocean have low albedo. The Earth’s planetary albedo changes 
mainly through varying cloudiness, snow, ice, leaf area and land 
cover changes.
Ambient 
persuasive 
technology Technological systems 
and environments that are designed to change human cognitive 
processing, attitudes and behaviours without the need for the user’s 
conscious attention.
Anomaly The deviation of a variable from its value averaged over 
a reference period. See also Reference period.
Anthromes ‘Human 
systems, 
with 
natural 
ecosystems 
embedded within them’ (Ellis and Ramankutty 2008). The anthrome 
classification system is based on human population density and land 
use, and comprises the following classes: dense settlements, villages, 
croplands, rangeland, forested (then broadened to seminatural) and 
wildlands (Ellis et al. 2010).
Anthropocene A proposed new geological epoch resulting from 
significant human-driven changes to the structure and functioning of 
the Earth System, including the climate system. Originally proposed 
in the Earth System science community in 2000, the proposed new 
epoch is undergoing a formalisation process within the geological 
community based on the stratigraphic evidence that human activities 
have changed the Earth System to the extent of forming geological 
deposits with a signature that is distinct from those of the Holocene, 
and which will remain in the geological record. Both the stratigraphic 
and Earth System approaches to defining the Anthropocene consider 
the mid-20th century to be the most appropriate starting date, 
although others have been proposed and continue to be discussed. 
The Anthropocene concept has been taken up by a diversity of 
disciplines and the public to denote the substantive influence humans 
have had on the state, dynamics and future of the Earth System. See 
also Holocene.
Anthropogenic Resulting from or produced by human activities. 
See also Anthropogenic emissions, and Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic emissions Emissions of greenhouse gases 
(GHGs), precursors of GHGs and aerosols caused by human activities. 
These activities include the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, land 
use and land-use changes (LUC), livestock production, fertilisation, 
waste management, and industrial processes. See also Anthropogenic, 
and Anthropogenic removals.
Anthropogenic removals The withdrawal of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) from the atmosphere as a result of deliberate human 
activities. These include enhancing biological sinks of CO2 and using 
chemical engineering to achieve long term removal and storage. 
Carbon capture and storage (CCS) from industrial and energy-related 
sources, which alone does not remove CO2 from the atmosphere, 
can help reduce atmospheric CO2 if it is combined with bioenergy 
production (BECCS). [Note: In the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
GHG Inventories, which are used in reporting of emissions to the 
UNFCCC, 'anthropogenic’ land-related GHG fluxes are defined as all 
806
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
those occurring on 'managed land’, i.e. ‘where human interventions 
and practices have been applied to perform production, ecological or 
social functions’. However, some removals (e.g. removals associated 
with CO2 fertilisation and N deposition) are not considered as 
‘anthropogenic’, or are referred to as ‘indirect’ anthropogenic 
effects, in some of the scientific literature assessed in this report. As 
a consequence, the land-related net GHG emission estimates from 
global models included in this report are not necessarily directly 
comparable with LULUCF estimates in national GHG Inventories. 
See also Anthropogenic emissions, Bioenergy with carbon dioxide 
capture and storage (BECCS), Carbon dioxide capture and storage 
(CCS) and Land use, Land-use change, and Forestry (LULUCF).
Aridity The state of a long-term climatic feature characterised 
by low average precipitation or available water in a region. Aridity 
generally arises from widespread persistent atmospheric subsidence 
or anticyclonic conditions, and from more localised subsidence 
in the lee side of mountains (adapted from Gbeckor-Kove, 1989; 
Türkeş, 1999).
Atmosphere The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth, divided 
into five layers — the troposphere which contains half of the Earth’s 
atmosphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the thermosphere, 
and the exosphere, which is the outer limit of the atmosphere. The 
dry atmosphere consists almost entirely of nitrogen (78.1% volume 
mixing ratio) and oxygen (20.9% volume mixing ratio), together 
with a number of trace gases, such as argon (0.93 % volume mixing 
ratio), helium and radiatively active greenhouse gases (GHGs) such 
as carbon dioxide (CO2) (0.04% volume mixing ratio) and ozone (O3). 
In addition, the atmosphere contains the GHG water vapour (H2O), 
whose amounts are highly variable but typically around 1% volume 
mixing ratio. The atmosphere also contains clouds and aerosols. See 
also Carbon dioxide (CO2), Ozone (O3), Troposphere, Stratosphere, 
Greenhouse gas (GHG), and Hydrological cycle.
Atmosphere-ocean general circulation model 
(AOGCM) See Climate model.
Atmospheric boundary layer The atmospheric layer adjacent 
to the Earth’s surface that is affected by friction against that boundary 
surface, and possibly by transport of heat and other variables across 
that surface (AMS, 2000). The lowest 100 m of the boundary layer 
(about 10% of the boundary layer thickness), where mechanical 
generation of turbulence is dominant, is called the surface boundary 
layer or surface layer.
Attribution See Detection and attribution.
Baseline scenario In much of the literature the term is also 
synonymous with the term business-as-usual (BAU) scenario, although 
the term BAU has fallen out of favour because the idea of business 
as usual in century-long socio-economic projections is hard to 
fathom. In the context of transformation pathways, the term baseline 
scenarios refers to scenarios that are based on the assumption that 
no mitigation policies or measures will be implemented beyond 
those that are already in force and/or are legislated or planned to 
be adopted. Baseline scenarios are not intended to be predictions 
of the future, but rather counterfactual constructions that can serve 
to highlight the level of emissions that would occur without further 
policy effort. Typically, baseline scenarios are then compared to 
mitigation scenarios that are constructed to meet different goals 
for greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, atmospheric concentrations 
or temperature change. The term baseline scenario is often used 
interchangeably with reference scenario and no policy scenario. See 
also Emission scenario, and Mitigation scenario. 
Biochar Relatively stable, carbon-rich material produced by 
heating biomass in an oxygen-limited environment. Biochar is 
distinguished from charcoal by its application: biochar is used as 
a soil amendment with the intention to improve soil functions and 
to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from biomass that would 
otherwise decompose rapidly (IBI, 2018).
Biodiversity Biodiversity or biological diversity means the 
variability among living organisms from all sources including, among 
other things, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and the 
ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity 
within species, between species and of ecosystems (UN, 1992). See 
also Ecosystem, and Ecosystem service. 
Bioenergy Energy derived from any form of biomass or its 
metabolic by-products. See also Biomass and Biofuel.
Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage 
(BECCS) Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) technology 
applied to a bioenergy facility. Note that depending on the total 
emissions of the BECCS supply chain, carbon dioxide (CO2) can be 
removed from the atmosphere. See also Bioenergy, and Carbon 
dioxide capture and storage (CCS).
Biofuel A fuel, generally in liquid form, produced from biomass. 
Biofuels include bioethanol from sugarcane, sugar beet or maize, and 
biodiesel from canola or soybeans. See also Biomass, and Bioenergy.
Biogeochemical effects Processes through which land affects 
climate, excluding biophysical effects. These processes include 
changes in net emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) towards the 
atmosphere, net emissions of aerosols (mineral and organic), ozone 
deposition on ecosystems, and net emissions of biogenic volatile 
organic compounds (BVOCs) and their subsequent changes in 
atmospheric chemistry. See also Biophysical effects. 
Biomass Organic material excluding the material that is fossilised 
or embedded in geological formations. Biomass may refer to the mass 
of organic matter in a specific area (ISO, 2014). See also Bioenergy, 
and Biofuel.
Traditional biomass
The combustion of wood, charcoal, agricultural residues and/or 
animal dung for cooking or heating in open fires or in inefficient 
stoves as is common in low-income countries.
Biome 'Global-scale zones, generally defined by the type of plant 
life that they support in response to average rainfall and temperature 
patterns. For example, tundra, coral reefs or savannas’ (IPBES, 2019).
Biophysical effects The range of physical processes through 
which land affects climate. These processes include changes in 
hydrology (e.g. water vapor fluxes at the land/atmosphere interface), 
heat exchanges via convective fluxes (latent and sensible), radiation 
(solar and infra-red, absorbed and emitted), and momentum (e.g. 
affecting wind speed).
807
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
Black carbon (BC) A relatively pure form of carbon, also known 
as soot, arising from the incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, 
biofuel, and biomass. It stays in the atmosphere only for days or 
weeks. Black carbon is a climate forcing agent with strong warming 
effect, both in the atmosphere and when deposited on snow or ice. 
See also Atmosphere, and Aerosol.
Blue carbon All biologically-driven carbon fluxes and storage 
in marine systems that are amenable to management can be 
considered as blue carbon. Coastal blue carbon focuses on rooted 
vegetation in the coastal zone, such as tidal marshes, mangroves and 
seagrasses. These ecosystems have high carbon burial rates on a per 
unit area basis and accumulate carbon in their soils and sediments. 
They provide many non-climatic benefits and can contribute to 
ecosystem-based adaptation. If degraded or lost, coastal blue carbon 
ecosystems are likely to release most of their carbon back to the 
atmosphere. There is current debate regarding the application of the 
blue carbon concept to other coastal and non-coastal processes and 
ecosystems, including the open ocean. See also Ecosystem services, 
and Carbon sequestration.
Business as usual (BAU) See Baseline scenario.
Carbon budget Refers to three concepts in the literature: 
(1) an assessment of carbon cycle sources and sinks on a global 
level, through the synthesis of evidence for fossil-fuel and cement 
emissions, land-use change emissions, ocean and land CO2 sinks, 
and the resulting atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) growth rate. 
This is referred to as the global carbon budget; (2) the estimated 
cumulative amount of global carbon dioxide emissions that that is 
estimated to limit global surface temperature to a given level above 
a reference period, taking into account global surface temperature 
contributions of other greenhouse gases (GHGs) and climate forcers; 
(3) the distribution of the carbon budget defined under (2) to the 
regional, national, or sub-national level based on considerations of 
equity, costs or efficiency. See also Remaining carbon budget.
Carbon cycle The flow of carbon (in various forms, e.g., as carbon 
dioxide (CO2), carbon in biomass, and carbon dissolved in the ocean 
as carbonate and bicarbonate) through the atmosphere, hydrosphere, 
terrestrial and marine biosphere and lithosphere. In this report, the 
reference unit for the global carbon cycle is GtCO2 or GtC (one 
Gigatonne = 1 Gt = 1015 grams; 1GtC corresponds to 3.667 GtCO2).
Carbon dioxide (CO2) A naturally occurring gas, CO2 is also a by-
product of burning fossil fuels (such as oil, gas and coal), of burning 
biomass, of land-use changes (LUC) and of industrial processes (e.g., 
cement production). It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas 
(GHG) that affects the Earth’s radiative balance. It is the reference gas 
against which other GHGs are measured and therefore has a Global 
Warming Potential (GWP) of 1. See also Greenhouse gas (GHG), Land 
use, and Land-use change.
Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS) A process in 
which a relatively pure stream of carbon dioxide (CO2) from industrial 
and energy-related sources is separated (captured), conditioned, 
compressed and transported to a storage location for long-term 
isolation from the atmosphere. Sometimes referred to as Carbon 
Capture and Storage. See also Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation 
(CCU), Bioenergy with carbon dioxide capture and storage (BECCS), 
and Sequestration.
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU) A process in 
which carbon dioxide (CO2) is captured and then used to produce a 
new product. If the CO2 is stored in a product for a climate-relevant 
time horizon, this is referred to as carbon dioxide capture, utilisation 
and storage (CCUS). Only then, and only combined with CO2 recently 
removed from the atmosphere, can CCUS lead to carbon dioxide 
removal. CCU is sometimes referred to as Carbon dioxide capture and 
use. See also Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS).
Carbon dioxide capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) See 
Carbon dioxide capture and utilisation (CCU).
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR) Anthropogenic activities 
removing carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere and durably 
storing it in geological, terrestrial, or ocean reservoirs, or in products. 
It includes existing and potential anthropogenic enhancement of 
biological or geochemical sinks and direct air capture and storage, 
but excludes natural CO2 uptake not directly caused by human 
activities. See also Mitigation (of climate change), Greenhouse gas 
removal (GGR), Negative emission technologies, and Sink.
Carbon intensity The amount of emissions of carbon dioxide 
(CO2) released per unit of another variable such as gross domestic 
product (GDP), output energy use or transport.
Carbon price The price for avoided or released carbon dioxide 
(CO2) or CO2-equivalent emissions. This may refer to the rate of 
a carbon tax, or the price of emission permits. In many models that 
are used to assess the economic costs of mitigation, carbon prices are 
used as a proxy to represent the level of effort in mitigation policies. 
See also Mitigation.
Carbon sequestration The process of storing carbon in a carbon 
pool. See also Blue carbon, Carbon dioxide capture and storage 
(CCS), Uptake, and Sink.
Carbon sink See Sink.
Carbon stock The quantity of carbon in a carbon pool. See also 
Pool, carbon and nitrogen.
Citizen science A voluntary participation of the public in the 
collection and/or processing of data as part of a scientific study 
(Silvertown, 2009).
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) A mechanism defined 
under Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol through which investors 
(governments or companies) from developed (Annex B) countries 
may finance greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction or removal 
projects in developing countries (Non-Annex B), and receive Certified 
Emission Reduction Units (CERs) for doing so. The CERs can be credited 
towards the commitments of the respective developed countries. 
The CDM is intended to facilitate the two objectives of promoting 
sustainable development (SD) in developing countries and of helping 
industrialised countries to reach their emissions commitments in 
a cost-effective way.
Climate Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the 
average weather, or more rigorously, as the statistical description in 
terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period 
808
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
of time ranging from months to thousands or millions of years. The 
classical period for averaging these variables is 30 years, as defined 
by the World Meteorological Organization. The relevant quantities 
are most often surface variables such as temperature, precipitation 
and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including a statistical 
description, of the climate system.
Climate change A change in the state of the climate that can be 
identified (e.g., by using statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/
or the variability of its properties and that persists for an extended 
period, typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due to 
natural internal processes or external forcings such as modulations 
of the solar cycles, volcanic eruptions and persistent anthropogenic 
changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use. Note 
that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), in its Article 1, defines climate change as: ‘a change of 
climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity 
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and which is 
in addition to natural climate variability observed over comparable 
time periods’. The UNFCCC thus makes a distinction between climate 
change attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric 
composition and climate variability attributable to natural causes. 
See also Climate variability, Global warming, Ocean acidification, and 
Detection and attribution.
Climate extreme (extreme weather or climate event) The 
occurrence of a value of a weather or climate variable above (or 
below) a threshold value near the upper (or lower) ends of the 
range of observed values of the variable. For simplicity, both extreme 
weather events and extreme climate events are referred to collectively 
as ‘climate extremes.’ See also Extreme weather event.
Climate feedback An interaction in which a perturbation in 
one climate quantity causes a change in a second and the change 
in the second quantity ultimately leads to an additional change in 
the first. A negative feedback is one in which the initial perturbation 
is weakened by the changes it causes; a positive feedback is one in 
which the initial perturbation is enhanced. The initial perturbation 
can either be externally forced or arise as part of internal variability.
Climate governance See Governance.
Climate model A numerical representation of the climate 
system based on the physical, chemical and biological properties 
of its components, their interactions and feedback processes and 
accounting for some of its known properties. The climate system 
can be represented by models of varying complexity; that is, for 
any one component or combination of components a spectrum or 
hierarchy of models can be identified, differing in such aspects as 
the number of spatial dimensions, the extent to which physical, 
chemical or biological processes are explicitly represented, or the 
level at which empirical parametrizations are involved. There is an 
evolution towards more complex models with interactive chemistry 
and biology. Climate models are applied as a research tool to study 
and simulate the climate and for operational purposes, including 
monthly, seasonal and interannual climate predictions. See also Earth 
system model (ESM). 
Climate projection Simulated response of the climate system 
to a scenario of future emissions or concentrations of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) and aerosols, and changes in land use, generally 
derived using climate models. Climate projections are distinguished 
from climate predictions by their dependence on the emission/
concentration/radiative forcing scenario used, which is in turn based 
on assumptions concerning, for example, future socioeconomic and 
technological developments that may or may not be realised.
Climate-resilient 
development 
pathways 
(CRDPs)  
Trajectories that strengthen sustainable development and efforts to 
eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities while promoting fair and 
cross-scalar adaptation to and resilience in a changing climate. They 
raise the ethics, equity, and feasibility aspects of the deep societal 
transformation needed to drastically reduce emissions to limit global 
warming (e.g., to 2°C) and achieve desirable and liveable futures and 
well-being for all.
Climate-resilient pathways Iterative processes for managing 
change within complex systems in order to reduce disruptions and 
enhance opportunities associated with climate change. See also 
Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs), Development 
pathways, Pathways, and Transformation pathways. 
Climate sensitivity The change in the annual global mean 
surface temperature in response to a change in the atmospheric 
carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration or other radiative forcing.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity 
An estimate of the global mean surface temperature response to 
a doubling of the atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration 
that is evaluated from model output or observations for evolving 
non-equilibrium conditions. It is a measure of the strengths of the 
climate feedbacks at a particular time and may vary with forcing 
history and climate state, and therefore may differ from equilibrium 
climate sensitivity.
Transient climate response
The change in the global mean surface temperature, averaged over 
a 20-year period, centred at the time of atmospheric carbon dioxide 
(CO2) doubling, in a climate model simulation in which CO2 increases 
at 1% yr–1 from pre-industrial. It is a measure of the strength of 
climate feedbacks and the timescale of ocean heat uptake. 
See also Climate model, and Global mean surface temperature 
(GMST).
Climate services Information and products that enhance users’ 
knowledge and understanding about the impacts of climate change 
and/or climate variability so as to aid decision-making of individuals 
and organisations and enable preparedness and early climate change 
action. Such services involve high-quality data from national and 
international databases on temperature, rainfall, wind, soil moisture 
and ocean conditions, as well as maps, risk and vulnerability 
analyses, assessments, and long-term projections and scenarios. 
Depending on the user’s needs, these data and information products 
may be combined with non-meteorological data, such as agricultural 
production, health trends, population distributions in high-risk areas, 
road and infrastructure maps for the delivery of goods, and other 
socio-economic variables (WMO, 2019).
Climate-smart agriculture (CSA) An approach to agriculture 
that aims to transform and reorient agricultural systems to effectively 
support development and ensure food security in a changing climate 
809
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
by: sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and incomes; 
adapting and building resilience to climate change; and reducing and/
or removing greenhouse gas emissions, where possible (FAO, 2018). 
Climate system The system consisting of five major components: 
the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, the lithosphere and 
the biosphere and the interactions between them. The climate system 
evolves in time under the influence of its own internal dynamics 
and because of external forcings such as volcanic eruptions, solar 
variations, orbital forcing, and anthropogenic forcings such as the 
changing composition of the atmosphere and land-use change.
Climate target A temperature limit, concentration level, 
or emissions reduction goal used towards the aim of avoiding 
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system. For 
example, national climate targets may aim to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by a certain amount over a given time horizon, for example 
those under the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate variability Variations in the mean state and other 
statistics (such as standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes, 
etc.) of the climate on all spatial and temporal scales beyond that 
of individual weather events. Variability may be due to natural 
internal processes within the climate system (internal variability), or 
to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external 
variability). See also Climate change.
CO2 equivalent (CO2-eq) emission The amount of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) emission that would cause the same integrated 
radiative forcing or temperature change, over a given time horizon, as 
an emitted amount of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a mixture of GHGs. 
There are a number of ways to compute such equivalent emissions 
and choose appropriate time horizons. Most typically, the CO2-
equivalent emission is obtained by multiplying the emission of a GHG 
by its Global Warming Potential (GWP) for a 100 year time horizon. 
For a mix of GHGs it is obtained by summing the CO2-equivalent 
emissions of each gas. CO2-equivalent emission is a common scale 
for comparing emissions of different GHGs but does not imply 
equivalence of the corresponding climate change responses. There 
is generally no connection between CO2-equivalent emissions and 
resulting CO2-equivalent concentrations.
CO2 fertilisation The enhancement of plant growth as a result 
of increased atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration. 
The magnitude of CO2 fertilisation depends on nutrients and 
water availability.
Co-benefits The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed 
at one objective might have on other objectives, thereby increasing 
the total benefits for society or the environment. Co-benefits are 
often subject to uncertainty and depend on local circumstances 
and implementation practices, among other factors. Co-benefits are 
also referred to as ancillary benefits. See also Adverse side-effects, 
and Risk.
Collective action  A number of people working together 
voluntarily to achieve some common objective (Meinzen-Dick and Di 
Gregorio, 2004).
Conference of the Parties (COP) The supreme body of UN 
conventions, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), comprising parties with a right to vote 
that have ratified or acceded to the convention. See also United 
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD).
Confidence The robustness of a finding based on the type, 
amount, quality and consistency of evidence (e.g., mechanistic 
understanding, theory, data, models, expert judgment) and on the 
degree of agreement across multiple lines of evidence. In this report, 
confidence is expressed qualitatively (Mastrandrea et al., 2010).  See 
also Likelihood, and Uncertainty.
Convection  Vertical motion driven by buoyancy forces arising 
from static instability, usually caused by near-surface cooling or 
increases in salinity in the case of the ocean and near-surface warming 
or cloud-top radiative cooling in the case of the atmosphere. In the 
atmosphere, convection gives rise to cumulus clouds and precipitation 
and is effective at both scavenging and vertically transporting 
chemical species. In the ocean, convection can carry surface waters 
to deep within the ocean.
Coping capacity The ability of people, institutions, organisations, 
and systems, using available skills, values, beliefs, resources, and 
opportunities, to address, manage, and overcome adverse conditions 
in the short to medium term. (UNISDR, 2009; IPCC, 2012a). See 
also Resilience.
Cost-benefit analysis Monetary assessment of all negative 
and positive impacts associated with a given action. Cost-benefit 
analysis enables comparison of different interventions, investments 
or strategies and reveal how a given investment or policy effort pays 
off for a particular person, company or country. Cost-benefit analyses 
representing society’s point of view are important for climate 
change decision making, but there are difficulties in aggregating 
costs and benefits across different actors and across timescales. See 
also Discounting.
Cost-effectiveness A measure of the cost at which a policy 
goal or outcome is achieved. The lower the cost the greater the 
cost effectiveness.
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP) A climate 
modelling activity from the World Climate Research Programme 
(WCRP) which coordinates and archives climate model simulations 
based on shared model inputs by modelling groups from around 
the world. The CMIP3 multi-model data set includes projections 
using SRES scenarios. The CMIP5 data set includes projections using 
the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The CMIP6 
phase involves a suite of common model experiments as well as an 
ensemble of CMIP-endorsed model intercomparison projects (MIPs).
Cumulative emissions The total amount of emissions released 
over a specified period of time. See also Carbon budget.
Decarbonisation Process by which countries, individuals or other 
entities aim to achieve zero fossil carbon existence. Typically refers 
to a reduction of the carbon emissions associated with electricity, 
industry and transport.
Decoupling Decoupling (in relation to climate change) is where 
economic growth is no longer strongly associated with consumption 
of fossil fuels. Relative decoupling is where both grow but at different 
810
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
rates. Absolute decoupling is where economic growth happens but 
fossil fuels decline.
Deforestation Conversion of forest to non-forest.  [Note: For 
a discussion of the term forest and related terms such as afforestation, 
reforestation and deforestation in the context of reporting and 
accounting Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities under the Kyoto Protocol, see 
2013 Revised Supplementary Methods and Good Practice Guidance 
Arising from the Kyoto Protocol.] See also Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Deliberative governance See Governance.
Demand and supply-side measures 
Demand-side measures  
Policies and programmes for influencing the demand for goods and/
or services. In the energy sector, demand-side management aims 
at reducing the demand for electricity and other forms of energy 
required to deliver energy services.
Supply-side measures 
Policies and programmes for influencing how a certain demand for 
goods and/or services is met. In the energy sector, for example, supply-
side mitigation measures aim at reducing the amount of greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions emitted per unit of energy produced.
See also Mitigation measures.
Demand-side measures See Demand and supply-side measures.
Desertification Land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-
humid areas resulting from many factors, including climatic variations 
and human activities (UNCCD, 1994).
Detection See Detection and attribution.
Detection and attribution Detection of change is defined 
as the process of demonstrating that climate or a system affected 
by climate has changed in some defined statistical sense, without 
providing a reason for that change. An identified change is detected 
in observations if its likelihood of occurrence by chance due to 
internal variability alone is determined to be small, for example, 
<10%. Attribution is defined as the process of evaluating the relative 
contributions of multiple causal factors to a change or event with 
a formal assessment of confidence.
Development pathways See Pathways.
Diet ‘The kinds of food that follow a particular pattern that 
a person or community eats’ (FAO, 2014). See also Dietary patterns.
Dietary patterns The quantities, proportions, variety or 
combinations of different foods and beverages in diets, and the 
frequency with which they are habitually consumed (Dietary 
Guidelines Advisory Committee, 2015).  See also Diet.
Dietary 
and 
nutrition 
transitions Modernisation, 
urbanisation, economic development, and increased wealth lead to 
predictable shifts in diet, referred to as ‘nutrition transitions’ (Misra 
and Khurana, 2008; Popkin, 2006). Over historical time there have 
been a number of dietary transitions but in recent decades the 
prime transition has been associated with changes from subsistence 
towards eating diets rich in calories and relatively poor in nutrition 
(the ‘westernised diet’) that are obesogenic. From a public health 
perspective, a new dietary transition is in focus, from the obesogenic 
diet to one promoting health.
Disaster A ‘serious disruption of the functioning of a community 
or a society at any scale due to hazardous events interacting with 
conditions of exposure, vulnerability and capacity, leading to one or 
more of the following: human, material, economic and environmental 
losses and impacts’ (UNISDR, 2017). See also Exposure, Risk, 
Vulnerability and Hazard.
Disaster risk management (DRM) Processes for designing, 
implementing, and evaluating strategies, policies, and measures 
to improve the understanding of current and future disaster risk, 
foster disaster risk reduction and transfer, and promote continuous 
improvement in disaster preparedness, prevention and protection, 
response, and recovery practices, with the explicit purpose of 
increasing human security, well-being, quality of life, and sustainable 
development (UNISDR, 2017).
Discounting A mathematical operation that aims to make 
monetary (or other) amounts received or expended at different 
times (years) comparable across time. The discounter uses a fixed 
or possibly time-varying discount rate from year to year that makes 
future value worth less today (if the discount rate is positive). The 
choice of discount rate(s) is debated as it is a judgement based on 
hidden and/or explicit values.
Discount rate See Discounting.
(Internal) Displacement The forced movement of people 
within the country they live in. Internally displaced persons (IDPs) are 
‘Persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to flee 
or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as 
a result of or in order to avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations 
of generalized violence, violations of human rights or natural or 
human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally 
recognized State border’ (UN, 1998).  See also Migration.
Displacement In land system science, displacement denotes the 
increasing spatial separation between the location of agricultural 
and forestry production and the place of consumption of these 
products, as it occurs with trade. Displacement disconnects spatially 
environmental impacts from their socioeconomic drivers.
Downscaling Method that derives local- to regional-scale (up to 
100 km) information from larger-scale models or data analyses. Two 
main methods exist: dynamical downscaling and empirical/statistical 
downscaling. The dynamical method uses the output of regional 
climate models, global models with variable spatial resolution, or 
high-resolution global models. The empirical/statistical methods [are 
based on observations and] develop statistical relationships that link 
the large-scale atmospheric variables with local/ regional climate 
variables. In all cases, the quality of the driving model remains an 
important limitation on quality of the downscaled information. The 
two methods can be combined, e.g., applying empirical/statistical 
downscaling to the output of a regional climate model, consisting of 
a dynamical downscaling of a global climate model.
Drainage  ‘Artificial lowering of the soil water table’ (IPCC, 2013). 
See also Rewetting.
811
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
Drought A period of abnormally dry weather long enough 
to cause a serious hydrological imbalance. Drought is a relative 
term, therefore any discussion in terms of precipitation deficit 
must refer to the particular precipitation-related activity that is 
under discussion. For example, shortage of precipitation during the 
growing season impinges on crop production or ecosystem function 
in general (due to soil moisture drought, also termed agricultural 
drought), and during the runoff and percolation season primarily 
affects water supplies (hydrological drought). Storage changes in 
soil moisture and groundwater are also affected by increases in 
actual evapotranspiration in addition to reductions in precipitation. 
A period with an abnormal precipitation deficit is defined as 
a meteorological drought.
Megadrought 
A very lengthy and pervasive drought, lasting much longer than 
normal, usually a decade or more.
Early warning systems (EWS) The set of technical, financial 
and institutional capacities needed to generate and disseminate 
timely and meaningful warning information to enable individuals, 
communities and organisations threatened by a hazard to prepare 
to act promptly and appropriately to reduce the possibility of harm 
or loss. Dependent upon context, EWS may draw upon scientific and/
or Indigenous knowledge. EWS are also considered for ecological 
applications e.g., conservation, where the organisation itself is not 
threatened by hazard but the ecosystem under conservation is 
(an example is coral bleaching alerts), in agriculture (for example, 
warnings of ground frost, hailstorms) and in fisheries (storm and 
tsunami warnings) (UNISDR, 2009; IPCC, 2012a).
Earth system feedbacks See Climate feedback.
Earth system model (ESM) A coupled atmosphere–ocean 
general circulation model in which a representation of the carbon 
cycle is included, allowing for interactive calculation of atmospheric 
carbon dioxide (CO2) or compatible emissions. Additional components 
(e.g., atmospheric chemistry, ice sheets, dynamic vegetation, nitrogen 
cycle, but also urban or crop models) may be included. See also 
Climate model.
Ecological cascade A series of secondary extinctions as a result 
of the extinction of a key species within an ecosystem (Soulé, 2010).
Ecosystem A functional unit consisting of living organisms, their 
non-living environment and the interactions within and between 
them. The components included in a given ecosystem and its spatial 
boundaries depend on the purpose for which the ecosystem is 
defined: in some cases they are relatively sharp, while in others they 
are diffuse. Ecosystem boundaries can change over time. Ecosystems 
are nested within other ecosystems and their scale can range from 
very small to the entire biosphere. In the current era, most ecosystems 
either contain people as key organisms, or are influenced by the effects 
of human activities in their environment. See also Ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services Ecological processes or functions having 
monetary or non-monetary value to individuals or society at large. 
These are frequently classified as (1) supporting services such as 
productivity or biodiversity maintenance, (2) provisioning services 
such as food or fibre, (3) regulating services such as climate regulation 
or carbon sequestration, and (4) cultural services such as tourism or 
spiritual and aesthetic appreciation. See also Ecosystem.
Effective climate sensitivity See Climate sensitivity.
Effective radiative forcing See Radiative forcing.
El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) The term El Niño was 
initially used to describe a warm-water current that periodically flows 
along the coast of Ecuador and Peru, disrupting the local fishery. It has 
since become identified with warming of the tropical Pacific Ocean 
east of the dateline. This oceanic event is associated with a fluctuation 
of a global-scale tropical and subtropical surface pressure pattern 
called the Southern Oscillation. This coupled atmosphere–ocean 
phenomenon, with preferred time scales of two to about seven 
years, is known as the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). It is often 
measured by the surface pressure anomaly difference between Tahiti 
and Darwin and/or the sea surface temperatures in the central and 
eastern equatorial Pacific. During an ENSO event, the prevailing trade 
winds weaken, reducing upwelling and altering ocean currents such 
that the sea surface temperatures warm, further weakening the trade 
winds. This phenomenon has a great impact on the wind, sea surface 
temperature and precipitation patterns in the tropical Pacific. It has 
climatic effects throughout the Pacific region and in many other parts 
of the world, through global teleconnections. The cold phase of ENSO 
is called La Niña.
Embodied (embedded) [emissions, water, land] The total 
emissions [water use, land use] generated [used] in the production 
of goods and services regardless of the location and timing of those 
emissions [water use, land use] in the production process. This 
includes emissions [water use, land use] within the country used 
to produce goods or services for the country’s own use, but also 
includes the emissions [water use, land use] related to the production 
of such goods or services in other countries that are then consumed 
in another country through imports. Such emissions [water, land] 
are termed ‘embodied’ or ‘embedded’ emissions, or in some cases 
(particularly with water) as ‘virtual water use’ (David and Caldeira, 
2010; Allan, 2005; MacDonald et al., 2015).
Emission scenario A plausible representation of the future 
development of emissions of substances that are radiatively active 
(e.g., greenhouse gases (GHGs), aerosols) based on a coherent and 
internally consistent set of assumptions about driving forces (such as 
demographic and socio-economic development, technological change, 
energy and land use) and their key relationships. Concentration 
scenarios, derived from emission scenarios, are often used as 
input to a climate model to compute climate projections.  See also 
Baseline scenario, Mitigation scenario, Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCPs) (under Pathways), Shared socio-economic pathways 
(SSPs) (under Pathways), Scenario, Socio-economic scenario, and 
Transformation pathway.
Emission trajectories A projected development in time of the 
emission of a greenhouse gas (GHG) or group of GHGs, aerosols, and 
GHG precursors. See also Pathways.
Energy access Access to clean, reliable and affordable energy 
services for cooking and heating, lighting, communications, and 
productive uses (with special reference to Sustainable Development 
Goal 7) (AGECC, 2010). See also Traditional biomass.
812
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
Enabling conditions (for adaptation and mitigation 
options) Conditions that affect the feasibility of adaptation 
and mitigation options, and can accelerate and scale-up systemic 
transitions that would limit temperature increase and enhance 
capacities of systems and societies to adapt to the associated climate 
change, while achieving sustainable development, eradicating 
poverty and reducing inequalities. Enabling conditions include 
finance, technological innovation, strengthening policy instruments, 
institutional capacity, multi-level governance, and changes in human 
behaviour and lifestyles. They also include inclusive processes, 
attention to power asymmetries and unequal opportunities for 
development and reconsideration of values.
Energy efficiency The ratio of output or useful energy or energy 
services or other useful physical outputs obtained from a  system, 
conversion process, transmission or storage activity to the input 
of energy (measured as kWh kWh–1, tonnes kWh–1 or any other 
physical measure of useful output like tonne-km transported). Energy 
efficiency is often described by energy intensity. In economics, 
energy intensity describes the ratio of economic output to energy 
input. Most commonly energy efficiency is measured as input energy 
over a physical or economic unit, i.e. kWh USD–1 (energy intensity), 
kWh tonne–1. For buildings, it is often measured as kWh m–2, and 
for vehicles as km liter–1or liter km–1. Very often in policy ‘energy 
efficiency’ is intended as the measures to reduce energy demand 
through technological options such as insulating buildings, more 
efficient appliances, efficient lighting, efficient vehicles, etc.
Energy security The goal of a given country, or the global 
community as a whole, to maintain an adequate, stable and 
predictable energy supply. Measures encompass safeguarding the 
sufficiency of energy resources to meet national energy demand at 
competitive and stable prices and the resilience of the energy supply; 
enabling development and deployment of technologies; building 
sufficient infrastructure to generate, store and transmit energy 
supplies and ensuring enforceable contracts of delivery.
Enhanced weathering Enhancing the removal of carbon 
dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere through dissolution of silicate 
and carbonate rocks by grinding these minerals to small particles 
and actively applying them to soils, coasts or oceans.
(Model) Ensemble A group of parallel model simulations 
characterising historical climate conditions, climate predictions, or 
climate projections. Variation of the results across the ensemble 
members may give an estimate of modelling-based uncertainty. 
Ensembles made with the same model but different initial conditions 
only characterise the uncertainty associated with internal climate 
variability, whereas multi-model ensembles including simulations 
by several models also include the impact of model differences. 
Perturbed parameter ensembles, in which model parameters are 
varied in a systematic manner, aim to assess the uncertainty resulting 
from internal model specifications within a single model. Remaining 
sources of uncertainty unaddressed with model ensembles are 
related to systematic model errors or biases, which may be assessed 
from systematic comparisons of model simulations with observations 
wherever available.  See also Climate projection.
Equality A principle that ascribes equal worth to all human beings, 
including equal opportunities, rights, and obligations, irrespective 
of origins.
Inequality 
Uneven opportunities and social positions, and processes of 
discrimination within a group or society, based on gender, 
class, ethnicity, age, and (dis)ability, often produced by uneven 
development. Income inequality refers to gaps between highest and 
lowest income earners within a country and between countries. See 
also Equity and Fairness.
Equilibrium climate sensitivity See Climate sensitivity.
Equity The principle of being fair and impartial, and a basis for 
understanding how the impacts and responses to climate change, 
including costs and benefits, are distributed in and by society in more 
or less equal ways. It is often aligned with ideas of equality, fairness 
and justice and applied with respect to equity in the responsibility 
for, and distribution of, climate impacts and policies across society, 
generations, and gender, and in the sense of who participates and 
controls the processes of decision making.
Distributive equity 
Equity in the consequences, outcomes, costs and benefits of actions 
or policies. In the case of climate change or climate policies for 
different people, places and countries, including equity aspects of 
sharing burdens and benefits for mitigation and adaptation.
Gender equity 
Equity between women and men with regard to their rights, 
resources and opportunities. In the case of climate change, gender 
equity recognises that women are often more vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change and may be disadvantaged in the process 
and outcomes of climate policy.
Inter-generational equity 
Equity between generations. In the context of climate change, inter-
generational equity acknowledges that the effects of past and present 
emissions, vulnerabilities and policies impose costs and benefits for 
people in the future and of different age groups.
Procedural equity 
Equity in the process of decision making including recognition and 
inclusiveness in participation, equal representation, bargaining 
power, voice and equitable access to knowledge and resources 
to participate. 
See also Equality and Fairness.
Evaporation The physical process by which a liquid (e.g., water) 
becomes a gas (e.g., water vapour).
Evapotranspiration The combined processes through which 
water is transferred to the atmosphere from open water and ice 
surfaces, bare soil, and vegetation that make up the Earth’s surface.
Potential Evapotranspiration  
The potential rate of water loss without any limits imposed by the 
water supply.  See also Evaporation.
Evidence Data and information used in the scientific process to 
establish findings. In this report, the degree of evidence reflects the 
amount, quality, and consistency of scientific/technical information 
813
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
on which the Lead Authors base their findings. See also Agreement, 
Confidence, Likelihood, and Uncertainty.
Exposure The presence of people; livelihoods; species or 
ecosystems; environmental functions, services, and resources; 
infrastructure; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places and 
settings that could be adversely affected. See also Hazard, Risk, 
and Vulnerability.
Extratropical Cyclone Any cyclonic-scale storm that is not 
a  tropical cyclone. Usually refers to a middle- or high-latitude 
migratory storm system formed in regions of large horizontal 
temperature variations. Sometimes called extratropical storm or 
extratropical low.   See also Tropical cyclone.
Extreme weather or climate event See Climate extreme 
(extreme weather or climate event).
Extreme weather event An event that is rare at a particular 
place and time of year. Definitions of ‘rare’ vary, but an extreme 
weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th 
or 90th percentile of a probability density function estimated from 
observations. By definition, the characteristics of what is called 
extreme weather may vary from place to place in an absolute sense. 
When a pattern of extreme weather persists for some time, such as 
a season, it may be classed as an extreme climate event, especially 
if it yields an average or total that is itself extreme (e.g., drought 
or heavy rainfall over a season). See also Heat wave, and Climate 
extreme (extreme weather or climate event).
Fairness Impartial and just treatment without favouritism or 
discrimination in which each person is considered of equal worth 
with equal opportunity. See also Equity, and Equality.
Feasibility The degree to which climate goals and response 
options are considered possible and/or desirable. Feasibility 
depends on geophysical, ecological, technological, economic, social 
and institutional conditions for change. Conditions underpinning 
feasibility are dynamic, spatially variable, and may vary between 
different groups. See also Enabling conditions.
Feedback See Climate feedback.
Flexible governance See Governance.
Flood The overflowing of the normal confines of a stream or other 
body of water, or the accumulation of water over areas that are not 
normally submerged. Floods include river (fluvial) floods, flash floods, 
urban floods, rain (pluvial) floods, sewer floods, coastal floods, and 
glacial lake outburst floods.
Flux A movement (a flow) of matter (e.g., water vapor, particles), 
heat or energy from one place to another, or from one medium (e.g., 
land surface) to another (e.g., atmosphere).
Food loss and waste ‘The decrease in quantity or quality 
of food’. Food waste is part of food loss and refers to discarding 
or alternative (non-food) use of food that is safe and nutritious 
for human consumption along the entire food supply chain, from 
primary production to end household consumer level. Food waste is 
recognised as a distinct part of food loss because the drivers that 
generate it and the solutions to it are different from those of food 
losses (FAO, 2015b).
Food security A situation that exists when all people, at all times, 
have physical, social and economic access to sufficient, safe and 
nutritious food that meets their dietary needs and food preferences 
for an active and healthy life (FAO, 2001). [Note: Whilst the term 
‘food security’ explicitly includes nutrition within it ‘dietary needs …
for an active and healthy life’, in the past the term has sometimes 
privileged the supply of calories (energy), especially to the hungry. 
Thus, the term ‘food and nutrition security’ is often used (with the 
same definition as food security) to emphasise that the term food 
covers both energy and nutrition (FAO, 2009).] 
Food system All the elements (environment, people, inputs, 
processes, infrastructures, institutions, etc.) and activities that 
relate to the production, processing, distribution, preparation and 
consumption of food, and the output of these activities, including 
socio-economic and environmental outcomes (HLPE, 2017). [Note: 
Whilst there is a global food system (encompassing the totality of 
global production and consumption), each location’s food system is 
unique, being defined by that place’s mix of food produced locally, 
nationally, regionally or globally.]
Forcing See Radiative forcing.
Forest A vegetation type dominated by trees. Many definitions 
of the term forest are in use throughout the world, reflecting 
wide differences in biogeophysical conditions, social structure and 
economics. [Note: For a discussion of the term forest in the context of 
National GHG inventories, see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
GHG Inventories and information provided by the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2019).] See 
also Afforestation, Deforestation, and Reforestation.
Fossil fuels Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits, 
including coal, oil, and natural gas.
Framework Convention on Climate Change See United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Gender equity See Equity.
Glacier A perennial mass of ice, and possibly firn and snow, 
originating on the land surface by the recrystallisation of snow and 
showing evidence of past or present flow. A glacier typically gains 
mass by accumulation of snow, and loses mass by melting and ice 
discharge into the sea or a lake if the glacier terminates in a body of 
water. Land ice masses of continental size (>50 000 km2) are referred 
to as ice sheets.
Global climate model (also referred to as general circulation 
model, both abbreviated as GCM) See Climate model.
Global mean surface temperature (GMST) Estimated 
global average of near-surface air temperatures over land and 
sea-ice, and sea surface temperatures over ice-free ocean regions, 
with changes normally expressed as departures from a value over a 
specified reference period. When estimating changes in GMST, near-
surface air temperature over both land and oceans are also used. See 
also Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT), Land surface air 
temperature, and Sea surface temperature (SST).
814
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
Global mean surface air temperature (GSAT) Global average 
of near-surface air temperatures over land and oceans. Changes 
in GSAT are often used as a measure of global temperature change in 
climate models but are not observed directly. See also Global mean 
surface temperature (GMST), and Land surface air temperature. 
Global warming An increase in global mean surface temperature 
(GMST) averaged over a 30-year period, or the 30-year period centred 
on a particular year or decade, expressed relative to pre-industrial 
levels unless otherwise specified. For 30-year periods that span past 
and future years, the current multi-decadal warming trend is assumed 
to continue. See also Climate change, and Climate variability.
Governance A comprehensive and inclusive concept of the full 
range of means for deciding, managing, implementing and monitoring 
policies and measures. Whereas government is defined strictly in 
terms of the nation-state, the more inclusive concept of governance 
recognises the contributions of various levels of government (global, 
international, regional, sub-national and local) and the contributing 
roles of the private sector, of nongovernmental actors, and of civil 
society to addressing the many types of issues facing the global 
community, and the local context where the effectiveness of policies 
and measures are determined.
Adaptive governance
An emerging term in the literature for the evolution of formal 
and informal institutions of governance that prioritise planning, 
implementation and evaluation of policy through iterative social 
learning; in the context of climate change, governance facilitating 
social learning to steer the use and protection of natural resources, 
and ecosystem services, particularly in situations of complexity 
and uncertainty.
Climate governance 
Purposeful mechanisms and measures aimed at steering social 
systems towards preventing, mitigating, or adapting to the risks 
posed by climate change (Jagers and Stripple, 2003).  
Deliberative governance 
Involves decision making through inclusive public conversation 
which allows opportunity for developing policy options through 
public discussion rather than collating individual preferences through 
voting or referenda (although the latter governance mechanisms can 
also be proceeded and legitimated by public deliberation processes).
Flexible governance 
Strategies of governance at various levels, which prioritise the use 
of social learning and rapid feedback mechanisms in planning and 
policy making, often through incremental, experimental and iterative 
management processes.
Governance capacity 
The ability of governance institutions, leaders, and non-state and 
civil society to plan, co-ordinate, fund, implement, evaluate and 
adjust policies and measures over the short, medium and long term, 
adjusting for uncertainty, rapid change and wide ranging impacts 
and multiple actors and demands.  
Multi-level governance 
Negotiated, non-hierarchical exchanges between institutions at the 
transnational, national, regional and local levels. 
Participatory governance 
A governance system that enables direct public engagement in 
decision-making using a variety of techniques for example, referenda, 
community deliberation, citizen juries or participatory budgeting. The 
approach can be applied in formal and informal institutional contexts 
from national to local, but is usually associated with devolved 
decision making (Fung and Wright, 2003; Sarmiento and Tilly, 2018). 
Governance capacity  See Governance.
Grazing land The sum of rangelands and pastures not considered 
as cropland, and subject to livestock grazing or hay production. It 
includes a wide range of ecosystems, e.g. systems with vegetation 
that fall below the threshold used in the forest land category, 
silvo-pastoral systems, as well as natural, managed grasslands 
and semideserts.
Green infrastructure The interconnected set of natural and 
constructed ecological systems, green spaces and other landscape 
features. It includes planted and indigenous trees, wetlands, parks, 
green open spaces and original grassland and woodlands, as well 
as possible building and street level design interventions that 
incorporate vegetation. Green infrastructure provides services and 
functions in the same way as conventional infrastructure (Culwick 
and Bobbins, 2016). 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, 
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at 
specific wavelengths within the spectrum of terrestrial radiation 
emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. 
This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour (H2O), 
carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone 
(O3) are the primary GHGs in the Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, there 
are a number of entirely human-made GHGs in the atmosphere, 
such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing 
substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Beside CO2, N2O 
and CH4, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the GHGs sulphur hexafluoride 
(SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
Greenhouse gas removal (GGR) Withdrawal of a greenhouse 
gas (GHG) and/or a precursor from the atmosphere by a sink. See also 
Carbon dioxide removal (CDR), and Negative emissions. 
Gross domestic product (GDP) The sum of gross value added, 
at purchasers’ prices, by all resident and non-resident producers in 
the economy, plus any taxes and minus any subsidies not included 
in the value of the products in a country or a geographic region for a 
given period, normally one year. GDP is calculated without deducting 
for depreciation of fabricated assets or depletion and degradation of 
natural resources.
Halocarbons A collective term for the group of partially 
halogenated organic species, which includes the chlorofluorocarbons 
(CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs), halons, methyl chloride and methyl bromide. Many of the 
halocarbons have large Global Warming Potentials. The chlorine and 
bromine-containing halocarbons are also involved in the depletion of 
the ozone layer.
Hazard The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced 
physical event or trend that may cause loss of life, injury, or other 
815
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
health impacts, as well as damage and loss to property, infrastructure, 
livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems and environmental 
resources. See also Disaster, Exposure, Risk, and Vulnerability.
Heatwave  A period of abnormally hot weather. Heatwaves and 
warm spells have various and in some cases overlapping definitions. 
See also Extreme weather event.
Holocene The current interglacial geological epoch, the second of 
two epochs within the Quaternary period, the preceding being the 
Pleistocene. The International Commission on Stratigraphy defines 
the start of the Holocene at 11,700 years before 2000 (ICS, 2019).See 
also Anthropocene.
Human behaviour The way in which a person acts in response 
to a particular situation or stimulus. Human actions are relevant 
at different levels, from international, national, and sub-national 
actors, to NGO, firm-level actors, and communities, households, and 
individual actions.
Adaptation behaviour 
Human actions that directly or indirectly affect the risks of climate 
change impacts.
Mitigation  behaviour 
Human actions that directly or indirectly influence mitigation. 
Human behavioural change  A transformation or modification 
of human actions. Behaviour change efforts can be planned in ways 
that mitigate climate change and/or reduce negative consequences 
of climate change impacts.
Human rights Rights that are inherent to all human beings, 
universal, inalienable, and indivisible, typically expressed and 
guaranteed by law. They include the right to life, economic, social, and 
cultural rights, and the right to development and self-determination 
(based upon the definition by the UN Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights).
Procedural rights  
Rights to a legal procedure to enforce substantive rights.
Substantive rights  
Basic human rights, including the right to the substance of being 
human such as life itself, liberty and happiness.
Human security   A condition that is met when the vital core of 
human lives is protected, and when people have the freedom and 
capacity to live with dignity. In the context of climate change, the 
vital core of human lives includes the universal and culturally specific, 
material and non-material elements necessary for people to act on 
behalf of their interests and to live with dignity.
Human system Any system in which human organisations 
and institutions play a major role. Often, but not always, the term 
is synonymous with society or social system. Systems such as 
agricultural systems, urban systems, political systems, technological 
systems, and economic systems are all human systems in the sense 
applied in this report.
Hydrological cycle  The cycle in which water evaporates from the 
oceans and the land surface, is carried over the Earth in atmospheric 
circulation as water vapour, condenses to form clouds, precipitates 
as rain or snow, which on land can be intercepted by trees and 
vegetation, potentially accumulating as snow or ice, provides runoff 
on the land surface, infiltrates into soils, recharges groundwater, 
discharges into streams, and ultimately, flows out into the oceans 
as rivers, polar glaciers and ice sheets, from which it will eventually 
evaporate again. The various systems involved in the hydrological 
cycle are usually referred to as hydrological systems.
Ice sheet An ice body originating on land that covers an area of 
continental size, generally defined as covering >50,000 km2. An ice 
sheet flows outward from a high central ice plateau with a small 
average surface slope. The margins usually slope more steeply, and 
most ice is discharged through fast flowing ice streams or outlet 
glaciers, often into the sea or into ice shelves floating on the sea. 
There are only two ice sheets in the modern world, one on Greenland 
and one on Antarctica. The latter is divided into the East Antarctic Ice 
Sheet (EAIS), the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) and the Antarctic 
Peninsula ice sheet. During glacial periods there were other ice 
sheets. See also Glacier.
Impacts (consequences, outcomes) The consequences of 
realised risks on natural and human systems, where risks result 
from the interactions of climate-related hazards (including extreme 
weather and climate events), exposure, and vulnerability. Impacts 
generally refer to effects on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, 
ecosystems and species, economic, social and cultural assets, services 
(including ecosystem services), and infrastructure. Impacts may be 
referred to as consequences or outcomes, and can be adverse or 
beneficial. See also Adaptation, Exposure, Hazard, Loss and Damage, 
and losses and damages, and Vulnerability.
(climate change) Impact assessment The practice of 
identifying and evaluating, in monetary and/or non-monetary terms, 
the effects of climate change on natural and human systems.
Incremental adaptation See Adaptation.
Indigenous 
knowledge The 
understandings, 
skills 
and 
philosophies developed by societies with long histories of interaction 
with their natural surroundings. For many Indigenous peoples, 
Indigenous knowledge informs decision-making about fundamental 
aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer term actions. This 
knowledge is integral to cultural complexes, which also encompass 
language, systems of classification, resource use practices, social 
interactions, values, ritual and spirituality. These distinctive ways 
of knowing are important facets of the world’s cultural diversity. 
(UNESCO, 2018). See also Local knowledge.
Indirect land-use change See Land-use change.
Industrial revolution A period of rapid industrial growth with 
far-reaching social and economic consequences, beginning in Britain 
during the second half of the 18th century and spreading to Europe 
and later to other countries including the United States. The invention 
of the steam engine was an important trigger of this development. 
The industrial revolution marks the beginning of a strong increase 
in the use of fossil fuels, initially coal, and hence emission of carbon 
dioxide (CO2). See also Pre-industrial.
Industrialised/developed/developing countries There are 
a diversity of approaches for categorising countries on the basis of 
their level of economic development, and for defining terms such 
816
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
as industrialised, developed, or developing. Several categorisations 
are used in this report. (1) In the United Nations system, there is no 
established convention for designating of developed and developing 
countries or areas. (2) The United Nations Statistics Division specifies 
developed and developing regions based on common practice. 
In addition, specific countries are designated as Least Developed 
Countries (LDC), landlocked developing countries, small island 
developing states (SIDS), and transition economies. Many countries 
appear in more than one of these categories. (3) The World Bank 
uses income as the main criterion for classifying countries as 
low, lower middle, upper middle, and high income. (4) The United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) aggregates indicators for 
life expectancy, educational attainment, and income into a single 
composite Human Development Index (HDI) to classify countries as 
low, medium, high, or very high human development.
Inequality  See Equality.
Institution  Rules, norms and conventions held in common by 
social actors that guide, constrain and shape human interaction. 
Institutions can be formal, such as laws and policies, or informal, 
such as norms and conventions. Organisations - such as parliaments, 
regulatory agencies, private firms, and community bodies - develop 
and act in response to institutional frameworks and the incentives 
they frame. Institutions can guide, constrain and shape human 
interaction through direct control, through incentives, and through 
processes of socialisation. See also Institutional capacity.
Institutional capacity Building and strengthening individual 
organisations and providing technical and management training to 
support integrated planning and decision-making processes between 
organisations and people, as well as empowerment, social capital, 
and an enabling environment, including the culture, values and 
power relations (Willems and Baumert, 2003). 
Integrated assessment A method of analysis that combines 
results and models from the physical, biological, economic and 
social sciences and the interactions among these components in 
a consistent framework to evaluate the status and the consequences 
of environmental change and the policy responses to it. See also 
Integrated assessment model (IAM).
Integrated assessment model (IAM) Models that integrate 
knowledge from two or more domains into a single framework. They 
are one of the main tools for undertaking integrated assessments.
One class of IAM used in respect of climate change mitigation may 
include representations of: multiple sectors of the economy, such as 
energy, land use and land use change; interactions between sectors; 
the economy as a whole; associated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
and sinks; and reduced representations of the climate system. This 
class of model is used to assess linkages between economic, social 
and technological development and the evolution of the climate 
system. Another class of IAM additionally includes representations of 
the costs associated with climate change impacts, but includes less 
detailed representations of economic systems. These can be used to 
assess impacts and mitigation in a cost-benefit framework and have 
been used to estimate the social cost of carbon.
Integrated response options In this report, integrated 
response options are those options that simultaneously address 
more than one land challenge. These can be categorised into options 
that rely on a) land management, b) value chain management, and 
c) risk management. Integrated response options are not mutually 
exclusive. See also Land challenge. 
Integrated water resources management (IWRM) A process 
which promotes the coordinated development and management of 
water, land and related resources in order to maximise economic and 
social welfare in an equitable manner without compromising the 
sustainability of vital ecosystems.
Inter-generational equity  See Equity.
Internal variability See Climate variability.
Irreversibility A perturbed state of a dynamical system is defined 
as irreversible on a given timescale if the recovery timescale from 
this state due to natural processes is substantially longer than the 
time it takes for the system to reach this perturbed state. See also 
Tipping point.
Kyoto Protocol The Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is an 
international treaty adopted in December 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, at 
the Third Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP3) to the 
UNFCCC. It contains legally binding commitments, in addition to 
those included in the UNFCCC. Countries included in Annex B of the 
Protocol (mostly OECD countries and countries with economies in 
transition) agreed to reduce their anthropogenic greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions (carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous 
oxide (N2O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), 
and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) by at least 5% below 1990 levels 
in the first commitment period (2008–2012). The Kyoto Protocol 
entered into force on 16 February 2005 and as of May 2018 had 192 
Parties (191 States and the European Union). A second commitment 
period was agreed in December 2012 at COP18, known as the Doha 
Amendment to the Kyoto Protocol, in which a new set of Parties 
committed to reduce GHG emissions by at least 18% below 1990 
levels in the period from 2013 to 2020. However, as of May 2018, the 
Doha Amendment had not received sufficient ratifications to enter 
into force. See also Paris Agreement.
Land The terrestrial portion of the biosphere that comprises the 
natural resources (soil, near surface air, vegetation and other biota, 
and water), the ecological processes, topography, and human 
settlements and infrastructure that operate within that system (FAO, 
2007; UNCCD, 1994). 
Land challenges In this report, land challenges refers to land-
based mitigation and adaptation, desertification, land degradation 
and food security. 
Land cover The biophysical coverage of land (e.g., bare soil, 
rocks, forests, buildings and roads or lakes). Land cover is often 
categorised in broad land-cover classes (e.g., deciduous forest, 
coniferous forest, mixed forest, grassland, bare ground). [Note: In 
some literature assessed in this report, land cover and land use are 
used interchangeably, but the two represent distinct classification 
systems. For example, the land cover class woodland can be under 
various land uses such as livestock grazing, recreation, conservation, 
or wood harvest.] See also Land cover change, and Land-use change.
817
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
Land cover change Change from one land cover class to another, 
due to change in land use or change in natural conditions (Pongratz et 
al., 2018). See also Land-use change, and Land management change.
Land degradation A negative trend in land condition, caused by 
direct or indirect human-induced processes including anthropogenic 
climate change, expressed as long-term reduction or loss of at least 
one of the following: biological productivity, ecological integrity or 
value to humans. [Note: This definition applies to forest and non-
forest land. Changes in land condition resulting solely from natural 
processes (such as volcanic eruptions) are not considered to be 
land degradation. Reduction of biological productivity or ecological 
integrity or value to humans can constitute degradation, but any one 
of these changes need not necessarily be considered degradation.]
Land degradation neutrality A state whereby the amount 
and quality of land resources necessary to support ecosystem 
functions and services and enhance food security remain stable or 
increase within specified temporal and spatial scales and ecosystems 
(UNCCD, 2019).
Land management Sum of land-use practices (e.g., sowing, 
fertilizing, weeding, harvesting, thinning, clear-cutting) that take 
place within broader land-use categories. (Pongratz et al., 2018) 
Land management change  
A change in land management that occurs within a land-use category. 
See also Land-use change.
Land potential The inherent, long-term potential of the land to 
sustainably generate ecosystem services, which reflects the capacity 
and resilience of the land-based natural capital, in the face of ongoing 
environmental change (UNEP, 2016).
Land rehabilitation Direct or indirect actions undertaken with 
the aim of reinstating a level of ecosystem functionality, where 
the goal is provision of goods and services rather than ecological 
restoration (McDonald, et al., 2016).
Land restoration The process of assisting the recovery of land 
from a degraded state (McDonald et al., 2016; IPBES, 2018). 
Land surface air temperature (LSAT) The near-surface air 
temperature over land, typically measured at 1.25–2 m above the 
ground using standard meteorological equipment.
Land use  The total of arrangements, activities and inputs applied 
to a parcel of land. The term land use is also used in the sense of 
the social and economic purposes for which land is managed 
(e.g., grazing, timber extraction, conservation and city dwelling). 
In national GHG inventories, land use is classified according to 
the IPCC land use categories of forest land, cropland, grassland, 
wetlands, settlements, other lands (see the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for 
National GHG Inventories for details). See also Land-use change and 
Land management.
Land-use change (LUC) The change from one land use category 
to another. [Note: In some of the scientific literature assessed in this 
report, land-use change encompasses changes in land-use categories 
as well as changes in land management.]
Indirect land-use change (iLUC)
Land use change outside the area of focus, that occurs as 
a consequence of change in use or management of land within the 
area of focus, such as through market or policy drivers. For example, 
if agricultural land is diverted to biofuel production, forest clearance 
may occur elsewhere to replace the former agricultural production. 
See also Afforestation, Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
(AFOLU), Deforestation, Land use, land-use change and forestry 
(LULUCF), Reforestation, the IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-
Use Change, and Forestry (IPCC, 2000), and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
for National GHG Inventories (IPCC, 2006).
Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) In the 
context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories under the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 
2019), LULUCF is a GHG inventory sector that covers anthropogenic 
emissions and removals of GHG in managed lands, excluding non-
CO2 agricultural emissions. Following the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
for National GHG Inventories, ‘anthropogenic’ land-related GHG 
fluxes are defined as all those occurring on ‘managed land’, i.e., 
‘where human interventions and practices have been applied to 
perform production, ecological or social functions’. Since managed 
land may include carbon dioxide (CO2) removals not considered 
as ‘anthropogenic’ in some of the scientific literature assessed in 
this report (e.g., removals associated with CO2 fertilisation and 
N  deposition), the land-related net GHG emission estimates from 
global models included in this report are not necessarily directly 
comparable with LULUCF estimates in National GHG Inventories. See 
also Land-use change (LUC). 
Latent heat flux The turbulent flux of heat from the Earth’s 
surface to the atmosphere that is associated with evaporation or 
condensation of water vapour at the surface; a component of the 
surface energy budget. See also Atmosphere, and Flux. 
Leakage The effects of policies that result in a displacement of the 
environmental impact, thereby counteracting the intended effects of 
the initial policies.
Lifecycle assessment (LCA) Compilation and evaluation of the 
inputs, outputs and the potential environmental impacts of a product 
or service throughout its life cycle (ISO, 2018).
Likelihood The chance of a specific outcome occurring, where this 
might be estimated probabilistically. Likelihood is expressed in this 
report using a standard terminology (Mastrandrea et al., 2010). See 
also Agreement, Evidence, Confidence, and Uncertainty.
Livelihood  The resources used and the activities undertaken in 
order to live. Livelihoods are usually determined by the entitlements 
and assets to which people have access. Such assets can be 
categorised as human, social, natural, physical, or financial.
Local knowledge The understandings and skills developed 
by individuals and populations, specific to the places where they 
live. Local knowledge informs decision-making about fundamental 
aspects of life, from day-to-day activities to longer term actions. 
This knowledge is a key element of the social and cultural systems 
which influence observations of, and responses to climate change; 
it also informs governance decisions (UNESCO, 2018). See also 
Indigenous knowledge.
818
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
Lock-in A situation in which the future development of a system, 
including infrastructure, technologies, investments, institutions, and 
behavioural norms, is determined or constrained (‘locked in’) by 
historic developments.
Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF) A set of well-mixed 
greenhouse gases with long atmospheric lifetimes. This set of 
compounds includes carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous oxide (N2O), 
together with some fluorinated gases. They have a warming effect on 
climate. These compounds accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal 
to centennial timescales, and their effect on climate hence persists 
for decades to centuries after their emission. On timescales of 
decades to a century already emitted emissions of long-lived climate 
forcers can only be abated by greenhouse gas removal (GGR). See 
also Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF).
Loss and Damage, and losses and damages Research has 
taken Loss and Damage (capitalised letters) to refer to political 
debate under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) following the establishment of the Warsaw 
Mechanism on Loss and Damage in 2013, which is to ‘address loss 
and damage associated with impacts of climate change, including 
extreme events and slow onset events, in developing countries that 
are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.’ 
Lowercase letters (losses and damages) have been taken to refer 
broadly to harm from (observed) impacts and (projected) risks 
(Mechler et al., 2018). 
Maladaptive actions (Maladaptation) Actions that may lead 
to increased risk of adverse climate-related outcomes, including via 
increased greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, increased vulnerability 
to climate change, or diminished welfare, now or in the future. 
Maladaptation is usually an unintended consequence.
Malnutrition Deficiencies, excesses, or imbalances in a person’s 
intake of energy and/or nutrients. The term malnutrition addresses 
three broad groups of conditions: undernutrition, which includes 
wasting (low weight-for-height), stunting (low height-for-age) 
and underweight (low weight-for-age); micronutrient-related 
malnutrition, which includes micronutrient deficiencies (a lack of 
important vitamins and minerals) or micronutrient excess; and 
overweight, obesity and diet-related noncommunicable diseases 
(such as heart disease, stroke, diabetes and some cancers) (WHO, 
2018). Micronutrient deficiencies are sometimes termed ‘hidden 
hunger’ to emphasise that people can be malnourished in the sense 
of deficient without being deficient in calories. Hidden hunger can 
apply even where people are obese.
Managed forest Forests subject to human interventions (notably 
silvicultural management such as planting, pruning, thinning), timber 
and fuelwood harvest, protection (fire suppression, insect supression) 
and management for amenity values or conservation, with defined 
geographical boundaries (Ogle et al., 2018). [Note: For a discussion 
of the term ‘forest’ in the context of National GHG inventories, see 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National GHG Inventories.] See also 
Managed land.
Managed grassland Grasslands on which human interventions 
are carried out, such as grazing domestic livestock or hay removal.
Managed land In the context of national greenhouse gas (GHG) 
inventories under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC), the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
GHG Inventories (IPCC, 2006) defines managed land ‘where human 
interventions and practices have been applied to perform production, 
ecological or social functions’. The IPCC (2006) defines anthropogenic 
GHG emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector as all those 
occurring on ‘managed land’. The key rationale for this approach is 
that the preponderance of anthropogenic effects occurs on managed 
lands. [Note: More details can be found in 2006 IPCC Guidelines for 
National GHG Inventories, Volume 4, Chapter 1.]
Market failure When private decisions are based on market 
prices that do not reflect the real scarcity of goods and services but 
rather reflect market distortions, they do not generate an efficient 
allocation of resources but cause welfare losses. A market distortion 
is any event in which a market reaches a market clearing price 
that is substantially different from the price that a market would 
achieve while operating under conditions of perfect competition and 
state enforcement of legal contracts and the ownership of private 
property. Examples of factors causing market prices to deviate from 
real economic scarcity are environmental externalities, public goods, 
monopoly power, information asymmetry, transaction costs, and non-
rational behaviour.
Measurement, reporting and verification (MRV)
Measurement
‘The process of data collection over time, providing basic datasets, 
including associated accuracy and precision, for the range of 
relevant variables. Possible data sources are field measurements, 
field observations, detection through remote sensing and interviews’ 
(UN REDD, 2009). 
Reporting
‘The process of formal reporting of assessment results to the UNFCCC, 
according to predetermined formats and according to established 
standards, especially the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) Guidelines and GPG (Good Practice Guidance)’ (UN  REDD, 
2009). 
Verification
‘The process of formal verification of reports, for example, the 
established approach to verify national communications and national 
inventory reports to the UNFCCC’ (UN REDD, 2009).
Megadrought See Drought.
Methane (CH4) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) to be 
mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol. Methane is the major component 
of natural gas and associated with all hydrocarbon fuels. Significant 
anthropogenic emissions also occur as a result of animal husbandry 
and paddy rice production. Methane is also produced naturally 
where organic matter decays under anaerobic conditions, such as 
in wetlands.
Migrant See Migration. 
Migration ‘The movement of a person or a group of persons, either 
across an international border, or within a State. It is a population 
movement, encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever 
its length, composition and causes; it includes migration of refugees, 
819
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
displaced persons, economic migrants, and persons moving for other 
purposes, including family reunification’ (IOM, 2018). 
Migrant 
‘Any person who is moving or has moved across an international 
border or within a State away from his/her habitual place of residence, 
regardless of (1) the person’s legal status; (2) whether the movement 
is voluntary or involuntary; (3) what the causes for the movement are; 
or (4) what the length of the stay is’ (IOM, 2018). 
See also (Internal) Displacement.
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) A set of eight 
time-bound and measurable goals for combating poverty, hunger, 
disease, illiteracy, discrimination against women and environmental 
degradation. These goals were agreed at the UN Millennium Summit 
in 2000 together with an action plan to reach the goals by 2015.
Mitigation (of climate change) A human intervention to 
reduce emissions or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases. 
Mitigation behaviour See Human behaviour.
Mitigation measures In climate policy, mitigation measures are 
technologies, processes or practices that contribute to mitigation, 
for example renewable energy technologies, waste minimisation 
processes, public transport commuting practices.
Mitigation option A technology or practice that reduces 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions or enhances sinks. 
Mitigation pathways  See Pathways.
Mitigation scenario A plausible description of the future that 
describes how the (studied) system responds to the implementation 
of mitigation policies and measures. See also Emission scenario, 
Pathways, Socio-economic scenarios, and Stabilisation (of GHG or 
CO2-equivalent concentration).
Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) Mechanisms put in place 
at national to local scales to respectively monitor and evaluate 
efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapt to the 
impacts of climate change with the aim of systematically identifying, 
characterising and assessing progress over time. 
Motivation (of an individual) An individual’s reason or 
reasons for acting in a particular way; individuals may consider 
various consequences of actions, including financial, social, affective, 
and environmental consequences. Motivation can arise from factors 
external or internal to the individual.
Multi-level governance See Governance.
Narratives (in the context of scenarios) Qualitative 
descriptions of plausible future world evolutions, describing 
the characteristics, general logic and developments underlying 
a particular quantitative set of scenarios. Narratives are also referred 
to in the literature as ‘storylines’. See also Scenario, Scenario storyline, 
and Pathways.
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) A term used 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) whereby a country that has joined the Paris Agreement 
outlines its plans for reducing its emissions. Some countries NDCs 
also address how they will adapt to climate change impacts, and 
what support they need from, or will provide to, other countries to 
adopt low-carbon pathways and to build climate resilience. According 
to Article 4 paragraph 2 of the Paris Agreement, each Party shall 
prepare, communicate and maintain successive NDCs that it intends 
to achieve. In the lead up to the 21st Conference of the Parties in 
Paris in 2015, countries submitted Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions (INDCs). As countries join the Paris Agreement, unless 
they decide otherwise, this INDC becomes their first Nationally 
Determined Contribution (NDC).
Negative emissions Removal of greenhouse gases (GHGs) from 
the atmosphere by deliberate human activities, i.e., in addition to the 
removal that would occur via natural carbon cycle processes.  See 
also Net negative emissions, Net-zero emissions, Carbon dioxide 
removal (CDR), and Greenhouse gas removal (GGR). 
Negative emissions technologies An activity or mechanism 
that results in negative emissions. 
Net negative emissions A situation of net negative emissions is 
achieved when, as result of human activities, more greenhouse gases 
(GHG) are removed from the atmosphere than are emitted into it. 
Where multiple greenhouse gases are involved, the quantification of 
negative emissions depends on the climate metric chosen to compare 
emissions of different gases (such as global warming potential, global 
temperature change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time 
horizon). See also Negative emissions, Net-zero emissions and Net-
zero CO2 emissions.
Net-zero CO2 emissions  Conditions in which any remaining 
anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions are balanced by 
anthropogenic CO2 removals over a specified period. See also Net-
zero emissions, and Net negative emissions.
Net-zero emissions Net-zero emissions are achieved when 
emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) to the atmosphere are 
balanced by anthropogenic removals. Where multiple greenhouse 
gases are involved, the quantification of net-zero emissions depends 
on the climate metric chosen to compare emissions of different 
gases (such as global warming potential, global temperature 
change potential, and others, as well as the chosen time horizon). 
See also Net-zero CO2 emissions, Negative emissions, and Net 
negative emissions. 
Nitrous oxide (N2O) One of the six greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
to be mitigated under the Kyoto Protocol. The main anthropogenic 
source of N2O is agriculture (soil and animal manure management), 
but important contributions also come from sewage treatment, 
fossil fuel combustion, and chemical industrial processes. N2O is also 
produced naturally from a wide variety of biological sources in soil 
and water, particularly microbial action in wet tropical forests.
Non-overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Nutrition transition A predictable change in dietary patterns 
associated with a country’s economic development whereby 
‘problems of under- and overnutrition often coexist, reflecting the 
trends in which an increasing proportion of people consume the types 
of diets associated with a number of chronic diseases’ (Popkin, 1994). 
820
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
Ocean acidification (OA) A reduction in the pH of the ocean, 
accompanied by other chemical changes, over an extended period, 
typically decades or longer, which is caused primarily by uptake 
of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere, but can also be 
caused by other chemical additions or subtractions from the ocean. 
Anthropogenic ocean acidification refers to the component of pH 
reduction that is caused by human activity (IPCC, 2011, p. 37). See 
also Climate change.
Ocean fertilisation Deliberate increase of nutrient supply to 
the near-surface ocean in order to enhance biological production 
through which additional carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere 
is sequestered. This can be achieved by the addition of micro-
nutrients or macro-nutrients. Ocean fertilisation is regulated by the 
London Protocol
Overshoot See Temperature overshoot.
Overshoot pathways See Pathways.
Ozone (O3) The triatomic form of oxygen (O3). In the troposphere, 
it is created both naturally and by photochemical reactions involving 
gases resulting from human activities (smog). Tropospheric ozone acts 
as a greenhouse gas (GHG). In the stratosphere, it is created by the 
interaction between solar ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen 
(O2). Stratospheric ozone plays a dominant role in the stratospheric 
radiative balance. Its concentration is highest in the ozone layer.
Paris Agreement The Paris Agreement under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was adopted on 
December 2015 in Paris, France, at the 21st session of the Conference 
of the Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC. The agreement, adopted by 196 
Parties to the UNFCCC, entered into force on 4 November 2016 and 
as of May 2018 had 195 Signatories and was ratified by 177 Parties. 
One of the goals of the Paris Agreement is ‘Holding the increase in the 
global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial 
levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C 
above pre-industrial levels’, recognising that this would significantly 
reduce the risks and impacts of climate change. Additionally, the 
Agreement aims to strengthen the ability of countries to deal with 
the impacts of climate change. The Paris Agreement is intended 
to become fully effective in 2020. See also Kyoto Protocol, and 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).
Participatory governance See Governance.
Pasture Area covered with grass or other plants used or suitable 
for grazing of livestock; grassland. 
Pathways The temporal evolution of natural and/or human 
systems towards a future state. Pathway concepts range from sets 
of quantitative and qualitative scenarios or narratives of potential 
futures to solution-oriented decision-making processes to achieve 
desirable societal goals. Pathway approaches typically focus on 
biophysical, techno-economic, and/or socio-behavioural trajectories 
and involve various dynamics, goals, and actors across different scales.
1.5°C pathway
A pathway of emissions of greenhouse gases and other climate 
forcers that provides an approximately one-in-two to two-in-three 
chance, given current knowledge of the climate response, of global 
warming either remaining below 1.5°C or returning to 1.5°C by 
around 2100 following an overshoot. 
See also Temperature overshoot.
Adaptation pathways  
A series of adaptation choices involving trade-offs between short-
term and long-term goals and values. These are processes of 
deliberation to identify solutions that are meaningful to people in 
the context of their daily lives and to avoid potential maladaptation. 
Development pathways
Development pathways are trajectories based on an array of social, 
economic, cultural, technological, institutional, and biophysical 
features that characterise the interactions between human and 
natural systems and outline visions for the future, at a particular scale. 
Mitigation pathways 
A mitigation pathway is a temporal evolution of a set of mitigation 
scenario features, such as greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and 
socio-economic development.
Overshoot pathways 
Pathways that exceed the stabilisation level (concentration, forcing, 
or temperature) before the end of a time horizon of interest 
(e.g., before 2100) and then decline towards that level by that time. 
Once the target level is exceeded, removal by sinks of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) is required. See also Temperature overshoot.
Non-overshoot pathways 
Pathways that stay below the stabilisation level (concentration, 
forcing, or temperature) during the time horizon of interest (e.g., 
until 2100).
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)
Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concentrations 
of the full suite of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and aerosols and 
chemically active gases, as well as land use/land cover (Moss et 
al., 2008). The word representative signifies that each RCP provides 
only one of many possible scenarios that would lead to the specific 
radiative forcing characteristics. The term pathway emphasises the 
fact that not only the long-term concentration levels, but also the 
trajectory taken over time to reach that outcome are of interest 
(Moss et al., 2010). RCPs were used to develop climate projections in 
CMIP5. See also Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP), and 
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs).
•  RCP2.6: One pathway where radiative forcing peaks at 
approximately 3 W m–2 and then declines to be limited at 
2.6 W m–2 in 2100 (the corresponding Extended Concentration 
Pathway, or ECP, has constant emissions after 2100).
•  RCP4.5 and RCP6.0: Two intermediate stabilisation pathways in 
which radiative forcing is limited at approximately 4.5 W m–2 
and 6.0 W m–2 in 2100 (the corresponding ECPs have constant 
concentrations after 2150).
•  RCP8.5: One high pathway which leads to >8.5 W m–2 in 2100 
(the corresponding ECP has constant emissions after 2100 until 
2150 and constant concentrations after 2250).
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs)
Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs) were developed to 
complement the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) with 
varying socio-economic challenges to adaptation and mitigation 
821
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
(O’Neill et al., 2014). Based on five narratives, the SSPs describe 
alternative socio-economic futures in the absence of climate policy 
intervention, comprising sustainable development (SSP1), regional 
rivalry (SSP3), inequality (SSP4), fossil–fueled development (SSP5), 
and a middle-of-the-road development (SSP2) (O’Neill et al., 2017; 
Riahi et al., 2017). The combination of SSP-based socio-economic 
scenarios and RCP-based climate projections provides an integrative 
frame for climate impact and policy analysis. 
Transformation pathways 
Trajectories describing consistent sets of possible futures of 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, atmospheric concentrations, 
or global mean surface temperatures implied from mitigation and 
adaptation actions associated with a set of broad and irreversible 
economic, technological, societal, and behavioural changes. This can 
encompass changes in the way energy and infrastructure are used 
and produced, natural resources are managed and institutions are set 
up and in the pace and direction of technological change (TC).
See also Scenario, Scenario storyline, Emission scenario, Mitigation 
scenario, Baseline scenario, Stabilisation (of GHG or CO2-equivalent 
concentration), and Narratives.
Peat Soft, porous or compressed, sedentary deposit of which 
a substantial portion is partly decomposed plant material with high 
water content in the natural state (up to about 90 percent) (IPCC, 
2013). See also Peatlands. 
Peatlands Peatland is a land where soils are dominated by peat. 
See also Reservoir, and Sink.
Peri-urban areas Parts of a city that appear to be quite rural 
but are in reality strongly linked functionally to the city in its daily 
activities.
Permafrost Ground (soil or rock and included ice and 
organic material) that remains at or below 0°C for at least two 
consecutive years.
pH A dimensionless measure of the acidity of a solution given 
by its concentration of hydrogen ions ([H+]). pH is measured on 
a logarithmic scale where pH = -log10[H+]. Thus, a pH decrease of 
1 unit corresponds to a 10-fold increase in the concentration of H+, or 
acidity. See also Ocean acidification.
Phenology The relationship between biological phenomena that 
recur periodically (e.g., development stages, migration) and climate 
and seasonal changes.
Planetary health The Rockefeller-Lancet Commission defines 
planetary health as ‘the achievement of the highest attainable 
standard of health, well-being, and equity worldwide through 
judicious attention to the human systems — political, economic, and 
social — that shape the future of humanity and the Earth’s natural 
systems that define the safe environmental limits within which 
humanity can flourish. Put simply, planetary health is the health of 
human civilisation and the state of the natural systems on which it 
depends’ (Whitmee et al., 2015). 
Political economy The set of interlinked relationships between 
people, the state, society and markets as defined by law, politics, 
economics, customs and power that determine the outcome of 
trade and transactions and the distribution of wealth in a country 
or economy. 
Pool, carbon and nitrogen A reservoir in the earth system where 
elements, such as carbon and nitrogen, reside in various chemical 
forms for a period of time. 
Poverty A complex concept with several definitions stemming 
from different schools of thought. It can refer to material 
circumstances (such as need, pattern of deprivation or limited 
resources), economic conditions (such as standard of living, inequality 
or economic position) and/or social relationships (such as social class, 
dependency, exclusion, lack of basic security or lack of entitlement).
See also Poverty eradication.
Poverty eradication 
A set of measures to end poverty in all its 
forms everywhere. See also Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Precursors Atmospheric compounds that are not greenhouse 
gases (GHGs) or aerosols, but that have an effect on GHG or aerosol 
concentrations by taking part in physical or chemical processes 
regulating their production or destruction rates. See also Aerosol, and 
Greenhouse gas (GHG).
Pre-industrial The multi-century period prior to the onset of 
large-scale industrial activity around 1750. The reference period 
1850–1900 is used to approximate pre-industrial global mean 
surface temperature (GMST). See also Industrial revolution.
Primary production The synthesis of organic compounds 
by plants and microbes, on land or in the ocean, primarily by 
photosynthesis using light and carbon dioxide (CO2) as sources 
of energy and carbon respectively. It can also occur through 
chemosynthesis, using chemical energy, e.g., in deep sea vents.
Gross Primary Production (GPP)
The total amount of carbon fixed by photosynthesis over a specific 
time period.
Net primary production (NPP)
The amount of carbon accumulated through photosynthesis minus 
the amount lost by plant respiration over a specified time period that 
would prevail in the absence of land use. 
Procedural equity   See Equity
Procedural rights See Human rights.
Projection A potential future evolution of a quantity or set of 
quantities, often computed with the aid of a model. Unlike predictions, 
projections are conditional on assumptions concerning, for example, 
future socio-economic and technological developments that may 
or may not be realised. See also Climate projection, Scenario, 
and Pathways.
Radiative forcing The change in the net, downward minus 
upward, radiative flux (expressed in W m–2) at the tropopause or 
top of atmosphere due to a change in a driver of climate change, 
such as a change in the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2), 
the concentration of volcanic aerosols or the output of the Sun. 
The traditional radiative forcing is computed with all tropospheric 
properties held fixed at their unperturbed values, and after allowing 
for stratospheric temperatures, if perturbed, to readjust to radiative-
dynamical equilibrium. Radiative forcing is called instantaneous if no 
822
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
change in stratospheric temperature is accounted for. The radiative 
forcing once rapid adjustments are accounted for is termed the 
effective radiative forcing. Radiative forcing is not to be confused with 
cloud radiative forcing, which describes an unrelated measure of the 
impact of clouds on the radiative flux at the top of the atmosphere.
Reasons for concern (RFCs) Elements of a classification 
framework, first developed in the IPCC Third Assessment Report, 
which aims to facilitate judgments about what level of climate 
change may be dangerous (in the language of Article 2 of the 
UNFCCC) by aggregating risks from various sectors, considering 
hazards, exposures, vulnerabilities, capacities to adapt, and the 
resulting impacts.
Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest 
Degradation (REDD+)  REDD+ refers to reducing emissions 
from deforestation; reducing emissions from forest degradation; 
conservation of forest carbon stocks; sustainable management 
of forests; and enhancement of forest carbon stocks (see UNFCCC 
decision 1/CP.16, para. 70).
Reference period The period relative to which anomalies are 
computed. See also Anomalies.
Reference scenario See Baseline scenario.
Reforestation Conversion to forest of land that has previously 
contained forests but that has been converted to some other use. 
[Note: For a discussion of the term forest and related terms such 
as afforestation, reforestation and deforestation in the context 
of reporting and accounting Article 3.3 and 3.4 activities under 
the Kyoto Protocol, see 2013 Revised Supplementary Methods 
and Good Practice Guidance Arising from the Kyoto Protocol.] See 
also Afforestation, Deforestation, and Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
Region A relatively large-scale land or ocean area characterised 
by specific geographical and climatological features. The climate of 
a land-based region is affected by regional and local scale features 
like topography, land use characteristics and large water bodies, as 
well as remote influences from other regions, in addition to global 
climate conditions. The IPCC defines a set of standard regions for 
analyses of observed climate trends and climate model projections 
(see IPCC 2018, Fig. 3.2; AR5, SREX).
Remaining carbon budget Cumulative global carbon dioxide 
(CO2) emissions from the start of 2018 to the time that CO2 emissions 
reach net-zero that would result, at some probability, in limiting 
global warming to a given level, accounting for the impact of other 
anthropogenic emissions. See also Carbon budget.
Representative 
concentration 
pathways 
(RCPs) See 
Pathways.
Reservoir A component or components of the climate system 
where a greenhouse gas (GHG) or a precursor of a greenhouse gas is 
stored (UNFCCC Article 1.7). 
Resilience The capacity of interconnected social, economic 
and ecological systems to cope with a hazardous event, trend or 
disturbance, responding or reorganising in ways that maintain their 
essential function, identity and structure. Resilience is a positive 
attribute when it maintains capacity for adaptation, learning and/
or transformation (adapted from the Arctic Council, 2013). See also 
Hazard, Risk, and Vulnerability.
Respiration The process whereby living organisms convert 
organic matter to carbon dioxide (CO2), releasing energy and 
consuming molecular oxygen.
Rewetting ‘The deliberate action of changing a drained soil 
into a wet soil, e.g. by blocking drainage ditches, disabling pumping 
facilities or breaching obstructions’ (IPCC, 2013). See also Drainage.
Risk The potential for adverse consequences for human or 
ecological systems, recognising the diversity of values and objectives 
associated with such systems. In the context of climate change, 
risks can arise from potential impacts of climate change as well as 
human responses to climate change. Relevant adverse consequences 
include those on lives, livelihoods, health and well-being, economic, 
social and cultural assets and investments, infrastructure, services 
(including ecosystem services), ecosystems and species. 
In the context of climate change impacts, risks result from dynamic 
interactions between climate-related hazards with the exposure 
and vulnerability of the affected human or ecological system to the 
hazards. Hazards, exposure and vulnerability may each be subject 
to uncertainty in terms of magnitude and likelihood of occurrence, 
and each may change over time and space due to socio-economic 
changes and human decision-making (see also risk management, 
adaptation, and mitigation). 
In the context of climate change responses, risks result from the 
potential for such responses not achieving the intended objective(s), 
or from potential trade-offs with, or negative side-effects on, other 
societal objectives, such as the Sustainable Development Goals (see 
also risk trade-off). Risks can arise for example from uncertainty in 
implementation, effectiveness or outcomes of climate policy, climate-
related investments, technology development or adoption, and 
system transitions.
Risk assessment The qualitative and/or quantitative scientific 
estimation of risks. See also Risk management, and Risk perception.
Risk management Plans, actions, strategies or policies to reduce 
the likelihood and/or magnitude of adverse potential consequences, 
based on assessed or perceived risks. See also Risk assessment, and 
Risk perception.
Risk perception The subjective judgment that people make about 
the characteristics and severity of a risk. See also Risk assessment, 
and Risk management.
Risk trade-off The change in portfolio of risks that occurs when 
a countervailing risk is generated (knowingly or inadvertently) by an 
intervention to reduce the target risk (Wiener and Graham, 2009). 
See also Adverse side-effect, and Co-benefits.
Runoff  The flow of water over the surface or through the 
subsurface, which typically originates from the part of liquid 
precipitation and/or snow/ice melt that does not evaporate or 
refreeze, and is not transpired. See also Hydrological cycle.
Saline soils Soils with levels of soluble salts (commonly sulphates 
and chlorides of calcium and magnesium) in the saturation extract 
823
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
high enough to negatively affect plant growth. Saline soils are usually 
flocculated and have good water permeability (Well and Brady, 2016). 
See also Soil salinity and Sodic soils. 
Scenario A plausible description of how the future may develop 
based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions 
about key driving forces (e.g., rate of technological change (TC), 
prices) and relationships. Note that scenarios are neither predictions 
nor forecasts, but are used to provide a view of the implications 
of developments and actions. See also Baseline scenario, Emission 
scenario, Mitigation scenario and Pathways.
Scenario storyline A narrative description of a scenario (or 
family of scenarios), highlighting the main scenario characteristics, 
relationships between key driving forces and the dynamics of their 
evolution. Also referred to as ‘narratives’ in the scenario literature. 
Sea ice 
Ice found at the sea surface that has originated from 
the freezing of seawater. Sea ice may be discontinuous pieces (ice 
floes) moved on the ocean surface by wind and currents (pack ice), 
or a motionless sheet attached to the coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice 
concentration is the fraction of the ocean covered by ice. Sea ice less 
than one year old is called first-year ice. Perennial ice is sea ice that 
survives at least one summer. It may be subdivided into second-year 
ice and multi-year ice, where multi-year ice has survived at least 
two summers.
Sea level change (sea level rise/sea level fall) Change to 
the height of sea level, both globally and locally (relative sea level 
change) due to (1) a change in ocean volume as a result of a change 
in the mass of water in the ocean, (2) changes in ocean volume 
as a result of changes in ocean water density, (3) changes in the 
shape of the ocean basins and changes in the Earth’s gravitational 
and rotational fields, and (4) local subsidence or uplift of the land. 
Global mean sea level change resulting from change in the mass 
of the ocean is called barystatic. The amount of barystatic sea level 
change due to the addition or removal of a mass of water is called 
its sea level equivalent (SLE). Sea level changes, both globally and 
locally, resulting from changes in water density are called steric. 
Density changes induced by temperature changes only are called 
thermosteric, while density changes induced by salinity changes 
are called halosteric. Barystatic and steric sea level changes do not 
include the effect of changes in the shape of ocean basins induced by 
the change in the ocean mass and its distribution.
Sea 
surface 
temperature 
(SST) The subsurface bulk 
temperature in the top few meters of the ocean, measured by ships, 
buoys, and drifters. From ships, measurements of water samples in 
buckets were mostly switched in the 1940s to samples from engine 
intake water. Satellite measurements of skin temperature (uppermost 
layer; a fraction of a millimetre thick) in the infrared or the top 
centimetre or so in the microwave are also used, but must be adjusted 
to be compatible with the bulk temperature.
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction The Sendai 
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030 outlines seven 
clear targets and four priorities for action to prevent new, and to 
reduce existing disaster risks. The voluntary, non-binding agreement 
recognises that the State has the primary role to reduce disaster risk 
but that responsibility should be shared with other stakeholders 
including local government, the private sector and other stakeholders, 
with the aim for the substantial reduction of disaster risk and 
losses in lives, livelihoods and health and in the economic, physical, 
social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses, 
communities and countries.
Sequestration See Uptake and Carbon sequestration.
Shared socio-economic pathways (SSPs) See Pathways.
Short-lived climate forcers (SLCF) A set of compounds that are 
primarily composed of those with short lifetimes in the atmosphere 
compared to well-mixed greenhouse gases (GHGs), and are also 
referred to as near-term climate forcers. This set of compounds 
includes methane (CH4), which is also a well-mixed greenhouse gas, 
as well as ozone (O3) and aerosols, or their precursors, and some 
halogenated species that are not well-mixed greenhouse gases. 
These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal to 
centennial timescales, and so their effect on climate is predominantly 
in the first decade after their emission, although their changes can still 
induce long-term climate effects such as sea level change. Their effect 
can be cooling or warming. A subset of exclusively warming short-
lived climate forcers is referred to as short-lived climate pollutants.
See also Long-lived climate forcers (LLCF).
Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP) See Short-lived climate 
forcers (SLCF).
Sink Any process, activity or mechanism which removes 
a greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas 
from the atmosphere (UNFCCC Article 1.8). See also Sequestration, 
Source, and Uptake. 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Small Island 
Developing States (SIDS), as recognised by the United Nations 
OHRLLS (Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed 
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island 
Developing States), are a distinct group of developing countries 
facing specific social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities 
(UN-OHRLLS, 2011). They were recognised as a special case both for 
their environment and development at the Rio Earth Summit in Brazil 
in 1992. Fifty eight countries and territories are presently classified 
as SIDS by the UN OHRLLS, with 38 being UN member states and 
20 being Non-UN Members or Associate Members of the Regional 
Commissions (UN-OHRLLS, 2018).
Social costs The full costs of an action in terms of social welfare 
losses, including external costs associated with the impacts of this 
action on the environment, the economy (GDP, employment) and on 
the society as a whole.
Social cost of carbon (SCC) 
The net present value of aggregate 
climate damages (with overall harmful damages expressed as 
a number with positive sign) from one more tonne of carbon in the 
form of carbon dioxide (CO2), conditional on a global emissions 
trajectory over time.
Social-ecological system An integrated system that includes 
human societies and ecosystems, in which humans are part of 
nature. The functions of such a system arise from the interactions and 
interdependence of the social and ecological subsystems. The system’s 
structure is characterised by reciprocal feedbacks, emphasising that 
824
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
humans must be seen as a part of, not apart from, nature (Arctic 
Council, 2016; Berkes and Folke, 1998).
Social inclusion 
A process of improving the terms of participation 
in society, particularly for people who are disadvantaged, through 
enhancing opportunities, access to resources, and respect for rights 
(UN DESA 2016). 
Social learning A process of social interaction through which 
people learn new behaviours, capacities, values, and attitudes.
Societal (social) transformation See Transformation.
Socio-economic scenario A scenario that describes a possible 
future in terms of population, gross domestic product (GDP), 
and other socio-economic factors relevant to understanding the 
implications of climate change. See also Baseline scenario, Emission 
scenario, Mitigation scenario, and Pathways.
Socio-technical transitions Where technological change is 
associated with social systems and the two are inextricably linked.
Sodic soils Soils with disproportionately high concentration of 
sodium (Na+) in relation to calcium (Ca2+) and magnesium (Mg2+) 
adsorbed at the cation exchange site on the surface of soil particles. 
Sodic soils are characterised by a poor soil structure and poor 
aeration (NDSU, 2014). See also Soil salinity. 
Soil carbon sequestration (SCS) Land management changes 
which increase the soil organic carbon content, resulting in a net 
removal of carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere.
Soil conservation The maintenance of soil fertility through 
controlling erosion, preserving soil organic matter, ensuring favourable 
soil physical properties, and retaining nutrients (Young, 1989).
Soil erosion 
The displacement of the soil by the action of water 
or wind. Soil erosion is a major process of land degradation.
Soil organic carbon Carbon contained in soil organic matter.
Soil organic matter The organic component of soil, comprising 
plant and animal residue at various stages of decomposition, and 
soil organisms.
Soil moisture Water stored in the soil in liquid or frozen form. 
Root-zone soil moisture is of most relevance for plant activity.
Soil salinity The concentration of soluble salts in the water 
extracted from a saturated soil (saturation extract), comprising 
chlorides and sulphates of Sodium (Na+), calcium (Ca2+) and 
magnesium (Mg2+) as well as carbonate salts (adapted from FAO, 
1985). See also Saline soils, and Sodic soils. 
Source Any process or activity which releases a greenhouse gas, 
an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas into the atmosphere 
(UNFCCC Article 1.9). See also Sink.
Stabilisation (of GHG or CO2-equivalent concentration)  
A state in which the atmospheric concentrations of one greenhouse 
gas (GHG) (e.g., carbon dioxide) or of a CO2-equivalent basket of 
GHGs (or a combination of GHGs and aerosols) remains constant 
over time.
Stranded assets Assets exposed to devaluations or conversion 
to ‘liabilities’ because of unanticipated changes in their initially 
expected revenues due to innovations and/or evolutions of the 
business context, including changes in public regulations at the 
domestic and international levels.
Stratosphere The highly stratified region of the atmosphere 
above the troposphere extending from about 10 km (ranging from 9 
km at high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average) to about 50 
km altitude. See also Atmosphere, and Troposphere.
Subnational actors State/provincial, regional, metropolitan 
and local/municipal governments as well as non-party stakeholders, 
such as civil society, the private sector, cities and other subnational 
authorities, local communities and indigenous peoples. 
Substantive rights See Human rights.
Supply-side measures See Demand and supply-side measures.
Surface temperature See Global mean surface temperature 
(GMST), Land surface air temperature, and Sea surface 
temperature (SST).
Sustainability 
A dynamic process that guarantees the 
persistence of natural and human systems in an equitable manner.
Sustainable development (SD) 
Development that meets 
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs (WCED, 1987) and 
balances social, economic and environmental concerns. See also 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and Development pathways 
(under Pathways).
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) The 17 global goals 
for development for all countries established by the United Nations 
through a participatory process and elaborated in the 2030 Agenda 
for Sustainable Development, including ending poverty and hunger; 
ensuring health and well-being, education, gender equality, clean 
water and energy, and decent work; building and ensuring resilient 
and sustainable infrastructure, cities and consumption; reducing 
inequalities; protecting land and water ecosystems; promoting peace, 
justice and partnerships; and taking urgent action on climate change.
See also Sustainable development (SD).
Sustainable forest management The stewardship and use of 
forests and forest lands in a way, and at a rate, that maintains their 
biodiversity, productivity, regeneration capacity, vitality and their 
potential to fulfil, now and in the future, relevant ecological, economic 
and social functions, at local, national, and global levels, and that 
does not cause damage to other ecosystems (Forest Europe, 1993).
Sustainable intensification (of agriculture) Increasing yields 
from the same area of land while decreasing negative environmental 
impacts of agricultural production and increasing the provision of 
environmental services (CGIAR, 2019). [Note: this definition is based 
on the concept of meeting demand from a finite land area, but it 
is scale-dependent. Sustainable intensification at a given scale (e.g., 
global or national) may require a decrease in production intensity 
at smaller scales and in particular places (often associated with 
previous, unsustainable, intensification) to achieve sustainability 
(Garnett et al., 2013).] 
825
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
Sustainable land management The stewardship and use of 
land resources, including soils, water, animals and plants, to meet 
changing human needs, while simultaneously ensuring the long-term 
productive potential of these resources and the maintenance of their 
environmental functions (Adapted from WOCAT, undated).
Technology transfer  The exchange of knowledge, hardware and 
associated software, money and goods among stakeholders, which 
leads to the spread of technology for adaptation or mitigation. The 
term encompasses both diffusion of technologies and technological 
cooperation across and within countries.
Teleconnections A statistical association between climate 
variables at widely separated, geographically-fixed spatial locations. 
Teleconnections are caused by large spatial structures such as basin-
wide coupled modes of ocean-atmosphere variability, Rossby wave-
trains, mid-latitude jets and storm tracks, etc.
Temperature overshoot The temporary exceedance of a 
specified level of global warming, such as 1.5°C. Overshoot implies 
a peak followed by a decline in global warming, achieved through 
anthropogenic removal of carbon dioxide (CO2) exceeding remaining 
CO2 emissions globally. See also Pathways (Subterms: Overshoot 
pathways, Non-overshoot Pathways).
Tier In the context of the IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Gas Inventories, a tier represents a level of methodological complexity. 
Usually three tiers are provided. Tier 1 is the basic method, Tier 2 
intermediate and Tier 3 most demanding in terms of complexity 
and data requirements. Tiers 2 and 3 are sometimes referred to as 
higher tier methods and are generally considered to be more accurate 
(IPCC, 2019). 
Tipping point A level of change in system properties beyond 
which a system reorganises, often abruptly, and does not return to 
the initial state even if the drivers of the change are abated. For the 
climate system, it refers to a critical threshold beyond which global 
or regional climate changes from one stable state to another stable 
state. Tipping points are also used when referring to impact: the term 
can imply that an impact tipping point is (about to be) reached in 
a natural or human system. See also Irreversibility.
Transformation A change in the fundamental attributes of 
natural and human systems.
Societal (social) transformation   
A profound and often deliberate shift initiated by communities toward 
sustainability, facilitated by changes in individual and collective 
values and behaviours, and a fairer balance of political, cultural, and 
institutional power in society.
Transformation pathways See Pathways.
Transformational adaptation See Adaptation.
Transformative change A system wide change that alters the 
fundamental attributes of the system.
Transient climate response to cumulative CO2 emissions 
(TCRE) The transient global average surface temperature change 
per unit cumulative carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, usually 1000 
GtC. TCRE combines both information on the airborne fraction of 
cumulative CO2 emissions (the fraction of the total CO2 emitted that 
remains in the atmosphere, which is determined by carbon cycle 
processes) and on the transient climate response (TCR). See also 
Transient climate response (TCR) (under Climate sensitivity).
Transit-oriented development (TOD) An approach to urban 
development that maximises the amount of residential, business and 
leisure space within walking distance of efficient public transport, so 
as to enhance mobility of citizens, the viability of public transport and 
the value of urban land in mutually supporting ways.
Transition The process of changing from one state or condition to 
another in a given period of time. Transition can occur in individuals, 
firms, cities, regions and nations, and can be based on incremental or 
transformative change.
Tropical cyclone The general term for a strong, cyclonic-scale 
disturbance that originates over tropical oceans. Distinguished from 
weaker systems (often named tropical disturbances or depressions) 
by exceeding a threshold wind speed. A tropical storm is a tropical 
cyclone with one-minute average surface winds between 18 and 
32 m s–1. Beyond 32 m s–1, a tropical cyclone is called a hurricane, 
typhoon, or cyclone, depending on geographic location. See also 
Extratropical cyclone.
Troposphere The lowest part of the atmosphere, from the surface 
to about 10 km in altitude at mid-latitudes (ranging from 9 km at 
high latitudes to 16 km in the tropics on average), where clouds and 
weather phenomena occur. In the troposphere, temperatures generally 
decrease with height. See also Atmosphere, and Stratosphere.
Uncertainty A state of incomplete knowledge that can result 
from a lack of information or from disagreement about what is 
known or even knowable. It may have many types of sources, 
from imprecision in the data to ambiguously defined concepts or 
terminology, incomplete understanding of critical processes, or 
uncertain projections of human behaviour. Uncertainty can therefore 
be represented by quantitative measures (e.g., a probability density 
function) or by qualitative statements (e.g., reflecting the judgment 
of a team of experts) (see IPCC, 2004; Mastrandrea et al., 2010; Moss 
and Schneider, 2000). See also Confidence, and Likelihood.
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification 
(UNCCD) A legally binding international agreement linking 
environment and development to sustainable land management, 
established in 1994. The Convention’s objective is ‘to combat 
desertification and mitigate the effects of drought in countries 
experiencing drought and/or desertification’. The Convention 
specifically addresses the arid, semi-arid and dry sub-humid areas, 
known as the drylands, and has a particular focus on Africa. As of 
October 2018, the UNCCD had 197 Parties.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) The UNFCCC was adopted in May 1992 and opened for 
signature at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro. It entered into 
force in March 1994 and as of May 2018 had 197 Parties (196 States 
and the European Union). The Convention’s ultimate objective is the 
‘stabilisation of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere 
at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference 
with the climate system’. The provisions of the Convention are 
pursued and implemented by two treaties: the Kyoto Protocol and 
the Paris Agreement.
826
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
Urban green infrastructure Public and private green spaces, 
including remnant native vegetation, parks, private gardens, golf 
courses, street trees, urban farming and engineered options such 
as green roofs, green walls, biofilters and raingardens (Norton et 
al., 2015).
Urban and Peri-urban agriculture ‘The cultivation of crops and 
rearing of animals for food and other uses within and surrounding 
the boundaries of cities, including fisheries and forestry’ (EPRS, 2014).
Uptake The addition of a substance of concern to a reservoir. See 
also Carbon sequestration, and Sink.
Vegetation browning A decrease in photosynthetically active 
plant biomass which is inferred from satellite observations. 
Vegetation greening An increase in photosynthetically active 
plant biomass which is inferred from satellite observations. 
Vulnerability The propensity or predisposition to be adversely 
affected. Vulnerability encompasses a variety of concepts and 
elements including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm and lack of 
capacity to cope and adapt. See also Exposure, Hazard, and Risk.
Water cycle 
See Hydrological cycle.
Well-being 
A state of existence that fulfils various human needs, 
including material living conditions and quality of life, as well as 
the ability to pursue one’s goals, to thrive, and feel satisfied with 
one’s life. Ecosystem well-being refers to the ability of ecosystems to 
maintain their diversity and quality.
Wetland Land that is covered or saturated by water for all or part 
of the year (e.g., peatland).
 
 
 
827
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
References 
Allan, J.A., 2005: Virtual water: A strategic resource global solutions to 
regional deficits. Groundwater, 36(4), 545–546, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-
6584.1998.tb02825.x. 
AMS, 2000: AMS Glossary of Meteorology, 2nd ed. American Meteorological 
Society, Boston, MA, Retrieved from: http://amsglossary.allenpress.com/
glossary/browse. 
Arctic Council, 2013: Glossary of terms. In: Arctic Resilience Interim Report 
2013. Stockholm Environment Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, 
Stockholm, Sweden, pp. viii.
Arctic Council, 2016: Arctic Resilience Report 2016 [M. Carson and G. Peterson 
(eds).]. Stockholm Environment Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
Berkes, F. and C. Folke, 1998: Linking Social and Ecological Systems: 
Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building Resilience. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, 
NY, USA, 459 pp.
CGIAR, 2019: Sustainable intensification of agriculture: oxymoron or real deal? 
The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR). 
Retrieved 
from: 
https://wle.cgiar.org/thrive/big-questions/sustainable-
intensification-agriculture-oxymoron-or-real-deal/sustainable-1 . 
Culwick, C. and K. Bobbins, 2016: A Framework for a Green Infrastructure 
Planning Approach in the Gauteng City–Region. GCRO Research Report 
No. 04, Gauteng City–Region Observatory (GRCO), Johannesburg, South 
Africa, 127 pp.
Davis, S.J. and K. Caldeira, 2010: Consumption-based accounting of CO2 
emissions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 107(12), 5687–5692, doi:10.1073/pnas.0906974107. 
Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee, 2015: Scientific Report of the 2015 
Dietary Guidelines Advisory Committee. US Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Research Service, Washington DC, United States of America.  
Ellis, E.C. and N. Ramankutty, 2008: Putting people in the map: 
anthropogenic biomes of the world. Front. Ecol. Environ., 6(8), 439–447, 
doi: 10.1890/070062. 
Ellis, E.C., K.K. Goldewijk, S. Siebert, D. Lightman and N. Ramankutty, 
2010: Anthropogenic transformation of the biomes, 1700 to 2000. 
Global Ecology and Biogeography, 19(5), 589–606, doi:10.1111/j.1466-
8238.2010.00540.x. 
EPRS, 2014: Urban and Peri-Urban Agriculture. European Parliamentary 
Research Service. Retrieved from: https://epthinktank.eu/2014/06/18/
urban-and-peri-urban-agriculture/ 
FAO, 1985: Irrigation water management: Training manual no.1 – Introduction 
to irrigation. eds, C. Brouwer, A. Goffeau, and M. Heibloem. Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy. 
FAO, 2000: Land cover classification system (LCCS): Classification concepts 
and user manual. [A. Di Gregorio and L.J.M. Jansen (eds.)]. Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy, 179 pp. 
FAO, 2001: Glossary. In: The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2001. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, 
Italy, pp. 49–50.
FAO, 2005: Building on gender, agrobiodiversity and local knowledge: 
A  training manual. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy.
FAO, 2007: Land evaluation: Towards a revised framework. Land and water 
discussion paper. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO), Rome, Italy. 
FAO, 2009: Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security. WSFS 2009/2, 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome, Italy. 
FAO, 2013: Food wastage footprint: Impacts on natural resources. Summary 
report. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 
Rome, Italy, 63 pp.
FAO, 2015a: Agroforestry. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO). Retrieved from: http://www.fao.org/forestry/
agroforestry/80338/en/.
FAO, 2015b: Food waste. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (FAO). Retrieved from: http://www.fao.org/platform-food-loss-
waste/food-waste/definition/en/. 
FAO, 2018: Climate–Smart Agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization 
of  the United Nations (FAO). Retrieved from: www.fao.org/climate–
smart–agriculture.
Forest Europe, 1993: Resolution H1 General Guidelines for the Sustainable 
Management of Forests in Europe. Second Ministerial Conference on the 
Protection of Forests in Europe, Helsinki, 16–17 June 1993. Retrieved from: 
https://www.foresteurope.org/docs/MC/MC_helsinki_resolutionH1.pdf.
Fung, A. and E.O. Wright (eds.), 2003: Deepening Democracy: Institutional 
Innovations in Empowered Participatory Governance. Verso, London, 
UK, 312 pp.
Garnett, T. et al, 2013: Sustainable intensification in Agriculture: Premises and 
Policies. Science, 341(6141), 33. doi:10.1126/science.1234485.
Gbeckor-Kove, N. 1989: Lectures on drought, desertification, in drought and 
desertification. WMO, TDNo. 286, World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland. 
HLPE, 2017: Nutrition and food systems. The High Level Panel of Experts on 
Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security. 
Rome, Italy, 152 pp. 
IBI, 2018: Frequently Asked Questions About Biochar: What is biochar? 
International Biochar Initiative (IBI). Retrieved from: https://biochar–
international.org/faqs.
ICS, 2019: Formal subdivision of the Holocene Series/Epoch. International 
Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS). Retrieved from http://www.stratigraphy.
org/index.php/ics-news-and-meetings/125-formal-subdivision-of-the-
holocene-series-epoch. 
IOM, 2018: Key Migration Terms. International Organization for Migration 
(IOM). Retrieved from: www.iom.int/key–migration–terms.
IPBES, 2018: The IPBES assessment report on land degradation and restoration. 
[Montanarella, L., Scholes, R., and Brainich, A. (eds.)]. Secretariat of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
services, Bonn, Germany, 744 pp.
IPBES, 2019: Glossary. Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem services, Bonn, Germany. Retrieved 
from: https://www.ipbes.net/glossary. 
IPCC, 2000: Land Use, Land–Use Change, and Forestry: A Special Report of the 
IPCC. [Watson, R.T., I.R. Noble, B. Bolin, N.H. Ravindranath, D.J. Verardo, and 
D.J. Dokken (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 375 pp.
IPCC, 2003: Definitions and Methodological Options to Inventory Emissions 
from Direct Human–induced Degradation of Forests and Devegetation of 
Other Vegetation Types. [Penman, J., M. Gytarsky, T. Hiraishi, T. Krug, D. 
Kruger, R. Pipatti, L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, K. Tanabe, and F. Wagner 
(eds.)]. Institute for Global Environmental Strategies (IGES), Hayama, 
Kanagawa, Japan, 32 pp.
IPCC, 2004: IPCC Workshop on Describing Scientific Uncertainties in 
Climate Change to Support Analysis of Risk of Options. Workshop Report. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, Switzerland, 
138 pp.
IPCC, 2006: 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
[H.S. Eggleston, L. Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara, K. Tanabe (eds)]. Institute for 
Global Environmental Strategies (IGES), Hayama, Kanagawa, Japan, 20 pp. 
IPCC, 2011: Workshop Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change Workshop on Impacts of Ocean Acidification on Marine Biology 
and Ecosystems. [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, K.J. Mach, G.–K. 
Plattner, M.D. Mastrandrea, M. Tignor, and K.L. Ebi (eds.)]. IPCC Working 
828
Annex I 
Glossary
AI
Group II Technical Support Unit, Carnegie Institution, Stanford, California, 
United States of America, 164 pp.
IPCC, 2012a: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance 
Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups I and II 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). [Field, C.B., V. 
Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, 
G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.
IPCC, 2012b: Meeting Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change Expert Meeting on Geoengineering. IPCC Working Group III 
Technical Support Unit, Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, 
Potsdam, Germany, 99 pp.
IPCC, 2013: 2013 Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories: Wetlands. [Hiraishi, T., T. Krug, K. Tanabe, 
N. Srivastava, J. Baasansuren, M. Fukuda, and T.G. Troxler (eds).]. 
IPCC, Switzerland. 
ISO, 2014: ISO 16559:2014(en) Solid biofuels – Terminology, definitions and 
descriptions. International Standards Organisation (ISO). Retrieved from: 
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso:16559:ed-1:v1:en. 
ISO, 2018: ISO 14044:2006. Environmental management – Life cycle 
assessment – Requirements and guidelines. International Standards 
Organisation (ISO). Retrieved from: www.iso.org/standard/38498.html.
Jagers, S.C. and J. Stripple, 2003: Climate Governance Beyond the State. 
Global Governance, 9(3), 385–399, www.jstor.org/stable/27800489.
MacDonald, G.K., K.A. Brauman, S. Sun, K.M. Carlson, E.S. Cassidy, J.S. Gerber, 
and P.C. West, 2015: Rethinking agricultural trade relationships in an era 
of globalization. BioScience, 65(3), 275–289, doi:10.1093/biosci/biu225. 
Mastrandrea, M.D. et al., 2010: Guidance Note for Lead Authors of the 
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report on Consistent Treatment of Uncertainties. 
Intergovernmental 
Panel 
on 
Climate 
Change 
(IPCC), 
Geneva, 
Switzerland, 6 pp.
McDonald, T., J. Jonson, and K.W. Dixon, 2016: National standards for the 
practice of ecological restoration in Australia. Restoration Ecology, 24(S1) 
S4-S32, doi:10.1111/rec.12359. 
MA, 2005: Appendix D: Glossary. In: Ecosystems and Human Well–being: 
Current States and Trends. Findings of the Condition and Trends Working 
Group [Hassan, R., R. Scholes, and N. Ash (eds.)]. Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment (MA). Island Press, Washington DC, USA, pp. 893–900.
Meinzen-Dick, R. and M. Di Gregorio, 2004: Collective Action and Property 
Rights for Sustainable Deveopment. International Food and Policy Research 
Institute. Washington DC, USA. 
Mitchell, T. and S. Maxwell, 2010: Defining climate compatible development. 
CDKN ODI Policy Brief November 2010/A, Climate & Development 
Knowledge Network (CDKN), 6 pp.
Misra, A., L. Khurana, 2008: Obesity and the metabolic syndrome in 
developing countries. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 
93(11), 3–30, doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-1595. 
Moss, R.H. and S.H. Schneider, 2000: Uncertainties in the IPCC TAR: 
Recommendations to Lead Authors for More Consistent Assessment and 
Reporting. In: Guidance Papers on the Cross Cutting Issues of the Third 
Assessment Report of the IPCC [Pachauri, R., T. Taniguchi, and K. Tanaka 
(eds.)]. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, 
Switzerland, pp. 33–51
Moss, R.H. et al., 2008: Towards New Scenarios for Analysis of Emissions, 
Climate 
Change, 
Impacts, 
and 
Response 
Strategies. Technical 
Summary. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Geneva, 
Switzerland, 25 pp.
Moss, R.H. et al., 2010: The next generation of scenarios for climate change 
research and assessment. Nature, 463(7282), 747–756, doi:10.1038/
nature08823.
MRFCJ, 2018: Principles of Climate Justice. Mary Robinson Foundation For 
Climate Justice (MRFCJ). Retrieved from: www.mrfcj.org/principles–of–
climate–justice.
NDSU, 2014: Saline and Sodic Soils. North Dakota State University 
(NDSU). Retrieved from: https://www.ndsu.edu/soilhealth/wp-content/
uploads/2014/07/Saline-and-Sodic-Soils-2-2.pdf. 
Norton, B.A., A.M. Coutts, S.J. Livesley, R.J. Harris, A.M. Hunter, and N.S.G. 
Williams, 2015: Planning for cooler cities: A framework to prioritise 
green infrastructure to mitigate high temperatures in urban landscapes. 
Landscape and Urban Planning, 134, 127–138, doi:10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2014.10.018. 
O’Neill, B.C. et al., 2014: A new scenario framework for climate change 
research: the concept of shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 
122(3), 387–400, doi:10.1007/s10584–013–0905–2.
O’Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic 
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental 
Change, 42, 169–180, doi:10.1016j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.
Park, S. E. et al., 2012: Informing adaptation responses to climate change 
through theories of transformation. Global Environmental Change, 22(1), 
115–126. doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.10.003.
Peters, B.G. and J. Pierre, 2001: Developments in intergovernmental relations: 
towards multi–level governance. Policy & Politics, 29(2), 131–135, 
doi:10.1332/0305573012501251.
Popkin, B.M., 1994: The nutrition transition in low-income countries: 
an emerging crisis. Nutr. Rev. 52(9), 285–298, doi: https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1753-4887.1994.tb01460.x. 
Popkin, B.M., 2006: Global nutrition dynamics: the world is shifting rapidly 
toward a diet linked with noncommunicable diseases. The American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 84(2), 289–298, doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/
ajcn/84.1.289.  
Pongratz, J. et al., 2018: Models meet data: Challenges and opportunities in 
implementing land management in Earth system models. Global Change 
Biology, 24(4) 1470–1487, doi: 10.1111/gcb.13988. 
Riahi, K. et al., 2017: The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and their 
energy, land use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An 
overview. Global Environmental Change, 42, 153–168, doi:10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Rulli, M.C. and P. D’Odorico, 2014: Food appropriation through large scale 
land acquisitions. Environmental Research Letters, 9(6), doi: 10.1088/1748-
9326/9/6/064030. 
Sarmiento, H. and C. Tilly, 2018: Governance Lessons from Urban Informality. 
Politics and Governance, 6(1), 199–202, doi:10.17645/pag.v6i1.1169.
Silvertown, J. (2009). A new dawn for citizen science. Trends in Ecology & 
Evolution, 24(9), 467–471, doi: 10.1016/J.TREE.2009.03.017. 
Soulé, M.E., 2010: Conservation relevance of ecological cascades. In: 
Trophic Cascades: Predators, Prey, and the Changing Dynamics of Nature 
[J. Terborgh and J.A. Estes (eds.)]. Island Press, 337–352. 
Tabara, J.D., J. Jager, D. Mangalagiu, and M. Grasso, 2018: Defining 
transformative climate science to address high–end climate change. 
Regional Environmental Change, 1–12, doi:10.1007/s10113–018–1288–8.
Termeer, C.J.A.M., A. Dewulf, and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational 
change: governance interventions for climate change adaptation from 
a continuous change perspective. Journal of Environmental Planning and 
Management, 60(4), 558–576, doi:10.1080/09640568.2016.1168288.
Türkeş M, 1999: Vulnerability of Turkey to desertification with respect 
to  precipitation and aridity conditions. Turkish J. Eng. Environ. Sci., 
23, 363–380. 
Türkeş, M., 2017: General Climatology: Fundamentals of Atmosphere, 
Weather and Climate. Revised Second Edition, Kriter Publisher Physical 
Geography Series No: 4, ISBN: 978-605-9336-28-4, xxiv + 520 pp. Kriter 
Publisher, Berdan Matbaası: İstanbul. (In Turkish).
United Nations Secretary General’s Advisory Group on Energy and Climate 
(AGECC), 2010: Energy for a Sustainable Future. New York, NY, USA.
UN, 1992: Article 2: Use of Terms. In: Convention on Biological Diversity. 
United Nations (UN), pp. 3–4.
829
Glossary  
Annex I
AI
UN, 1998: Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement. E/CN.4/1998/53/
Add.2,United Nations (UN) Economic and Social Council, 14 pp.
UN, 2015: Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development. A/RES/70/1, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New 
York, NY, USA, 35 pp.
UNCCD, 1994: United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in 
countries experiencing serious drought and/or desertification, particularly 
in Africa. A/AC.241/27, United Nations General Assembly (UNGA), New 
York, NY, USA, 58 pp. 
UNCCD, 2019: Achieving Land Degradation Neutrality. United Nations 
Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD). Retrieved from: https://
www.unccd.int/actions/achieving-land-degradation-neutrality. 
UN DESA, 2016: Identifying social inclusion and exclusion. In: Leaving 
no one behind: the imperative of inclusive development. Report on the 
World Social Situation 2016. ST/ESA/362, United Nations Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA), New York, NY, USA, pp. 17–31.
UNESCO, 2018: Local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems. United Nations 
Educational,Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Retrieved 
from: 
www.unesco.org/new/en/natural–sciences/priority–areas/links/
related–information/what–is–local–and–indigenous–knowledge.
UNEP, 2016: Unlocking the sustainable potential of land resources: 
evaluating systems, strategies and tools. Factsheet. United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP). Retrieved from: http://hdl.handle.
net/20.500.11822/7711. 
UNFCCC, 1992: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
United Nations, New York, United States. Retrieved from: https://unfccc.
int/files/essential_background/background_publications_htmlpdf/
application/pdf/conveng.pdf. 
UNFCCC, 2019: Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF). United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climatic Change (UNFCCC), Bonn, 
Germany. Retrieved from: https://unfccc.int/topics/land-use/workstreams/
land-use--land-use-change-and-forestry-lulucf.
UNISDR, 2009: 2009 UNISDR Terminology on Disaster Risk Reduction. United 
Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR), Geneva, 
Switzerland, 30 pp.
UNOHCHR, 2018: What are Human rights? UN Office of the High Commissioner 
for Human Rights (UNOHCHR). Retrieved from: www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/
Pages/whatarehumanrights.aspx.
UN–OHRLLS, 2011: Small Island Developing States: Small Islands Big(ger) 
Stakes. Office for the High Representative for the Least Developed 
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing 
States (UN–OHRLLS), New York, NY, USA, 32 pp.
UN–OHRLLS, 2018: Small Island Developing States: Country profiles. Office 
for the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked 
Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN–OHRLLS). 
Retrieved from: http://unohrlls.org/about–sids/country–profiles.
UN–REDD, 2009: Measurement, Assessment, Reporting and Verification 
(MARV): Issues and Options for REDD. Draft Discussion Paper, United 
Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries (UN–
REDD), Geneva, Switzerland, 12 pp.
Vandergeten, E., H. Azadi, D. Teklemariam, J. Nyssen, F. Witlox and E. Vanhaute, 
2016: Agricultural Outsourcing or Land Grabbing: A Meta-Analysis. 
Landscape Ecology, 31(7), 1395–1417, doi: 10.1007/s10980-016-0365-y. 
WCED, 1987: Our Common Future. World Commission on Environment and 
Development (WCED), Geneva, Switzerland, 400 pp., doi:10.2307/2621529.
Well, R.R. and N.C. Brady, 2016: Nature and property of soils, 15th Edition. 
Pearson Education Limited, Harlow, England, 420–430 pp. 
Wiener, J.B. and J.D. Graham, 2009: Risk vs. risk: Tradeoffs in protecting health 
and the environment. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
Willems, S. and K. Baumert, 2003: Institutional Capacity and Climate Actions. 
COM/ENV/EPOC/IEA/SLT(2003)5, Organisation for Economic Co–operation 
and Development (OECD) International Energy Agency (IEA), Paris, France, 
50 pp.
Whitmee, S. et al., 2015: Safeguarding human health in the Anthropocene 
epoch: Report of the Rockefeller Foundation-Lancet Commission on 
planetary health. The Lancet, 366(10007), 1973–2028. 
WHO, 2018: Malnutrition. World Health Organization (WHO). Retrieved from: 
http://www.who.int/topics/malnutrition/en/. 
WMO, 2019: What are weather/climate services? Global Framework for 
Climate Services, Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from: https://www.wmo.
int/gfcs/what_are_climate_weather_services. 
WOCAT, undated: Glossary. World Overview of Conservation Approaches 
and Technologies (WOCAT). Retrieved from: https://www.wocat.
net/en/glossary. 
Young, A. 1989: Agroforestry for soil conservation. International Council for 
Research in Agroforestry, Nairobi, Kenya, 318p. 
