THE REGIONAL IMPACTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE
An Assessment of Vulnerability
W M O
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
'A.
U N E P
f
?3»1„ 
1 К#Й>ЙЛ
ü g
ш
Ш ёШ я
ш
ш
т
ш
иШ
ш
■fîç
t e IгЬ2
l Ê ?.*л
T h e  R e g i o n a l  I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e : 
A n  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  V u l n e r a b i l i t y
The degree to which human conditions and the natural environment are vulnerable to the potential effects of climate change is 
a key concern for governments and the environmental science community worldwide. To provide the best available base of 
scientific information for policymakers and public use, governments requested that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) prepare this assessment of the vulnerability of different regions of the world. The Regional Impacts o f Climate 
Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability reviews state-of-the-art information on potential impacts of climate change for ecological 
systems, water supply, food production, coastal infrastructure, human health, and other resources for ten global regions:
• 
Africa
• 
The Arctic and the Antarctic
• 
Australasia
• 
Europe 
Latin America
• 
Middle East and Arid Asia
• 
North America 
Small Island States
• 
Temperate Asia 
Tropical Asia
This assessment reveals that human health, ecological systems, and socioeconomic sectors are vulnerable to changes in climate, 
including the magnitude and rate of climate change, as well as to changes in climate variability. It also illustrates that the 
increasing costs of climate and climate variability, in terms of loss of human life and capital due to floods, storms, and 
droughts, are a result of the lack of adjustment and response in society’s policies and use of resources. This book points to 
management options that would make many sectors more resilient to current variability in climate and thus help these sectors 
adapt to future changes in climate.
The assessment of each region’s vulnerability to climate change shares a common structure to facilitate comparison of 
information. The focus is on sensitivity, adaptation options, critical zones, and especially vulnerable regions/countries or 
sectors/resources. The regional assessments have been prepared by leading researchers. The report is based on information 
contained in the IPCC Second Assessment Report and integrates the most recent research on the topics affecting these regions.
This book can be expected to become the primary source of information on regional aspects of climate change for policymakers, 
the scientific community, and students.
Robert T. Watson served as co-chair of IPCC Working Group II until September 1997, at which time he assumed the overall 
chairmanship of the IPCC. He also is Director of the Environment Department of the World Bank. Before taking up his current 
responsibilities, he was Associate Director for Environment in the Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office 
of the President of the United States of America. He previously held the positions of Director of the Science Division and 
Chief Scientist for the Office of Mission to Planet Earth at NASA. He served as Chair of the Science and Technical Advisory 
Panel to the Global Environmental Facility.
Marufu C. Zinyowera served as co-chair of IPCC Working Group II until September 1997. He has been Director of the 
Zimbabwe Meteorological Services since 1984, and has represented Zimbabwe in many meteorological and environmental fora.
Richard H. Moss has served as Head of the IPCC Working Group II Technical Support Unit since 1993. Prior to this, he was 
Deputy Director of the Human Dimensions of Global Environmental Change Programme at the International Geosphere- 
Biosphere Programme in Stockholm, Sweden. He also served on the faculty of Princeton University, United States.
'Ч* ■ „•. •. '-• ■-•- "■'
The Regional Impacts 
of Climate Change
An Assessment of Vulnerability
Edited by
Robert T. Watson 
Marufu C. Zinyowera 
Richard H. Moss
The World Bank 
Zimbabwe Meteorological Services 
Battelle Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory
Project Administrator
David J. Dokken
A Special Report of IPCC Working Group II 
Published for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY PRESS
PUBLISHED BY THE PRESS SYNDICATE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE 
The Pitt Building, Trumpington Street, Cambridge CB2 IRP, United Kingdom
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU, UK 
http://www.cup.cam.ac.uk
40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011-4211, USA 
http://www.cup.org
10 Stamford Road, Oakleigh, Melbourne 3166, Australia
©Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1998
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without
the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 1998
Printed in the United States of America
A  catalog record for this book is available from the British Library
Library o f Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available
ISBN 0-521- 632560 Hardback 
ISBN 0-521- 634555 Paperback
Photo Credits -  Cover imagery derived from the following sources: ‘The World Bank’ CD-ROMs (Aztech New Media Corporation); ‘Photo 
Gallery’ CD-ROMs (SoftKey International, Inc.); and the ‘Earth, Air, Fire, and Water’ CD-ROM (MediaRights, Inc.).
Cover Art Designer -  Mark Sutton, Global Vision Works.
Contents
F orew ord....................................................................................................................................................................................................................vii
P refa ce.........................................................................................................................................................................................................................ix
Summary for Policymakers: The Regional Impacts of Climate Change -  An Assessment of Vulnerability............................... 1
1. 
Introduction....................................................................................................................................................................................................... 19
2. 
A fric a .................................................................................................................................................................................................................29
3. 
The Arctic and the Antarctic......................................................................................................................................................................... 85
4. 
A ustralasia....................................................................................................................................................................................................... 105
5. 
Europe...............................................................................................................................................................................................................149
6 . 
Latin A m eric a................................................................................................................................................................................................187
7. 
Middle East and Arid A sia ......................................................................................................................................................................... 231
8 . 
North A m erica................................................................................................................................................................................................253
9. 
Small Island States........................................................................................................................................................................................ 331
10. Temperate A s ia .............................................................................................................................................................................................355
11. Tropical A s ia ..................................................................................................................................................................................................381
Annexes
A. 
Regional Trends and Variations of Temperature and Precipitation....................................................................................................411
B. 
Simulation of Regional Climate Change with Global Coupled Climate Models and Regional Modeling Techniques . . 427
C. 
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global W arm ing.......................................................................................... 439
D. 
Socio-Economic Baseline D a ta ................................................................................................................................................................457
E. 
Color P lates.................................................................................................................................................................................................... 481
F. 
Glossary of T erm s........................................................................................................................................................................................495
G. 
Acronyms, Chemical Symbols, and Units..............................................................................................................................................505
H. 
Authors, Contributors, and Expert Reviewers of the Regional Impacts Special R eport............................................................. 509
I. 
List of Major IPCC R eports.......................................................................................................................................................................515
Ш : У ^  ч -г ^ ц . < 3
.
' *““' '-‘'^ - ''- ^  у-»-г-;^--х.^л;-дГйи¥ !д'»|'|^Ви > ^ .4ч П У д г31 ^ ^ ^ Г !^ у
^ «
ü
2^/А-S'^"S
Ш
1
И
Foreword
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was 
jointly established by the World Meteorological Organization 
and the United Nations Environment Programme in 1988 to 
assess the scientific and technical literature on climate change, 
the potential impacts of changes in climate, and options for 
adaption to and mitigation of climate change. Since its incep­
tion, the IPCC has produced a series of Assessment Reports, 
Special Reports, Technical Papers, methodologies, and other 
products which have become standard works of reference, 
widely used by policymakers, scientists, and other experts.
This Special Report, which has been produced by Working 
Group II of the IPCC, builds on the Working Group’s contri­
bution to the Second Assessment Report (SAR), and incorpo­
rates more recent information made available since m id-1995. 
It has been prepared in response to a request from the 
Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice 
(SBSTA) of the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC). It addresses an important question posed 
by the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the UNFCCC, 
namely, the degree to which human conditions and the natur­
al environment are vulnerable to the potential effects of cli­
mate change. The report establishes a common base of infor­
mation regarding the potential costs and benefits of climatic 
change, including the evaluation of uncertainties, to help the 
COP determine what adaptation and mitigation measures 
might be justified. The report consists of vulnerability assess­
ments for 10 regions that comprise the Earth’s entire land sur­
face and adjoining coastal seas: Africa, Arid Western Asia 
(including the M iddle East), A ustralasia, Europe, Latin 
America, North America, the Polar Regions (The Arctic and 
the Antarctic), Small Island States, Temperate Asia, and 
Tropical Asia. It also includes several annexes that provide 
information about climate observations, climate projections, 
vegetation distribution projections, and socioeconomic trends.
As usual in the IPCC, success in producing this report has 
depended on the enthusiasm and cooperation of numerous sci­
entists and other experts worldwide. These individuals have 
given generously of their time, often going beyond reasonable 
demands of duty. We applaud, admire, and are grateful for their 
commitment to the IPCC process. We are pleased to note the 
continuing efforts made by the IPCC to ensure participation of 
scientists and other experts from the developing countries and 
countries with economies in transition. Given the regional 
focus of this report, their participation was especially essential 
to its successful completion. We also express our thanks to the 
many governments, including those in the developing regions 
and regions with economies in transition, that supported these 
scientists and experts in their work.
We take this opportunity to express our gratitude to the fol­
lowing individuals for nurturing another IPCC report through 
to completion:
• 
Professor B. Bolin, the Chairman of the IPCC
• 
The Co-Chairs of Working Group II, Dr. R.T. Watson 
(USA) and Dr. M.C. Zinyowera (Zimbabwe)
• 
The Vice-Chairs of the Working Group, Dr. M. Beniston 
(Switzerland), Dr. O. Canziani (Argentina), Dr. J. Friaa 
(Tunisia), Ing. (Mrs.) M. Perdomo (Venezuela), Dr. S.K. 
Sharma (India), Mr. H. Tsukamoto (Japan), and 
Professor P. Vellinga (The Netherlands)
Dr. R.H. Moss, Head of the Technical Support Unit 
(TSU) of Working Group II, Mr. D.J. Dokken, the 
Project Administrator, and the other members of the 
TSU, including Ms. S. MacCracken, Ms. L. Van Wie 
McGrory, and Ms. F. Ormond
Dr. N. Sundararaman, the Secretary of the IPCC, and 
his staff, including Ms. R. Bourgeois, Ms. C. Ettori, and 
Ms. C. Tanikie.
G.O.P. Obasi
Ms. E. Dowdeswell
Secretary-General
World Meteorological Organization
Executive Director
United Nations Environment Programme
^ Ш
.
[ V i h l f ^ ^
lllaétjeqtq >ДЙ'С
+ ' 
.■?j-.. J«K îsÆi.
Æ -. 
-.-. ; 
-> 
--• .
ш ш е ш
Preface
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has 
produced a series of Assessment Reports, Special Reports, 
Technical Papers, and methodologies. As an intergovernmental 
body, the IPCC has procedures governing the production of 
each of these. This Special Report on the Regional Impacts of 
Climate Change was first requested by the Subsidiary Body for 
Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) of the 
Conference of the Parties (COP) to the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as a 
Technical Paper, which restricted the authors to using only 
materials already in IPCC Assessment Reports and Special 
Reports. In the course of drafting the paper, the authors felt that 
the inclusion of new literature that had become available since 
the completion of the IPCC Second Assessment Report (SAR), 
including work undertaken under the auspices of several “country 
studies programs,” would make the paper more complete, up- 
to-date, and broadly representative of trends and vulnerabilities 
in the regions. Including these materials in the report would not 
have conformed to the IPCC procedures for Technical Papers; 
hence, the IPCC decided at its Twelfth Session (Mexico City, 
11-13 September 1996) to rewrite the Technical Paper as a 
Special Report, and SBSTA was informed accordingly.
The Special Report explores the potential consequences of 
changes in climate for ten continental- or subcontinental- 
scale regions. Because of the uncertainties associated with 
regional projections of climate change, the report necessarily 
takes the approach of assessing sensitivities and vulnerabili­
ties of each region, rather than attempting to provide quanti­
tative predictions of the impacts of climate change. As in the 
SAR, “vulnerability” is the extent to which climate change 
may damage or harm a system; it is a function of both sensi­
tivity to climate and the ability to adapt to new conditions.
This assessment confirms the findings of the SAR and under­
lines the potential for climate change to alter the ability of the 
Earth’s physical and biological systems (land, atmosphere, and 
oceans) to provide goods and services essential for sustainable 
economic development.
The report represents an important step in the evolution of the 
impact assessment process for the IPCC. Previous impact assess­
ments have examined the potential effects of climate change pri­
marily at a global scale. This report analyzes impacts at a conti­
nental or subcontinental scale that is of more practical interest to 
decisionmakers. This regional approach reveals wide variation in 
the vulnerability of different populations and environmental sys­
tems. This variation stems from differences in local environmen­
tal conditions; economic, social, and political conditions; and 
degrees of dependence on climate-sensitive resources, among 
other factors. Because of its smaller scale of analysis, the 
report provides more information regarding the potential for
the adaptation of systems, activities, and infrastructure to climate 
change than did the SAR. The chapters indicate, however, that far 
more research and analysis of adaptation options and adjustment 
processes are necessary if private sector and governmental enti­
ties are to make climate-sensitive sectors more resilient to today’s 
climate variability, and to limit damage from— or take advantage 
of—^potential long-term changes in climate.
The report is also an initial step in examining how projected 
changes in climate could interact with other environmental 
changes (e.g., biodiversity loss, land degradation, stratospheric 
ozone depletion, and degradation of water resources) and 
social trends (e.g., population growth, economic development, 
and technological progress). The assessment indicates that 
additional research into the interlinkages among environmental 
issues also is needed.
This report will provide a foundation for impacts assessment in 
the Third Assessment Report (TAR), which is expected to be 
completed in late 2000. An important early step in the process 
of preparing the IPCC TAR will be to review and refine the 
approach— and the regional groupings— used in this assess­
ment. In doing so, advances in the ability to project climatic 
and environmental changes on finer scales will be an important 
consideration. The report provides a foundation for the TAR in 
another important respect, as it represents a substantial further 
step forward in increasing the level of participation of scien­
tists and technical experts from developing countries and coun­
tries with economies in transition. The IPCC remains commit­
ted to building on this accomplishment, and will not relax its 
efforts to identify experts from these regions and secure their 
participation in future assessments.
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of numerous 
individuals and organizations to the successful completion of 
this report. First and foremost, we are grateful for the voluntary 
efforts of the members of the scientific and technical communi­
ty who prepared and peer-reviewed the chapters and annexes of 
the report. These individuals served in several capacities, includ­
ing Convening Lead Authors, Lead Authors, Contributors/ 
Reviewers, Regional Coordinators, and Sector Contributors 
(authors of the SAR who extracted regional information from 
their sector-oriented chapters as starting points for the regional 
assessments). We also gratefully acknowledge the assistance 
provided by governments to a number of these lead authors.
All of these contributions would have come to nothing had it 
not been for the tireless and good-natured efforts of David Jon 
Dokken, Project Administrator, whose roles and responsibilities
Preface
in preparation of this report are too numerous to mention, and 
without whom the report would not have been assembled in such 
a timely and efficient fashion. Other members of the Working 
Group II Technical Support Unit also provided significant help 
in preparation of the report, including Sandy MacCracken, Laura 
Van Wie McGrory, and Flo Ormond. The staff of the IPCC 
Secretariat, including Rudie Bourgeois, Chantai Ettori, and 
Cecilia Tanikie, provided essential support and welcome advice.
Others who contributed to the report in various analytical and 
organizational roles and to whom we wish to express our 
thanks include Tererei Abete, Isabel Alegre, Ron Benioff,
Carroll Curtis, Paul Desanker, Robert Dixon and his colleagues 
at the U.S. Country Studies Program, Roland Fuchs, Christy 
Goodale, David Gray, Mike Hulme, Jennifer Jenkins, Richard 
Юе1п, S.C. Majumdar, Scott Ollinger, Erik Rodenberg, Robert 
Scholes, Joel Smith, Regina Tannon, David Theobald, and 
Hassan Virjl.
Bert Bolin 
Robert Watson 
Marufn Zinyowera 
Narasimhan Sundararaman 
Richard Moss
S u m m a r y  f o r  P o l i c y m a k e r s
T h e  R e g i o n a l  Im p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  Ch a n g e : 
A n  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  V u l n e r a b i l i t y
A Special Report of Working Group II
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
CONTENTS
1. 
Scope of the Assessment 
3
2. 
Nature of the Issue 
3
3. 
Approach of the Assessment 
3
4. 
Overview of Regional Vulnerahilities to Global Climate Change 
4
4.1. 
Ecosystems 
4
4.2. 
Hydrology and Water Resources 
5
4.3. 
Food and Fiber Production 
6
4.4. 
Coastal Systems 
6
4.5. 
Human Health 
7
5. 
Anticipatory Adaptation in the Context of Current Policies and Conditions 
7
6. 
Regional Vulnerability to Global Climate Change 
8
6.1. 
Africa 
8
6.2. 
Polar Regions: The Arctic and the Antarctic 
9
6.3. 
Arid Western Asia (Middle East and Arid Asia) 
10
6.4. 
Australasia 
11
6.5. 
Europe 
12
6 .6 . 
Latin America 
13
6.7. 
North America 
14
6 .8 . 
Small Island States 
15
6.9. 
Temperate Asia 
16
6.10. 
Tropical Asia 
17
7. 
Research Needs 
18
Authors/Contributors 
18
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
1.
Scope of the Assessment
This report has been prepared at the request of the Conference 
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its subsidiary bodies (specif­
ically, the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological 
Advice— SBSTA). The special report provides, on a regional 
basis, a review of state-of-the-art information on the vulnera­
bility to potential changes in climate of ecological systems, 
socioeconomic sectors (including agriculture, fisheries, water 
resources, and human settlements), and human health. The 
report reviews the sensitivity of these systems as well as 
options for adaptation. Though this report draws heavily upon 
the sectoral impact assessments of the Second Assessment 
Report (SAR), it also draws upon more recent peer-reviewed 
literature {inter alia, country studies programs).
2.
Nature of the Issue
Human activities (primarily the burning of fossil fuels and 
changes in land use and land cover) are increasing the atmos­
pheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, which alter radiative 
balances and tend to warm the atmosphere, and, in some 
regions, aerosols— ^which have an opposite effect on radiative 
balances and tend to cool the atmosphere. At present, in some 
locations primarily in the Northern Hemisphere, the cooling 
effects of aerosols can be large enough to more than offset the 
warming due to greenhouse gases. Since aerosols do not remain 
in the atmosphere for long periods and global emissions of their 
precursors are not projected to increase substantially, aerosols 
will not offset the global long-term effects of greenhouse gases, 
which are long-lived. Aerosols can have important conse­
quences for continental-scale patterns of climate change.
These changes in greenhouse gases and aerosols, taken together, 
are projected to lead to regional and global changes in tempera­
ture, precipitation, and other climate variables— ^resulting in 
global changes in soil moisture, an increase in global mean sea 
level, and prospects for more severe extreme high-temperature 
events, floods, and droughts in some places. Based on the range 
of sensitivities of climate to changes in the atmospheric con­
centrations of greenhouse gases (IPCC 1996, WG I) and plausi­
ble changes in emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols 
(IS92a-f, scenarios that assume no climate policies), climate 
models project that the mean annual global surface temperature 
will increase by 1-3.5°C by 2100, that global mean sea level 
will rise by 15-95 cm, and that changes in the spatial and tem­
poral patterns of precipitation would occur. The average rate of 
warming probably would be greater than any seen in the past 
1 0 , 0 0 0  years, although the actual annual to decadal rate would 
include considerable natural variability, and regional changes 
could differ substantially from the global mean value. These 
long-term, large-scale, human-induced changes will interact 
with natural variability on time scales of days to decades [e.g., 
the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon] and 
thus influence social and economic well-being. Possible local 
climate effects which are due to unexpected events like a climate
change-induced change of flow pattern of marine water streams 
like the Gulf Stream have not been considered, because such 
changes cannot be predicted with confidence at present.
Scientific studies show that human health, ecological systems, 
and socioeconomic sectors (e.g., hydrology and water 
resources, food and fiber production, coastal systems, and 
human settlements), all of which are vital to sustainable devel­
opment, are sensitive to changes in climate— including both 
the magnitude and rate of climate change— as well as to 
changes in climate variability. Whereas many regions are like­
ly to experience adverse effects of climate change— some of 
which are potentially irreversible— some effects of climate 
change are likely to be beneficial. Climate change represents 
an important additional stress on those systems already affect­
ed by increasing resource demands, unsustainable management 
practices, and pollution, which in many cases may be equal to 
or greater than those of climate change. These stresses will 
interact in different ways across regions but can be expected to 
reduce the ability of some environmental systems to provide, 
on a sustained basis, key goods and services needed for suc­
cessful economic and social development, including adequate 
food, clean air and water, energy, safe shelter, low levels of dis­
ease, and employment opportunities. Climate change also will 
take place in the context of economic development, which may 
make some groups or countries less vulnerable to climate 
change— for example, by increasing the resources available for 
adaptation; those that experience low rates of growth, rapid 
increases in population, and ecological degradation may 
become increasingly vulnerable to potential changes.
3.
Approach of the Assessment
This report assesses the vulnerability of natural and social sys­
tems of major regions of the world to climate change. 
Vulnerability is defined as the extent to which a natural or 
social system is susceptible to sustaining damage from climate 
change. Vulnerability is a function of the sensitivity of a sys­
tem to changes in climate (the degree to which a system will 
respond to a given change in climate, including both beneficial 
and harmful effects) and the ability to adapt the system to 
changes in climate (the degree to which adjustments in prac­
tices, processes, or structures can moderate or offset the poten­
tial for damage or take advantage of opportunities created, due 
to a given change in climate). Under this framework, a highly 
vulnerable system would be one that is highly sensitive to 
modest changes in climate, where the sensitivity includes the 
potential for substantial harmful effects, and one for which the 
ability to adapt is severely constrained.
Because the available studies have not employed a common set 
of climate scenarios and methods, and because of uncertainties 
regarding the sensitivities and adaptability of natural and social 
systems, the assessment of regional vulnerabilities is necessar­
ily qualitative. However, the report provides substantial and 
indispensable information on what currently is known about 
vulnerability to climate change.
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability
In a number of instances, quantitative estimates of impacts of 
climate change are cited in the report. Such estimates are 
dependent upon the specific assumptions employed regarding 
future changes in climate, as well as upon the particular meth­
ods and models applied in the analyses. To interpret these esti­
mates, it is important to bear in mind that uncertainties regard­
ing the character, magnitude, and rates of future climate change 
remain. These uncertainties impose limitations on the ability of 
scientists to project impacts of climate change, particularly at 
regional and smaller scales.
It is in part because of the uncertainties regarding how climate 
will change that this report takes the approach of assessing vul­
nerabilities rather than assessing quantitatively the expected 
impacts of climate change. The estimates are best interpreted 
as illustrative of the potential character and approximate mag­
nitudes of impacts that may result from specific scenarios of 
climate change. They serve as indicators of sensitivities and 
possible vulnerabilities. Most commonly, the estimates are 
based upon changes in equilibrium climate that have been sim­
ulated to result from an equivalent doubling of carbon dioxide 
(CO 2 ) in the atmosphere. Usually the simulations have exclud­
ed the effects of aerosols. Increases in global mean tempera­
tures corresponding to these scenarios mostly fall in the range 
of 2-5°C. To provide a temporal context for these scenarios, 
the range of projected global mean warming by 
2 1 0 0  is
1-3.5°C accompanied by a mean sea-level rise of 15-95 cm, 
according to the IPCC Second Assessment Report. General 
circulation model (GCM) results are used in this analysis to 
justify the order of magnitude of the changes used in the sensi­
tivity analyses. They are not predictions that climate will 
change by specific magnitudes in particular countries or 
regions. The amount of literature available for assessment 
varies in quantity and quality among the regions.
4. 
Overview of Regional Vulnerabilities 
to Global Climate Change
Article 2 of the UNFCCC explicitly acknowledges the impor­
tance of natural ecosystems, food production, and sustainable 
economic development (see Box 1). This report’s assessment of
Box 1. Article 2 of the UNFCCC: Objective
The ultimate objective of this Convention and any relat­
ed legal instruments that the Conference of the Parties 
may adopt is to achieve, in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of the Convention, stabilization of green­
house gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level 
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interfer­
ence with the climate system. Such a level should be 
achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosys­
tems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that 
food production is not threatened and to enable eco­
nomic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.
regional vulnerability to climate change focuses on ecosystems, 
hydrology and water resources, food and fiber production, 
coastal systems, human settlements, human health, and other 
sectors or systems (including the climate system) important to 
10 regions that encompass the Earth’s land surface. Wide vari­
ation in the vulnerability of similar sectors or systems is to be 
expected across regions, as a consequence of regional differ­
ences in local environmental conditions, preexisting stresses to 
ecosystems, current resource-use patterns, and the framework 
of factors affecting decisionmaking— including government 
policies, prices, preferences, and values. Nonetheless, some 
general observations, based on information contained in the 
SAR and synthesized from the regional analyses in this assess­
ment, provide a global context for the assessment of each 
region’s vulnerability.
4.1. 
Ecosystems
Ecosystems are of fundamental importance to environmental 
function and to sustainability, and they provide many goods and 
services critical to individuals and societies. These goods and 
services include: (i) providing food, fiber, fodder, shelter, med­
icines, and energy; (ii) processing and storing carbon and nutri­
ents; (iii) assimilating wastes; (iv) purifying water, regulating 
water runoff, and moderating floods; (v) building soils and 
reducing soil degradation; (vi) providing opportunities for 
recreation and tourism; and (vii) housing the Earth’s entire 
reservoir of genetic and species diversity. In addition, natural 
ecosystems have cultural, religious, aesthetic, and intrinsic exis­
tence values. Changes in climate have the potential to affect the 
geographic location of ecological systems, the mix of species 
that they contain, and their ability to provide the wide range of 
benefits on which societies rely for their continued existence. 
Ecological systems are intrinsically dynamic and are constantly 
influenced by climate variability. The primary influence of 
anthropogenic climate change on ecosystems is expected to be 
through the rate and magnitude of change in climate means and 
extremes— climate change is expected to occur at a rapid rate 
relative to the speed at which ecosystems can adapt and reestab­
lish themselves— and through the direct effects of increased 
atmospheric CO 2  concentrations, which may increase the pro­
ductivity and efficiency of water use in some plant species. 
Secondary effects of climate change involve changes in soil 
characteristics and disturbance regimes (e.g., fires, pests, and 
diseases), which would favor some species over others and thus 
change the species composition of ecosystems.
Based on model simulations of vegetation distribution, which 
use GCM-based climate scenarios, large shifts of vegetation 
boundaries into higher latitudes and elevations can be expect­
ed. The mix of species within a given vegetation class likely 
will change. Under equilibrium GCM climate scenarios, large 
regions show drought-induced declines in vegetation, even 
when the direct effects of CO 2  fertilization are included. By 
comparison, under transient climate scenarios— in which trace 
gases increase slowly over a period of years— the full effects of 
changes in temperature and precipitation lag the effects of a
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability
change in atmospheric composition by a number of decades; 
hence, the positive effects of CO 2  precede the full effects of 
changes in climate.
Climate change is projected to occur at a rapid rate relative to 
the speed at which forest species grow, reproduce, and reestab­
lish themselves (past tree species’ migration rates are believed 
to be on the order of 4-200 km per century). For mid-latitude 
regions, an average warming of 1-3.5°C over the next 100 
years would be equivalent to a poleward shift of the present 
geographic bands of similar temperatures (or “isotherms”) 
approximately 150-550 km, or an altitude shift of about 
150-550 m. Therefore, the species composition of forests is 
likely to change; in some regions, entire forest types may dis­
appear, while new assemblages of species and hence new 
ecosystems may be established. As a consequence of possible 
changes in temperature and water availability under doubled 
equivalent-C 0 2  equilibrium conditions, a substantial fraction 
(a global average of one-third, varying by region from one-sev­
enth to two-thirds) of the existing forested area of the world 
likely would undergo major changes in broad vegetation 
types— ^with the greatest changes occurring in high latitudes 
and the least in the tropics. In tropical rangelands, major alter­
ations in productivity and species composition would occur 
due to altered rainfall amount and seasonality and increased 
évapotranspiration, although a mean temperature increase 
alone would not lead to such changes.
Inland aquatic ecosystems will be influenced by climate 
change through altered water temperatures, flow regimes, 
water levels, and thawing of permafrost at high latitudes. In 
lakes and streams, warming would have the greatest biological 
effects at high latitudes— where biological productivity would 
increase and lead to expansion of cool-water species’ ranges—  
and at the low-latitude boundaries of cold- and cool-water 
species ranges, where extinctions would be greatest. Increases 
in flow variability, particularly the frequency and duration of 
large floods and droughts, would tend to reduce water quality, 
biological productivity, and habitat in streams. The geographi­
cal distribution of wetlands is likely to shift with changes in 
temperature and precipitation, with uncertain implications for 
net greenhouse gas emissions from non-tidal wetlands. Some 
coastal ecosystems (saltwater marshes, mangrove ecosystems, 
coastal wetlands, coral reefs, coral atolls, and river deltas) are 
particularly at risk from climate change and other stresses. 
Changes in these ecosystems would have major negative 
effects on freshwater supplies, fisheries, biodiversity, and 
tourism.
Adaptation options for ecosystems are limited, and their effec­
tiveness is uncertain. Options include establishment of corri­
dors to assist the “migration” of ecosystems, land-use man­
agem ent, plantings, and restoration of degraded areas. 
Because of the projected rapid rate of change relative to the 
rate at which species can reestablish themselves, the isolation 
and fragmentation of many ecosystems, the existence of mul­
tiple stresses (e.g., land-use change, pollution), and limited 
adaptation options, ecosystems (especially forested systems.
montane systems, and coral reefs) are vulnerable to climate 
change.
4.2. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
Water availability is an essential component of welfare and 
productivity. Currently, 1.3 billion people do not have access 
to adequate supplies of safe water, and 2  billion people do not 
have access to adequate sanitation. Although these people are 
dispersed throughout the globe— reflecting sub-national vari­
ations in water availability and quality— some 19 countries 
(primarily in the Middle East and north and southern Africa) 
face such severe shortfalls that they are classified as either 
water-scarce or water-stressed; this number is expected to 
roughly double by 2025, in large part because of increases in 
demand resulting from economic and population growth. For 
example, most policy makers now recognize drought as a 
recurrent feature of Africa’s climate. However, climate change 
will further exacerbate the frequency and magnitude of 
droughts in some places.
Changes in climate could exacerbate periodic and chronic 
shortfalls of water, particularly in arid and semi-arid areas of 
the world. Developing countries are highly vulnerable to cli­
mate change because many are located in arid and semi-arid 
regions, and most derive their water resources from single­
point systems such as bore holes or isolated reservoirs. These 
systems, by their nature, are vulnerable because there is no 
redundancy in the system to provide resources, should the pri­
mary supply fail. Also, given the limited technical, financial, 
and management resources possessed by developing countries, 
adjusting to shortages and/or implementing adaptation mea­
sures will impose a heavy burden on their national economies. 
There is evidence that flooding is likely to become a larger 
problem in many temperate and humid regions, requiring adap­
tations not only to droughts and chronic water shortages but 
also to floods and associated damages, raising concerns about 
dam and levee failures.
The impacts of climate change will depend on the baseline 
condition of the water supply system and the ability of water 
resources managers to respond not only to climate change but 
also to population growth and changes in demands, technolo­
gy, and economic, social, and legislative conditions.
Various approaches are available to reduce the potential vul­
nerability of water systems to climate change. Options include 
pricing systems, water efficiency initiatives, engineering and 
structural improvements to water supply infrastmcture, agri­
culture policies, and urban planning/management. At the 
national/regional level, priorities include placing greater 
emphasis on integrated, cross-sectoral water resources man­
agement, using river basins as resource management units, and 
encouraging sound pricing and management practices. Given 
increasing demands, the prevalence and sensitivity of many 
simple water management systems to fluctuations in precipita­
tion and runoff, and the considerable time and expense
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
required to implement many adaptation measures, the water 
resources sector in many regions and countries is vulnerable to 
potential changes in climate.
4.3. 
Food and Fiber Production
Currently, 800 million people are malnourished; as the w orld’s 
population increases and incomes in some countries rise, food 
consumption is expected to double over the next three to four 
decades. The most recent doubling in food production 
occurred over a 25-year period and was based on irrigation, 
chemical inputs, and high-yielding crop varieties. W hether the 
remarkable gains of the past 25 years will be repeated is 
uncertain: Problems associated with intensifying production 
on land already in use (e.g., chemical and biological runoff, 
waterlogging and salinization of soils, soil erosion and com­
paction) are becoming increasingly evident. Expanding the 
amount of land under cultivation (including reducing land 
deliberately taken out of production to reduce agricultural out­
put) also is an option for increasing total crop production, but 
it could lead to increases in competition for land and pressure 
on natural ecosystems, increased agricultural emissions of 
greenhouse gases, a reduction in natural sinks of carbon, and 
expansion of agriculture to marginal lands— all of which 
could undermine the ability to sustainably support increased 
agricultural production.
Changes in climate will interact with stresses that result from 
actions to increase agricultural production, affecting crop 
yields and productivity in different ways, depending on the 
types of agricultural practices and systems in place. The main 
direct effects will be through changes in factors such as tem­
perature, precipitation, length of growing season, and timing of 
extreme or critical threshold events relative to crop develop­
ment, as well as through changes in atmospheric CO 2  concen­
tration (which may have a beneficial effect on the growth of 
many crop types). Indirect effects will include potentially detri­
mental changes in diseases, pests, and weeds, the effects of 
which have not yet been quantified in most available studies. 
Evidence continues to support the findings of the IPCC SAR 
that “global agricultural production could be maintained rela­
tive to baseline production” for a growing population under 
2 xC 0 2  equilibrium climate conditions. In addition, the region­
al findings of this special report lend support to concerns over 
the “potential serious consequences” of increased risk of 
hunger in some regions, particularly the tropics and subtropics. 
Generally, middle to high latitudes may experience increases in 
productivity, depending on crop type, growing season, changes 
in temperature regimes, and the seasonality of precipitation. In 
the tropics and subtropics— ^where some crops are near their 
maximum temperature tolerance and where dryland, nonirri­
gated agriculture predominates— yields are likely to decrease. 
The livelihoods of subsistence farmers and pastoral peoples, 
who make up a large portion of rural populations in some 
regions, also could be negatively affected. In regions where 
there is a likelihood of decreased rainfall, agriculture could be 
significantly affected.
Fisheries and fish production are sensitive to changes in climate 
and currently are at risk from overfishing, diminishing nursery 
areas, and extensive inshore and coastal pollution. Globally, 
marine fisheries production is expected to remain about the 
same in response to changes in climate; high-latitude freshwa­
ter and aquaculture production is likely to increase, assuming 
that natural climate variability and the structure and strength of 
ocean currents remain about the same. The principal impacts 
will be felt at the national and local levels, as centers of pro­
duction shift. The positive effects of climate change— such as 
longer growing seasons, lower natural winter mortality, and 
faster growth rates in higher latitudes— may be offset by nega­
tive factors such as changes in established reproductive pat­
terns, migration routes, and ecosystem relationships.
Given the many forces bringing profound changes to the agri­
cultural sector, adaptation options that enhance resilience to 
current natural climate variability and potential changes in 
means and extremes and address other concerns (e.g., soil ero­
sion, salinization) offer no- or low-regret options. For example, 
linking agricultural management to seasonal climate predic­
tions can assist in incremental adaptation, particularly in 
regions where climate is strongly affected by ENSO condi­
tions. The suitability of these options for different regions 
varies, in part because of differences in the financial and insti­
tutional ability of the private sector and governments in differ­
ent regions to implement them. Adaptation options include 
changes in crops and crop varieties, development of new crop 
varieties, changes in planting schedules and tillage practices, 
introduction of new biotechnologies, and improved water- 
management and irrigation systems, which have high capital 
costs and are limited by availability of water resources. Other 
options, such as minimum- and reduced-tillage technologies, 
do not require such extensive capitalization but do require high 
levels of agricultural training and support.
In regions where agriculture is well adapted to current climate 
variability and/or where market and institutional factors are in 
place to redistribute agricultural suфluses to make up for short­
falls, vulnerability to changes in climate means and extremes 
generally is low. However, in regions where agriculture is 
unable to cope with existing extremes, where markets and insti­
tutions to facilitate redistribution of deficits and suфluses are 
not in place, and/or where adaptation resources are limited, the 
vulnerability of the agricultural sector to climate change should 
be considered high. Other factors also will influence the vul­
nerability of agricultural production in a particular country or 
region to climate change— including the extent to which current 
temperatures or precipitation patterns are close to or exceed tol­
erance limits for important crops; per capita income; the per­
centage of economic activity based on agricultural production; 
and the preexisting condition of the agricultural land base.
4.4. 
Coastal Systems
Coastal zones are characterized by a rich diversity of ecosys­
tems and a great number of socioeconomic activities. Coastal
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
human populations in many countries have been growing at 
double the national rate of population growth. It is currently 
estimated that about half of the global population lives in 
coastal zones, although there is large variation among coun­
tries. Changes in climate will affect coastal systems through 
sea-level rise and an increase in storm-surge hazards and pos­
sible changes in the frequency and/or intensity of extreme 
events.
Coasts in many countries currently face severe sea-level rise 
problems as a consequence of tectonically and anthropogeni­
cally induced subsidence. An estimated 46 million people per 
year currently are at risk of flooding from storm surges. Climate 
change will exacerbate these problems, leading to potential 
impacts on ecosystems and human coastal infrastructure. Large 
numbers of people also are potentially affected by sea-level 
rise— for example, tens of millions of people in Bangladesh 
would be displaced by a 1 -m increase (the top of the range of 
IPCC Working Group I estimates for 2100) in the absence of 
adaptation measures. A  growing number of extremely large 
cities are located in coastal areas, which means that large 
amounts of infrastructure may be affected. Although annual 
protection costs for many nations are relatively modest— about 
0.1% of gross domestic product (GDP)— the average annual 
costs to many small island states total several percent of GDP. 
For some island nations, the high cost of providing storm-surge 
protection would make it essentially infeasible, especially given 
the limited availability of capital for investment.
Beaches, dunes, estuaries, and coastal wetlands adapt natural­
ly and dynamically to changes in prevailing winds and seas, as 
well as sea-level changes; in areas where infrastructure devel­
opment is not extensive, planned retreat and accommodation to 
changes may be possible. It also may be possible to rebuild or 
relocate capital assets at the end of their design life. In other 
areas, however, accommodation and planned retreat are not 
viable options, and protection using hard structures (e.g., dikes, 
levees, floodwalls, and barriers) and soft structures (e.g., beach 
nourishment, dune restoration, and wetland creation) will be 
necessary. Factors that limit the implementation of these 
options include inadequate financial resources, limited institu­
tional and technological capability, and shortages of trained 
personnel. In most regions, current coastal management and 
planning frameworks do not take account of the vulnerability 
of key systems to changes in climate and sea level or long lead 
times for implementation of many adaptation measures. 
Inappropriate policies encourage development in impact-prone 
areas. Given increasing population density in coastal zones, 
long lead times for implementation of many adaptation mea­
sures, and institutional, financial, and technological limitations 
(particularly in many developing countries), coastal systems 
should be considered vulnerable to changes in climate.
4.5.
Human Health
In much of the world, life expectancy is increasing; in addi­
tion, infant and child mortality in most developing countries is
dropping. Against this positive backdrop, however, there 
appears to be a widespread increase in new and resurgent vector- 
borne and infectious diseases, such as dengue, malaria, han­
tavirus, and cholera. In addition, the percentage of the develop­
ing world’s population living in cities is expected to increase 
from 25% (in 1960) to more than 50% by 2020, with percent­
ages in some regions far exceeding these averages. These 
changes will bring benefits only if accompanied by increased 
access to services such as sanitation and potable water supplies; 
they also can lead to serious urban environmental problems, 
including air pollution (e.g., particulates, surface ozone, and 
lead), poor sanitation, and associated problems in water quality 
and potability, if access to services is not improved.
Climate change could affect human health through increases in 
heat-stress mortality, tropical vector-borne diseases, urban air 
pollution problems, and decreases in cold-related illnesses. 
Compared with the total burden of ill health, these problems 
are not likely to be large. In the aggregate, however, the direct 
and indirect impacts of climate change on human health do 
constitute a hazard to human population health, especially in 
developing countries in the tropics and subtropics; these 
impacts have considerable potential to cause significant loss of 
life, affect communities, and increase health-care costs and lost 
work days. Model projections (which entail necessary simpli­
fying assumptions) indicate that the geographical zone of 
potential malaria transmission would expand in response to 
global mean temperature increases at the upper part of the 
IPCC-projected range (3-5°C by 2100), increasing the affect­
ed proportion of the world’s population from approximately 
45% to approximately 60% by the latter half of the next centu­
ry. Areas where malaria is currently endemic could experience 
intensified transmission (on the order of 50-80 million addi­
tional annual cases, relative to an estimated global background 
total of 500 million cases). Some increases in non-vector-borne 
Infectious diseases— such as salmonellosis, cholera, and giar­
diasis— also could occur as a result of elevated temperatures 
and increased flooding. However, quantifying the projected 
health impacts is difficult because the extent of climate- 
induced health disorders depends on other factors— such as 
migration, provision of clean urban environments, improved 
nutrition, increased availability of potable water, improve­
ments in sanitation, the extent of disease vector-control mea­
sures, changes in resistance of vector organisms to insecticides, 
and more widespread availability of health care. Human health 
is vulnerable to changes in climate— particularly in urban 
areas, where access to space conditioning may be limited, as 
well as in areas where exposure to vector-borne and communi­
cable diseases may increase and health-care delivery and basic 
services, such as sanitation, are poor.
5. 
Anticipatory Adaptation in the Context of 
Current Policies and Conditions
A key message of the regional assessments in this report is that 
many systems and policies are not well-adjusted even to 
today’s climate and climate variability. Increasing costs, in
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
terms of human life and capital, from floods, storms, and 
droughts demonstrate current vulnerability. This situation sug­
gests that there are adaptation options that would make many 
sectors more resilient to today’s conditions and thus would 
help in adapting to future changes in climate. These options—  
so-called “win-win” or “no-regrets” options— could have mul­
tiple benefits and most likely would prove to be beneficial even 
in the absence of climate change impacts.
In many countries, the economic policies and conditions (e.g., 
taxes, subsidies, and regulations) that shape private decision 
making, development strategies, and resource-use patterns 
(and hence environmental conditions) hinder implementation 
of adaptation measures. In many countries, for example, water 
is subsidized, encouraging over-use (which draws down exist­
ing sources) and discouraging conservation measures— which 
may well be elements of future adaptation strategies. Other 
examples are inappropriate land-use zoning and/or subsidized 
disaster insurance, which encourage infrastructure develop­
ment in areas prone to flooding or other natural disasters—  
areas that could become even more vulnerable as a result of cli­
mate change. Adaptation and better incoфoration of the long­
term environmental consequences of resource use can be 
brought about through a range of approaches, including 
strengthening legal and institutional frameworks, removing 
preexisting market distortions (e.g., subsidies), correcting mar­
ket failures (e.g., failure to reflect environmental damage or 
resource depletion in prices or inadequate economic valuation 
of biodiversity), and promoting public participation and educa­
tion. These types of actions would adjust resource-use patterns 
to current environmental conditions and better prepare systems 
for potential future changes.
The challenge is to identify opportunities that facilitate sus­
tainable development by making use of existing technologies 
and developing policies that make climate-sensitive sectors 
resilient to today’s climate variability. This strategy will 
require many regions of the world to have more access to 
appropriate technologies, information, and adequate financing. 
In addition, the regional assessments suggest that adaptation 
will require anticipation and planning; failure to prepare sys­
tems for projected changes in climate means, variability, and 
extremes could lead to capital-intensive development of infra­
structure or technologies that are ill-suited to future conditions, 
as well as missed opportunities to lower the costs of adaptation. 
Additional analysis of current vulnerability to today’s climate 
fluctuations and existing coping mechanisms is needed and 
will offer lessons for the design of effective options for adapt­
ing to potential future changes in climate.
6. 
Regional Vulnerability to Global Climate Change
6.1. 
Africa
Several climate regimes characterize the African continent; the 
wet tropical, dry tropical, and alternating wet and dry climates are 
the most common. Many countries on the continent are prone to
recurrent droughts; some drought episodes, particularly in south­
east Africa, are associated with ENSO phenomena. Deterioration 
in terms of trade, inappropriate policies, high population growth 
rates, and lack of significant investment— coupled with a highly 
variable climate— ^have made it difficult for several countries to 
develop patterns of livelihood that would reduce pressure on the 
natural resource base. Under the assumption that access to ade­
quate financing is not provided, Africa is the continent most vul­
nerable to the impacts of projected changes because widespread 
poverty limits adaptation capabilities.
Ecosystems: In Africa today, tropical forests and rangelands are 
under threat from population pressures and systems of land use. 
Generally apparent effects of these threats include loss of biodi­
versity, rapid deterioration in land cover, and depletion of water 
availability through destruction of catchments and aquifers. 
Changes in climate will interact with these underlying changes 
in the environment, adding further stresses to a deteriorating sit­
uation. A  sustained increase in mean ambient temperatures 
beyond 1°C would cause significant changes in forest and range­
land cover; species distribution, composition, and migration pat­
terns; and biome distribution. Many organisms in the deserts 
already are near their tolerance limits, and some may not be able 
to adapt further under hotter conditions. Arid to semi-arid sub- 
regions and the grassland areas of eastern and southern Africa, 
as well as areas currently under threat from land degradation and 
desertification, are particularly vulnerable. Were rainfall to 
increase as projected by some GCMs in the highlands of east 
Africa and equatorial central Africa, marginal lands would 
become more productive than they are now. These effects are 
likely to be negated, however, by population pressure on mar­
ginal forests and rangelands. Adaptive options include control of 
deforestation, improved rangeland management, expansion of 
protected areas, and sustainable management of forests.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Of the 19 countries around 
the world currently classified as water-stressed, more are in 
Africa than in any other region— and this number is likely to 
increase, independent of climate change, as a result of increas­
es in demand resulting from population growth, degradation of 
watersheds caused by land-use change, and siltation of river 
basins. A  reduction in precipitation projected by some GCMs for 
the Sahel and southern Africa— if accompanied by high inter­
annual variability— could be detrimental to the hydrological bal­
ance of the continent and disrupt various water-dependent 
socioeconomic activities. Variable climatic conditions may 
render the management of water resources more difficult both 
within and between countries. A  drop in water level in dams 
and rivers could adversely affect the quality of water by 
increasing the concentrations of sewage waste and industrial 
effluents, thereby increasing the potential for the outbreak of 
diseases and reducing the quality and quantity of fresh water 
available for domestic use. Adaptation options include water 
harvesting, management of water outflow from dams, and 
more efficient water usage.
Agriculture and Food Security: Except in the oil-exporting 
countries, agriculture is the economic mainstay in most African
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
countries, contributing 20-30%  of GDP in sub-Saharan Africa 
and 55% of the total value of African exports. In most African 
countries, farming depends entirely on the quality of the rainy 
season— a situation that makes Africa particularly vulnerable 
to climate change. Increased droughts could seriously impact 
the availability of food, as in the horn of Africa and southern 
Africa during the 1980s and 1990s. A rise in mean winter tem­
peratures also would be detrimental to the production of win­
ter wheat and fruits that need the winter chill. However, in sub­
tropical Africa, warmer winters would reduce the incidence of 
damaging frosts, making it possible to grow horticultural pro­
duce susceptible to frosts at higher elevations than is possible 
at present. Productivity of freshwater fisheries may increase, 
although the mix of fish species could be altered. Changes in 
ocean dynamics could lead to changes in the migratory patterns 
of fish and possibly to reduced fish landings, especially in 
coastal artisinal fisheries.
Coastal Systems: Several African coastal zones— many of 
which already are under stress from population pressure and 
conflicting uses— ^would be adversely affected by sea-level rise 
associated with climate change. The coastal nations of west and 
central Africa (e.g., Senegal, Gambia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, 
Cameroon, Gabon, Angola) have low-lying lagoonal coasts that 
are susceptible to erosion and hence are threatened by sea-level 
rise, particularly because most of the countries in this area have 
major and rapidly expanding cities on the coast. The west coast 
often is buffeted by storm surges and currently is at risk from 
erosion, inundation, and extreme storm events. The coastal zone 
of east Africa also will be affected, although this area experi­
ences calm conditions through much of the year. However, sea- 
level rise and climatic variation may reduce the buffer effect of 
coral and patch reefs along the east coast, increasing the poten­
tial for erosion. A  number of studies indicate that a sizable pro­
portion of the northern part of the Nile delta will be lost through 
a combination of inundation and erosion, with consequent loss 
of agricultural land and urban areas. Adaptation measures in 
African coastal zones are available but would be very costly, as 
a percentage of GDP, for many countries. These measures could 
include erection of sea walls and relocation of vulnerable 
human settlements and other socioeconomic facilities.
Human Settlement, Industry, and Transportation: The main 
challenges likely to face African populations will emanate from 
extreme climate events such as floods (and resulting landslides 
in some areas), strong winds, droughts, and tidal waves. 
Individuals living in marginal areas may be forced to migrate to 
urban areas (where infrastructure already is approaching its lim­
its as a result of population pressure) if the marginal lands 
become less productive under new climate conditions. Climate 
change could worsen current trends in depletion of biomass 
energy resources. Reduced stream flows would cause reduc­
tions in hydropower production, leading to negative effects on 
industrial productivity and costly relocation of some industrial 
plants. Management of pollution, sanitation, waste disposal, 
water supply, and public health, as well as provision of adequate 
infrastructure in urban areas, could become more difficult and 
costly under changed climate conditions.
Human Health: Africa is expected to be at risk primarily from 
increased incidences of vector-borne diseases and reduced 
nutritional status. A  warmer environment could open up new 
areas for malaria; altered temperature and rainfall patterns also 
could increase the incidence of yellow fever, dengue fever, 
onchocerciasis, and trypanosomiasis. Increased morbidity and 
mortality in subregions where vector-bome diseases Increase 
following climatic changes would have far-reaching economic 
consequences. In view of the poor economic status of most 
African nations, global efforts will be necessary to tackle the 
potential health effects.
Tourism and Wildlife: Tourism— one of Africa’s fastest-growing 
industries— is based on wildlife, nature reserves, coastal 
resorts, and an abundant water supply for recreation. Projected 
droughts and/or reduction in precipitation in the Sahel and 
eastern and southern Africa would devastate wildlife and 
reduce the attractiveness of some nature reserves, thereby 
reducing income from current vast investments in tourism.
Conclusions: The African continent is particularly vulnerable 
to the impacts of climate change because of factors such as 
widespread poverty, recurrent droughts, inequitable land distri­
bution, and overdependence on rain-fed agriculture. Although 
adaptation options, including traditional coping strategies, the­
oretically are available, in practice the human, infrastructural, 
and economic response capacity to effect timely response 
actions may well be beyond the economic means of some 
countries.
6.2. 
Polar Regions: The Arctic and the Antarctic
The polar regions include some very diverse landscapes, and 
the Arctic and the Antarctic are very different in character. The 
Arctic is defined here as the area within the Arctic Circle; the 
Antarctic here includes the area within the Antarctic 
Convergence, including the Antarctic continent, the Southern 
Ocean, and the sub-Antarctic islands. The Arctic can be 
described as a frozen ocean surrounded by land, and the 
Antarctic as a frozen continent surrounded by ocean. The pro­
jected warming in the polar regions is greater than for many 
other regions of the world. Where temperatures are close to 
freezing on average, global warming will reduce land ice and 
sea ice, the former contributing to sea-level rise. However, in 
the interiors of ice caps, increased temperature may not be suf­
ficient to lead to melting of ice and snow, and will tend to have 
the effect of increasing snow accumulation.
Ecosystems: Major physical and ecological changes are expect­
ed in the Arctic. Frozen areas close to the freezing point will 
thaw and undergo substantial changes with warming. 
Substantial loss of sea ice is expected in the Arctic Ocean. As 
warming occurs, there will be considerable thawing of per­
mafrost— leading to changes in drainage, increased slumping, 
and altered landscapes over large areas. Polar warming proba­
bly will increase biological production but may lead to differ­
ent species composition on land and in the sea. On land, there
10
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability
will be a tendency for polar shifts in major biomes such as tun­
dra and boreal forest and associated animals, with significant 
impacts on species such as bear and caribou. However, the 
Arctic Ocean geographically limits northward movement. 
Much smaller changes are likely for the Antarctic, but there 
may be species shifts. In the sea, marine ecosystems will move 
poleward. Animals dependent on ice may be disadvantaged in 
both polar areas.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Increasing temperature will 
thaw permafrost and melt more snow and ice. There will be 
more running and standing water. Drainage systems in the 
Arctic are likely to change at the local scale. River and lake ice 
will break up earlier and freeze later.
Food and Fiber Production: Agriculture is severely limited by 
the harsh climate. Many limitations will remain in the future, 
though some small northern extension of farming into the 
Arctic may be possible. In general, marine ecological produc­
tivity should rise. Warming should increase growth and devel­
opment rates of nonmammals; ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation 
is still increasing, however, which may adversely affect prima­
ry productivity as well as fish productivity.
Coastal Systems: As warming occurs, the Arctic could experi­
ence a thinner and reduced ice cover. Coastal and river naviga­
tion will increase, with new opportunities for water transport, 
tourism, and trade. The Arctic Ocean could become a major 
global trade route. Reductions in ice will benefit offshore oil 
production. Increased erosion of Arctic shorelines is expected 
from a combination of rising sea level, permafrost thaw, and 
increased wave action as a result of increased open water. 
Further breakup of ice shelves in the Antarctic peninsula is 
likely. Elsewhere in Antarctica, little change is expected in 
coastlines and probably in its large ice shelves.
Human Settlements: Human communities in the Arctic will be 
substantially affected by the projected physical and ecological 
changes. The effects will be particularly important for indige­
nous peoples leading traditional lifestyles. There will be new 
opportunities for shipping, the oil industry, fishing, mining, 
tourism, and migration of people. Sea ice changes projected for 
the Arctic have major strategic implications for trade, especial­
ly between Asia and Europe.
Conclusions: The Antarctic peninsula and the Arctic are very 
vulnerable to projected climate change and its impacts. 
Although the number of people directly affected is relatively 
small, many native communities will face profound changes 
that impact on traditional lifestyles. Direct effects could include 
ecosystem shifts, sea- and river-ice loss, and permafrost thaw. 
Indirect effects could include feedbacks to the climate system 
such as further releases of greenhouse gases, changes in ocean 
circulation drivers, and increased temperature and higher pre­
cipitation with loss of ice, which could affect climate and sea 
level globally. The interior of Antarctica is less vulnerable to 
climate change, because the temperature changes envisaged 
over the next century are likely to have little impact and very
few people are involved. However, there are considerable 
uncertainties about the mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheets 
and the future behavior of the West Antarctic ice sheet (low 
probability of disintegration over the next century). Changes in 
either could affect sea level and Southern Hemisphere climates.
6.3. 
Arid Western Asia (Middle East and Arid Asia)
This region includes the predominantly arid and semi-arid 
areas of the Middle East and central Asia. The region extends 
from Turkey in the west to Kazakstan in the east, and from 
Yemen in the south to Kazakstan in the north. The eastern part 
of the region has a large area dominated by mountains.
Ecosystems: Vegetation models project little change in most 
arid or desert vegetation types under climate change projec­
tions— i.e., most lands that are deserts are expected to remain 
deserts. Greater changes in the composition and distribution of 
vegetation types of semi-arid areas— for example, grasslands, 
rangelands, and woodlands— are anticipated. Small increases 
in precipitation are projected, but these increases are likely to 
be countered by increased temperature and evaporation. 
Improved water-use efficiency by some plants under elevated 
CO 2  conditions may lead to some improvement in plant pro­
ductivity and changes in ecosystem composition. Grasslands, 
livestock, and water resources are likely to be the most vulner­
able to climate change in this region because they are located 
mostly in marginal areas. Appropriate land-use management, 
including urban planning, could reduce some of the pressures 
on land degradation. Management options, such as better stock 
management and more integrated agro-ecosystems, could 
improve land conditions and counteract pressures arising from 
climate change. The region is an important refuge for wild rel­
atives of many important crop species; with appropriate con­
servation measures it may continue to provide a source of 
genetic material for future climatic conditions.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Water shortage, already a 
problem in many countries of this arid region, is unlikely to be 
reduced, and may be exacerbated, by climate change. Changes 
in cropping practices and improved irrigation practices could 
significantly improve the efficiency of water use in some coun­
tries. Glacial melt is projected to increase under climate 
change— leading to increased flows in some river systems for 
a few decades, followed by a reduction in flow as the glaciers 
disappear.
Food and Fiber Production: Land degradation problems and 
limited water supplies restrict present agricultural productivity 
and threaten the food security of some countries. There are few 
projections of the impacts of climate change on food and fiber 
production for the region. The adverse impacts that may result 
in the region are suggested by the results of studies that estimate 
that wheat production in Kazakstan and Pakistan would decline 
under selected scenarios of climate change. The studies, how­
ever, are too few to draw strong conclusions regarding agricul­
ture across the entire region. Many of the options available to
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
11
combat existing problems would contribute to reducing the 
anticipated impacts of climate change. Food and fiber produc­
tion, concentrated on more intensively managed land, could 
lead to greater reliability in food production and reduce the 
detrimental impacts of extreme climatic events. Countries of the 
former Soviet Union are undergoing major economic changes, 
particularly in agricultural systems and management. This tran­
sition is likely to provide opportunities to change crop types and 
introduce more efficient irrigation— providing significant win- 
win options for conservation of resources to offset the project­
ed impacts of climate change.
Human Health: Heat stress, affecting human comfort levels, 
and possible spread in vector-borne diseases are likely to result 
from changes in climate. Decreases in water availability and 
food production would lead to indirect impacts on human 
health.
Conclusions: Water is an important limiting factor for ecosys­
tems, food and fiber production, human settlements, and 
human health in this arid region of the world. Climate change 
is anticipated to alter the hydrological cycle, and is unlikely to 
relieve the limitations placed by water scarcity upon the region. 
Climate change and human activities may further Influence the 
levels of the Caspian and Aral Seas, which will affect associat­
ed ecosystems, agriculture, and human health in the surround­
ing areas. Win-win opportunities exist which offer the potential 
to reduce current pressures on resources and human welfare in 
the region and also offer the potential to reduce their vulnera­
bility to adverse impacts from climate change.
6.4. 
Australasia
Australasia includes Australia, New Zealand, and their outly­
ing islands. The region spans the tropics to mid-latitudes and 
has varied climates and ecosystems, ranging from interior 
deserts to mountain rainforests. The climate is strongly affect­
ed by the oceanic environment and the FNSO phenomenon.
Ecosystems: Some of the region’s ecosystems appear to be 
very vulnerable to climate change, at least in the long term, 
because alterations to soils, plants, and ecosystems are very 
likely, and there may be increases in fire occurrence and insect 
outbreaks. Many species will be able to adapt, but in some 
instances, a reduction of species diversity is highly likely. Any 
changes will occur in a landscape already fragmented by agri­
cultural and urban development; such changes will add to 
existing problems such as land degradation, weeds, and pest 
infestations. Impacts on aquatic ecosystems from changes in 
river flow, flood frequency, and nutrient and sediment inputs 
are likely to be greatest in the drier parts of the region. Coastal 
ecosystems are vulnerable to the impacts of sea-level rise and 
possible changes in local meteorology. Tropical coral reefs, 
including the Great Barrier Reef, may be able to keep pace 
with sea-level rise— but will be vulnerable to bleaching and 
death of corals induced by episodes of higher sea temperatures 
and other stresses. Measures to facilitate adaptation include
better rangeland management; plantings along waterways; and 
research, monitoring, and prediction. Active manipulation of 
species generally will not be feasible in the region’s extensive 
natural and lightly managed ecosystems.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Vulnerability appears to be 
potentially high. Any reduction of water availability, especial­
ly in Australia’s extensive drought-prone areas, would shaфen 
competition among uses, including agriculture and wetland 
ecosystem needs. Freshwater supplies on low-lying islands are 
also vulnerable. More frequent high-rainfall events may 
enhance groundwater recharge and dam-filling events, but they 
also may increase the impacts of flooding, landslides, and ero­
sion, with flood-prone urban areas being heavily exposed to 
financial loss. Reduced snowpack and a shorter snow season 
appear likely, and New Zealand’s glaciers are likely to shrink 
further. Some adaptation options are available, but the cost 
involved would be high.
Food and Fiber Production: Vulnerability appears to be low, at 
least in the next few decades (potentially high sensitivity cou­
pled with high adaptability). Agriculture in the region is adapt­
able, and production increases are likely in some cases. However, 
there may be a trend toward increased vulnerability in the 
longer term— especially in warmer and more water-limited 
parts of Australia, where initial gains for some crops are eroded 
later as the delayed full effects of climate change (e.g., changes 
in temperature and precipitation) tend to outweigh the more 
Immediate benefits of Increased atmospheric CO 2 concentra­
tions. Impacts will vary widely from district to district and crop 
to crop. There will be changes in growth and quality of crops 
and pastures; shifts in the suitability of districts for particular 
crops; and possibly increased problems with weeds, pests, and 
diseases. Rangeland pastoralism and irrigated agriculture will 
be especially affected where rainfall changes occur. Changes in 
food production elsewhere in the world, which affect prices, 
would have major economic impacts on the region. With regard 
to forestry, the longer time to maturity results in a relatively 
large exposure to financial loss from extreme events, fire, or 
any locally rapid change in climate conditions.
Coastal Systems: Parts of the region’s coasts and rapidly grow­
ing coastal settlements and infrastructure are very vulnerable to 
any increase in coastal flooding and erosion arising from sea- 
level rise and meteorological changes. Indigenous coastal and 
island communities in the Torres Strait and in New Zealand’s 
Pacific island territories are especially vulnerable. Many adap­
tation options exist, although these measures are not easily 
implemented on low-lying islands. Moreover, climate change 
and sea-level rise generally are not well accommodated in cur­
rent coastal management planning frameworks.
Human Settlements: In addition to hydrological and coastal 
risks, moderate vulnerability is present from a variety of 
impacts on air quality, drainage, waste disposal, mining, trans­
port, insurance, and tourism. Overall, these effects are likely to 
be small relative to other economic influences, but they still 
may represent significant costs for large industries.
12
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
Human Health: Some degree of vulnerability is apparent. 
Indigenous communities and the economically disadvantaged 
may be more at risk. Increases are expected in heat-stress mor­
tality, vector-borne diseases such as dengue, water and sewage- 
related diseases, and urban pollution-related respiratory prob­
lems. Though small compared with the total burden of ill 
health, these impacts have the potential to cause considerable 
community impact and cost.
Conclusions: Australia’s relatively low latitude makes it par­
ticularly vulnerable to impacts on its scarce water resources 
and on crops growing near or above their optimum tempera­
tures, whereas New Zealand’s cooler, wetter, mid-latitude 
location may lead to some benefit through the ready availabil­
ity of suitable crops and likely increases in agricultural pro­
duction. In both countries, however, there is a wide range of 
situations where vulnerability is thought to be moderate to 
high— particularly in ecosystems, hydrology, coastal zones, 
human settlements, and human health.
63. 
Europe
Europe constitutes the western part of the Eurasian continent. 
Its eastern boundary is formed by the Ural Mountains, the Ural 
River, and part of the Caspian Sea. The proximity of the rela­
tively warm Gulf Stream and typical atmospheric circulation 
contribute to the large spatial and temporal variability of the 
region’s temperature and precipitation. South of the main 
Alpine divide, the climate is of the Mediterranean type.
Ecosystems: Natural ecosystems generally are fragmented, dis­
turbed, and confined to poor soils. This situation makes them 
more sensitive to climate change. Mediterranean and boreal 
grasslands may shift in response to changes in the amount and 
the seasonal distribution of precipitation. The northern bound­
aries of forests in Fennoscandia and northern Russia would 
likely expand into tundra regions, reducing the extent of tun­
dra, mires, and permafrost areas. Survival of some species and 
forest types may be endangered by the projected movement of 
climate zones at rates faster than migration speeds. High- 
elevation ecosystems and species are particularly vulnerable 
because they have nowhere to migrate. An increase in temper­
ature, accompanied by decreases in soil moisture, would lead 
to a substantial reduction in peat formation in Fennoscandian 
and northern Russian peatlands. Thawing of the permafrost 
layer would lead to lowered water tables in some areas and 
would flood thaw lakes in others, altering current wetland 
ecosystem types. Although the diversity of freshwater species 
may increase in a warmer climate, particularly in middle and 
high latitudes, there may be an initial reduction in species 
diversity in cool temperate and boreal regions. Ecosystems in 
southern Europe would be threatened mainly by reduced pre­
cipitation and subsequent increases in water scarcity.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Most of Europe experienced 
temperature increases this century larger than the global aver­
age, and enhanced precipitation in the northern half and
decreases in the southern half of the region. Projections of 
future climate, not taking into account the effect of aerosols, 
indicate that precipitation in high latitudes of Europe may 
increase, with mixed results for other parts of Europe. The cur­
rent uncertainties about future precipitation are mainly exacer­
bated by the effects of aerosols.
Water supply may be affected by possible increases in floods in 
northern and northwest Europe and by droughts in southern por­
tions of the continent. Many floodplains in western Europe 
already are overpopulated, which hampers effective additional 
flood protection. Pollution is a major problem for many rivers; a 
warmer climate could lead to reduced water quality, particularly 
if accompanied by reduced runoff. Warmer summers would lead 
to increased water demand, although increased demand for irri­
gation would be at least partly offset for many crops by 
increased water-use efficiency associated with CO 2  fertilization.
Expected changes in snow and ice will have profound impacts 
on European streams and rivers. Up to 95% of Alpine glacier 
mass could disappear by 2 1 0 0 , with subsequent consequences 
for the water flow regime— affecting, for example, summer 
water supply, shipping, and hydropower. Also, in some areas, 
winter tourism would be negatively affected.
Water management is partly determined by legislation and coop­
eration among government entities, within countries and inter­
nationally; altered water supply and demand would call for a 
reconsideration of existing legal and cooperative arrangements.
Food and Fiber Production: Risks of frost would be reduced in 
a warmer climate, allowing winter cereals and other winter 
crops to expand to areas such as southern Fennoscandia and 
western Russia. Potential yields of winter crops are expected to 
increase, especially in central and southern Europe, assuming 
that neither precipitation nor irrigation are limiting and that 
water-use efficiency increases with the ambient atmospheric 
concentration of CO 2 . Increasing spring temperatures would 
extend suitable zones for most summer crops. Summer crop 
yield increases are possible in central and eastern Europe, 
though decreases are possible in western Europe. Decreases in 
precipitation in southern Europe would reduce crop yields and 
make irrigation an even larger competitor to domestic and 
industrial water use. Along with potential crop yields, farmer 
adaptation, agricultural policy, and world markets are impor­
tant factors in the economic impact of climate change on the 
agricultural sector.
Coastal Systems: Coastal zones are ecologically and economi­
cally important. Settlement and economic activity have reduced 
the resilience and adaptability of coastal systems to climate 
variability and change, as well as to sea-level rise. Some coastal 
areas already are beneath mean sea level, and many others are 
vulnerable to storm surges. Areas most at risk include the 
Dutch, German, Ukrainian, and Russian coastlines; some 
Mediterranean deltas; and Baltic coastal zones. Storm surges, 
changes in precipitation, and changes in wind speed and direc­
tion add to the concern of coastal planners. In general, major
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability
13
economic and social impacts can be contained with relatively 
low investment. This is not true, however, for a number of low- 
lying urban areas vulnerable to storm surges, nor for ecosys­
tems— particularly coastal wetlands— ^which may be even fur­
ther damaged by protective measures.
Human Settlements: Supply and demand for cooling water will 
change. Energy demand may increase in summer (cooling) and 
decrease in winter (heating), and peak energy demand will 
shift. Infrastructure, buildings, and cities designed for cooler 
climates will have to be adjusted to warming, particularly heat 
waves, to maintain current functions. In areas where precipita­
tion increases or intensifies, there are additional risks from 
landslides and river floods.
Human Health: Heat-related deaths would increase under glob­
al warming and may be exacerbated by worsening air quality 
in cities; there would be a reduction in cold-related deaths. 
Vector-borne diseases would expand. Health care measures 
could significantly reduce such impacts.
Conclusions: Even though capabilities for adaptation in man­
aged systems in many places in Europe are relatively well 
established, significant impacts of climate change still should 
be anticipated. Major effects are likely to be felt through 
changes in the frequency of extreme events and precipitation, 
causing more droughts in some areas and more river floods 
elsewhere. Effects will be felt primarily in agriculture and 
other water-dependent activities. Boreal forest and permafrost 
areas are projected to undergo major change. Ecosystems are 
especially vulnerable due to the projected rate of climate 
change and because migration is hampered.
6.6.
Latin America
Latin America includes all continental countries of the Americas 
from Mexico to Chile and Argentina, as well as adjacent seas. 
The region is highly heterogeneous in terms of climate, ecosys­
tems, human population distribution, and cultural traditions. 
Several Latin American countries— especially those of the 
Central American isthmus, Ecuador, Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, 
and Argentina— are significantly affected with adverse socio­
economic consequences by seasonal to interannual climate vari­
ability, particularly the ENSO phenomenon. Most production is 
based on the region’s extensive natural ecosystems, and the 
impacts of current climate variability on natural resources sug­
gest that the impacts of projected climate changes could be 
important enough to be taken into account in national and 
regional planning initiatives. Land use is a major force driving 
ecosystem change at present, interacting with climate in com­
plex ways. This factor makes the task of identifying common 
patterns of vulnerability to climate change very difficult.
Ecosystems: Large forest and rangeland areas are expected to 
be affected as a result of projected changes in climate, with 
mountain ecosystems and transitional zones between vegeta­
tion types extremely vulnerable. Climate change could add an
additional stress to the adverse effects of continued deforesta­
tion in the Amazon rainforest. This impact could lead to biodi­
versity losses, reduce rainfall and mnoff within and beyond the 
Amazon basin (reduced precipitation recycling through évapo­
transpiration), and affect the global carbon cycle.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Climate change could signifi­
cantly affect the hydrological cycle, altering the intensity and 
temporal and spatial distribution of precipitation, surface runoff, 
and groundwater recharge, with various impacts on different nat­
ural ecosystems and human activities. Arid and semi-arid areas 
are particularly vulnerable to changes in water availability. 
Hydropower generation and grain and livestock production are 
particularly vulnerable to changes in water supply, particularly 
in Costa Rica, Panama, and the Andes piedmont, as well as adja­
cent areas in Chile and western Argentina between 25°S and 
37°S. The impacts on water resources could be sufficient to lead 
to conflicts among users, regions, and countries.
Food and Fiber Production: Decreases in agricultural production 
— even after allowing for the positive effects of elevated CO 2  
on crop growth and moderate levels of adaptation at the farm 
level— are projected for several major crops in Mexico, coun­
tries of the Central American isthmus, Brazil, Chile, Argentina, 
and Uruguay. In addition, livestock production would decrease 
if temperate grasslands have to face substantial decreases in 
water availability. Extreme events (e.g., floods, droughts, 
frosts, storms) have the potential to adversely affect rangelands 
and agricultural production (e.g., banana crops in Central 
America). The livelihoods of traditional peoples, such as many 
Andean communities, would be threatened if the productivity 
or surface area of rangelands or traditional crops is reduced.
Coastal Systems: Losses of coastal land and biodiversity 
(including coral reefs, mangrove ecosystems, estuarine wet­
lands, and marine mammals and birds), damage to infrastruc­
ture, and saltwater intrusion resulting from sea-level rise could 
occur in low-lying coasts and estuaries in countries such as 
those of the Central American isthmus, Venezuela, Argentina, 
and Uruguay. Sea-level rise that blocks the runoff of flatland 
rivers into the ocean could increase the risks of floods in their 
basins (e.g., in the Argentine Pampas).
Human Settlements: Climate change would produce a number 
of direct and indirect effects on the welfare, health, and securi­
ty of the inhabitants of Latin America. Direct impacts resulting 
from sea-level rise, adverse weather, and extreme climatic con­
ditions (e.g., floods, flash floods, windstorms, landslides, and 
cold and heat outbreaks), as well as indirect effects through 
impacts on other sectors such as water and food supply, trans­
portation, energy distribution, and sanitation services, could be 
exacerbated by projected climate change. Particularly vulnera­
ble groups include those living in shanty towns in areas around 
large cities, especially where those settlements are established 
in flood-prone areas or on unstable hillsides.
Human Health: Projected changes in climate could increase the 
impacts of already serious chronic malnutrition and diseases
14
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
for some Latin American populations. The geographical distri­
butions of vector-borne diseases (e.g., malaria, dengue, 
Chagas’) and infectious diseases (e.g., cholera) would expand 
southward and to higher elevations if temperature and precipi­
tation increase. Pollution and high concentrations of ground- 
level ozone, exacerbated by increasing surface temperature, 
would have the potential to negatively affect human health and 
welfare, especially in urban areas.
Conclusions: Increasing environmental deterioration (e.g., 
changes in water availability, losses of agricultural lands, and 
flooding of coastal, riverine, and flatland areas) arising from 
climate variability, climate change, and land-use practices 
would aggravate socioeconomic and health problems, encour­
age migration of rural and coastal populations, and deepen 
national and international conflicts.
6.7. 
North America
This region consists of Canada and the United States south of 
the Arctic Circle. Within the region, vulnerability to and the 
impacts of climate change vary significantly from sector to 
sector and from subregion to subregion. This “texture” is 
important in understanding the potential effects of climate 
change on North America, as well as in formulating and imple­
menting viable response strategies.
Ecosystems: Most ecosystems are moderately to highly sensitive 
to changes in climate. Effects are likely to include both benefi­
cial and harmful changes. Potential impacts include northward 
shifts of forest and other vegetation types, which would affect 
biodiversity by altering habitats and would reduce the market 
and non-market goods and services they provide; declines in for­
est density and forested area in some subregions, but gains in 
others; more frequent and larger forest fires; expansion of arid 
land species into the great basin region; drying of prairie pothole 
wetlands that currently support over 50% of all waterfowl in 
North America; and changes in distribution of habitat for cold-, 
cool-, and warm-water fish. The ability to apply management 
practices to limit potential damages is likely to be low for 
ecosystems that are not already intensively managed.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Water quantity and quality 
are particularly sensitive to climate change. Potential impacts 
include increased runoff in winter and spring and decreased 
soil moisture and runoff in summer. The Great Plains and 
prairie regions are particularly vulnerable. Projected increases 
in the frequency of heavy rainfall events and severe flooding 
also could be accompanied by an increase in the length of dry 
periods between rainfall events and in the frequency and/or 
severity of droughts in parts of North America. Water quality 
could suffer and would decline where minimum river flows 
decline. Opportunities to adapt are extensive, but their costs 
and possible obstacles may be limiting.
Food and Fiber Production: The productivity of food and fiber 
resources of North America is moderately to highly sensitive to
climate change. Most studies, however, have not fully consid­
ered the effects of potential changes in climate variability; water 
availability; stresses from pests, diseases, and fire; or interac­
tions with other, existing stresses. Warmer climate scenarios 
(4—5°C increases in North America) have yielded estimates of 
negative impacts in eastern, southeastern, and corn belt regions 
and positive effects in northern plains and western regions. 
More moderate warming produced estimates of predominately 
positive effects in some warm-season crops. Vulnerability of 
commercial forest production is uncertain, but is likely to be 
lower than less intensively managed systems due to changing 
technology and management options. The vulnerability of food 
and fiber production in North America is thought to be low at 
the continental scale, though subregional variation in losses or 
gains is likely. The ability to adapt may be limited by informa­
tion gaps; institutional obstacles; high economic, social, and 
environmental costs; and the rate of climate change.
Coastal Systems: Sea level has been rising relative to the land 
along most of the coast of North America, and falling in a few 
areas, for thousands of years. During the next century, a 50-cm 
rise in sea level from climate change alone could inundate 
8,500 to 19,000 km2 of dry land, expand the 100-year flood- 
plain by more than 23,000 km^, and eliminate as much as 50% 
of North America’s coastal wetlands. The projected changes in 
sea level due to climate change alone would underestimate the 
total change in sea level from all causes along the eastern 
seabord and Gulf coast of North America. In many areas, wet­
lands and estuarine beaches may be squeezed between advanc­
ing seas and dikes or seawalls built to protect human settle­
ments. Several local governments are implementing land-use 
regulations to enable coastal ecosystems to migrate landward 
as sea level rises. Saltwater intrusion may threaten water sup­
plies in several areas.
Human Settlements: Projected changes in climate could have 
positive and negative impacts on the operation and mainte­
nance costs of North American land and water transportation. 
Such changes also could increase the risks to property and 
human health and life as a result of possible increased exposure 
to natural hazards (e.g., wildfires, landslides, and extreme 
weather events) and result in increased demand for cooling and 
decreased demand for heating energy— with the overall net 
effect varying across geographic regions.
Human Health: Climate can have wide-ranging and potentially 
adverse effects on human health via direct pathways (e.g., ther­
mal stress and extreme weather/climate events) and indirect 
pathways (e.g., disease vectors and infectious agents, environ­
mental and occupational exposures to toxic substances, food 
production). In high-latitude regions, some human health 
impacts are expected due to dietary changes resulting from shifts 
in migratory patterns and abundance of native food sources.
Conclusions: Taken individually, any one of the impacts of 
climate change may be within the response capabilities of a 
subregion or sector. The fact that they are projected to occur 
simultaneously and in concert with changes in population.
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability
15
technology, economics, and other environmental and social 
changes, however, adds to the complexity of the impact 
assessment and the choice of appropriate responses. The char­
acteristics of subregions and sectors of North America suggest 
that neither the impacts of climate change nor the response 
options will be uniform.
Many systems of North America are moderately to highly sen­
sitive to climate change, and the range of estimated effects 
often includes the potential for substantial damages. The tech­
nological capability to adapt management of systems to lessen 
or avoid damaging effects exists in many instances. The abili­
ty to adapt may be diminished, however, by the attendant costs, 
lack of private incentives to protect publicly owned natural 
systems, imperfect information regarding future changes in cli­
mate and the available options for adaptation, and institutional 
barriers. The most vulnerable sectors and regions include long- 
lived natural forest ecosystems in the east and interior west; 
water resources in the southern plains; agriculture in the south­
east and southern plains; human health in areas currently expe­
riencing diminished urban air quality; northern ecosystems and 
habitats; estuarine beaches in developed areas; and low- 
latitude cool- and cold-water fisheries. Other sectors and sub- 
regions may benefit from opportunities associated with warmer 
temperatures or, potentially, from COj fertilization— including 
west coast coniferous forests; some western rangelands; 
reduced energy costs for heating in the northern latitudes; 
reduced salting and snow-clearance costs; longer open-water 
seasons in northern channels and ports; and agriculture in the 
northern latitudes, the interior west, and the west coast.
6.8. 
Small Island States
With the exception of Malta and Cyprus in the Mediterranean, 
all of the small island states considered here are located within 
the tropics. About one-third of the states comprise a single 
main island; the others are made up of several or many islands. 
Low-lying island states and atolls are especially vulnerable to 
climate change and associated sea-level rise because in many 
cases (e.g., the Bahamas, Kiribati, the Maldives, the Marshall 
Islands), much of the land area rarely exceeds 3 ^  m above 
present mean sea level. Many islands at higher elevation also 
are vulnerable to climate change effects, particularly in their 
coastal zones, where the main settlements and vital economic 
infrastructure almost invariably are concentrated.
Ecosystems: Although projected temperature rise is not antici­
pated to have widespread adverse consequences, some critical 
ecosystems, such as coral reefs, are very sensitive to tempera­
ture changes. Although some reefs have the ability to keep pace 
with the projected rate of sea-level rise, in many parts of the 
tropics (e.g., the Caribbean Sea, the Pacific Ocean) some 
species of corals live near their limits of temperature tolerance. 
Elevated seawater temperatures (above seasonal maxima) can 
seriously damage corals by bleaching and also impair their 
reproductive functions, and lead to increased mortality. The 
adaptive capacity of mangroves to climate change is expected
to vary by species, as well as according to local conditions 
(e.g., the presence or absence of sediment-rich, macrotidal 
environments, the availability of adequate fresh water to main­
tain the salinity balance). The natural capacity of mangroves to 
adapt and migrate landward also is expected to be reduced by 
coastal land loss and the presence of infrastructure in the 
coastal zone. On some islands, ecosystems already are being 
harmed by other anthropogenic stresses (e.g., pollution), which 
may pose as great a threat as climate change itself. Climate 
change would add to these stresses and further compromise the 
long-term viability of these tropical ecosystems.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Freshwater shortage is a 
serious problem in many small island states, and many such 
states depend heavily on rainwater as the source of water. 
Changes in the patterns of rainfall may cause serious prob­
lems to such nations.
Coastal Systems: Higher rates of erosion and coastal land loss 
are expected in many small islands as a consequence of the pro­
jected rise in sea level. In the case of Majuro atoll in the Marshall 
Islands and Kiribati, it is estimated that for a 1-m rise in sea level 
as much as 80% and 12.5% (respectively) of total land would be 
vulnerable. Generally, beach sediment budgets are expected to 
be adversely affected by reductions in sediment deposition. On 
high islands, however, increased sediment yield from streams 
will help to compensate for sand loss from reefs. Low-lying 
island states and atolls also are expected to experience increased 
sea flooding, inundation, and salinization (of soils and freshwa­
ter lenses) as a direct consequence of sea-level rise.
Human Settlements and Infrastructure: In a number of islands, 
vital infrastructure and major concentrations of settlements are 
likely to be at risk, given their location at or near present sea 
level and their proximity to the coast (often within 1
- 2  km; 
e.g., bCiribati, Tuvalu, the Maldives, the Bahamas). Moreover, 
vulnerability assessments also suggest that shore and infra­
structure protection costs could be financially burdensome for 
some small island states.
Human Health: Climate change is projected to exacerbate 
health problems such as heat-related illness, cholera, dengue 
fever, and biotoxin poisoning, and would place additional 
stress on the already over-extended health systems of most 
small islands.
Tourism: Tourism is the dominant economic sector in a number 
of small island states in the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific and 
Indian Oceans. In 1995, tourism accounted for 69%, 53%, and 
50% of gross national product (GNP) in Antigua, the Bahamas, 
and the Maldives, respectively. This sector also earns consider­
able foreign exchange for a number of small island states, many 
of which are heavily dependent on imported food, fuel, and a 
range of other vital goods and services. Foreign exchange earn­
ings from tourism also provided more than 50% of total rev­
enues for some countries in 1995. Climate change and sea-level 
rise would affect tourism directly and indirectly; Loss of beach­
es to erosion and inundation, salinization of freshwater aquifers.
16
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
increasing stress on coastal ecosystems, damage to infrastruc­
ture from tropical and extra-tropical storms, and an overall loss 
of amenities would jeopardize the viability and threaten the 
long-term sustainability of this important industry in many 
small islands.
Conclusions: To evaluate the vulnerability of these island states 
to projected climate change, a fully integrated approach to vul­
nerability assessments is needed. The interaction of various bio­
physical attributes (e.g., size, elevation, relative isolation) with 
the islands’ economic and sociocultural character ultimately 
determines the vulnerability of these islands. Moreover, some 
islands are prone to periodic nonclimate-related hazards (e.g., 
earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis); the overall vulnera­
bility of these islands cannot be accurately evaluated in isolation 
from such threats. Similarly, vulnerability assessments for these 
small island states should take into consideration the value of 
nonmarketed goods and services (e.g., subsistence assets, com­
munity structure, traditional skills and knowledge), which also 
may be at risk from climate change. In some island societies, 
these assets are just as important as marketed goods and services.
Uncertainties in climate change projections may discourage 
adaptation, especially because some options may be costly or 
require changes in societal norms and behavior. As a guiding 
principle, policies and development programs which seek to 
use resources in a sustainable manner, and which can respond 
effectively to changing conditions such as climate change, 
would be beneficial to the small island states, even if climate 
change did not occur.
The small island states are extremely vulnerable to global cli­
mate change and global sea-level rise. A  range of adaptation 
strategies are theorectically possible. On some small low-lying 
island states and atolls, however, retreat away from the coasts is 
not an option. In some extreme cases, migration and resettlement 
outside of national boundaries might have to be considered.
6.9. 
Temperate Asia
Temperate Asia includes countries in Asia between 18°N and 
the Arctic Circle, including the Japanese islands, the Korean 
peninsula, Mongolia, most parts of China, and Russian Siberia. 
The east-west distance of the area is about 8,000 km, and its 
north-south extent is about 5,000 km. Distinct subregions 
include arid/semi-arid, monsoonal, and Siberian regions.
Ecosystems: Although the area of potential distribution of tem­
perate forests in Temperate Asia is, to a large extent, cleared and 
used for intensive agriculture, global climate change can be 
considered sufficient to trigger structural changes in the remain­
ing temperate forests. The nature and magnitude of these 
changes, however, depend on associated changes in water avail­
ability, as well as water-use efficiency. Shifts in temperature and 
precipitation in temperate rangelands may result in altered 
growing seasons and boundary shifts between grasslands, 
forests, and shrublands. Some model studies suggest that in a
doubled CO 2  climate there would be a large reduction in the 
area (up to 50%) and productivity of boreal forests (primarily in 
the Russian Federation), accompanied by a significant expan­
sion of grasslands and shrublands. There also would be a 
decrease in the area of the tundra zone of as much as 50%—  
accompanied by the release of methane from deep peat 
deposits— and an increase (less than 25%), in CO 2 emissions.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Overall, most 2 xC 0 2  equilib­
rium scenario simulations show a decrease in water supply, 
except in a few river basins. Warmer winters may affect water 
balances because water demands are higher in spring and sum­
mer. Equilibrium climate conditions for doubled equivalent 
CO 2  concentrations indicate that a decrease of as much as 25% 
in mountain glacier mass is possible by 2050. Initially, runoff 
from glaciers in central Asia is projected to increase threefold 
by 2050, but by 2100 glacier runoff would taper to two-thirds 
of its present value. Model results suggest that runoff in the 
northern part of China is quite vulnerable to climate change, 
mainly as a consequence of changes in precipitation in spring, 
summer, and autumn, especially during the flood season. To 
balance water supply with water demand, increasingly efficient 
water management is likely the best approach for Japan. In 
other parts of Temperate Asia, water-resource development 
will remain important; the central adaptation issue is how the 
design of new water-resource infrastructure should be adjusted 
to account for uncertainties resulting from climate change. The 
most critical uncertainties are the lack of credible projections 
of the effects of global change on the Asian monsoon or the 
ENSO phenomenon, which have great influence on river 
runoffs. Multiple-stress impact studies on water resources in 
international river basins are needed in the future.
Food and Fiber Production: Projected changes in crop yields 
using climate projections from different GCMs vary widely. In 
China, for example, across different scenarios and different 
sites, the changes for several crop yields by 2050 are projected 
to be: rice, -78% to +15%; wheat, -21% to +55%; and maize, 
-19% to +5%. An increase in productivity may occur if the pos­
itive effects of CO 2 on crop growth are considered, but its mag­
nitude remains uncertain. A  northward shift of crop zones is 
expected to increase agricultural productivity in northern 
Siberia but to decrease (by about 25%) grain production in 
southwestern Siberia because of a more arid climate. 
Aquaculture is particularly important to Temperate Asia. 
Greater cultivation of warm-water species could develop. 
Warming will require greater attention to possible oxygen 
depletion, fish diseases, and introduction of unwanted species, 
as well as to potential negative factors such as changes in 
established reproductive patterns, m igration routes, and 
ecosystem relationships.
Coastal Systems: An increase in sea level will exacerbate the 
current severe problems of tectonically and anthropogenically 
induced land subsidence in delta areas. Saltwater intrusion also 
would become more serious. A sea-level rise of 1 m would 
threaten certain coastal areas— for example, the Japanese 
coastal zone, on which 50% of Japan’s industrial production is
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: A n Assessment o f Vulnerability
17
located (e.g., Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya); in addition, about 
90% of the remaining sandy beaches in Japan would be in dan­
ger of disappearing.
Human Health: Heat-stress mortality and illness (predomi­
nantly cardiorespiratory) are projected to more than double by 
2050 resulting from an increase in the frequency or severity of 
heat waves under climate-change conditions projected by a 
transient GCM (GFDL X2, UKMO X 6 ). Net climate change- 
related increases in the geographic distribution (elevation and 
latitude) of the vector organisms of infectious diseases (e.g., 
m alarial m osquitoes, schistosom e-spreading snails) and 
changes in the life-cycle dynamics of vectors and infective par­
asites would, in aggregate, increase the potential transmission 
of many vector-borne diseases. Increases in nonvector-borne 
infectious diseases— such as cholera, salmonellosis, and other 
food- and water-related infections— also could occur because 
of climatic impacts on water distribution, temperature, and 
microorganism proliferation. Disease surveillance could be 
strengthened and integrated with other environmental moni­
toring to design early warning systems; develop early, envi­
ronmentally sound public health interventions; and develop 
anticipatory societal policies to reduce the risk of outbreaks 
and subsequent spread of epidemics.
Conclusions: The major impacts in Temperate Asia under glob­
al climate change are projected to be large shifts of the boreal 
forests, the disappearance of significant portions of mountain 
glaciers, and water supply shortages. The most critical uncer­
tainty in these estimates stems from the lack of credible projec­
tions of the hydrological cycle under global climate change sce­
narios. The effects of climate change on the Asian monsoon and 
the ENSO phenomenon are among the major uncertainties in 
the modeling of the hydrological cycle. Projections of agricul­
tural crop yields are uncertain, not only because of the uncer­
tainty in the hydrological cycle but also because of the potential 
positive effects of CO 2  and production practices. Sea-level rise 
endangers sandy beaches in the coastal zones, but remains an 
anthropogenically induced problem in delta areas. Integrated 
impact studies considering multi-stress factors are needed.
6.10. 
Tropical Asia
Tropical Asia is physiographically diverse and ecologically 
rich in natural and crop-related biodiversity. The present total 
population of the region is about 1 . 6  billion, and it is projected 
to increase to 2.4 billion by 2025. The population is principal­
ly rural-based, although in 1995, the region included 6  of the 
25 largest cities in the world. The climate in Tropical Asia is 
characterized by seasonal weather patterns associated with the 
two monsoons and the occurrence of tropical cyclones in the 
three core areas of cyclogenesis (the Bay of Bengal, north 
Pacific Ocean, and South China Sea). Climate change will add 
to other stresses such as rapid urbanization, industrialization, 
and economic development, which contribute to unsustainable 
exploitation of natural resources, increased pollution, land 
degradation, and other environmental problems.
Ecosystems: Substantial elevational shifts of ecosystems in the 
mountains and uplands of Tropical Asia are projected. At high 
elevation, weedy species can be expected to displace tree 
species— though the rates of vegetation change could be slow 
compared to the rate of climate change and constrained by 
increased erosion in the Greater Himalayas. Changes in the dis­
tribution and health of rainforest and drier monsoon forest will 
be complex. In Thailand, for instance, the area of tropical for­
est could increase from 45% to 80% of total forest cover, 
whereas in Sri Lanka, a significant increase in dry forest and a 
decrease in wet forest could occur. Projected increases in évapo­
transpiration and rainfall variability are likely to have a nega­
tive impact on the viability of freshwater wetlands, resulting in 
shrinkage and desiccation. Sea-level rise and increases in sea- 
surface temperature are the most probable major climate 
change-related stresses on coastal ecosystems. Coral reefs may 
be able to keep up with the rate of sea-level rise but suffer 
bleaching from higher temperatures. Landward migration of 
mangroves and tidal wetlands is expected to be constrained by 
human infrastructure and human activities.
Hydrology and Water Resources: The Himalayas have a criti­
cal role in the provision of water to continental monsoon Asia. 
Increased temperatures and increased seasonal variability in 
precipitation are expected to result in increased recession of 
glaciers and increasing danger from glacial lake outburst 
floods. A reduction in average flow of snow-fed rivers, coupled 
with an increase in peak flows and sediment yield, would have 
major impacts on hydropower generation, urban water supply, 
and agriculture. Availability of water from snow-fed rivers may 
increase in the short term but decrease in the long run. Runoff 
from rain-fed rivers may change in the future. A  reduction in 
snowmelt water will put the dry-season flow of these rivers 
under more stress than is the case now. Increased population 
and increasing demand in the agricultural, industrial, and 
hydropower sectors will put additional stress on water 
resources. Pressure on the drier river basins and those subject 
to low seasonal flows will be most acute. Hydrological changes 
in island and coastal drainage basins are expected to be rela­
tively small in comparison to those in continental Tropical 
Asia, apart from those associated with sea-level rise.
Food and Fiber Production: The sensitivity of major cereal 
and tree crops to changes in temperature, moisture, and CO 2  
concentration of the magnitudes projected for the region has 
been demonstrated in many studies. For instance, impacts on 
rice yield, wheat yield, and sorghum yield suggest that any 
increase in production associated with CO 2  fertilization will be 
more than offset by reductions in yield from temperature or 
moisture changes. Although climate change impacts could 
result in significant changes in crop yields, production, storage, 
and distribution, the net effect of the changes regionwide is 
uncertain because of varietal differences; local differences in 
growing season, crop management, etc.; the lack of inclusion 
of possible diseases, pests, and microorganisms in crop model 
simulations; and the vulnerability of agricultural areas to 
episodic environmental hazards, including floods, droughts, 
and cyclones. Low-income rural populations that depend on
18
The Regional Impacts o f Climate Change: An Assessment o f Vulnerability
traditional agricultural systems or on marginal lands are partic­
ularly vulnerable.
Coastal Systems: Coastal lands are particularly vulnerable; sea- 
level rise is the most obvious climate-related impact. Densely 
settled and intensively used low-lying coastal plains, islands, 
and deltas are especially vulnerable to coastal erosion and land 
loss, inundation and sea flooding, upstream movement of the 
saline/freshwater front, and seawater intrusion into freshwater 
lenses. Especially at risk are large delta regions of Bangladesh, 
Myanmar, Viet Nam, and Thailand, and the low-lying areas of 
Indonesia, the Philippines, and Malaysia. Socioeconomic 
impacts could be felt in major cities and ports, tourist resorts, 
artisinal and commercial fishing, coastal agriculture, and infra­
structure development. International studies have projected the 
displacement of several millions of people from the region’s 
coastal zone, assuming a 1-m rise in sea level. The costs of 
response measures to reduce the impact of sea-level rise in the 
region could be immense.
Human Health: The incidence and extent of some vector-borne 
diseases are expected to increase with global warming. Malaria, 
schistosomiasis, and dengue— ^which are significant causes of 
mortality and morbidity in Tropical Asia— are very sensitive to 
climate and are likely to spread into new regions on the margins 
of presently endemic areas as a consequence of climate change. 
Newly affected populations initially would experience higher 
fatality rates. According to one study that specifically focused 
on climate influences on infectious disease in presently vulner­
able regions, an increase in epidemic potential of 12-27% for 
malaria and 3 1 ^ 7 %  for dengue and a decrease of schistosomi­
asis of 11-17% are anticipated under a range of GCM scenarios 
as a consequence of climate change. Waterborne and water- 
related infectious diseases, which already account for the 
majority of epidemic emergencies in the region, also are expect­
ed to increase when higher temperatures and higher humidity 
are superimposed on existing conditions and projected increas­
es in population, urbanization, declining water quality, and 
other trends.
Conclusions: The potential direct effects of climate change 
assessed here, such as changes in water availability, crop yields, 
and inundation of coastal areas, all will have further indirect 
effects on food security and human health. The suitability of 
adaptation strategies to different climatic environments will 
vary across the diverse subregions and land uses of the region. 
Adaptive options include new temperature- and pest-resistant 
crop varieties; new technologies to reduce crop yield loss; 
improvements in irrigation efficiency; and Integrated approach­
es to river basin and coastal zone management that take account 
of current and longer-term issues, including climate change.
These needs include:
Better baseline data, both climatic and socioeconomic 
Better scenarios, especially of precipitation, extreme 
events, sulfate aerosol effects, and regional-scale 
changes
Better understanding of the ecological and physiolog­
ical effects of increasing CO 2  concentrations, taking 
account of species competition and migrations, soil 
and nutrients, acclimation, and partitioning between 
crop yields, roots, stems, and leaves 
Dynamic models of climate, biospheric processes, 
and other socioeconomic factors to take account of 
the developing, time-varying nature of global change 
Impact assessments across a range of scenarios and 
assumptions to enable the assessment of risk, particu­
larly in regions comprised primarily of developing 
countries and small island states, where resources for 
research and assessment have been inadequate to date 
Analysis of adaptation options, including the need for 
development of new technologies and opportunities 
for adapting existing technologies in new settings 
Integrated assessments across sectors, from climate 
change to economic or other costs, across countries 
and regions, including adaptations, and including 
other socio-economic changes.
Authors/Contributors
Robert T. W atson (USA), M arafu C. Zinyowera (Zim babwe), Richard H. M oss 
(USA), Reid E. Basher (New Zealand), M artin Beniston (Switzerland), 
Osvaldo F. Canziani (Argentina), Sandra M. D iaz (Argentina), David J. 
Dokken (USA), John T. Everett (USA), B. Blair Fitzharris (New Zealand), 
Habiba Gitay (Australia), Bubu R Jallow  (The Gambia), M urari Lai (India), R. 
Shakespeare M aya (Zim babwe), Roger F. M cLean (Australia), M .Q. M irza 
(Bangladesh), Ron Neilson (USA), Ian R. Noble (Australia), I^eonard A. Nurse 
(Barbados), H.W.Q. G koth-Qgendo (Kenya), A. Barrie Rittock (Australia), 
David S. Shriner (USA), S.K. Sinha (India), Roger B. Street (Canada), Su Jilan 
(China), Avelino G. Suarez (Cuba), Richard S.J. Toi (The N etherlands), Laura 
Van W ie M cGrory (USA), M asatoshi Yoshino (Japan)
7.
Research Needs
The gaps and deficiencies revealed in this special report sug­
gest some priority areas for further work to help policymakers 
in their difficult task.
1
Introduction
CONTENTS
1.1. 
Scope of the Assessment 
21
1.2. 
Approach of the Assessment 
21
1.3. 
Baseline Data and Climate Scenarios 
22
1.3.1. 
Climate Observations 
22
1.3.2. 
Climate Scenarios 
23
1.3.3. 
Socioeconomic and Resource-Use Baseline Data 
23
1.3.4. 
Development of Integrated Socioeconomic and Climate Change Scenarios 
25
References 
26
Introduction
21
1.1. 
Scope of the Assessment
Worldwide concern about possible climate change and acceler­
ation of sea-level rise resulting from increasing concentrations 
of greenhouse gases has led governments to consider interna­
tional action to address the issue, particularly through the 
development of the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC). Because the extent and urgency 
of action required to mitigate the source of the problem—  
namely the emission of greenhouse gases by human activi­
ties— depends on the level of vulnerability, a key question for 
the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the Convention, and for 
policymakers in general, is the degree to which human condi­
tions and the natural environment are vulnerable to the poten­
tial effects of climate change. Impact assessments are needed 
to establish the costs and benefits of climatic change as a guide 
to what adaptation and mitigation measures might be justified. 
Without such assessments, we run the risk of making unin­
formed, unwise, and perhaps unnecessarily costly decisions.
The foundation for policy formulation for the climate change 
problem is scientific information on greenhouse gas emissions, 
the climate system and how it may change, and the likely 
impacts on human activities and the environment. To provide 
the best available base of scientific information for policymak­
ers and public use, governments have requested that the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) periodical­
ly assess and summarize the current scientific literature related 
to climate change. The most recent assessment is the Second 
Assessment Report (SAR), a comprehensive three-volume 
report completed in 1995 and published in 1996. This assess­
ment involved extensive inputs from thousands of scientists and 
was reviewed by governments and leading experts. The SAR 
takes a global view of the impacts of climate change, organiz­
ing chapters by ecosystem type or socioeconomic sector (e.g., 
forests, grasslands, agriculture, and industry).
In making use of the SAR, the UNFCCC negotiators found a 
need for more explicit information on how different regions of 
the world might be affected, to better assess their degrees of 
vulnerability. Accordingly, the Subsidiary Body for Scientific 
and Technological Advice (SBSTA) of the UNFCCC request­
ed that the IPCC prepare a report that provided a geographi­
cally explicit view of the problem, particularly the vulnerabili­
ties for each region. Initially, a Technical Paper was planned 
(which, under the IPCC rules of procedure, limited the authors 
to citing only material included in the SAR), but in September 
1996 the IPCC XIIth Plenary at Mexico City decided that a 
Special Report should be produced. This decision was taken to 
allow the inclusion and proper review of new material post­
dating the SAR— especially new work emerging from several 
country studies programs, as well as regional studies which 
were not included in the SAR due to its global scope.
The present report is the result of this process. This report pro­
vides assessments of vulnerability of climate change for 1 0  
regions of the globe: Africa, the Arctic and the Antarctic (Polar 
Regions), Australasia, Europe, Latin America, Middle East and
Arid Asia (Arid Western Asia), North America, Small Island 
States, Temperate Asia, and Tropical Asia. It also includes sev­
eral annexes that provide information about climate observa­
tions, climate projections, vegetation distribution projections, 
and socioeconomic baseline assumptions used in the report.
1.2. 
Approach of the Assessment
This report should be read as an assessment of the scientific 
and technical literature related to the sensitivity, adaptability, 
and vulnerability of ecosystems and social and economic sec­
tors in the 1 0  regions— not as a quantitative integrated assess­
ment of impacts. The approach used in preparing the assess­
ment was agreed by the lead authors at a series of scoping 
meetings held in Washington, DC, in May and September 
1996, which set the direction of the assessment when it was 
being prepared as a technical paper. These meetings were used 
to review materials from the sectoral assessments of the SAR 
and organize them into regional analyses, and to identify com­
mon issues across the regions and standardize approaches to 
addressing them. After the paper was reprogrammed as a spe­
cial report, a series of chapter-specific regional consultations 
and meetings of lead authors and other experts was held to 
refine the scope of each regional assessment and to identify 
studies and methods to use in addition to those used in the 
SAR. These meetings were held in Toronto, Canada (13-15 
January 1997); New Delhi, India (23-25 January 1997); 
Harare, Zimbabwe (27-29 January 1997); Tarawa, Kiribati 
(10-13 February 1997); M ontevideo, Uruguay (11-13 
February 1997); and Amsterdam, The Netherlands (19-21 
March 1997).
On the basis of these meetings, the lead authors set about 
preparing each chapter to provide an assessment of the vul­
nerability of natural ecosystems, socioeconomic sectors, and 
human health in the region. The definition of vulnerability 
used in the SAR was adopted for use by the lead authors in 
this report: “Vulnerability” is the extent to which climate 
change may damage or harm a system; it is a function of both 
the “sensitivity” of a system or structure to climate and the 
opportunities for “adaptation” to new conditions. Sensitivity 
is defined as the degree to which a system will respond to a 
change in climatic conditions (e.g., the extent of change in 
ecosystem composition, structure, and functioning, including 
primary productivity, resulting from a given change in tem­
perature or precipitation). The responses may result in either 
beneficial or harmful effects. Adaptation is defined as adjust­
ments in practices, processes, or structures in response to pro­
jected or actual changes in climate. Adjustments can be either 
spontaneous or planned, reactive or anticipatory. In some 
cases (e.g., for many ecosystems), options for planned or 
anticipatory adaptation may not exist. Adaptations can reduce 
negative impacts or take advantage of new opportunities pre­
sented by changing climate conditions. It is in part because of 
the uncertainties associated with regional projections of cli­
mate change (these uncertainties are summarized in Section
1.3.2. and described more fully in Annex B) that this report
22
Introduction
takes the approach of assessing vulnerabilities, rather than 
quantitatively assessing expected impacts of climate change.
This report is based upon evidence found in the published liter­
ature, which uses a diverse range of methods and models. This 
diversity reflects current uncertainties regarding the functioning 
of complex natural and social systems and how they respond to 
changes in climate. The assessment did not include the perfor­
mance of new research or computer model simulations by the 
authors to estimate impacts under common scenarios of green­
house gas emissions or climate change. Such work was beyond 
the scope of the report. Because the available studies have not 
employed a common set of climate scenarios, and because of 
uncertainties regarding the sensitivity and adaptability of natur­
al and social systems, the assessment of regional vulnerabilities 
is necessarily qualitative. Often only very general conclusions 
can be supported by the currently available evidence. In a num­
ber of instances, quantitative estimates of Impacts of climate 
change are cited in the report. Such estimates are strongly 
dependent upon the specific assumptions made and models 
used. These estimates should not be inteфreted as predictions of 
the most likely impacts, but rather as illustrations of the poten­
tial character and magnitude of impacts that may result from 
specific scenarios of climate change.
Many impacts studies use model simulations for the equilibri­
um climatic response to a carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) doubling, 
rather than more recent model simulations of climate change 
resulting from gradually increasing CO 2  concentrations and 
changing concentrations of aerosols and stratospheric ozone. 
Thus the level of warming used in many of the impacts studies 
may not be reached until several decades after 2 1 0 0 , rather 
than by that date. However, this does not necessarily mean that 
all impacts will be slowed; for example, the transient simula­
tions exhibit larger land-sea temperature change contrasts, and 
this would be expected to alter atmospheric circulation and 
weather patterns in ways not predicted in the equilibrium sim­
ulations. Historical observations of the impacts of weather pat­
terns— including droughts, floods, storms, and other extreme 
weather events— suggest that changes in climate variability 
could have important impacts on natural and social systems.
Some readers of the special report will be interested only in a 
particular region, whereas others will be interested in compar­
ing information from different regions. To facilitate such com­
parison, a common structure, or template, for each regional 
chapter was developed. The main elements of this chapter tem­
plate follow:
Executive Summary
Regional Characteristics
• 
Biogeography (countries, ecosystems, socioeconomic 
activities covered)
• 
Trends (key socioeconomic and resource-use infor­
mation based on data from existing international 
sources, compiled by the Technical Support Unit in 
cooperation with World Resources Institute)
• 
Major climatic zones
• 
Observed trends for temperature and precipitation 
(based on IPCC, 1996, WG I, Chapter 3, extended and 
updated to cover a broader number of contiguous 
regions)
• 
Summary of available information on projections of 
future climate (based on IPCC, 1996, WG I, Chapter 
6 ) and including updated material specific to the 
region used in regional impact assessments
Sensitivity, Adaptability, and Vulnerability
• 
Coverage of topics in this section will vary by region, 
depending on the most important sectors for each 
region; however, chapters organize the information 
into the following categories:
-  
Ecosystems (including biodiversity)
-  
Hydrology/water supply
-  
Food and fiber for human consumption (agricul­
ture, forestry, and fisheries)
-  
Coastal systems
-  
Human settlements and urbanization
-  
Human health
-  
Other topics particularly relevant to each region 
(e.g., energy, transport, tourism)
Integrated Assessment of Potential Impacts
• 
Assessments of illustrative case examples related to 
ecosystems, water supply/basin management, and 
socioeconomic activities
• 
Integrated model results, if available
• 
Lessons from past fluctuations/variability
This approach is broadly consistent with the seven-step method 
outlined by the IPCC in its Technical Guidelines for Assessing 
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations (IPCC, 1994b). 
These steps are: 1) defining the problem; 2) selecting the 
method; 3) testing the method/sensitivity; 4) selecting scenar­
ios; 5) assessing biophysical/socioeconomic impacts; 6 ) assess­
ing autonomous adjustments; and 7) evaluating adaptation 
strategies.
1.3. 
Baseline Data and Climate Scenarios
I.3.I. 
Climate Observations
Current trends in regional variations of temperature and pre­
cipitation also are important parts of the baseline against which 
the potential effects of climate change should be assessed. 
IPCC (1996, WG I, Chapter 3) provided time series plots and 
global maps depicting trends for temperature and precipitation. 
This information was extended and updated by one of the lead 
authors of the WG I assessment (T. Karl, USA). The informa­
tion was provided to the regional assessment lead authors and 
is contained in Annex A of this special report, which describes 
the data sets used for depicting these trends. Additional infor­
mation based on regional analyses has been added to several of 
the regional chapters by the lead authors.
Introduction
23
1.3.2. 
Climate Scenarios
GCM-based scenarios are the most credible and frequently 
used projections of climate change. Other types of climate pro­
jections include synthetic scenarios and analogue scenarios. 
These approaches and their limitations are described in IPCC 
(1994b).
In the IPCC’s second assessment (1996, WG I, Chapter 6 ), 
seven regions were identified for regional analysis of climate 
simulations. That analysis was based on transient runs with 
atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (AOGCMs) 
suitable for construction of regional climate scenarios, using 
additional regionalization techniques to improve the sim ula­
tion of regional climate change. The team of lead authors that 
conducted that analysis, led by F. Giorgi and G. Meehl, pre­
pared information on the simulation of regional climate 
change with global coupled climate models and regional 
modeling techniques for use by the regional assessment 
teams. That information, which is presented in Annex В of 
this report, is based entirely on the information included in 
the W G I contribution to the SAR. No new information has 
been added to the previous analysis.
The wide range of changes in temperature and precipitation 
indicated at the time of doubled CO 2  concentrations for each 
region is illustrated in Figures B-1 and B-2, which show large 
model-to-model differences. Annex В provides the following 
conclusion regarding the confidence that can be placed in 
regional climate projections:
“Analysis of surface air temperature and precipitation 
results from regional climate change experiments carried 
out with AOGCMs indicates that the biases in present-day 
simulations of regional climate change and the inter-model 
variability in the simulated regional changes are still too 
large to yield a high level of confidence in simulated change 
scenarios. The limited number of experiments available 
with statistical downscaling techniques and nested regional 
models has shown that complex topographical features, 
large lake systems, and narrow land masses not resolved at 
the resolution of current GCMs significantly affect the sim­
ulated regional and local change scenarios, both for precip­
itation and (to a lesser extent) temperature (IPCC, 1996). 
This adds a further degree of uncertainty in the use of 
GCM-produced scenarios for impact assessments. In addi­
tion, most climate change experiments have not accounted 
for human-induced landscape changes and only recently 
has the effect of aerosols been investigated. Both these fac­
tors can further affect projections of regional climate 
change.”
The wide range of projected changes in temperature and pre­
cipitation suggest that caution is required in treating any 
impact assessments based on GCM results as firm predictions. 
This uncertainty is why the term “climate scenarios” has been 
adopted in most impact assessments. Such scenarios should be 
regarded as internally consistent patterns of plausible future
climates, not as predictions. Decisionmakers need to be aware 
of the uncertainties associated with climate projections so that 
they can weigh them in formulation of strategies to cope with 
the risks of climate change.
The review chapters in this report summarize impact studies 
based on a range of climate scenarios where they were avail­
able. Most studies were based on the older, mixed-layer GCM 
climate scenarios; results from coupled transient models have 
only recently become available, and studies using these sce­
narios are only beginning to be conducted. The older GCM 
runs estimate stable equilibrium conditions for IXCO2  and 
2 хС 0 г climates and generally show more global mean warm­
ing than recent transient model runs (see Table 1-1 for a list of 
equilibrium scenarios used in studies assessed in this special 
report). In the transient model runs (see Table 1-2 for a listing 
of transient scenarios cited), in which trace gases increase 
slowly over a period of years, the full effects of changes in 
temperature and precipitation lag the effects of changes in 
atmospheric composition by a number of decades. Thus, in 
impact studies using transient scenarios (e.g., model studies of 
potential climate change impacts on vegetation distribution), 
the positive effects of CO 2  on plant growth and other variables 
dependent upon plant production precede the full effects of 
changes in climate.
This complication does not mean that impact assessments 
based on older equilibrium GCM projections are of no value. 
Rather, it suggests that their results should be carefully inter­
preted. Where possible, the actual projected changes in tem­
perature, precipitation, and so forth have been stated in the text, 
and climate scenarios representing the range of potential 
changes in temperature and precipitation have been used for 
regions where a range of scenarios is available. Space limita­
tions prevent the presentation of fine detail, but the original 
source papers and reports are listed. Unfortunately, even some 
of the original material does not give as much precise informa­
tion as might be desired.
At the very least. Impact assessments based on older climate 
scenarios can be used to estimate the sensitivity of the various 
sectors to climate change. New transient GCMs based on 
improved coupling to the oceans; better scenarios of green­
house gas and sulfate aerosol emissions; and better representa­
tion of processes of cloud formation, water vapor transport, 
ice/snow formation, vegetation feedbacks, and ocean circula­
tion will produce quantitatively different results.
1.3.3. 
Socioeconomic and Resource-Use Baseline Data
The vulnerability of ecosystems and socioeconomic sectors 
will be affected by their baseline or initial conditions and by 
the other stresses to which they may be subjected. For this rea­
son, it is important to examine the vulnerability of these sys­
tems and sectors in the context of existing and projected devel­
opments. To provide a consistent set of socioeconomic and 
resource-use data, the Technical Support Unit collated data
24
Introduction
requested by the authors from, among other sources. World 
Resources 1996-97 (WRI/UNEP/UNDP/World Bank, 1996) 
(see Annex D for a complete list of sources). These data 
include information on:
• 
Population and related indicators (1995 population, 
current population density, projected population den­
sity for 2025, and urban and coastal populations) 
Economic indicators [gross domestic product (GDP) 
per capita; annual growth rate for GDP; and percent­
age of GDP from agriculture, industry, and services] 
Land cover and use (total land area and amount of 
land in several categories, including permanent crop­
land, permanent pasture, forest and woodland, and 
other land)
• 
A gricultural activities (am ount of irrigated land, 
size of agricultural labor force, and livestock 
holdings)
Water use (water resources per capita and annual 
water withdrawals for domestic uses, industry, and 
agriculture)
• 
Energy use (total commercial energy consumption 
and consumption of energy sources that are sensitive 
to changes in climate, including traditional fuels and 
hydroelectric production)
Biodiversity (known and endemic mammal, bird, and 
plant species).
It is important to note that these data are intended simply to 
provide a consistent set of assumptions on important social
Table 1-1: The global mixed-layer atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (equilibrium 2xC02 simulations) used for 
impact assessment studies in this report.
Group
Experiment
Acronym
Horizontal 
Resolution 
(# of waves 
or iat X long)
Global 
Surface Air 
Temperature 
Change (°Q
Reference(s)
GFDL
A l
R15
3.2
Wetherald and Manabe, 1988
G roL
A2
R15
4.0
Manabe and Wetherald, 1987
G roL
A3
R30
4.0
Wetherald and Manabe, 1989
OSU
B1
4°x5°
2 . 8
Schlesinger and Zhao, 1989
MRI
C l
4°x5°
-4.3
Noda and Tokioka, 1989
NCAR
D1
R15
4.0
Washington and Meehl, 1984; Meehl and Washington, 1990
NCAR
D2
R15
4.6
Washington and Meehl, 1993
CSIR04
El
R 2 1
4.0
Gordon et al., 1992; Gordon and Hunt, 1994
CSIR09
FI
R 2 1
4.8
Whetton et al, 1993; Watterson et al, 1995
GISS
G l
8 °xl0 °
4.8
Hansen effl/., 1984
UKMO
HI
5°x7.5°
5.2
Wilson and Mitchell, 1987
UKMO
H2
5°x7.5°
3.2
Mitchell and Warrilow, 1987
UKMO
H3
25°x3.75°
3.5
Mitchell era/., 1989
CCC
J1
T32
3.5
Boer et al., 1992; McFarlane et al, 1992; Boer, 1993
MPI
K1
T106^
-
Bengtsson etal, 1995,1996
Note: In general, the findings on impact assessment contained in this report are based on climate change scenarios inferred from the model 
experiments listed above and cited in IPCC’s First Assessment Report (1990) and its supplement (1992).
“Time-slice experiments with atmosphere-only ECHAM3 T 106 model.
Introduction
25
and economic factors that will influence demands on environ­
mental goods and services (and hence the stresses to which 
environmental systems may be subjected), as well as the 
human and financial capacity of societies to adapt to potential 
climate change. They are not intended to be a definitive source 
of data on social and economic trends in any particular coun­
try. Projections of socioeconomic conditions such as popula­
tion, incomes, land uses, technological change, economic 
activity by sector, demands for water and other resources, and 
other variables are at least as uncertain as regional projections 
of climate change; as with regional climate information, they 
should be used as scenarios of future conditions, not treated as 
predictions.
1.3.4. 
Development o f Integrated Socioeconomic and 
Climate Change Scenarios
It is important for policymakers to be able to put climate 
change impacts in the context of other social, economic, and 
technological conditions, such as:
Demographic change 
Land-use change 
Land degradation 
Air and water pollution
Economic and social change, “development” (includ­
ing technological change), and poverty.
Table 1-2: A  brief description o f the global coupled atmosphere-ocean general circulation models (transient simulations) used 
fo r impact assessment studies in this report.
Group
Model
Name®
Horizontal 
Resolution 
Experiment 
(# of waves
Acronymb 
or lat x lon^
Global 
SurfeceAir 
Temperature 
GHG 
Oiange at COj 
Scenario^ 
Doubling (°Q
Reference(s)
BMRC
G ro L
MRI
NCAR
NCAR
UKMO
5° Ocean 
1° Ocean
UKTRl
XI (a) 
X2(g) 
X3(p) 
X4(q) 
X5(r)
X 6 (s)
R 2 1
R15
4°x5°
R15
R15
2.5°x3.75°
1 %/yr
1 %/yr
1 %/yr
1 %/yr
1 %/yr
1 %/yr
UKMO 
HADCM2 
X7 (z)
MPI 
ECHAMl+LSG 
X8  (m)
MPI 
ECHAM3+LSG 
X9 (y)
CSIRO 
-  
X10(d)
CCC 
CGCMl 
X ll (b)
GISS 
-  
X12(k)
2.5°x3.75° 
1%/yr + aerosols
T21 
1.3%/yr
T 21 
1.3%/yr + aerosols
R 2 1  
1 %/yr
T32 
1 %/yr
4°x5° 
1%/yr
1.35
2.2
1.6
2.3 
3.8
1.7
-2.5
1.3 
na 
2.0 
2.6
1.4
Colman ef я/., 1995 
Manabe et я/., 1991,1992 
Tokioka et я/., 1995 
Meehl et я/., 1993 
Meehl, 1996
Washington and Meehl, 1996
Murphy, 1995; МифЬу and Mitchell, 
1995; Senior, 1995
Mitchell and Johns, 1997
Cubasch et я/., 1992
Hasselmann et al, 1995
Gordon and O’Fairell, 1997
Boer et al, 1997; Flato et ai, 1997
Russell et al, 1995
Note: In general, the climate change scenarios described in this document are based on those inferred from the model experiments listed 
above and reported in the IPCC Second Assessment Report (1996). The future regional projections for combined greenhouse gases 
(equivalent COj) and aerosol forcings (based on experiments X7 and/or X9) also have been discussed for some regions, 
na = not available 
“If different from group name.
^Parenthetical refers to experiment listed in Table 6.3 of the SAR Working Group I volume (also see Table B-1 in Annex B).
‘'The GHG scenario refers to the rate of increase of COj used in the model experiments; most experiments use 1%/yr, which gives a doubling 
of CO2 after 70 years (IS92a gives a doubling of equivalent CO2 after 95 years).
26
Introduction
Thus, each chapter in this report has a section on “integrated 
assessment,” which attempts to draw together the interactions 
among sectors, countries, and forces of change. Integrated 
assessment has been tackled at various levels:
Integrating the chain of effects from changes in 
atmospheric composition and climate to changes in 
biophysical systems to socioeconomic consequences 
(the “vertical” dimension)
Including the interactions among systems, sectors, 
and activities (the “horizontal” dimension) 
Considering climate change in the context of other 
trends and changes in society (the “time” or “global 
change” dimension).
Some case study examples have been highlighted in the fol­
lowing chapters, but integrated assessment is in its infancy, and 
the development of new integrated scenarios of socioeconom­
ic changes, emissions of greenhouse gases, and potential 
changes in climate was not possible in the time available for 
preparation of this report. This type of analysis is a priority for 
the IPCC, however; it currently is the focus of two related 
activities: a special report on emissions scenarios and a task 
group on climate scenarios for impact analysis. We expect that 
the Third Assessment Report (TAR) will be based on such an 
integrated set of scenarios.
The gaps and deficiencies revealed in this special report sug­
gest some priority areas for further work to help policymakers 
in their difficult task. These needs Include:
• 
Better baseline data, climate and socioeconomic 
Better scenarios, especially of precipitation, extreme 
events, sulfate aerosol effects, and regional-scale changes 
Better understanding of the ecological and physiolog­
ical effects of increasing CO 2  concentrations, taking 
account of species competition and migrations, soil 
and nutrients, acclimation, partitioning between crop 
yields, roots, stems, and leaves
• 
Dynamic models of climate, biospheric processes, 
and socioeconomic factors to take account of the 
developing, time-varying nature of global change 
Impact assessments across a range of scenarios and 
assumptions to enable the assessment of risk— partic­
ularly in regions composed primarily of developing 
countries, where resources for research and assess­
ment have been inadequate to date
More and better integrated assessments across sec­
tors, from climate change to economic or other costs, 
across countries and regions, including adaptations 
and other socioeconomic changes.
Clearly, impact assessments have not been made across all 
potentially affected sectors and regions, so many potential 
costs and benefits remain to be examined and, where possible, 
quantified. Nevertheless, we believe the present report summa­
rizes a substantial body of work that, if carefully interpreted, 
may provide useful guidance to policymakers.
References
Bengtsson, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1995: Hurricane-type vortices in a 
general circulation model. Tellus, 47A, 1751-1796.
Bengtsson, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1996: W ill greenhouse gas-induced 
w arm ing over the next 50 years lead to higher frequency and greater 
intensity of hurricanes? Tellus, 48A, 57-73.
B oer, G.J., N.A. M cFarlane, and M. Lazare, 1992: G reenhouse gas-induced 
clim ate change sim ulated w ith the CCC second-generation general cir­
culation model. J. Climate, 5, 1045-1077.
B oer, G.J., 1993: Climate change and the regulation o f the surface moisture 
and energy budgets. Clim. D yn., 8, 225-239.
Boer, G.J., G. Flato, C. Reader, and D. Ram sden, 1997: A  transient climate 
change sim ulation w ith historical and projected greenhouse gas and 
aerosol forcing (to be submitted).
Colm an, R.A., S.B. Power, B.J. M cAvaney, and R.R. Dahni, 1995: A  non-flux 
corrected transient CO 2 experim ent using the BM RC coupled atm os­
phere-ocean GCM . Geophys. Res. Lett., 22, 3047-3050.
Cubasch, U., K. H asselm ann, H. Hock, E. M aier-Reimer, U. M ikolajewicz, 
B.D. Santer, and R. Sausen, 1992: Time dependent greenhouse w arm ing 
com putations w ith a coupled ocean atm osphere model. Clim. D yn., 8, 
55-69.
Flato, G., G.J. Boer, W.G. Lee, N.A. M cFarlane, D. Ram sden, C. Reader, and 
A. W eaver, 1997: The CCCma Global Coupled M odel and its control cli­
m ate (to be submitted).
Gordon, H.B, and B. Hunt, 1994: Clim ate variability within an equilibrium  
greenhouse sim ulation. Clim. Dyn., 9, 195-212.
Gordon, H.B., P.H. W hetton, A.B. Pittock, A.M . Fowler, and M .R. Haylock, 
1992: Sim ulated changes in daily rainfall intensity due to enhanced 
greenhouse effect: im plications for extrem e rainfall events. Clim. Dyn., 
8, 83-102.
Gordon, H.B. and S.P. O ’Farrell, 1997: Transient clim ate change in the 
CSIRO coupled model w ith dynam ical sea ice. M on. Wea. Rev., 125, 
875-901.
Hansen, J,, A. l^ c is, D. Rind, G. Russell, P. Stone, I. Fung, R. Ruedy, and J. 
Lerner, 1984: Clim ate Sensitivity: A nalysis of feedback m echanism s. In: 
C lim ate Processes and C lim ate Sensitivity [H ansen, J.E. and T. 
Takahashi (eds.)]. A m erican Geophysical U nion, W ashington, DC, 
130-163.
H asselm ann, K., L. Bengtsson, U. Cubasch, G.C. Hegerl, H. Rodhe, E. 
Roeckner, H. von Storch, R. Voss, and J. W aszkewitz, 1995: D etection o f 
anthropogenic climate change using a fingerprint method. Proceedings 
of M odem  D ynam ic M eteorology Sym posium  in honour o f A ksel W iin- 
Nielsen [Ditlevsen, P. (ed.)]. ECM W F Press.
IPCC, 1994b: IP C C  Technical G uidelines fo r A ssessing Clim ate Change 
Im pacts and Adaptations. Prepared by IPCC W orking Group II [Carter, 
T.R., M.L. Parry, H. H arasawa, and S. N ishioka (eds.)] and W M O/UNEP. 
University College, London, U nited Kingdom, and Center for Global 
Environm ental Research, Tsukuba, Japan, 59 pp.
M anabe, S. and R.T. W etherald, 1987: Large scale changes of soil wetness 
induced by an increase in atm ospheric carbon dioxide. J. Atmos. Sci., 44, 
1211-1235.
M anabe, S., R.J. Stouffer. M.J. Spelman, and K. Bryan, 1991: Transient 
responses of a coupled ocean atm osphere m odel to gradual changes of 
atm ospheric CO j Part I —  A nnual m ean response. J. Climate, 4, 
785-818.
M anabe, S., M.J. Spelman, and R.J. Stouffer, 1992: Transient responses of a 
coupled ocean-atm osphere model to gradual changes in atm ospheric 
CO 2. Part II —  Seasonal response. J. Climate, 5, 105-126.
M cFarlane, N.A., G.J. Boer, J.P. Blanche!, and M. Lazare, 1992: The 
Canadian Clim ate Centre second general circulation m odel and its equi­
librium climate. J. Climate, 5, 1013-1044.
M eehl, G.A. and W.M. W ashington, 1990: CO j clim ate sensitivity and snow 
—  sea ice albedo param eterization in an atm ospheric GCM  coupled to a 
mixed layer ocean model. Clim atic Change, 16, 283-306.
M eehl, G.A., G.W. Branstator, and W.M. W ashington, 1993: Tropical Pacific 
interannual variability and CO 2 clim ate change. J. Climate, 6, 42-63.
M eehl, G.A., 1996: Vulnerability of fresh w ater resources to clim ate change in 
the tropical Pacific region. J. Water, A ir and Soil Pollution, 92, 203-213.
Introduction
27
M eehl, G.A. and W.M. W ashington, 1996: El Nino-like clim ate change in a 
model w ith increased CG j concentrations. Nature, 382, 56-60.
M itchell, J.F.B. and D.A. Warrilow, 1987: Sum m er dryness in northern m id­
latitude due to increased CQj. Nature, 330, 238-240.
M itchell, J.F.B., C.A. Senior, and W.J. Ingram, 1989: CQj and climate: A  miss­
ing feedback? Nature, 341, 132-134.
M itchell, J.F.B. and T.J. Johns, 1996: Sensitivity of regional and seasonal cli­
mate to transient forcing by CG 2 and aerosols. J. CUmate, 10, 245-267.
M u rp h y , J.M ., 1995: Transient response of the Hadley Centre coupled model 
to increasing carbon dioxide. Part II — A nalysis of global mean response 
using sim ple models. J. Climate, 8, 496-514.
M u rp h y , J. and J.F.B. M itchell, 1995: Transient response of the Hadley Centre 
coupled m odel to increasing carbon dioxide. Part II —  Temporal and spa­
tial evolution of patterns. J. Climate, 8, 57-80.
N oda, A. and T. Tokioka, 1989: The effect of doubling the CO 2 concentration 
on convective and non-convective precipitation in a general circulation 
m odel coupled w ith a simple m ixed layer ocean. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 67, 
1055-1067.
Schlesinger, M.E. and Z.C. Zhao, 1989: Seasonal clim ate changes induced by 
doubled CQ 2 as sim ulated in the QSU atm ospheric GCM /m ixed layer 
ocean model. J. Climate, 2, 4 5 9 ^ 9 5 .
S enior, C.A., 1995: The dependence of climate sensitivity on the horizontal 
resolution of a GCM . J. Climate, 8, 2860-2880.
Tokioka, T., A. Noda, A. Kitoh, Y. Nikaidou, S. Nakagawa, T. M otoi, S. 
Yukimoto, and T. Takata, 1995: A  transient CQ 2 experim ent w ith the MRI 
CGCM — quick report. J. Met. Soc. Japan, 74(4), 817-826.
W ashington, W.M. and G.A. M eehl, 1984: Seasonal cycle experiment on the 
climate sensitivity due to a doubling of CG 2 with an atmospheric gener­
al circulation model coupled to a simple mixed layer ocean model. J. 
Geophys. Res., 89, 9475-9503.
W ashington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1993: Greenhouse sensitivity experi­
ments with penetrative convection and tropical cirrus albedo effects. 
Clim. Dyn., 8, 211-223.
W ashington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1996: High latitude climate change in a 
global coupled ocean-atm osphere-sea ice model with increased atm os­
pheric CG 2. J. Geophys. Res., 101, 12795-12801.
W atterson, I.G., M.R. Dix, H.B. Gordon, and J.L. M cGregor, 1995: The 
CSIRG 9-level atm ospheric general circulation model and its equilibrium 
present and doubled CG 2 climates. Auxr. M et. M ag., 44, 111-125.
W etherald, R.T. and S. M anabe, 1988: Cloud feedback processes in a general 
circulation model. J. Atmos. Sci., 45, 1397-1415.
W hetton, PH ., A.M . Fowler, M .R. Haylock, and A.B. Pittock, 1993: 
Im plications of climate change due to the enhanced greenhouse effect on 
floods and droughts in A ustralia. Climatic Change, 25, 289-317.
W ilson, C.A. and J.F.B. M itchell, 1987: A  doubled C O 2 climate sensitivity 
experim ent w ith a global climate model including a simple ocean. J. 
Geophys. Res., 92, 13315-13343.
«-ай
-ттш I
т з : . . . .
_ m - v jj-
V,
'“ ' ........................... ib iw fe^ j
1Й
t ■ 'Iriri'v i^ W V  . ‘ ’: i
. .14
4,y.
«- 
- - **--.m...J
WPEMWOHML
' -' ‘à:Jft
,?A- 
jSÈf.fri
Ш'-ГШ
г> ш т :
й ш .а ж ’
P  вАяцв/к;^
 
 
....
' 
'Sfe*'*
2
Africa
MARUFU С. ZINYOWERA (ZIMBABWE), BUBU R JALLOW (THE GAMBIA), 
R. SHAKESPEARE MAYA (ZIMBABWE), H.WO OKOTH-OGENDO (KENYA) 
Lead Authors:
L.F. Awosika (Nigeria), E.S. Diop (Senegal), T.E. Downing (UK), M. El-Raey 
(Egypt), D. Le Sueur (South Africa), C.H.D. Magadza (Zimbabwe), S. Touré 
(Cote d ’Ivoire), C. Vogel (South Africa)
Contributors:
E.L. Edroma (Uganda), A. Joubert (South Africa), W. Marume (Zimbabwe),
S.L. Unganai (Zimbabwe), D. Yates (USA)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
31
2.3.4.
African Coastal Zones
64
2.3.4.1. Vulnerability and Impacts of
2.1.
Introduction
33
Climate Change on Coastal Zones
65
2.1.1. Physical Geography
33
2.3.4.2. Adaptation Strategies and
2.1.2. People and Natural Resources
35
Measures in the Coastal Zone
67
2.3.5.
Human Settlements, Energy,
2.2.
Regional Climate
35
Industry, and Transport
6 8
2.2.1. African Climate Trends and Projections
36
2.З.5.1. Human Settlements
6 8
2.3.5.2. Energy
6 8
2.3.
Vulnerabilities and
2.3.5.3. Industry
70
Potential Impacts for Key Sectors
37
2.3.5.4. Transport
70
2.3.1. Terrestrial Ecosystems
37
2.3.5.5. Mitigation and Adaptation:
2.3.1.1. Introduction
37
Response Options
71
2.3.1.2. Climatic Driving Forces
38
2.3.6.
Wildlife, Tourism, and Recreation
72
2.3.1.3. Soils, Plant Growth,
2.3.7.
Human Health
74
and Land Degradation
39
2.3.7.1. Vulnerability and Adaptation
75
2.3.1.4. Forest and Woodland Ecoystems
41
2.3.1.5. Rangelands
43
2.4.
Integrated Assessment of Potential Impacts
76
2.З.1.6. Deserts
43
2.3.1.7. Mountain Regions
43
2.5.
Major Challenges Ahead for Africa
78
2.3.1.8. Adaptation and Vulnerability
44
2.3.2. Hydrology and Water Resources
44
References
79
2.3.2.1. Hydrological Systems
44
2.3.2.2. Water Supply
49
2.3.2.3. Adaptation and Vulnerability
50
2.3.3. Agriculture and Food Security
52
2.3.3.1. Socioeconomic Vulnerability
52
2.3.3.2. Food and Fiber Production
52
2.3.3.3. Marine and Riverine Fisheries
63
2.3.3.4. Production Forestry
64
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Several climate regimes characterize the African continent; the 
wet tropical, dry tropical, and alternating wet and dry climates 
are the most common. Many countries on the continent are 
prone to recurrent droughts; some drought episodes, particu­
larly in southeast Africa, are associated with El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomena. Deterioration in terms of 
trade, inappropriate policies, high population growth rates, and 
lack of significant investment— coupled with a highly variable 
climate— have made it difficult for several countries to devel­
op patterns of livelihood that would reduce pressure on the nat­
ural resource base. Under the assumption that access to ade­
quate financing is not provided, Africa is the continent most 
vulnerable to the impacts of projected changes because wide­
spread poverty limits adaptation capabilities.
Ecosystems: In Africa today, tropical forests and rangelands are 
under threat from population pressures and systems of land use. 
Generally apparent effects of these threats include loss of biodi­
versity, rapid deterioration in land cover, and depletion of water 
availability through destruction of catchments and aquifers. 
Changes in climate will interact with these underlying changes 
in the environment, adding further stresses to a deteriorating sit­
uation. A  sustained increase in mean ambient temperatures 
beyond 1°C would cause significant changes in forest and range­
land cover; species distribution, composition, and migration pat­
terns; and biome distribution. Many organisms in the deserts 
already are near their tolerance limits, and some may not be able 
to adapt further under hotter conditions. Arid to semi-arid sub- 
regions and the grassland areas of eastern and southern Africa, 
as well as areas currently under threat from land degradation and 
desertification, are particularly vulnerable. Were rainfall to 
increase as projected by some general circulation models 
(GCMs) in the highlands of east Africa and equatorial central 
Africa, marginal lands would become more productive than they 
are now. These effects are likely to be negated, however, by pop­
ulation pressure on marginal forests and rangelands. Adaptive 
options include control of deforestation, improved rangeland 
management, expansion of protected areas, and sustainable man­
agement of forests.
Hydrology and Water Resources: Of the 19 countries around 
the world currently classified as water-stressed, more are in 
Africa than in any other region— and this number is likely to 
increase, independent of climate change, as a result of increas­
es in demand resulting from population growth, degradation of 
watersheds caused by land-use change, and siltation of river 
basins. A reduction in precipitation projected by some GCMs 
for the Sahel and southern Africa— if accompanied by high 
interannual variability— could be detrimental to the hydrological
balance of the continent and disrupt various water-dependent 
socioeconomic activities. Variable climatic conditions may 
render the management of water resources more difficult both 
within and between countries. A drop in water level in dams 
and rivers could adversely affect the quality of water by 
increasing the concentrations of sewage waste and industrial 
effluents, thereby increasing the potential for the outbreak of 
diseases and reducing the quality and quantity of fresh water 
available for domestic use. Adaptation options include water 
harvesting, management of water outflow from dams, and 
more efficient water usage.
Agriculture and Food Security: Except in the oil-exporting 
countries, agriculture is the economic mainstay in most African 
countries, contributing 20-30%  of gross domestic product 
(GDP) in sub-Saharan Africa and 55% of the total value of 
African exports. In most African countries, farming depends 
entirely on the quality of the rainy season— a situation that 
makes Africa particularly vulnerable to climate change. 
Increased droughts could seriously impact the availability of 
food, as in the Horn of Africa and southern Africa during the 
1980s and 1990s. A rise in mean winter temperatures also 
would be detrimental to the production of winter wheat and 
fruits that need the winter chill. However, in subtropical Africa, 
warmer winters would reduce the incidence of damaging 
frosts, making it possible to grow horticultural produce sus­
ceptible to frosts at higher elevations than is possible at pre­
sent. Productivity of freshwater fisheries may increase, 
although the mix of fish species could be altered. Changes in 
ocean dynamics could lead to changes in the migratory patterns 
of fish and possibly to reduced fish landings, especially in 
coastal artisinal fisheries.
Coastal Systems: Several African coastal zones— many of 
which already are under stress from population pressure and 
conflicting uses— would be adversely affected by sea-level 
rise associated with climate change. The coastal nations of 
west and central Africa (e.g., Senegal, The Gambia, Sierra 
Leone, Nigeria, Cameroon, Gabon, Angola) have low-lying 
lagoonal coasts that are susceptible to erosion and hence are 
threatened by sea-level rise, particularly because most of the 
countries in this area have major and rapidly expanding cities 
on the coast. The west coast often is buffeted by storm surges 
and currently is at risk from erosion, inundation, and extreme 
storm events. The coastal zone of east Africa also will be 
affected, although this area experiences calm conditions 
through much of the year. However, sea-level rise and climat­
ic variation may reduce the buffer effect of coral and patch 
reefs along the east coast, increasing the potential for erosion.
32
Africa
A number of studies indicate that a sizable proportion of the 
northern part of the Nile delta will be lost through a combina­
tion of inundation and erosion, with consequent loss of agri­
cultural land and urban areas. Adaptation measures in African 
coastal zones are available but would be very costly, as a per­
centage of GDP, for many countries. These measures could 
include erection of sea walls and relocation of vulnerable 
human settlements and other socioeconomic facilities.
Human Settlement, Industry, and Transportation: The main 
challenges likely to face African populations will emanate 
from extreme climate events such as floods (and resulting land­
slides in some areas), strong winds, droughts, and tidal waves. 
Individuals living in marginal areas may be forced to migrate 
to urban areas (where infrastructure already is approaching its 
limits as a result of population pressure) if the marginal lands 
become less productive under new climate conditions. Climate 
change could worsen current trends in depletion of biomass 
energy resources. Reduced stream flows would cause reduc­
tions in hydropower production, leading to negative effects on 
industrial productivity and costly relocation of some industrial 
plants. Management of pollution, sanitation, waste disposal, 
water supply, and public health, as well as provision of ade­
quate infrastructure in urban areas, could become more diffi­
cult and costly under changed climate conditions.
Human Health: Africa is expected to be at risk primarily from 
increased incidences of vector-borne diseases and reduced
nutritional status. A warmer environment could open up new 
areas for malaria; altered temperature and rainfall patterns also 
could increase the incidence of yellow fever, dengue fever, 
onchocerciasis, and trypanosomiasis. Increased morbidity and 
mortality in subregions where vector-borne diseases increase 
following climatic changes would have far-reaching economic 
consequences. In view of the poor economic status of most 
African nations, global efforts will be necessary to tackle the 
potential health effects.
Tourism and Wildlife: Tourism— one of A frica’s fastest- 
growing industries— is based on wildlife, nature reserves, 
coastal resorts, and an abundant water supply for recreation. 
Projected droughts and/or reduction in precipitation in the 
Sahel and eastern and southern Africa would devastate 
w ildlife and reduce the attractiveness of som e nature 
reserves, thereby reducing income from current vast invest­
ments in tourism.
Conclusions: The African continent is particularly vulnerable 
to the impacts of climate change because of factors such as 
widespread poverty, recurrent droughts, inequitable land distri­
bution, and overdependence on rain-fed agriculture. Although 
adaptation options, including traditional coping strategies, the­
oretically are available, in practice the human, infrastructural, 
and economic response capacity to effect timely response 
actions may well be beyond the economic means of some 
countries.
Africa
33
2.1. 
Introduction
This chapter focuses on the potential impacts of climate change 
on ecosystems, natural resources, and various socioeconomic 
sectors of mainland Africa. To the extent permitted by the lit­
erature, it describes the functions and current status of a num­
ber of key resource sectors and ecosystems; the ways in which 
these systems would respond to changes in climatic conditions; 
options for adaptation to projected changes in climate; and the 
vulnerability of each system or sector, taking into account 
adaptation options as well as impediments to their implemen­
tation. Downing (1992, 1996) suggests that vulnerability is an 
aggregate measure of human welfare that integrates environ­
mental, social, economic, and political exposure to a range of 
potentially harmful perturbations or threats. Vulnerability 
varies spatially and temporally for different communities, 
although they may face the same risk (Eele, 1996). Feasible 
strategies for coping with future climate changes therefore 
must be rooted in a full understanding of the complex structure 
and causes of present-day social vulnerability, through an 
understanding of vulnerability to climatic variability on sea­
sonal to interannual time scales.
Although Africa, of all the major world regions, has con­
tributed the least to potential climate change because of its 
low per capita fossil energy use and hence low greenhouse 
gas emissions, it is the most vulnerable continent to climate 
change because widespread poverty limits capabilities to 
adapt. The ultim ate socioeconom ic im pacts of clim ate 
change will depend on the relative resilience and adaptation 
abilities of different social groups. In general, the commer­
cial sector and high-income households in communal areas 
are better equipped to adjust adequately and in a timely fash­
ion. Much w ill depend on the coping abilities and m echa­
nisms used by governments and households over the next 50 
years or so. Such abilities are determined by political stew­
ardships. If the region manages to achieve reasonable eco­
nomic growth, the prospects for proper adjustments to cli­
mate change are much better than if economic stagnation 
prevails (Hulme, 1996b).
2.1.1. 
Physical Geography
Africa has a total land area of 30,244,000 km^. Countries con­
sidered in this chapter are listed in Box 2-1, and socioeconomic 
data are provided in Annex D.
Africa’s physical features include a series of plateaus, higher in 
the east and gradually declining toward the west. The general 
elevation is relieved by great shallow basins and their river sys­
tems; by the deep incision of the 6,400-km Great Rift Valley; 
and by often-magnificent volcanoes, fault blocks, and insel- 
bergs. Figure 2-1 shows capitals, other major cities, and eleva­
tions. The highest point is Mount Kilimanjaro (5,894 m); the 
lowest point is in the Qattara Depression, at 132 m below sea 
level. Africa’s vast plateaus are broken only by a few rather 
low mountain ranges— of which the outstanding ones are the
Atlas, Ahaggar, Cameroons, Tibetsi, and Ethiopian and east 
African highlands, as well as the Drakensberg Mountains. In 
east Africa are (in addition to Kilimanjaro) Mount Kenya 
(5,199 m), the Ruwenzoris (5,120 m), and Mount Elgon (4,321 
m) (Pritchard, 1985).
The African continent encompasses a rich mosaic of ecologi­
cal settings. Together these ecosystems harbor a wealth of 
economically and biologically important resources, from 
individual species to productive habitats (Huq et a l, 1996). 
One quarter of Africa is hyper-arid desert; one third is in the 
humid climate zone; and the remainder of the continent is 
dryland, consisting of arid, semi-arid, and dry subhumid 
areas (UNEP, 1992). These drylands are home to about 400 
million people— two-thirds of the continent’s total popula­
tion. Recurrent droughts have long been a permanent feature 
of life throughout the drylands of Africa. Over the past 30 
years or so, however, unusually severe and/or prolonged 
droughts in these drylands have seriously affected agriculture 
and wildlife and caused many deaths and severe malnutrition. 
In some areas, desertification has accom panied these 
droughts, although the processes leading to desertification are 
much more varied than climate alone. Currently, 36 countries 
in Africa are affected by recurrent drought and some degree 
of desertification (UNEP, 1992). The risk of drought is high­
est in the Sudano-Sahelian belt and in southern Africa 
(Nicholson et a l, 1988).
Box 2-1. The Africa Region
Algeria
Libya
Angola
Madagascar
Benin
Malawi
Botswana
Mali
Burkina Faso
Mauritania
Burundi
Morocco
Cameroon
Mozambique
Central African Republic
Namibia
Chad
Niger
Congo
Nigeria
Cote d’Ivoire
Reunion
Democratic Republic of
Rwanda
Congo (DRC)
Senegal
(formerly Zaire)
Sierra Leone
Djibouti
Somalia
Egypt
South Africa
Equatorial Guinea
Sudan
Eritrea
Swaziland
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana
Togo
Guinea
Tunisia
Guinea-Bissau
Uganda
Kenya
Zambia
Lesotho
Zimbabwe
Liberia
34
Africa
Elevation
Below 5 m 
5 - 1 0 0 m 
100 - 250 m 
250-500 m 
500 -1000 m 
1000 - 2500 m 
2500 - 5000 m 
Greater than 5000 m
О  Capitals 
Other Major Cities - Pop. 1995 (’000s)
• 
Less than 1000
•  
1000 - 2000 
#  2000 - 5000 
Ф  5000-10000
^
 Greater than 10000
500 
0 
500 
1000 KUometers
Figure 2-1: The Africa region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic Information 
System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
Africa
35
2.1.2. 
People and Natural Resources
The population of Africa is approximately 650 million (World 
Bank, 1995b). About two-thirds of the population lives in rural 
areas and derives its main income from agriculture. In some 
countries— such as Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Malawi, and 
Uganda— rural population makes up more than 80% of the 
total. Agriculture is the fundamental economic activity in these 
countries; although it accounts on average for only about 
20-30%  of GDP, agriculture contributes the largest share of 
total exports (Cleaver and Schreiber, 1994).
Cultivated land per capita varies considerably across the conti­
nent, reflecting the uneven distribution of population (for exam­
ple, low density in the Congo basin but high in the east African 
Highlands) as well as low levels of technology and the unsuit­
ability of wide areas for farming. Dependence on shifting culti­
vation makes the area needed for cropland high. Scarcity of good 
land, coupled with soil degradation and low levels of inputs and 
technology, results in increasing deficits in food production. The 
predominance of rain-fed subsistence agriculture and, across 
southern Africa, overdependence on (water-demanding) maize 
has helped ensure that food security for most of the continent is 
inextricably linked to the quality of each rainy season. In dryland 
regions, crop and livestock production are extremely susceptible 
to seasonal rainfall variability and, as a result, have shown con­
siderable volatility in recent years. Drought shock, however, 
extends well beyond the confines of agriculture (crop) and live­
stock production, partly because of the important roles these two 
sectors play in the overall economies of many African states. 
Crop and livestock production are major employers and make 
significant contributions to GDP and export earnings. They also 
are major sources of raw materials for industries such as textiles, 
food processing, and fuel refining. On the other hand, they are 
major markets for other industries such as machinery, animal 
feeds, fuel, and fertilizer producers (Gibberd et a l, 1996).
Of the 30 poorest countries of the world, 22 are African (World 
Bank, 1996). The average income level in sub-Saharan Africa 
in 1993 was $520 per capita, and the average growth rate per 
capita was negative (-0.8% per year from 1980 to 1993). By 
the year 2000, the number of poor in Africa is projected to 
increase to an estimated 265 million— ^which would represent 
more than 40% of the continent’s population (World Bank, 
1990). In Africa, poverty is linked to the environment in com­
plex ways, particularly in economies that are based on 
exploitation of natural resources. Degradation of these 
resources reduces the productivity of poor persons, who most 
rely on them, and makes poor communities even more suscep­
tible to extreme events (whether meteorological, economic, or 
political in origin) (World Bank, 1996). Poverty is exacerbated 
by a demographic profile that continues to record an annual 
population growth rate of just under 3%, the highest in the 
world (WRI, 1994). As a result, the population in many African 
countries will continue to double every 20 to 30 years, well 
into the 21st century. However, the high incidence of Incurable 
diseases— such as malaria, human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), and hepatitis В— may modify this estimate.
2.2. 
Regional Climate
The continent of Africa is characterized by several climatic 
regimes and ecological zones. All parts of the continent, except 
the Republic of South Africa, Lesotho, and the Mediterranean 
countries north of the Sahara, have tropical climates. These 
tropical climates may be divided into three distinct climatic 
zones: wet tropical climates, dry tropical climates, and alter­
nating wet and dry climates (Huq et a l, 1996).
Several comprehensive descriptions of the climates of Africa 
exist, most notably those of Thomson (1965) and Griffiths 
(1972). Surveys of African rainfall have been carried out by 
Newell e ta l (1972), Kraus (1977), Kiaus (1978), Tyson (1986), 
and Nicholson (1994b). These researchers agree that summer 
rainfall maxima, which are dominant over most of Africa, are 
controlled primarily by the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone 
(ITCZ). Over land, the ITCZ tends to follow the seasonal march
Box 2-2. Africa’s Natural Resources, 
Economy, and Political Environment
African economies have made relatively low levels of 
investment in infrastructure and directly productive 
capital goods— and hence continue to rely heavily on 
natural capital (natural resources). This natural capital 
is at risk because poverty and high population growth 
often induce land degradation and deforestation—  
which in turn lead to growing food insecurity and loss 
of biodiversity. This pattern contributes to migration 
into rural areas that often are less suitable for agricul­
tural expansion and to urban areas with inappropriate 
physical, social, and economic infrastructure. The 
process also contributes to population growth by creat­
ing an incentive for large families: Adding family labor 
becomes one way of coping with the increasing time 
costs of gathering fuel and water and clearing new 
land. The severity of this population-agriculture- 
environment nexus is compounded by low investment 
in human capital (human resource development), which 
often restricts individuals to continued reliance on 
unskilled labor and short-term exploitation of natural 
resources (the land) as the only feasible survival 
options.
Although Africa’s youthful population represents future 
social capital, a great deal of investment in terms of 
education, training, and skills development will be 
required to ensure its full productivity in the next 
decade and beyond. Particular attention will need to be 
paid to capacity-building in information technology to 
better prepare African societies for efficient, sustainable 
management of the continent’s fragile resources. In 
addition, the region’s political structures, which deter­
mine decision making in resource allocation and con­
sumption, will have to be stabilized.
36
Africa
of the sun and oscillates between the fringes of the Sahara in 
boreal summer and the northern Kalahari desert in the austral 
summer. The latitude zones of these arid and semi-arid deserts 
demarcate the tropics from the subtropics. Rainfall in the sub­
tropics is modulated by mid-latitude storms, which may be dis­
placed Equator-ward in winter. Further modification of these 
broad patterns is provided by natural features such as lakes and 
mountains, and by the influence of ocean currents. The pole­
ward extremes of the continent have extratropical influences 
associated with mid-latitude synoptic disturbances, resulting in 
significant winter rainfall (Griffiths, 1972).
In general, surface air temperatures over most of Africa display 
a high degree of thermal uniformity, spatially and seasonally 
(Riehl, 1979). The extreme north and south of the continent, 
however, experience cold frontal systems that quasi-regularly 
introduce abrupt air mass changes. Temperatures there are 
more variable in response to a large annual cycle of insolation 
and the effects of seasonally varying air masses and winds. 
Mean temperature trends over the past 100 years, averaged 
over continental Africa, are shown in Figure 2-2. The highland 
areas of eastern and southern Africa are substantially cooler 
than lowland regions, and there is evidence that recent warm­
ing trends may have been exaggerated in these mountain areas 
(Hulme, 1996a).
relatively small changes in the position of the ITCZ can have 
large consequences for rainfall in the Sahel; thus, this region is 
a sensitive indicator of climate change in Africa. Coefficients of 
rainfall variability in Africa exceed 200% in the deserts; they 
are about 40% in most semi-arid regions, and between 5% and 
20% in the wettest areas (Figure 2-3).
Most policymakers now recognize drought as a normal feature 
of A frica’s climate and acknowledge that its recurrence is 
inevitable. Widespread occurrences of severe drought during 
the past three decades have repeatedly underscored the vul­
nerability of developed and developing societies to its ravages 
in Africa. Although the variability of African climate is 
inevitable, loss of human life and economic disruption associ­
ated with extreme climatic fluctuation can be lessened by 
advance warning. Recent scientific advances in understanding 
the climate system and breakthroughs in predictive capabili­
ties on seasonal time scales provide an opportunity to reduce 
the vulnerability of human societies by planning for previous­
ly unexpected variations from mean climatic conditions. 
Current forecasting capabilities, although by no means per­
fect, provide a better indication of climatic conditions that are 
expected to prevail during the next season or two than simply 
assum ing that rainfall and tem perature w ill be normal 
(Bonkoungou, 1996).
Rainfall over Africa exhibits high spatial and temporal variabil­
ity (see Figures 2-3 and 2-4). Mean annual rainfall ranges from 
as low as 10 mm in the innermost core of the Sahara to more 
than 2 , 0 0 0  mm in parts of the equatorial region and other parts 
of west Africa (Figure 2-4). The rainfall gradient is largest along 
the southern margins of the Sahara— the region known as the 
Sahel— ^where mean annual rainfall varies by more than 1,000 
mm over about 750 km. This tight rainfall gradient means that
2.2.1. 
African Climate Trends and Projections
Temperature and precipitation trends are reviewed in Annex A 
of this report. Rainfall trends— especially over the past 30 
years or so— have had a very large bearing on socioeconomic 
development of the continent because most activities are agri­
culturally based (Serageldin, 1995).
Year
Figure 2-2: Observed annual temperature changes in Africa (see Annex A).
Africa
37
Northern Sahel
n f l. 
П п . п М
. Ill „ 
„ П 
m
:  
r
i
'
.
I
.
I
.
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
.
r
i
p
 
1 
.
Г 
n ^  ППр. 
i
Central Sahel
r ti f jiJ L  n . ^  [1Ш У
f 
. 
1 
. 
) 
.
J T p  
1
t 
. 
1 
. 
t 
.
Southern Sahel
n fflfllrn
i n
r ^  I^ U IT H I 
' 
. 
1 
. 
1 
1
u “ q JU UtI 
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
.
Щ
Щ
 
П
1 
. 
1 
1 
1 
.
Soudano-Guinean
Ivi llr Л_ fTj m fî rTFlflflrv n 
Iffî
i 
. 
1 
. 
1 
. 
f 
. 
1 
.
H lfj
I 
. 
1 
. 
1 
.
Guinea Coast
4
L
t  Тр'ЕГ 
J 
[
' 
. 
( 
. 
1 
.
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
.
u U'yHnFHj
I
.
I
.
r
 Î '  
1 
.
Eastern Africa
J  пп
1 
. 
1 
.
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
.
1 
. 
1 
. 
1 
.
Northern Kalahari
Л
 nfi M
I j l . n P
1 
. 
1 
.
T J u  i T ^ H i p u  
1
,
1
.
1
,
1 
. 
( 
.
lljll} j[f
1
Southern Kalahari
fli 1 
n _ fl 
^ !-nn 
n.
I t n  
0
t ïPljB liitjj* 
[j]J 
______ 1___ ____ 1___ _
J ___ ____ \— ^— 1— — J —
____ \___ b _ l ------
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
0 
-1 
-2
1
О 
-1 
-2
1901 
1911 
1921 
1931 
1941 
1951 
1961 
1971 
1981 
1991
Year
Figure 2-3: Rainfall fluctuations for select areas of Africa, 
expressed as a regionally averaged standard departure 
(Nicholson, 1993).
Uncertainties in GCMs make deriving regional climate change 
predictions impossible (see Annex В of this report for an assess­
ment of regional projections of climate change). Therefore, it is 
important to interpret model outputs in the context of their 
uncertainties and to consider them as potential scenarios of 
change for use in sensitivity and vulnerability studies. In IPCC 
(1990), IPCC (1996), and Hernes et al. (1995), the Sahel 
(10-20°N, 20-40°E) was selected as a study region for purpos­
es of inter-comparing GCM outputs. Since then, several 
approaches to subregional climate projection have been devel­
oped at national levels (e.g., Joubert, 1995; Ringius et a l, 
1996); several others have been developed under the U.S. 
Country Studies Program (USCSP, 1996).
Although most initial climate change simulations used GCMs, 
an increasing number of climate-modeling centers have used 
regional climate models (RCMs). RCMs rely on similar physi­
cal representations of atmospheric processes as GCMs but oper­
ate at a much finer spatial resolution— typically 50 km— over 
limited domains. Little climate change work using RCMs nest­
ed within GCMs has been completed as yet for Africa (Ringius 
et a l, 1996), so it remains necessary to rely on extracting 
regional results for Africa from GCM climate change experi­
ments. A selection of such results is summarized in Box 2-3.
2.3. 
Vulnerabilities and Potential Impacts 
for Key Sectors
2.3.1. 
Terrestrial Ecosystems
2.3.1.1. 
Introduction
Numerous schemes have been used to describe Africa’s vegeta­
tion and ecosystems. W hite’s (1983) classification system is 
used here, aggregated (after Justice et a l, 1994) to show the 
rainforest in central Africa (unmarked) and two major cate­
gories of woodland savannas divided by moisture and nutrient 
level: broad-leafed, nutrient-poor, moist savannas; and fine- 
leafed, nutrient-rich, arid savannas (Figure 2-5). This aggrega­
tion summarizes current understanding of the role of soil nutri­
ents and moisture on vegetation distribution in Africa, especial­
ly in savannas (Scholes and Walker, 1993). The broad-leafed 
savannas include the extensive miombo woodlands of central 
and southern Africa. Nutritionally poor soils support only low- 
quality grass for grazing, so the numbers of large herbivores is 
low in miombo and other broad-leafed savannas (Frost, 1996). 
The fine-leafed savannas include acacia-dominated thorn 
woodlands, which have higher-quality grass and so support 
large numbers of large herbivores; these areas constitute the 
main rangeland region.
Africa is composed essentially of woodlands and grasslands, 
with rainforests occupying only about 7% of the land area. 
Africa’s rainforests represent slightly less than one-fifth of the 
total remaining rainforest in the world; Asia and Latin America 
contain the rest (Sayer et al, 1992). Only about a third of 
Africa’s historical forest extent remains, with west Africa’s
38
Africa
forests being lost faster than those of any other region. Annual 
deforestation rates average 0.7% per annum (FAO, 1997).
WRI (1996) indicates that only 8 % (0.5 million km^) of Africa’s 
regional forest remains as “frontier forest.” (Frontier forest is 
essentially natural/primary forest of sufficient size to support 
ecologically viable populations of indigenous species.) More 
than 90% of west Africa’s original forest has been lost, and only 
a small part of what remains qualifies as frontier forest. Of the 
remaining forest, 77% is under moderate or high threat from 
logging and commercial hunting to meet growing urban 
demand for bushmeat. Demands on forests also have escalated 
in some regions (e.g., as a result of civil unrest that has pushed 
hundreds of thousands of people into previously intact forest).
Many studies of African ecosystems emphasize particular veg­
etation types— savanna grasslands, miombo woodlands, 
mopane woodlands, rangelands, or rainforest— or particular 
regions: the Sahel, sub-Saharan Africa, or the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC). In general, the structure of 
Africa’s vegetation is determined by climate at the large scale, 
then soil type (texture) and nutrient levels at the local scale
Figure 2-4: Mean annual precipitation (mm) in Africa (Martyn, 1992).
(Scholes and Walker, 1993). Fire and herbivory are important 
disturbance factors. Increased moisture in drier areas will like­
ly result in a complex set of feedbacks between nutrients, fire 
occurrence, decomposition, and competing vegetation.
Increased variability in rainfall and changes in temperature will 
likely disrupt key ecosystem processes such as phenology and 
will influence insect pests and diseases in mostly unknown 
ways. Direct effects on pests will involve disruption of insect 
life cycles or creation of more suitable conditions for new pests 
(or for old pests to expand their territory). Ticks, tsetse flies, 
and locusts are notable examples of serious insect pests in 
Africa. Although a lot of work has been done to study these 
insects, a lot remains to be done, especially in relation to how 
climate change may impact them.
2.3.1.2. 
Climatic Driving Forces
Of the many climatic factors that are important for plant growth, 
among the most significant in relation to climate change are 
temperature, water availability (determined by precipitation and
soil characteristics, as well as 
other meteorological variables), 
and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) con­
centrations. Consideration of the 
effects of climate change requires 
examination of the direct effects 
of changes in CO 2  concentrations 
and climate variables on the 
growth of plants, as well as the 
ways in which these direct effects 
are modified by soil feedbacks 
and 
biological 
interactions 
among different organisms.
The 
effects 
of 
tem perature 
changes will vary in different 
subregions and ecosystems. An 
increase in tem peratures will 
reduce the incidence of frost 
damage in areas where this dam­
age occurs and widen the poten­
tial geographical range of species 
that are lim ited by minimum 
tem peratures. The extent of 
effects of higher temperatures on 
African vegetation (e.g., effects 
on respiration rates, membrane 
dam age) is largely uncertain. 
Temperature is known to interact 
with 
CO 2  
concentration, 
so 
expected increases in respiration 
resulting from a tem perature 
increase alone may be offset or 
even reduced by higher CO 2  con­
centrations (W ullschleger and 
Norby, 1992).
Box 2-3. Climate Scenarios
With respect to temperature, land areas may warm by 2050 by as much as 1.6°C over the Sahara and semi-arid parts of 
southern Africa (Hernes ct al., 1995; Ringius ct al., 1996). Equatorial countries (Cameroon, Uganda, and Kenya) might 
be about 1.4°C warmer. This projection represents a rate of warming to 2050 of about 0.2°C per decade. Sea-surface 
temperatures in the open tropical oceans surrounding Africa will rise by less than the global average (i.e., only about 
0.6-0.8°C); the coastal regions of the continent therefore will warm more slowly than the continental interior.
Rainfall changes projected by most GCMs are relatively modest, at least in relation to present-day rainfall variability. In 
general, rainfall is projected to increase over the continent— the exceptions being southern Africa and parts of the Horn of 
Africa; here, rainfall is projected to decline by 2050 by about 10%. Seasonal changes in rainfall are not expected to be 
large; Joubert and Tyson (1996) found no evidence for a change in rainfall seasonality among a selection of mixed-layer and 
fully coupled GCMs. Hewitson and Crane (1996) found evidence for slightly extended later summer season rainfall over 
eastern South Africa (though nowhere else), based on a single mixed-layer model prediction. Great uncertainty exists, how­
ever, in relation to regional-scale rainfall changes simulated by GCMs (Joubert and Hewitson, 1997). Parts of the Sahel 
could experience rainfall increases of as much as 15% over the 1961-90 average. Equatorial Africa could experience a 
small (5%) increase in rainfall. These rainfall results are not consistent: Different climate models, or different simulations 
with the same model, yield different patterns. The problem involves determining the character of the climate change signal 
on African rainfall against a background of large natural variability compounded by the use of imperfect climate models.
Projected temperature increases are likely to lead to increased open water and soil/plant evaporation. Exactly how large 
this increased evaporative loss will be would depend on factors such as physiological changes in plant biology, atmos­
pheric circulation, and land-use patterns. As a rough estimate, potential évapotranspiration over Africa is projected to 
increase by 5-10%  by 2050. Little can be said yet about changes in climate variability or extreme events in Africa.
Rainfall may well become more intense, but whether there will be more tropical cyclones or a changed frequency of El 
Nino events remains largely in the realm of speculation.
Changes in sea level and climate in Africa might be expected by the year 2050. Hernes ct al. (1995) project a sea-level 
rise of about 25 cm. There will be subregional and local differences around the coast of Africa in this average sea-level 
rise— depending on ocean currents, atmospheric pressure, and natural land movements— but 25 cm by 2050 is a general­
ly accepted figure (Joubert and Tyson, 1996). For Africa south of the Equator, simulated changes in mean sea-level pres­
sure produced by mixed-layer and fully coupled GCMs are small (~1 hPa)— smaller than present-day simulation errors 
calculated for both types of models (Joubert and Tyson, 1996). Observed sea-level pressure anomalies of the same mag­
nitude as simulated changes are known to accompany major large-scale circulation adjustments associated with extended 
wet and dry spells over the subcontinent.
Africa 
39
In m ost of A frica, w ater availability is projected to have 
The amount of water available to plants over the course of the
the greatest im pact on plant processes. Individual species 
year affects plant growth and location across soil and climate
are adapted to particular w ater regim es and may perform  
types. Available soil water (in combination, of course, with other
poorly and possibly die out in conditions to w hich they are 
factors) generally controls the growth cycle (beginning and end)
poorly adapted (e.g., Hinckley et a l, 1981). The effects of and other events such as when to leaf, shed leaves, set buds, and
clim ate change w ill vary— depending, for exam ple, on 
so forth. Water availability and temperature indices and parame-
how particular plant types use w ater (water-use efficiency, 
ters (maxima and minima, heat sums, cold sums) have been used
W UE) or the am ount of w ater available in the soil. Plants 
to relate the distribution of vegetation formations to climatic fac-
are grouped into C 3 , C 4 , and CAM plant types depending 
tors (for more details on these plant biogeography models, see
on how the process of photosynthesis takes place (see 
Section 2.3.1.4). However, large uncertainties in GCM precipi-
IPCC 1996, W G II, Section A.2.2). C 3 plants (which 
tation projections constrain our ability to project ecosystem
include m ost trees and crop species such as wheat, rice, 
responses to changes in climate. Thus, improving climate mod-
barley, cassava, and potato) have relatively poor W UE, 
eling at the regional scale is a priority in most of Africa, where
unlike C 4  plants (most of the tropical grasses and agricul- 
ecosystem processes are limited by moisture,
tural species such as m aize, sugarcane, and sorghum).
H igher CO 2  concentration w ill likely improve water-use
efficiency and growth in C 3 plants in water-lim ited environ- 
2.3.1.3. 
Soils, Plant Growth, and Land Degradation
ments. C 4  and CAM plants (including desert plants such as
cacti) are unlikely to be affected directly by changes in CO 2  
Many African soils are agriculturally poor, because they are 
concentration. 
very old, badly leached, and often infertile. Latentes (the oldest
40
Africa
soils) are agriculturally unproductive. Laterized red earths are 
younger and less leached and occur in regions of heavy rainfall, 
so they are quite agriculturally productive. Nonlaterized red 
earths, which are found in drier regions (e.g., savannas), are 
good agricultural soils. Upland red earths are an immature 
group that occasionally are intensively farmed. In regions of 
moderate rainfall, the most fertile soils are located in the high 
veld of southern Africa and parts of west Africa. The black 
soils— the vertisols— are very fertile but become adhesive dur­
ing the rainy season and almost rock-like in the drought period. 
In arid regions, soil humus is very low; moisture often is drawn 
upward by capillarity and, on evaporation, deposits dissolved 
minerals in a crust at the surface. In Mediterranean regions, the 
summer drought, the absence of frost, and the small degree of 
chemical weathering has led to poorly formed soils.
The ability for soil to support particular natural or agricultural 
communities is fundamental in any future scenarios of ecosys­
tem development. Soil development is slow and will likely lag
Figure 2-5: The distribution of broad-leafed and fine-leafed savannas in Africa. Dark- 
shaded areas are broad-leafed, nutrient-poor, moist savannas, and striped areas are fine- 
leafed, nutrient-rich, arid savannas. This map has been derived from White (1983) by 
reclassifying woodland and wooded grassland map units into one of the two savanna 
classes according to the dominant tree species.
climate and vegetation change. In the short term, changes in 
the soil-water regime and turnover of organic matter and relat­
ed mineralization or immobilization of nitrogen and other 
nutrients will have the greatest effect on ecosystem functions. 
Among the factors that will affect these soil processes, fire and 
land use probably are the most important. Changes in fire 
regimes (e.g., frequency, intensity) will directly influence 
organic-matter processes in the soil and nutrient fluxes— and 
so will have a significant impact on how soils will function. 
Land use and land-use history on given sites influence nutrient 
dynamics and the potential for erosion damage.
Land degradation— defined as “a reduction in the capability of 
the land to support a particular use” (Blaikie and Brookfield, 
1987)— is a major problem in Africa and the whole world. 
Support by African countries for the Convention on 
Desertification (United Nations, 1992)— ^which recognizes that 
6 6 % of the continent is desert or dryland, and 73% of the agri­
cultural drylands already are degraded— clearly shows that
most African governments are 
aware of this problem.
Recognized forms of land degra 
dation include 
soil 
erosion 
salinization, soil contamination 
loss of soil organic matter 
decline in nutrient levels, acidifi 
cation, and loss of soil structure 
Low rainfall, long dry seasons 
recurrent droughts, mobile sur 
face deposits, skeletal soils, and 
sparse 
vegetation 
encourage 
desertification 
(Le 
Houerou, 
1989; Dregne, 1983; Kassas, 
1995). A  combination of climat­
ic variations and human land- 
management practices can lead 
to excessive land degradation, 
eventually leading to desertifica­
tion. Thus, efforts to reduce vul­
nerability to clim ate change 
must take into account land man­
agement and the social and eco­
nomic factors that drive people’s 
use of the land.
Most studies of soil erosion have 
looked at soil loss from plot- 
based measurements and then 
extrapolated to estimate total soil 
loss per hectare. Although soil 
erosion clearly is a major prob­
lem in many parts of Africa, sim­
ple extrapolations from plots to 
w hole countries and into the 
future 
can 
be 
misleading. 
Erosion is a m ajor problem 
locally, and steps must be taken
Africa
41
to combat soil erosion at the farm and catchment levels. Reij et 
al. (1996) argue for participatory approaches to soil and water 
conservation, rather than large-scale, top-down interventions 
that encompass technology alone. The social and economic 
context is critical for success.
2.3.1.4. 
Forest and Woodland Ecosystems
Forests in Africa are of great socioeconomic importance as 
sources of timber, fuel, and many nonwood products, as well as 
for the protection of water resources. Ecologically, they serve 
critical roles in water, carbon, and nutrient cycling. The 
impacts of climate change on forests at the continental scale 
will be assessed in very broad terms using biome distribution 
models.
In geological time scales, forest boundaries fluctuated a great 
deal during the Pleistocene epoch (Sayer et a l, 1992); the 
forests of Africa even now are considerably more extensive 
than they were during the most recent high-latitude glacial 
advance about 18,000 years ago. Environmental conditions in 
tropical Africa at about 18,000 before present (BP) are quite 
well known, thanks to a large number of pollen and plant 
microfossil studies (see Hamilton, 1988, for more details). 
During the severe arid period around 18,000 BP, core areas 
(centers of biotic diversity) were the main centers of forest 
survival. Two such principal core areas are located in 
Cameroon/Gabon and eastern Democratic Republic of Congo 
(DRC) (formerly Zaire); other, less-diverse core areas are in 
west Africa and near the east African coast (Sayer et a t,
1992). The core areas are not only rich in numbers of species 
and endemics but also are centers of distribution of disjunct 
species. Some of these species are unlikely to be able to dis­
perse from core area to core area without continuous forest 
cover. For example, gorillas are disjunctly distributed across 
the Zaire basin (Figures 2-6 to 2-8). Although the forests 
between the two populations seem suitable for the species, 
some explanation is needed regarding how their ranges 
became fragmented. A  likely explanation for the gorilla and
Sierra Leone/ 
Liberia 
Core Area 
ГЧ
Figure 2-6: Distribution of forest, core areas, and gradients of 
decreasing biotic diversity in tropical Africa. Core areas are 
believed to approximate sites of forest réfugia at the time of the 
last world glacial maximum (18,000 BP) (Hamilton, 1988).
Figure 2-7: Forest réfugia during arid periods in central 
Africa: A) Central refuge; D,C,G) Cameroon/Gabon refuge 
(D, Niger section; C, Cameroon section; G, Gabon or 
Ogoowe basin section); B) southern Zaire basin refuge; E) 
north Angola refuge; F) southern scarps of Zaire basin; and 
H) Lunda Plateau (Kingdon, 1980).
other obligate forest species is that their ranges became frag­
mented as a result of forest retraction at times of aridity and 
that these species subsequently have been slow to expand 
their range to include all potentially suitable habitat. Thus, 
animal species may not adapt fast enough to rapid changes in 
climate.
Current vegetation distribution can be studied using biome 
distribution models. Biome distribution models such as 
MAPSS (Neilson, 1995) and B I0M E3 (Haxeltine and 
Prentice, 1996) simulate the distribution of potential global 
vegetation based on local vegetation and hydrological 
processes and the properties of plants. They simulate the mix­
ture of life forms (such as trees, shrubs, and grasses) that can 
coexist at a site while in competition with each other for light 
and water. These models simulate the maximum carrying 
capacity, or vegetation density (in the form of leaf area), that 
can be supported at the site under the constraints of energy and 
water. A change in leaf area can be interpreted as a change in 
overall carrying capacity or standing crop of the site, regard­
less of whether it is potential natural vegetation or under cul­
tivation. This carrying capacity potential is the basis for appli­
cation of these models to all of Africa to indicate possible 
shifts in agricultural or vegetation potential.
MAPSS and B I0M E3 outputs were generated (see Annex 
C) using several GCM scenarios, with and without CO 2  
effects and aerosol em issions. Table 2-1 sum m arizes 
changes in areal coverage for four main biome types in 
Africa (the shrub/woodlands biome was combined with 
grasslands). The models indicate a net shift from more arid 
biomes (low leaf area index— LAI) to more mesic biomes 
(higher LAI) for the OSU, GFDL, and UKMO scenarios. Exact 
percentages of change and where this change would occur are 
highly uncertain because the models indicate potential, not 
actual, vegetation.
42
Africa
The biome models are able to capture some overall divisions 
(e.g., rainforest versus woodland versus arid), but they do not 
yet capture fine-scale detail for Africa. This limitation is a 
result of the quality of the climate data used as inputs, coarse 
soils inform ation, and the nature of the models— which 
were primarily designed to describe vegetation in temperate 
climates.
Biome distribution models simu­
late only static vegetation (i.e., 
equilibrium  
vegetation 
at 
a 
future date). Factors that affect 
vegetation dynamics, such as 
com petition 
and 
disturbance 
(fire, herbivory), are not consid­
ered. These factors have not yet 
been incorporated in global veg­
etation 
models 
(but 
see 
Woodward and Steffen, 1996, for 
plans and developments in this 
area). An important factor to 
consider with regard to whether 
a vegetation type can respond as 
sim ulated 
is 
migration. 
Migrating species would require 
corridors of unmanaged land. 
The 
fragm ented 
nature 
of 
rem aining African vegetation 
(outside the rainforests) would 
make vegetation responses to cli­
m ate 
change 
difficult. 
The 
destructive aspects of fires also 
would reduce m igration. The 
dynamics of savannas and wood­
lands (such as miom bo) are 
strongly linked to fires, so likely 
changes in fire intensity and fre­
quency will have unknown con­
sequences on vegetation.
Some progress is being made in 
the development of models of 
vegetation dynamics that include 
the effects of fire and herbivory 
for African vegetation (e.g.. Menant et a l, 1991; Van Dalaan 
and Shugart, 1989; Desanker, 1996). However, these models 
have to be widely tested and validated before they can be used 
to evaluate impacts of climate change at the broad scale. 
Results of biogeochemical modeling in savannas using the 
CENTURY model of Parton ct a l (1992) are discussed in 
Section 2.3.1.5.
Table 2-1: Changes in areal coverage (in 1,000 kml) o f major biome types under current and GCM  scenarios using MAPSS 
(with a direct CO2 effect).
Biome 1/pe*
C urrent^
OSU3
GFDL3
иЬШ О З
Tropical broad-leafed forest
2,986
5,752
4,798
2,909
Savanna/woodland
8,845
8,662
9,462
11,449
Lumped shrub and grass
8,713
7,534
8,083
8,025
Arid
8,814
7,497
7,146
7,200
“Biome types are defined in the MAPSS model description in Annex C. Minor biome types have been ignored in this table; therefore, col­
umn totals will not be the same. Model experiments are 2хС0г equilibrium scenarios and are described in Annex C.
2 1 9 6 1 -9 0  av erag e clim ate.
3A11 scenarios are 2xC0 2 equilibrium scenarios.
Africa
43
2.3.1.5. 
Rangelands
Rangelands in Africa (i.e., grasslands, savannas, and wood­
lands, which contain both grasses and woody plants) cover 
approximately 2.1x109 ha. Africa’s livestock population of 
about 184 million cattle, 3.72 million small ruminants (sheep 
and goats), and 17 million camels extracts about 80% of its 
nutrition from these vast rangelands (IPCC 1996, WG II, Table
2-1). In addition, Africa’s rangelands support a vibrant tourist 
industry that, in many countries, is the leading contributor to 
gross national product (GNP). Because Africa’s population has 
been growing at about 3% annually, the rangelands recently 
have become an arena for intense human and animal conflict, 
leading to serious reduction in spatial distribution and diversi­
ty of species. This reduction is likely to be exacerbated by pro­
jected changes in climate.
From a land-use perspective, there are differences between west 
Africa and east Africa in the way rangelands are used. In arid and 
semi-arid areas of west Africa (rainfall 5-600 mm), millet (or 
another crop) is planted over a unimodal (one peak in rainfall per 
year) rainy season ( 3 ^  months); then fields remain fallow over 
the 8 - to 9-month dry season. Livestock eat crop residues. Land 
use is dominated by cultivation, with livestock playing a sub­
sidiary role in the village economy (Ellis and Galvin, 1994). In 
east Africa, by contrast, areas with higher rainfall (up to 600 
mm) are inhabited by pastoral people rather than farmers. The 
Ngisonyoka of northern Kenya, for example, are pastoral 
nomads, completely dependent on their livestock for food, liveli­
hood, and life (Galvin, 1992). In dry parts of eastern Africa, cul­
tivation is uncommon and occurs mainly where irrigation is pos­
sible or where water can otherwise be sequestered and stored for 
cropping (Ellis and Galvin, 1994). Rainfall is bimodal (two 
peaks in rainfall per year) in most east African rangelands, 
resulting in two plant-growing seasons. This pattern has impor­
tant implications for natural vegetation and rain-fed agriculture 
(de Ridder et al, 1982). According to Ellis et al. (1987), Turkana 
pastoralists in northern Kenya say that the best years for live­
stock production are not necessarily those with the greatest rain­
fall. Rather, years in which moderate rainfall extends over sev­
eral months, resulting in a long period of foliage production and 
livestock milk production, are good years. Thus, the distribution 
and timing of rainfall will be at least as important as total annu­
al amounts projected under climate change.
Rangelands are noted for high climatic variability and high fre­
quency of drought events. They have a long history of human 
use. The combination of climatic variability and human land 
use make rangeland ecosystems more susceptible to rapid 
degeneration of ecosystem properties (Parton et al, 1996). 
Because these systems develop under highly variable rainfall 
regimes, they are conducive to rapid changes in ecosystem 
structure given modifications in fire and grazing patterns 
(Archer et a l, 1994; Ojima et a l, 1994) and altered climate 
regimes (OIES, 1991).
At the very broad scale, simulations with the biome models 
(MAPSS and BI0M E3) projected increases in the extent of
rangelands, mainly as a result of a reduction in the area of arid 
and semi-arid desert resulting from the reduction of drought 
stress with projected higher rainfall. However, ecosystem 
process models are more appropriate in analysis of this specif­
ic ecosystem type. Ojima et a l (1996) used the CENTURY 
(Parton et a l, 1992) ecosystem process model of plant-soil 
interactions to analyze the impact of climate and atmospheric 
CO 2  changes on grasslands of the world, including 7 of 31 sites 
in Africa. Ojima et a l (1996) looked at the effects of increas­
ing CO 2  and climate, using climate change scenarios based on 
the Canadian Climate Centre (CCC) and GFDL GCMs. They 
found that changes in total plant productivity were positively 
correlated to changes in precipitation and nitrogen mineraliza­
tion (with nitrogen mineralization the most important factor). 
The response to nitrogen mineralization was consistent with 
the general observation that grasslands respond positively to 
addition of nitrogen fertilizer (Rains et a l, 1975; Lauenroth 
and Dodd, 1978). Plant responses to CO 2  were modified in 
complex ways by moisture and nutrient availabilities; their 
results generally indicated that CO 2  enrichment had a greater 
effect with higher moisture stress. However, nutrient limita­
tions reduced CO 2 responses. Ojima et a l (1996) concluded 
that increased atmospheric CO 2  will offset the negative effects 
of periodic droughts, making grasslands more resilient to nat­
ural (and human-induced changes in) climate variability. The 
strength of this beneficial effect, however, is controlled by the 
availability of nitrogen and other nutrients, which tend to be 
limited in many African landscapes.
2.3.1.6. 
Deserts
Deserts are an environmental extreme characterized by low 
rainfall that is highly variable intra-annually and interannually. 
Desert air is very dry; incoming solar and outgoing terrestrial 
radiation are intense, with large daily temperature fluctuations; 
and potential evaporation is high. Many organisms in the 
deserts already are near their tolerance limits (IPCC, 1996). 
The Sahara in north Africa and the Namib desert in southwest 
Africa are classified as the hottest deserts in the world— with 
average monthly temperatures above 30°C during the warmest 
months and extremes above 50°C. The diurnal temperature 
range often is large; winter nights in the Namib Desert some­
times are as cold as 10°C (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 3.3.1) or 
lower. Extreme desert systems already experience wide fluctu­
ations in rainfall and are adapted to coping with sequences of 
extreme conditions. Initial changes associated with climate 
change are less likely to create conditions significantly outside 
present ranges of tolerance; desert biota show very specialized 
adaptations to aridity and heat, such as obtaining their moisture 
from fog or dew (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 3.4.2).
2.3.1.7. 
Mountain Regions
Mountains usually are characterized by sensitive ecosystems and 
regions of conflicting interests between economic development 
and environmental conservation. In Africa, most mid-elevation
44
Africa
ranges, plateaus, and high-mountain slopes are under consider­
able pressure from commercial and subsistence farming activi­
ties (Rogers, 1993). Mountain environments are potentially vul­
nerable to the impacts of global warming. This vulnerability has 
important ramifications for a wide variety of human uses— such 
as nature conservation, mountain streams, water management, 
agriculture, and tourism (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.2).
There is a general picture of continuing ice retreat on the 
mountains. On Mount Kenya, the Lewis and Gregory glaciers 
have shown recession since the late 19th century (IPCC 1996, 
W G II, Box 5-3). Changes in climate (as projected in Greco ct 
a l, 1994) could reduce the area and volume of seasonal snow, 
glacier, and periglacial belts— ^with a corresponding shift in 
landscape processes. The retreat of some glaciers on 
Kilimanjaro and Mt. Kenya would have significant impacts on 
downstream ecosystems, people, and their livelihoods because 
of moderation of the seasonal flow regimes of rivers upstream. 
Further reduction of snow cover and glaciers also could reduce 
the scenic appeal of African high mountain landscapes for 
tourists and thus have a negative impact on tourism.
Forest fires would increase in places where summers become 
warmer and drier. Prolonged periods of summer drought would 
transform areas already sensitive to fire into regions of sus­
tained fire hazard. Mt. Kenya and mountains on the fringes of 
the Mediterranean Sea already subject to frequent fire episodes 
could be affected (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.2.2.3).
2.3.1.8. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
There is potential for spontaneous and assisted adaptation in 
Africa. Many options will need to involve a combination of 
efforts to reduce land degradation and foster sustainable man­
agement of resources. This section highlights options for 
forestry and woodlands, rangelands, and wildlife.
A number of adaptive processes designed to prevent further 
deterioration of forest cover already are being implemented to 
some degree. Some of these measures involve natural respons­
es when particular tree species develop the ability to make more 
efficient use of reduced water and nutrients under elevated CO 2  
levels. Other adaptive measures involve human-assisted action 
programs (such as tree planting) designed to minimize undesir­
able impacts. These strategies will include careful monitoring 
and microassessment of discreet impacts of climate change on 
particular species. Low-latitude forest adaptation options, espe­
cially in west Africa, must include active vegetation and soil 
management. For example, Gilbert et a l (1995) have indicated 
that silvicultural practices, endangered species habitat manage­
ment, watershed manipulation, and antidesertification tech­
niques could be applied given current infrastructure in 
Cameroon and Ghana. These adaptive measures will help 
reduce climate change impacts on forest watersheds and semi- 
arid woodlands. Smith and Lenhart (1996) have identified 
enhancement of forest seed banks as an adaptation policy option 
for maintaining access to a sufficient variety of seeds to allow
the original genetic diversity of forests to be rebred. Genetic 
diversity also provides an assurance that benefits provided by 
forests are not lost forever (Smith and Lenhart, 1996) and is par­
ticularly relevant to the maintenance of the forests in the Sahel 
and other extremely sensitive regions of Africa where 20 years 
of recurrent drought have degraded the forests. Mwakifwamba 
(1997) asserts that adaptation strategies or measures in Tanzania 
should focus mainly on reducing high deforestation rates, pro­
tecting existing forests, and introducing new species or improv­
ing existing species.
For rangelands, Milton ct a l (1994) present a conceptual 
model of arid rangeland degradation that suggests that degra­
dation proceeds in steps— increasingly difficult and costly to 
reverse— and discusses adaptation options (see Box 2-4). 
Assisted management is a lot harder for wildlife in game 
reserves than for livestock. Monitoring is required to identify 
populations at risk (from deforestation), as well as reserved 
areas that are changing their vegetation types in response to cli­
mate, leaving some animals in habitat types that are not suit­
able. Massive fragmentation of previous forests and woodlands 
makes it difficult for wildlife to migrate along corridors to 
areas with more water and foliage. Close monitoring would 
identify groups of wildlife that are in danger, and steps can be 
taken to move them to suitable habitat.
At the institutional level, mechanisms need to be created (or 
improved upon) to facilitate the flow of scientific results into 
the decision-making and policy-making process. Joint plan­
ning of projects that would impact cross-boundary catchment 
areas will become increasingly important if the climate 
becomes more variable and water more scarce for many 
regions of Africa.
2.3.2. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
Water resources are inextricably linked with climate, so the 
prospect of global climate change has serious implications for 
water resources and regional development (Riebsame et a l, 
1995). Efforts to provide adequate water resources for Africa 
will confront a number of challenges, including population 
pressure, problem s associated with land use such as 
erosion/siltation, and possible ecological consequences of 
land-use change on the hydrological cycle. Climate change 
will make addressing these problems more complex.
2.3.2.1. 
Hydrologica I Systems
Africa has several surface water bodies spread throughout the 
continent. Table 2-2 lists the 10 largest surface-water bodies in 
sub-Saharan Africa, along with basin countries and basin area 
(after Rangeley ct a l, 1994). Other smaller water bodies exist 
within country boundaries. Africa has the greatest number of 
rivers and water bodies that cross or form international bound­
aries. The 10 river basins in Table 2-2 (including Lake Chad) 
have a total drainage area greater than 350,000 km^, and they
Africa
45
Box 2-4. A  Conceptual Model of Arid Rangeland Degradation
Overuse by a narrow suite of domesticated herbivores has led to progressive loss of secondary productivity and diversity 
in rangelands. Degraded rangelands may not return to their original state, even when they are rested for decades 
(Westoby et al., 1989; O ’Connor, 1991). Milton et al. (1994) develop the idea that the probability of reversing grazing- 
induced change may be inversely related to the amount of disturbance involved in the transition. They develop a step­
wise model of rangeland degradation and show how the potential for recovery appears to be related to the function of the 
affected component. Their study stresses the need to recognize and treat degradation early because management inputs 
and costs increase for every step in the degradation process. Steps and management options are described below.
Similar models can be constructed for climate effects, to conceptualize potential impacts and points of intervention.
Steps and management options fo r arid rangeland degradation.
Stepwise degradation of arid or semi-arid rangelands. Symptoms describe the state of plant and animal assemblages; 
management options refer to actions that a manager could take to improve the condition of the range; and management 
level refers to the system (level of the food chain) on which management should be focused.
StepO
Description:
Symptoms: 
Management Option: 
Management Level:
Biomass and composition of vegetation varies with climatic cycles and 
stochastic events (e.g., droughts, diseases, hail, frost, fire)
Perennial vegetation varies with weather
Adaptive management, involving timely manipulations of livestock densities 
Secondary producers (i.e., grazers and herbivores)
S te p l
Description:
Symptoms: 
Management Option: 
Management Level:
Herbivory reduces reestablishment of palatable plants, allowing populations 
of unpalatable species to grow
Demography of plant population changes (age-structural changes)
Strict grazing controls 
Secondary producers
Step 2
Description:
Symptoms: 
Management Option: 
Management Level:
Step 3
Description:
Symptoms:
Management Option: 
Management Level:
Step 4
Description:
Symptoms: 
Management Option: 
Management Level:
Plant species that fail to establish are lost, as are their specialized predators 
and symbionts
Plant and animal losses, reduced capacity to support herbivores 
Manage vegetation (e.g., add seed, remove plants)
Primary producers (i.e., vegetation)
Biomass and productivity of vegetation fluctuates as ephemerals and weed 
species benefit from loss of cover from perennial plants 
Perennial biomass reduced (short-lived plants and instability increase), 
resident birds decrease, nomadic bird species
Manage soil cover (e.g., mulching, erosion barriers, roughen soil surface) 
Physical environment (soil)
Denudation and desertification involve changes in soil function and soil 
microbe activity
Vegetation cover completely lost, erosion accelerated; soil salinization, 
aridification
Difficult to address; costs of restoration or rehabilitation too high; nonpastoral 
use of land only economic option 
Difficult to identify
46
Africa
Table 2-2: The 10 largest surface-water bodies in sub-Saharan Africa (Rangeley et al., 1994).
Basin
No. of 
Countries
Basin Area 
(1,000 km2)
Basin Countries
Congo
Nile
Niger
Lake Chad
Zambezi
Orange
Okavango
Limpopo
Volta
Senegal
10
4
4
4
6
4
3,720
3,031
2,200
1,910
1,420
950
529
385
379
353
Zaire, Central African Republic, Angola, Congo, Zambia, 
Tanzania, Cameroon, Burundi, Rwanda
Sudan, Ethiopia, Egypt, Uganda, Tanzania, Kenya, Zaire, 
Rwanda, Burundi
Mali, Nigeria, Niger, Guinea, Cameroon, Burkina Faso, 
Benin, Cote d ’Ivoire, Chad
Chad, Niger, Central African Republic, Nigeria, Sudan, 
Cameroon
Zambia, Angola, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Malawi, 
Botswana, Tanzania, Namibia
South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho
Botswana, Angola, Namibia, Zimbabwe
South Africa, Botswana, Mozambique, Zimbabwe
Burkina Faso, Ghana, Togo, Cote d’Ivoire, Benin, Mali
Mali, Mauritania, Senegal, Guinea
combine to affect 33 sub-Saharan countries and Egypt. Sharma 
et a i (1996) assert that few of the transboundary river basins 
in the region are effectively jointly managed. Effective man­
agement would require treaties, political commitment, institu­
tions, capacity, information, and finance. National interests 
often override regional objectives. The large number of coun­
tries belonging to multiple river and lake basins makes region­
al cooperation very difficult. Table 2-3 shows dependence on 
external surface water for selected countries. Coordinated 
action among African countries will determine whether coun­
tries in the region can effectively adapt to changes in the 
hydrology of African rivers and lakes.
The major effects of climate change on African water systems 
will be through changes in the hydrological cycle, the balance 
of temperature, and rainfall. A case study of the impacts of cli­
mate change on the Zambezi and Nile River basins follows, 
based on Riebsame et a i (1995). Additional literature on the 
Zambezi basin includes Calder et a i (1996), Pinay (1988), 
Balek (1977), Conway and Hulme (1993), Vorosmarty and 
Moore (1991), Vorosmarty et a i (1991), and du Toit (1983).
The Nile and Zambezi basins are the second and fourth largest 
river systems in Africa; key geographic characteristics are 
depicted in Figure 2-9 and key hydrological characteristics 
given in Table 2-4. Both the Nile and Zambezi have a low 
runoff efficiency and a high dryness index, indicating a high
sensitivity to climate change. Analysis showed the Nile as very 
sensitive while the Zambezi was fairly sensitive. Although the 
severity of the impacts of climate change depended primarily 
on the magnitude of change, the different hydrological sensi­
tivities of the basins are also important. The Nile and Zambezi 
are especially sensitive to climate warming: Runoff decreases
Table 2-3: Dependence on external surface water— selected 
countries (after Gleick, 1993).
Country
% Total Flow 
Originating 
Outside Border
Ratio of External 
Water Supply to 
Internal Supply'
Egypt
97
32.3
Mauritania
95
17.5
Botswana
94
16.9
The Gambia
8 6
6.4
Congo
77
3.4
Sudan
77
3.3
Niger
6 8
2 . 1
Senegal
34
0.5
'“External” represents river runoff originating outside national 
borders; “internal” includes average flows of rivers and aquifers 
from precipitation within the country.
Africa
47
in these basins even when precipitation increases, due to the 
large hydrological role played by evaporation.
There were striking responses in runoff for the Nile. Riebsame et 
al. (1995) conclude that despite potential adjustments, Nile flows 
throughout the basin are extremely sensitive to temperature and
precipitation changes. GCM scenarios provide widely diverging 
pictures of possible future river flows, from a 30% increase to a 
78% decrease. There are formal agreements between Egypt and 
Sudan on the allocation of flows from the Nile, now and under 
any future enhancements. However, any reductions over 20% 
would exceed the management capability of the agreements and
Table 2-4: Hydrological characteristics for the Zambezi and Nile River 
basins (extracted from Riebsame et a l, 1995).
Parameter
Zambezi
Nile
Blue Nile
Length (km)
2,600
6,500
1 , 0 0 0
Area (km2 x 10^)
1,330
2,880
313
Flow (mVsec)
4,990
2,832
1 , 6 6 6
Flow (109 mVyr)
157
89
53
Specific Discharge (I/sec-km^)
3.8
1 . 0
5.3
Runoff (R) (mm)
118
31
168
Precipitation (P) (mm)
990
730
784
R/P
0 . 1 2
0.04
0 . 2 1
PET/P
2.50
5.50
1.80
Note; PET = Potential évapotranspiration.
ZAMBEZI RIVER BASIN
CalchnertBointey 
Sminp
Figure 2-9: The Nile and Zambezi River basins. For the Zambesi River basin, climate change impacts were projected for the 
basin above Lake Kariba with the existing Kariba Dam and with a proposed new dam and reservoir at Batoka Gorge 
(Riebsame et a l, 1995).
48
Africa
would result in major social and economic impacts. 
Adjustments in response to climate change would either 
involve changes in water allocation or structural adjustments in 
the upper and lower basin. The large uncertainty in climate- 
change projections makes it very hard for basin managers to 
adopt any response policy. There is need for a regional climate 
modeling effort over the Nile to help reduce this uncertainty. It 
remains prudent to make capital investments in decreasing 
water demand via more efficient irrigation management as a 
very wise adaptation to climate change.
The seasonal runoff pattern for the Zambezi remained relative­
ly unchanged; the river was sensitive, however, to temporal 
shifts of the rainy season. There was a net deficit in river flows 
due to higher surface temperatures, which increase the rate of 
évapotranspiration. 
Hydropower 
production 
at 
Kariba 
decreased slightly under the GISS and GFDL scenarios, while 
the cooler scenarios of UICMO and GISS led to small increas­
es in power generation. Seasonality of flow had more marked 
effects on production, a function of storage capacity of the 
dams in relation to ability to store excess and regulate water 
flows. Under climate change, there would be less water enter­
ing Kariba, and this would likely lead to reduction in fish pop­
ulations. Adaptation to climate change for the Zambezi basin 
was suggested to depend on better planning of water projects 
that consider hydrological inter-relationships of the basin as a 
whole, crossing many national boundaries. This requirement 
for countries to look beyond their own needs is a major factor 
in implementing adaptation options.
The Niger River runs over 4,000 km across west Africa, and its 
basin covers about one third of the subregion including Guinea, 
Cote d’Ivoire, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Benin, Nigeria, 
Cameroon, and Chad. The pressure on this river basin is 
intense. For example, the Sahelian drought of the 1970s seri­
ously affected hydropower generation from Nigeria’s Kaiji 
Dam on the Niger River during the 1973-77 period. This 
caused a severe shortfall in power generation to consumers in 
Nigeria, Mali, Benin, and Chad.
There is some concern that the negative impacts of climate 
change on water supply could be larger (and the gains smaller) 
than those reported in current assessments. Many GCMs have 
not explicitly incorporated the influence of persistent drought in 
evaluating the impact of global warming. In particular, equilib­
rium models begin each year with no model memory of ground­
water depletion in a preceding year. Yet the successive accumu­
lation of back-to-back drought years often can have devastating 
effects on groundwater, runoff, reservoir storage, marginal agri­
cultural activities, and water quality (Cline, 1992).
Despite relatively small climatic changes projected for the 
tropics, tropical lakes also may be quite sensitive to climate 
change (see Box 2-5). The level of Lake Victoria (in eastern 
Africa) rose rapidly in the early 1960s following only a few 
seasons with above-average rainfall and has remained high 
since (Sene and Pinston, 1994— as cited in IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.5.2).
Box 2-5. African Lakes and Climate Change
African Great Lakes are sensitive to climate variation 
on time scales of decades to millennia (Kendall, 1969; 
Livingstone, 1975; Haberyan and Hecky, 1987). Lake 
Victoria (the w orld’s second-largest freshwater lake by 
area). Lake Tanganyika (the w orld’s second-deepest 
lake), and Lake Malawi were closed basins for extend­
ed periods in the Pleistocene and Holocene epochs 
(Owen ct a l, 1990). Lakes M alawi and Tanganyika 
were hundreds of meters below their current levels; 
Victoria dried out completely. Today these lakes are in 
delicate hydrological balance and are nearly closed. 
Only 6 % of the water input to Tanganyika leaves at its 
riverine outflow (which was totally blocked when the 
lake was explored by Europeans) (Bootsma and 
Hecky, 1993).
Higher temperatures would increase evaporative loss­
es, especially if rainfall also declined. M inor declines 
in mean annual rainfall ( 1 0 - 2
0 %) for extended periods 
would lead to the closure of these basins even if tem­
peratures were unchanged (Bootsma and Hecky,
1993). Tropical temperatures are increasing; tem pera­
tures in the 1980s were 0.5°C warmer than a century 
earlier and 0.3°C warmer than during the period 
1951-1980. Concurrently, Lake Victoria’s epilimnion 
was warmer by 0.5°C in the early 1990s than in the 
1960s (Hecky ct a l, 1994). Although current climate 
scenarios project only small increases in tropical tem­
peratures, small changes in temperature and water bal­
ance can dramatically alter water levels, as well as 
mixing regimes and productivity.
Recent temperature and rainfall data and GCM sim u­
lations indicate increasing aridity in the tropics (Rind,
1995). Increases of 1-2°C in air temperatures could 
substantially increase the stability of stratification in 
permanently stratified Tanganyika and Malawi. Their 
deep waters are continuously warm, but the <1°C dif­
ference between surface and deep water in warm sea­
sons maintains a density difference that prevents full 
circulation. Lake Tanganyika’s deep water has been 
characterized as a “relict” hypolimnion that formed 
under a cooler climate within the past 1 , 0 0 0  years 
(Hecky ct a l, 1994). Since then, warming has created 
a barrier to vertical circulation. Additional warming 
could strengthen this barrier and reduce the mixing of 
deep, nutrient-rich hypolimnetic water and nutrient- 
depleted surface layers; that mixing sustains one of 
the most productive freshwater fisheries in the world 
(Hecky ct a l, 1981).
Source; IPCC 1996, WG II, Box 10-1.
23.2.2. 
Water Supply
Water supply undoubtedly is a most important resource for 
Africa’s social, economic, and environmental well-being. 
Currently, about two-thirds of the rural population and one- 
quarter of the urban population are without safe drinking water, 
and even higher proportions lack proper sanitation. Climate 
change will likely make the situation more adverse. The great­
est impact will continue to be felt by the poor, who have the 
most limited access to water resources. This section focuses 
mainly on sub-Saharan Africa (SSA).
Availability of water in SSA is highly variable. Only the humid 
tropical zones in central and west Africa have abundant water. 
Availability of water varies considerably within countries, too, 
influenced by physical characteristics and seasonal patterns of 
rainfall. According to Sharma et al. (1996), eight countries were 
suffering from water stress or scarcity in 1990; this situation is 
getting worse as a consequence of rapid population growth, 
expanding urbanization, and increased economic development. 
By 2000, about 300 million Africans risk living in a water­
scarce environment. Moreover, by 2025, the number of coun­
tries experiencing water stress will rise to 18— affecting 600 
million people (World Bank, 1995b). Figure 2-10 shows how 
countries will shift from water surplus to water scarcity as a 
result of population changes alone between 1990 and 2025, 
using a per capita water-scarcity limit of 1,000 m'/yr. The 
scarcity statistics also can be associated with challenges to 
international water resources: Eight river basins already face 
water stress, and four face scarcity (Figure 2-11); Figure 2-12 
illustrates water availability in the year 2025 (taking account of 
population increase alone) (Sharma et a l, 1996).
Africa
49
During the 1980s and 1990s, drought affected urban areas and 
industry very severely. Most water-dependent industries in 
southern Africa were forced to reduce their activities after 
water reservoirs fell to critical levels. Beverage companies, 
which use a lot of water to wash bottles, had to change to non- 
returnable aluminum cans (which require less water). 
Botswana’s construction and textile industries had to retrench 
workers after operations were scaled down because of a severe 
shortage of water. Similar problems hit Bulawayo, the heart of 
Zimbabwe’s industrial sector; companies were almost forced to 
pull out and relocate elsewhere because of a lack of water, and 
half of the small businesses crumbled. In South Africa, 
Swaziland, and Zimbabwe, sugarcane industries almost ground 
to a halt because there was no water for irrigation. Power 
rationing in Kenya in 1996-97 as a consequence of drought 
severely disrupted the country’s manufacturing and engineer­
ing industries (UNEP, 1997).
Unfortunately, there are few assessments of how climate 
change or responses to it could affect local wetland biodiversi­
ty. The climate change scenarios of Greco et al. (1994) project 
that there could be less water in most of the large rivers in the 
Sahel over the next 30-60 years, with the possible exception of 
the major rivers flowing into Lake Chad. This shift would 
mean less available water in the large wetlands along these 
rivers, unless there are changes to the management of outflow 
from dams. Changes to the hydrology of smaller wetlands will 
depend not only on climate change but also on whether they 
are supplied with surface water or groundwater, as well as the 
extent of cropping in their catchment areas. The loss of small 
wetlands may lead to a significant risk of extinction for local 
populations of turtles and small birds (Gibbs, 1993), although
6000
5000
4000
£S
s  3000
s
и
2000
1000
□  1990 per capita w ater availability 
■  2025 per capita w ater availability
ШШШ I
2500 m ' 
1667 m ' 
1000 m'
Э 
*0•о
ЯЗс
ясs3
s.
CQ
6
Я
вос/з
о 
2 
.2 
л  
'о. 
^
Н 
n  
.ts 
о  
Q 
^
■ 5 
х> 
Ш 
В  N
I
23CÙ
.2
О
ад
2
и
Figure 2-10: Water scarcity and people in Africa (Sharma et a i, 1996).
50
Africa
taxa that are easily transported as adults, eggs, cysts, larvae, 
and so forth would be subjected to less risk (Magadza, 1991). 
If wetlands in the eastern Sahel become drier, relatively mobile 
birds that are dependent on wetland habitat could move into 
wetlands further east (i.e., in Niger, northern Nigeria, northern 
Cameroon, Chad).
2.3.2.3. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
Climate change will have various effects on water resources 
and water management in Africa. The large variability in pro­
jected climate scenarios over Africa’s most vulnerable river 
basin systems (such as the Nile) makes any policy reformula­
tion in anticipation of climate change difficult. However, 
improved efficiency in irrigation systems and water use are 
strongly recommended modes of action because they will ben­
efit the region regardless of the degree and direction of climate 
change. Detailed studies of the river basins are essential to 
provide adequate information for planning and negotiation 
purposes in this area that will continue to generate tension 
across many borders.
Sharma et al. (1996) have evaluated the sub-Saharan African 
countries with respect to their degree of national commitment 
and planning to address water problems in general and have 
developed a list of country performance indicators (Table 2-5). 
Columns 4-7 describe the enabling environment; columns 1
and 2 are poverty indicators; and columns 1, 2, and 3 are risk 
indicators, where problems will call for either more water or 
more efficient management of existing stocks. The following 
points are critical:
• 
The extent of political stability, ownership of devel­
opment efforts, and commitment to sustainable water 
resources management in each country
• 
The extent to which an enabling environment exists—  
consisting of transparent and accountable governance 
in the water sector, clear legislation and policy, strate­
gies and investment programs, stakeholder participa­
tion, and the capacity for water resources management 
at all levels
• 
The extent to which information and knowledge 
exists to gauge water availability and quality, con­
sumer demand, and sectoral needs (e.g., sanitation 
coverage, irrigation, hydropower).
Knowledge also is needed about multiple cross-sectoral link­
ages relating to a nation’s water development (competing 
demands from agriculture, industry, and m unicipalities; 
reliance upon international waters). Depending on how a coun­
try fares with regard to the three critical points above, the types 
of efforts and interventions required by funding agencies and 
nations will vary. Countries that fare poorly in this analysis will 
be most vulnerable to climate changes because they will have 
less capacity to adapt.
Juba-
shibeli
Above the 
W ater Stress Limit 
Ч
I  W ater Stress 
g  W ater Scarcity
Limpopo
Figure 2-11: Water availability at river-basin level (1995) 
(Sharma et a l, 1996).
Figure 2-12: Water availability at river-basin level (2025) for 
projected population levels (Sharma et a l, 1996).
Africa
51
Table 2-5: Sub-Saharan Africa: Country indicators for water resources (after Sharma et al, 1996).
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
% Population
% Popnlation
Irrigated
Capacity for
Statnsof
Statnsof
with Safe
with
Area as %
Governance
Resource
Water
Water Plant
Drinking Water
Sanitation
of Potential
Environment
Management
L^islation
Policy
Southern AMca
Angola
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Available
Nonavaflable
Botswana
High
High
Low
High
High
Available
Available
Lesotho
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
High
Available
Avaflable
Malawi
Medium
High
Low
High
Medium
Available
Avaflable
Mozambique
Low
Low
Low
Low
Available
Nonavaflable
Namibia
Low
High
Available
Avaflable
South Africa
High
Medium
Avaflable
Avaflable
Swaziland
Low
Medium
High
High
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Zambia
Medium
Medium
Low
Medium
Avaflable
Partial
Zimbabwe
Medium
Low
Medium
High
High
Avaflable
Avaflable
Eastern Africa
Djibouti
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Eritrea
Medium
Ethiopia
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
Avaflable
Avaflable
Kenya
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
Avaflable
Avaflable
Somalia
Low
Low
High
Low
Low
Sudan
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Low
Tanzania
Medium
High
Low
Medium
Low
Avaflable
Available
Uganda
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Nonavaflable
Avaflable
Central Africa
Burundi
Low
Medium
High
Low
Low
Cameroon
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Central African Republic: 
Low
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Chad
Low
Low
Medium
Low
Comoros
High
Low
Congo
Low
Low
Low
Medium
Low
Equitorial Guinea
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Gabon
High
Low
Medium
Medium
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Madagascar
Low
Low
High
Medium
Low
Mauritius
High
High
High
Medium
Rwanda
Medium
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Seychelles
High
High
Zaire
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Low
West-Central Africa
Benin
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Burkina Faso
High
Low
Low
High
Medium
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Cote d’Ivoire
High
High
Medium
Medium
Medium
Partial
Partial
Ghana
Medium
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Niger
Medium
Low
Medium
Medium
Nonavaflable
Nonavaflable
Nigeria
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Low
Nonavaflable
Nonavaflable
Togo
Medium
Low
Low
Low
Western Africa
Cape Verde
Medium
Low
Medium
Avaflable
Avaflable
The Gambia
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Low
Avaflable
Avaflable
Guinea
Low
Medium
Medium
Low
Low
Nonavaflable
Nonavaflable
Guinea-Bissau
Low
Low
Low
Avaflable
Nonavaflable
Liberia
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
MaU
Low
Low
Medium
Low
Mauritania
Medium
Low
Medium
Medium
Sao Tome and Principe
Medium
Low
Medium
Low
Senegal
Medium
Medium
Medium
Medium
Partial
Partial
Sierra Leone
Low
Low
Medium
Low
Low
Notes: Blank boxes indicate no data avaflable. Columns 1 and 2: Low = 0-33%, Medium = 34-66%, High = 67—100%. Column 3: Low = 0-29%, Medium = 
30-60%, High = 61-100%. Column 4 based on political and social stability. Column 5 based on efficiency of domestic resource mobilization and allocation, to 
Columns 6 and 7, “Partial” indicates draft bill/policy or obsolete laws.
52
Africa
2.3.3. 
Agriculture and Food Security
2.3.3.1. 
Socioeconomic Vulnerability
Many indicators of human development highlight Africa’s rela­
tive poverty and vulnerability (Table 2-6). With smaller hold­
ings and little investment in agriculture, household production 
faces difficulties in meeting subsistence requirements or devel­
oping specialized export crops. Household expenditures on 
food are high— more than half of the annual budget, on average. 
Africa receives the largest amount of food aid of any continent. 
Low rates of female literacy and high rates of infant mortality 
are indicative of populations that have low status and inade­
quate infrastructure for education and health— two essential 
requirements for vigorous rural development. The high num­
bers of refugees highlight potential economic and political 
instability. Vulnerable populations include smallholder agricul­
turists with inadequate resources, pastoralists, rural landless 
laborers, and the urban poor. Rural populations are directly 
affected by climatic variations. Reduced food supplies and high 
prices immediately affect landless laborers who have little sav­
ings. The effect on agriculturists and pastoralists depends on 
how much surplus they produce and the relative terms of trade 
(e.g., between food and livestock). A  dramatic increase in urban 
poverty has been noted in the past decade— one consequence of 
stagnant rural development and high population pressures. The 
urban poor are indirectly affected by climate change through 
changes in prices and regional investment.
2.3.3.2. 
Food and Fiber Production
Agriculture constitutes a large share of African economies, 
with a mixture of subsistence and commercial production. 
Forestry is an important complement to agriculture in many 
rural areas, but managed forests are less significant. Fisheries 
are important in coastal areas and islands but a small compo­
nent of the African economy as a whole. African agriculture is 
sensitive to present climatic variations. The effects of climate 
change are uncertain, but adverse impacts are likely in many 
regions. The future of African agriculture and food security 
depends on the outcome of climate change in Africa, indige­
nous responses to global change, development efforts in the 
next few decades, and global patterns of commodity produc­
tion and demand (which also are affected by climate change 
and policy responses to global change).
2.3.3.2.1. Present agriculture
African economies are highly dependent on agriculture: Arable 
land and permanent pasture occupy one-third of the land area 
of Africa. Agriculture constitutes approximately 30% of GDP 
(see Table 2-7 and Annex D). Almost three-fourths of the 
African population resides in rural areas, and almost all of the 
rural labor force is engaged in agriculture (including livestock, 
forestry, and fisheries). However, much of the land is of poor 
quality; less than 10% of Africa is actively cultivated. Annual
Table 2-6: Regional vulnerability to food crises in Africa.
Expenditure 
on Food 
(% of consumption)
Food Aid 
(cereals)
(kg per capita)
Refugees
Female 
Literacy 
(adult) (%)
Infant 
Mortality 
(per 1000)
African Region!
Northern
42
18
221,450
45
59
Sudano-Sahelian
42
13
974,800
17
119
Gulf of Guinea
39
6
819,750
28
109
Central
39
3
480,500
41
97
Eastern
37
4
1,408,150
43
1 0 2
Indian Ocean
57
1 2
0
73
6 6
Southern
57
15
1,793,800
53
85
Total
57
10
5,698,450
35
97
Comparison Country
Bangladesh
59
1 2
245,300
22
108
Thailand
30
2
255,000
90
26
Mexico
35
3
47,300
85
35
Greece
30
- 1
1,900
89
8
United Kingdom
1 2
-3
24,600
X
7
'Northern: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia; Sudano-Sahelian: Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Chad, Djibouti, Eritrea, The Gambia, 
Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan; Gulf of Guinea: Benin, Cote d’Ivoire, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Nigeria, 
Sierra Leone, Togo; Central: Angola, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Sao Tome and Principe, 
Zaire; Eastern: Burundi, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda; Indian Ocean: Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles; 
Southern: Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
Source: WRI, 1994.
Africa
53
food production over the past few decades has grown by 2 .8 % 
per year for cereals, 2.9% for legumes, and 4.0% for roots and 
tubers, although the total cultivated area has grown by only 
0.6%. Although population densities are relatively low com­
pared with global averages, some rural areas are very densely 
populated, and population growth rates have yet to reach sta­
bility levels.
Throughout Africa, the staple crops are cereals— maize in par­
ticular. Millet and sorghum are widely grown as well; wheat 
and teff are common in some regions. Almost all agriculture is 
rain-fed, although irrigation is important in some regions. The 
absence of irrigation (less than 1 0 % of the cultivated area is
irrigated) increases the sensitivity of crop yields to climatic 
variations. Cash crops are important in every country but vary 
in their distribution and profitability. Coffee, tea, groundnuts, 
cocoa, tobacco, and palm oil are grown as cash crops. Other 
significant crops (at least in terms of household consumption) 
include cassava, yams, legumes, and horticultural crops. Agro- 
pastoralism and extensive nomadic pastoralism are common in 
semi-arid regions. Relying on grass and browse, pastoralism is 
particularly sensitive to long periods of drought when grazing 
resources are depleted by livestock and not renewed.
The regions of Africa have distinct characteristics. North Africa 
and the Indian Ocean islands rely on irrigated agriculture. In
Table 2-7: Regional agriculture in Africa.
Population
Population
Crop
Irrigated
Average
Fertilizer
Food
Density
Growth
Land
Land
Yield of Cereals
Use
Prod. Index
Region'
(pop/km2)
(%)
(% of total)
(% of total)
(l^/ha)
(kg/yr)
(1970=100)
Resources
Northern
226
2.25
5
27
1,973
94
115
Sudano-Sahelian
106
2.72
4
7
727
5
90
Gulf of Guinea
891
2.83
21
2
892
6
100
Central
145
2.70
4
1
923
2
87
Eastern
541
2.88
10
2
1,363
12
92
Indian Ocean
262
1.96
5
23
1,988
140
98
Southern
208
2.56
6
7
929
27
76
Total
253
2.65
6
8
1,098
25
92
Bangladesh
9,853
2.18
72
31
2,572
101
96
Thailand
1141
0.92
45
19
2,052
39
109
Mexico
491
1.55
13
21
2,430
69
100
Greece
795
0.07
30
31
3,700
172
101
United Kingdom
2,404
0.19
28
2
6,332
350
112
GNP
GDP in
GDP Growth
Public Agricultural
per capita ($)
Agriculture (%)
Rate (%/yr)
Investment ($)
Investm ent
Northern
1,285
17
3.60
25
Sudano-Sahelian
860
34
2.36
7
Gulf of Guinea
760
39
1.87
15
Central
760
22
2.15
5
Eastern
593
47
3.05
13
Indian Ocean
280
22
3.85
6
Southern
333
21
3.38
7
Total
355
30
2.75
11
Bangladesh
205
37
4.20
68
Thailand
1,697
13
7.80
78
Mexico
2,971
8
1.50
129
Greece
6,530
17
1.60
25
United Kingdom
33,850
2
2.80
347
'Regions are as in Table 2-6. 
Source: WRI, 1994.
54
Africa
west Africa, the gradient of climates from the Sahara to the 
humid coast determines the potential for agriculture. 
Subsistence agriculture and pastoralism dominate the Sudan 
and Sahelian regions; plantation agriculture is found along the 
Guinea coast. The highlands of east Africa are well known for 
productive agriculture that takes advantage of the two rainy sea­
sons. The lowlands, however, are subject to erratic rainfall and 
poor soils. Coffee and tea are major cash crops in the highlands. 
The humid and sub-humid zones of central Africa, where 
drought is seldom a problem, are conducive to roots and tubers.
Most rural households engage in subsistence agriculture, 
although large commercial estates are found throughout Africa. 
Moreover, regionally diverse values, cultures, and practices in 
agriculture make for a truly unique region. In many African 
cultures, identity and the measure of personal wealth and value 
are determined by the amount of land one owns, the number of 
cattle in one’s herd, or the amount of food produced for the 
community, rather than monetary wealth. These nuances make 
African agriculture a particularly important sector within the 
climate change debate.
Prolonged drought— lasting a season or longer over a wide­
spread area— is the most serious climatic hazard affecting 
African agriculture, water supplies, and ecosystems. If 
droughts become more common, widespread, and persistent, 
many subhumid and semi-arid regions will have difficulty sus­
taining viable agricultural systems. Drought-prone environ­
ments already have been settled and land converted from 
extensive grazing and long-fallow cultivation to permanent 
cropping. Box 2-6 reviews the frequency of drought in Africa 
and its impacts.
2.3.3.2.2. 
Impacts o f climate change
The effects of climatic variations on African agriculture have 
been well established through decades of field experiments, 
statistical analyses of observed yields, and monitoring of agri­
cultural production. The most important climatic element is 
precipitation, particularly seasonal drought and the length of 
the growing season. The distribution of rainfall within the 
growing season also may affect yields. Local flooding and 
storms are minor problems. Low temperatures and radiation 
limit production in some high-elevation regions; frost is a haz­
ard in South Africa. High temperatures can affect yields and 
yield quality in semi-arid and arid regions, although water is 
more important. Sea-level rise and coastal erosion will affect 
groundwater, irrigated agriculture, and low-lying coastal land 
in some areas.
The direct effects of CO 2  enrichment on plants tend to increase 
yields and reduce water use. Increased COj concentrations 
increase the rate of photosynthesis and increase water-use effi­
ciency (the efficiency with which plants use water to produce 
a unit of biomass or yield). The direct effects are strongest for 
plants with C3  pathways, such as wheat, compared with C4  
plants like maize, sorghum, millet, and sugarcane— which are
staples for much of sub-Saharan Africa. CO 2  enrichment also 
affects weeds, many of which are C4  plants (Ringius et a l, 
1996). According to the IPCC Second Assessment Report, the 
effect of a doubling in CO 2  concentrations (from the present) 
varies from a 10% increase to almost a 300% increase in bio­
mass; WUE may increase by up to 50% (or more) (IPCC, 
1996). Thus, the beneficial effects of increased concentrations 
of CO 2  are likely to offset some of the effects of decreased pre­
cipitation. However, the effect of CO 2  on crops in Africa—  
where nutrients often are a limiting factor and leaf tempera­
tures are high— remains highly uncertain.
Unfortunately, regional projections of precipitation change 
diverge quite strongly in Africa. For example, scenarios of sum­
mer precipitation in the Sahel show a range of ±20% for nine 
atmosphere-ocean GCMs reported in Annex B. However, pre­
sent trends in precipitation in Africa show a decrease in some 
regions. Recent transient scenarios report lower temperature 
changes, globally as well as for Africa. Thus, for agriculture, 
there is little confidence in present scenarios for precipitation—  
the most important aspect of climate change for African agri­
culture. However, a combination of the potential effects of 
increased CO 2  concentrations and lower temperatures (at time 
of doubling) using transient scenarios suggests that the impacts 
of these scenarios may be less severe than those of earlier equi­
librium GCM model experiments. Nevertheless, even a small 
decrease in precipitation can be significant. Furthermore, few 
scenarios of drought risk and the distribution of rainfall within 
the growing season have been developed.
Although African agriculture clearly is sensitive to climatic 
variations, perhaps equally important is the gap between pre­
sent and potential agricultural yields in Africa. For example, a 
serious impact of climate change might be a decrease of 2 0 % 
in maize yields. Yet present yields among smallholders often 
are only half (or even one-tenth) of potential yields. The eval­
uation of potential impacts of climate change should not mask 
the enormous potential for more-productive agricultural sys­
tems in Africa (see Section 2.3.3.2.3).
At the national level. Figure 2-13 shows the variability in 
national maize yields for selected countries (Hulme, 1996a). 
The effects of the 1984-85 and 1991-92 droughts are clear (see 
Box 2-6). The coefficient of variation for annual maize yields 
varies from about 10% in central Africa to almost 50% in drier 
countries such as Botswana and Swaziland. A  significant com­
ponent of the variability is likely to be related to rainfall, 
although prices and market policies are influential. The role of 
precipitation in agricultural productivity was demonstrated 
dramatically in the Sahel and eastern and southern Africa dur­
ing the drought period 1970-95 (Buckland, 1992). Water 
scarcity revealed widespread dependence on rain-fed agricul­
ture and the lack of infrastructural development for supple­
mental irrigation and water resources. For example, Zimbabwe 
in 1991 and 1992 imported 800,000 tons of maize, 250,000 
tons of wheat, and 2 0 0 , 0 0 0  tons of refined and semirefined 
sugar to make up the shortfall associated with reduced agricul­
tural production as a result of rainfall shortages (Makarau,
1992). Studies of the role of climatic variability in African food 
National crop modeling studies that specifically address cli-
security have a long tradition. At the local level, agroclimatic 
mate change now have been carried out for many countries for
studies such as A kong’a et al. (1988), Downing et al. (1990), 
a variety of puфoses (see Sivakumar, 1991, 1993; Eid, 1994;
Mortimore (1989), and Sivakumar (1991,1993) considered the 
Muchena, 1994; Fischer and van Velthuizen, 1996; Makadho,
effects of climatic variability on agriculture, with an emphasis 
1996; Matarira et al., 1996; Sivakumar et a i, 1996; USCSP,
on coping with drought. Back-to-back drought episodes in sub- 
1996). Recent studies sponsored by the United Nations
humid and semi-arid zones led to the failure of crop production 
Environment Programme (UNEP), the Global Environment
and dependency on other sources of income to buy food, or on 
Facility (GEF), the USCSP, and others are to be published
famine relief. 
soon. A few regional studies have been conducted (e.g., Hulme
Africa 
55
Box 2-6. African Drought: Episodes and Impacts
Extensive droughts have afflicted Africa, with serious episodes since independence in 1965-1966,1972-1974, 
1981-1984, 1986-1987, 1991-1992, and 1994-1995 (WMO, 1995; Usher, 1997). The causes of African drought are 
numerous and vary among regions, seasons, and years. Local droughts occur every year; continental crises appear to 
occur once (or more recently twice) every decade. Major droughts tend to be connected to ENSO anomalies. It seems 
prudent to expect drought in Africa to continue to be a major climatic hazard.
The potential effect of climate change on drought in Africa is uncertain. At a local level, increased temperatures are likely 
to lead to increased moisture demand. The balance between rainfall and higher évapotranspiration implies more frequent 
water scarcity. However, a great deal depends on vegetation response to higher CO 2  concentrations and the timing of rain­
fall. The combination of higher évapotranspiration and even a small decrease in precipitation could lead to significantly 
greater drought risks. An increase in precipitation variability would compound temperature effects. For example, Hulme 
(1996b) reports that interannual variability increases on the order of 25% in much of southern Africa in the UKTR sce­
nario for the 2050s. Within the region, however, some areas experience a similar decrease in variability. The temperature- 
precipitation-C 0 2  forcing of seasonal drought probably is less significant than the prospect of large-scale circulation 
changes that drive continental droughts that occur over several years. A  change in the frequency and duration of atmos­
phere-ocean anomalies, such as the ENSO phenomenon, could force such large-scale changes in Africa’s rainfall climatol­
ogy. However, such scenarios of climate change are not well developed at the global level, much less for Africa.
The effects of drought are cross-cutting, with severe direct impacts on agriculture, water resources, and natural vegetation 
and indirect effects on health, the economy, and institutions (see Benson and Clay, 1994, for an overview of drought 
impacts). The impacts of drought are confounded by environmental degradation, including soil erosion, water pollution, and 
deforestation. Intersectoral linkages, the diversity of the economy, the numbers of vulnerable people, the intensity of water 
use in the economy, the role of financial systems and public enteфrises, and public revenue and expenditure affect the 
severity and distribution of drought impacts. Drought in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s triggered widespread starvation and 
loss of life, particularly in the Sahel and the Horn of Africa. Similar famine has been averted in the 1990s through more 
effective early warning systems and responses. The aggregate impact of drought on the economies of Africa can be large: 
8-9%  of GDP in Zimbabwe and Zambia in 1992, 4-6%  of GDP in Nigeria and Niger in 1984 (Benson and Clay, 1994).
The 1991-1992 episode in southern Africa amply illustrates the impact of drought. In that episode, the SADC countries 
experienced the worst drought of the century: From central Zambia through central Malawi and Mozambique southward, 
there were seasonal deficits of as much as 80% of normal rainfall (Zinyowera and Unganai, 1993). Large sections of the 
SADC subregion received scanty rainfall— 20-75%  of normal— during the rainy season from October 1991 through 
April 1992. Abnormally high temperatures (47°C along the South Africa-Zimbabwe border) exacerbated the extreme 
dryness. Regional grain production fell 60% short of expected levels. Food stocks had been depleted, largely as a conse­
quence of exports. Roughly five times more food had to be brought into southern Africa than had been delivered to the 
Horn of Africa during the famine of 1984-1985. Six different transport corridors were used to deliver food aid, and 11 
countries assisted in trying to alleviate the crisis wrought by the drought. Even though 1992-1993 and 1993-1994 could 
be considered post-drought periods, recovery in the subregion was slow. Nutritional status was affected by crop failure, 
depending on alternative sources of income and drought responses. The number of food-insecure households among 
communal farmers in Zimbabwe more than doubled during the 1991-1992 drought, especially in semi-arid zones 
(Christensen and Stack, 1992). The level of the reservoir at Kariba Dam, which supplies power to Zambia and 
Zimbabwe, fell below the level required to generate hydroelectric power (see lUCN, 1994). Water shortages, electricity 
shortages and rationing, input supply difficulties, reduction in demand, and macroeconomic constraints led to a 9% 
reduction in manufacturing output in Zimbabwe, with a 6 % loss in foreign currency receipts (Benson and Clay, 1994).
56
Africa
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
■ Botswana
-  -6,— - Burundi 
— • —  Malawi 
— H—  South Africa 
Swaziland 
— X—  Tanzania 
— e—  Zaire
-♦—  Zambia
1963 1965 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995
Year
Figure 2-13: Maize yields in Africa (Hulme, 1996b), based on FAO data.
et a l, 1995; Hulme, 1996a; Ringius et a l, 1996), although an 
authoritative continental assessment has not been compiled. 
Global studies have included Africa— often, however, using 
poor data or inadequate spatial coverage and ignoring many 
critical issues of vulnerability and food security.
The general conclusion is that climate change will affect some 
parts of Africa negatively, although it will enhance prospects 
for crop production in other areas (see Downing, 1992, for case 
studies of agriculture in Kenya, Zimbabwe, and Senegal). 
Warmer climates will alter the distribution of agroecological 
zones. Highlands may become more suitable for annual crop­
ping as a result of increased temperatures (and radiation) and 
reduced frost hazards. Although C 3 crops exhibit a positive 
response to increased CO 2  (as much as 30% with 2 XCO2 ), the 
optimal productive temperature range is quite narrow. Some 
regions could experience temperature stress at certain growing 
periods— necessitating shifting of planting dates to minimize 
this risk. Expansion of agriculture is important in the east 
African highlands. For example, agroecological suitability in 
the highlands of Kenya would increase by perhaps 20% with 
warming of 2.5°C based on an index of potential food produc­
tion (Downing, 1992). In contrast, semi-arid areas are likely to 
be worse off. In eastern Kenya, 2.5°C of warming results in a 
20% decrease in calorie production. In some lowlands, high- 
temperature events may affect some crops. Growth is hindered 
by high temperatures, and plant metabolism for many cereal 
crops begins to break down above 40°C. Burke et a l (1988)
found that many crops manage heat stress (with ample water 
supply) through increased transpiration to maintain foliage 
temperatures at their optimal range. Because a large portion 
of African agriculture is rain-fed, however, heat-related plant 
stress may reduce yields in several key crops— such as wheat, 
rice, maize, and potatoes. At the other extreme of the C 3  tem ­
perature spectrum, several crops (such as wheat and several 
fruit trees) require chilling periods (vernalization). Warmer 
night temperatures could impede vernalization in plants that 
require chilling, such as apples, peaches, and nectarines. 
Locations suitable for grapes and citrus fruit would shift to 
higher elevations. C 4  crops are more tolerant, in general, to 
climate variations involving temperature ranges between 
25°C and 35°C. These crops most often are located in 
warmer, dryer climates; they are quite susceptible to water 
stress.
In Egypt, Eid (1994) evaluated wheat and maize sensitivity to 
warmer temperatures; Strzepek et a l (1995; see also Conway 
and Hulme, 1996) reported an integrated assessment of climate 
change impacts on coastal resources, agriculture, and water. 
The agricultural sector is highly sensitive to climate change, 
although different scenarios result in widely different impacts 
on irrigated agriculture.
In Kenya, a recent study by the International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) (Fischer and van Velthuizen, 
1996) highlights the diverse effects of climate change. The Food
Africa
57
and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Agroecological Zone 
model was used to delineate crop-growing regions and their suit­
ability for a wide range of crops. Rising temperatures and 
increased plant water requirements would lead to dramatic 
reductions in agricultural production potential, especially in 
eastern and southern Kenya. In central and western Kenya, tem­
perature increases would result in an extension of the land suit­
able for cultivation because some higher-elevation areas would 
become suitable for cropping. Along with higher cropping inten­
sities in the highlands, this effect more than outweighs the 
effects of moisture stress in the lowlands. In humid regions 
(>270 days of growing periods), diminished wetness could 
reduce pest and disease constraints. The balance of increased 
évapotranspiration and precipitation in semi-arid regions deter­
mines the effect of climate change on agriculture and food secu­
rity in the lowlands.
Using the ACRU/CERES hybrid model— one of the most 
sophisticated crop-climate models developed in Africa—  
Schulze et al. (1996) have evaluated the impact of climate 
change on maize in South Africa. The investigators divided the 
diverse geography of South Africa into 712 relatively homoge­
neous zones, each associated with vegetation, soil, and climate 
data. Daily values of temperature (minimum and maximum), 
rainfall, wind speed, and solar radiation are used in the crop 
evaluation, based on the CERES-Maize model. Recent scenario 
analysis of the model (see Hulme, 1996a) shows a wide range 
of potential maize yields in South Africa. For three scenarios of 
climate change (corresponding to the middle of the next centu­
ry), yields decrease in the semi-arid west. For most of the coun­
try, however, potential yields would increase— generally by as 
much as 5 t/ha. The COj enrichment effect counteracts the rel­
atively modest changes in temperature and precipitation. In 
parts of the eastern highlands, particularly in Lesotho, dramatic 
increases in yields result from higher temperatures.
Hulme (1996b) presents an integrated view of climate impacts 
in southern Africa. Prospects for agriculture depend critically 
upon changes in precipitation. A  “dry” scenario suggests less- 
suitable conditions in semi-arid and subhumid regions. With 
little decrease (or increases) in precipitation, agriculture should 
be able to cope with the average changes. However, shifts in 
drought risk need to be considered.
Ultimately, climate change is a global issue— even more so for 
traded commodities such as agricultural products. Some 
regions, for example, may be less competitive in national and 
global agricultural markets, with corresponding impacts on 
exports and imports. Africa, in particular, may be sensitive to 
changes in world prices and stocks because many countries 
rely on food imports. Several world-trade models have been 
tested with scenarios of climate change, with differing assump­
tions regarding economic growth, population growth, trade lib­
eralization, and technological innovation (see Fischer et al, 
1994, 1996; Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994). Because they are 
global simulations, they can illustrate some of the dynamic 
adjustments in world prices and regional imports and exports 
that may result from climate change. However, Africa is not
well represented in such assessments. Scenarios tend to be 
trend projections that discount the potential for dramatic 
improvements in agriculture or welfare. Moreover, the lack of 
uniform and accessible data on crop-climate sensitivity in 
Africa leads to large uncertainties in predicted impacts in 
Africa. A  critical question is the extent to which climate change 
at the global level alters African exports (reflecting changes in 
comparative advantage) and food imports (reflecting the world 
price of cereals).
Most livestock in Africa are herded in nomadic areas, although 
significant numbers are kept in paddocks on farms. Domestic 
animals, especially cattle, also will be affected by climate 
change. In the cold highlands of Lesotho, for example, animals 
would benefit from warmer winters but could be negatively 
affected by a lowering of the already low nutritional quality of 
grazing. Heat stress also is a concern in warmer areas. The 
direct impacts of changes in the frequency, quantity, and inten­
sity of precipitation and water availability on domestic animals 
are uncertain. However, increased droughts could seriously 
impact the availability of food and water— as in southern Africa 
during the droughts of the 1980s and 1990s (IPCC, 1996).
Agricultural pests, diseases, and weeds also will be affected by 
climate change. Little quantitative research on these topics has 
been undertaken in Africa, however. Perhaps the most signifi­
cant shifts could occur in tsetse fly distributions and human 
disease vectors (such as mosquito-borne malaria). Tsetse fly 
infestation often limits where livestock can be kept or the 
expansion of extensive agriculture (Hulme, 1996a). Declining 
human health would affect labor productivity in agriculture.
African economies depend on natural resources, and the 
impact of changing natural resources affects several sectors. 
Perhaps more so than in many regions, the cross-sectoral 
impacts of climate change need to be understood. Agriculture 
depends on water resources, a healthy labor supply, and 
demand for its products. In turn, rural health, incomes, and 
development depend on viable agricultural economies. One 
example of the potential interactions is the role of drought. A 
small change in drought risk need not affect agriculture to a 
great extent, as long as food supplies and household income 
can be saved over several years. However, an increase in 
drought risk could affect regional water supplies, leading to 
rationing of water and energy and reduced irrigation. 
Increasing aridity and prolonged spells of severe drought could 
accelerate abandonment of the rural economy and migration to 
urban centers.
2.3.3.2.3. 
Adaptation and vulnerability
Low investment in agriculture (see Table 2-7) means that 
African agriculture is extremely sensitive to climatic fluctua­
tions. The current status of agriculture is not encouraging: It is 
characterized by stagnant yields, land degradation, and recur­
rent droughts (Box 2-7 suggests strategies to cope with current 
levels of climate variability and drought). Furthermore, political
58 
Africa
Box 2-7. Drought and Famine Responses
The loss of human life and economic disruption associated with extreme climatic fluctuation can be lessened by enhanc­
ing household coping strategies, preparedness, and advanced warning and timely responses. The initial aim in responding 
to drought is to maintain household livelihoods and mitigate the effects of rainfall shortages. Seasonal hunger, poverty, 
and household crises recur among vulnerable households throughout Africa. It is often difficult for governments, donors, 
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to distinguish between chronic conditions and an emerging crisis during a 
drought (or other shock). Recent scientific advances in understanding the climate system and predicting seasonal drought 
provide an opportunity to reduce the vulnerability of human societies (Rasmusson, 1987; Hastenrath, 1995; Bonkoungou, 
1996). Predictions of seasonal rainfall already are operational in many regions of Africa, with lead times of up to several 
months. Longer-term forecasts also may be possible. However, drought predictions still need to be incorporated into 
African management of agriculture, water, energy, and national economies (see Gibberd et a l, 1996).
Increasing drought preparedness in Africa has resulted in a plethora of organizations that monitor climate, agriculture, veg­
etation, and resources; make available early-warning information; participate in multidisciplinary research; and promote 
preparedness plans. International early-warning systems such as the World Food Programme, the Food and Agriculture 
Organization, Save the Children Fund, U.S. Famine Early Warning System, and Agence Europèene pour le 
Développement et la Santé, among others, link local and national efforts with international responses. Following the dev­
astating droughts of the 1970s in the Sahel, the AGRHYMET center was established in Niger. The SADC has a similar 
program on food security. Drought monitoring centers in Kenya and Zimbabwe and the African Centre for Meteorological 
Applications in Development were established in the 1990s. National departments, universities, and NGOs also have been 
active in promoting drought monitoring, mitigation, and preparedness. By monitoring key indicators of staple food pro­
duction, national stocks, and import availability, a rough and ready national balance can be calculated using population 
estimates and per capita needs (SADC, 1996). Most famine early-warning systems (EWSs) predict the failure of food sys­
tems (Wilhite and Easterling, 1987). Increasingly, the focus of monitoring and intervention has been on food-insecure peo­
ple who strive to subsist within food systems, rather than national food balances per se (Davies, 1996). Many EWSs now 
monitor upstream determinants of production (such as rainfall and soil moisture) as well as downstream outcome indica­
tors (such as market prices for food and the nutritional status of those most vulnerable). Vulnerability assessment (and 
mapping) is one tool for integrating the climatic, production, and socioeconomic dimensions of drought in the context of 
sustainable development. Unfortunately, the focus often remains on food balances and food crises rather than solving 
chronic hunger and enhancing the livelihoods of the most vulnerable populations.
Early warnings do not guarantee effective responses. Early warnings by the drought monitoring centers and national 
meteorological services of a severe drought in 1991 were largely ignored by government and donor agencies (SADC,
1994). Economic structural adjustment programs failed to take rainfall variability into account in their design and 
emphasis on reform. Thus, numerous countries were poorly prepared, without a national disaster management program 
in place. There were conflicts over statistics used in emergency programs— where data from different sources were not 
reconciled— which led to delays in response. The response to the 1990s drought in Kenya was more positive; one month 
after the drought was apparent, large-scale food imports were made, and local food stocks were utilized (Longhurst,
1992; see Downing et al., 1990, for a description of the similar success in 1984—1985). Preprogrammed drought respons­
es also assisted in averting a major crisis; In northern Kenya, a decentralized early-warning system was well developed, 
and recommendations were translated rapidly into firm decisions to mitigate the impact of the drought.
Local coping strategies for drought and famine are well illustrated in the inner Niger delta of the Malian Sahel (Davies, 
1996). Famine, although not entirely absent, is not a common occurrence in the Sahel. Periods of drought have been 
more frequent since the late 1960s, although there is little consensus regarding their origin or whether such drought is a 
permanent trend. Over the past 30 years or so, drought and famine have been part of a downward spiral of impoverish­
ment, increasing vulnerability, destitution, and sometimes death. As a result of the Sahelian droughts of the early 1970s 
and the mid-1980s, fundamental changes are taking place in the livelihoods of people as they adapt to confront declining 
food security. Local livelihood systems have become less resilient and more sensitive (more vulnerable) to food stress 
with successive periods of drought. The nature and degree of vulnerability vary according to the livelihood system. 
Famines could be mitigated if policymakers can recognize and reinforce local coping strategies.
Lessons learned in responding to drought in Africa need to be widely implemented to reduce the threat of famine and 
enhance livelihood security. Promising developments in climate prediction and experience in early warning and respons­
es lay the foundation for ending famine in Africa. Responses to drought also provide insight into effective adaptation to 
climate change. Reducing present vulnerability reduces the threat of catastrophic impacts. Institutional management of 
present climatic hazards should support adaptive learning to cope with future climate change.
Africa
59
conflicts have adversely affected food production, making the 
continent extremely vulnerable to climate change. Without a 
sound agricultural sector, Africa is unlikely to develop diversi­
fied economies that can cope with the impact of climate change. 
Thus, the impact of climate change on agriculture and food 
security in Africa over the next few decades will depend on 
progress in applied agricultural research and development.
There is a need for assessments of crops, agricultural systems, 
food economy, and food security at local, national, and region­
al levels, but data are not readily available (IPCC, 1996). In 
some African countries, such studies are underway.
Adaptation to climate change is not automatic or autonomous. The 
motivations, constraints, and domains of authority of decision­
makers involved in shaping policy, implementing decisions, 
and coping with the consequences of changes in resources and 
hazards must be considered (see Grimble and Chan, 1995). The 
principal stakeholders in African agriculture range from vul­
nerable consumers and subsistence producers to national and 
international organizations charged with planning, research, 
and relief (see Gibberd et a i, 1996, for examples in the context 
of seasonal climate prediction). Consumers are the ultimate 
stakeholders in adapting to climate change. For particularly 
vulnerable groups (such as resource-poor farmers, landless 
laborers, the urban poor, the destitute and displaced, or refugee 
populations), the outcome of strategies to adapt to climate
change and climatic hazards may alter their livelihoods. 
Failure to cope with adverse change could lead to significant 
deprivation, social disruption, and population displacement. 
Producers adapt to climatic variations every season but have 
varying interests in climate change. Subsistence farmers are 
unlikely to have the resources necessary to consider specific 
strategies to adapt to climate change. Commercial farmers are 
more likely to be linked to national markets and international 
agribusinesses and able to invest in agricultural technology. 
However, adopting specific strategies depends on cost effec­
tiveness within the context of short-term enterprise goals. One 
of the key stakeholders in enacting forward-looking strategies 
is business— from local market traders to international com­
modity and research organizations. However, commodity 
traders are not likely to be affected directly by the conse­
quences of climate change, as long as production is viable and 
trade required somewhere in the world. Incentives may be 
required to induce agribusiness to adopt a longer planning 
horizon and to develop and implement adaptive responses. At 
present, the bulk of responsibility for designing, evaluating, 
and implementing strategic responses falls upon national gov­
ernments, national and international research centers, and aid 
organizations (particularly bilateral and multilateral groups, 
although some international and even local NGOs may take an 
interest in adaptation policies). These are the same actors 
charged with development; extending their purview to longer- 
term climate change should not be difficult.
Box 2-8. Maize Adaptation to Ciimate Change in Zimbabwe
Throughout the world there is great scope to adapt to the agricultural impacts of climate change. Simulations with the 
CERES-Maize crop model at four sites in Zimbabwe illustrate the impacts of climate change and the effect of changing 
planting dates (Makadho, 1996; see also Muchena, 1994; Hulme, 1996b). The CERES model simulates crop develop­
ment and yield using specialized functions to calculate photosynthesis, phenological stage, évapotranspiration, and parti­
tioning of biomass. Simulations were discrete, with the default initial soil water moisture set at the field capacity of the
soils. Nitrogen stress and pests were not simulated. 
Grain yield (kg/ha) from  CERES-Maize simulations fo r 
Average potential yields, as simulated with 40 years of 
Zimbabwe J  
climate data, range from more than 3.5 t/ha in Region II
(Karoi) to barely 1 t/ha in Region V (Beit Bridge).
There is a considerable gap between these potential 
yields and the yields realized by farmers in the region. 
In semi-arid zones (Region V), 500 kg/ha would be an 
above-average yield. Average commercial farm yields 
in the high veld are closer to the potential yield because 
of application of fertilizer. For the two equilibrium sce­
narios of climate change, yields decrease in the high 
veld (Karoi) and semi-arid region (Beit Bridge) but 
increase in the middle zones (Gweru and Masvingo). If 
the season start is adjusted, the yield decreases in the 
high veld, and semi-arid zones produce sizable increas­
es. For example, planting on 15 October at Karoi results 
in 3.7 t/ha at present. With climate change and delaying 
planting to 1 November, yields would be 4.6 t/ha— a 
25% increase. At Beit Bridge, the season would shift 
toward earlier planting to avoid high temperatures and 
water stress at the height of the summer.
P Date
Present
CCC
GFDL
Karoi
15 Oct
3,727
2,643
2,940
1 Nov
3,654
4,641
4,630
Gweru
15 Oct
3,006
5,011
5,446
Masvingo
15 Oct
3,006
3,493
3,097
Beit Bridge
15 Dec
1,213
713
725
1 Dec
1,203
1,304
1,453
1 Nov
1,136
838
1,740
“P Date is simulated planting date; CCC is the Canadian Climate 
Centre equilibrium GCM experiment, and GFDL is the Geophysical 
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory equilibrium GCM experiment.
Source: Makadho, 1996; see also Matarira et ai, 1996.
60
Africa
What options are available to different stakeholders to begin 
preparing for climate change in Africa? The impacts of climate 
change could be serious, at least in some regions and for some 
stakeholders. Equally important, however, climate change pre­
sents new opportunities that may promote development. Table
2 - 8  lists generic agricultural adjustments that currently are 
practiced in Africa and may be appropriate to cope with cli­
mate change. Adjustments are grouped according to the level 
of the agricultural sector in which they might be applied: land 
management, crop variety and land use, crop husbandry, and
Table 2-8: Agricultural adjustments to climate change.
Strategy and Adjustment 
Mechanisms
Costs
Implementation
Constraints and Issues
Land Management
Moisture management 
(conservation, irrigation, 
soil drainage, mulching, 
fallowing); soil management 
(mulching, tiUage, стор 
rotation, land drainage)
Regulate soil water bal- 
Higher costs for additional 
ance through incremental 
irrigation works, water, 
irrigation, drainage, control operation, and mainte- 
of evaporation, and runoff; nance; some additional 
enhance organic matter, 
labor and inputs 
use fertilizer, control soil 
erosion
Gradual implementation 
with increased tempera­
tures, often in response to 
drought
Water availability (surface 
and ground), water quality, 
terrain, alternative 
demands for water, invest­
ment capital and incentives
Crop Variety and Land Use
Cultivars; rotations; crop 
substitution; cropped area; 
crop location; conversion 
to/from crops or pasture; 
changes in specialization; 
livestock types and levels
Switch varieties, crops, or 
rotations (longer maturing 
varieties, heat- and 
drought-tolerant, requiring 
less vernalization); more 
flexible cropping system 
with seasonal forecasts, 
spread risk; switch location 
(regional or within farm) 
to new climates or soils; 
change specialization (e.g., 
arable/pasture production); 
change resource intensity 
(e.g., stocking rate)
Costs include development 
of cultivars, livestock 
breeding, and restmcturing 
for different farming sys­
tems; marginal costs may 
be minimal if encom­
passed in normal agricul­
tural investment
Costs are staged or incre­
mental, but related to rate 
of climate change and pos­
sible effects of severe 
episodes; new cultivars 
require 10-15 years to 
develop
Lead time to develop new 
cultivars; soil suitability 
and terrain in conversion 
to agricultural uses; 
delayed response to new 
conditions; need for addi­
tional information and 
training; availability of 
genetic material
Crop Husbandry: 
Planting and Harvesting
Timing of planting and 
harvest; plant mixed 
varieties; planting depth; 
plant density
Earlier/later scheduling 
Few additional costs; shifts 
with changed growing sea- in labor requirements dur- 
son or to shift timing of 
ing season 
heat stress; flexible crop­
ping system; plant deeper 
in drier conditions; thin 
crop in dry years to lower 
plant density and reduce 
competition for moisture
Gradual adjustment with 
little lead time; possibly 
greater flexibility in 
response to seasonal or 
monthly weather forecasts
Availabffity of cultivars, 
changes in winter season, 
frost, soils, field accessibil­
ity due to wet conditions 
may limit applicability
Crop Husbandry: Fertility 
and Pest Management
Herbicides; pesticides; 
fertilizer application; 
nitrogen-fixing crops
Control weeds to reduce 
competition for moisture, 
nutrients, and light; control 
pests and diseases that 
limit plant growth, yield, 
or yield quality; nature, 
quantity, and timing of fer­
tilizer affect plant uptake
Input costs increase in 
general; considerable 
savings possible for some 
fertilizer/crop regimes, but 
increased costs in other 
regions
Gradual adjustment with 
short lead time and rapid 
responses, except for new 
crops and invading pests, 
diseases, and weeds
Toxic and ecological con­
cerns with fertilizer leach­
ing; information to 
respond to new pests, 
diseases, and weeds; new 
crops
Table 2S  continued.
Africa
61
Mechanisms
Costs
Implementation
Constraints and Issues
Economic Adjustinents: 
Farm Level 
Investment in agriculture 
(equipment and machinery); 
farm inputs; savings and 
storage; labor and 
employment; off-farm 
purchases; food 
consumption
Increased investment in 
agriculture to increase 
yields; increased food 
storage to reduce 
variabihty in supply; 
increased savings and 
purchases to supplement 
storage; off-farm employ­
ment to support increased 
investment and food 
purchases; altered food 
consumption to cope with 
seasonal shortages, shifts 
to new varieties, economic 
crises, labor demands
Infrastmcture for storage 
and marketing; operation 
and maintenance costs for 
storage; opportunity cost 
of off-farm employment; 
costs of new technology; 
additional costs in dry 
years for purchases, 
replanting, etc.
Gradual but variable relat­
ed to yields; storage facffi- 
ties minor on-farm; grad­
ual shifts in employment, 
but sudden with extreme 
episodes
Limited by finance, tech­
nology, type of agricultural 
production, 5иф 1и5 , access 
to regional and internation­
al economics and trade
farm-level economic adjustments (macro-economic and sec­
toral planning also should be considered). Box 2-8 evaluates 
one such adjustment in Zimbabwe.
Beyond improving agriculture using available strategies, what 
more should be done to plan for climate change? Ringius et al. 
(1996) provided guidelines on adaptation for agriculture and 
water in Africa (see also Downing et al, 1996). Anticipating 
climate change may be warranted for projects with long life 
spans (e.g., irrigation schemes); where the marginal cost of 
adaptation is small or brings benefits regardless of climate 
change; for protection against extreme events; and to prevent 
irreversible impacts (e.g., preservation of biodiversity). For 
example, the most certain aspect of climate change is increased 
CO 2  concentrations. Efforts to enhance positive CO 2  responses 
in new cultivars may be worth the investment in plant breeding 
and agricultural technology, irrespective of projected changes 
in moisture availability. Strategic food reserves to buffer poten­
tial increases in the variation of local and national production 
might be relatively inexpensive at the international level but 
not warranted for most countries or at local grain banks. 
Drought early warning and preparedness could build upon the 
considerable improvements that already are underway in many 
regions of Africa, including making better use of seasonal cli­
mate predictions.
Protection against irreversible impacts or losses of valued 
resources may be warranted in some situations. Thus, if coastal 
erosion and sea-level rise threaten valuable coastal resources, 
protection measures may be cost-effective. For example, 
groundwater pumping may be required to lower the water table 
if saline intrusion affects agriculture in low-lying areas. It is 
unlikely that such projects are a priority in the near future. 
However, protection measures should be considered in the 
design of new development.
Regulation of resource allocation and development is deficient 
in much of Africa. Institutional and regulatory reform may be 
warranted to preclude development in areas that become increas­
ingly hazardous (such as coastal zones) and to protect vulnera­
ble communities (e.g., economic restructuring). Establishing pri­
orities for development based on future land capabilities may be 
premature for most regions, but flexibility in development prior­
ities should be retained and new information taken into account. 
For example, the ability of community groups to manage rapid 
resource changes may warrant further support. Market structures 
often support crops with a high level of risk and fail to support 
markets for drought-tolerant crops. Regulations that constrain 
free trade may increase the volatility of local markets and food 
supplies in response to climatic variations.
If the present scope for adaptation is limited, investment in 
research and education are warranted to develop new solutions 
and stimulate behavioral changes to accommodate climate 
change. For example, development of cultivars that optimize 
responses to CO 2  enrichment and development and testing of 
new cultivars suitable for a range of likely climatic conditions 
require improved research. Education on environmental issues 
is warranted, although it is probably too soon to undertake spe­
cific campaigns designed to adapt to climate change. However, 
a broad capacity to address environmental issues and commu­
nicate understanding to stakeholders is urgently needed. This 
capacity is even more critical in linking greenhouse gas abate­
ment with sustainable development issues.
Beyond specific adaptive actions, institutions may need to be 
strengthened— for example, to enhance the productivity of nat­
ural resources, to increase the capacity to respond to develop­
mental pressures and resource crises, and to improve environ­
mental quality. Concerning drought, institutions need to make 
better use of climate information to cope with climatic risks
62
Africa
and reduce vulnerability. These are ongoing development 
objectives, but further assistance is warranted in light of the 
risk of changes in climatic hazards.
Ringius et al. (1996) evaluate four ensembles of adaptive 
strategies at different levels of planning:
1) 
Farm-level adaptive responses include substitution of 
agronomic practices (changes in sowing date, planting 
density, cultivars, etc.); altered inputs (e.g., fertilizer, pest 
and weed control, crop choice); and agricultural devel­
opment (soil and water management that requires more 
substantial investment). The priority stakeholder is the 
smallholder farming sector. Commercial farms would be 
less likely to need assistance in these sorts of adaptive 
strategies. On the other hand, these strategies are less 
likely to be effective for agropastoralists and pastoralism 
in general. Such farm-level agronomic improvements 
can be effective, can be readily implemented, and have 
few substantial constraints to their adoption.
2) 
At the national level, three strategies commonly are 
proposed:
Maintaining strategic reserves allows the govern­
ment (or marketing bodies) to dampen price fluc­
tuations and release food in emerging crises. 
Large national reserves have been held in the 
past, but have been reduced under structural 
adjustment agreements because of their cost.
• 
Markets and trading conditions could be adjusted 
to promote private-sector responses to climate 
change and climatic variability. This strategy 
might take the form of tax incentives for carry­
over stocks or bonds to smooth income between 
adverse and good trading years. This approach 
would build upon present efforts to reduce trade 
barriers, with some specific adjustments to 
accommodate climate change.
Promoting agricultural development in general 
would close the gap between research and prac­
tice. The need to adapt to climate change could be 
used as one argument for fresh initiatives in pro­
moting adaptive agricultural research and devel­
opment in Africa.
The primary beneficiaries of such national adaptive 
strategies are consumers and commercial producers 
who depend on markets for food consumption. 
M arket adjustm ents may entail some trade-offs 
between consumers and producers or between rela­
tively prosperous farmers and vulnerable smallhold­
ers who may not have access to inputs and markets. 
Yet the potential for multiple benefits is high (except 
for strategic reserves, which are a burden on the econ­
omy). As a group, these strategies would be reason­
ably effective in preparing for climate change.
3) 
At the global level, some policies to prepare for cli­
mate change may be justified:
• 
Climate change may require additional trade to 
smooth out fluctuations in national production.
Maintaining international prices within accept­
able limits would benefit poorer countries that 
might not be able to afford large imports in times 
of scarcity. In the transition toward a new cli­
mate, such an international capacity to prevent 
food deficits from becoming survival emergen­
cies would appeal to the humanitarian goals of 
ending famine and reducing hunger.
• 
Encouraging free trade between and among 
countries should stimulate agricultural markets in 
regions with a comparative advantage. This trade 
may be a major benefit to some countries and a 
significant cost to others, as the impacts of cli­
mate change alter traditional markets. In princi­
ple, free trade allows national surpluses and 
deficits to be accommodated more efficiently. 
Thus, supply and price fluctuations are buffered 
at the global level, widening the potential pool of 
responses to climate change.
International mechanisms to promote agrotech­
nology transfers to developing countries might 
focus on basic foodstuffs: wheat, rice, and maize. 
International agencies might license new tech­
nologies developed by biotechnology firms for 
dissemination and use in developing countries.
4) 
Reducing drought risk and societal vulnerability 
would provide greater resilience in coping with cli­
mate change. Concerted action is required in three 
areas: mitigation to reduce vulnerability, monitoring 
drought and vulnerability, and preparedness to respond 
effectively to emerging crises. Considerable progress 
has been made in the past decade; a further decade of 
development might reap substantial rewards in efforts 
to eliminate widespread famine and enhance liveli­
hood security, at least in times of drought (see 
Downing et a l, 1996; Gibberd et al, 1996). The pri­
ority stakeholders should be the most vulnerable 
socioeconomic groups affected by drought crises—  
although many levels of local, national, and interna­
tional actors are required to implement drought moni­
toring, mitigation, and emergency responses.
These four broad strategies would promote African resilience 
in the face of present climatic risks and enhance Africa’s 
capacity to adapt to climate change. In the next few decades, 
Africa must manage the transition from vulnerable subsistence 
agriculture to resilient, adaptive systems. If real progress is 
achieved, most regions and populations could cope with cli­
mate change over the next few decades. Climate change on top 
of continued vulnerability and agricultural crises threatens 
regional security.
The fundamental requirement for adaptation in Africa is to pro­
mote sustainable agricultural development— closing the gap 
between experimental yields and farm yields, overcoming con­
straints in markets, and providing rural infrastructure (credit, 
inputs, transport, etc.), which will enhance the capacity of the 
agricultural sector to contribute to local and national economic
Africa
63
development. The overall aim should be to make the best use 
of climate as a resource for agriculture by enhancing the capa­
bilities of agriculturists, agribusiness, and organizations to 
respond to climate variations and climate change. Perhaps the 
clearest specific objective at present is to prepare for climatic 
hazards by reducing vulnerability by way of developing moni­
toring capabilities and by enhancing the responsiveness of the 
agricultural sector to forecasts of production variations and 
food crisis.
2.3.3.3. 
M arine and Riverine Fisheries
The African nations possess a variety of lacustrine, riverine, 
and marine habitats with more than 800 freshwater and marine 
species. Ten ichthyofauna regions, based largely on present- 
day drainage systems, have been delineated for Africa (Lowe- 
McConnell, 1987). These regions are dominated by the Niger, 
the Nile, the Congo, and the Zambezi River systems; they also 
include several inland drainage areas associated with lakes 
(Hlohowskyj et a l, 1996). Among the riverine systems, the 
Congo River (including its major tributaries) contains the most 
diverse fish fauna, with about 690 species (of which 80% are 
endemic) (Lowe-McConnell, 1987). Lacustrine systems in 
Africa (particularly the Rift Valley lakes) contain the most 
diverse and unique fish assemblages found anywhere in Africa, 
if not the world. For example. Lake Malawi has more than 240 
identified fish species (of which more than 90% are endemic), 
and another 500 or more species awaiting taxonomic identifi­
cation (Lewis et a l, 1986).
Fish make up a significant part of the food supply in Africa 
(Hersoug, 1995). FAO (1993) estimates the total fish harvest 
potential at around 10.5 million tons: 7.8 million in saltwater 
fisheries and 2.7 million in freshwater fisheries. In a densely 
populated country such as Nigeria, as much as one-third of the 
protein supply comes from fish (Hersoug, 1995). Consequently, 
any fluctuation in the fish stock will impact planning and man­
agement. A  reduction in fish stocks will have the greatest effect 
on countries that are heavily dependent on fisheries and cannot 
diversify easily into other activities; Mauritania, Namibia, and 
Somalia are examples of African countries in this category 
(Clarke, 1993).
The productivity of freshwater and sea margins has become 
stressed mainly by economic activities rather than climate vari­
ability. For example, the artificial opening of the sand barrier at 
the mouth of the Cote d’Ivoire River to clear floating weeds 
has allowed seawater to enter the lower part of the river and has 
changed species dominance (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
16.1.1). On the Nile, the Aswan Dam so thoroughly regulates 
flows that the delta has become degraded ecologically. Local 
sardine populations that once thrived and provided food for the 
region have collapsed with the decline in production that 
depended on the strong surges of floodwaters and their pulse 
nutrients. The Sahelian drought is causing increased salinity in 
the lower parts of Senegalese rivers, but a dam erected near the 
mouth of the Senegal River to stop the rising salinity and ease
severe problems in local agriculture prevents fish migration 
(Binet et a l, 1995).
2.З.З.З.1. 
Vulnerability o f fisheries resources
The vulnerability of fisheries to climate change depends on the 
nature of the climate change, the nature of the fishery, and its 
species and habitats. Changes in climatic conditions such as air 
temperature and precipitation affect fisheries by altering habi­
tat availability or quality. Specifically, fisheries habitats may 
be affected by changes in water temperature; the timing and 
duration of extreme temperature conditions; the magnitude and 
pattern of annual stream flows; surface-water elevations; and 
the shorelines of lakes, reservoirs, and near-shore marine envi­
ronments (Carpenter et a l, 1992).
Mean annual air temperature is the most important factor in 
predicting lake fish production across latitudes. Alterations in 
seasonal climate patterns should change the population distri­
butions in larger lakes. Large-lake fish production could 
increase about 6 % with a 1°C rise in average annual air tem­
perature (M eisner et a l, 1987; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
16.2.1). Warm-water lakes generally have higher productivi­
ty than cold-water lakes, and existing warm-water lakes will 
be in areas with the least change in temperature. It is reason­
able to expect higher overall productivity from freshwater 
systems.
Although changing rainfall patterns and flood regimes may 
have profound effects on freshwater fish, marine fisheries are 
likely to be affected more by elevated temperatures (Hernes et 
a l, 1995). The impacts of elevated temperatures could include:
A shift in centers of production and the composition of 
fish species as ecosystems move geographically and 
change internally. This is in contrast to freshwater fish 
species— ^particularly in small, shallow rivers and 
lakes— ^which will have limited possibilities to adapt to 
the changes through migration.
• 
Economic values can be expected to fall until long­
term stability is reestablished. Rapid changes result­
ing from physical forcing favor smaller, low-priced, 
opportunistic species that discharge large numbers of 
eggs over long periods.
• 
Where ecosystems shift position, national fisheries will 
suffer if institutional mechanisms are not in place that 
enable fishermen to move within and across present 
exclusive economic zone boundaries. Subsistence and 
other small-scale fishermen (who dominate in Africa) 
probably will suffer disproportionally from such 
changes (Everett, 1994).
2.3.3.3.2. 
Adaptation options for fisheries resources
Adaptation to existing climate variability may demonstrate 
ways to deal with climate change. The following adaptation
64
Africa
options are suggested for the fisheries industry (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 16.3.1):
• 
Modify and strengthen fisheries management policies 
and institutions and associated fish population and 
catch-monitoring activities.
• 
Preserve and restore wetlands, estuaries, floodplains, 
and bottomlands— essential habitats for most fisheries. 
Cooperate more closely with forestry, water, and other 
resource managers because of the close interaction 
between land cover and maintenance of adequate fish­
ery habitat. The adequacy of management practices in 
all sectors affecting fisheries (e.g., water resources, 
coastal management) needs to be examined to ensure 
that proper responses are made as climate changes. 
Promote fisheries conservation and environmental 
education among fishermen.
• 
In cases of species collapse and obvious ecosystem 
disequilibrium , restock with ecologically sound 
species and strains as habitat changes; great care is 
needed to avoid ecological damage.
• 
Develop aquaculture and tourism to make coastal 
communities better able to deal with uncertainties of 
climate change.
To reduce the possibility of fishery disruption, strict biological 
monitoring should be implemented, and properly enforced 
fishing controls must be instituted. These strategies would help 
keep stock-replacement levels stable in the face of physical 
stress caused by climate change and other environmental phe­
nomena while meeting the growing demand for fish and fish­
ery products by an ever-increasing population.
2.3.3.4. 
Production Forestry
Plantations of exotic species are a major source of wood for 
timber and paper industries in Africa; indigenous species 
(hardwoods) are used mostly for fuelwood, for charcoal pro­
duction, and in traditional construction. Some Indigenous 
species have very specialized uses, including making furniture, 
musical instruments, railway sleepers, and carvings. In such 
cases, natural stands are harvested by removing large and 
viable trees, with residual stands left to recover. It is likely that 
natural stands would take 60 or more years before they produce 
trees of harvestable size. Exotic species, on the other hand, can 
take less than 10 years to about 30 years to produce poles and 
sawtimber-quality trees. The most common introduced species 
are pines (mostly Pinus patula), eucalypts, and cypress 
(Cupressus spp.).
In the 1980s, fast-growing exotic plantations were regarded as 
the solution to Africa’s dwindling fuelwood resources. Many 
projects performed poorly, however, because of poor species 
choice, lack of species trials, limited site characterization, and 
unforeseen pests (such as goats and termites). Conversion of 
extensive areas of woodland, shrub, or savannas to forest plan­
tations has had ecological consequences that have not been
fully assessed for Africa. Elsewhere, extensive plantations lead 
to increased transpiration and reduced runoff, so catchment 
yields can be reduced. Although there are signs of this process 
in many parts of Africa, no data have been collected. 
Eucalypts, in particular, have been suspected of drying land­
scapes and lowering water tables (FAO, 1985).
In many countries in Africa, forest plantations are established 
in marginal areas (to avoid competing with agriculture), and 
often in complex terrain (mountainsides and plateaus). Soil 
erosion after timber harvesting leads to siltation problems in 
rivers and reservoirs and can cause serious problems in hydro­
electric generation. Plantations traditionally have been man­
aged to maximize financial returns. Erosion problems associat­
ed with clear-cutting and log extraction will need to be 
addressed in future silvicultural planning, especially where 
logging is being carried out in catchment areas that are impor­
tant for drinking water or hydroelectric generation.
The widespread use of exotic conifer species has increased the 
incidence of exotic forest pests, such as aphid pests (Katerere, 
1983). These include the Eurasian pine woolly aphid, Pineus 
pini (Macquart); the Holarctic pine needle aphid, Eulachnus 
rileyi (Williams); and the European cypress aphid, Cinara 
cupressi (Buckton). The cypress aphid was first reported in 
Africa in Malawi in 1986 (Chilima, 1991); by 1990, it had 
spread to several countries, including Kenya (Owuar, 1991). In 
Africa, the aphid attacks the exotic plantations of Cupressus 
lusitanica, as well as indigenous species such asJuniperuspro- 
cera and Widdringtonia nodiflora (Mulanje cedar)— M alawi’s 
national tree. In Kenya, about half of the approximately
150,000 ha of plantation forests is Cupressus lusitanica. The 
aphid thus poses a considerable threat to the timber industry 
(Orondo and Day, 1994). Data are being collected to assess the 
extent of damage and any correlations with climatic factors in 
eastern and southern Africa (Chilima, pers. comm.).
Plantations may be most vulnerable to climate change through 
increased stress resulting from drought, which makes condi­
tions ideal for new or old pests and diseases. In a matter of a 
few years, an important species can be wiped out— ^before con­
trol measures are developed or new species found to replace it. 
No data exist on how plantation species in Africa might 
respond to increases in CO 2  concentrations. It would seem 
likely, though, that improved W UE associated with a CO 2  fer­
tilization effect would boost productivity.
2.3.4. 
African Coastal Zones
The African coastal zone consists of a narrow, low-lying 
coastal belt. It also includes the continental shelf and coasts of 
32 mainland countries. It is composed of a variety of ecosys­
tems, including barrier/lagoons, deltas, mountains, wetlands, 
mangroves, coral reefs, and shelf zones. These ecosystems 
vary in width from a few hundred meters (in the Red Sea area) 
to more than 100 km, especially in the Niger and Nile deltas. 
In west Africa (Mauritania to Namibia), the coastal zone spans
Africa
65
a broad range of habitats and biota and includes the pristine 
islands of Bijagos Archipelago; the offshore island nations of 
Cape Verde and Sao Tome and Principe; and the remote central 
Atlantic islands of San Helena and Ascension.
A large percentage of west Africa’s urban population lives in 
coastal cities. In Nigeria, for example, about 20 million people 
(2 2 .6 % of the national population) live along the coastal zone; 
about 4.5 million Senegalese (6 6 .6 % of the national population) 
live in the Dakar coastal area. About 90% of the industries in 
Senegal are located within the Dakar coastal zone. In Ghana, 
Benin, Togo, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria, most of the economic 
activities that form the backbone of the national economies are 
located within the coastal zone. Coastal areas also form the food 
basket of the region. Offshore and inshore areas, as well as estu­
aries and lagoons, support artisinal and industrial fisheries 
accounting for more than 75% of fishery landings in the region.
The coastal zone of east Africa, including coastal wetlands, 
extends from Sudan to South Africa and includes the near-shore 
islands off the coast of Tanzania and Mozambique and the 
oceanic islands of Madagascar, the Seychelles, Comoros, 
Mauritius, and Reunion. The desert margins of the Red Sea fea­
ture some of the richest coral reefs in the world. Coral reefs fur­
ther south, extending from Kenya to the Tropic of Capricorn, 
are well distributed around most of the oceanic islands. They 
buffer the coastline against the impact of wave breakers and the 
full force of storms and cyclones. Many principal east African 
cities are located inland. Despite their low densities, however, 
coastal cities like Dar es Salaam and Mombasa are experienc­
ing annual population growth of 6.75% and 5%, respectively 
(World Bank, 1995a). Coastal tourism and fisheries represent 
large inputs into the GNP of east African states.
Coastal population pressures and increasing exploitation of 
coastal resources— utilizing conflicting exploitation methods—  
have led to coastal degradation. Coastal erosion, flooding, pol­
lution (air, water, land), deforestation, saltwater intrusion, and 
subsidence are some of the environmental problems degrading 
large parts of the coastal area of Africa. Coastal erosion already 
has been reported to reach 23-30 m annually in some parts of 
coastal west Africa (Ibe and Quelennac, 1989). In Cote d’Ivoire, 
high erosion rates have been reported in areas off the Abidjan 
harbor. It also is estimated that about 40% of the mangroves in 
Nigeria had been lost by 1980 (WRI, 1990); about 60% of man­
grove areas in Senegal also have been lost as a result of man­
grove clearing, coastal erosion, and increases in the salinity of 
water and soil. Industrial pollution from oil spills and discharge 
of domestic untreated wastes is polluting large areas of the 
coast, including lagoons and near-shore areas. The Korle lagoon 
in Accra, Lagos lagoon, and Ebrie lagoon in Abidjan all have 
been polluted, resulting in loss of fisheries resources.
Under doubled CO 2 , climate change is projected to adversely 
affect several physical, ecological/biological, and socioeconomic 
characteristics of the west African coastal zone and adjacent 
oceans that presently are under stress. At the same time, popula­
tion pressures and conflicting policies of exploitation of coastal
resources also have had adverse effects on coastal sustainability. 
Environmental problems degrading the coastal area are projected 
to increase as a result of either sea-level rise or an increase in 
extreme weather events (IPCC, 1996).
23.4.1. 
Vulnerability and Impacts o f Climate Change 
on Coastal Zones
Climate change will exacerbate existing physical, ecologi­
cal/biological, and socioeconomic stresses on the African 
coastal zone. Most existing studies focus on the extent to which 
rising sea level could inundate and erode low-lying areas or 
increase flooding caused by storm surges and intense rain­
storms. The coastal nations of west and central Africa (e.g., 
Senegal, The Gambia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, Cameroon, 
Gabon, Angola) have low-lying lagoonal coasts that are sus­
ceptible to erosion and hence are threatened by sea-level rise, 
particularly because most of the countries in this area have 
major and rapidly expanding cities on the coast (IPCC, 1996).
Africa’s west coast often is buffeted by storm surges and cur­
rently is at risk from erosion, inundation, and extreme storm 
events. Inundation could be a significant concern (Awosika et 
a l, 1992; Dennis e ta l, 1995; French e ta l, 1995; ICST, 1996; 
Jallow et a l, 1996). Major cities such as Banjul (Jallow et a l, 
1996), Abidjan, Tabaou, Grand Bassam, Sassandra, San Pedro 
(ICST, 1996), Lagos, and Port Harcourt (Awosika et a l,
1992)— all situated at sea level— would be very vulnerable. 
Finally, tidal waves, storm surges, and hazards also may 
increase and may modify littoral transport (Allersman and 
Tilsmans, 1993).
The coastal zone of east Africa also will be affected— although, 
unlike west Africa’s Atlantic coast, this area experiences calm 
conditions through much of the year. Along the east coast of 
Africa, sea-level rise and climatic variation may decrease the 
attenuation of coral and patch reefs that have evolved along 
major sections of the continental shelf. The lessening of this 
buffer effect as a result of climate change would increase the 
potential for erosion of the east coast. Increases in population 
growth rates in the principal coastal cities of east Africa, com­
bined with a likelihood of a 1 -m sea-level rise, could create 
conditions for significant negative impacts on tourism-oriented 
economies, ecology, and natural habitats of this area.
Existing literature provides information about the implications 
of sea-level rise for Egypt, Nigeria, Senegal, Cote d ’Ivoire, 
The Gambia, and Tanzania.
2.З.4.1.1. 
Egypt
Results from studies on various aspects of the impacts and pos­
sible responses to sea-level rise on the Egyptian coast (Broadus 
et a l, 1986; Milliman et a l, 1989; Sestini, 1989; Ante, 1990; 
El-Raey, 1990; El-Sayed, 1991; Khafagy et a l, 1992; Stanley 
and Warne, 1993) indicate that a sizable proportion of the
66
Africa
northern part of the Nile delta will be lost to a combination of 
inundation and erosion, with consequent loss of agricultural 
land and urban areas. Furthermore, agricultural land losses will 
occur as a result of soil salinization (El-Raey et a i, 1995).
Khafagy et a l (1992) estimate that for a 1-m sea-level rise, 
about 2,000 km2 of land in coastal areas of the lower Nile delta 
may be lost to inundation. Substantial erosion should be 
expected, possibly leading to land losses of as much as 1 0 0  
km2. A very rough estimate of the agricultural land area that 
might become unusable is 1,000 km^ (100,000 ha). With an 
average land value of US$1.5 / т /  the value of land loss in the 
lower Nile delta as a result of flooding alone will be on the 
order of US$750 million (2,500 million Egyptian pounds) 
(Khafagy et a l, 1992). Outside the delta, erosion is expected to 
be quite limited. If average erosion were 20 m along 50% of 
the remaining coast (and assuming land values on the order of 
5 Egyptian pounds per m^), the total loss would be about 
US$60 million (200 million Egyptian pounds).
For the Governorate of Alexandria, two main economic areas 
appear most vulnerable: the Alexandria lowlands and the 
Alexandria beaches (El-Raey et a l, 1995). The Alexandria 
lowlands— on which the city of Alexandria originally devel­
oped— are vulnerable to inundation, waterlogging, increased 
flooding, and salinization under accelerated sea-level rise. The 
two surviving Alexandria beaches (Gleam and El Chatby) will 
be lost even with a 0.5-m rise in sea level. Based on the 0.5-m 
scenario, estimated losses of land, installations, and tourism 
will exceed US$32.5 billion. An average business loss is esti­
mated at US$127 million/yr because most tourist facilities such 
as hotels, camps, and youth hotels are located within 200-300 
m of the shoreline. It has been widely reported that 8  million 
people would be displaced in Egypt by a 1-m rise in sea level, 
assuming no protection and existing population levels 
(Broadus et a l, 1986; Milliman et a l, 1989). This estimate is 
based on the displacement of 4 million people in the Nile delta, 
as well as the entire population of Alexandria.
23.4.1.2. 
Nigeria
If sea level rises, inundation could occur along more than 70% 
of the Nigerian coastline, placing land at risk many kilometers 
inland (Awosika et a l, 1992). In Nigeria, inundation is the pri­
mary threat for at least 96% of the land at risk (Awosika et al, 
1992; French et a l, 1995). With a 1-m rise in sea level, up to 
600 km2 of land would be at risk. This area includes parts of 
Lagos and other smaller towns along the coast. For the Mud 
Coast, a 1-m rise will place as much as 2,016 km^ of land at 
risk. Even with no acceleration in sea-level rise, current rates 
of land loss through edge erosion alone could cause losses of 
as much as 250 km^ by the year 2100. This land loss is equiv­
alent to an average shoreline recession of 3 km. Erosion threat­
ens a higher percentage of the land on the Strand Coast than in 
the delta (4.6-20.7% for the Strand Coast, versus 0.8-3.5% for 
the delta). Without consideration of oil wells in the Niger delta, 
the greatest value at risk is along the Barrier Coast— ranging
from just over US$1.3 billion with a 0.2-m sea-level rise to 
almost US$14 billion with a 2-m rise. When the value of the oil 
fields is considered, the value at risk increases from US$81.4 
million to almost US$2.2 billion with a 0.2-m rise and from 
US $ 6  billion to more than US$19 billion for a 2-m rise. On the 
Strand Coast, a 1-m rise will result in a value loss of more than 
US$18 billion; the largest contribution to this loss would come 
from the oil fields in the area.
In Nigeria, a potentially massive “environmental refugee” 
migration will occur. For a 1-m rise, more than 3 million peo­
ple are at risk, based on the present population. The estimated 
number of people that would be displaced ranges from 740,000 
for a 0.2-m rise to 3.7 million for a 1-m rise and 10 million for 
a 2-m rise (Awosika et a l, 1992).
2.З.4.1.З. 
Senegal
In Senegal, a 1-m rise in sea level could inundate and erode 
more than 
6 , 0 0 0  km^ of land, most of which is wetlands 
(Dennis et a l, 1995). In general, inundation is responsible for 
more than 95% of the land loss, independent of the scenario 
considered. Dennis et a l (1995) have shown that, under a 1-m 
scenario, buildings with a total market value of at least 
US$499-707 million would be at risk. On a national basis, 
tourist facilities represent 20-30%  of the total value at risk 
under the 1-m scenario. Under the 1-m scenario, it is estimat­
ed that at least 110,000-180,000 people— or 1.4-2.3%  of the 
1990 population of Senegal— are at risk (Dennis et a l, 1995). 
Nearly all of these people are located south of the Cape Verde 
peninsula; the bulk of the population at risk lives south of 
Rufisque.
2.З.4.1.4. 
Cote d ’Ivoire
In Cote d ’Ivoire, a 1-m sea-level rise will lead to inundation of 
1,800 km2 of lowland. The rate of shoreline retreat as a result 
of erosion is estimated to vary from 4.5 m to 7.4 m per annum 
(ICST, 1996). The most threatened infrastructures on the 
coastal zone are the Autonomous Port of Abidjan (Port 
Autonome d’Abidjan, PAA) and the port of San Pedro.
2.З.4.1.5. 
The Gambia
In The Gambia, inundation is projected to lead to a loss of 92 
km2 of land for a 1-m sea-level rise. Shoreline retreat is pro­
jected to vary between 6 . 8  m in cliff areas to about 880 m for 
flatter and sandier areas (Jallow e ta l, 1996). If a 1-m sea-level 
rise were to occur as envisaged, without protective measures 
the whole capital city of Banjul would be lost in the next 50-60 
years because a majority of the city is below 1 m. Preliminary 
analysis of data from the Gambian Department of Lands on the 
value of land and sample properties between Banjul and the 
Kololi Beach Hotel suggests that about 1,950 billion Dalasis 
(US$217 million) of property will be lost (Jallow et a l, 1996).
Africa
67
All of the structures located on land between Sarro and Banjul 
cemeteries and the whole of Banjul will be lost. (It was not 
possible to attach monetary value to this loss of public places.) 
According to Jallow et al. (1996), the entire population of 
Banjul (42,000 inhabitants) and people living in the eastern 
parts of Bakau and Cape St. Mary— as well as the swampy 
parts of Old Jeswang, Kanifing Industrial Estate, Eboe Town, 
Taldning Kunjang, Fagikunda, and Aruko— ^will be displaced.
2.3.4.1.6. 
Tanzania
Using sea-level rise scenarios of 0.5 and 1.0 m per century, 
Mwaipopo (1997) assessed the potential impacts of such a rise 
on the coastline of Tanzania. The results revealed that, with a 
0.5-m and 1-m sea-level rise, about 2,090 km^ and 2,117 km^ 
of land would be inundated, respectively. With a 1-m sea-level 
rise, another 9 km^ of land would be eroded. Projected damage 
is expected to be about Tsh. (Tanzanian shillings) 50 billion for 
a 0.5-m rise and Tsh. 8 6  billion for 1-m rise.
2.3.4.2. 
Adaptation Strategies and Measures
in the Coastal Zone
Ibe (1990) has found that large-scale protective engineering 
measures are impractical in Africa because of the high costs to 
countries in the region. Instead, low-cost, low-technology, but 
effective measures— such as permeable, nonconcrete, floating 
breakwaters; artificial raising of beach elevations; and installa­
tion of rip-rap, timber groins, and so forth— are considered 
more sensible.
In Egypt, protection of beaches and associated infrastructure 
must depend upon continuous and periodic nourishment. The 
total cost of protection is estimated to be only US$21 million 
and $42 million for the 0.5-m and 1-m scenarios, respectively 
(El-Raey et a l, 1995). The city of Alexandria is built on three 
intermittent calcareous ridges, parts of which are leveled and 
thus constitute a potential pathway for rising water to reach the 
lowland south of the city. El-Raey et al. (1995) have suggested 
that maintaining the beaches in front of these pathways, using 
beach nourishment, will help to prevent surface water from 
reaching the lowland south of the city through these paths, par­
ticularly during storm surges. Construction of small dikes also 
may be necessary.
According to French et al. (1995), the potential cost of protec­
tion against a 1-m rise in sea level in Nigeria ranges from 
US$558-668 million if densely developed areas are protected 
(important areas protection) to US$1.4 -1 . 8  billion if all shores 
are protected from erosion, inundation, and flooding (total pro­
tection). Under the “important areas protection” option, the 1-m 
sea-level rise scenario would require a total of 430 km of sea­
wall and associated fill, costing nearly US$200 million. An 
additional 474 km of sheltered seawall and 180 km of open- 
coast seawall is required when total protection is considered. 
More than 600,000 villagers could be displaced by a 1-m rise
in sea level, based on existing population (French et a i, 1995). 
It is impractical to protect these villages and populations at risk 
in Nigeria from a 1-m rise in sea level. Relocation probably is 
the most practical solution to the problem of inundation of the 
villages.
If the option considered in Senegal is “important areas protec­
tion,” Dennis et al. (1995) suggest that about 70 km— or about 
14.5%— of the open coastline would require protection. Total 
protection would require protection of 2,063 km, including 310 
km of open-coast seawall and 1,680 km of sheltered-coast sea­
wall. The cost of total protection is about 2 .5 ^  times higher 
than the costs of important areas protection.
With regard to The Gambia, Jallow et al. (1996) argue that if 
sea-level rise were to occur as envisaged, the most appropriate 
response (considering The Gambia’s economic situation) 
would be to protect important areas. The projected cost 
includes US$3.1 million for construction of a 7-km low-cost 
seawall and US$3.9 million for construction of a revetment. 
About 16 km of dikes is required to protect villages bordering 
wetlands and swamplands from seasonal flooding. Four types 
of actions could fulfill required protection needs:
Repair of groin systems
• 
Construction of breakwaters
Construction of low-cost seawalls
• 
Construction of revetments.
In Cote d’Ivoire, the most essential response to a potential sea- 
level rise of 1  m in the next century would be to protect impor­
tant areas— such as the two ports at Abidjan and San Pedro; the 
airport; tourism facilities; residential areas; and other areas of 
high economic Importance, particularly in Grand Bassam, 
Abidjan, Grand Lahou, Sassandra, San Pedro, and Tabou 
(ICST, 1996). No cost estimates are attached to this protection.
Within an integrated approach, there is a great opportunity to 
anticipate problems associated with sea-level rise rather than 
simply react to change as, or after, it occurs (Nicholls and 
Leatherman, 1994). Furthermore, a well-planned response that 
seeks to anticipate the physical impacts of sea-level rise in a 
timely fashion will minimize unwise decisions and result in 
lower costs for reactive responses such as protection (Nicholls 
and Leatherman, 1995). Anticipatory responses include urban 
growth planning, building setbacks, wetland preservation and 
mitigation, public awareness, and integrated coastal zone 
management.
Policies and regulations concerning the use of the coastal zone 
for any form of human activity should include consideration of 
sea-level rise. Physical planning and building-control measures 
and regulations should be instituted and implemented. 
Allocation of land for any economically useful puфose in 
areas likely to be flooded or inundated should be avoided. The 
public should be informed of the risk of living in coastal and 
lowland areas that are threatened by sea-level rise. Timely pub­
lic education about erosion, sea-level rise, and flooding risks
68
Africa
could be a cost-effective means of reducing future expendi­
tures. Where coastal infrastructures such as roads, fish land, 
and curing plants are approved and must be constructed, the 
authorities and owners of these infrastructures should make 
sure that marginal increases in the height of the structures are 
included to offset sea-level rise (Smith and Lenhart, 1996) and 
other related phenomena. People located in high-risk areas 
should be offered incentives to relocate out of these areas. 
Setbacks could be used as buffer zones to allow sea level to rise 
without threatening coastal development. French et al. (1995) 
recommended incoфorating buffer zones between the shore 
and new coastal development in Nigeria.
Adaptation to climate change and concomitant adverse effects 
will involve an understanding of climate change parameters 
and dynamics, including monitoring and data analysis of cli­
mate change parameters. This strategy should lead to an 
African Climate Change Scenario (ACCS), upon which coun­
tries can base their adaptation options. Existing scenarios and 
adaptation measures for climate change and sea-level rise are 
built around Western experiences.
All of the adaptation strategies, options, and policies discussed 
above will reduce the risks from current climate variability and 
protect against potential climate change and sea-level rise. 
These measures should be combined in a coastal zone man­
agement plan (CZMP). The CZMP brings together all actors in 
the coastal area to address coastal-zone problems. The program 
should consist of a set of principles and plans to guide the use 
of coastal land for conservation, recreation, and development.
2.3.5. 
Human Settlements,
Energy, Industry, and Transport
The pattern of distribution of human settlements often reflects 
the uneven nature of resource endowments and availability 
between regions and within individual communities. In Africa, 
as elsewhere, there are heavy concentrations of human settle­
ments within 60 km of coastal zones, in areas of high econom­
ic potential, in river and lake basins, in close proximity to 
major transportation routes, and in places that enjoy hospitable 
climatic regimes. Changes in climate conditions would have 
severe impacts not only on the pattern of distribution of human 
settlements but also on the quality of life in particular areas. 
For example, wetter coasts or drier conditions in up-country 
areas could lead to spontaneous migrations as an adaptive 
option. Similarly, the pattern of energy use could change radi­
cally as a result of technological adaptations arising from cli­
mate change.
IPCC (1996) and UNFCCC (1992) acknowledge that develop­
ing countries’ energy demands must increase to meet their 
needs for economic development. This increase must occur so 
these countries can respond to their development needs and to 
support the needs of growing populations. More of this eco­
nomic development will be in industrial and transport sectors 
than in any other sector. It has been argued that the growth of
the energy, industry, and transport sectors is needed as coun­
tries go through their economic transitions, which will 
decrease their vulnerability. Current high dependence on land- 
based production activities— such as agriculture and fish­
eries— only increases the vulnerability of African countries. 
The energy, industry, and transport sectors are thus important 
in discussing vulnerability and adaptation.
2.3.5.1. 
Human Settlements
The main challenges likely to face African populations will 
emanate from the effects of extreme events such as tropical 
storms, floods, landslides, wind, cold waves, droughts, and 
abnormal sea-level rises that are expected as a result of climate 
change. These events are likely to exacerbate management 
problems relating to pollution, sanitation, waste disposal, water 
supply, public health, infrastructure, and technologies of pro­
duction (IPCC, 1996).
Adaptation strategies lie mainly in relocating populations, effi­
cient energy supply and use, introduction of adaptation tech­
nologies, and improved management systems. Because most of 
these strategies have high cost implications, existing economic 
constraints of African countries may present major obstacles. 
In addition, implementing some of these strategies may have 
aspects that go beyond costs; relocation of human settlements 
from low-lying coastal areas that are vulnerable to inundation, 
for example, is likely to create problems that go beyond cost 
implications and include changes in social structure— clear 
policies on land use, fortified by flexible land-tenure regimes, 
will be needed.
2.3.5.2. 
Energy
The impacts of climate change on the energy sector will be felt 
primarily through losses or changes in hydropower potential 
for electricity generation and the effects of increased runoff 
(and consequent siltation) on hydrogeneration, as well as 
changes in the growth rates of trees used for fuelwood. The 
total primary energy use in 1990 in sub-Saharan Africa (includ­
ing South Africa) was broken down in the following shares: 
biomass fuels (53%), petroleum (26%), coal (14%), large-scale 
hydro (3%), natural gas (2%), and other renewables (2%). The 
most vulnerable areas of the energy sector to climate change in 
Africa are the provision of energy services for rural areas and, 
to some extent, for urban low-income needs. Table 2-9 shows 
that millions of cubic meters of wood are harvested each year 
for energy purposes. The extent of biomass dependence for the 
African energy sector is high; this dependence is critical 
because the source of biomass is supported only by the natural 
regeneration of indigenous natural forests. In addition to the 
primary energy sources listed in Table 2-10, dependence on 
charcoal is high in east and southern Africa, in countries such 
as Zambia and Tanzania; in Zambia, where charcoal provides 
80% of urban household energy needs, 3.5 million tons of char­
coal are produced annually from indigenous forests.
Africa
Table 2-9: Relative extent o f rural population
69
in selected African countries and associated fuelwood production.
Subregion
Representative
Country
Fuelwood 
Production (103 m3)
Population (103)
Rural 
Population (%)
West Africa
Nigeria
90,699
95,198
77
Ghana
8,493
13,588
6 8
East Africa
Kenya
32,174
20,600
80
Ethiopia
37,105
43,557
8 8
Southern Africa
Zimbabwe
5,988
8,777
75
Botswana
NA
1,107
81
North Africa
Sudan
18,202
21,550
79
Egypt
1,962
46,909
54
Central Africa
Cameroon
9,389
9,873
58
Chad
3,137
5,018
73
Sources: Compiled from UNEP, 1990; ADB AEP, 1996.
In the household sector, fuelwood accounts for 97% of all ener­
gy consumed (Chidumayo, 1997). Although natural stocks of 
wood may be high, wood resources available to the majority of 
the rural population are very low in many areas. Brickmaking 
and tobacco and tea curing are major wood uses. In Zimbabwe, 
wood used for brickmaking is said to equal that used for cook­
ing in rural areas (Bradley and Dewees, 1993); tobacco estates 
in Malawi account for 21% of total fuelwood consumption 
(Moyo et a l, 1993). In Botswana, the fencing of fields to keep 
out livestock consumes 1.5 times more wood than is used for 
cooking in farm ing households (Tietema et a l, 1991). 
Indigenous miombo and other woodlands in sub-Saharan 
Africa contribute significantly to the firewood harvested for 
consumption and conversion to charcoal. Stands are left to 
recover, with minimal active management. The ability of users 
to purchase alternative forms of energy (gas or electricity), as 
well as charcoal, depends on the economics of each family. 
Therefore, poor people (with limited buying power) are most 
vulnerable to reductions in fuelwood supply. Increasing popu­
lations also are contributing to depletion of resources. In rela­
tively dense woodland areas, where population density is low, 
there usually is enough deadwood that can be collected and 
used for fuelwood. Increasing incidence of drought, however, 
leads to increased fire frequency— which, in turn, reduces 
deadwood material in woodlands. If current natural resource 
management systems are not changed, Africa could run the risk 
of depleting its forest resources used as biomass energy at a 
rate faster than the rate of population growth. The paucity of 
data on biomass depletion and regeneration rates makes mean­
ingful assessment difficult and compounds the problems of 
possible reduced precipitation and subsequent lower regenera­
tion rates by making it difficult to identify appropriate response 
options. There already are indications of a negative supply bal­
ance (e.g., extensive household utilization of agricultural and 
animal wastes for energy).
In 1992, Africa’s electricity output was 312,000 GWh; thermal 
power provided 78% and hydroelectricity 19%, with a small 
amount (3%) from nuclear sources in South Africa (ADB AEP, 
1996). Thermal power plants require huge volumes of water in 
their cooling systems; in a situation of reduced rainfall, loss of 
cooling-water resources will not only reduce generation capac­
ity but also retard construction of new plants. It may be rea­
sonably expected, therefore, that exploitation of the continent’s 
massive coal reserves in areas with such resources would be 
inhibited by both the anti-coal lobby and shortages of cooling 
water. In the past (e.g., during the drought of 1991-92), 
declines in precipitation led to a significant loss of total 
hydropower energy, including losses of as much as 30% from 
the Kariba Dam (which supplies power for Zambia and 
Zimbabwe). It has been suggested that future hydropwer out­
put could could be affected by climate change. Salewicz (1995) 
investigated the vulnerability of the Zambezi basin to climate 
change. He noted that 75% of the lower Zambezi waters flow 
into Kariba. Under climate change scenarios, this area is pro­
jected to experience increased rainfall and ranoff into Lake 
Kariba. Although there may be shifts in the seasonal reliability 
of given discharges for the Lower Zambezi, it is possible that 
hydropower generation capacity would be adversely affected. 
Similar impacts could occur on the Congo, Nile, and Niger 
river hydropower systems, resulting in critical electricity sup­
ply shortfalls throughout the continent. In addition, the conti­
nent’s massive hydroelectric potential of 150,000 GWh/yr 
would be significantly curtailed. Such a situation would lead to 
the introduction of major changes in fuel supply strategies in 
most countries. A  case has been made for developing micro- 
and small-scale hydropower plants in Africa to overcome the 
cost of large-scale generation systems. This type of plant will 
require a defined minimum level of runoff. Reductions in pre­
cipitation could significantly reduce the number of viable sites 
for such micro-hydro installations.
70
Africa
Table 2-10: Estimates o f primary energy supplies (%) in subregions’ representative countries.
Representative 
Subregion 
Country
Oil
Coal
Gas
Biomass
Electricity/Hydro
West Africa
Nigeria
27
0.4
12.6
59
1
Ghana
21
—
69
10
East Africa
Kenya
21
1
-
70
8
Ethiopia
8
—
—
90
2
Southern Africa
Zimbabwe
10
50
—
25
15
Botswana
17
6
-
73
4
North Africa
Sudan
19
_
—
80
1
Egypt
54
2
21
15
—
Central Africa
Cameroon
19
—
67
14
Chad
33
-
77
—
Average
62.5
Sources: Compiled and computed from UNEP, 1990; ADB AEP, 1996.
2.3.5.3. 
Industry
a debilitating effect on industrial production. Water demand
in many states in southern and northern Africa already has
Changes in future climate should be actively considered in 
exceeded or is expected to exceed water supply soon.
developing a sustainable industrial development path for 
Africa. Vulnerability in African industry may relate more to the 
inhibiting effects of climate change on industrial expansion 
than to its effects on existing industrial installations and invest­
ments. The most serious impacts of climate change on this sec­
tor would be related to loss of competitiveness associated with 
increased costs of production resulting from changes or retro­
fitting of plants for cleaner production. Reduced surface-water 
supplies would lead to extended use of groundwater sources—  
which, in most cases, have to be treated on site to achieve 
desired water-quality standards for specific industrial applica­
tions. Other major effects will result from a lack of water for 
industrial processes and increased costs of cooling for temper­
ature-controlled processes and storage; Africa’s industry has a 
large number of agro-industrial operations that need large 
amounts of water.
Besides these direct effects, there will be indirect effects, 
such as rising water costs; in cases of severe and recurrent 
water shortages, this factor could lead to relocation of indus­
trial plants. Electricity shortages, due to a drop in the water 
level which causes a decline in hydropower, also will affect 
industry— particularly the steel sector (including iron and 
steel), ferro-chrome production, cement production, textiles, 
and aluminum production. These industries are among some 
of the most advanced on the continent, but they are highly 
dependent on constant electricity supplies. Although there are 
no data to indicate the level of water shortages that may result 
from a decline in precipitation, it is obvious that water short­
ages that affect concentrated urban settlements also will have
Although detailed assessments of the impact of sea-level rise 
on coastal industries have been made for Asia and other 
regions, little information is available for Africa. It can be 
assumed, however, that most of the impacts that would ensue 
in other coastal zones would apply equally in Africa. Most 
impacts would be related to relocation of industries. The 
extent of these impacts could not be assessed in any detail 
without a more complete assessment of coastal zone industri­
al locations.
2.3.5.4. 
Transport
The transport sector is based on long-term, immovable infra­
structure such as roads, rails, and water. In most parts of the 
continent, road networks have tended to link industrial centers 
with major areas of agricultural activity; railways have been 
designed in the past primarily with a sea-route orientation to 
facilitate international shipments of primary products. Climate 
change may lead to industrial relocation, resulting either from 
sea-level rise in coastal-zone areas or from transitions in agro­
ecological zones. This relocation would necessitate additional 
infrastructural investments. It also may render waterways dys­
functional, thereby necessitating additional road and rail 
investments to replace them. If sea-level rise occurs, the effect 
on the many harbors and ports around the continent will be 
quite devastating economically for many coastal-zone coun­
tries. Excessive precipitation, which may occur in some parts 
of Africa, is likely to have serious negative effects on road
Africa
71
networks and air transport. On the other hand, if climate 
change leads to drier conditions, maintenance costs may be 
reduced. Typical road networks on the continent consist of 
gravel roads linking major urban centers, which have paved 
road systems. Swaziland has a reasonable percentage of paved 
roads (55% by 1990). The situation is much worse in other 
countries, as indicated in Table 2-11, which shows the quality 
of road networks for selected African countries.
Agricultural production activities involve extensive trans­
portation on the farm, to ferry farm products and inputs and to 
move farm implements. These critical operations are easily 
disturbed by excessive rains. The effects of such disturbances 
are likely to be higher in the case of large-scale commercial 
farms, which are highly mechanized. During recent droughts 
on the continent, soils on roads became friable as a result of 
high temperatures and dry weather. Such roads were easily 
washed away when the rains finally came, resulting in serious 
soil erosion and high repair costs to farmers. For small-scale 
communal land farmers, this situation was represented by 
massive soil erosion along pathways on and off the farm. In 
many cases, these washed-out pathways became the source of 
gullies.
Impacts on air transport would be greatest for airports located 
in coastal areas or near other water bodies, such as rivers or 
lakes. Indirect effects also would be felt if increased precipita­
tion resulted from climate change, as some models have sug­
gested. In this case, existing air transport support systems—  
such as meteorological data bases— may be stretched to their 
limits because they were designed for certain prevailing cli­
mates in the continent. Bad weather, in general, would raise the 
potential for air traffic accidents.
2.3.5.5. 
Mitigation and Adaptation: Response Options
The suggestion that a “solar revolution” (Kane, 1996) may 
replace the temporary fossil economy is rather simplistic. For 
African countries— which have yet to develop their infrastruc­
ture significantly and their basic industries— the need for cen­
tralized energy systems will continue for some time, although 
it may coexist with advances in solar installations. Besides this 
general transition, A frica’s centralized energy systems—  
including hydroelectric, coal, and oil thermal systems— will 
need to benefit from cleaner, more efficient energy-conversion 
technologies. This transition will be based on autonomous effi­
ciency improvements in the short to medium term, but Africa 
will not be in a position to drive trends toward such improve­
ments, due to economic and technical trends.
Wind energy is a widely suggested option, based on average 
wind speeds of 5.8 m/s (Kane, 1996). Unless technologies are 
developed to generate electricity at lower speeds, the windmill 
option will remain limited in its application because wind 
speeds in the region generally are low, averaging 3-5 m/s.
New and renewable energy sources, however, offer other bene­
fits in addition to being alternatives to large hydropower and 
thermal power generation systems. These alternative energy 
sources will generate more jobs overall in the economy. 
According to Kane (1996), these jobs will be high-quality jobs, 
mainly in systems design. For this reason, this benefit may 
remain limited in Africa because the continent lags other regions 
in the development of new technologies such as windmills, solar 
photovoltaics (TVs), and biogas digesters, which have been 
spearheaded in China and India. African countries should take 
immediate steps, with external support, to rectify this deficiency.
Table 2-11: Road networks and density for selected African countries.
Country
Paved
Roads
%
Paved
Total
(km)
Density 
(km/1,000 km2)
Vehicles/km
Angola
8,900
1 2 . 1
73,400
59
4
Botswana
3,740
20.4
18,330
32
4
Ethiopia
13,300
34.5
38,600
32
1
Kenya
9,800
14.5
67,800
117
5
Lesotho
540
1 1 . 2
4,840
161
5
Malawi
2,400
18.3
13,140
1 1 1
2
Mauritius
1,795
8 6
2,090
1,045
65
Mozambique
5,400
15.1
35,700
45
2
Namibia
—
-
6,500
8
2 1
South Africa
—
29.8
-
-
-
Swaziland
730
2 1 . 2
3,450
203
17
Tanzania
3,580
4
82,600
87
1
Uganda (1993)
8,342
2 1
40,057
166
2.4
Zambia
6,300
16
39,160
52
3
Zimbabwe
13,000
17
78,700
2 0 2
5
Average
-
23
-
166
1 0
Source: Zhou and Molcofi, 1997.
72
Africa
Energy efficiency improvements— ^which, in Africa, will have 
to be autonomous in most cases— offer a significant response 
option. Energy wastage in Africa is quite high; in some cases, 
savings of up to 40% can be achieved. In the electricity sector, 
total system losses sometimes exceed 30% in situations where 
universal standards are below 8 %, including some systems in 
Africa (Davidson, 1992). Reducing these inefficiencies will 
provide a demand-side option for electricity supply. Demand- 
side management options, however, need strong support pro­
grams to overcome a number of implementation barriers.
With regard to industry, it has been suggested that “much of 
industry will have to mimic nature, reusing and recycling every 
chemical that it uses in cyclical processes.” This approach 
implies “shifting to sustainable industries” (Kane, 1996). 
Before the current climate change debate, this strategy entailed 
using renewable materials for industrial raw materials— such 
as natural fibers as opposed to finite resources such as miner­
als. However, reduced productivity in agriculture— ^which is 
the current base for industrial raw materials in most African 
countries-—limits the usefulness of this suggestion.
Small-scale mills have been suggested as ideal for developing 
countries because they could achieve recycling of resources 
and greater efficiencies (Kane, 1996). It would be more effi­
cient, for example, to install small-scale mills in dispersed 
locations around the country to reduce the cost of moving scrap 
to large, centrally located mills. In Africa, this approach would 
be a relevant option to reduce the decline or depletion rate for 
natural ores and to disperse job opportunities around the coun­
try. Steel production is significant in Nigeria, Zimbabwe, and 
South Africa; plants in these countries, however, are tradition­
al large-scale installations. The introduction of small-scale 
mills could enable the industry to spread to other locations 
across the continent.
2.3.6. 
Wildlife, Tourism, and Recreation
Tourism— one of Africa’s most promising and fastest-growing 
industries (about 15% per year)— is based on wildlife and water 
supply for recreation. Recurrent droughts in the past decade 
have depleted wildlife resources significantly. Permanent loss 
of such attractions would waste vast amounts of investment in 
tourism. The greatest impacts would occur in drought-prone 
areas of the Sahel, east Africa, and southern Africa.
High levels of floral and faunal species diversity exist in vari­
ous reserved areas in relict, fragmented patches of natural veg­
etation. Most wildlife is in reserved areas surrounded by human 
land use (agriculture). This fragmentation and concentration of 
animals in specific areas make them highly vulnerable because 
vegetation (habitat) will not respond quickly enough to changed 
climate, and wildlife will be unable to migrate to more suitable 
climatic conditions because of limited corridors between 
wildlife reserves in different vegetation and climate types; 
moreover, wildlife would be slow in responding to a changing 
habitat boundary (see Section 2.3.1.4).
Climate change will impact the tourism industry indirectly 
through changes in water and vegetation, as well as through 
wider-scale socioeconomic changes— for example, fuel prices 
and patterns of demand for specific activities or destinations. 
Various indirect impacts also may derive from changes in land­
scape— the “capital” of tourism (Krippendorf, 1984)— ^which 
might lead potential tourists to perceive Africa as less attractive 
and consequently to seek new locations elsewhere. There also 
may be new competition from other tourist locations as cli­
mates change (particularly on seasonal time frames), especial­
ly in relation to northern vacation periods.
Tourist attractions such as Victoria Falls could become much 
less attractive as a result of reduced river discharge and alter­
ation of the rainforest. Hydrology models for tropical savanna 
Africa suggest reduced runoff as a result of climate change 
(Hulme, 1996a). The tourist impacts of these changes will 
include alteration of characteristics of popular tourist destina­
tions. In the 1992 drought period, Victoria Falls lost some of 
its attractiveness as a result of much reduced water discharge 
over the falls. Furthermore, the reduced flow resulted in 
reduction of the spray that maintains the rainforest that is part 
of Victoria Falls’ aura— resulting in the death of flora around 
the falls.
In southern and eastern Africa, there are a variety of water- 
based tourist activities— such as sailing, skiing, angling, raft­
ing, and so forth. Such activities could be affected by changes 
in river flows and the impacts of land use (especially agricul­
ture) on water quality— such as eutrophication, which gives 
rise to objectionable blue-green algae and a proliferation of 
aquatic weeds (such as Eichhornia and Salvinia). These devel­
opments will compromise the aesthetic value of tourist desti­
nations. Many reservoirs in Africa (such as Lake Victoria and 
the Nile Sudd) are under threat. In addition to their tourist 
value, these inland waters in Africa are a source of protein. 
Many water bodies in Africa show very high sensitivity to 
changes in runoff. Inland drainage systems— such as Lake 
Chad, the east African Rift Valley lakes (e.g.. Lake Nakuru, 
Lake Naivasha), and other shallow water bodies such as Lake 
Chilwa and the Okovango delta— have a delicate hydrological 
balance. Complete drying of the lake recently occurred at Lake 
Chilwa in Malawi and Lake Nakuru in Kenya. Magadza (1984,
1996) has suggested that fish production in large reservoirs 
such as Lake Kariba can be significantly affected by decreased 
runoff because of reduced nutrient inflow.
The wetlands of Africa— such as the Okovango delta, the 
Kafue River floodplains, and Lake Bangweulu— have rich and 
varied wild fauna and are especially conspicuous for their avi­
fauna. Magadza (1996) shows how the gradual drying of the 
Caprivi Strip wetlands resulted in a population reduction of the 
wetland vertebrates and the complete disappearance of some 
species from the area. Such aridification of wetlands has been 
followed by encroachment of human cultivation.
The destruction of coastal infrastructure, sandy beaches and 
barriers, and marine ecosystems would have negative impacts
Africa
73
Box 2-9. Cape Cross: The Ecological Importance of Coastal Wetlands
A number of African coastal areas, such as the Namibian coast, offer unique habitats for migratory bird species as well 
as a variety of local species (Williams, 1990). These wetlands are maintained by a complex hydrology of ephemeral 
rivers that flow onto the Namibian west coast. Changes in sea level would affect these western coastal wetlands through 
habitat loss.
Cape Cross, one of the earliest recorded (15th century) points of contact for European explorers in southern Africa, is 
best known for the large Cape Fur Seal {Arctocephalus pusillus) colony, numbering about 150,000 animals. To the south 
of the rocky promontory, a sand barrier has formed from sediments continually washed north from the Orange River. 
Behind this barrier is a series of lagoons, 5 km^ in extent, comprising salt flats fed by seawater seepage and high-tide 
washovers (Williams, 1990). Wooden guano platforms were erected in these areas in the 1950s to allow cormorants to 
breed and roost (Rand, 1952). Guano is still harvested today from 30,000 pairs of Cape cormorants that nest there 
(Williams, 1990/
As many as 11,000 individuals of 28 species of coastal birds— including intra-African immigrants, palaearctic immi­
grants, and resident breeders— may be found on the lagoons (Williams, 1990). Among species listed as red data birds, 
more than 2,000 individuals of the southern African race of the black-necked grebe (Podiceps nigricollis gurneyi) may 
appear in these lagoons— about 16% of the estimated world population (Cooper and Hockey, 1981; Williams, 1990). The 
lagoons also regularly support between 1% and 3% of the southern African subcontinental population of greater flamingo 
{Phoenicopterus ruber) and lesser flamingo (P. minor) and up to 22% of the coastal population of Cape Teal {Anus 
capensis) (Williams, 1990). For palaearctic migrants, including the Curlew sandpiper (Calidris ferruginea), the total 
number approaches 4,200 individuals; Cape Cross ranks about eighth in importance for these birds along the Namib 
coast (Williams, 1990). The Cape Cross seal colony falls within a national reserve and only limited disturbance occurs in 
the lagoons because of their inaccessibility. The area, therefore, suffers no current threat.
on tourism in these areas (Okoth-Ogendo and Ojwang, 1995). 
This effect could be exacerbated by disturbances in the pattern 
of human settlements in coastal zones and the general loss of 
environmental values.
Many tourist facilities (such as hotels) have been invested on 
inland lakeshores and reservoirs— such as Midmar Reservoir 
in South Africa, Lake Malawi, Lake Chad, Lake Victoria, and 
several other lakes in the Rift Valley in east Africa. In some
Figure 2-14: Lake Kariba water storage 1990-91 to 1995-96 
(Hulme, 1996b).
cases, there also are downstream facilities, such as those on the 
Shire River and Liwonde. Past drought episodes have demon­
strated that fluctuations in lake levels affect the quality of ser­
vices that the lakeside resorts offer; the water level may recede 
a considerable distance from the facility. Lake Kariba current­
ly is 13 m below its storage-capacity level; services such as 
dry-dock facilities have lain idle for several years. Figure 2-14 
shows the changes in water level of Lake Kariba during the 
1991-92 drought period. Where the lake is the primary source 
of an effluent river, river-based tourist facilities would be sim­
ilarly prejudiced by lower lake levels. Such impacts would be 
more pronounced on reservoirs that combine other activities 
(e.g., irrigation or hydroelectric power generation) with 
tourism.
An assessment of how the whole natural environment and 
wildlife might be susceptible to climate change should be an 
integral part of environment planning (Mkanda, 1996). A num­
ber of sub-Saharan countries regard the conservation of bio­
logical diversity (wildlife) together with agriculture and 
tourism activities as an important win-win solution to the 
nature resource that also offers a major source of much-needed 
revenue (World Bank, 1996). In a report on wildlife conser­
vancies in Zimbabwe, Price Waterhouse (1994) demonstrated 
that wildlife presented the best land-use options in semi-arid 
parts of southeast Zimbabwe. This application, in the 
Gonarezhou nature reserve, has been facilitated by an appro­
priate legal framework in Zimbabwe— based on the Parks and 
Wildlife Act, which essentially confers stewardship of wildlife 
on landowners.
74
Africa
2.3.7. 
H um an Health
The links between clim ate and many environm ental and 
vector-borne diseases (VBDs) are felt through the impacts 
of various clim atic com ponents (e.g., tem perature, rainfall) 
on the physiology of pathogens and their vectors. Although 
there are crude atlases of disease distribution within A frica 
(Knoch and Schulze, 1956), accurate and verified models 
that translate these physiological clim ate-related processes 
into more detailed maps of disease distribution are scarce. 
Such maps and m odels are necessary to set the baseline of 
current levels and lim its of transm ission against w hich pro­
jected im pacts of clim ate change can be m easured. These 
changes may include shifts in the distribution of diseases 
into areas that previously were disease-free or a change in 
severity at a given location. A lthough such m odels now 
exist (M artens et al., 1995a,b; le Sueur et a i, in prepara­
tion), m ost rem ain hypothetical and largely unverified. 
However, they may provide good starting points to illus­
trate the effects of projected clim ate change. In the case of 
m alaria, a continental effort— M apping M alaria Risk in
A frica (M ARA/ARM A)— is now underway; this effort w ill 
provide a data base of disease distribution and severity that 
can be used to verify clim ate-induced processes. No such 
parallel efforts, however, currently are underway for other 
diseases of the A frican continent that may be affected by 
clim ate change (e.g., arboviruses, trypansom iasis, and 
schistosom iasis).
In Africa, VBDs are major causes of illness and death. Table 
2-12 provides global estimates of the number of people at risk 
from and the number of people who currently are infected by 
major VBDs. Currently, the distribution of most VBDs 
remains well within the climatic limits of their vectors. The 
extent to which disease transmission potential shifts geo­
graphically in response to shifts in vector distribution follow­
ing climate change will depend partly on how human activi­
ties modify local ecosystems (M cM ichael et a i, 1996). 
Rodent-borne diseases that could be affected by climate 
change include plague and hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. 
In a warmer and more urbanized world, rodent populations—  
which act as pathogen reservoirs and as hosts for the relevant
Table 2-12: Major tropical vector-borne diseases and the likelihood o f change in their distribution as a result o f climate change.
Disease
Vector
Number at Risk 
(millions)'
Number Infected or 
New Cases/Year
Likelihood of 
Present 
Altered Distribution 
Distribution 
with Climate Change
Malaria
Mosquito
2,400
300-500 million
Tropics/subtropics
+++
Schistosomiasis
Water snail
600
200 million
Tropics/subtropics
++
Lymphatic filariasis 
Mosquito
1,094
117 million
Tropics/subtropics
+
African
trypanosomiasis
Tsetse fly
55
250,000-300,000
cases/yr
Tropical Africa
+
Dracunculiasis
Crustacean
(copepod)
100
100,000/yr
South Asia/ 
Middle Last/ 
Central-West Africa
?
Leishmaniasis
Phebotomine 
sand fly
350
12 million infected, 
500,000 new cases/yr^
Asia/South Europe/ 
Africa/Americas
+
Onchocerciasis
Blackfly
123
17.5 million
Africa/Latin America
++
American
trypanosomiasis
Triatomine bug
100
18-20 million
Central-South America
+
Dengue
Mosquito
2,500
50 million/yr
Tropics/subtropics
++
Yellow fever
Mosquito
450
<5,000 cases/yr
Tropical South America 
and Africa
++
+ = likely; ++ = very likely; +++ = highly likely; ? = unknown.
'Top three entries are population prorated projections, based on 1989 estimates.
^Annual incidence of visceral leishmaniasis; annual incidence of cutaneous leishmaniasis is 1-1.5 million cases/yr. 
Sources: РАНО, 1994; WHO, 1994, 1995; Michael and Bundy, 1996; WHO statistics.
Africa
75
arthropod vectors— will tend to increase. Thus, incidences of 
these diseases can be expected to rise (Shope, 1991).
Projected increases in the interannual variability of climate 
would have marked implications for the impact of seasonal 
epidemic diseases such as malaria. In general, control and mit­
igation activities for such diseases are planned around mean 
expected levels in any one year. Significant interannual varia­
tion impedes intervention and mitigation because of the impact 
on national budgets (which plan for mean circumstances) and 
lags that occur in relation to responses to climatically Induced 
epidemic situations. In addition, such variation results in inter­
mittent exposure of nonimmune populations— resulting in high 
levels of morbidity and mortality. The recent degree of vari­
ability is clearly illustrated in Table 2-13, which shows data for 
four southern African countries. This variability highlights the 
need for more climate-based forecasting systems capable of 
predicting such interannual variations with a lead time that 
allows health authorities to respond in a timely manner with 
preparatory/preventative measures (Jury, 1996; le Sueur and 
8Ьаф, 1996).
2.3.7.1. 
Vulnerability and Adaptation
It is projected that climate-related mortality will increase in the 
large cities of north Africa (IPCC, 1996), from direct effects as 
well as from indirect impacts of climate change. These impacts 
will include potential increases in the incidence of VBDs such 
as malaria, yellow fever, dengue fever, onchocerciasis, and try­
panosomiasis arising from elevated temperatures and altered 
rainfall. High-elevation locations such as Nairobi or Harare 
may become vulnerable to malaria epidemics because the 
malaria parasite may be able to survive in the possibly warmer 
conditions (IPCC, 1996) at higher elevations than the current 
limits.
Minimum temperatures (T^j^ or nighttime and winter temper­
atures) are crucial parameters for vector survival and affect the 
latitude and elevation of distribution, as well as the length of
season permissive to transmission. Т„,щ is known to play an 
important role in limiting the distribution of malaria vector 
populations at a given locality where summer conditions are 
suitable for transmission (Craig and le Sueur, in preparation; 
Leeson, 1931). Thus, meteorological variables can create con­
ditions conducive to disease spread or even to clusters of out­
breaks (in the case of flooding or drought) (Epstein et a l,
1993). A  drop in water level in dams and rivers also would 
affect the quality of household and industrial fresh water 
because reduced water volume would increase the concentra­
tion of sewage and other effluent in rivers— resulting in out­
breaks of diseases such as diarrhea, dysentery, and cholera. 
During 1992 and 1993, cholera affected almost every country 
in the SADC region, claiming hundreds of lives. In many 
drought-affected areas in Zambia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, and 
South Africa, streams and rivers dried up. Villagers (mainly 
women) had to walk long distances— only to collect polluted 
water, which they shared with wild animals and livestock. 
SARDC (1994) notes that when a major cholera outbreak 
occurred in several countries in southern Africa in the mid- 
1980s, the region had just come out of another drought. 
Reduced water flow during these droughts reduced the capaci­
ty of rivers, streams, and swamps to dilute agrochemicals and 
process fertilizers in fields, adversely affecting soil ecosys­
tems. These drought-related problems are likely to increase 
under projected climate change. Vulnerabilities and control 
measures will affect the impact, however.
The growing resistance of insects to insecticides and of 
microorganisms to antimicrobials, as well as the toxicity of pes­
ticides to helpful (predator) Insects and larger animals (includ­
ing humans), will limit the effectiveness of these control mea­
sures. Thus, nurturing environmental conditions that reduce 
vulnerability to VBD spread (e.g., extensive land clearing and 
monocultures), and those that shore up generalized defenses 
(trees around plots and settlements to harbor birds that consume 
bugs) becomes increasingly important (Epstein, 1993, 1995).
In west Africa, the population of blackflies— ^which carry 
onchocerciases (river blindness)— may increase by as much as
Table 2-13: Interannual variability o f malaria (number o f cases) within the southern Africa region.
C ountry
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
Botswana
(confirmed)
415
14,615
5,335
2,129
19,340
(unconfirmed)!
4,293
40,722
24,256
15,470
49,315
Namibia'
238,592
386,215
407,863
286,407
3 5 3 , 5 9 3 2
South Africa
2,886
13,330
10,298
9,287
29,206
Zimbabwe'
420,137
877,734
797,659
721,376
1,585,850
‘Clinically diagnosed. 
“Incomplete.
76
Africa
25%, according to precipitation projections from the GISS 
GCM. Schistosomiasis and malaria, both of which depend on 
water availability, also are likely to increase as a result of pro­
jected expansion of irrigation in hot climates. African try­
panosomiasis (sleeping sickness), which is carried by the tsetse 
fly, also could proliferate because higher temperature would 
increase the range of the vector in areas prone to this infection. 
The distribution of tsetse flies may increase in east Africa 
(Rogers and Packer, 1993). Other minor health effects could 
include higher incidences of skin disorders or cancers, cataracts 
and similar forms of eye damage, and suppression of immune 
systems as a consequence of stratospheric ozone depletion—  
which leads to greater ultraviolet radiation (IPCC, 1996).
Nutritional status also is likely to be severely affected by 
droughts and associated crop failures, as in southern Africa 
during the droughts of the 1980s to early 1990s. This factor 
will further reduce the natural persistence of African commu­
nities and increase exposure to disease.
There is increasing evidence that many emergent and resurgent 
diseases may be related to ecosystem instability (Epstein, 
1995). In many cases, this resurgence may be related not to cli­
matic change but to other human-induced changes in the envi­
ronment (e.g., lyme disease, dengue, hantavirus) (Levins et ai, 
1994; Wenzel, 1994; Epstein, 1995). Other diseases with clear 
links to climate and climatic change include malaria (Bouma et 
a i, 1994; Loevinsohn, 1994) and cholera (Epstein, 1992,1995; 
Epstein et ai, 1993). Nonclimatic environmental modifications 
often disrupt natural habitats through processes such as defor­
estation or afforestation, resulting in the provision of new habi­
tats for vectors or pathogens. Climatically induced change, 
however, can include short-term impacts as a result of interan­
nual variation or long-term change associated with factors such 
as global warming. The effects of such changes are likely to be 
most noticeable in areas that constitute the fringes of distribu­
tion of a particular disease. Changes in distribution often will 
cause susceptible populations (those with little or no immuni­
ty) to be exposed to diseases not previously encountered— and 
result in severe morbidity and mortality. In addition, areas of 
traditionally low risk may become more vulnerable. The impli­
cations of such changes, especially in populations that lack 
immunity, have severe consequences (individual, social, and 
economic) for exposed individuals and health authorities.
Rogers (1996) modeled the effect of projected future climate 
changes on the distribution of three important disease vec­
tors— mosquitoes, tsetse flies, and ticks— in southern Africa. 
The human diseases relating to these vectors are malaria (mos­
quitoes) and human African trypanosomiasis (tsetse flies). 
Climatic change may alter not only the physiological con­
straints placed on the vector but also the ability of the parasite 
to survive within the vector (Molineaux, 1988).
Within Africa, little evidence exists of causal changes in dis­
ease transmission and climate. This lack of evidence does not 
mean that these changes do not exist; rather, it may reflect the 
lack of available epidemiological data as a result of poor or
absent surveillance and health information systems. Within 
Africa, 71.3% of the burden of disease is attributed to infec­
tious diseases; malaria is the single greatest contributor 
(10.8%). All other vector-borne, helminthic, and environmen­
tally related diseases that are affected by climate contribute 
about 2% of the total burden of disease. With regard to envi­
ronmentally related diseases in Africa, malaria contributes 
more than 80% of the cause of lost disability adjusted life years 
(World Bank, 1993; WHO, 1996b). These estimates exclude 
diarrhea but include cholera.
Malaria contributes the highest percentage (>80%) of the cli­
mate-related disease burden in Africa. The physiological rela­
tionships among climate, vectors, and pathogens are only par­
tially understood. Malaria provides a good example of how 
potential climate change may affect environmental and vector- 
bome diseases. Surveillance systems and epidemiological data 
on malaria exist in some of the regions most susceptible to cli­
mate change, allowing future monitoring to move from specu­
lative to causal relationships.
One of the deficient micronutrients in malnourished Africans is 
iron. Woman and children are disproportionately affected by 
anemia, and pregnant women are especially at risk. In addition, 
one of the major causes of death in acute and complicated malar­
ia is anemia. Thus, the potential exists for exacerbated morbidi­
ty and mortality in regions in which climate change may 
decrease nutritional status and increase malaria transmission.
Climate-related impacts on health status are likely to increase 
most within Africa, largely as a result of the high burden of dis­
ease within the continent and its vulnerability in terms of miti­
gation and nutritional status. In contrast to other regions of the 
world, a significant proportion of the burden of disease in Africa 
is related to climatically affected infectious diseases. Typical of 
many of these diseases in Africa is the fact that their severity 
focuses within the tropics, and infection rates approach satura­
tion. Thus, the marginal regions of distributions, where severity 
of transmission is restricted climatologically, are most likely to 
be affected by climatic change. It is important to distinguish 
between restrictions related to rainfall and those related to tem­
perature. In cases where rainfall restricts distribution, increases 
in temperature may result in a decrease in disease incidence and 
distribution. Conversely, in areas where low temperature cur­
rently limits distribution, increased temperature may increase 
regional severity and cause distributional extension.
2.4. 
Integrated Assessment of Potential Impacts
Work on integrated assessment of climate change in the Africa 
region is in its infancy. Several different approaches are being 
applied in country studies and primary research. These 
approaches include assessments of illustrative case examples 
related to ecosystems, water supply/basin management, and 
socioeconomic activities such as agriculture. These case stud­
ies begin to integrate, for specific subregions (such as water­
sheds or agricultural production areas), the impacts of climate
Africa
77
Box 2-10. The Potential Impact of Long-Term Climate Change 
on Vector-Borne Diseases: The Case of Malaria
Malaria is a vector-bome environmental disease; as such, it is greatly influenced by macro- and microenvironmental 
changes. The impact of human-induced environmental change on malaria can be graded on a scale that commences at a 
global level and terminates at the level of an individual family homestead. In the investigation of environmentally induced 
changes in malaria transmission, it is impossible to restrict the study to localized environmental changes because they are 
nested within the changing macroenvironment. To understand the dynamics of these changes, as well as their interactions 
and their potential for prediction of occurrence, it is essential that we consider the role of macroenvironmental change 
(e.g., global warming) as well as microenvironmental change (e.g., deforestation or changes in land-use patterns, housing 
type, migration).
□  0 
0
 0.03 
0
 0.05 
0
 0.08
■ I  0.16
H O .2 2
Î0.27 
10.30 
10.33 
10.36 
10.38
О
0
П
0.03
a
0.05
■
0.08
■
0.11
■
0.14
■
0.16
■
0.19
■
0.22
■ I 0.25
m 0.27
■
0.30
■
0.33
ШШ0.36
Ш 0.38
Degree o f Change: a) 5-month model with 1°C increase, b) 5-month model with 0.5°C increase, c) 5-month model 
with 0.5°C increase at elevation >1,300 m, and d) 5-month model with Г С  increase at elevation >1,300 m.
Box 2-10 continued
There is little doubt that global warming is now a reality (IPCC 1990, Chapters 5, 7, 8 ). Over the past three decades 
there has been a marked increase in mean temperatures, especially at higher latitudes; in the tropics, the increase is esti­
mated to be about 0.2°C (IPCC 1990, Chapter 5). Some attention has focused on global climate change and its implica­
tions for epidemic malaria transmission (Bouma et al., 1994; Martens et a l, 1995a; Martin and Lefebvre, 1995). The 
impact of these climatic changes on malaria is likely to be greatest in regions where malaria transmission previously was 
limited physiologically by low temperatures, which limit the development of the vector and the parasite. In these areas, 
transmission is likely to be limited to specific seasons (when temperatures are favorable) or may not occur at all.
Increased temperatures will lengthen the transmission season, resulting in a marked increase in incidence. Increased tem­
peratures also can expand transmission into regions that previously defined the limits of malaria transmission because of 
the effects of latitude or elevation (or both).
Studies in Rwanda (Loevinsohn, 1994) and Kenya (Knight and Neville, 1991; Some, 1994) have investigated the extent 
to which small-scale land-use changes can be responsible for dramatic increases in highland malaria. The effects of 
short-term environmental changes, as well as changes in human behavioral patterns (e.g., migration, changes in control 
activities in adjacent regions), are superimposed on more general effects of macroenvironmental change and are likely to 
play an important role in the onset of epidemics. Thus, although climate change may mean certain regions become more 
susceptible to malaria transmission, the actual risk of epidemics may remain low because of the absence of local contrib­
utory risk factors.
The accompanying figures a, b, c, and d provide a delineation of regions that would be environmentally affected by 0.5°C 
and 1.0°C increases in temperature. Figures a and b limit the modeling process to the highland areas of Africa, whereas 
Figures с and d include regions in which malaria distribution previously was restricted by elevation and latitude. These 
“new” zones of malaria transmission would be intermediate between areas of known annual transmission and those where 
malaria has never occurred. With respect to the latter (the upper limit), the simulation errs on the side of caution: Malaria 
always is limited (cannot occur at present) and is not subject to interannual variation. It uses existing long-term, retrospec­
tive, climatological (temperature and rainfall) and topographic surfaces that already exist for Africa (Hutchinson et al,
1995). Inherent in the prerequisite for such epidemic fringe malaria (elevation or latitude) is that in certain years a window 
of suitable environmental conditions will exist. This window consists of a number of consecutive months with suitable 
environmental conditions. The graphic provides a conservative estimate; it assumes a prerequisite of five consecutive 
months, whereas in some regions (such as the Sahel) this may be as short as three (Bagayako, pers. comm.). Despite the 
occurrence of such a window, transmission may not occur. Transmission then will be contingent on human activities that 
result in the introduction of the parasite into this suitable (short-term) climatological environment.
The premise that climate variables, on their own, may not always reliably predict epidemic risk has important implica­
tions for the forecasting of epidemics and changes in distribution. This model is not definitive but provides an illustration 
of how climate may impact upon disease distribution and how regions of impact may be delineated. Similarly, the 
change or shift in severity in existing malarial regions could be modeled. The figures illustrate that increased tempera­
tures would significantly increase susceptible regions in areas of the Southern Hemisphere where distribution previously 
was constrained by latitude. In contrast, northern Africa is not affected because the distribution concurs with the Sahelian 
region, where the absence of rainfall and high temperatures limits the disease (similarly with Botswana). Conversely, in 
certain areas of southern Africa, especially South Africa, low temperatures previously were limiting— thus, a significant 
increase in distribution is likely.
78 
Africa
change with the potential impacts of other factors such as 
will require fundamental advances in the research literature. As
land-use change, demographic change, land degradation, air 
a basis for integration, primary research on impacts on the
and water pollution, and economic and social change (includ- 
potentially most vulnerable sectors and regions must be con­
ing factors such as changing resource demands resulting from 
ducted so that interactions among the many potential costs and
economic development and technological change). 
benefits can be assessed and, where possible, quantified.
The use of integrated assessment models has not been wide­
spread in the African context, although it is becoming an item 
2.5. 
M ajor Challenges Ahead for Africa 
on the agenda of several modeling groups and organizations.
More widespread use of integrated assessment models is a pri- 
One of the first and most pressing scientific steps to address the
ority for the IPCC in the Third Assessment Report, although it 
shortage of data on African climate is the maintenance and (if
Africa
79
possible) enhancement of the surface climate observing network. 
The network is important because, for the detection of long-term 
climate change, stable and continuous observing sites are neces­
sary. The World Meteorological Organization (WMO) has a pro­
gram to designate and maintain key sites as Reference Climate 
Stations. This program needs additional recognition and funding. 
The observing network also will help in the calibration of new 
satellite-based methods of observing the climate (WMO, 1992).
reversing desertification; combating coastal erosion and pollu­
tion; ensuring sustainable industrial development; making effi­
cient use of energy resources; maintaining forests and wildlife 
resources; managing demographic change; and ensuring ade­
quate food security. These priority areas highlight environmen­
tal and developmental concerns in the region that require 
immediate attention from the research and policy communities 
(Hulme, 1996a).
There is a continual need to evaluate the results of GCM exper­
iments that simulate greenhouse gas- and aerosol-induced cli­
mate change to identify the likely subregional response within 
Africa to projected global-mean warming. This research should 
be seen as only one part of the much larger effort underway 
worldwide to narrow the uncertainties surrounding predictions 
of greenhouse gas-induced climate change. Determining 
whether recent desiccation in the Sahel is associated in some 
way with global air pollution also is of great importance 
(Hastenrath, 1995; Ringius et al., 1996).
In addition to conducting more comprehensive assessments of 
the sensitivity and vulnerability of key resource sectors and 
systems, there is an urgent need to begin to apply existing and 
developing techniques for integration of potential climate 
change impacts on several dimensions, as suggested in the 
introduction to this report. These dimensions include:
Integrating the chain of effects from changes in atmos­
pheric composition and climate to changes in biophys­
ical systems to the socioeconomic consequences (the 
“vertical” dimension)
Including interactions among systems, sectors, and 
activities (the “horizontal” dimension)
• 
Considering climate change in the context of other 
trends and changes in society (the “time” or “global 
change” dimension)
• 
Considering the integrated impacts of current levels 
and episodes of climate variability.
In light of the large number and magnitude of socioeconomic 
and environmental changes projected for Africa, developing 
integrated assessments of climate change is an urgent priority 
for the region.
As this information on sectoral vulnerabilities and integrated 
assessment of potential climate change impacts is developed, it 
must penetrate more fully into national government organiza­
tions and international donor agencies. This penetration is nec­
essary to ensure that what is known about past and present cli­
mate variability is properly taken into account in developing 
national economic and environmental plans (Sadowski et al.,
1996). Such sensitization of the policymaking process to cli­
mate variability also ensures that as knowledge about future 
climate change improves, it too can be sensibly used to guide 
drought/climate-related economic policy (OECD, 1996).
Within Africa, priority areas for environmental policy include 
securing sustainable water supply and quality; preventing and
References
A frican  D eveiopm ent B ank, A frican D eveiopm ent F un d / A frica E nergy 
P ro g ra m m e  
(ADB 
A E P ), 
1996: 
E n e r g y  
a n d  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
I n t e r a c t i o n s . Technicai Paper No. E E l, Energy and Environm ent 
Technical Paper Series, Abidjan, Ivory Coast.
A kong’a, J., T.E. Downing, N.T. Konijn, D.N. Mungai, H.R. Muturi, and H.L. 
Potter, 1988: The effects of climatic variations on agriculture in central and 
eastern Kenya. In: 
T h e  I m p a c t  o f  C l i m a t i c  
V a r i a t i o n s  
o n  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  
A s s e s s m e n t s  i n  S e m i - A r i d  R e g i o n s  [Parry, M.L., T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijn 
(eds).]. Kluwer Academic Press, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 123-270.
A llersm an, E. and W.K. Tilsmans, 1993: Coastal conditions in West Africa: A  
review. O c e a n  a n d  C o a s t a l  M a n a g e m e n t , 19, 199-240.
A nte, B., 1990: Im pacts of clim ate change on the socioeconom ic structure and 
activities in the M editerranean region. In: C h a n g i n g  C U m a t e  a n d  t h e  
C o a s t , volum e 2 [Titus, J.G. (ed.)]. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. J27-J38.
A rch er, S., D.S. Schimel, and E.A. Holland, J994: M echanism s of shrubland 
expansion: Land use, climate or CO 2 ? C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 29, 91-99.
Atvosika, L.F., G.T. French, R.T. Nicholls, and C.E. Ibe, J992: The impacts o f sea 
level rise on the coastline of Nigeria [O’Callahan, J. (ed.)]. In: G l o b a l  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  t h e  R i s i n g  C h a l le n g e  o f  t h e  S e a . Proceedings of the 
IPCC Workshop at Margarita Island, Venezuela, 9-13 March 1992. National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Silver Spring, MD, USA, 690 pp.
B agayako, М ., 1996: M alaria Research and Training Centre, Bam ako, Mali, 
(personal com m unication)
B alek, J., 1977: H y d r o l o g y  a n d  W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  i n  T r o p i c a l  A f r i c a . Elsevier 
Science Publishers, Amsterdam , Netherlands, 27 pp.
Benson, C. and E. Clay, J994: The impact of drought on sub-Saharan African 
econom ies. I D S  B u l l e t i n , 25(4), 24-32.
B inet, D., L. LeReste, and P.S. Diouf, J995. Influence des eaux de ruisselle­
m ent et des rejets fluviaux sur les ecosystem es et les ressources vivantes 
des cotes d ’A frique occidentale. In: F A O  F i s h e r i e s  T e c h n i c a l  P a p e r ,  
E f f e c t s  o f  R i v e r i n e  I n p u t s  o n  C o a s t a l  E c o s y s t e m s . Food and Agriculture 
Organization, Rome, Italy.
B laikie, PM . and H.C. Brookfield, 1987: L a n d  D e g r a d a t i o n  a n d  S o c i e t y .  
M ethuen, London, U K  and New York, USA, 296 pp.
B onkoungou, E.G., 1996: Drought, desertification and w ater management in 
sub-Saharan Africa. In: S u s t a i n i n g  t h e  F u t u r e :  E c o n o m i c ,  S o c i a l ,  a n d  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
C h a n g e  
i n  
S u b - S a h a r a n  A f r i c a  [Benneh, G., W B . 
M organ, and J.I. U itto (eds.)]. United Nations University Press, New 
York, NY, USA, pp. 165-180.
B ooth, T. H., J990: M apping regions clim atically suitable for particular tree 
species at the global scale. F o r e s t  E c o l o g y  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t , 36, 47-60.
B ootsm a, H.A. and R.F. Hecky, 1993: Conservation of the African Great 
Lakes: a limnological perspective. C o n s e r v a t i o n  B i o l o g y , 7, 644-656.
B oum a, M .J., H.E. Sondorp, and H.J. van der Kaay, J994: Climate change and 
periodic epidem ic malaria. L a n c e t , 343, 342.
B radley, P. and P. Dewees, 1993: Indigenous woodlands, agricultural production 
and household economy in the communal areas. In: L i v i n g  w i t h  T r e e s :  
P o l i c i e s  f o r  F o r e s t r y  M a n a g e m e n t  i n  Z i m b a b w e  [Bradley, PN . and K. 
M cNamara (eds.)]. The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 63-137.
B roadus, J., S. M illiman, D. Edwards, D.G.Aubrey and F. Bable, J986: Rising 
sea level and dam m ing of rivers: possible effects in Egypt and 
Bangladesh. In: E f f e c t s  o f  C h a n g e s  i n  S t r a t o s p h e r i c  O z o n e  a n d  G l o b a l  
C l i m a t e , volum e 4 [Titus, J.G., (ed.)]. U.S. Environm ental Protection 
Agency and UNEP, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 165-189.
80
Africa
B uckland. R.W., 1992: C e r e a l  O u t p u t  i n  t h e  S A D C C  R e g i o n  D u r i n g  D r y  S p e lls .  
SADC Regional W orkshop on Climate Change, W indhoek, Namibia.
B urke, J.J., J.R. M ahan, and J.L. Hatfield, 1988: Crop-specific therm al kinet­
ic w indow s in relation to w heat and cotton biom ass production. 
A g r o n o m y  J o u r n a l , 80, 553-556.
C ald er, I.R., R.L. Hall, H.G. Bastable, H.R. Gunston, 0 . Shela, A. Chirwa, 
and R. Kafundu, 1995: The impact of land use change on w ater resources 
in sub-Saharan Africa: a m odelling study of Lake M alawi. J o u r n a l  o f  
H y d r o l o g y , 170, 123-135.
C arp en ter, S.R., S.G. Fisher, N.B. Grimm , and J.F. Kitchell, 1992: Global 
change and freshw ater ecosystem s. A n n u a l  
R e v i e w  
o f  E c o l o g i c a l  
S y s t e m s , 23, 119-139.
C hidum ayo, E.N., 1997: M i o m b o  E c o l o g y  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t . IT Publications, 
London, United Kingdom (in press).
C hilim a, C.Z., 1991: The status and developm ent o f conifer aphid damage in 
M alawi. In: E x o t i c  A p h i d  P e s t s  o f  C o n i f e r s .  A  C r i s i s  i n  A f r i c a n  F o r e s t r y .  
Proceedings of a W orkshop at M aguga, Kenya, June 3-6,1991. Food and 
Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy, pp. 64—67.
C hilim a, C.Z. 1997: Forest Research Institute o f M alawi, Zom ba, M alawi, 
(personal com m unication)
C leav er, K.M . and G.A. Schreiber, 1994: 
R e v e r s i n g  
t h e  
S p i r a l :  
t h e  
P o p u l a t i o n ,  A g r i c u l t u r e  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t  N e x u s  i n  S u b - S a h a r a n  A f r i c a :  
D i r e c t i o n s  o n  D e v e l o p m e n t  S e r i e s . The World Bank, W ashington, DC, 
USA, 293 pp.
C line, W .R., 1992: 
T h e  
E c o n o m i c s  
o f  G l o b a l  
W a r m i n g . Institute for 
International Econom ics, W ashington, DC, USA, 408 pp.
C onw ay, D. and M. Hulme, 1993: Recent fluctuations in precipitation and 
ranoff over the Nile sub-basins and their impact on main Nile discharge. 
C l i m .  C h a n g e , 25, 127-151.
C onw ay, D. and M. Hulme, 1996: The im pacts of climate variability and 
future clim ate change in the Nile Basin on w ater resources in Egypt. 
W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  D e v e l o p m e n t , 1(2/3), 277-296.
C ooper, J. and P.A.R. Hockey, 1981: T h e  A t l a s  a n d  S i t e  R e g i s t e r  o f  S o u t h  
A f r i c a n  
C o a s t a l  B i r d s .  
P a r t  2 ,  
T h e  A t l a s . Report to South African 
National Com m ittee for Oceanographic Research, 324 pp.
C raig, M. and D. le Sueur (in preparation): A frican C l i m a t i c  M o d e l  o f  M
a l a r i a  
T r a n s m i s s i o n  B a s e d  o n  M o n t h l y  R a i n f a l l  a n d  T e m p e r a t u r e . 16 pp.
D avidson, O.R., 1992: Energy issues in sub-Saharan Africa: future directions. 
A n n u a l  R e v i e w  o f  E n e r g y  a n d  t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t . , 17, 359-404.
Davies, S., 1996: A d a p t a b l e  L i v e l i h o o d s :  C o p i n g  w i t h  F o o d  I n s e c u r i t y  i n  t h e  
M a l i a n  S a h e l
D ennis, K.C., I. Niang-Diop, and R.J. Nicholls, 1995: Sea level rise and 
Senegal: potential im pacts and consequences. J .  C o a s t a l  R e s . , special 
issue 14, 243-261.
de R idder, N., L. Stroosnijder, A.M . Cisse, and H. van Keulen, 1982: PPS 
course book. Vol. I, Theory. P r o d u c t i v i t y  o f  S a h e l i a n  R a n g e l a n d s :  A  
S t u d y  o f  t h e  S o i ls ,  t h e  V e g e t a t i o n s  a n d  t h e  E x p l o i t a t i o n  o f  T h a t  N a t u r a l  
R e s o u r c e . Departm ent of Soil Science and Plant Nutrition, W ageningen 
A gricultural University, W ageningen, Netherlands, pp. 227-231.
D esanker, P.V., 1996; D evelopm ent of a M iom bo woodland dynam ics model 
in Zam bezian A frica using M alawi as a case study. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 36, 
279-288.
D ow ning, T.E., 1992: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  V u l n e r a b l e  P l a c e s :  G l o b a l  F o o d  
S e c u r i t y  a n d  C o u n t r y  S t u d ie s  i n  Z i m b a b w e ,  K e n y a ,  S e n e g a l ,  a n d  C h i l e .  
Research Paper No. 1, Environm ental Change Unit, U niversity of 
Oxford, Oxford, U nited Kingdom , 54 pp.
D ow ning, T.E. (ed.), 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
a n d  
W o r l d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y .  
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 662 pp.
D ow ning, T.E., S. Lezberg, C. W illiams, and L. Berry, 1990: Population 
change and environm ent in central and eastern Kenya . E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
C o n s e r v a t i o n , 17(2), 123-133.
D ow ning, T.E., M.J. Watts, and H.G. Bohle, 1996: Climate change and food 
insecurity; Toward a sociology and geography of vulnerability. In: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
a n d  
W o r l d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y  [Downing, T.E. (ed.)]. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 183-206.
D regne, H.E., 1983; D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n  o f  A r i d  L a n d s . Harwood Academy, New 
York, NY, USA, 242 pp.
du Toit, R.F., 1983: Hydrological changes in the M iddle-Zam bezi system. T h e  
Z a m b e z i  S c i e n c e  N e w s , 17(708), 121-126.
Eele, G., 1996: Policy lessons from  com m unities under pressure. In; C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  W o r l d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y  [Downing, T.E. (ed).]. Springer-Verlag, 
Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 184-206.
E id, H.M ., 1994: Im pact of clim ate change on sim ulated wheat and maize 
yields in Egypt. In: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  f o r  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
A g r i c u l t u r e :  
C r o p  M o d e l i n g  S t u d y  [Rosenzweig, C. and A. Iglesias 
(eds.)]. U.S. Environm ental Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 
pp. 1-14.
Ellis, J.E. and K.A. Galvin, 1994; Clim ate patterns and land use practices in 
the dry zones of east and west A frica. B i o s c i e n c e , 44(5), 340-349.
Ellis, J.E., K.A. Galvin, J.T. M cCabe, and D.M . Swift, 1987: P a s t o r a l i s m  a n d  
d r o u g h t  i n  T u r k a n a  D i s t r i c t  K e n y a . Report to the N orwegian A gency for 
International D evelopm ent, Nairobi, Kenya.
E l-R aey, М ., 1990: Response to the im pacts o f greenhouse-induced sea-level 
rise on the northern coastal regions of Egypt. In: C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e  a n d  
t h e  C o a s t , volum e 2 [Titus, J.G. (ed.)]. U.S. Environm ental Protection 
Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 225-238.
E l-R aey, М ., S. Nasr, O. Frihy, S. Desouke, and K.H. Dewidar, 1995: Potential 
im pacts of accelerated sea level rise on A lexandria G overnate, Egypt. J .  
C o a s t a l  R e s . , special issue 14, 190-204.
E l-Sayed, M .K., 1991: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  R e l a t i v e  S e a  R i s e  o n  A l e x a n d r i a . In: 
Proceedings o f First International M eeting (Cities on W ater), December, 
1989, Venice, Italy, [Frassetto, R. (ed.)]. M arsilo Editori, pp. 183-189.
E pstein, P.R., 1992: Cholera and the environm ent. L a n c e t , 339, 1167-1168.
Epstein, P.R., 1993; Algal bloom s in the spread and persistence o f cholera. 
B i o S y s t e m s , 31(2-3), 209-221.
Epstein, P.R., 1995: Em erging diseases and ecosystem  instability: new threats 
to public health. A m e r i c a n  J o u r n a l  o f  P u b l i c  H e a l t h , 85, 168-172.
Epstein, P.R., T.E. Ford, and R.R. Collwell, 1993; M arine ecosystem s. L a n c e t ,  
342, 1216-1219.
E verett, G.V., 1994: Prom oting industrial fisheries in W est A frica, F A O  F i s h .  
C i r c . , no. 857, Food and Agriculture Organization of the U nited Nations, 
Rome, Italy, 56 pp.
FA O  (Food an d  A g ricu ltu re O rganization), 1985: The Ecological Effects of 
Eucalyptus. F A O  F o r e s t r y  P a p e r  5 9 , Food and Agriculture Organization 
of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, 88 pp.
FAO, 1993; Yearbook Production: Volume 46, 1992. FAO Statistical Series 
No. 112, Food and Agriculture Organization o f the U nited Nations, 
Rome, Italy.
FA O , 1994: R e v i e w  o f  P o l l u t i o n  
i n  
t h e  A f r i c a n  a q u a t i c  e n v i r o n m e n t [D. 
Calam ari and H. Naeve (eds.)], CIFA Technical Paper 25, Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United N ations, Rome, Italy.
FA O , 1997: 
S t a t e  
o f  t h e  
W
o r l d ’s  
F o r e s t s  
1 9 9 7 , Food and A griculture 
Organization of the U nited Nations, Rome, Italy.
Fischer, G., K. Frohberg, M.L. Parry, and C. Rosenzweig, 1994: Climate 
change and world food supply, dem and and trade. W ho benefits, who 
loses? G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  C h a n g e , 4(1), 7-23.
F ischer, G., K. Frohberg, M.L. Parry, and C. Rosenzweig, 1996: Im pacts of 
potential climate change on global and regional food production and vul­
nerability. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  W o r l d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y  [T.E. Downing 
(ed.)]. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 115-160.
Fischer, G. and H.T. van Velthuizen, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  G l o b a l  
A g r i c u l t u r a l  P o t e n t i a l  P r o j e c t :  A  
C a s e  S t u d y  o f  K e n y a . W P-96-071. 
International Institute for Applied System s Analysis, Laxenburg, A ustria, 
50 pp.
F ren ch , G.T., L.F. Awosika, and C.E. Ibe, 1995: Sea level rise and Nigeria: 
potential im pacts and consequences. J .  C o a s t a l  R e s . , special issue 14, 
224-242.
F rost, P.G.H., 1996: The ecology of m iom bo woodlands. I n - . T h e  M i o m b o  i n  
T r a n s i t i o n :  
W o o d l a n d s  a n d  
W e l f a r e  i n  A f r i c a .  [Campbell, B. (ed.)]. 
CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia, pp. 11-57.
G alvin, K.A., 1992: Nutritional ecology of pastoralists in dry tropical Africa. 
A m e r i c a n  J o u r n a l  o f  H u m a n  B i o l o g y , 4(2), 209-221.
G ib b erd , V , J. Rook, C.B. Sear, and J.B. W illiams, 1996: D r o u g h t  R i s k  
M a n a g e m e n t  i n  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a :  t h e  P o t e n t i a l  o f  L o n g  L e a d  C l i m a t e  
F o r e c a s t s  f o r  
I m p r o v e d  
D r o u g h t  
M a n a g e m e n t . Chatham  M aritime, 
N atural Resources Institute, Chatham  M aritime.
G ibbs, J.P., 1993: Im portance of small w etlands for the persistence of local 
populations o f wetland associated animals. W e t l a n d s , 13, 25-31.
Africa
81
Gleick, P.H., 1993: W a t e r  i n  C r i s i s . Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 473 pp.
Greco, S., R.H. Moss, D. Viner, and R. Jenne, 1994: C l i m a t e  S c e n a r i o s  a n d  
S o c i o - E c o n o m i c  
P r o j e c t i o n s  
f o r  
I P C C  
W
G I I  
A s s e s s m e n t .  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Washington, DC, USA, 6 1  pp.
G riffiths, J.F. (ed.), 1972: Climates of A frica. W
o r l d  S u r v e y  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y ,  
Volume 10. Elsevier, N ew York, NY, USA, 604 pp.
G rim ble, R. and M .-K. Chan, 1995: Stake holder analysis for natural resource 
managem ent in developing countries: Some practical guidelines for m ak­
ing m anagem ent more participatory and effective. N a t u r a l  R e s o u r c e s  
F o r u m , 19, 113-124.
H aberyan, K.A. and R.E. Hecky, 1987: The Late Pleistocene and Holocene 
stratigraphy and paleolim nology o f Lakes K v u  and Tanganyika. 
P a l e o g e o g r a p h y ,  P a l e o c l i m a t o l o g y  a n d  P a l e o e c o l o g y , 61, 169-197.
H am ilton, A.C., 1988: Guenon evolution and forest history. In: A  P r i m a t e  
R a d i a t i o n :  E v o l u t i o n a r y  B i o l o g y  o f  t h e  A f r i c a n  G u e n o n s  [Gautier-Hion, 
A., F. Bourliere, J.P. Gantier, and J. K ingdon (eds.)]. Cam bridge 
University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 13-34.
H arco u rt, A.H., K.J. Stewart, and J.M . Inahoro, 1989: Gorilla quest in 
Nigeria. O r y x , 23(1), 7-13.
H asten rath , S., 1995: Recent advances in tropical climate prediction. B u l l .  
A m e r .  M e t e o r .  S o c . , 8, 1519-1532.
H axeltine, A. and I.C. Prentice, 1996: BIOM E3: A n equilibrium  terrestrial 
biosphere m odel based on ecophysiological constraints, resource avail­
ability and com petition am ong plant functional types. 
G l o b a l  
B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s , 10, 693-710.
H ecky, R.E., F.W.B. Bugenyi, P. Ochumba, J.F. Tailing, R. M ugidde, M. 
Gophen, and L. Kaufman, 1994: Deoxygenation o f the deep w ater of Lake 
Victoria, East Africa. L i m n o l o g y  a n d  O c e a n o g r a p h y , 39, 1476-1481.
H ecky, R.E., E.J. Fee, H.J. K in g , and J.M.W. Rudd, 1981: Relationship 
betw een prim ary productivity and fish production in Lake Tanganyika. 
T r a n s a c t i o n s  o f  t h e  A m e r i c a n  F i s h e r i e s  S o c i e t y , 110, 336-345.
H ernes, H., A. Dalfelt, T. Berntsen, B. H oltsm ark, L.O. Naess, R. Selrod, and 
A. Aaheim , 1995: 
C l i m a t e  
S t r a t e g y  f o r  A f r i c a .  Cicero Report No. 
1995(3), Cicero, Oslo, Norway, 83 pp.
Hinckley, T.M., R.O. Teskey, F. Duhme, and H. Richter, 1981: Temperate hard­
wood forests. In: W a t e r  d e f i c i t s  a n d  p l a n t  g r o w t h .  V I .  W o o d y  p l a n t  c o m m u ­
n i t i e s  [Kozlowski, T.T. (ed.)]. Academic Press, New York, NY, pp. 153-208.
H lohow skyj, I., M .S. Brody, and R.T, Lackey, 1996: M ethods for assessing the 
vulnerability of African fisheries resources to climate change. C l i m a t e  
R e s e a r c h , 6, 97-106.
H ulm e, М., 1996a: Clim atic change within the period of meteorological 
records. In: T h e  P h y s i c a l  G e o g r a p h y  o f  A f r i c a  [Adams, W.M., A.S. 
Goudie, and A.R. Orm e (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, Oxford, United 
Kingdom, 429 pp.
H ulm e, М., 1996b: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a :  a n  E x p l o r a t i o n  o f  
S o m e  P o t e n t i a l  I m p a c t s  a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s  i n  t h e  S A D C  R e g i o n . Report 
com m issioned by W W F International and coordinated by the Climate 
Research Unit, UEA, Norwich, United Kingdom , 104 pp.
H ulm e, М ., D. Conway, P.M. Kelly, S. Subak, and T.E. Downing, 1995: T h e  
I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  o n  A f r i c a .  Stockholm  Environm ent Institute, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 46 pp.
H uq, S., L.J. M ata, I. Nem esova, and S. Toure, 1996: Chapter 4— Regional 
Summary. In: 
V u l n e r a b i l i t y  
a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  
t o  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e :  
a  
S y n t h e s i s  o f  R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  U . S .  C o u n t r y  S t u d ie s  [Lenhart, S., S. Huq, 
L.J. M ata, I. Nem esova, and S. Toure. (eds.).] U.S. Country Studies 
Program, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 69-108.
H utchinson, M.F., H.A. Nix, J.P. M cM ahon, and K.D. Ord, 1995: Africa: a 
Topographic and Clim atic Database. Version 1.0, O ctober 1995. Centre 
for Resource and Environm ental Studies, A ustralian National University, 
Canberra, Australia.
Ibe, A.C., 1990: A djustm ents to the impact of sea level rise along the W est and 
Central African coasts. In: C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e  a n d  t h e  C o a s t ,  v o l .  2  [Titus, 
J.G. (ed.)]. Proceedings of the first IPCC CZM S workshop, M iami, 27 
N ovem ber-1 D ecem ber 1989, E nvironm ental Protection Agency, 
W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 3-12.
Ibe, A.C. and R.E. Q uelennac, 1989: M ethodology for assessm ent and control 
of coastal erosion in w est A frica and central Africa. U N E P  R e g i o n a l  S e a  
R e p o r t s  a n d  S t u d ie s  N o .  1 0 7 . United Nations Environm ent Programme, 
New York, NY, USA.
IC S T  (Ivorian C o u n try  S tudy Team ), 1996: V u l n e r a b i l i t y  o f  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  o f  
C ô t e  d ’I v o i r e  t o  S e a  L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  O p t i o n s . Report on the 
Côte d ’Ivoire/USA Collaborative Study on Climate Change in Côte 
d ’Ivoire.
IP C C , 1990: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  T h e  I P C C  S c i e n t i f i c  A s s e s s m e n t . [Houghton, 
J.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
New York, NY, USA, and Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 365 pp.
-  
M itchell, J.F., S. M anabe, T. Tokioka, and V. M eleshko, Chapter 5. 
E q u i l i b r i u m  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —
a n d  i t s  I m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  t h e  F u t u r e ,  
pp. 131-172.
-  
Folland, C.K., T. Karl, and K.Y. Vinnikov, Chapter 7. O b s e r v e d  
C l i m a t i c  V a r i a t i o n s  a n d  C h a n g e , pp. 195-238.
Wigley, T.M.L. and T.P. Barnett, Chapter 8. D e t e c t i o n  
o f  t h e  
G r e e n h o u s e  E f f e c t  i n  t h e  O b s e r v a t io n s , pp. 239-256.
IP C C , 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
1 9 9 5 :  
T h e  
S c i e n c e  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  
o f  
W
G I  
t o  
t h e  
S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  
R e p o r t  
o f  
t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  o n  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Houghton, J.T., L.G. 
M eira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell 
(eds.)].Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 572
pp.
IP C C , 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  S c i e n t i f i c - T e c h n i c a l  A n a l y s i s .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  
G r o u p  I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Watson, R.T., M.C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, and 
Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 880 pp.
-  
Kirschbaum , M.U.F., Chapter A. E c o p h y s i o l o g i c a l ,  E c o l o g i c a l ,  a n d  
S o i l  P r o c e s s e s  i n  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s :  A  P r i m e r  o n  G e n e r a l  
C o n c e p t s  a n d  R e l a t i o n s h i p s , p.57-74.
-  
Allen-Diaz, B., Chapter 2. R a n g e l a n d s  
i n  a  C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :
I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n , pp. 131-158.
-  
Noble, I.R. and H. Gitay, Chapter 3. 
D e s e r t s  
i n  
a  C h a n g i n g
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s , pp. 159-189.
-  
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
o n  M o u n t a i n  R e g i o n s , pp. 191-213.
A m ell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. H y d r o l o g y  a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  E c o l o g y , pp. 325-364.
-  
Everett, J., Chapter 16. F i s h e r i e s , pp. 511-537.
Jallow , B.R, M.K.A. Barrow, and S.P. Leatherman, 1996: Vulnerability of the 
coastal zone of The Gambia to sea level rise and developm ent of 
response options. C l i m .  R e s . , 6, 165-177.
Jo u b ert, A.M ., 1995: Sim ulations of southern A frican climate by early-gener- 
ation general circulation models. S o u t h  A f r i c a n  J .  S c i e n c e , 91, 85-91. 
Ju ry , М ., 1996: M
a l a r i a  F o r e c a s t i n g  W o r k s h o p :  R e p o r t  o n  W o r k s h o p  o n  
R e d u c i n g  C l i m a t e  R e l a t e d  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  i n  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a .  
V i c t o r i a  
F a l l s ,  
Z i m b a b w e . Office of Global Programs, National Oceanic and 
A tm ospheric Adm inistration, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 73-84.
Justice, C., B. Scholes, and P. Frost, 1994: A f r i c a n  S a v a n n a s  a n d  t h e  g l o b a l  
a t m o s p h e r e :  
r e s e a r c h  
a g e n d a : : 
IG BP R eport 31. 
International 
Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, Stockholm, Sweden, 51 pp.
K ane, H., 1996: Shifting to Sustainable Industries. In: S t a t e  o f  t h e  W o r l d  1 9 9 6 :  
a  W o r l d w a t c h  I n s t i t u t e  r e p o r t  o n  p r o g r e s s  t o w a r d  a  s u s t a i n a b l e  s o c i e t y .  
W.W. Norton and Company, New York, U SA  and London, United 
Kingdom, pp. 152-167.
K assas, М ., 1995: D esertification: a general review. J o u r n a l  
o f  A r i d  
E n v i r o n m e n t s , 30(2), 115—128.
K atercre, Y , 1983: Insect pests of pine plantations in the eastern districts of 
Zim babwe, 1. Prelim inary list. 
Z i m b a b w e  J o u r n a l  
o f  A g r i c u l t u r a l  
R e s e a r c h , 21, 101-105.
K endall, R.L., 1969: A n ecological history of the Lake Victoria basin.
E c o l o g i c a l  M o n o g r a p h s , 39, 121-176.
K bafagy, A.A., C.H. Hulsbergen, and G. Baarse, 1992: A ssessm ent o f the vul­
nerability of Egypt to sea level rise. In: G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  t h e  
R i s i n g  C h a l l e n g e  o f  t h e  S e a  [O ’Callahan, J. (ed).]. Proceedings of the 
IPPCC W orkshop, M arch 1992, M argarita Island, Venezuela. National 
Oceanic and Atm ospheric Adm inistration, Silver Spring, MD, USA. 
K ingdon, J.S., 1980: The role of visual signals and face patterns in African for­
est monkeys (guenons) of the genus C e r c o p i t h e c u s .  T r a n s a c t i o n s  o f  t h e  
Z o o l o g i c a l  S o c i e t y ,  L o n d o n , 35, 425-75.
82
Africa
K laus, D., 1978: Spatial distribution and periodicity of mean annual precipita­
tion south of the Sahara. A r c h .  M e t e o r .  G e o p h y s .  B i o k l i m .  S e r . B . , 26, 
17-27.
Knight. R., and C. Neville, 1991: T h e  M
a l a r i a  S i t u a t i o n  i n  K e n y a ,  S e a s o n a l  
E p i d e m i c  
a n d  
N o n - E n d e m i c  
E c o z o n e s . Internal report to National 
M alaria Control Program m e Subcommittee.
Knoch. K. and A. Schulze, 1956: Niederschlag. Tem peratur und Schwule in 
Afrika. In: W o r l d  A l l a s  o f  E p i d e m i c  D i s e a s e s , volum e 2. Heidelberger 
and A kadem ie der W issenschaften, Heidelberg, Germany.
Kraus, E.B., 1977: Subtropical droughts and cross-equatorial energy trans­
ports. M o n .  W e a . R e v . , 105, 1009-1018.
K rippendorf, J., 1984: The capital o f tourism  in danger. In: 
T h e  
T r a n s f o r m a t i o n  o f  Swisv M o u n t a i n  R e g i o n s  [Brugger, E.A. et al. (eds.)]. 
Haupt Publishers, Bern, Switzerland, pp. 427-450.
Lauenroth, W.K. and J.L. Dodd, 1978: The effects of water- and nitrogen- 
induced stress on plant community structure in a sem iarid grassland. 
O e c o l o g i a , 36, 211-222.
Leeson, H.S., 1931: A nopheline m osquitoes in southern Rhodesia. M e m .  
L o n d o n  S c h .  H y g .  T r o p .  M e d . , 4, 1.
Le Houerou, H.N., 1989: T h e  G r a z i n g  L a n d  E c o s y s t e m s  o f  t h e  A f r i c a n  S a h e l .  
Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, USA.
le Sueur, D., and B.L. Shaф , 1996: M
a l a r i a  F o r e c a s t i n g  P r o j e c t :  R e p o r t  o n  
W o r k s h o p  o n  R e d u c i n g  C l i m a t e  R e l a t e d  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  i n  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a .  
V i c t o r i a  F a l l s ,  Z i m b a b w e . Office of Global Programs, National Oceanic 
and A tm ospheric A dm inistration, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 65-73.
Levins, R., T. Awerbuch, U. Brinkman, I. Eckardt, P. Epstein, N. M akhoul, C. 
A lbuququerque de Possas, C. Puccia, A. Spilman, and M.E. Wilson, 
1994: The em ergence of new diseases. A m e r i c a n  S c i e n t i s t , 82, 52-60.
Lewis, D., P. Reinthal, and J. Trendall, 1986: A  G u i d e  t o  t h e  F i s h e s  o f  L a k e  
M
a l a w i  N a t i o n a l  
P a r k . W orld W ildlife Fund, World Conservation 
Center, Gland, Switzerland.
Livingstone, D.A., 1975: Late quaternary clim atic change in Africa. A n n u a l  
R e v i e w  o f  E c o l o g y  a n d  S y s t e m a t i c s , 6, 249-280.
Loevinsohn, M .E., 1994: Climatic w arm ing and increased m alaria incidence 
in Rwanda. L a n c e t , 343, 714-717.
L ow e-M cC onnell, R.H., 
1987: 
E c o l o g i c a l  
S t u d i e s  
i n  
T r o p i c a i  
F i s h  
C o m m u n it ie s . Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
M agadza, C.H.D., 1984: An analysis of plankton from  Lake Bangweulu, 
Zambia. H y d r o b i o l o g i e  d u  B a s s i n  d u  L a k e  B a n g w e o l o  e t  d u  L u a p u l a  
JSymoens, J.J., (ed.)].
M agadza, C.H.D., 1991: Some possible impacts of climate change on African 
ecosystem s. In: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
S c i e n c e ,  
I m p a c t s  
a n d  
P o l i c y .  
Proceedings of the Second World Climate Conference [Jager, J. and H.L. 
Ferguson (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, United 
Kingdom, pp. 385-390.
M agadza, C.H.D., 1996: Climate change: some likely multiple impacts in 
southern Africa. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  W o r l d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y  [Downing, 
T.E. (ed.)]. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 4 4 9 ^ 8 3 .
M akadho, J.M ., 1996: Potential effects of clim ate change on corn production 
in Zimbabwe. C l i m a t e  R e s e a r c h , 6, 147-151.
M akarau, A., 1992: N a t i o n a l  D r o u g h t  a n d  D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n  P o l i c i e s :  
t h e  
Z i m b a b w e  S i t u a t i o n . SADC Regional W orkshop on Climate Change, 
1992. W indhoek, Namibia.
M artens, W.J.M., Т.Н. Jetten, J. Rotm ans, and L.W. Niessen, 1995a: Climate 
change and vector-borne diseases: a global m odelling perspective. 
G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  C h a n g e , 5, 195-209.
M artens, W .J.M., L.W. Niessen, J. Rotmans, Т.Н. Jetten, and A.J. M cM ichael, 
1995b: Potential impact of global climate change on m alaria risk. 
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s , 103, 458-464.
M artin, P. and M. Lefebvre, 1995: M alaria and climate: sensitivity of malaria 
potential transm ission to climate. A m b i o , 24(4), 200-220.
M artyn, D., 1992: C l i m a t e s  o f  t h e  
W o r ld ,  
D e v e l o p m e n t s  
i n  A t m o s p h e r i c  
S c i e n c e ,  1 8 . Elsevier, New York, NY, USA, 435 pp.
M atarira, C.H., W. Kamukondiwa, F.C. M wamuka, J.M . M akadho, and L.S. 
Unganai, J996: Vulnerability and adaptation assessments in Zimbabwe, 
in: 
V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  
a  S y n t h e s i s  o f  
R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  U . S .  C o u n t r y  S t u d ie s  [Lenhart, S., S. Huq, L.J. Mata, I. 
Nemesova, S. Toure, and J.B. Smith (eds.).] U.S. Country Studies 
Program, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 129-140.
M cM ichael, A. J., A. Haines, R. Sloof, and S. Kovats (eds.), J996: C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  H u m a n  H e a l t h . World H ealth Organisation, Geneva, 297 pp.
M cisner, J.D ., J.L. Goodie, H.A. Regier, B.J. Shuter, and W.J. Christie, J987: 
A n assessm ent of the effect of clim ate w arm ing on Great Lakes Basin 
fish. J .  G r  L .  R e s . , 13. 340-352.
M enaut, J.C., J. Gignoux, C. Prado, and J. Clobert, 199J: The community 
dynamics in a humid savanna of the Côte d ’Ivoire: m odeling the effects of 
fire and competition with grass and neighbors. J. B i o g e o g r . , 17, 471-481.
M ichael, E. and D.A.P. Bundy, 1996: The global burden of lym phatic filaria­
sis. I n . W o r l d  B u r d e n  o f  D i s e a s e s  [Murray, C.J.L, and A .D, Lopez (eds.)]. 
W orld Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
M illim an, J., J. Broadhaus, and F. Gable, 1989: Environm ental and econom ic 
im plications of rising sea level and subsiding deltas, the Nile and Bengal 
exam ples. A m b i o , 18, 340-345.
M ilton, S.J., W. Richard, J. Dean, M.A. du Plessis, and W. Roy Siegfried, 1994: 
A  conceptual model of arid rangeland degradation. B i o s c i e n c e , 4 4 , 1 0 - 7 6 .
M kanda, F.X., 1996: Potential im pacts of future clim ate change on nyala 
( T r a g e l a p h u s  a n g a s i )  in Lengwe National Park, M alawi. C l i m .  R e s . , 6, 
157-164.
M olineaux, L., 1988: The epidem iology of human m alaria as an explanation 
o f its distribution, including some im plications for control. In: V o l u m e  I ,  
M
a l a r i a :  P r i n c i p l e s  a n d  P r a c t i s e s  o f  M a l a r i o l o g y .  L-ongman Group, 
United Kingdom, pp. 913-998.
M ortim ore, М ., 1989: A d a p t i n g  
t o  
D r o u g h t :  
F a r m e r s ,  
F a m i n e s  
a n d  
D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n  i n  W e s t A f r i c a .  Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, 
United Kingdom , 299 pp.
M oyo, S., P. O ’Keefe, and M. Sill, 1993: T h e  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a n  E n v i r o n m e n t :  
P r o f i l e s  o f  t h e  S A D C  C o u n t r i e s . ETC Foundation/Earthscan Publishers, 
Ltd., London, U nited Kingdom.
M uchena, P., 1994: Implications of climate change for maize yields in 
Zim babw e. In: 
I m p l i c a t i o n s  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  f o r  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
A g r i c u l t u r e :  C r o p  M o d e l i n g  S t u d y  [Rosenzweig, C. and A. Iglesias (eds.)]. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 1-9.
Neilson, R.P., 1995: A  model for predicting continental scale vegetation distri­
bution and w ater balance. E c o l .  A p p l . ,  5, 362-385.
Newell, R.E., J.W. Kidson, D.G. Vincent, and G.J. Boer, 1972: T h e  G e n e r a l  
C i r c u l a t i o n  o f  t h e  T r o p i c a l  A t m o s p h e r e  a n d  I n t e r a c t i o n s  w i t h  E x t r a -  
T r o p i c a l  L a t i t u d e s , volume 1. M IT Press, Cam bridge, M A, USA, 258 pp.
Nicholls, R.J. and S.P  Ixatherm an, 1994: Sea level rise and coastal m anage­
m ent. 
I n - . G e o m o r p h o l o g y  
a n d  L a n d  
M a n a g e m e n t  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
E n v i r o n m e n t [M cGregor, D. and D. Thom pson (eds.)]. John W iley and 
Sons, United Kingdom.
Nicholls, R.J. and S.P  I-eatherman, 1995: The im plications of accelerated sea- 
level rise for developing countries: a discussion. J .  C o a s t a l  R e s . , 14, 
303-323.
Nicholson, S.E., 1993: A n overview o f African rainfall fluctuations of the last 
decade. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 6, 1463-1466.
N icholson, S.E., 1994a: A  review of clim ate dynam ics and clim ate variability 
in eastern Africa. In: T h e  L i m n o l o g y ,  C l i m a t o l o g y  a n d  P a l e o c l i m a t o l o g y  
o f  t h e  E a s t  A f r i c a n  L a k e s  [Johnson, T.C. and E. Odada (eds.)]. Gordon 
and Breach, London, United Kingdom.
Nicholson, S.E., 1994b: Recent rainfall fluctuations in A frica and their rela­
tionship to past conditions. H a l o c e n e , 4, 121-131.
Nicholson, S.E., J. Kim, and J. Hoopingarner, 1988: A t l a s  o f  A f r i c a n  R a i n f a l l  
a n d  U s  I n t e r a n n u a l  V a r i a b i l i t y . D epartm ent of M eteorology, The Florida 
State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA, 237 pp.
O ’Connor, T.G., 1991: Local extinction in perennial grasslands: a life-history 
approach. A m .  N a t . , 137, 735-773.
O ECD, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  P o l i c y  I n i t i a t i v e s ,  t h e  1 9 9 5 1 9 6  U p d a t e . OECD 
Energy and the Environm ent Series, Paris, France, 185 pp.
O IES (Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies), 1991: A r i d  E c o s y s t e m s  
I n t e r a c t i o n s :  R e c o m m e n d a t i o n s  f o r  D r y l a n d s  R e s e a r c h  i n  t h e  G l o b a l  
C h a n g e  R e s e a r c h  P r o g r a m . OIES Report 6, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Ojima, D.S., W.J. Parton, M.B. Coughenour, and J.M .O. Scurlock, 1996: 
Impact of climate and atm ospheric carbon dioxide changes on grasslands 
of the world. In: G l o b a l  C h a n g e :  E f f e c t s  o n  C o n i f e r o u s  F o r e s t s  a n d  
G r a s s l a n d s  [Breymeyer, A.I., D.O. Hall, J.M . M ellilo, and G.I. Agren 
(eds.)]. Scientific Com m ittee on Problem s of the Environm ent (SCOPE), 
Chichester, NY, USA, Wiley, pp. 271-309.
Africa
83
Ojima, D.S., D.S. Schimei, W.J. Parton, and C.E. Owensby, 1994: Long- and 
short-term  effects o f fire on nitrogen cycling in tallgrass prairie. 
B i o g e o c h e m i s t r y , 23, 1-18.
O koth-O gendo, H.W .O. and J.B. Ojwang (eds.), 1995: A  
C l i m a t e  f o r  
D e v e l o p m e n t :  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  p o l i c y  o p t i o n s  f o r  A f r i c a .  African Centre 
for Technological Studies, Nairobi, Kenya, 264 pp.
Orondo, S.B.O. and R.K. Day, 1994: Cypress aphid ( C i n a r a  c u p r e s s i )  damage 
to a cypress ( C u p r e s s u s  l u s i t a n i c a )  stand in Kenya. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l  
o f  P e s t  M a n a g e m e n t , 40, 141-144.
Owen, R.B., R. Crossley, T.C. Johnson, D. Tweddle, L. Kornfield, S. Davison,
D.H. Eccles, and D.E. Engstrom , 1990: M ajor low levels of Lake M alawi 
and their im plications for spéciation rates in cichlid fishes. P r o c e e d i n g s  
o f  t h e  R o y a l  S o c i e t y , London, UK, 240, 519-553.
O w u ar, A .L ., 1991: Exotic conifer aphids in K enya, their current status and 
options for m anagem ent. In: E x o t i c  A p h i d  P e s t s  o f  C o n i f e r s .  A  C r i s i s  
i n  A f r i c a n  F o r e s t r y . Proceedings o f a W orkshop at M aguga, K enya, 
June 3-6, 1991. Food and A griculture O rganization, Rom e, Italy, pp. 
58-63.
РАНО, 1994: Leishm aniasis in i b e  A a a e n c a s .  E p i d e m i o l o g i c a l  B u l l e t i n , 15(3), 
8-13.
Parton, W .J., M .B. C oughenour, J.M .O . Scurlock, and D.S. O jim a, 1996: 
G lobal grassland ecosystem  m odeling; developm ent and test of 
ecosystem  m odels for grassland ecosystem s. In: 
G l o b a l  
C h a n g e :  
E f f e c t s  o n  C o n i f e r o u s  F o r e s t s  a n d  G r a s s l a n d s  [Breym eyer, A .I., D.O. 
H all, J.M . M ellilo, and G.I. A gren (eds.)]. Scientific C om m ittee on 
Problem s o f the Environm ent (SCO PE), C hichester, NY, USA, Wiley, 
pp. 229-269.
Parton, W.J., B. M cKeown, V. Kirchner, and D. Ojima, 1992; C E N T U R Y  
U s e r s ’ M a n u a l . N atural Resource Ecology Laboratory, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, CO.
Pinay, G., 1988: H y d r o b i o l o g i c a l  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  t h e  Z a m b e z i  R i v e r  S y s t e m :  a  
R e v i e w . International Institute for A pplied System s A nalysis (IIASA) 
W orking Paper W P-88-089. IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria, 116 pp.
Price W aterhouse, 1994: T h e  L o w v e l d  C o n s e r v a n c i e s :  N e w  O p p o r t u n i t i e s  f o r  
P r o d u c t i v e  
a n d  
S u s t a i n a b l e  L a n d - U s e . Price W aterhouse W ildlife, 
Tourism , and Environm ental Consulting, Save Valley, Bubiana and 
Chiredzi River Conservancies, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Pritchard, 1985: A f r i c a :  
a  
S t u d y  
G e o g r a p h y  f o r  A d v a n c e d  S t u d e n t s .  
Longm an, Zimbabwe.
R ains, J.R., C.E. Owensby, and K. Kemp, 1975: Effects of nitrogen fertiliza­
tion, burning, and grazing on reserve constituents of big bluestem. J .  
R a n g e  M a n a g e . , 28, 358-362.
Rangeley, R., B.M . Thiam , R.A. A ndersen, and C.A. Lyle, 1994: I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
R i v e r  B a s i n  O r g a n i z a t i o n s  i n  S u b - S a h a r a n  A f r i c a .  Technical Paper No. 
250. The W orld Bank, W ashington, DC, USA, 70 pp.
Rasm nsson, E.M ., 1987: Global clim ate change and vulnerability: effects on 
drought and desertification in A frica. In: D r o u g h t  a n d  H u n g e r  i n  A f r i c a  
[Glantz, M .H. (ed.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, United 
K ingdom, pp. 3-22.
Rejj, C., I. Scoones, and C. Toulmin (eds), 1996: S u s t a i n i n g  
t h e  S o i l :  
I n d i g e n o u s  
S o i l  
a n d  
W a t e r  
C o n s e r v a t i o n  
i n  
A f r i c a .  Earthscan 
Publications Ltd., London, U nited Kingdom , 260 pp.
Riebsam e, W.E., K.M. Strzepek, J.L. W escoat, Jr., R. Perrit, G.L. Graile, J. 
Jacobs, R. Leichenko, C. M agadza, H. Phien, B.J. Urbiztondo, P. 
Restrepo, W.R. Rose, M. Saleh, L.H. Ti, C. Tucci, and D. Yates, 1995: 
Com plex river basins. In: A s C l i m a t e  C h a n g e s ,  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  I m p a c t s  
a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s  [Strzepek, K.M . and J.B. Sm ith (eds.)]. Cam bridge 
University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 57-91.
Rind, D., 1995: Drying out the tropics. N e w  S c i e n t i s t , 146, 36-40.
R ingius, L., T.E. Downing, M. Hulme, and R. Selrod, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
i n  A f r i c a :  I s s u e s  a n d  R e g i o n a l  S t r a t e g y . Cicero Report No. 1996(2), 
Cicero, Oslo, Norway, 154 pp.
R ogers, D., 1996: Changes in disease vectors. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  
S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a :  
a n  
E x p l o r a t i o n  
o f  S o m e  
P o t e n t i a l  
I m p a c t s  
a n d  
I m p l i c a t i o n s  i n  t h e  S A D C  R e g i o n  [Hulme, M. (ed.)]. Report com m is­
sioned by W orld W ildlife Fund International and coordinated by the 
Climate Research Unit, UEA, Norwich, United Kingdom, pp. 49-55.
Rogers, D.J. and M.J. Packer, 1993: Vector-borne diseases, m odels and glob­
al change. L a n c e t , 342, 1282-1284.
Rogers, P., 1993: W hat w ater managers and planners need to know about cli­
mate change and w ater resources management. In: P r o c .  C o n f e r e n c e  o n  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  M a n a g e m e n t [Ballentine, T. and E. 
Stakhiv (eds.)]. U.S. Army Institute for W ater Resources, Fort Belvoir, 
VA, pp. I/1-I/14.
Rosenzweig, C. and M.L. Parry, 1994: Potential impact of climate change on 
w orld food supply. N a t u r e , 367(6450), 133-138.
Sadowski, М., S. M eyers, F. M ullins, J. Sathaye, and J. W isnieski, 1996; 
M ethods of assessing GHG mitigation for countries w ith econom ies in 
transition. E n v i r o n .  M a n a g e m e n t , 20 (Supplem ent 1), S1-S118.
Salewicz, A., 1995: Im pact of climate change on the operation of Lake Kariba 
hydropow er schem e on the Zam bezi river. In: 
W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  
M a n a g e m e n t  i n  t h e  F a c e  o f  C l i m a t i c  a n d  H y d r o l o g i e  
U n c e r t a i n t i e s  
[Kaczmarek, Z. et al. (eds.)]. Kluwer A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands.
SAR D C , 1994: S t a t e  o f  t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t  i n  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a .  A  Report by 
the Southern A frican Research and D ocum entation Center (SARDC) 
in C ollaboration w ith lU C N — The W orld Conservation Union— and 
the Southern A frican D evelopm ent Com m unity, H arare, Zim babwe, 
332 pp.
Sayer, J. A., C.S. Harcourt, and N.M . Collins, 1992: T h e  C o n s e r v a t i o n  A t l a s  
o f  T r o p i c a l  F o r e s t s :  A f r i c a .  M acmillan, for International Union for 
Conservation of N ature and Natural Resources, 288 pp.
Scholes, R. J. and B.H. Walker, 1993: A n  A f r i c a n  S a v a n n a .  S y n t h e s i s  o f  t h e  
N y l s v l e y  
S t u d y . C am bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, U nited 
Kingdom, 306 pp.
Schulze, R.E., G.A. Kiker, and R.P. Kunz, 1996: Global climate change and 
agricultural productivity in Southern Africa: thought for food and food 
for thought. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  W o r l d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y  [Downing, 
T.E. (ed.)]. North A tlantic Treaty Organization ASI Series, Volume 137. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany, pp 421-447.
Sene, K.J. and D.T. Pinston, 1994: A  review and update of the hydrology of 
Lake Victoria, East Africa. H y d r o l o g i c a l  S c i e n c e s  J o u r n a l , 39, 47-63.
Serageldin, I., 1995: N u r t u r i n g  D e v e l o p m e n t  ( A i d  a n d  C o o p e r a t i o n  i n  T o d a y ’s  
C h a n g i n g  W o r ld ) . The World Bank, W ashington, DC, USA.
Sestini, G., 1989: T h e  I m p l i c a t i o n  o f  C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e s  f o r  t h e  N i l e  D e l t a .  
Report W G  2/14, UNEP/OCA, Nairobi, Kenya.
Sharm a, N.P., T. Damhaug, E. Gilgan-Hunt, D. Grey, V. Okaru, and D. 
Rothberg, 1 9 9 6 :  A f r i c a n  W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s :  C h a l l e n g e s  a n d  O p p o r t u n i t i e s  
f o r  S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t . World Bank Technical Paper No. 331, The 
W orld Bank, W ashington, DC, USA, 115 pp.
Shope, 
R., 
1991; 
G lobal 
clim ate change and 
infectious 
diseases. 
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s , 96, 171-174.
Sivakum ar, M.V.K., 1991: Climate change and implications for agriculture in 
Niger. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 20, 297-312.
Sivakum ar, M.V.K., 1993: Global climate change and crop production in the 
Sudano-Sahelian zone of west Africa. In: I n t e r n a t i o n a l  C r o p  S c ie n c e ,  
volum e I. Crop Science Society of America, M adison, W I, USA.
Sm ith, J.B. and S.S. Lenhart, 1996: Climate change adaptation policy options. 
C l i m .  R e s . ,  6 , 193-201.
Som e, E.S., 1994: Effects and control of highland m alaria epidemic in Uasin 
Gishu District, Kenya. E a s t  A f r i c a n  M e d i c a l J o u r n a l ,  71 (1), 2-8.
Stanley, D.J. and A.G. W ame, 1993: Nile Delta: recent geological evaluation 
and human impact. S c i e n c e , 260, 628-634.
Strzepek, K.M ., S.C. Onyeji, M. Saleh, and D.N. Yates, 1995: An assessment 
of integrated climate change impacts on Egypt. In: As C l i m a t e  C h a n g e s :  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  I m p a c t s  a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s . [Strzepek, K.M. and J.B. Smith 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, pp. 
180-200.
Tietem a, T , D.J. Toisma, E.M . Veenendaal, and J. Schroten, 1991: Plant 
responses to human activities in the tropical savanna ecosystem of 
Botswana. V e g e t a t i o , 115, 157-167.
Tyson, PR ., 1986: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  V a r i a b i l i t y  i n  S o u t h e r n  A f r i c a .  Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 220 pp.
UNEP, 1992; W o r l d  A t l a s  o f  D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n  [M iddleton, N.J. and D.S.G. 
Thom as (eds.)]. Edward Arnold Publishers, Sevenoaks, United Kingdom, 
69 pp.
U N FC C C , 1992: U n i t e d  N a t i o n s  F r a m e w o r k  C o n v e n t i o n  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e .  
United Nations, New York, NY, USA, 29 pp.
Africa
U S C SP (U.S. C o u n try  S tu d ies P ro g ra m ), 
1996: 
V u l n e r a b i l i t y  
a n d  
A d a p t a t i o n  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  a  S y n t h e s i s  o f  R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  U . S .  
C o u n t r y  S t u d ie s  [Smith, J., S. Huq, S. Lenhart, L.J, M ata, I. Nemesova, 
and S. Toure (eds.).] U.S. Country Studies Program. Kluwer, Norwell, 
MA, USA, 366 pp.
U sher, P., 1997: C o m m e n t s  o n  t h e  1 9 9 6 1 9 7  D r o u g h t s  i n  K e n y a , (unpublished).
Van D alaan. J.C. and H.H. Shugart, 1989: OUTENIQ U A  —  A  com puter 
model to simulate succession in the m ixed evergreen forests of the 
Southern Cape, South Africa. L a n d s c a p e  E c o l o g y , 24, 255-267.
V orosm arty, C.J, and B. M oore 111, 1991: M odeling basin-scale hydrology in 
support of physical climate and global biogeochem ical studies: an exam ­
ple using the Zam bezi River. S u r v e y s  i n  G e o p h y s i c s , 12, 271-311.
V orosm arty, C.J, B. M oore III, A. Grace, B.J. Peterson, E.B. Rastetter, and J. 
M ellilo, 1991: Distributed param eter models to analyze the impact of 
human disturbance of the surface hydrology of a large tropical drainage 
basin in Southern Africa. In: H y d r o l o g y  f o r  t h e  W a t e r  M a n a g e m e n t  o f  
L a r g e  R i v e r  B a s i n s . Proceedings of the Vienna Symposium, August 
1991. lAHS Publication No. 201 [van de Ven, F.H.M, D. Gutnecht, D.P. 
Loucks, and K.A. Salewicz (eds.)], pp. 233-244.
W enzel, R.P., 1994: A  new H antavirus infection in North America. N e w  
E n g l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c i n e , 330, 1004-1005.
W estoby, М., В. Walker, and 1. Noy-M eir, 1989: O pportunistic management 
for rangelands not at equilibrium . J o u r n a l  o f  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , 42, 
26-274.
W hite, F., 1983: T h e  V e g e t a t i o n  o f  A f r i c a .  UNESCO, Paris, France, 356 pp.
W H O  (W orld H ealth O rganization), 1990: P o t e n t i a l  H e a l t h  E f f e c t s  
o f  
C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e : Report of a W HO Task Group. W HO/PEP/90.10, 
W HO, Geneva, Switzerland, 58 pp.
W H O . 1994: P r o g r e s s  R e p o r t  C o n t r o l  o f  T r o p i c a l  D i s e a s e s . CTD/M IP/94.4, 
unpublished document.
W H O , 
1996a: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
a n d  
H u m a n  
H e a l t h . W orld Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 297 pp.
W H O , 1996b: I n v e s t i n g  i n  H e a l t h  R e s e a r c h  a n d  D e v e l o p m e n t . Report of the 
Ad Hoc Com m ittee on Health Research Relating to Future Intervention 
Options. W HO, Geneva, Switzerland, 278 pp.
W ilhite, D.A. and W.E. Easterling, 1987: P l a n n i n g  f o r  D r o u g h t :  T o w a r d  a  
R e d u c t i o n  o f  S o c i e t a l  V u l n e r a b i l i t y . W estview Press, Boulder, CO, USA 
and London, United Kingdom.
W illiam s, М., 1990: Understanding wetlands. \ a : W e t l a n d s :  a  t h r e a t e n e d  l a n d ­
s c a p e  [W illiams, M. (ed.)]. Basil Blackwell, Ltd., Oxford, UK, pp. 1-14.
W M O  (W orld M eteorological O rganization), 1992: T h e  T h i r d  L o n g - T e r m  
P l a n .  P a r t  I I ,  V o l u m e  1 . World W eather W atch Program. W M O, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
W M O , 1995: G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  S y s t e m  R e v i e w :  C l i m a t e  S y s t e m  M o n i t o r i n g .  
W M O, Geneva, Switzerland.
W oodw ard, F.I. and W.L. Steffen, 1996: N a t u r a l  D i s t u r b a n c e s  a n d  H u m a n  
L a n d  
U s e  
i n  
D y n a m i c  
G l o b a l  
V e g e t a t i o n  
M o d e l s . International 
G eosphere-Biosphere Program m e Report 38, Stockholm , Sweden.
W orld B ank, 1990: W o r l d  D e v e l o p m e n t  R e p o r t  1 9 9 0 :  P o v e r t y . W orld Bank 
and Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, 272 pp.
W orld B ank, 1993: W o r l d  D e v e l o p m e n t  R e p o r t :  I n v e s t i n g  i n  H e a l t h . Oxford 
University Press, New York, NY, USA, 329 pp.
W orld B ank, 1995a: A  F r a m e w o r k  f o r  I n t e g r a t e d  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  M a n a g e m e n t  
i n  S u b - S a h a r a n  A f r i c a :  B u i l d i n g  B l o c k s  f o r  E n v i r o n m e n t a l l y  S u s t a i n a b l e  
D e v e l o p m e n t  i n  A f r i c a .  Paper No. 4, A frica. Technical Department. The 
World Bank, W ashington, DC, USA.
W orld B ank, 1995b: T o w a r d  E n v i r o n m e n t a l l y  S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t  i n  
S u b - S a h a r a n  A f r i c a .  The World Bank, W ashington, DC, USA, 300 pp.
W orld B ank, 1996: 
T o w a r d  E n v i r o n m e n t a l l y  S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t  i n  
S u b - S a h a r a n  
A f r i c a :  
a  
W
o r l d  
B a n k  
A g e n d a . The W orld B ank, 
W ashington, DC, USA, 140 pp.
W R I (W orld R esources In stitu te), 1990: W o r l d  R e s o u r c e s  1 9 9 0 - 1 9 9 1 . World 
Resources Institute/U nited Nations Environm ent Program m e/U nited 
Nations D evelopm ent Program m e/The W orld Bank. Oxford University 
Press, New York, NY, USA.
W R I, 1994: 
W
o r l d  
R e s o u r c e s :  
A  
G u i d e  
t o  
t h e  
G l o b a l  
E n v i r o n m e n t ,  
1 9 9 4 - 1 9 9 5 . W orld Resources Institute/U nited Nations Environm ent 
Program m e/United Nations D evelopm ent Program m e/The W orld Bank, 
Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, 400 pp.
W R I, 1996: W o r l d  R e s o u r c e s :  A  G u i d e  t o  t h e  G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t ,  1 9 9 6 - 9 7 .  
W orld 
R esources 
Institute/U nited 
N ations 
E nvironm ent 
Program m e/United Nations D evelopm ent Program m e/The W orld Bank. 
Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, 342 pp.
W ullschleger, S.D. and R.J. Norby, 1992: Respiratory cost o f leaf grow th and 
m aintenance in w hite oak saplings exposed to atm ospheric CO 2  enrich­
ment. C a n a d i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  F o r e s t  R e s e a r c h ,  2 2 , 1717-1721.
Z inyow era, M .C., and S.L. Unganai, 1993: Drought in southern Africa. An 
update on the 1991-92 drought. D r o u g h t  N e t w o r k  N e w s  I n t . , 4(3), 3-4.
3
The Arctic and the Antarctic
JOHN T. EVERETT (USA) AND B. BLAIR FITZHARRIS (NEW ZEALAND) 
Lead Author:
B. Maxwell (Canada)
Contributors:
M. Beniston (Switzerland), RA. Berkman (USA), H.S. Bolton (USA), J. Brown 
(USA), R. Brown (Canada), D. Demaster (USA), S. Diaz (Argentina), R. Dixon 
(USA), D. Drewry (UK), L. Dyke (Canada), K.A. Edwards (Kenya), A. Gunn 
(Canada), R. Hewitt (USA), R. Jefferies (Canada), S. Kim (Korea), R Kuhry 
(Finland), J. Kuylenstierna (UN), W.J.M. Martens (Netherlands), M. McFarland 
(USA), A.D. McGuire (USA), A.J. McMichael (UK), U. Molau (Sweden), M. Oquist 
(Sweden), C.J. Feckham (USA), C.A. Rinaldi (Argentina), F. Roots (Canada),
E. Sakshaug (Norway), M. Scott (USA), J.B. Smith (USA), R.S.J. Toi
(The Netherlands), C. Tynan (USA), E.G. Weatherhead (USA), G. Weller (USA),
E. Wolff (UK)
Note: This draft is built m ostly on the IPCC Second A ssessm ent Report, w ith contributions from  the peer-reviewed literature provided by those 
listed above. The location of the supporting text is referenced as appropriate.
CONTENTS
Executive Summary 
87
3.1. Introduction 
89
3.2. Regional Climate and Past Variability 
89
3.3. Vulnerability and Potential Impacts 
92
3.3.1. 
Ice and Snow 
92
3.3.2. 
Permafrost, Hydrology, and Water Resources 
94
3.3.3. 
Terrestrial Ecological Systems 
95
3.3.4. 
Freshwater and Marine Ecological Systems 
97
3.3.5. 
Fisheries 
99
3.3.6. 
Agriculture 
100
3.3.7. 
Navigation 
100
3.3.8. 
Sub-Antarctic Islands 
101
3.3.9. 
Infrastructure, Settlements, and Health 
101
3.4. Integrated Analysis of Potential Vulnerabilities and Impacts and Future Research Needs 
102
References 
102
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Main Points
Docnment Summary
The Arctic is extremely vulnerable to projected climate 
change and its impacts. Over the period of this assessment, 
climate change is expected to contribute to major physical, 
ecological, sociological, and economic changes already 
begun in the Arctic. Because of a variety of positive feed­
back mechanisms, the Arctic is likely to respond to climate 
change rapidly and more severely than any other area on 
earth. The most direct and pronounced changes to the 
Arctic are likely to include changes in temperature and 
precipitation, with subsequent effects on sea ice and per­
mafrost. Much smaller changes are likely for the Antarctic 
over the period of this assessment. The Antarctic is likely 
to respond relatively slowly to climate change.
Substantial loss of sea ice is expected in the Arctic Ocean. 
If there is more open water, there will be impacts on the 
climate system of northern countries as temperatures mod­
erate and precipitation increases. If warming occurs, there 
will be considerable thawing of permafrost— leading to 
changes in drainage, increased slumping, and altered land­
scapes over large areas.
Polar warming probably should increase biological pro­
duction but may lead to different species composition on 
land and in the sea. On land, there will be a tendency for 
poleward shifts in major biomes and associated animals. 
However, the Arctic Ocean geographically limits move­
ment of the tundra, taiga, and boreal forest. In the sea, 
marine ecosystems will move poleward. Animals depen­
dent on ice may be disadvantaged.
Changes in the polar climate are likely to affect the rest of 
the world through increased sea levels from melting of the 
cryosphere, increased warming of lower latitudes from 
slowing of oceanic transport of heat, and increased green­
house gas levels through carbon dioxide and methane 
emissions in the Arctic.
Human communities in the Arctic will be affected by these 
physical and ecological changes. The effects will be par­
ticularly important for indigenous peoples leading tradi­
tional lifestyles.
There will be economic benefits and costs. Benefits 
include new opportunities for shipping across the Arctic 
Ocean, lower operational costs for the oil and gas industry, 
lower heating costs, and easier access for tourism. 
Increased costs can be expected from several sources, 
including disruptions caused by thawing of permafrost and 
reduced transportation capabilities across frozen ground 
and water. Sea-ice changes in the Arctic have major strate­
gic implications for trade and defense.
Regional Climate. Cold is the overwhelming characteris­
tic of polar regions, with nine months of snow, ice, cold, 
and relative darkness. In the Arctic, there are only a few 
weeks of thaw, when much of the ground is boggy and 
awash with water. There also are episodes of extreme cold 
and storms. In Antarctica, temperatures mostly remain 
below freezing.
Climate Trends. Parts of the Arctic and Antarctic have 
warmed over the past half-century, while some parts 
appear to have cooled. Precipitation seems higher. Trends 
in the overall ice balance of the world’s major ice sheets in 
Greenland and Antarctica are uncertain. There is conflict­
ing information on changes in the thickness and extent of 
sea ice globally. Ice seems to be thinning in the Arctic but 
not in the Antarctic.
Vulnerability and Impacts. Systems in the Arctic and 
Antarctic Peninsula are extremely sensitive to tempera­
ture. The primary impacts will be on the physical environ­
ment, biota and ecosystems, and human activities. The 
Arctic Ocean has strong sensitivity to temperature because 
its exposed areal extent grows and shrinks by as much as 
50% within a single year. Interannual variability in sea ice 
similarly shows extreme sensitivity to temperature. The 
Arctic terrestrial system, primarily based on permafrost, 
also is very sensitive to temperature because much of the 
permafrost is currently discontinuous. Strong positive 
feedback mechanisms within the Arctic suggest that cli­
mate change is likely to be more severe in the Arctic than 
in the rest of the world.
Terrestrial Ecological Systems. Climate change may 
occur at a rapid rate relative to forest migration ability. If 
there is warming, there will be a poleward migration of the 
northern treeline. However, geographic limitations may 
restrict the migration of the boreal forest. If warming 
occurs and the forest cover changes, there will be major 
impacts on biological resources (e.g., bears, caribou, small 
mammals, amphibians, and insects). The effects of climate 
change have not been deeply investigated in the Antarctic 
terrestrial ecosystem, but its distribution and specific com­
position could be altered by global warming.
Marine Ecological Systems. In general, productivity 
should rise. Warming should increase growth and develop­
ment rates of nonmammals; however, ultraviolet-B (UV-B) 
radiation is still increasing, which may constrain primary 
productivity as well as fish productivity. Additional risks 
include the loss of sea-ice cover, upon which several 
marine mammals depend for food and protection. Also,
Arctic shipping, oil exploration and transport, and econom­
ic development could bring risks to many species. 
Additional Stressors. In addition to climatically driven 
changes, such as changes in sea ice and temperature, the 
Arctic currently is stressed from a variety of sources, and 
some of these stresses are likely to increase in the next few 
decades. Additional stresses that may confound the effects 
of climate change include hydrocarbons, radionuclides, 
acidification, heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants, 
and UV radiation, as well as increased human develop­
ment, traffic, and potential oil spills.
Ice. If there is warming, the Arctic Ocean, as well as Arctic 
lakes and streams, could experience a thinner and reduced 
ice cover. In contrast, vast Antarctica is so cold that any 
warming within the IPCC scenarios should have little 
impact except in the Dry Valleys and on the Antarctic 
Peninsula. In fact, ice could accumulate through greater 
snowfall, slowing sea-level rise.
Permafrost. Permafrost covers all of Antarctica and most 
of the Arctic. Much of the Arctic permafrost is close to 
thawing, making it an area extremely sensitive to even 
small changes in temperature. Effects of thawing per­
mafrost include large-scale slumping, erosion, and sinking 
of areas. All of these effects will disrupt current vegeta­
tion, ecosystems, water balance, and human structures. 
Fisheries. Warming could lead to a rise in production 
unless changes in water properties would disrupt the 
spawning grounds of fish in high latitudes. There could be 
a substantial redistribution of important fish species. 
Fisheries on the margin of profitability could prosper or 
decline. Fishing seasons will lengthen, but most stocks 
already are fully exploited.
Navigation and Transport. If sea-ice coverage is 
reduced, coastal and river navigation will increase. 
Opportunities for water transport, tourism, and trade will 
increase. The Arctic Ocean could become a major trade 
route. Seasonal transport across once-frozen land and 
rivers may become more difficult or costly. Offshore oil 
production should benefit from less ice.
Sub-Antarctic Islands. These small, isolated, usually 
uninhabited islands in the Southern Ocean have special­
ized flora and important marine mammals and birds. Many 
seem to have warmed over the past 50 years, and this trend 
is expected to continue. Climate change impacts are 
unlikely to be important for most animal and bird species, 
but plant communities could change. Glaciers will proba­
bly shrink.
Arctic Settlements. If the climate ameliorates, conditions 
will favor the northward spread of agriculture, forestry, 
and mining, with an expansion of population and settle­
ments. More infrastructure— such as marine, road, rail, 
and air links— ^would be required. Changes in the distribu­
tion and abundance of sea and land animals will impact on 
traditional lifestyles of native communities. 
Infrastructure. If the permafrost thaws, much infrastruc­
ture— including pipelines, airstrips, water supply and 
sewage systems, building foundations, roads, rail lines, 
and mining systems and structures— ^will be damaged. 
Thawing could disrupt petroleum production in the tundra. 
Redesign and replacement of many of these systems will 
be needed.
Integrated Analysis. Direct effects could include ecosys­
tem shifts, sea- and river-ice loss, and permafrost thaw. 
Indirect effects could include positive feedback to the cli­
mate system. There will be new challenges and opportuni­
ties for shipping, the oil industry, fishing, mining, tourism, 
infrastructure, and the movement of populations, resulting 
in more interactions and changes in trade and strategic bal­
ance. There will be winners and losers. As examples, a 
reduced and thinning ice cover will disadvantage polar 
bears, while sea otters will have new habitats; communi­
ties on new shipping routes will grow, while those built on 
permafrost will have difficulties. Native communities will 
face profound changes impacting on traditional lifestyles.
The Arctic and the Antarctic
89
3.1. 
Introduction
Polar environmental changes are expected to be greater than 
for many other places on Earth (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 
7.5). The Arctic and Antarctic contain about 20% of the w orld’s 
land area. Athough similar in many ways, the two polar regions 
are different in that the Arctic is a frozen ocean surrounded by 
land, whereas the Antarctic is a frozen continent surrounded by 
ocean. The Antarctic is thermally isolated by the polar vortex, 
whereas the Arctic is influenced by seasonal atmospheric trans­
port from the surrounding continents.
The Antarctic, for the purposes of this document, comprises the 
Antarctic continent, the surrounding Southern Ocean, south of 
55°S, and the Sub-Antarctic islands (e.g., Campbell Island, 
Heard Island, South Georgia Islands). It is the driest, windiest, 
coldest, and cleanest continent and covers around 14 million 
km2 (UNEP, 1997). It is devoid of trees. Its boundary is some­
times taken to coincide with the Antarctic Convergence, which 
roughly parallels the mean February air isotherm of 10°C and 
is the northern boundary of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. 
The area is managed by the Consultative Parties to the 
Antarctic Treaty to the dedication of science and peace (UNEP, 
1997.) The Arctic, for the purposes of this document, is defined 
as the area within the Arctic Circle; it includes the boreal 
forests and discontinuous permafrost, although some authors 
prefer to use the area north of the natural tree line— ^which 
coincides approximately with the mean July air isotherm of 
10°C (Sugden, 1982). The Arctic areas of North America, Asia, 
and Europe are included here, rather than in other regional 
chapters.
The polar regions are a zone marginal for the distribution of 
many species; however, native organisms thrive in terrestrial 
and marine ecosystems. Apart from research bases, the 
Antarctic is virtually uninhabited by humans. It is the only con­
tinent without indigenous peoples (about 4,000 persons are 
there for prolonged periods, engaged in scientific research). 
The Arctic, however, has been populated for thousands of years 
by a variety of indigenous peoples who have developed ways 
of life to adapt to the harsh and changing climate, but at very 
low densities compared to the rest of the world. A number of 
urban outposts have developed in recent times. There is a dis­
tinct contrast and sometimes conflict between intrusive modern 
society and indigenous culture.
There is little resource use in the Antarctic and surrounding 
Southern Ocean apart from fishing and tourism. These indus­
tries have been increasing in activity over recent years and have 
considerable potential for growth. Although tourists generally 
make visits of shorter duration, the number of tourists now is 
about double the number of scientists. Antarctic tourism is 
growing rapidly; the expected number of tourists might exceed
10,000 persons in the 1997-98 season (lAATO, 1997). Some 
local fish populations have been depleted, but the krill popula­
tion could become a food source even though the maximum 
harvest has only been on the order of 500,000 tons. There is a 
multinational approach to natural resources and environmental
management, with minerals exploration and exploitation 
banned by international agreement. By contrast, the Arctic lies 
within the political boundaries of some of the world’s richest 
and most powerful nations. There is considerable economic 
activity based around fishing, farming and herding, oil extrac­
tion, mining, and shipping. Ail of these activities are climate 
sensitive. The Arctic has been a critical strategic area, and there 
still are considerable defense establishments in the region.
3.2. 
Regional Climate and Past Variability
The overwhelming characteristic of polar regions, in terms of 
both intensity and duration, is the cold. The long winter night 
ensures very low temperatures in winter. However, warm 
North Atlantic water flows into the Arctic Ocean at about 500 
m water depth at a temperature of +2 to +4°C in the Fram Strait 
area and remains near 0°C even after reaching the other side of 
the Arctic. The polar regions show large seasonal variations in 
incoming solar radiation, from none during the winter to 24 
hours of sunlight at mid-summer. The poles receive less solar 
radiation annually than the equator, but in their respective mid­
summers the daily totals are greater than at other places on 
earth. The high albedo of polar regions, from the persistent 
snow and ice and the large loss of long-wave radiation due to 
the exceptional clarity and dryness of the atmosphere, is a key 
factor in the surface energy budget and ensures a net loss of 
radiation in all or most of the months of the year. The loss is 
compensated through transport of sensible and latent heat from 
lower latitudes, usually within cyclones, and by heat carried 
within ocean currents. Because of the lack of transport of warm 
current to the Southern Ocean and the pressure of strong west­
erlies, which blocks heat supply over the Antarctic, the 
Antarctic is colder than the Arctic. Summer temperatures in 
most of the Antarctic continent remain well below freezing. In 
the Arctic, however, rapid and strong snowmelt produces a 
large influx of fresh water to the rivers and Arctic Ocean in the 
spring and summer and supports a burst of life during a brief 
and intense summer. Important circulation systems of the 
world’s oceans are driven by sinking cold water at the periph­
ery of polar regions.
After nine months of snow, ice, cold, and relative darkness, 
there are a few brief weeks of thaw when much of the Arctic 
ground is awash with water and boggy. Overland travel is easy 
when surfaces are firmly frozen but becomes more difficult in 
summer when they are not. Surface transport over ice in seas, 
lakes, and rivers much of the year must give way to transport 
over water in summer. This marked seasonal contrast provides 
two dramatically different environments, which are a challenge 
and constraint to traditional and modern human systems 
(Sugden, 1982).
The freeze-thaw threshold of 0°C is crucial in polar regions. 
Large changes in physical, biological, and human systems 
occur when temperature crosses this threshold. Therefore, any 
climate change that shifts the freeze-thaw line, whether in 
space or time, will bring about important impacts.
90
The Arctic and the Antarctic
Temporary incursions of cold air at lower latitudes have their 
source in polar regions. Antarctic storms sometimes strongly 
affect South America and southern New Zealand and exert some 
influence on the weather and climate of Australia and much of 
the Southern Hemisphere. In the Northern Hemisphere, the 
northern part of the subtropical zone and the southern part of the 
temperate zone in winter are the most vulnerable. Episodes of 
extreme cold and blizzards are major climate concerns for cir- 
cumpolar countries like Russia and Canada.
Ice cores from the Arctic and Antarctic provide a particularly 
valuable archive of past climate and are direct evidence for the 
amount of increases in carbon dioxide (CO 2 ), methane (CH4), 
and nitrous oxide (N 2 O). There is evidence from these records 
of rapid warming -11,500 years ago, at the end of the last 
glacial period. Recent results (Cuffey et a l, 1995; Johnsen et 
al., 1995) suggest that the temperature changes were larger 
than previously thought; that the coldest parts of the last glacial 
period could have been as much as 21°C colder than the pre­
sent temperature in central Greenland; and that temperatures 
increased by more than 10°C in a few decades. There is evi­
dence of an even more rapid change in the precipitation pat­
tern, rapid reorganizations in atmospheric circulation, and peri­
ods of rapid warming during the past 20,000 years. Surface 
water salinity and temperature have exhibited parallel changes 
that resulted in reduced oceanic convection in the North 
Atlantic and in reduced strength of the global conveyor belt 
ocean circulation (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 3.6.4).
There also are indications of rapid warm-cold oscillations during 
the last glacial period in the central Greenland records. Rapid 
warmings of ~10°C in a few decades were followed by periods 
of slower cooling over a few centuries and then a generally rapid
return to glacial conditions. About 20 such intervals, each lasting 
between 500 and 2,000 years, occurred during the last glacial 
period (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 3.6.3). However, the great ice 
sheet of Greenland has changed little in extent during this cen­
tury (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4).
The exact sequence of events leading to rapid climate events 
within the glacial period is not well understood, but it has gen­
erally been believed that the mechanisms are related to the 
existence of large Northern Hemisphere ice sheets. Although 
there is some indication that a cooling event may have 
occurred within the last interglacial period (M aslin and 
Tzedadakis, 1996), the evidence from paleorecords for rapid 
and catastrophic events in interglacial periods remains a topic 
in need of further study.
There has been a tendency toward warmer temperatures in 
parts of the Arctic and Antarctic over the past half-century 
(Raper et a l, 1984; Jones et a l, 1986; Chapman and Walsh,
1993). Figures 3-1 and 3-2 depict winter temperature anom­
alies from 1961-1990 means for the Arctic and the Antarctic 
Peninsula (60° and higher latitude), respectively, for this cen­
tury. The former depicts evidence of long-term fluctuation in 
winter temperatures, with about a 2°C warming trend over 
nearly 100 years of recorded data. This trend is supported by 
the annual temperature record of Figure A-5 in Annex A. 
Figure 3-2 is less definitive in depicting a clear warming trend 
in the Antarctic, but it should be noted that the data base for 
this record is more limited, consisting mostly of data from near 
the Antarctic Peninsula. Borehole temperature measurements 
show that permafrost is warming in some areas, though not 
everywhere. Later freeze-up and earlier break-up dates for 
river and lake ice are observed in some tundra and boreal lands.
Year
Figure 3-1: Observed annual winter (DJF) temperature anomaly over the Arctic during the period 1900-96.
The Arctic and the Antarctic
91
These latter events are each at least a week different compared 
to the last century (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7 Executive 
Summary).
There is growing evidence of recent atmospheric warming on 
the Antarctic Peninsula. A  warming trend of 0.056°C/yr— a 
total increase of ~2.5°C since 1945— has been recorded for 
Faraday Station on the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula 
(King, 1994), and a 2.1°C increase in decadal average of the 
mean annual temperature between 1931-1940 and 1981-90 
has been recorded from Orcadas Station on South Orkney 
Island (Hoffman et a l, 1997). The glacier retreat (Skvarca et 
a l, 1995) and the very recent collapses of the northernmost 
Larsen (Rott et a l, 1996) and Wordie Ice Shelves appear to be 
consistent with a warming trend in this region.
From the main part of the Antarctic continent, there have been 
discharges of enormous icebergs from the Filchner and Ross 
Ice Shelves (Rott et a l, 1996; Vaughan and Doake, 1996). 
However, the great ice sheets of Antarctica have changed lit­
tle in extent during this century. The dynamic responses of the 
different ice sheets are influenced largely by whether they are 
marine (e.g.. West Antarctic Ice Sheet) or land-based (e.g.. 
East Antarctic Ice Sheet). Accumulation on the Antarctic con­
tinent has increased significantly (by as much as 5-10% ) in 
the past few decades. The dynamic response times of land- 
based ice sheets (East Antarctica and Greenland) to climate 
change are on the order of thousands of years, so they are not 
necessarily in equilibrium with current climate. The response 
times of marine-based ice sheets (West Antarctica) probably 
are much shorter because they may be directly influenced by 
sea level and other environmental effects such as salinity, tem­
perature, and currents. Observational evidence is insufficient
to determine whether they are in balance or have decreased or 
increased in volume over the past 100 years (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 7.4).
In the circum-Arctic, there has been a tendency for negative 
mass balances in ice caps and glaciers over the past 30 years or 
longer (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.2.2). A recent Canadian 
study, however, measured no significant changes in either the 
mass balance of snow accumulation or ice melt over the past 
32 years in the Canadian Arctic (Koerner and Lundgaard,
1995).
An increase has been found in the numbers of cyclones and 
anticyclones over the Arctic between 1952 and 1989 (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 3.5.3.2). Station measurements indicate 
that annual snowfall has increased over the period 1950-90 by 
about 20% over northern Canada (north of 55°N) and by about 
11% over Alaska. Total precipitation has increased in all of 
these regions (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 3.3.2).
Projections of future polar climate face several difficulties. The 
reliability of the simulated climate change scenarios is not 
high, and there are considerable model-to-model differences. 
However, all or most general circulation models (GCMs) show 
the following features: greater warming over land than sea; 
reduced warming, or even cooling, in the high-latitude 
Southern Ocean and part of the northern North Atlantic Ocean; 
maximum warming in high northern latitudes in winter and lit­
tle warming over the Arctic in summer; increased precipitation 
and soil moisture in high latitudes in winter; a reduction in the 
strength of the North Atlantic currents; and a widespread 
reduction in diurnal range of temperature (IPCC 1996, WG I, 
Section 6.2.5).
Year
Figure 3-2: Observed annual winter (JJA) temperature anomaly over Antarctica during the period 1900-96.
92
The Arctic and the Antarctic
The polar systems are extremely sensitive to the variability 
of tem perature, and several aspects of these systems will be 
affected by any further climate change. The primary impacts 
will be on the physical environm ent, including ice, per­
mafrost, and hydrology; on biota and ecosystems, including 
fisheries and terrestrial systems; and on human activities, 
including social and economic impacts on settlem ents, on 
resource extraction and transportation, and on existing 
infrastructure.
3.3. 
Vulnerability and Potential Impacts
3.3.1. 
Ice and Snow
Sea ice covers about 11% of the world’s ocean, depending on 
the season. It affects albedo, salinity, and ocean-atmosphere 
thermal exchange (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.3.1.4). 
Studies on regional changes in the Arctic and Antarctic indicate 
trends of decadal length, often with plausible mechanisms pro­
posed for periodicities of a decade or more (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 8 .3.1.4). At present, however, there is considerable 
year-to-year variation and no convincing evidence of long­
term changes in the extent of global sea ice.
In Antarctica, temperatures are so low that comparatively little 
surface melting occurs on the continental ice sheet; ice loss is 
mainly by iceberg calving, the rates of which are determined 
by dynamic processes involving long response times (thou­
sands of years). Even if Antarctica were to warm in the future, 
its mass balance is expected to become more positive: The rise 
in temperature would be insufficient to initiate melt but would 
increase snowfall (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4). Little 
change in Antarctic ice sheets is expected over the next 50 
years, although longer-term behavior— including that of West 
Antarctic ice— remains uncertain, and some instability is pos­
sible. Some areas of Antarctica may show a pronounced 
change and dynamic response. The Antarctic Peninsula, for 
instance, receives 28% of the continent’s snowfall and experi­
ences warmer temperatures and summer melting at sea level. A 
rise in temperature would be expected to cause continued wast­
ing of marginal ice shelves in the Antarctic Peninsula, but this 
melting has no direct effects on sea level, nor is it indicative of 
changes in the Antarctic ice sheets.
In the Antarctic, where the sea-ice cover is divergent and land 
boundaries are less important, it is more reasonable to suppose 
that the main effect of global warming will be a simple retreat 
of the ice edge southward. Even here, however, a complex set 
of feedback mechanisms comes into play when the air temper­
ature changes. The balance of lead concentration, upper ocean 
structure, and pycnocline depth adjusts itself to minimize the 
impact of changes, tending to preserve an ice cover even 
though it may be thinner and more diffuse (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 7.4.5). The modeling of Gordon and O ’Farrell (1997) 
demonstrates an ultimate reduction in Antarctic sea ice of 
about 25% for a doubling of COj, with the ice retreating fairly 
evenly around the continent.
A recent study by Nicholls (1997) discounts the significance of 
air temperature-induced melting of the more massive ice 
shelves south of the Antarctic Peninsula in a climate-warming 
scenario. Studies of the seasonal water temperature changes of 
the sub-ice-shelf cavity of the Antarctic Filchner-Ronne Ice 
Shelf indicate that the flux of high-salinity shelf water (HSSW) 
is responsible for the net melting at the ice shelf’s base. As 
rates of sea-ice formation decrease during warmer winters, the 
flux of HSSW beneath the ice shelf is reduced. Subjected to 
less warm water flux, the sub-ice cavity will cool. Nicholls 
concludes that a moderate warming of the climate could, in 
fact, lead to a basal thickening of the Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf, 
perhaps increasing its longevity.
With climate warming, ice cover in lakes and rivers is expect­
ed to decrease, with large changes in lake water levels. In the 
largest Antarctic desert, the McMurdo Dry Valleys, closed- 
basin lakes fed by glacier meltwater streams rose as much as 
10 m from 1970 to 1990, or almost 480 mm per year. In the 
Antarctic Dry Valley, ice cover has thinned for some perma­
nently ice-covered lakes. Lake Hoare thinned by 20 cm/yr over 
a 10-year period beginning in 1977. Because light attenuation 
by the ice is a major limiting factor, these climate-related 
changes are expected to cause shifts in the biota of such lakes 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.6.1.4).
The Greenland ice sheet, which has no floating ice shelves of 
consequence, is different from the Antarctic ice sheets. Ice loss 
from surface melting and runoff is of the same order of magni­
tude as loss from iceberg calving. Thus, climate change in 
Greenland could have immediate effects on the surface mass 
balance of the ice sheet through melting and runoff as well as 
through accumulation. If there is warming, both the melt rates 
at the margins and the accumulation rates in the interior should 
increase. The former rate is expected to dominate. Thus, the 
mass balance could become negative (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 7.4). Nevertheless, changes in the general form of the 
total ice sheet over the next century are expected to be small.
Increased temperatures in the Arctic are likely to shorten the 
duration of ice cover on Arctic lakes. A  longer open-water peri­
od, together with warmer summer conditions, will increase 
evaporative loss. Some patchy wetlands and shallow lakes owe 
their existence to a positive water balance and the presence of 
an impermeable permafrost substrate that inhibits deep perco­
lation; enhanced evaporation and ground thaw will cause some 
to disappear (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.4). If there is 
decreased precipitation and lower flood frequency, the 
Mackenzie Delta in the Canadian arctic could shrink in sever­
al decades (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.5.2), although the 
pre-Pleistocene depositions of gravel in the delta are suffi­
ciently large that a more likely scenario is a profound change 
in the delta’s form and extent.
A major source of uncertainty about sea-level change relates to 
the future behavior of the polar ice sheets, which hold most of 
the nonoceanic water on Earth’s surface. Most of their volumes 
lie on land above sea level. However, much of the West
The Arctic and the Antarctic
93
Antarctic ice sheet is below sea level. The discovery of major 
recent changes in certain Antarctic ice streams has focused 
public attention on the possibility of “collapse” of this ice 
reservoir within the next century, with potential impacts on sea 
level (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.3.3.1). The collapse of the 
West Antarctic ice sheet by the year 2100— with consequential 
major sea-level rise— is not impossible, but its likelihood is 
considered to be very low (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.5.5).
Observed variations in sea-ice thickness are in accord with the 
predictions of numerical models that take account of ice 
dynamics and deformation as well as ice thermodynamics. The 
limited information available does not provide evidence of 
detectable change in the thickness of Antarctic sea ice (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 7.2.5). Nevertheless, researchers have 
identified significant reductions in the summer sea-ice cover in 
the Bellingshausen and Admundsen Seas in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s that are consistent with a warming climate west of 
the A ntarctic Peninsula (Jacobs and Comiso, 
1993). 
Measurements from a series of submarine transects near the 
North Pole show large interannual variability in ice draft over 
the period 1979-1990. There is some evidence of a decline in 
mean thickness in the late 1980s relative to the late 1970s 
(IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 7.2.5). Between 1978 and 1994, 
the Arctic sea ice appears to have decreased by 5.5%.
Based on some global model scenarios for a doubling of CO 2 , 
a large change in the extent and thickness of sea ice is possible, 
not only from warming but also from changes in circulation 
patterns of both atmosphere and oceans. There is likely to be 
substantially less sea ice in the Arctic Ocean (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 7 Executive Summary). Major areas that are now 
ice-bound throughout the year are likely to have long periods 
during which waters are open and navigable. Some models 
even predict an ice-free Arctic, although most scenarios main­
tain significant summer ice centered on the North Pole. 
Melting of snow and glaciers will lead to increased freshwater 
influx, changing the chemistry and salinity of oceanic areas 
affected by the runoff.
However, the ability of existing GCMs to predict the extent of 
Arctic ice change is limited by the inadequacy of regional polar 
models to simulate the multiscale dynamics of sea ice. GCM 
experiments with simplified treatments of sea-ice processes 
produce widely varying results and do not portray the extent of 
and seasonal changes in sea ice for the current climate very 
well. Given these limitations in existing ice modeling, some 
authors estimate that with a doubling of greenhouse gases, sea 
ice would cover only about 50% of its present area; others pro­
ject a sea-ice reduction of 43% for the Southern Hemisphere 
and 33% for the Northern Hemisphere. The global area of sea 
ice is projected to shrink by up to 17 x 10^ km^ (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 7.4.5).
Ramsden and Fleming (1995) suggest that Arctic sea ice would 
be little altered under doubled CO 2 conditions. More recent 
analyses by Gordon and O ’Farrell (1997), who use a dynamic 
ice procedure within a transient-coupled-atmosphere-ocean
model, predict a 60% loss in summer sea ice in the Northern 
Hemisphere by the time CO 2  has doubled. In their model, ice 
loss appeared earlier and proceeded more rapidly than it did in 
the Southern Hemisphere.
Although current polar models are subject to considerable 
uncertainty, they are the best available tools to explore possible 
future scenarios. A  regional study of the Canadian sector of the 
Beaufort Sea proposed an increase from 60 days to 150 days in 
the open-water (ice-free) season (McGillivray et a i, 1993). 
There could also be reduced ice thickness. The maximum 
extent of open water in summer could increase from the current 
150-200 km to 500-800 km offshore. At the same time, if 
longer fetches are available, wave heights would increase (e.g., 
the proportion of waves in excess of 6  m would rise from 16% 
to 39%) (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.4). This increased 
open-water exposure of the ice-rich coastlines would most cer­
tainly result in increased erosion.
Using empirical ice growth-melt models, Wadhams (1990) pre­
dicts that in the Northwest Passage and Northern Sea Route, a 
century of warming would lead to a decline in winter fast-ice 
thickness from 1.8-2.5 m at present to 1.4-1 . 8  m and an 
increase in the ice-free season of 41-100 days. Other 
researchers, using another mix of models, find these ice-free 
day estimates a little high (Flato and Brown, 1996). This effect 
will be of great importance for the extension of the navigation 
season in the Russian Northern Sea Route and the Northwest 
Passage.
Predicting the future character of moving pack ice is a difficult 
problem because dynamics (ocean and wind currents), rather 
than thermodynamics (radiation and heat components), deter­
mine its average thickness. Wind stress acting on the ice sur­
face causes the ice cover to open up to form leads (ice-free 
areas). Later, under convergent stress, refrozen leads and thin­
ner ice elements are crushed to form pressure ridges. 
Exchanges of heat, salt, and momentum are all different from 
those that would occur in fast-ice cover. The area-averaged 
growth rate of ice is dominated (especially in autumn and early 
winter, when much lead and ridge creation take place) by the 
small fraction of the sea surface occupied by ice less than 1  m 
thick (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.5).
In the coastal zones of the Arctic Ocean— such as off the 
Canadian Arctic Archipelago, where there is net convergence 
of currents— the mean ice thickness is very high (7 m or more) 
because of ridging. Here the mean thickness is determined by 
mechanical factors, largely the strength of the ice, and may not 
be as sensitive to global warming as in other regions (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 7.4.5).
Feedback mechanisms in the Arctic often are strong and com­
plex, and not all have been fully identified or quantified. Most 
are positive in nature. For example, as biomes migrate north­
ward, taller plants will tend to lower albedo, especially where 
they protrude through the snow. This will lead to a further 
enhancement of warming. Similarly, decreases in the extent of
94
The Arctic and the Antarctic
snow and ice cover will lower albedo and act to warm the water 
and land. Increased precipitation, expected with many warm­
ing scenarios, could provide a possible negative feedback as 
some will contribute to increased snow thickness. As Arctic 
warming increases the open-water area, precipitation may fur­
ther increase and cause thicker snow cover, including on sea 
ice. The growth rate of land-fast ice could be expected to 
decrease, as has been directly observed (Brown and Coté, 
1992). However, if snow thickness is increased to the point 
where not all of it is melted in summer, more protection may 
be conferred on the ice surface— ^which could lead to an 
increase, rather than a decrease, in equilibrium ice thickness 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.5). This scenario also would 
increase the stability of the upper mixed layer of the ocean, 
leading to more sea ice production.
3.3.2. 
Permafrost, Hydrology, and Water Resources
Permafrost— ground material that remains below freezing—  
underlies as much as 25% of the global land surface, including 
all of Antarctica and virtually all of the Arctic (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 7.1). In continental areas in the tundra, as well as 
some boreal lands, it extends to considerable depths. It also is 
present under shallow polar seabeds, in ice-free areas in 
Antarctica, on some sub-Antarctic islands, and in many moun­
tain ranges and high plateaus of the world (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 7.2.3). Ice-rich permafrost may contain up to twice as 
much (frozen) water as the same soil in a thawed state (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 7.3.4). It forms an impervious layer to 
deep infiltration of water, maintaining high water tables and 
poorly aerated soils.
By the year 2050, increases are expected in the thickness of the 
active layer of permafrost and in the loss of extensive areas of 
discontinuous permafrost in Arctic and sub-Arctic areas. Major 
changes in the volume and extent of deep, continuous per­
mafrost are unlikely because it is very cold and reacts with 
longer time lags (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7 Executive 
Summary).
In areas of good drainage, significant increases in active layer 
depth or loss of permafrost are expected to cause drying of 
upper soil layers in most regions.
Widespread loss of permafrost will trigger erosion or subsi­
dence of ice-rich landscapes (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7 
Executive Summary). A critical factor influencing the response 
of tundra to wanning is the presence of ground ice. Ground ice 
generally is concentrated in the upper 1 0  m of permafrost— the 
very layers that will thaw first as permafrost degrades. This 
loss is effectively irreversible because once the ground ice 
melts, it cannot be replaced for millennia, even if the climate 
were to cool subsequently. The response of the permafrost 
landscape to warming will be profound, but it also will vary 
greatly at the local scale, depending on ground-ice content. As 
substantial ice in permafrost is melted, there will be land sub­
sidence. This process of thermokarst erosion in lowland areas
will create many ponds and lakes and lead to coastal retreat and 
inland erosion (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5). These physi­
cal changes will result in major changes in ecosystem structure 
and landscape in the interior land masses of the sub-Arctic.
Peatlands will be extremely vulnerable to climate change if 
warmer temperatures lead to a thawing of the permafrost layer 
and affect their hydrology through changes in surface eleva­
tion, drainage, or flooding. These wetlands have a limited 
capacity to adapt to climate change because it is unlikely that 
new permafrost areas will form (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
6.3.1). Permafrost is the key factor, generally, in maintaining 
high water tables in these peatland ecosystems (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Chapter 7 Executive Summary).
A forerunner of future landscapes can be seen in areas of mas­
sive ground ice— such as in Russia, where past climatic warm­
ing has altered the landscape by producing extensive flat-bot­
tomed valleys. Ponds within an area of thermokarst topography 
eventually grow into thaw lakes. These lakes continue to 
enlarge for decades to centuries because of wave action and 
continued thermal erosion of the banks. Liquefaction of the 
thawed layer will result in mudflows on slopes in terrain that is 
poorly drained or contains ice-rich permafrost. On steeper 
slopes there also will be landslides. Winter discharge of 
groundwater often leads to ice formation. This formation is 
expected to increase on hill slopes and in the stream channels 
of the tundra (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5).
Climatic warming would likely make notable changes in the 
hydrology of Arctic areas. The nival regime runoff patterns 
will weaken for many rivers in the permafrost region. The plu­
vial influence upon runoff will intensify for rivers along the 
southern margin of Arctic regions of Eurasia and North 
America. Should the climate continue to warm, the vegetation 
will likely be different from today. When lichens and mosses—  
which tend to be suppressers of évapotranspiration— are 
replaced by transpiring plants, evaporative losses will increase. 
Enhanced evaporation will lower the water table, which would 
be followed by changes in the peat characteristics as the exten­
sive wetland surfaces become drier (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 7.5.1).
Thawing of permafrost deepens the active layer, allowing 
greater infiltration and water storage, especially for rain that 
falls during the thawed period. Warming of the ground also will 
lead to the formation of unfrozen zones within the permafrost 
that provide porousness to enhance groundwater flow and 
increase chemical weathering and nutrient release. The chemi­
cal composition and amount of groundwater discharge may be 
changed as subpermafrost or intrapermafrost water is connect­
ed to the surface. In autumn and winter, more groundwater 
should be available to maintain baseflow, further extending the 
stream-flow season. With earlier snowmelt, the seasonality of 
river flows will be different (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.1). 
Because many of the major river systems are north-flowing and 
cross several climate zones that may respond differently to cli­
mate warming, predictions are further complicated.
The Arctic and the Antarctic
95
3.3.3. 
Terrestrial Ecological Systems
Climate change will affect terrestrial ecological systems 
through changes in permafrost as well as direct climatic 
changes, including changes in precipitation, snow cover, and 
temperature. Terrestrial ecoystems are likely to change from 
tundra to boreal forests, although vegetative changes are likely 
to lag climatic change. Vegetational ecosystem models suggest 
that the tundra will decrease by as much as one- to two-thirds 
of its present size (see Annex C). Climate change is expected 
to occur at a rapid rate relative to the speed at which forest 
species grow, reproduce, and reestablish themselves or to their 
ability to develop appropriate soils. The boreal forest covers 
approximately 17% of the world’s land surface in a circumpo­
lar complex of forested and partially forested ecosystems in 
northern Eurasia and North America (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 1.6.1). If there is warming, the greatest forest changes 
are expected in high latitudes. Polar projections of this region’s 
terrestrial ecological changes (Figure 3-3) derived from two 
different models’ depictions of the future cli­
mate reinforce this conclusion, showing signif­
icant reduction in the tundra and taiga biomes 
and expansion of the boreal forest.
A poleward migration of the northern tree line 
would decrease winter albedo because the tree 
canopy has much lower albedo than exposed 
snow surfaces, affecting local climate through 
increased absorption of the sun’s incoming 
energy (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ). Large 
losses are projected in the area of boreal 
forests despite their encroachment into current 
tundra. Shrinkage in total area because of the 
geographically limited poleward shift leads to 
a net loss of about 25% in boreal coverage 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.3.4). On the 
other hand, vegetative ecosystem modeling 
suggests an expansion in the boreal forest 
ranging from 108% to 133% of the present 
size (see Annex C). The species composition 
of forests is likely to change; entire forest 
types may disappear, while new assemblages 
of species, and hence new ecosystems, may be 
established (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 3.1). 
The rate of migration is critical, and it is like­
ly that the loss from the southern margin will 
be greater than the gain in the northern margin. 
Projections for habitat changes are presented 
in Table 3-1.
By 1995, the Arctic contained 285 protected 
areas covering 2.1 million km^ (UNEP, 1997). 
There will be considerable impacts of climate 
change on resource management in the tundra 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5). There is like­
ly to be a change in the migration patterns of 
polar bears and numbers of caribou, along with 
other biological impacts (IPCC 1996, WG II,
Section 7.5). High-arctic Peary caribou and musk-oxen may 
become extinct, and barren-ground caribou and musk-oxen 
elsewhere may be reduced (Gunn, 1995). Arctic island caribou 
migrate seasonally across the sea ice between many of the arc­
tic islands in late spring and fall; changes in sea ice would dis­
rupt those migrations, with unforeseen consequences to popu­
lation survival and gene flow.
It is also anticipated that small mammals, from lemmings to 
aquatic furbearers (muskrats, beavers, mink), will face ecosys­
tem alterations that will change their abundance and distribu­
tion. Amphibians and reptiles can be expected to increase their 
range, and the distribution and abundance of hundreds of 
arthropod species will alter. Changes in the timing and abun­
dance of forage availability and parasite infestations may accu­
mulate— driving populations into decline, with serious conse­
quences for people still depending on them (Jefferies, 1992). 
Increased incidences of forest fires and insect outbreaks are 
likely, such as already observed in Alaska.
MAPSS : ConUol
Hadley + Sulfate + C 02
Tundra 
i
ОШО Taiga/Tundra
I Boreal Conifer Forest 
I I I Temperate Evergreen Forest 
Hllllll Temperate Mixed Forest 
^
 SavannaAVoodland 
Shrub/Woodland 
^
 Grassland
MAPSS : Control
GFDL R30 + C02
 
Tundra
[ПП1 Taiga/Tundra 
Ш  Boreal Conifer Forest 
Ш  Temperate Evergreen Forest 
n
 Temperate Mixed Forest 
^
 SavannaAVoodland 
ShrubAVoodland 
^
 Grassland
Figure 3-3: Ecological shifts derived from the MAPSS model in 
response to changes projected by two GCM simulations of future climate.
96
The Arctic and the Antarctic
Table 3-1: Area o f each biome (in 1,000 ктЗ) north o f the 
Arctic Circle, under current and future climate(s), as project­
ed by three models discussed in Annex C.
MAPSS + CO 2  Effect 
Present 
OSU 
GFDLR30 
UKMOS
Ice (perennial 
land-mass ice)
Tundra
Taiga/Tundra
Boreal
Conifer Forest 
Other
1,745 
1,437
4,316
1,950
0
178
2,972
2,520
791
468
1,328
2,019
2,632
1,432
778
1,532
1,832
2,265
1,643
918
Indirect temperature effects associated with changes in tundra 
thaw depth, nutrient availability, and vegetation will cause sub­
stantial changes in Arctic species composition, litter quality, 
and nutrient availability. Increased nutrient availability 
increases shrub abundance and decreases the abundance of 
mosses, an important soil insulator (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 2.7.3).
Some alpine and tundra plants have no photoperiod require­
ments for initiating growth and therefore are affected by spring 
frosts. For example, in northern Sweden, increased length of 
the growing season and increased summer temperature will 
have a significant impact on reproduction and population 
dynamics in Arctic and alpine plants (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 5.2.3.1). Experimental doubling of CO 2 concentration 
has relatively little multiyear effect on plant growth in Arctic 
tundra, presumably because of constraints of low nutrient sup­
ply (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 2.2.2).
Major shifts in biomes will be associated with changes in 
microbiological (bacteria, algae, etc.) and insect communities. 
As a consequence, some may diminish while others prosper. 
All microbiologically facilitated processes are strongly affect­
ed by moisture and temperature. Annual soil respiration rates 
are likely to increase because of the lengthened season for 
breakdown of plant material and because increasing tempera­
ture strongly stimulates organic-matter decomposition, espe­
cially in Arctic regions subject to permafrost (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section A.3.1).
In the recent geologic past, the tundra was a carbon sink. 
Recent climatic warming in the Arctic, coupled with the con­
comitant drying of the active layer and the lowering of the 
water table, has shifted areas of the Arctic from sinks to 
sources of CO 2  (Oechel et a i, 1993). Extrapolating results 
from the Alaskan tundra to the circumpolar Arctic, regional 
warming could have caused a net flux from the land to the 
atmosphere of about 0.2 GtC/yr during the 1980s (IPCC
1996, WG I, Section 9.2.3.1). However, unpublished evi­
dence from the Land-Atmosphere-Ice-Interactions compo­
nent of ARCSS indicates that there may be substantial inter­
annual variability in the source-sink relationship of Arctic 
tundra. This concern is reinforced by recent study by Myneni 
et al. (1997). Loss of a sizable portion of more than 50 Gt of 
carbon in Arctic soils and 450 Gt of carbon in soils of all tun­
dra ecosystems could cause an appreciable positive feedback 
on the atmospheric rise of CO 2  (IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 
7.4.3). It should be noted, however, that the preceding pro­
jections are based on an assessment for all high-latitude 
ecosystems, not just the tundra, and could be misleading as an 
indication of the potential for tundra ecosystems to act as a 
positive feedback. In addition, Schimel et al. (1994) and 
McGuire et al. (1995) have modeled the temperature sensi­
tivity of soil carbon responses and find levels much less than 
450 GtC.
Enhanced decomposition of soil organic matter leads to the 
release of trace gases and feedbacks on the global climate. A 
change in total CH 4  flux from Arctic wetlands can be expected 
if the areal extent of wetlands changes, the duration of the 
active period changes, or the per-unit-area production or oxi­
dation of CH 4  changes (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 6.3.3.2.2). 
The limited available data for the CH 4  content of permafrost 
has substantial variability. High CH 4  concentrations in ice- 
bonded sediments and gas releases suggest that pore-space 
hydrate may be found at depths as shallow as 119 m. These 
data raise the possibility that gas hydrates could occur at much 
shallower depths and may be more rapidly influenced by cli­
mate change than previously thought (IPCC 1996, W G II, 
Section 7.4.3).
In Antarctica, the terrestrial ecosystem is comparatively sim­
ple, constrained by an exposed land area that is very cold. 
Only 2% of the Antarctic surface is not covered by ice. This 
limited regime is mostly rocky areas where the temperature is 
below freezing except for periods of a few days or weeks dur­
ing the Austral summer. These “Antarctic oases” provide a 
natural laboratory for assessing the vulnerability and response 
of this ecosystem to climate change. The mainland plays host 
to a number of microscopic plants that are found mainly in 
crevices and cavities of exposed rocks. Even the poorly devel­
oped soil of Antarctica harbors bacteria, algae, yeast and other 
fungi, lichens, and even moss spore (though usually in a dor­
mant stage). The coastal region is particularly hospitable to 
the vegetation of lichens and mosses. Meltwater in the area 
helps to support herbaceous species such as grass. Some 
species of invertebrates survive in the harsh environment by 
super-cooling or anhydrobiosis mechanisms (Walton and 
Bonner, 1985). The Dry Valley’s environmental conditions 
resemble those on Mars; this area is one of the world’s most 
extreme desert regions. It was formed by the advances and 
retreats of glaciers through the coastal mountain ranges. The 
ecosystem there consists of microorganisms, microinverte­
brates, mosses, and lichens. Climate change will impact on the 
physiology, distribution, and species composition of this ter­
restrial ecosystem.
The Arctic and the Antarctic
97
3.3.4. 
Freshwater and M arine Fcological Systems
The ranges of many species in lakes and streams are likely to 
shift poleward by about 150 km for every 1°C increase in air 
tem perature (IPCC 1996, W G II, Technical Summary, 
Section 3.3.1). This axiom is not useful for extrapolation in 
oceanic waters. If global warming effects continue, the sea 
surface temperature increases would be about 3°C in the 
North Pacific in 50 years. This change represents the same 
effect that would be seen in a present isotherm shift north­
ward of about 500 km in mid-latitudes (Kim, 1995). Climate 
change or regime shifts might change distribution, species 
composition, and productivity in the North Pacific as well as 
adjacent subarctic areas.
Water temperatures have a direct impact on the productivity of 
fish species and the relative abundance of different fish 
species. Climatic changes are likely to affect not only water 
temperatures but also salinity and seasonal water cycles. 
Temperature influences biological production and can have a 
profound effect on growth and m etabolic processes. 
Observations show that biological rates double or halve with a 
10°C increase or decrease in temperature, respectively. Over 
the range of temperatures encountered in the ocean ( - 2  to 
+30°C), maximum growth rates of plankton vary by about a 
factor of 10. At high latitudes, where the temperature range is 
smaller (-2 to +3°C), temperature changes may have a rela­
tively larger effect. Even small changes in temperature could 
have pronounced effects on biological rates of growth and 
development. Further, glacial meltwater is known to affect the 
nearshore 
zonation 
of Antarctic 
marine 
invertebrates 
(Berkman, 1994) and increased meltwater production may fur­
ther impact species in the Antarctic coastal zone. Climate 
Impacts on long-lived benthic invertebrate species such as 
sponges and some calcareous species, some of which have 
decadal and perhaps century-long lifespans, are unknown.
Greenhouse warming of the troposphere would be accompa­
nied by cooling of the stratosphere. Changes in the stratos­
pheric ozone layer have occurred over both the Arctic and the 
Antarctic. In the Antarctic, the occurrence of a persistent 
stratospheric ozone hole occurs during the spring and is due to 
ozone-depleting substances, including chlorofluorocarbons. 
The low human and species populations in the Antarctic have 
limited the biological damage, although there is evidence that 
significant changes in ecosystem function could occur. In the 
Arctic, where considerably more biological activity may be 
affected, ozone depletion and increased UV radiation have 
been observed over the past decade. Ozone depletion has 
occurred both as a steady decline and also with short, isolated 
areas of very low ozone (Weatherhead and Morseth, 1997). 
Climate change may further ozone depletion. The cooling of 
the stratosphere is likely to increase this depletion with current 
chlorine loading. However, chlorine loading can be expected 
to decline considerably in the future. Some of the episodes of 
low ozone observed in the Arctic are not associated with 
chemical depletion but are due to the influx of low-ozone air 
from lower latitudes (Taalas, 1993; Taalas et a i, 1995).
Whether these episodes will Increase or decrease will depend 
on stratospheric circulation patterns near the Arctic; thus, it 
also may be influenced by climate changes. The chemically 
induced and the dynamically induced episodes of low ozone 
occurring in the Arctic both appear to be increasing in fre­
quency and severity (Taalas et a i, 1997; Weatherhead and 
Morseth, 1997). These depletion events are most prevalent in 
the spring, when biological activity is highly sensitive to UV- 
B radiation. Increased levels are likely to affect the human 
populations as well as the aquatic and terrestrial species and 
ecosystems (Taalas, 1993; SCOPE, 1996).
Sea ice is important in the development and sustenance of tem- 
perate-to-polar ecosystems. Ice conditions conducive to ice- 
edge primary production provide a primary food source in 
polar ecosystems. Ice-dependent activities of organisms ensure 
energy transfer from primary producers (algae and phyto­
plankton) to higher trophic levels (fish, marine birds, and 
mammals). As a consequence, the ice-dependent habitat main­
tains and supports abundant biological communities (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 8.3.2).
One of the direct effects of global warming will be a change in 
the extent of sea ice— which will have the beneficial effect of 
increasing the extent of many aquatic species but may nega­
tively impact one of the areas most important for primary pro­
duction: the ice edge. For some species, this change would be 
beneficial because it would allow greater penetration of light 
and freer movement. The absence of ice over the continental 
shelf of the Arctic Ocean would produce a sharp rise in the pro­
ductivity of this region, provided that a sufficient supply of 
nutrients is maintained. For other species, there appear to be 
significant disadvantages. For example, in southern latitudes, 
warming could affect pack-ice movement and timing and 
reduce its extent, in turn affecting the distribution and reducing 
the abundance and productivity of krill. Krill is the fundamen­
tal link in the food web of the Southern Ocean. Changes in 
wind strength, the effects of the Antarctic Convergence, and 
the west-east and east-west surface currents of the Southern 
Ocean also may affect productivity in the ice edge zone (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 16.2.2.2).
In the polar regions, the seasonal development and regression 
of sea ice is of substantial biological importance (in addition to 
its profound role in global ocean-atmosphere exchange of heat, 
water, and gases). Blooms of phytoplankton at the ice edge, 
induced by upwelling of nutrient-rich water and/or the stabiliz­
ing effect of melting icewater, are significant at high latitudes 
in both hemispheres. Changes in the extent and thickness of ice 
affect the timing, magnitude, and duration of the seasonal pulse 
of primary production in polar regions. The composition of the 
marine ecosystem depends on the mode of sea-ice formation. 
These changes in turn affect the quantity and quality of food 
available to grazers and the timing and magnitude of vertical 
flux of carbon and other elements. Such series of events are 
particularly important in highly productive systems such as the 
Bering Sea, where a 5% reduction in sea ice has been observed 
over the past decade.
98
The Arctic and the Antarctic
UV-B radiation may directly affect fish and their larvae, phy­
toplankton, and krill. The development and survival of some 
species are at apparent threshold levels at current UV-B levels. 
Significant changes in ecosystem function and functioning 
could occur as species sensitive to UV-B radiation are replaced 
by more resistant species (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 16.2.7). 
Experimental results have shown damaging effects on aquatic 
organisms from polar regions, particularly on phytoplankton 
(photosystem damage, DNA damage, modifications in nutrient 
uptake, changes in species composition, etc.), but a series of 
internal and external protective mechanisms (synthesis of pho- 
toprotective pigments, DNA repair mechanisms, vertical mix­
ing in the water column, etc.) may counteract these negative 
effects (Vincent and Roy, 1993). On the other hand, large-scale 
ice retreat due to global warming would increase the exposure 
to UV-B radiation in the water column during the maximum 
development of the ozone hole (Septem ber-O ctober). 
However, the solar angle during the spring period is very low. 
This factor may minimize the penetration of UV-B radiation in 
the water column, thus reducing harmful effects on the biota 
(Arrigo, 1994; McMinn ct a l, 1994). Thus, care should be 
taken in extrapolating experimental results to the real world. 
More in situ studies and modeling efforts are necessary to 
assess the effects of increased UV-B radiation during ozone 
hole episodes.
In the Arctic, mean levels of ozone have decreased. In addition, 
smaller, less well-understood ozone-depletion events, or mini­
ozone holes, have occurred. Presently, Arctic ozone-depletion 
events are not sufficiently understood, and whether they will 
increase in severity also is not clear. However, there is some 
indication that ozone depletion in the Arctic is tied closely to 
global warming and the accompanying cooling of the Arctic 
stratosphere. Arctic ozone-depletion events are most prevalent 
in the spring when biological activity is highly sensitive to UV- 
B radiation. Increased levels are likely to affect human popula­
tions as well as aquatic and terrestrial species and ecosystems.
a good example for illustrating the vulnerability and complex 
responses of Antarctic ecosystems to climate, environmental, 
and ecosystem changes.
A  number of marine mammals depend explicitly on ice cover. 
For example, the extent of the polar bear’s habitat is deter­
mined by the maximum seasonal surface area of marine ice in 
a given year. The disappearance of or a major reduction in ice 
cover would threaten the very survival of the polar bear, as well 
as certain marine seals. Similarly, a reduction in ice cover 
would reduce food supplies for seals and walruses and increase 
their vulnerability to natural predators and human hunters and 
poachers. Other animals, such as the sea otter, could benefit by 
moving into new territories with reduced ice (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 8.3.2).
Furthermore, many species of penguins and seals that are 
dependent upon krill production in the Southern Ocean use 
coastal areas as breeding sites. Year-class strength of krill is 
closely related to climate change or sea-ice distribution, and 
the growth, survival, and hatching rates of penguin chicks or 
seal pups at the rookery are directly influenced by krill abun­
dance in the sea.
Animals that migrate great distances— as do most of the great 
whales and seabirds— are subject to possible disruptions in the 
distribution and timing of their food sources during migration. 
It remains unclear how the contraction of ice cover would 
affect the migration routes of animals that normally follow the 
ice front. The timing and order of whale migration, for 
instance, may be influenced by changes in sea-ice cover, with 
subsequent impacts on their energetics (e.g., feeding and repro­
ductive biology). At least some migrating species may respond 
rapidly to new situations; for example, migrating ducks have 
altered their routes to take advantage of the recent exploding 
population of zebra mussels in the Great Lakes (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 8.3.2).
Warming, changes in upwellings, circulation variations, and 
wind changes would affect the distribution and characteristics 
of polynyas (ice-free areas) and ice edges that are vital to polar 
ecosystems. Predicted climate change also may have important 
Impacts on marine mammals such as whales, dolphins, and 
seals and seabirds such as cormorants, penguins, storm petrels, 
and albatross. Geographic centers of food production will most 
certainly shift. Underlying primary productivity will change 
due to changes in upwelling, loss of ice-edge effects, and ocean 
temperatures. Changes in critical habitats such as sea ice (due 
to climate warming) and nesting and rearing beaches (due to 
sea-level rise) will occur. Diseases and production of oceanic 
biotoxins due to warming temperatures and shifts in coastal 
currents will increase (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.3.2). 
However, it is presently impossible to predict the magnitude 
and significance of these impacts. Recent changes in the pen­
guin population on the Antarctic Peninsula have been related to 
climate warming (Fraser ct a l, 1992), but should also be inter­
preted in the context of penguin rookery variations that have 
occurred in the past (Baroni and Orombelli, 1994). Penguin are
Many pelagic marine mammals (e.g., the great whales) are able 
to locate and follow seasonal centers of food production that 
frequently change from year to year because of local oceano­
graphic conditions. Similarly, their migrations may change to 
accommodate interannual differences in environmental condi­
tions. However, some marine mammal stocks (e.g., seals and 
sea lions) have life histories that tie them to specific geograph­
ic features (e.g., pupping beaches or ice fields). Although they 
have some flexibility in their need for specific habitats, some 
marine mammals may be more severely affected than others by 
changes in the availability of necessary habitats and prey 
species that result from climate change.
With sea-level rise, marine mammal calving and pupping 
beaches may disappear from areas where there are no alterna­
tives. Some species will be able to take advantage of increases 
in prey abundance and spatial/temporal shifts in prey distribu­
tion toward or within their primary habitats. Conversely, some 
populations of birds and seals will be adversely affected by cli­
matic changes if food sources decline or are displaced away
The Arctic and the Antarctic
99
from regions suitable for breeding or rearing of young (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 8.3.2).
Furthermore, recent evidence indicates that the extent of sea­
sonal sea ice, at least in some areas of the Northern 
Hemisphere, is retreating. This information, coupled with pre­
dictions of warming from GCMs, suggests that current barriers 
to gene flow among marine mammal stocks in the Arctic may 
change dramatically in the next 50 years. Although this shift 
may not result in a reduction in abundance at the species level, 
it could very well change the underlying population structure 
of many species of Arctic whales and seals, which will greatly 
affect their management.
Although the impacts of these ecological changes are likely to 
be significant, they cannot be reliably forecast or evaluated. 
Climate change may have positive and negative impacts, even 
on the same species. Positive effects such as extended feeding 
areas and seasons in higher latitudes, more-productive high lat­
itudes, and lower winter mortality may be offset by negative 
factors that alter established reproductive patterns, breeding 
habitats, disease vectors, migration routes, and ecosystem rela­
tionships (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.3.2).
3.3.5. 
Fisheries
The basic limiting factors for fish production in polar and sub­
polar regions are light and temperature. Warming in high lati­
tudes should lead to longer growing periods, increased growth 
rates, and ultimately, perhaps, increases in the general produc­
tivity of these regions (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 16.2.2.2). 
On the other hand, the probability of nutrient loss resulting 
from reduced deep-water exchange could result in reduced pro­
ductivity in the long term. Again, this complexity highlights 
the importance of changes in temperature for patterns of circu­
lation. Global warming could have especially strong impacts 
on the regions of oceanic subpolar fronts, where temperature 
increases in deep water could lead to a substantial redistribu­
tion of pelagic and benthic communities, including commer­
cially important fish species (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
8.3.2).
In polar regions, the number of dominant fish species is small; 
many species of low abundance are typical of tropical regions, 
with the exception of upwelling areas. Only 15-20 commer­
cially important species in the Arctic or Antarctic Oceans are 
recorded, whereas the numbers increase to about 50 and 
16-450 in the boreal and tropic areas, respectively (Laevastu, 
et a i, 1996). The poleward distribution of fish due to climate 
warming generally expands fishing areas. This expansion 
might produce better yields of fish production. In the higher 
latitudes, however, spawning grounds of cold-water species 
that are very sensitive to the temperature change might be 
destroyed by changes in water properties.
In some cases, fisheries on the margin of profitability could 
prosper or decline. For example, if there is a retreat of sea ice in
Antarctica, the krill fishery— ^which is regulated by the current 
ice-free period— could become more attractive to nations not 
already involved (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 16.2.2.3). Fishery 
statistics may be more valuable for the analyses of interannual 
and long-term fluctuations of marine populations than was pre­
viously thought. Time series of catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE) 
statistics from the commercial krill fishery operating around 
South Georgia during 1973-1993 have been used for consider­
ing the hypothesis that fluctuations in the abundance of krill in 
the Scotia Sea area are related to environmental changes. A con­
sistent correlation has been found between the various CPUE 
indices and ice-edge positions: The further south the ice-edge 
occurred during the winter-spring season, the lower the CPUE 
values in the following fishing season. The most extreme 
expression of this relationship was the lack of a krill fishery in 
1978 and 1984, when the ice did not extend far north during the 
previous winter. By contrast, in 1978 and 1984 the March ice- 
edge reached its northern limit at 50°S, preceding high CPUE 
values in 1979 and 1985. A  consistent relationship also exists 
between CPUE and water temperature. Warm-water tempera­
ture in the South Georgia shelf area in January-February corre­
sponded to lower CPUE values in the same year. There also is 
significant correlation between air transport in late spring and 
CPUE in the next year. For example, a prevalence of southerly 
meridional air transport precedes high CPUE values (Fedoulov 
et ai, 1996). It must be emphasized, however, that the physical 
regimes of the sub-Antarctic region in the vicinity of South 
Georgia are very complicated, and this model may not be 
applicable to the entire Antarctic.
Fedoulov et al. (1996) proposed the following mechanism as a 
hypothesis to explain how ice, ocean, and atmospheric compo­
nents of the Southern Ocean affect krill distribution. Kxill usu­
ally are more abundant in the southern Scotia Sea along the 
Weddell Scotia Confluence (WSC), so it is likely that the cur­
rents play a key role in krill transport to South Georgia from 
the Antarctic Peninsula. The WSC zone extends northward in 
the eastern Scotia Sea, and this colder water penetrates along 
the southeastern shelf of South Georgia. The position of the 
WSC is thought to be determined by the intensity of the 
Weddell gyre, which in turn is driven by the formation of dense 
and cold Weddell water. The main factor in the creation of the 
cold Weddell water is increased salinity resulting from ice for­
mation. Hence, the dominance of a warm or cold year reflects 
the intensity of the Weddell gyre and consequently the general 
position of the WSC. It is reasonable to suppose that ice can 
start to influence krill distribution when it is close to or covers 
the area of the WSC. Ice cover modifies the mechanism of drift 
current formation and creates favorable (northern ice-edge 
position) or unfavorable (southern ice-edge position) condi­
tions for krill transport to South Georgia.
In a recent study, Loeb et al. (1997) are documenting a more 
complex relationship between krill and salpa, a pelagic tuni­
cate. In essence, extensive seasonal ice cover promotes early 
krill spawning, inhibits population blooms of pelagic salps, and 
favors the survival of krill larvae through their first winter. 
Salpa blooms affect adult krill reproduction and the survival of
100
The Arctic and the Antarctic
krill larvae. If a decrease in the frequency of winters with 
extensive sea-ice development accompanies the warming trend 
in the Antarctic Peninsula area, the frequency of krill recruit­
ment failures would be expected to Increase, and the krill pop­
ulation would decline. An Increase in salpa blooms would fur­
ther depress krill numbers. This codependency of competing 
species on changing climate variables has implications for the 
management of the krill fishery and for populations of verte­
brate predators such as penguins, fish, and whales, which 
depend on krill.
3.3.6. 
Agriculture
Agriculture in polar lands is severely limited by the harsh cli­
mate. Although agriculture is not practiced in Antarctica, some 
agriculture currently takes place in the Arctic. If temperature 
were to increase and result in earlier last-freeze dates and later 
first-frost dates, conditions for Arctic agriculture should 
become more favorable, although climate conditions will still 
make agriculture in the Arctic extremely difficult. There 
already are indications in Alaska, based on the last 70 years, for 
an increase in the length of the growing season (Sharratt, 
1992). Although considerably more land will be available for 
farming if temperatures increase, moisture and nutrient prob­
lems will limit the productivity of these areas (Mills, 1994). 
The more immediate effects are likely to be on plants such as 
cotton grass that are important to caribou and reindeer popula­
tions (Kuropat, 1984).
3.3.7. 
Navigation
Reduced sea-ice extent and thickness would increase the sea­
sonal duration of polar navigation on rivers and in coastal areas 
that are presently affected by seasonal ice cover (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 7.5). Improved opportunities for water trans­
port, tourism, and trade at high latitudes are expected as a result. 
These activities will have important implications for the people, 
economies, and navies of nations along the Arctic rim (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Chapter 7 Executive Summary). Reduced sea ice 
will provide safer approaches for tourist ships and new oppor­
tunities for sightseeing around Antarctica and the Arctic (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 7.5.5). Increased calving of icebergs from 
the Antarctic Peninsula may, however, affect navigation and 
shipping lanes north of the Antarctic Convergence. Decreased 
sea-ice extent around Antarctica could make it easier for tourist 
vessels with less preparedness for sea-ice travel to visit the con­
tinent and surrounding islands. Some may be ill-prepared to 
navigate and respond to the extreme and highly variable envi­
ronmental conditions in the Southern Ocean. There is no clear 
consensus, however, about whether the frequency of icebergs, 
and their danger to shipping, will change with global warming 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4). Increased precipitation may 
reduce the enthusiasm for tourism in some areas.
Projected reductions in the extent and thickness of the sea- 
ice cover in the A rctic Ocean and its peripheral seas could
substantially benefit shipping, perhaps opening the Arctic 
Ocean as a major trade route (IPCC 1996, W G II, Technical 
Summary, Section 3.2.4). This projection would include the 
opening of both the Northwest Passage and the Russian 
Northern Sea Route for up to 100 days a year. One French 
experiment indicated that the use of the Northeast Passage in 
ice-free seasons shortened by about 3 weeks the shipping dura­
tion between Europe and Far East Asia compared with the pre­
sent route (i.e., via the Suez Canal). Although a reduction of 
sea ice may be a boon to international shipping and consumers 
in East Asia, North America, and Western Europe, policies 
designed to limit the total burden of pollutants entering the 
Arctic environment from ports, ship operations, and accidents 
may have to be developed (IPCC 1996, W G II, Chapter 8  
Executive Summary).
Less river ice and a shorter ice season in northward flowing 
rivers of Canada and Russia should enhance north-south river 
transport. Combined with less sea ice in the Arctic, this devel­
opment would provide new opportunities for reorganization of 
transport networks and trade links. Ultimately, those changes 
could affect Northern Hemisphere trading patterns (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 7.5.1).
A survey of the potential impacts on Canadian shipping sug­
gested net benefits to Arctic and ocean shipping due to deeper 
drafts in ports and longer navigational seasons, with mixed 
results for lake and river shipping due to the opposing effects 
of a longer shipping season but lower drafts. Demands to main­
tain Arctic shipping may increase. In Siberia and Canada, 
many rivers are used as solid roads during winter. Warmer win­
ters would require a shift to water transport or the construction 
of more all-weather roads. Other impacts on means of transport 
could arise from changes in snowfall or melting of the per­
mafrost (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 11.5.2.1).
Currently, ice-breaking efforts are an expensive aspect of navi­
gation in the Arctic. Interannual variability prevents the elimi­
nation of these programs unless extreme changes in sea ice 
should occur. Some ice-breaking programs in some areas may 
be cut back with moderate warming of the Arctic. In other areas, 
costs may rise to keep newly available routes open longer. A 
disappearance of sea ice south of Labrador would eliminate 
Canadian Coast Guard ice-breaking requirements. This would 
mean an annual saving of CDN$15-20 million. Even larger 
savings also can be expected in the former Soviet Union if ice 
retreats from the shores of the Kara, Laptev, and Chukchi Seas. 
Similar savings would accrue along the Gulf of Bothnia with 
the absence of ice. The effect of annual warming on ice calving 
(simulated using a simple degree-day model) shows that for 
every 1°C of warming there would be a 1° latitude retreat of ice­
berg occurrence in the Atlantic Ocean. In the Southern Ocean, 
any effects of reduced sea ice will be economically less pro­
nounced (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.3).
Offshore oil and gas exploration and production conducted at 
high latitudes may be assisted by a longer ice-free season. A 
possible beneficial effect would be shorter winters to disrupt
The Arctic and the Antarctic
101
construction, exploration, and drilling programs. A  decrease in 
thickness and extent of sea ice in the Arctic will extend the 
drilling seasons for floating vessels considerably. A reduction 
in sea ice and icebergs also will reduce “downtime” on off­
shore oil and gas drilling explorations. Currently such inter­
ruptions cost Canadian explorations more than CDNS40 mil­
lion annually. The most critical factor could be ice movement 
during winter. If there were increased numbers and severity of 
storm surges and wave activity, design requirements for off­
shore structures and associated coastal facilities would 
increase, and oil spill clean-up could become more difficult 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.4).
3.3.8. 
Sub-Antarctic Islands
The sub-Antarctic islands are small land areas surrounded by 
vast areas of the Southern Ocean. Some of these islands are 
sufficiently high to possess glaciers and small ice caps. Their 
climate is characterized by strong and persistent winds, little 
sunshine, many rain days, and cool temperatures. They are 
generally uninhabited, though they contain highly specialized 
flora and important marine mammal and bird populations.
Many of these islands have shown a tendency for warming 
over the last half of this century. Their future climate will be 
controlled by changes in the surface temperature of the 
Southern Ocean and the strength of Southern Hemisphere 
westerlies. The sub-Antarctic islands are expected to continue 
to warm. The impacts of climate change are unlikely to be 
important for most animal and bird species, but there could be 
changes in the species composition of plant communities. 
Glaciers will probably shrink.
3.3.9. 
Infrastructure, Settlements, and Health
The climate dictates many aspects of the way of life for all peo­
ple living in the Arctic. Climate changes are likely to affect the 
current subsistence economies, habitability, and health of the 
Arctic people. If warming occurs, there will be striking 
changes in the landscapes at northern high latitudes. These 
changes may be exacerbated where they are accompanied by 
growing numbers of people and increased economic activity 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7 Executive Summary). There 
could be a northward spreading of agricultural, forestry, and 
mining activities— resulting in increased population and inten­
sified settlement patterns— into Arctic areas. The rate of such 
spread is an issue of debate and will depend on social and eco­
nomic factors, intervention strategies, and natural processes. 
Marine, road, rail, and air links would have to be expanded 
accordingly. Although this development would entail substan­
tial extra capital and operating costs, it also would be an eco­
nomic opportunity (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 11.4.4).
Changes in landscape, sea-ice distribution, and river and lake 
ice could have a major impact on indigenous people who live 
in Arctic regions and depend upon traditional occupations.
food gathering, and hunting. They depend directly on the liv­
ing resources of the area and often travel on ice, so their liveli­
hood may be widely affected. The resulting redistribution and 
abundance changes of terrestrial and marine animals that are 
vital to the subsistence lifestyles of Native communities may 
have major impacts. Ice roads and crossings commonly are 
used to link northern settlements. The greatest economic 
impact is likely to stem from decreases in ice thickness and 
bearing capacity, which could severely restrict the size and 
load limit of vehicular traffic (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5). 
Road maintenance related to permafrost thawing already is a 
major problem with high associated costs in many sub-Arctic 
areas. At the same time, further warming is likely to cause 
many small settlements, particularly along the coast and on 
small islands, to be abandoned because of permafrost loss and 
sea-level rise.
Anticipated hydrological changes and reductions in the areal 
extent and depth of permafrost could lead to large-scale dam­
age to infrastructure. Some transportation systems, mining 
activities, and structures will be threatened by thawing (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 7.5.1). For example, thawing could lead 
to disruption of existing petroleum production and distribution 
systems in the tundra unless mitigation techniques are adopted 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7 Executive Summary). This 
impact may require changes in the design of oil pipelines to 
avoid slumping, breaks, and leaks (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 
11.5.4). Fortunately, most of this technology already is in use 
south of the permafrost line.
Structures such as pipelines, airstrips, community water supply 
and sewage systems, and building foundations are susceptible 
to performance problems if existing frozen foundations or sub­
grades thaw, even minimally. Extensive measures would be 
needed to ensure the structural stability and durability of instal­
lations for tourism, mining, and telecommunication in per­
mafrost areas affected by climate warming. In some cases, 
existing settlements would become uninhabitable because of 
permafrost changes. Transport links also could be affected, 
with serious disruption and increased maintenance costs from 
ground subsidence, side-slope slumpings, landslides, icings, 
and ice-mound growth.
On the other hand, many northern cities will spend less money 
on snow and ice clearance. More frequent periods of open 
water for rivers, lakes, and seas, however, will produce greater 
snowfall downwind. This factor will be important near Hudson 
Bay, the Barents Sea, and the Sea of Okhotsk (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, 7.4.1). Engineering design criteria will need to be modified 
to reflect changing snow and frost climates, deepening of the 
active layer over permafrost, and warming and ultimate disap­
pearance of marginal or discontinuous permafrost. Present per­
mafrost engineering commonly designs for the warmest year in 
the past 2 0  years of record; such criteria may need to be 
reviewed and revised (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.1).
Sea-level rise will affect a few outlying Arctic communities, 
many of which are on the shoreline, as well as major coastal
102
The Arctic and the Antarctic
industrial facilities such as the Prudhoe Bay oilfields in Alaska. 
Sea-level rise also will allow ice-thrust events to be more dam­
aging to the shoreline. Coastal permafrost will be thermally 
eroded, which will produce local slumping and coastal retreat.
Episodes of extreme cold and blizzards are major climate con­
cerns for circumpolar countries like Russia and Canada (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 12.4.2.5). However, the Polar regions 
will remain cold, so the direct effects of global warming are 
likely to have little effect on human health. Potential indirect 
effects, such as changes in infectious diseases and vector 
organisms, are largely unknown. UV-B radiation is increasing, 
which can damage the genetic (DNA) material of living cells 
(in an inverse relationship to organism complexity) and induce 
skin cancers in experimental animals. It also may affect human 
health: UV-B radiation is implicated in the causation of human 
skin cancer and lesions of the conjunctiva, cornea, and lens; it 
also may impair the body’s immune system (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 18.4).
Ocean will change with global warming (IPCC 1996, W G II, 
Section 8.3.2). More certainty is required regarding the future 
behavior of the marine-based West Antarctic Ice Sheet and ice 
balance of the continent. Changes have the potential to sub­
stantially alter sea level and southern hemispheric climate, but 
the time frame needs to be defined.
Most human and natural systems in the Arctic and the Antarctic 
Peninsula are extremely sensitive to temperature. Future glob­
al warming is expected to be greatest in these areas. Large 
reductions in sea ice, permafrost, and tundra will disrupt many 
natural systems and change species composition over land and 
in the polar oceans. These areas appear to be vulnerable to cli­
mate change, although the number of people directly affected 
would be relatively small. However, most are indigenous peo­
ple, who lead traditional lifestyles and have few adaptive 
strategies that can be implemented. Antarctica is less vulnera­
ble because the temperature changes envisioned over the next 
century are likely to have little impact, and few people are 
involved.
3.4. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential Vnlnerabilities and 
Impacts and Fnture Research Needs
References
Individual sectors and resources will not be affected in isola­
tion but in interaction with one another. The direct effects of 
climate change include shifts in geographic distribution of 
ecosystems, changes in sea and river ice, thaw of permafrost, 
and changes in coastal areas. Indirect effects include feedbacks 
to the climate system through less ice and snow reflectivity, 
changes in sea ice and ocean circulation, and ecological 
sources and sinks of CO2 and CH4. Improvements are needed 
in modeling of future sea-ice distribution and thickness 
because of their importance as drivers for other physical and 
ecological systems, economics, and transportation. There is 
uncertainty about whether changes in tundra will cause it to act 
as a source or a sink for CO 2 . This issue needs to be resolved.
There is a variety of positive and negative shifts in opportuni­
ties for shipping, the oil industry, fishing, mining, and tourism, 
as well as coastal infrastructure and the movement of popula­
tions. These impacts will lead to further interactions and poten­
tial changes in trade and strategic balance. The health conse­
quences of these shifts will depend on human capacity to adapt.
The Arctic is more vulnerable than the Antarctic because of its 
sensitive and fragile ecosystems and the impacts on traditional 
lifestyles of indigenous peoples and because climate changes 
are expected to be greater. An integrated impact assessment 
using multiple stress models is required for the Arctic. When 
associated with baseline monitoring, it should be possible to 
distinguish natural variability from human impacts.
Further analysis should focus on particularly sensitive zones 
and activities, vulnerable species, marginal communities, and 
estimates of economic impacts. To improve biological compo­
nents of regional and global models, it is important to under­
stand how, when, and where productivity in the Southern
A rrigo, K.R., 1994: Im pact of ozone depletion on phytoplankton grow th in the 
Southern Ocean: large-scale spatial and tem poral variability. M a r .  E c o l .  
P r o g .  S e r , 114, 1-12.
B aroni, C. and G. Orom belli, 1994: A bandoned penguin rookeries as 
Holocene paleoclim atic indicators in A ntarctica. G e o l o g y , 22, 23-26.
B erk m an , RA., 1994: Epizoic zonation on grow ing scallop shells in 
M cM urdo Sound, A ntarctica. J .  E x p e r .  M
a r i n e  B i o l o g y  a n d  E c o l o g y ,  
179, 49-67.
Brown, R.D. and P. Coté, 1992: Interannual variability of landfast ice thick­
ness in the Canadian High A rctic, 1950-1989. A r c t i c ,  45, 273-284.
C hapm an, W.L. and J.E. W alsh, 1993: Recent variations of sea ice and air 
tem perature in high latitudes. B u l l .  A m .  M e t .  S o c . , 74, 3 3 ^ 7 .
C uffey, K.M ., G.D. Clow, R.B. Alley, M. Stuiver, E.D. W addington, and R.W. 
Saltus, 1995: Large A rctic tem perature changes in the W isconsin- 
Holocene glacial transition. S c i e n c e , 270, 4 5 5 ^ 5 8 .
Fedoulov, P.P., E. M urphy, and K.E. Shulgovsky, 1996: Environm ent-krill 
relations in the South Georgia m arine ecosystem . C C A M L R  S c i e n c e , 3, 
13-30.
F lato, G.F. and R.D. Brown, 1996: Variability and clim ate sensitivity of land- 
fast sea ice. J. G e o p h y s i c a l  R e s e a r c h , 101(C10)25, 767-25, 777.
F raser, W.R., W.Z. Trivelpiece, D.G. Ainley, and S.G. Trivelpiece, 1992: 
Increases in Antarctic penguin populations: reduced com petition w ith 
whales or a loss of sea ice due to environm ental warm ing. P o l a r  B i o l o g y ,  
11, 525-531.
Gordon, H.B. and S.P. G ’Farrell, 1997: Transient clim ate change in the 
CSIRG coupled model w ith dynam ic sea ice. M o n t h l y  W e a t h e r  R e v i e w ,  
25(5), 875-907.
G unn, A., 1995: Responses o f arctic ungulates to clim ate change In: H u m a n  
e c o l o g y  a n d  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e . [Peterson, D.L. and D. R. Johnson (eds.)]. 
Taylor and Francis, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 90-104.
H offm an, J.A .J., S.E. Nuez, and W.M. Vargas, 1997: Tem perature, hum idi­
ty, and precipitation variations in A rgentina and the adjacent sub- 
A ntarctic region during the present century. M e t e o r o l .  Z e i t s c h r i f t ,  N.F. 
6, 3-11.
lAATO, 1997: 
O v e r v i e w  
o f  A n t a r c t i c  
t o u r i s m  
a c t i v i t i e s :  A  
s u m m a r y  
o f  
1 9 9 6 - 1 9 9 8  a n d  f i v e  y e a r  p r o j e c t i o n  1 9 9 7 -  2 0 0 2 . X X IA TC M /IP75, May 
1997, Christchurch, New Zealand.
IPCC, 1996. 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
1 9 9 5 :  
T h e  
S c i e n c e  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  G r o u p  1  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  f o r  t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro
The Arctic and the Antarctic
103
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
Nicholls, N., G.V. Gruza, J. Jouzel, T.R. Karl, L.A. Ogallo, and 
D.E. Parker, Chapter 3. O b s e r v e d  C l i m a t e  V a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  C h a n g e ,  
pp. 133-192.
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver, and T.M .L. Wigley, Chapter 
6. C l i m a t e  M o d e l s — P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  F u t u r e  C l i m a t e , pp. 289-357. 
W arrick, R.A., C. Le Provost, M.F. Meier, J. Oerlemans, and P.L. 
W oodworth, C hapter 7. C h a n g e s  i n  S e a  L e v e l , pp. 2 5 9 ^ 0 6 . 
M elillo, J.M ., I.e . Prentice, G.D. Farquhar, E.-D. Schulze, and O.E. 
Sala, C hapter 9. 
T e r r e s t r i a l  B i o t i c  R e s p o n s e s  t o  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
C h a n g e  a n d  F e e d b a c k s  t o  C l i m a t e , pp. 4 4 5 ^ 8 2 .
IP C C , 1996. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s ,  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  S c i e n t i f i c - T e c h n i c a l  A n a l y s e s .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  
G r o u p  I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  f o r  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Watson, R .T , M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
Moss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
K irschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  o n  F o r e s t s , pp. 95-130.
Allen-Diaz, B., Chapter 2. R a n g e l a n d s  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  
I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s ,  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n ,  pp. 131-158.
Noble, I.R. and H. Gitay. Chapter 3. D e s e r t s  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s , pp. 159-170.
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
o n  M o u n t a i n  R e g i o n s , pp. 191-214.
Oquist, M .G. and B.H. Svensson, Chapter 6. N o n - T i d a l  W e t la n d s ,  
pp. 215-240.
Fitzharris, B.B., Chapter 7. T h e  C r y o s p h e r e :  C h a n g e s  a n d  T h e i r  
I m p a c t s , pp. 241-266.
Ittekkot, V., Chapter 8. O c e a n s , pp. 267-288.
A m ell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. H y d r o l o g y  a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  E c o l o g y , pp. 325-364. 
M oreno, R.A. and J. Skea, Chapter 11. I n d u s t r y ,  
E n e r g y ,  
a n d  
T r a n s p o r t a t i o n :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 365-398.
Scott, M. J., Chapter 12. H u m a n  
S e t t l e m e n t s  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 399-426.
Everett, J.T., Chapter 16. F i s h e r i e s , pp. 511-538.
Jacobs, S.S. and J.C. Com iso, 1993: A  recent sea-ice retreat west of the 
Antarctic Peninsula. G e o p h y s i c a l  R e s e a r c h  L e t t e r s , 20(12), 1171-74.
Jefferies, R.L., 1992: Tundra grazing system s and clim atic change. In: A r c t i c  
e c o s y s t e m s  
i n  
a  
c h a n g i n g  
c l i m a t e  
a n  
e c o p h y s i o l o g i c a l  p e r s p e c t i v e  
[Chapin, F.S., R.L. Jefferies, J.F. Reynolds, G.R. Shaver, J. Svoboda, and
E.W. Chu (eds.)]. A cadem ic Press Inc., New York, NY, USA, pp. 
391-412.
Johnsen, S.J., D. Dahl-Jensen, W. D ansgaard, and N. Gundestrup, 1995: 
Greenland palaeotem peratures derived from GRIP bore hole temperature 
and ice core isotope profiles. T e l l u s , 47B, 624-629.
Jones, P.D., S.C.B. Raper, and T.M .L. Wigley, 1986: Southern Hemisphere 
surface air tem perature variations: 1851-1984. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e  a n d  
A p p l i e d  M e t e o r o l o g y , 25, 1213-1230.
K im , S., 1995: Clim ate change and fluctuation of fishery resources in the 
North Pacific (written in Korean w ith English abstract). O c e a n  P o l i c y  
R e s . , 10, 107-142.
King, J.C., 1994: Recent clim ate variability in the vicinity of the Antarctic 
Peninsula. I n t .  J .  C l i m
a t o l ,  14, 357-369.
K oerner, F. and L. Lundgaard, 1995: Glaciers and global warm ing. G e o g .  
P h y s .  Q u a t . , 49(3), 429-434.
K uropat, P., 1984: Foraging behavior of caribou on the calving ground in 
northwestern Alaska. M.S. Thesis, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, 95 pp.
Laevastu, T , D.L. Alverson, and R.J. M arasco, 1996: E x p l o i t a b l e  m a r i n e  
e c o s y s t e m s :  t h e i r  b e h a v i o r  &
 m a n a g e m e n t . Fishing N ews Books, 321 pp,
Loeb, V. V. Siegel, O. Holm -Hansen, R. Hewitt, W. Fraser, W, Trivelpiece, and 
S. Trivelpiece, 1997: Effects of sea-ice extent and krill or salp dominance 
on the Antarctic food web. N a t u r e , 387, 897-900.
M aslin, M. and C. Tzedadakis, 1996: Sultry last interglacial gets sudden chili. 
E O S  T r a n s a c t i o n s , 77, 353-354.
M cG illivray, D.G., T.A. Agnew, G.A. McKay, G.R. Pilkington, and M.C. Hill, 
1993: Impacts of clim atic change on the Beaufort sea ice regime: impli­
cations for the A rctic petroleum  industry. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  D i g e s t , 93-01, 
pp. 1-17.
M cG uire, A.D., J.M. M elillo, D.W. Kicklighter, and L.A. Joyce, 1995: 
Equilibrium  responses of soil carbon to climate change - empirical and 
process-based estimates. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 785-796.
M cM inn, A., H. Heijnis, and D. Hogson, 1994: M inimal effects of U VB radi­
ation in Antarctic diatom s over the past 20 years. N a t u r e , 370, 547-549.
M ills, P.P., 1994: The agricultural potential of Northwestern Canada and 
Alaska and the impact of climatic change. A r c t i c ,  47(2), 115-123.
M yneni, R.B., C.D. Keeling, C.J. Tucker, G. Asrar, and R.R. Nemani, 1997: 
Increased plant growth in the northern high latitudes from 1981 to 1991. 
N a t u r e , 386, 698-702.
N icholls, K.W., 1997; Predicted reduction in basal melt rates of an Antarctic 
ice shelf in a w arm er climate. N a t u r e , 388, 460-461.
O echel, W.C., S.J. Hastings, G. Vourlitis, M. Jenkins, G. Riechers, and N. 
Grulke, 1993: Recent change of A rctic tundra ecosystem s from a net car­
bon dioxide sink to a source. N a t u r e , 361(6412), 520-523.
R am sden, D. and G. Fleming, 1995: Use of a coupled ice-ocean model to 
investigate the sensitivity of the A rctic ice cover to doubling atm ospher­
ic C O j.T . G e o p h y s .  R e s . , 100(C4), 6817-6828.
R ap er, S.C.B., T.M .L. Wigley, P.R. M ayes, P.D. Jones, and M.J. Salinger, 
1984; Variations in Surface A ir Temperature Part 3: The Antarctic, 
1957-82. M o n t h l y  W e a t h e r  R e v i e w , 112, 1342-1353.
R ott, H., P. Skvarca, and T. Nagler, 1996: Rapid collapse of northern Larsen 
Ice Shelf, Antarctica. S c i e n c e , 271, 788-792.
Schim el, D.S., B.H. Braswell, E.A. Holland, R. M cKeown, D.S. Ojima, Т.Н. 
Painter, W.J. Parton, and A.R. Townsend, 1994; Climatic, edaphic, and 
biotic controls over storage and turnover of carbon in soils. G l o b a l  
B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e , 8, 785-796.
SC O PE , 1996: E f f e c t s  o f  I n c r e a s e d  U l t r a v i o l e t  R a d i a t i o n  i n  t h e  A r c t i c . lASC 
report #2. Oslo, Norway, 58 pp.
S h a rratt, B.S., 1992: Growing season trends in the Alaskan Climate Record. 
A r c t i c ,  45(2), 124-127.
Skvarca, P., H. Rott, and T. Nagler, 1995: Satellite imagery, a baseline for 
glacier variation study on James Ross Island, Antarctica. A n n .  G l a c i a l ,  
21, 291-296.
Sugden, D., 1982: A r c t i c  a n d  A n t a r c t i c :  a  m o d e r n  g e o g r a p h i c a l  s y n t h e s is . Basil 
Blackwell, Oxford, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 472 pp.
Taalas, P., 1993: Factors affecting the behavior of tropospheric and atmos­
pheric ozone in the European A rctic and in Antarctica. R e p o r t  N o .  1 0 . 
F i n n i s h  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  I n s t i t u t e  C o n t r i b u t i o n s , Finnish M eteorological 
Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 138 pp.
Taalas, P., J. Damski, A. Korpela, T. Koskela, E. Kyro, and G. Braathen, 1995: 
Connections between atmospheric ozone, the climate system and ultravi­
olet-B radiation in the A rctic. In: O z o n e  a s  a  c l i m a t e  g a s , vol. 32 [Wang, 
W.C. and I.S.A. Isaksen (eds.)]. NATO ASI Series. Springer-Verlag, 
Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 411-426.
Taalas, P., J. Damski, E. Kyro, M. Ginzburg, and G. Talamoni, 1997: The 
effect of stratospheric ozone variations on UV radiation and on tropos­
pheric ozone at high latitudes. J .  G e o p h y s .  R e s . (in press).
U N EP, 1997: G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t  O u t l o o k :  A n  O v e r v i e w . ISBN 92-807-1638- 
7, UNEP in collaboration with the Stockholm Environment Institute. 
Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford, 264 pp.
V aughan, D.G. and C.S.M . Doake, 1996: Recent atmospheric warm ing and 
retreat of ice shelves on the Antarctic Peninsula. N a t u r e , 379, 328-331.
Vincent, W.F., and S. Roy, 1993: Solar ultraviolet-B radiation and aquatic prima­
ry productivity: damage protection and recovery. E n v i r o n .  R e v . , 1,1-12.
W adham s, P., 1990: Sea ice and econom ic developm ent in the A rctic Ocean: 
a glaciologist’s experience. In: A r c t i c  T e c h n o l o g y  a n d  E c o n o m y .  P r e s e n t  
S i t u a t i o n  a n d  P r o b l e m s ,  F u t u r e  I s s u e s . Bureau Veritas, Paris, France, pp. 
1-23.
W alton, D.W.H. and W N . Bonner, 1985: Terrestrial habitats —  Introduction. 
In: A n t a r c t i c a  —
K e y  E n v i r o n m e n t s  [Bonner, W.N. and D.W.H. Walton 
(eds.)]. Pergamon Press, Oxford and New York, 381 pp.
W eatherhead, E.G. and C.M. M orseth, 1997: Climate change, ozone and UV 
radiation. In: A r c t i c  M o n i t o r i n g  a n d  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o g r a m ’s  A s s e s s m e n t  
R e p o r t . Oslo, Norway, (in press).
4
Australasia
REID E. BASHER (NEW ZEALAND) AND A. BARRIE PITTOCK (AUSTRALIA) 
Lead Authors:
B. Bates (Australia), T Done (Australia), R.M. Gifford (Australia), S.M. Howden 
(Australia), R. Sutherst (Australia), R. Warrick (New Zealand), P. Whetton 
(Australia), D. Whitehead (New Zealand), J.E. Williams (Australia), A. Woodward 
(New Zealand)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
4.1. 
Background Characterization of Region
4.2. 
Regional Climate Information
4.2.1. Current Climate
4.2.2. Trends in Climate, Sea Level, and CO 2
4.2.3. Climate Scenarios
4.3. 
Vulnerabilities and Potential Impacts 
for Key Sectors
4.3.1. Ecosystems
4.3.1.1. General
4.3.1.2. Soil Properties and Plant Growth
4.3.1.3. Terrestrial Ecosystems
4.3.1.4. Aquatic and Marine Ecosystems
4.3.1.5. Coral Reefs
4.3.1.6. Adaptation and Vulnerability
4.3.2. Hydrology and Water Resources
4.3.2.1. Hydrological Systems
4.3.2.2. Water Hazards and Water Supply
4.3.2.3. Snowfields and Hydroelectricity
4.3.2.4. Adaptation and Vulnerability
4.3.3. Food and Fiber Production
4.3.3.1. Agriculture and Horticulture
4.3.3.2. Production Forestry
4.3.3.3. Fisheries
4.3.3.4. Adaptation and Vulnerability
107
110
111
111
112
113
115
115
115
116 
116 
118
119
120 
120 
122
124
125
125
126 
126 
128 
128 
129
4.3.5.
4.3.6.
References
Coastal Systems
130
4.З.4.1.
Coastal Zones and Responses
130
4.3.4.2.
Coastal Infrastructure and
Human Impacts
131
4.3.4.3.
Vulnerability Assessments
and Case Studies
132
4.3.4.4.
Adaptation and Vulnerability
133
Human Settlements
134
4.З.5.1.
Energy
134
4.3.5.2.
Air and Water Pollution
134
4.3.5.3.
Minerals
134
4.3.5.4.
Insurance
134
4.3.5.5.
Transportation
135
4.3.5.6.
Tourism
135
4.3.5.7.
Adaptation and Vulnerability
135
Human Health
136
4.З.6.1.
Health Impacts
136
4.3.6.2.
Adaptation and Vulnerability
137
ited Analysis of Potential Impacts
137
141
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This region is defined here as Australia, New Zealand, and their 
outlying islands. Australia is a large, flat continent spanning the 
tropics to mid-latitudes, with relatively nutrient-poor soils and a 
very arid Interior, whereas New Zealand is much smaller, 
mountainous, and well watered. Both have “Gondwanan” 
ecosystems and unique flora and fauna. They have been subject 
to significant human influences— particularly from fire, agri­
culture, deforestation, and introduced exotic plants and animals. 
The total land area is 8  million square kilometers, and the pop­
ulation is 22 million. In contrast to other Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, 
commodity-based industries of agriculture and mining domi­
nate the economies and exports. Tourism is a major and rapidly 
growing industry.
Climate: Australasia’s climate is strongly influenced by the 
surrounding oceans. Key climatic features include tropical 
cyclones and monsoons in northern Australia; migratory mid­
latitude storm systems in the south, including New Zealand; 
and the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, 
which causes floods and prolonged droughts, especially in 
eastern Australia. Unfortunately, climate models at present 
cannot provide reliable predictions for these features under cli­
mate change.
Climate trends: The region’s climatic trends are consistent with 
those of other parts of the world. Mean temperatures have risen 
by up to 0.1 °C per decade over the past century; nighttime tem­
peratures have risen faster than daytime temperatures; and the 
past decade has seen the highest mean annual temperatures 
ever recorded. Increases in the frequency of heavy rainfalls and 
average rainfall have been reported for large areas of Australia. 
Sea levels have risen on average by about 20 mm per decade 
over the past 50 years.
Climate scenarios: Climate modeling and climate change sce­
narios for the region are relatively well developed. For 
Australia, the recently revised (1996) Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) sce­
narios for 2030 indicate temperature increases of 0.3-1.4°C 
and rainfall changes of up to 1 0 % in magnitude (decreases in 
winter, increases or decreases in summer, and overall a ten­
dency for decreases). The projected changes for 2070 are about 
twice those of the 2030 changes. Increases in the intensity of 
heavy rainfall events are indicated. For New Zealand, the tem­
perature increases are expected to be similar to those for 
Australia, but the recent revision indicates the possibility of an 
increase in westerly winds (unlike the decreases of previous 
scenarios)— and hence precipitation increases in the west and
precipitation decreases in the east. The changes in scenarios 
serve to caution against overinterpretation of impact studies 
based on any single scenario.
Ecosystems: In responding to climate change, Australasia’s 
biota may face a greater rate of long-term change than ever 
before. They also must respond in a highly altered landscape 
fragmented by urban and agricultural development. There is 
ample evidence for significant potential impacts. Alterations in 
soil characteristics, water and nutrient cycling, plant produc­
tivity, species interactions (competition, predation, parasitism, 
etc.), and composition and function of ecosystems are highly 
likely responses to Increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide 
(CO 2 ) concentration and temperature and to shifts in rainfall 
regimes. These changes would be exacerbated by any increas­
es in fire occurrence and insect outbreaks.
Aquatic systems will be affected by the disproportionately 
large responses in runoff, riverflow and associated nutrients, 
wastes, and sediments that are likely from changes in rainfall 
and rainfall intensity and by sea-level rise in estuaries, man­
groves, and other low-lying coastal areas. Australia’s Great 
Barrier Reef and other coral reefs are vulnerable to tempera­
ture-induced bleaching and death of corals, in addition to sea- 
level rise and weather changes. However, there is evidence that 
the growth of coral reef biota may be sufficient to adapt to sea- 
level rise. Our knowledge of climate change impacts on aquat­
ic and marine ecosystems is relatively limited.
Prediction of climate change effects is very difficult because of 
the complexity of ecosystem dynamics. Although Australasia’s 
biota and ecosystems are adapted to the region’s high climate 
variability (exemplified in arid and ENSO-affected areas), it is 
unclear whether this will provide any natural adaptation advan­
tage. Many species will be able to adapt through altered ecosys­
tem relationships or migration, but such possibilities may not 
exist in some cases, and reduction of species diversity is highly 
likely. Climate change will add to existing problems such as 
land degradation, weed infestations, and pest animals and gen­
erally will increase the difficulties and uncertainty involved in 
managing these problems.
The primary human adaptation option is land-use manage­
ment— for example, by modification of animal stocking rates 
in rangelands, control of pests and weeds, changed forestry 
practices, and plantings along waterways. Research, monitor­
ing, and prediction, both climatic and ecological, will be nec­
essary foundations to human adaptive responses. Active 
manipulation of species generally will not be feasible in the
region’s extensive natural or lightly managed ecosystems, 
except for rare and endangered species or commercially valu­
able species. In summary, it must be concluded that some of the 
region’s ecosystems are very vulnerable to climate change.
Hydrology and water resources: The four hydrological situa­
tions of most concern to the region are drought-prone areas, 
flood-prone urban areas, low-lying islands, and alpine snow- 
fields. Model simulations suggest changes of as much as ±20% 
in soil moisture and runoff in Australia by 2030, with consid­
erable variation from place to place and season to season and 
with the possibility of an overall reduction in average runoff. 
Water shortages would sharpen competition among various 
uses of water, especially where large diversions are made for 
economic purposes. One study shows A ustralia’s major 
Murray-Darling River system facing constraints on existing 
irrigation uses and/or harm to the riverine environment. More 
frequent high-rainfall events would enhance groundwater 
recharge and dam-filling events but also would increase the 
impacts of flooding, landslides, and erosion. A  preliminary 
study for an urban area near Sydney showed a tenfold increase 
in the potential damage of the “ 1 0 0 -year” flood under a dou­
bled CO 2  scenario. Water supplies on atolls and low-lying 
islands are vulnerable to saltwater intrusion of groundwater 
from rising sea levels and to possible rainfall reductions. 
Reduced snow amounts and a shorter snow season appear like­
ly and would decrease the amenity value of the mountains and 
the viability of the ski industry. The glaciers of New Zealand’s 
Southern Alps are likely to shrink further.
Adaptation options include integrated catchment management, 
changes to water pricing systems, water efficiency initiatives, 
building or rebuilding engineering structures, relocation of 
buildings, urban planning and management, and improved 
water supply measures in remote areas and low-lying islands. 
The financial exposure, and cost involved in potential adapta­
tions, indicate a high vulnerability with respect to hydrology.
Agriculture: Significant impacts on agriculture are likely, 
including crop and pasture performance increases from CO 2  
rises; mixed effects of temperature rises; changes in soil fertili­
ty; changes in quality of grain and pasture nutrition; shifts in the 
suitability of districts for particular crops, such as kiwifruit; and 
possibly increased problems with weeds, pests, and diseases.
Impacts will vary widely from district to district, crop to crop, 
and decade to decade. Grain crops may gain in the first few 
decades because of the immediate beneficial effect of higher 
CO 2 , but that advantage may be eroded as the delayed rise in 
temperature becomes greater and reduces the grain-filling peri­
od. In Australia’s warm low latitudes, some crops are near their 
maximum temperature tolerance and are likely to suffer 
increasingly as the temperature increases. The possibility of 
overall decreased rainfall in Australia would negatively affect 
rangeland pastoralism and irrigated agriculture (which is a 
major source of production). Any changes in global produc­
tion, and hence international food commodity prices, would 
have major economic impacts.
Farming in the region is well adapted to dealing with variabil­
ity and change through a variety of natural and market fac­
tors— for example, by means of plant breeding, diversification, 
seasonal climate prediction, and so forth. Such techniques are 
likely to be sufficient to adapt to climate change over the next 
few decades; in some cases, these techniques may facilitate 
expanded production. As the time horizon extends, however, 
the changing climate is likely to become less favorable to agri­
cultural production in Australia, leading to a long-term 
increase in vulnerability.
Forestry: Production forestry will be affected by changes in 
tree productivity; forest operational conditions; and weed, dis­
ease, and wildfire incidence. The net impact is not clear. The 
longer time to reach maturity results in a relatively large expo­
sure to financial loss from extreme events, fire, or any rapid 
change in climate conditions.
Fisheries: A  number of climate sensitivities have been identi­
fied, but the impacts cannot be predicted with any confidence. 
It appears that freshwater and near-shore fisheries will be more 
affected than open-ocean fisheries. The principal adaptation 
option is scientifically based integrated fisheries management 
and coastal zone management.
Coastal zones: The impacts on coastal zones of sea-level rise 
and climate change include inundation, riverine flooding, saline 
intrusion, erosion, and wave damage. The impacts of changes in 
weather conditions (winds, waves, storms, and storm surge) 
may be comparable to those of sea-level rise alone. Beaches, 
estuaries and coastal wetlands, and reefs— including the Great 
Barrier Reef—have adapted naturally to past changes in climate 
and sea level. However, in the future they are likely to face 
faster rates of change, and in many cases landward migration 
will be blocked by human land uses and infrastructure. Impacts 
will be complex, both physically and socioeconomically, and 
will vary greatly from place to place. There is potential for con­
siderable damage to the region’s low-lying coastal settlements 
and infrastructure where populations, tourism, and capital 
investment are large and growing. New Zealand also is exposed 
to impacts on its Pacific island territories, including the eventu­
al possibility of environmental refugee fluxes. Some parts of 
Australasia’s coastline, including a number of coastal cities and 
indigenous communities in low-lying coastal settlements and 
islands, are highly vulnerable.
Adaptation options include integrated coastal zone manage­
ment; redesign, rebuilding, or relocation of capital assets; pro­
tection of beaches and dunes; development zone control; and 
retreat plans.
Human settlements-. In addition to possible changes in the fre­
quency and magnitude of “natural disaster” type events such as 
urban fringe fires, floods, and extreme sea-level events, urban 
areas and industry will experience a variety of direct climatic 
impacts on water and air quality, water supply and drainage, 
waste disposal, energy production and distribution, minerals 
production, transport operations, insurance, and tourism. The
effects of the direct impacts are likely to be small relative to 
other economic influences, but the sectors are very large, and 
the impacts and necessary adaptations may represent major 
losses and costs. Thus, a moderate degree of vulnerability is 
present. Adaptations will include improved planning, zoning, 
and engineering standards that take climate change and sea- 
level rise into account.
Human health: Increases are expected in heat stress mortality 
(particularly in Australia), tropical vector-borne diseases such 
as dengue, and urban pollution-related respiratory problems. 
These impacts are small compared to the total burden of ill- 
health, but they have the potential to cause significant commu­
nity impact and cost. Indigenous communities and economical­
ly disadvantaged persons appear to be more at risk. Adaptation 
responses include strengthening existing public health infra­
structure and meeting the needs of vulnerable groups. A moder­
ate degree of vulnerability is apparent with health.
Integration: Some preliminary studies of impacts for limited 
areas or issues have been attempted for the region, but com­
prehensive integrated analyses are not available. A  cross-sector 
economic costing approach indicates substantial impacts on 
Australasia’s gross domestic product (GDP) (several percent 
per annum for a doubling of CO 2), but the method involved is
subject to 
considerable criticism. The New Zealand 
CLIMPACTS and Australian OzClim software packages have 
been developed as national-scale, integrated assessment 
methodologies to enable the progressive exploration of sensi­
tivities, impacts, adaptation options, and so forth as knowledge 
develops.
Research needs: Research is needed on better climate scenar­
ios; the dynamic responses of ecological systems; impacts on 
marine, aquatic, and coastal ecosystems; possible changes in 
the magnitude and frequency of “natural disasters”; impacts on 
settlements, industries, and health; cross-sector and multina­
tional interactions; and potential adaptations and their amelio­
rating effects.
Conclusion: Australia’s relatively low latitude makes it partic­
ularly vulnerable through impacts on its scarce water resources 
and on crops presently growing near or above their optimum 
temperatures, whereas New Zealand— a cooler, wetter, mid­
latitude country— may gain some benefit from the ready avail­
ability of suitable crops and the likely increase in agricultural 
production. In both countries, however, there is a wide range of 
situations in which vulnerability is thought to be moderate to 
high— particularly in ecosystems, hydrology, coastal zones, 
settlements and industry, and health.
по
Australasia
4.1. 
Background Characterization of Region
Summary: This region is defined here as Australia, New 
Zealand, and their outlying islands. Australia is a large, flat 
continent spanning the tropics to mid-latitudes, with relatively 
nutrient-poor soils and a very arid interior, whereas New 
Zealand is much smaller, mountainous, and well watered. Both 
have “Gondwanan ” ecosystems and unique flora and fauna. 
They have been subject to significant human influences—par­
ticularly from fire, agriculture, deforestation, and introduced 
exotic plants and animals. The total land area is 8 million 
square kilometers, and the population is 22 million. In contrast 
to other OECD countries, commodity-based industries o f agri­
culture and mining dominate the economies and exports. 
Tourism is a major and rapidly growing industry.
Australia is a large, ancient, eroded, and relatively flat continent, 
similar in size to Europe or the continental United States, with 
generally nutrient-poor soils. Situated between the Indian and 
Pacific Oceans, it is bordered to the north at 11°S by tropical 
waters and to the south at 44°S by the cold and windy Southern 
Ocean (Figure 4-1). It is the only major OECD country that lies 
largely in tropical and subtropical latitudes. In contrast. New 
Zealand is much smaller; it comprises two narrow, geologically 
young, and mountainous main islands located wholly in the mid­
latitudes, from 35°S to 48°S. The total land area of the two coun­
tries is 8  million km2. Small offshore islands greatly extend both 
countries’ jurisdictions. Key geographical features of the region
are its relative isolation in an oceanic hemisphere, Gondwanan 
ecosystems and unique flora and fauna, low human population 
densities, and significant climatic features such as the ENSO 
phenomenon, the very arid interior of Australia, and tropical 
cyclones.
The ecosystems of the region are extremely varied, owing to 
the range of climates arising from the large latitudinal range, 
the continentality of Australia, and the mountainous, maritime 
nature of New Zealand. Australia has mainly rainfall-limited 
ecosystems (both natural and agricultural), although high tem­
peratures also are limiting to crop production in some more 
northern areas. New Zealand has generally ample rainfall and 
mainly low-temperature limited ecosystems. More important 
biomes include the interior Australian deserts; semi-arid shrub­
lands and savannas; tropical and temperate grasslands; tropical 
and temperate rainforests; sclerophyll forests and woodlands; 
alpine zones in southeast Australia and New Zealand; freshwa­
ter and coastal wetlands; tropical and subantarctic islands; 
coral reefs; and deep ocean systems. Land-use is reported as 
being 6 % cropland (with a large fraction irrigated), 55% per­
manent pasture (much of it semi-arid rangelands), 19% forest 
and woodland, and 20% other (see WRI, 1996, Table 9.1; see 
also Annex D of this report).
Many parts of the region have been subject to significant human 
influences, particularly from the use of fire, widespread agri­
culture, vegetation clearance, deforestation, and other land-use
Elevation 
^23 Below 5 m 
— 15-100 nn 
■■ ■  100-250ГП 
— 1250-500m 
—  500-1000 nn 
m O O O -2 5 0 0  m 
2500 - 5000m 
Greater than 5000 m
©  Capitals
Omer Major Cities - Pop. 1995 (’000s)
• 
Less than 1000
• 1000-2000 
2000-5000 
5000-10000
Greater than 10000 
200
200 400 Kilomctera
Figure 4-1: The Australasia region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic Information System 
(GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
Australasia
111
change and from the introduction of exotic plants and ani­
mals— particularly rabbits and foxes in Australia and rabbits, 
deer, and Australian possums in New Zealand. Owing to mil­
lions of years of isolation, the region has a very high proportion 
of endemic species (plants and animals found only in this 
region), and its ecosystems are extremely vulnerable to intro­
duced pests, diseases, and weeds. Environmental pollution is 
relatively low, in line with the low human population. Local air 
and water pollution from urban industries, land transport, and 
intensive farming and related processes are of concern in some 
areas, and soil erosion, rising water tables, and dryland salin­
ization (as a result of land clearing and irrigation) are a concern 
in Australia (SOEC, 1996).
The region’s present population is about 18.5 m illion 
(Australia) and 3.5 m illion (New Zealand). Population 
growth of about 1 .6 % per annum is higher than the average 
for OECD countries, largely due to immigration. About 85% 
of the population live in urban and suburban areas, mostly 
near the coast. Half of A ustralia’s population lives in just four 
coastal cities. Average population density is low; even when 
arid areas are excluded, it is only about 5 persons/km^ for 
Australia (see Annex D). Both countries have strong relation­
ships with Pacific island countries, in some cases extending 
to specific constitutional responsibilities, and they are home 
to sizable populations of Pacific Islanders. Large populations 
outside the region are dependent on the region’s agricultural 
exports.
The two countries have open market economies, are members of 
the OECD, and in general have good access to the capital, tech­
nological, and human resources needed to adapt to the impacts 
of climate change. Per capita GDP is currently about US$19,000 
in Australia and US$14,000 in New Zealand (the lower values in 
Annex D are calculated on a different, comparative purchasing 
power basis). Real armual growth rates have been about 3%, and 
inflation is low. Unemployment is about 8-10%.
Primary industries are a cornerstone of the region’s economy. 
These industries include Australia’s low-input pastoralism 
(grain, meat, and wool) and irrigated agriculture and horticul­
ture and New Zealand’s meat, wool, dairy, and horticulture 
industries, together with the associated processing Industries in 
both countries. Forestry, fishing, and tropical crops also are 
important. Australia is a major exporter of coal, as well as ener­
gy-intensive iron, steel, and aluminium. Coal reserves are 
about 1 0 0  billion tonnes, with annual production of about 2 0 0  
million tonnes, mostly for export. About two-thirds of New 
Zealand’s electricity is hydro-generated. The bulk of the 
region’s exports is raw or processed agricultural and mining 
products; in this respect the regional economies are anomalous 
among OECD countries, being more like the less developed 
and emerging economies (Crocombe et a l, 1991). Thus, 
regional exports are heavily exposed to fluctuations in world 
commodity prices and trading conditions.
Tourism in the region— ^which is largely dependent on land­
scape, biodiversity, and climate— is growing faster than the
global average and now contributes about 13% of all export 
earnings, exceeding traditional export earners such as wool and 
wheat.
Socioeconomic trends in the region are similar to those in other 
developed countries. The population is aging, and there is a 
continuing shift of employment and population from lower 
value, commodity-related activities to higher value manufac­
turing and service activities. There is more intensive use of the 
less arid and more nutrient-rich land, especially for horticul­
ture; in New Zealand especially there is rapid development of 
plantation forestry.
4.2. 
Regional Climate Information
4.2.1. 
Current Climate
Summary: Australasia’s climate is strongly influenced by the 
surrounding oceans. Key climatic features include tropical 
cyclones and monsoons in northern Australia; migratory mid­
latitude storm systems in the south, including New Zealand; 
and the ENSO phenomenon, which causes floods and pro­
longed 
droughts, 
especially 
in 
eastern 
Australia. 
Unfortunately, climate models at present cannot provide reli­
able predictions for these features under climate change.
The region’s climate is strongly influenced by its oceanic con­
text. Northern Australia, lying just south of the Western Pacific 
oceanic “warm pool,” experiences tropical conditions, with a 
summer monsoon (Sturman and Tapper, 1996). Tropical 
cyclones (averaging six per year) are a major concern for 
northern coastal regions. Cyclones can track southward as far 
as New Zealand, bringing very high rainfalls (Sinclair, 1993a, 
b). Western and central Australia experience generally clear, 
dry conditions owing to large-scale subsidence. In the winter 
half-year, eastward-moving anticyclones cross the continent, 
and northern areas are influenced by mild, dry, southeast 
tradewinds. In the summer half-year, the anticyclones cross at 
higher latitudes— bringing fine weather to southern Australia 
and to New Zealand.
South of about 35°S there are increasingly strong westerly 
winds, within which large-scale atmospheric waves develop. 
The resulting migratory cyclonic and anticyclonic systems are 
key features of the weather of New Zealand, Tasmania, and the 
southern coasts of Australia, especially during winter 
(Maunder, 1971; Sturman and Tapper, 1996). The eastward 
progression of these weather systems brings cycles of warm 
northerly conditions followed by depressions, fronts, and 
sometimes severe outbreaks of cold air from the Southern 
Ocean.
Australia’s generally low relief (apart from Tasmania and the 
Great Dividing Range parallel to the east coast) does not sig­
nificantly affect the weather regimes. Because of the size of the 
continent, however, the rain-bearing weather systems progres­
sively dry out as they penetrate inland, resulting in a very arid
112
Australasia
central desert region (Sturman and Tapper, 1996). Australia is 
the driest populated continent; two-thirds of the land is classi­
fied as arid or semi-arid (<400 mm annual rainfall). About 87% 
of all rainfall is lost to evaporation from the land surface and 
vegetation, compared to 60% for the United States and Europe. 
Less than 5% of Australia has an average annual runoff greater 
than 250 mm; 26% of the land surface contributes more than 
8 8 % of total runoff, and half the land surface has no direct dis­
charge to the ocean.
An important feature of the region’s climate is the ENSO phe­
nomenon, which causes high year-to-year variability, especial­
ly of rainfall in northern and eastern Australia. The ENSO phe­
nomenon involves the interaction of the tropical Pacific Ocean 
with the global atmosphere and shifts in the major climatic pat­
terns of the globe every 2-5 years or so (McBride and Nicholls, 
1983; Rasmusson and Wallace, 1983; Bureau of Meteorology, 
1989; M cCreary and Anderson, 1991; Trenberth, 1991). 
During “El Nino” years— ^which are marked by unusually 
warm sea surface temperatures in the tropical eastern Pacific 
Ocean— ^Australia experiences reduced rainfall and extensive 
and often prolonged droughts, with severe impacts on rural 
communities and agricultural production. Major wildfires also 
can occur. At the opposite phase of the oscillation, during “La 
Nina” years, flooding is common. Australia has been described 
as a land o f drought and flooding rains.
Owing to its generally low rainfall and low runoff and the 
large seasonal and ENSO-related variations, A ustralia’s 
hydrological features are significantly different from almost 
all other regions and continents (Finlayson and McMahon, 
1988; M cM ahon and Finlayson, 1991; Flem ing, 1995; 
Thomas and Bates, 1997). The variability of Australian rain­
fall and runoff is among the greatest in the world: two to four 
times those of northwestern Europe and North America for the 
same climatic zones. Compared with other nations, the fre­
quency and duration of drought is extreme, though these are 
interspersed with sequences of above-average rainfall. About 
25% of the variance in annual rainfall is attributable to the 
ENSO phenomenon. Most of Australia’s major rivers have 
ceased to flow at least once during the past 1 0 0  to 2 0 0  years, 
and groundwater levels show remarkable variations through 
time.
In contrast. New Zealand has a maritime climate; few places 
are more than 100 km from the coast. Rainfall is relatively 
well-distributed by region and season, and the influence of the 
ENSO phenomenon on year-to-year variations is less than in 
Australia. Mountains rising to 2000-3000 m transverse to the 
prevailing westerly winds result in very wet conditions in 
western areas and drier “rainshadow” conditions in eastern 
areas. In the west of the South Island, annual rainfall can be as 
much as 1 2 , 0 0 0  mm, with high runoff, steep torrents, exten­
sive permanent snow fields at high altitudes, and fast-moving 
glaciers. Barely a few tens of kilometers to the east, annual 
rainfall may be as low as 500 mm. The eastern plains experi­
ence summer drought, which sometimes extends to spring and 
autumn.
Summary: The region’s climatic trends are consistent with 
those o f other parts o f the world. M ean temperatures have 
risen by up to 0.1 °C per decade over the past century; night­
time temperatures have risen faster than daytime tempera­
tures; and the past decade has seen the highest mean annual 
temperatures ever recorded. Increases in the frequency o f 
heavy rainfalls and average rainfall have been reported for 
large areas o f Australia. Sea levels have risen on average by 
about 20 mm per decade over the past 50 years.
Climate exhibits a variety of natural variations— from those 
occurring over geological time (McGlone et al., 1996) to those 
measured on decadal, year to year, and seasonal time scales. 
Long-term climate fluctuations in the Australasia region, 
assessed from historical data measured over the past century, 
are summarized in regional reviews by Hobbs (1988) and 
Salinger et al. (1996) and the regional-mean series in Figure A - 6  
of Annex A. The region’s trends are broadly consistent with 
global trends reported in the recent Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) second assessment (IPCC 1996, WG 
I, Chapter 3). The impacts of such long-term variations on land 
use in parts of southern Australia are documented by Heathcote 
(1994, 1996).
Air temperatures in the region have risen by 0.5-0.9°C since 
the beginning of the century (Salinger et a i, 1996), and New 
Zealand temperatures show a trend of +0.11°C per decade 
(Zheng et al., 1997). These figures are somewhat higher than 
the global mean trend (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 3.2.1). There 
are large variations in decadal averages (Figure A- 6 ), presum­
ably of natural origin. The largest increases have occurred 
since about 1950. Regional trends in intraseasonal and interan­
nual temperature variability were mixed and generally not sta­
tistically significant (Plummer, 1996). Nineteenth-century 
Australian temperature data may be systematically too high, 
owing to instrumentation error, which may partially mask the 
real temperature rise for Australia derived from these early data 
(IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 3.2.2.1). Ocean temperatures in the 
region also are generally rising (Folland and Salinger, 1995; 
Salinger et al., 1996; Holbrook and Bindoff, 1997; Zheng et 
a l, 1997).
Analyses have shown that, along with other parts of the world, 
the region’s minimum daily temperatures have tended to rise 
faster than the maximum daily temperatures, which means that 
the day-night difference (the diurnal temperature range) has 
decreased noticeably in most places, by up to 1°C over the past 
40 years (Karl et al., 1992; Salinger, 1995; Torok and Nicholls, 
1996; Zheng et a l, 1997). The trend in diurnal temperature 
range has been strongest since the 1950s and appears to be a 
result of increasing cloudiness— the source of which is unclear 
at present (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 8.5.3). In Australia, there 
has been a decrease in the number of clear days since at least 
the 1950s, with the largest declines occurring in spring 
(Plummer et a l, 1997), and cloud cover has increased by 5% 
overall since 1910 (Jones, 1991).
4.2.2. 
Trends in Climate, Sea Level, and CO2
Australasia
113
As expected, the trend toward rising temperatures has resulted 
in an increase in the frequency of very warm days and nights 
and a decrease in the frequency of very cool days and nights. 
Plummer et al.’s (1997) study of Australian data for 1961 to 
1995 showed that the decrease in the frequency of cool nights 
exhibited the strongest trend, whereas the decrease in the fre­
quency of cool days was a relatively weak trend.
Rainfall is intrinsically more variable than temperature, both 
from place to place and time to time; thus, the detection of 
trends in rainfall is more difficult and uncertain. The picture for 
the region is not straightforward. There are seasonal and sub­
regional differences, the trends are affected by the ENSO phe­
nomenon, and the results depend on the period chosen for 
analysis. Some of the observed trends, notably those in recent 
decades in the southwest of Western Australia (Allan and 
Haylock, 1993), have been related to changes in regional 
atmospheric circulation. The time series of regional average 
annual rainfall is shown in Figure A-6 . There are marked inter- 
decadal variations, which are dominated by ENSO-induced 
variations in summer half-year rainfall over northern and east­
ern Australia.
Recent studies (Nicholls and Lavery, 1992; Suppiah and 
Hennessy, 1996, 1997; Lavery et al., 1997) demonstrate an 
increase in heavy rainfall and average rainfall over large areas 
of Australia from 1910 to 1990. The largest increases have 
occurred along the east coast, particularly in New South Wales, 
but decreases are evident in southwest Western Australia and 
inland Queensland. In the summer half-year, the all-Australia 
average rainfall (based on areal weighting of station data) 
increased by 14%, heavy rainfall increased by 10-20%, and the 
number of dry days decreased by 4%. In the winter half-year, 
the changes were about half these figures. The trends in heavy 
rainfall are partially but not totally explained by ENSO fluctu­
ations over recent decades.
The evidence on global trends in tropical cyclones, ENSO 
behavior, mid-latitude storms, and other atmospheric circula­
tion is inconclusive (IPCC 1996, WG I, Sections 3.5.2.3,
3.5.3.1, 3.5.3.2). However, there is evidence of more frequent 
depressions along the east coast of Australia, which may be due 
to local circulation changes (Hopkins and Holland, 1997; 
Leighton et al., 1997). Increased numbers of tropical cyclones 
over the past few decades have been reported in the southwest 
Pacific region (north of New Zealand), with the greatest 
increases for the stronger cyclones, but there are doubts about 
the homogeneity of the available database, partly owing to 
improvements in observation capabilities in recent decades 
(Thompson et a i, 1992; Radford et al., 1996). In the Australian 
region (105-160°E), the total number of cyclones from the 
1969-70 to the 1995-96 seasons has decreased, but the num­
ber of strong cyclones has increased slightly, reflecting an 
ENSO influence, as has the total duration of tropical cyclones 
(Nicholls et al., 1997).
Although sea-level measurements are strongly influenced by 
local vertical land movement and other factors (and must be
carefully interpreted), the evidence points to an average rise in 
sea level in the Australasia region over the past 50 years of 
about 2 mm per year (Rintoul et al., 1996; Salinger et a l,
1996). This figure is within the range of the current estimate of 
global sea-level rise (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.2.1).
Higher CO 2  concentration has direct biological effects on 
plants through the increased CO 2  “fertilization” effect and 
increased plant water-use efficiency (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter A), in addition to its effect on the climate system. For 
this reason, we note that present-day atmospheric CO 2  concen­
trations are about 30% higher than in pre-industrial times 
(IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 2.1.1; Manning et a i, 1996) and 
are currently increasing at about 0.4% per year.
4.2.3. 
Climate Scenarios
Summary: Climate modeling and climate change scenarios for 
the region are relatively well developed. For Australia, the 
recently revised (1996) CSIRO scenarios for 2030 indicate 
temperature increases of0.3-1.4°C  and rainfall changes o f up 
to 10% in magnitude (decreases in winter, increases or 
decreases in summer, and overall a tendency for decreases). 
The projected changes for 2070 are about twice those o f the 
2030 changes. Increases in the intensity o f heavy rainfall 
events are indicated. For New Zealand, the temperature 
increases are expected to be similar to those for Australia, but 
the recent revision indicates the possibility o f an increase in 
westerly winds (unlike the decreases o f previous scenarios)—  
and hence precipitation increases in the west and precipitation 
decreases in the east. The changes in scenarios serve to cau­
tion against overinterpretation o f impact studies based on any 
single scenario.
The IPCC has concluded that climate models at present pro­
vide useful predictions at the global and continental scale, but 
as yet allow little confidence at subcontinental scales (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 6.6.3; Annex В of this report). A consid­
erable amount of global climate model development, testing, 
and intercomparison has been done in the Australasia region 
(Garratt et al., 1996; Gordon et a i, 1996; Whetton et al., 
1996b; Whetton et al., 1996d). This research currently pro­
vides the best source of climate change scenarios for the 
region. Two factors that are important in the region’s tempera­
ture changes are the moderating role of the extensive Southern 
Hemisphere oceans and the relative absence of aerosols that 
partially offset greenhouse gas warming in the northern hemi­
sphere (Ayers and Boers, 1996; IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 
6.2.2.2; Rintoul et a l, 1996).
To facilitate impact and policy studies, a series of scenarios for 
the region have been progressively developed in line with the 
development of climate modeling research. Scenarios for 
Australia were released in 1987 (Pittock, 1988), in 1990 
(Whetton and Pittock, 1990), in 1991 (CSIRO, 1991; Whetton 
ef a l, 1992), in 1992 (CSIRO, 1992; Mitchell et a l, 1994; 
Whetton et a l, 1996a), and in 1996 (CSIRO, 1996a). Similar
114
Australasia
scenarios have been released for New Zealand (Salinger et a l, 
1987; Salinger and Hicks, 1990a, 1990b; Salinger and Pittock, 
1991; Mullan, 1994— also described in Whetton et a l, 1996a). 
The integrated impact assessment models being developed for 
New Zealand (‘CO M PA CTS,’ Kenny et a l, 1995) and 
Australia (‘OzClim,’ CSIRO, 1996b) both include a scenario 
generator to enable the potential impacts of multiple scenarios 
to be investigated.
The majority of recently published regional impact studies are 
based on the scenarios of CSIRO (1992) for Australia and 
Mullan (1994) for New Zealand. These scenarios used spatial 
patterns of regional climate change derived from five general 
circulation model (GCM) experiments— namely, Jl, F I, A3, 
H3 of Table 1-1, and the Bureau of Meteorology Research 
Center (BMRC) experiment of Coleman et a l (1994). For 
2030, these gave warmings in Australia of 0.5-2.5°C for inland 
areas, 0 -1 .5°C for northern coastal areas, and 0.5-2.0°C for 
southern coastal areas, and warmings in New Zealand of 
0.5-2.0°C in inland Canterbury and Otago and 0.5-1.5°C else­
where. The Australian summer precipitation projections ranged 
from little change to as much as a 2 0 % increase, and winter 
precipitation projections showed as much as 1 0 % change— but 
the direction of change depended on the district. In New 
Zealand, regardless of season, precipitation increases from 
zero to about 20% were projected— except around Wellington, 
the east coast of the North Island, South Canterbury, and 
Otago. The projected changes for 2070 were about twice the 
magnitude of the 2030 changes.
The CSIRO (1992) and Mullan (1994) scenarios took into 
account the IPCC (1990) range of plausible greenhouse-gas 
emission scenarios and sensitivity of the global climate to 
increased greenhouse forcing, but the GCMs used were of a 
“slab ocean” type— that is, they did not include an interactive 
deep ocean. Very recently, the application of coupled ocean- 
atmosphere GCMs and the use of updated IPCC (1996a) glob­
al warming scenarios has led to significant shifts in the pro­
jected changes of climate (CSIRO, 1996a). The CSIRO (1992) 
and Mullan (1994) scenarios used the same five slab-ocean 
GCMs (except for an improved version of FI), and five cou- 
pled-ocean GCMs (XIO, X2, X 8 , and X 6  of Table 1-1, and 
another MPI experiment as in Lunkeit et a l, 1994). The 
marked differences in scenarios from the coupled models in the 
Australasian region highlight the need for caution in the use of 
climate scenario information for impact assessment.
In the new CSIRO (1996a) scenarios, the projections of warm­
ing for Australia have been reduced, mainly due to the down­
ward revision of global warming estimates. The new scenarios 
for 2030 are 0.4-1.4°C for inland areas, 0.3-1.0°C for northern 
coastal areas, and 0.3-1.3°C for southern coastal areas. The use 
of coupled ocean-atmosphere models in addition to the older 
non-coupled “slab ocean” models has led to major changes in 
summer rainfall scenarios, which for 2030 now vary from 
- 1 0 % to + 1 0 %, unlike the increases projected by the slab mod­
els alone. This difference appears to be due to the coupled 
models’ much slower rate of warming in the higher latitudes of
the Southern Hemisphere (Whetton et a l, 1996b). Winter rain­
fall change scenarios for 2030 are similar in coupled and slab 
models and range from decreases of up to about 1 0 % over 
inland areas to increases of a similar magnitude in the far south 
(mainly Tasmania). Related scenarios based on the results of a 
regional model (DARLAM) nested in the CSIRO slab-ocean 
GCM (experiment FI, Table 1-1) also have been developed 
(Hennessy et a l, 1997; Whetton et a l, 1997).
It should be noted that the CSIRO (1996a) scenarios continue to 
use results from the older slab-ocean climate models as well as 
from the newer coupled models. This is because there are still 
some doubts about the reliability of the scenarios from the cou­
pled models (Whetton et a l, 1996b). These doubts partly relate 
to the observed latitudinal gradient of warming in the Southern 
Hemisphere (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 3.2.2.3), which is more 
like that in the slab-ocean GCMs, and to the simulated rainfall 
decreases in summer over Australia— which are contrary to the 
observed small increases this century. This disagreement could 
be because the observed trends are not predominantly green­
house-related and may be influenced by natural multidecadal 
fluctuations in the coupled ocean-atmosphere system.
Alternative scenarios for New Zealand based on the newer 
coupled model results are in preparation. Significant differ­
ences in the projected patterns of rainfall change are expected 
because the coupled models simulate an increase in the 
strength of the mid-latitude westerly winds, which is the 
reverse of the previous slab-model based scenarios. Stronger 
westerlies are likely to show a greater tendency for rainfall 
increases on the wet western side of the Southern Alps and 
decreases on the dry eastern plains.
Any overall increase in temperature will tend to cause an 
increase in the frequency of extremely high temperatures and a 
decrease in the frequency of extremely low temperatures (e.g., 
frost) (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 6.5.7). A  similar effect will 
apply to areas of overall rainfall increase, and vice versa for 
areas of overall rainfall decrease. In addition, global climate 
models tend to predict that in a warmer climate there will be 
more high-intensity rainfall events, with more severe droughts 
and floods in some places but less severe droughts and floods 
in other places (Fowler and Hennessy, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG 
I, Section 6.5.7). Where interannual variability in rainfall is 
high, there may be more sensitivity to changes in the frequen­
cy of extreme events than to small changes in the mean climate 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 2.7.1).
Soil moisture will be directly affected by rainfall changes, 
including the replenishment of groundwater by more frequent 
high-rainfall events. Moreover, higher temperatures will 
increase the potential for évapotranspiration, causing faster 
drying of the soil.
Of particular concern for the Australasian region are possible 
changes to the region’s major weather systems— especially the 
timing, intensities, and locations of the tropical monsoonal and 
cyclone systems; the locations and intensities of mid-latitude
Australasia
115
weather systems and the subtropical anticyclone belt; and the 
frequency, intensity, and bias of the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation. Unfortunately, climate models do not at this stage 
provide firm projections for any of these key features (e.g., 
Pittock et a l, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG I, Sections 6.4.4, 6.5.4; 
Katzfey and Mclnnes, 1996; Pittock et a l, 1996; Suppiah et 
a l, 1996), although there are some tentative indications that 
tropical cyclones could increase their maximum potential 
intensities by as much as 1 0 - 2 0 % under doubled CO 2  condi­
tions (Henderson-Sellers and Zhang, 1997; Holland, 1997). 
The use of nested regional models may provide scenarios of 
tropical cyclone changes in the future (Suppiah et a l, 1996; 
Walsh and Watterson, 1997).
There are large differences between the results of the different 
global models, especially at the subcontinental scale (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 6 .6 ; Whetton et al., 1996d), and any 
regional circulation changes could impose large changes in 
temperature and rainfall on top of the continental-scale 
changes indicated above.
may not exist in some cases, and reduction o f species diversity 
is highly likely. Climate change will add to existing problems 
such as land degradation, weed infestations, and pest animals 
and generally will increase the difficulties and uncertainty 
involved in managing these problems.
The primary human adaptation option is land-use manage- 
m ent-flor example, by modification o f animal stocking rates in 
rangelands, control o f pests and weeds, changed forestry prac­
tices, and plantings along waterways. Research, monitoring, 
and prediction, both climatic and ecological, will be necessary 
foundations to human adaptive responses. Active manipulation 
o f species generally will not be feasible in the region’s exten­
sive natural or lightly managed ecosystems, except for rare 
and endangered species or commercially valuable species. In 
summary, it must be concluded that some o f the region’s 
ecosystems are very vulnerable to climate change.
4.3.1.1. 
General
4.3. 
Vulnerabilities and Potential Impacts for Key Sectors
4.3.1. 
Ecosystems
Summary: In responding to climate change, Australasia’s biota 
may face a greater rate o f long-term change than ever before. 
They also must respond in a highly altered landscape frag­
mented by urban and agricultural development. There is ample 
evidence for significant potential impacts. Alterations in soil 
characteristics, water and nutrient cycling, plant productivity, 
species interactions (competition, predation, parasitism, etc.), 
and composition and function o f ecosystems are highly likely 
responses to increases in atmospheric CO2 concentration and 
temperature and to shifts in rainfall regimes. These changes 
would be exacerbated by any increases in fire occurrence and 
insect outbreaks.
Aquatic systems will be affected by the disproportionately 
large responses in runoff, riverflow and associated nutrients, 
wastes and sediments that are likely from changes in rainfall 
and rainfall intensity and by sea-level rise in estuaries, man­
groves, and other low-lying coastal areas. Australia’s Great 
Barrier R eef and other coral reefs are vulnerable to tempera­
ture-induced bleaching and death o f corals, in addition to sea- 
level rise and weather changes. However, there is evidence that 
the growth o f coral reef biota may be sufficient to adapt to sea- 
level rise. Our knowledge o f climate change impacts on aquat­
ic and marine ecosystems is relatively limited.
Prediction o f climate change effects is very difficult because o f 
the complexity o f ecosystem dynamics. Although Australasia’s 
biota and ecosystems are adapted to the region’s high climate 
variability (exemplified in arid and ENSO-affected areas), it is 
unclear whether this will provide any natural adaptation 
advantage. M any species will be able to adapt through altered 
ecosystem relationships or migration, but such possibilities
Climate is a primary influence not only on the individual plant, 
animal, and soil components of an ecosystem but also on water 
and nutrient availability and cycling within the ecosystem, on 
fire and other disturbances, and on the dynamics of species 
interactions. Changes in climate therefore affect ecosystems 
both by directly altering an area’s suitability to the physiologi­
cal requirements of individual species and by altering the 
nature of ecosystem dynamics and species interactions (Peters 
and Darling, 1985). In addition, biota face an environment in 
which the rising atmospheric CO 2  concentration also will 
directly affect plants and soils.
The rate of climatic change may exceed any that the biota have 
previously experienced (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter A and 
Section 4.3.3). This rate of change poses a potentially major 
threat to ecosystem structure and function and possibly to the 
ability of evolutionary processes, such as natural selection, to 
keep pace (Peters and Darling, 1985). Although many of the 
biota and ecosystems in the region have adapted to high cli­
mate variability (exemplified in the region’s arid and ENSO- 
affected areas), it is unclear whether this will provide any 
advantage in adapting to the projected changes in climate.
Furthermore, in contrast to the case of climate change over 
geological time scales, today the region’s biota must respond 
in a landscape that has been highly modified by agricultural 
and urban development and introduced species (Peters, 1992). 
Considerable fragm entation of habitat has occurred in 
Australasia’s forests, temperate woodlands, and rangelands. In 
the short term, land-use changes such as vegetation clearance 
are likely to have a much greater bearing on the maintenance 
of conservation values than the direct effects of climate 
change on biodiversity (Saunders and Hobbs, 1992). In the 
longer term, however, climate change impacts are likely to 
become increasingly evident, especially where other process­
es have increased ecosystem vulnerability (Williams et a l,
1994).
116
Australasia
Australasia’s isolated evolutionary history has led to a very 
high level of endemism (plants and animals found only in the 
region). For example, 77% of mammals, 41% of birds, and 
93% of plant species are endemic (see Annex D). As one of 
the 1 2  recognized “mega-diversity” countries (and the only 
one that is an OECD member), Australia has a particular 
stewardship responsibility toward an unusually large fraction 
of the w orld’s biodiversity. Many of New Zealand’s endemic 
bird species are endangered. Species confined to limited 
areas or habitat, such as A ustralia’s endangered Mountain 
Pygmy Possum (Burramys parvus)— which is only found in 
the alpine and subalpine regions of southeast Australia 
(Dexter et al., 1995)— may be especially vulnerable to cli­
mate change.
Certain ecosystems have particular importance to the region’s 
indigenous people, both for use as traditional sources of food 
and materials and for their cultural and spiritual significance. 
Selected climate change impacts on Australian Aborigines and 
New Zealand Maori are considered in Sections 4.3.3.1 and 
4.3.4.2 respectively.
4.3.1.2. 
Soil Properties and Plant Growth
The impact of climate change on soil is difficult to predict 
(Jenldnson et a l, 1991; Gifford et a i, 1996a; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapters A and 4; McMurtrie and Comins, 1996; Tate et a l, 
1996; Thomley and Cannell, 1996). Soil nutrient availability is 
particularly important in Australia, where a high proportion of the 
continent has soils of low nutrient content. Increased CO 2  con­
centration and temperature will change the carbon-to-nitrogen 
ratios of biomass and hence of decomposing organic material. 
Higher temperatures are likely to increase the rate of decomposi­
tion of organic material; this loss may be partially offset, howev­
er, by the small observed increases in primary production that can 
occur with increased atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. 
Increases in soil carbon as a result of improved stock and pasture 
management are likely to be significant in Australian rangelands 
(Ash et a i, 1996).
Soil water availability is likely to be the most important limit­
ing factor for productivity in much of the region, especially in 
inland Australia and eastern districts of New Zealand. Soil 
water content will be affected by changes in rainfall (increases 
or decreases) and by increased évapotranspiration occurring as 
a result of increased temperature. Tropical forests that experi­
ence a long dry season— such as those in northern Australia—  
may be more sensitive to changes in rainfall than to changes in 
temperature.
Increased salinization and alkalization would occur in areas 
where evaporation increased or rainfall decreased (Varallyay,
1994); this development could have significant impacts on 
large areas of Australia’s semi-arid zones. In areas where 
salinity is a result of recharge processes, salinization would 
increase if the upstream recharging rainfall increased (Peck 
and Allison, 1988). Increasing atmospheric CO 2  concentration
can reduce the impact of salinity on plant growth (Nicolas et 
a i, 1993). An increased frequency of higher rainfall events 
would increase soil erosion (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
4.2.1), which would be a concern in much of New Zealand’s 
deforested hill country.
Rising levels of atmospheric CO 2  will have a considerable 
impact on the growth and morphology of plants, with likely 
increases in potential productivity through increases in carbon 
assimilation, water-use efficiency, and possibly nutrient-use 
efficiency. Increased water-use efficiency under higher CO 2  
conditions will lead to higher productivity, especially in water- 
limited systems; but the magnitude of the response will depend 
on other limiting factors such as soil nitrogen (Eamus, 1991; 
Gifford, 1992). Some experiments have shown an “acclimati­
zation” or “acclimation” effect, in which the growth response 
to higher CO 2  in the longer term is less than in short-term 
experiments (Gunderson and Wullschleger, 1994); whether this 
effect applies at the ecosystem level over many years remains 
untested, however.
In temperate zones, increased temperatures generally enhance 
the rate of plant and soil biochemical processes and lead to 
greater plant productivity. Thus, higher air temperatures are 
likely to increase plant growth in the mid-latitudes of New 
Zealand and southern Australia, where productivity is current­
ly limited by lower temperatures. In Australia’s tropical areas, 
however, higher temperature stresses (above 35-40°C over 
extended periods) may result in more frequent damage to the 
vegetation from desiccation and sunscald (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 1.4.3.2). In systems where C 3 and C4  species co-exist, 
their relative proportions may or may not change much, 
depending on the balance between increased photosynthesis in 
C 4  species at higher temperatures and increased photosynthesis 
in C 3 species arising from  elevated CO 2  concentration 
(Campbell and Hay, 1993).
Cloudiness has a major influence on the amount of solar radi­
ation reaching the Earth’s surface. Any changes in cloudiness 
associated with changing weather patterns would directly 
affect the characteristics of photosynthetically active radiation 
and the amounts of solar UVB radiation, which is often detri­
mental to biota and to the productivity of crop plants and trees 
(Hunt et a i, 1996). Many parts of Australasia experience rela­
tively high levels of solar radiation and solar UVB radiation. At 
present, climate models cannot provide reliable predictions of 
how cloudiness might change in the future.
4.3.1.3. 
Terrestrial Ecosystems
Predictions based on scenarios of climate change suggest 
increased variability and unpredictability in productivity and 
community composition. Any changes that might occur in the 
location and seasonal patterns of rainfall and in ENSO charac­
teristics would result in significant impacts and vulnerability 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 2.7.2 and Boxes 2.2 and 2.8). 
Although migration to more suitable climatic regimes is an
Australasia
117
option for some biota (Mitchell and Williams, 1996), ecosys­
tems are not expected to shift en masse. Differential rates of 
migration and survival of different species will inevitably 
change the abundance and distribution of species, community 
structure, and possibly ecosystem function at any given loca­
tion. Altered species interactions— for example, predation, par­
asitism, and competition— also are likely and may eliminate 
formerly successful species even if the climate remains within 
their physiological tolerances (Peters, 1992). Ecosystems 
whose “keystone” species are particularly sensitive to climate 
will be more at risk. (A keystone species is one that has a cen­
tral servicing role affecting many other organisms and whose 
demise is likely to result in the loss of a number of species and 
lead to major changes in ecosystem function.) Some species 
will be slow to migrate because of factors such as slow repro­
duction rate or limited seed dispersal mechanisms (IPCC 1996, 
WC II, Section 1.3.5); species with better capacity for disper­
sal and establishment, including weeds, will have an advan­
tage. Disruption in forest composition is most likely to occur 
where fragmentation of the forest reduces the potential for dis­
persal of new, more suitable species (Whitehead et a i, 1992). 
Although many species will be able to adapt, climate change is 
expected to reduce biodiversity in individual ecosystems over­
all (IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 1.3.6).
Rising temperatures can be accommodated by moves toward 
higher elevations (if the terrain allows) because air temperature 
decreases by about 1°C for every 100-200 m increase in ele­
vation (IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 5.2.3.3), or toward higher 
latitudes because temperatures generally decline as one moves 
poleward, especially in mid-latitudes. However, elevational 
migration is not an option for most of Australia’s predominant­
ly flat expanses, and latitudinal migration is a limited option in 
parts of tropical Australia where the latitudinal variation of 
temperature is small and poleward migration is limited by 
desert or land-use change; here the biota will increasingly 
experience temperatures never previously encountered. In con­
trast to North America and Eurasia, the oceanic boundary of 
southern Australia will restrict the poleward migration of ter­
restrial biota. Small offshore islands and mountain tops provide 
limited migration options, and escarpments, deserts, agricul­
tural land, and urban areas present physical barriers to migra­
tion. Conversely, changes in climate thresholds, such as frost, 
may remove an existing limitation to species survival and per­
formance. The survival of vulnerable species in réfugia, partic­
ularly during drought, and then expansion into adjacent areas 
(e.g., Morton et al., 1995) suggest that migration will be even 
more limited if there are increases in the frequency or intensi­
ty of climatic extremes such as drought.
More than half of the region comprises the arid and semi-arid 
ecosystems of grasslands, shrublands, and savanna. These 
areas exhibit a high degree of spatial variation, from small- 
scale variation in water and soils to larger-scale variation in cli­
mate patterns. In such rangeland ecosystems, the amount and 
timing of rainfall and nutrient limitations are the major deter­
minants of plant community composition, distribution, and 
productivity (Mott et a l, 1985; IPCC 1996, W C II, Section
2.1). Possible increases in rainfall intensity with climate 
change would increase the proportion of rain that runs off par­
ticular landscape elements and runs onto others, resulting in 
changes in the temporal and spatial functioning of rangelands 
(Stafford Smith et al., 1994). In general, rangelands are not in 
equilibrium but fluctuate between states according to rainfall, 
fire, grazing, and other factors (Westoby et a l, 1989; IPCC 
1996, W C II, Section 2.1). They have adapted to the naturally 
high variation of rainfall associated with their low mean rain­
fall and ENSO-related interannual variability. Should ecosys­
tem productivity and composition become more variable and 
unpredictable— as has been suggested by some climate change 
studies— then land management issues, such as the type of 
grazing activity, the use of fire for woody weed control, and 
pest animal management, w ill become more important 
(Stafford Smith et a l, 1994).
The responses of animals to climate change will be partly 
determined by the response of co-occurring plants and habitat. 
For example, migratory species may be affected by reduction 
of suitable habitats along their migration routes. Thermal 
stress, which is particularly evident in animals in a variety of 
Australian ecosystems (Nix, 1982), may affect the geographic 
range and the reproductive biology of species. Indeed, contrac­
tions in core climatic habitat were shown for more than 80% of 
threatened vertebrate species in Australia under three climate 
change scenarios based on CSIRO (1992) (Dexter et a i, 1995). 
Although some animal species may be physically capable of 
moving great distances, behavioral traits may restrict dispersal 
options (Peters, 1992). As with plants, animals that are less 
adaptable, less mobile, or physically restricted (such as fish in 
lakes) may decline or become extinct.
Forest and woodland are reported to cover 19% of Australia 
and 28% of New Zealand (WRI, 1996). Indigenous forests 
occupy nearly a quarter of New Zealand, mainly under conser­
vation control and often in mountain lands. The slowly matur­
ing trees of indigenous forests will be more vulnerable than 
other plants to long-term external change.
Alpine ecosystems in Australia, which occupy only a small 
area, have been identified as being particularly susceptible to 
climate change (Busby, 1988; Nias, 1992; Brereton et al.,
1995). Upslope areas required to cope with the predicted rise 
in temperatures may not be available for many of these ecosys­
tems. In small alpine streams, any increase in water tempera­
tures and reduction in water flow could be stressful for alpine 
stream animals. Model studies for Australian mountain vegeta­
tion show that there is potential for the expansion of woody 
vegetation and shrub communities, as well as rises in treelines 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.2.3.4).
Pests, weeds, and diseases play significant roles in Australian 
and New Zealand ecosystems (and agriculture). The geograph­
ical distribution and severity of their impacts on host plants and 
ecosystems could be dramatically changed by the combination 
of changes in climate, atmospheric composition, and habitat 
(Sutherst et a l, 1996). For example, any changes in the timing
118
Australasia
and intensity of plant moisture stress will bring changes in the 
relative advantage of different types of herbivorous insects.
Fire plays an important role in the composition, function, and 
dynamics of many Australian ecosystems (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 1.5.1). For example, the importance of the length of 
inter-fire 
interval 
has 
been 
repeatedly 
dem onstrated 
(Christensen and Kimber, 1975; Burgman and Lamont, 1992; 
Gill and Bradstock, 1995; Morrison et a l, 1995; Keith, 1996). 
It has been strongly suggested that the risk of fire may increase 
as the climate changes (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.3.1) 
because of factors such as higher temperatures and water 
stress— though there remains much speculation about future 
fire regimes owing to the uncertainty associated with the many 
climatic and ecosystem variables involved (Williams and Gill,
1995). If fires become more frequent under climate change 
(Beer and Williams, 1995; Pittock et a l, 1997), species com­
position and structure could be altered, at least in southern 
Australia. Changes in other components of the fire regime, 
such as intensity (which could be affected by changes in fuel 
loading) and season, likewise could affect species diversity. 
Any increased fire occurrence also could present increased 
risks to people and infrastructure in forested urban fringe areas 
of southeastern Australia.
4.3.1.4. 
Aquatic and Marine Ecosystems
Aquatic ecosystems are exposed to the primary effects of local 
changes in temperature, sunshine, wind, and so forth and to a 
wide range of secondary effects, particularly from changes in 
hydrology and waterborne materials. Increased water tempera­
tures, increased evaporation, and changes in inflows and flood­
ing would change the thermal and chemical structures of rivers 
and lakes. These changes would directly affect the nutrient sta­
tus of aquatic ecosystems; the survival, reproduction, and 
growth of organisms; the distribution and diversity of species; 
and overall ecosystem productivity (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Sections 10.5, 10.6). Changes in rainfall produce dispropor­
tionate changes in runoff and in mean flows and levels of rivers 
and some lakes; these effects might be exacerbated if the cli­
mate were to become more variable, with more frequent flood 
and drought events. Sea-level rise is likely to have significant 
effects on lowland aquatic ecosystems near the coasts. (Coral 
reefs are discussed in Section 4.3.1.5.)
An increased frequency of more intense rainfalls would 
increase the intensity of runoff events and thus might con­
tribute greater Inputs of nutrients, organic material, agricultur­
al waste, and sediment (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.5). This 
could lead to reduced water quality, stress on some species, and 
potentially increased biological productivity forming nuisance 
growths. Waterways in the many intensively farmed areas of 
the region may be particularly vulnerable to increased pollu­
tion by fertilizers, animal waste, and agrochemicals, with 
greater potential for algal blooms and aquatic plant prolifera­
tion. Algal blooms and eutrophication already are a major 
problem in many of Australasia’s inland waters (SOEC, 1996).
Excessive plant growth in lowland streams can reduce drainage 
capacity and increase risks of flooding.
Sediment transport following heavy rainfall can smother exten­
sive areas of estuarine habitat, resulting in loss of breeding 
habitat essential to many coastal fish species and affecting food 
supply for seabirds. Such an extreme event occurred in New 
Zealand’s Whangapoua estuary in 1995. Any increase in 
extreme rainfall events and sedimentation would be likely to 
have major impacts on river, lake, estuarine, and coastal 
waters— particularly the Great Barrier Reef lagoon (Larcombe 
et a l, 1996)— and lead to reduced aesthetic values and reduced 
recreational and tourist use.
In the lowland coastal rivers and floodplains of northern 
Australia, the possibly lower rainfall projected by the revised 
climate change scenarios (CSIRO, 1996a) would most likely 
lead to greatly decreased biodiversity because it has been 
found that poor wet seasons reduce the extent and duration of 
inundation— which in turn has dramatic impoverishing effects 
on the abundance and diversity of the biota. Drier conditions 
would likely lead to a decrease in the problem of insect-borne 
diseases, however. These floodplains may be particularly prone 
to the impacts of sea-level rise (Steering Committee of the 
Climate Change Study, 1995; Waterman, 1995), whereby 
storm surges, cyclonic floods, and seawater intrusions could 
devastate the freshwater biota. The possible effect of climate 
change on the present invasion of floodplains by aquatic and 
semi-aquatic weeds (Lonsdale, 1994; Miller and Wilson,
1995), or on future invasions, is unclear.
The fauna of small lowland tropical streams in northeastern 
Australia appear to be susceptible to depletion by floods and to 
have a relatively low rate of recovery (Rosser and Pearson,
1995), which suggests that an increase in the frequency and 
magnitude of extreme events may lower the diversity of low­
land rainforest streams. In contrast, upland rainforest streams 
have a high diversity (Pearson et a l, 1986) and appear to be 
relatively resilient (Benson and Pearson, 1987; Rosser and 
Pearson, 1995). A study in southeast Australia found that 
droughts deplete introduced trout but not the native galaxiids, 
resulting in an expansion of galaxiid populations downstream 
with the death of trout (Closs and Lake, 1996); thus, with 
increased drought the range of native fish in such small streams 
might increase.
The many ephemeral river and lake ecosystems in inland 
Australia (temporary rivers and lakes that only flow and fill 
occasionally) (Boulton and Lake, 1988; Lake, 1995) are 
attuned to high climate variability, but their resilience to long­
term change in the frequency and intensity of events is less cer­
tain. Information on their biota is scanty. A survey of the small 
and intermittently flowing streams of the George Gill Range in 
central Australia found an unexpected diversity in species 
(Davis et a l, 1993). Although increased temperature and 
droughts may threaten the viability of fish populations in this 
region, such changes may not greatly alter the invertebrate 
biota— which appear to be well adapted to variability in water
Australasia
119
availability. Breeding cycles of water birds may be affected 
(Hassall and Associates, 1997; see also Box 4-1).
The natural effects of drought may be exacerbated by climate 
change in catchments like the Murray-Darling basin in south­
eastern Australia, with its present high human demands on 
water. Billabongs (cutoff meanders), which are water bodies of 
high diversity (Boon e ta l, 1990; Hillman and Shiel, 1991), and 
off-channel wetlands may dry up for extensive periods and 
become depleted in terms of diversity. There is evidence that 
where species are eliminated by drought, recolonization may be 
slow (e.g., Boulton and Lake, 1992). The already increasing 
salinity of the Murray-Darling system (Macumber, 1990) could 
alter under a changed climate. Although much of the biota of its 
floodplain sections appears to have considerable salinity toler­
ance (Walker, 1992), above a salinity of 1 g/1 many species of 
freshwater biota, especially invertebrates, are adversely affect­
ed (Hart et a l, 1991). In lowland streams of northern Victoria, 
saline pools that develop under normal low-flow conditions 
(McGuckin et al., 1991) are increasing in number and are 
marked by a very low faunal diversity (Metzeling et al., 1995).
In relation to its size, southwestern Australia has highly endem­
ic fish and invertebrate fauna but low species richness (Bunn 
and Davies, 1990). The low diversity may be due to the isola­
tion of the area, its history of aridity, and a very low level of 
primary productivity. If changes in climate were to eliminate 
species in this area, it is unlikely that they would be replaced 
by species colonizing from elsewhere.
Although a great deal is known about New Zealand’s aquatic 
ecosystems, little research has been done on the potential 
impacts of climate change. A  number of issues and possible 
Impacts— such as the effects of rising sea level on estuaries and 
temperature effects on spawning— have been identified and 
discussed in preliminary reviews by Burns and Roper (1990), 
Glova (1990), Paul (1990), and McDowell (1992). McDowell 
concluded that scientific knowledge of the controls on New 
Zealand freshwater communities’ species composition and 
interactions and of ecosystem function is very limited, and is 
inadequate to make specific predictions even if very detailed 
climate scenarios were available.
It is known, however, that New Zealand’s lake ecosystems are 
very similar in composition and function despite the latitudinal 
range of 5°C in mean temperature, which suggests an insensi­
tivity of these ecosystems to projected temperature rises. 
Furthermore, New Zealand’s river ecosystems contain relative­
ly simple generalist species with little diversity— presumably a 
response to the high degree of short-term hydrological vari­
ability of the country’s short, steep rivers (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.6.3.4). Thus, these river ecosystems have an exist­
ing resilience to hydrological variability, which may offer 
some degree of insensitivity to predicted increases in rainfall 
variability.
Specific effects on aquatic ecosystems cannot be predicted 
with confidence. A general rule appears to be that the drier the
climate, the greater the sensitivity to climate change (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Chapter 10)— ^which implies that sensitivities and 
impacts are likely to be more significant in Australia than in 
New Zealand. Any increase in climatic variability, especially in 
extremes of flooding and drought, would have greater ecolog­
ical effects than a change in mean conditions (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Sections 10.5,10.6).
The region’s marine environment extends from tropical to sub- 
antarctic waters and includes extensive areas of open ocean. 
Any changes in the structure and strength of the region’s wind 
fields and ocean currents would alter nutrient upwelling, food 
networks, reproductive patterns, and species distribution 
(IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 16.2.2). In addition, the 
Australasian region can expect to be affected by major ocean­
ic changes occurring in other regions because the waters of the 
globe’s oceans circulate throughout all the major ocean basins. 
Changes in wind speed and direction over upwind land sur­
faces would alter wind-borne terrestrial nutrient input, includ­
ing micronutrients such as iron. Paleo-oceanographic research 
on sediments east of New Zealand has shown a close relation­
ship between ocean phytoplankton productivity— as represent­
ed by diatom content— and regional wind strength, as repre­
sented by terrestrial quartz content (Fenner et al., 1992).
As with freshwater systems, our knowledge of the role of cli­
mate in marine systems and our ability to predict climate 
change outcomes for the marine environment is very limited, 
though some of the responses of species and ecosystems to cli­
mate change described above for terrestrial systems are expect­
ed to apply to marine systems as well. Migration is an option 
for fish populations where coasts have a generally north-south 
alignment and suitable habitats exist. However, along the 
northern and southern extremities of Australia and New 
Zealand, or where a population is in equilibrium with a spe­
cialized habitat such as an estuary, rocky reef, island, or sub­
marine seamount, there may be more random losses and gains 
of faunal components. (Impacts on coastal systems are dis­
cussed further in Section 4.3.4.)
4.3.1.5. 
Coral Reefs
Australia’s coral reefs, including the Great Barrier Reef, are 
among the region’s most sensitive environments to sea-level 
rise and climate change— through potential inundation, flood­
ing, erosion, saline intrusion, bleaching and death of corals, 
and possible changes in tropical cyclone occurrence (some of 
these issues are covered in Section 4.3.4). Climate change 
impacts will be compounded by the rapid growth in environ­
mental stresses arising from existing population growth and 
increasing tourism (IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 9.4.3, 9.4.5). 
Coral bleaching and algal invasions are sometimes observed on 
the Great Barrier Reef, but the extent to which they are natur­
al or human-induced is unknown.
Coral bleaching is associated with several factors (including 
extreme temperatures and solar irradiance, subaerial exposure.
120
Australasia
sedimentation, freshwater dilution, contaminants, and dis­
eases) acting singly or in combination (Glynn, 1996). During 
bleaching, corals expel the symbiotic single-celled algae that 
live within their tissues, and then sometimes die (Brown, 
1997). This occurs when sea temperatures rise more than 2°C 
above normal, which is often associated with ENSO episodes. 
The frequency of high-temperature episodes will increase as 
mean temperatures gradually rise, which would result in more 
frequent and widespread damage to corals— especially those 
remote from a reliable supply of larvae of reef species or 
stressed through exposure to local climatic and/or human 
impacts such as riverine runoff (Larcombe et a l, 1996), high 
solar irradiance (especially ultraviolet wavelengths) (Glynn,
1996), and pollution (Dubinsky and Stambler, 1996). The 
effects of temperature rise also will depend on latitude, coral 
height in relation to sea level, and the direction and size of the 
prevailing wave climate.
There is evidence, however, that the temperature changes by 
themselves may be slow enough for the coral reef biota to 
adapt, through changes in their symbiotic partnerships (Brown,
1997) or genetically over a number of generations, as better- 
adapted genotypes settle and survive. At the scale of whole 
coral reefs and their communities, migration to higher latitudes 
may be a possibility. However, there is a host of historical, 
hydrodynamic, and ecological factors that determine current 
distributions of coral reef biota (Veron, 1995), and it could be 
centuries before substantial changes to species composition 
and increases in diversity are detected at Australia’s southern­
most coral reefs.
It has been predicted that, by itself, a rise in sea level might 
benefit many reefs because corals on reef tops would have a 
renewed and/or extended opportunity for vertical growth—  
unlike the last several thousand years, when they have been 
lim ited by sea level to exclusively horizontal growth 
(Wilkinson and Buddemeier, 1994; Wilkinson, 1996). Thus, 
the potential effect of sea-level rise over the next 50 years in 
tidally limited reef-top coral habitats is an increase in living 
coral cover and, in many cases, an increase in topographic 
relief. This scenario is quite likely to be played out in sheltered 
parts of many reefs, assuming that the majority of these reef- 
top corals are not killed by increased temperature or other 
causes (such as burial by sediments if high-intensity rainfall 
events were to increase). Although the vertical growth of most 
shallow corals will be able to keep pace with a rate of sea-level 
rise of up to 5 cm per decade, the mechanisms for reef island 
growth are not expected to keep pace with sea-level rise, and 
therefore many low islands may eventually become uninhabit­
able (Wilkinson, 1996; see also Section 4.3.4).
If reef tops do not keep pace with sea-level rise, there could be 
dramatic changes in the reef-top zonation of corals, other biota, 
and abiotic reef substrata because these are strongly controlled 
by the energy of the waves that pass over the reef (Done,
1983). The tendency would be for the plunging point for waves 
to gradually move toward the back of the reef, causing changes 
in the benthic zonation at the new location of the breaker zone
and for several meters to tens of meters either side. Moreover, 
any significant change in the frequency or magnitude of tropi­
cal storms (Suppiah et a l, 1996; Henderson-Sellers and Zhang, 
1997; Holland, 1997) would affect both the structure and 
growth of coral reefs (Lough, 1994; Wilkinson, 1996), since 
individual storms can cause considerable damage to reefs, 
from which it may take a decade or more to recover.
4.3.1.6. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
Adaptations to climate change may be categorized as either 
“autonom ous” adaptations— where biota and ecosystems 
respond and change of their own accord— or “planned” or 
“conscious” adaptations, undertaken by humans. The primary 
option for conscious adaptation measures in respect to near­
natural ecosystems is land-use management. This includes 
modification of land clearing, forestry practices, fire manage­
ment, rangeland animal stocking rates, pest animal manage­
ment, control of herbaceous and woody weeds, development of 
corridors for species migration, resting and rehabilitating 
degraded areas, and the consideration of climate change in 
management plans for urban, coastal, catchment, and other 
zones. Implementation of riparian (riverside) management 
practices and selective planting of upslope source areas would 
mitigate many of the adverse impacts of land development and 
hydrological changes on water quality and habitat values of 
streams, rivers, and ultimately lake and estuarine habitats. 
Active manipulation of species generally will not be feasible in 
the region’s extensive, lightly managed, natural ecosystems, 
though in some circumstances— such as for endangered or 
commercially important species— relocation to new and more 
suitable habitats may be desirable and feasible.
Continued research on natural ecosystems also is a necessary, 
integral part of adaptation responses. In many instances, our 
knowledge is insufficient to provide the guidance sought by 
managers and policymakers. Routine climatic, environmental, 
and ecological monitoring and prediction also are necessary.
In summary, it must be concluded that some of the region’s 
species and ecosystems are rather vulnerable to climate change 
because of the likely continued increase of greenhouse gases; 
the likely rate of climate change; the fundamental nature of 
likely changes to biota and ecosystems; the large proportion of 
Australasia affected; the ecological isolation and fragmentation 
of ecosystems of the region; existing environmental stresses; 
and the limited available options for conscious adaptation.
4.3.2. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
Summary: The four hydrological situations o f most concern to 
the region are drought-prone areas, flood-prone urban areas, 
low-lying islands, and alpine snowfields. M odel simulations 
suggest changes o f as much as ±20% in soil moisture and 
runoff in Australia by 2030, with considerable variation from 
place to place and season to season and with the possibility o f
Australasia
121
Box 4-1. Macquarie River Basin Study: An Integrated Assessment of Impacts
A collaborative study by a consulting company, two New South Wales (NSW) government agencies, and the CSIRO has 
made a preliminary integrated assessment of the impacts of climate change on the management of the scarce water 
resources of the Macquarie River basin in northern NSW (Hassall and Associates, 1997). The catchment contains dry­
land agriculture (mainly wheat) and pastoralism, irrigated agriculture (mainly cotton), several small towns, and an 
episodically flooded wetlands area known as the “Macquarie Marshes,” which is a major breeding area for birds. Over 
the past decade, agricultural and pasture production of sheep, beef, wool, wheat, and cotton contributed 92% to the 
regional economy.
The study considered the impacts of “low change” and “high change” climate scenarios in the region by 2030, based on 
estimates from the CSIRO regional climate model nested in the CSIRO slab-ocean GCM (experiment F I, Table 1-1), 
and IPCC (1996a) ranges of uncertainty in global warming. Spatially and seasonally varying projected rainfall and tem­
perature changes in the catchment ranged from about 0 to -15%, and 0.4 to 1.2°C, respectively. These were used in a 
catchment model to quantify possible changes in moisture, runoff, and water supplies. Output was then used in the 
IQQM river management model developed by the NSW Department of Land and Water Conservation. Consequences 
for the pastoral, agricultural, and wider economy of the region were then considered, using simple models of yield and 
income on climate. Consideration of the need for “environmental flows” in the river and to ensure wetland breeding 
habitat led to limitations on water diversions for irrigation. Results of this study showed that mean annual runoff to the
Burrendong Dam (the main 
water-storage facility) was 
reduced by 1 1 % in the low- 
change scenario and by 30% in 
the high-change scenario, with 
correspondingly less water 
available for irrigation under 
present river management rules. 
Using optimistic assumptions 
regarding the beneficial effects 
of increased CO 2  concentra­
tions on crops and pastures, the 
study found aggregate losses to 
the agricultural economy in 
2030 of 6 % in the low-change 
case and 23% in the high case. 
Beneficial effects of increased 
CO 2 on cotton approximately 
balanced the effects of climate 
change, but this was less true 
for wheat. By far the biggest 
losses were for sheep, beef, and 
wool, which constitute 63% of 
total agricultural production in 
the region.
Schematic o f the integrated climate change impact assessment approach used in the 
Macquarie River Basin Study. T is temperature, Pr is precipitation, PE is potential 
evaporation, and IQQM  is the “Integrated Quantity and Quality M odel” used for 
modeling regulated river systems in New South Wales.
The NSW National Parks and 
Wildlife Service forecast that, if 
the rules were not changed, the 
loss of water supply would lead 
to reduced filling of the 
Macquarie Marshes and thus 
reduced or less frequent breeding 
of some bird species, with possi­
ble local or regional extinctions, 
depending on what changes 
occur in other breeding areas.
722
Australasia
an overall reduction in average runoff. Water shortages would 
sharpen competition among various uses o f water, especially 
where large diversions are made for economic purposes. One 
study shows Australia’s major Murray-Darling River system 
facing constraints on existing irrigation uses and/or harm to 
the riverine environment. More frequent high-rainfall events 
would enhance groundwater recharge and dam-filling events 
but also would increase the impacts o f flooding, landslides, 
and erosion. A preliminary study for an urban area near 
Sydney showed a tenfold increase in the potential damage o f 
the “100-year” flood under a doubled CO2 scenario. Water 
supplies on atolls and low-lying islands are vulnerable to salt­
water intrusion o f groundwater from rising sea levels and to 
possible rainfall reductions. Reduced snow amounts and a 
shorter snow season appear likely and would decrease the 
amenity value o f the mountains and the viability o f the ski 
industry. The glaciers o f New Zealand’s Southern Alps are like­
ly to shrink further.
Adaptation options include integrated catchment management, 
changes to water pricing systems, water efficiency initiatives, 
building or rebuilding engineering structures, relocation o f 
buildings, urban planning and management, and improved 
water supply measures in remote areas and low-lying islands. 
The financial exposure, and cost involved in potential adapta­
tions, indicate a high vulnerability with respect to hydrology.
4.3.2.1. 
Hydrological Systems
Hydrological systems are potentially very sensitive to changes 
in climate. The three key variables are soil moisture, which is 
a primary control on vegetation and ecosystems; groundwater 
recharge, which feeds groundwater reserves; and runoff, which 
feeds rivers and causes floods. Increased temperatures are 
expected to cause increased potential evaporation and less 
snow, and possible changes in mean rainfall, rainfall intensity, 
and rainfall seasonality would affect soil moisture, streamflow, 
and groundwater recharge and the occurrence of floods and 
droughts. More frequent high-intensity rainfall would tend to 
increase the occurrence of flooding. Specific effects will 
depend on the pattern of change, in rainfall particularly, and the 
characteristics of catchments and cannot be predicted with con­
fidence. In general, the drier the climate, the greater the sensi­
tivity to climate change (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 10). 
Although the effects of rainfall changes and sea-level rise on 
groundwater resources are not adequately understood at pre­
sent, they cannot be ignored (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
10.3.6) and may be significant for inland and coastal aquifers 
in Australia (Ghassemi et al., 1991).
Water resources in the region are strongly affected by the heavy 
rainfall of major weather events, such as tropical cyclones in 
northern Australia, and by the ENSO phenomenon, which is the 
main source of year-to-year variation and contributes both 
widespread heavy rainfall and widespread drought, depending 
on its phase. However, climate models are unable to represent 
these well as yet and therefore cannot represent the resulting
major sources of surface runoff and groundwater recharge 
events. This situation presents a basic difficulty in assessing cli­
mate change impacts on hydrological systems and water 
resources.
A number of preliminary assessments and research studies of 
hydrological response in the region are available (e.g., 
Griffiths, 1990; Mosley, 1990; Bates et al., 1994; Chiew et al., 
1995; Bates et a l, 1996; Fitzharris and Garr, 1996; Minnery 
and Smith, 1996; Schreider et a l, 1996). Most of the research 
work has been based on available regional scenarios of tem­
perature and rainfall changes (see Section 4.2.3) and has 
focused on changes in water yield from unregulated rural 
catchments. Recent studies have begun to consider impacts on 
groundwater recharge (Green et a l, 1997) and on water 
resources systems as a whole (Hassall and Associates, 1997; 
see Box 4-1).
A  wide range of significant changes in water yield and soil 
moisture was found by Chiew et al. (1995), who considered the 
potential impacts of CSIRO (1992) climate scenarios on 28 
catchments that represent the large range of climatic, physical, 
and hydrological regimes experienced in Australia. By 2030, 
increases in annual runoff of up to 25% and 10% occurred for 
catchments in the wet tropics of northeastern Australia and in 
Tasmania, respectively. Decreases of up to 35% occurred for 
South Australia, and changes of ±20% and ± 50% occurred for 
southeastern Australia and the west coast, respectively. Changes 
in annual soil moisture levels ranged from -25% to +15%. 
Although the specific figures have high uncertainty (arising 
from the large scenario uncertainty), their magnitudes provide 
an indication of the size of changes that may conceivably occur.
Sizable changes in median monthly runoff during the wettest 
parts of the year and increases in annual maximum monthly 
runoff were found by Bates et al. (1996), who used the results 
of a single climate model (CSIR09, experiment F I, Table 1-1) 
and a stochastic daily weather generator to represent climate 
and hydrological variability under current and doubled CO 2  
conditions. The increases were due to the general increase in 
rainfall intensity and the increased frequency of heavy rainfall 
events indicated by the CSIR09 model.
A similar shift toward greater variability was found by 
Schreider et al. (1996), who applied the “most wet” and “most 
dry” climate change scenarios for 2030 and 2070 (adapted 
from CSIRO, 1992) to historical daily rainfall and temperature 
series for 14 rivers in the Ovens and Goulburn Basins in south­
eastern Australia. Figure 4-2 shows that in scenarios in which 
rainfalls were projected to decrease (“most dry” scenario), the 
frequency of high-flow events substantially decreased, and the 
drought frequency (as indicated by a soil wetness index) 
increased. However, in scenarios in which rainfalls were pro­
jected to increase, there was little increase in average annual 
runoff, but the frequency of high flow events increased.
Changes in catchment vegetation— either from climate change 
directly or from adaptation responses (such as afforestation)—
Australasia
123
would alter catchment hydrological characteristics, including 
evaporation, runoff, and extreme events (IPCC 1996, W C II, 
Sections 14.2, 14.4). The effects of changes in rainfall amount 
and timing on groundwater recharge can be amplified by the 
dynamic response of vegetation, according to a study by Creen 
et al. (1997) that used a daily soil-vegetation-atmosphere 
model to determine changes in groundwater recharge beneath 
North Stradbroke Island in northeastern Australia. It was found 
that the net recharge increased consistently by amounts greater 
than the change in rainfall and that the recharge was more 
affected by vegetation type than by soil type.
The responses to climate change of the large, arid, ephemeral 
lake systems of interior Australia are difficult to predict. 
Significant water-level changes may occur for nonephemeral 
lakes in dry evaporative drainages or small basins where pre­
sent evaporation is comparable with rainfall inputs (IPCC 
1996, WC II, Section 10.3).
Rising sea levels will cause the tidal saltwater wedge to intrude 
further upstream in estuaries and rivers, with resulting changes 
in salinity affecting estuarine aquatic ecosystems (Chappell et 
a i, 1996; Waterman, 1996). Similarly, sea-level rise also may 
lead to greater saltwater intrusion into coastal groundwater, 
aquifers, and surface waters in some coastal systems 
(Chassemi et al., 1991).
Hydrological systems in the future also will be affected by 
other changes such as deforestation and urbanization, both of 
which tend to increase runoff amount and runoff speed—  
increasing the risks of flash flooding, high sediment load­
ings, and pollution. Changes to water pricing and allocation
RUNOFF
150
ê
100
0)OX)
с«
50
и
a
0
4)3r
-50
-100
-150
Most Wet Scenario
_L
_L
_L
I
10 
20 
30 
40
F lo w  
(cu m ecs)
50
SOIL WETNESS
150
1 0 0
S '
0)OX)
50
8
JS
U
0
>2
e
s
-50
O’
Ïb
- 1 0 0
-150
Most Dry Scenario
I 
■ 
I 
. 
I 
. 
I 
. 
I 
. 
I
0.0 
.1 
.2 
.3 
.4 
.5 
. 6
S oil W etn ess In dex (Sk)
Figure 4-2: Change in frequencies of runoff and soil wetness for different climate scenarios. White bars are for 2030, and 
black bars are for 2070. Under the “most dry” scenario (top row), where rainfall decreases and warmings are relatively large, 
the frequencies of high runoff and high soil wetness substantially decrease. However, under the “most wet” scenario (bottom 
row), where rainfall increases and warmings are less, there is some increase in the highest runoffs but also some decreases in 
the highest soil wetness frequencies. For further details, see Schreider et al. (1996).
124
Australasia
mechanisms also will affect patterns of water use and demand 
(Fenwick, 1995; McClintock, 1997), and indeed can be used as 
adaptation measures.
43.2.2. 
Water Hazards and Water Supply
If rainfall becomes more extreme, flooding, landslides, and 
erosion would become greater and/or more frequent (Fowler 
and Hennessy, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 4.2, 12.4). 
Locations most at risk include steep or unstable hill country, 
river valleys, and floodplains. Most of the region’s settlements 
are adjacent to rivers and harbors. Furthermore, in low-lying 
coastal areas, sea-level rise will compound the problem by 
reducing river flood discharge rates and thus exacerbate flood 
heights and durations.
Where urban areas are exposed to flood risk, either directly or 
through failure of upstream river management works, the 
potential human and infrastructural vulnerability is extreme 
and has significant financial implications. Major costs to dam 
owners and public agencies would arise from any upward revi­
sion of Probable Maximum Flood estimates. The costs to pri­
vate property and public buildings and infrastructure of floods 
under the existing climate are already high; for example, the 
damage caused by the 1974 floods in Brisbane was reported to 
be A$660 million (Mlnnery and Smith, 1996). A  study by these 
authors of the Hawkesbury-Nepean corridor, an urban area 
near Sydney, estimated that the potential damage from the 
“ 1 0 0 -year” flood rose more than tenfold for a doubled CO 2  
scenario in which the flood return periods decreased by a fac­
tor of four (Table 4-1).
exacerbated by trends toward population growth, higher valu­
ation of natural waters, and possibly shifts to more intensive 
farming systems. If, on the other hand, there were an increase 
in water availability due to climate change, it might well 
encourage demand for more irrigation, with obvious short-term 
benefits— although in the longer-term this could lead to 
increased salinization in semi-arid regions.
In central Australia, low rainfall and high evaporation forces 
the few towns— such as Alice Springs and Yulara— and other 
tourist centers, cattle stations (ranches), and Aboriginal and 
mining settlements to rely on fresh or desalinated brackish 
groundwater (Knott and McDonald, 1983; Jacobson et al., 
1989; Jacobson, 1996). Economic growth and population 
growth will put added pressure on these supplies, which are 
recharged in part by occasional heavy rainfall events. Rainfall 
changes would have complex impacts on this groundwater sup­
ply because any reduced recharge would lower water tables 
and water supplies, and vice versa. The effects on water quali­
ty are not clear.
The water resources of atolls and low-lying islands are usually 
restricted to rainwater or limited sub-surface supplies. These 
are sensitive to climatic variations and environmental impacts, 
and in many cases are already stressed by unsustainable 
demand and pollution. With climate change, the freshwater 
lenses beneath coral atolls are exposed to saltwater intrusion 
from rising sea levels and possibly increased storm events, as 
well as to possible rainfall reductions where these occur. The 
indigenous populations of the Torres Strait, the Cocos 
(Keeling) Islands, and Pacific islands associated with New 
Zealand are likely to be affected.
Climate change is expected to affect water demand, water sup­
ply, and water quality (IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 14.2,
14.3). For many parts of the region, rainfall and water supply 
are generally adequate. However, the drier inland areas of 
Australia are vulnerable to potential water shortages during the 
seasonal minimum and during droughts; any additional short­
ages in these regions arising from climate change would sharp­
en competition among various economic, social, and environ­
mental uses and hence increase the effective cost of water. 
Considerable demand arises from urbanization and the diver­
sion of large amounts of water for economic purposes such as 
mining and irrigated agriculture. This competition may be
Table 4-1: Potential direct damage (in millions o f Australian 
dollars) o f a 1-in-100-year flood in the Hawkesbury-Nepean 
corridor for current and doubled CO2 scenarios (Minnery 
and Smith, 1996).
C urrent
Doubled CO 2
Residential
19
190
Commercial
8
140
Total
27
330
The major Murray-Darling River system, in southeastern 
Australia, is heavily regulated by dams and weirs and supplies 
1 0  billion m ' of water annually for human use, mainly for irri­
gation. This amounts to about 40% of the mean annual flow. 
Application of various scenarios (e.g., CSIRO, 1992) has sug­
gested a possible combination of decreased mean rainfall, 
higher temperatures and evaporation, and a higher frequency 
of extreme events (i.e., more floods and droughts) (e.g., 
Schreider et al., 1996; see Figure 4-2); if so, the inflows to the 
system may be reduced, and if irrigation demands remain 
fixed or increase, the remaining river flows would substantial­
ly decrease (see, e.g., Hassall and Associates, 1997, and Box 
4-1).
The Asian-Pacific Integrated Model (AIM) team has simulated 
changes in drought and flood intensities for a wide region, 
including Australia and New Zealand; AIM (1997) shows 
results using the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
(GFDL) Q-flux climate model (experiment A2 or A3). Based 
on the estimated magnitude of 1 0 -year return period monthly 
discharge events, they show small and spatially-varying 
changes in flood discharge over Australia but apparently sig­
nificant reductions in minimum flows in the Murray-Darling 
Basin. However, the rainfall simulation of experiment A2 over 
Australia is questionable (Whetton et al., 1994).
Australasia
125
Because of the higher variability of Australian rainfall, the stor­
age capacities of Australian water supply dams are typically 
about six times larger than those of European dams for the 
same percentage of mean annual streamflow and probability of 
water shortfall. In sharp contrast, New Zealand’s higher and 
more reliable rainfalls enable its hydro-electricity system to 
operate on a total reservoir capacity equal to only about six 
weeks of national demand— albeit with the attendant risk of a 
rapid decline in supply in times of drought, as was experienced 
during 1992 (Fitzharris, 1992).
4.3.2.3. 
Snowfields and Hydroelectricity
Increased temperatures will lead to a reduced fraction of pre­
cipitation falling as snow, higher snowlines, earlier spring 
snowmelt, and a shorter snow season in Australia (Whetton et 
al., 1996c) and New Zealand (Garr and Fitzharris, 1994; 
Fitzharris and Garr, 1996). Figure 4-3 shows the results of a 
simulation of the progressive shortening of the snow season at 
Mt. Bogong— one of Australia’s higher-altitude snow areas—  
over the first half of the next century, based on the CSIRO 
(1992) scenarios. Greater ablation of New Zealand’s Southern 
Alps’ glaciers can be expected, and the volumes of glaciers and 
total snowpack may decrease, depending on precipitation 
changes (note that the new scenarios for New Zealand referred 
to in Section 4.2.3 may result in increased precipitation in the 
Southern Alps). However, it has been estimated that even with 
a 10% increase in precipitation, a 2°C temperature rise would 
cause a 20% reduction in the Southern Alps’ snow amount 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.1). Reductions in relative 
snow amounts would change the seasonality of runoff by 
increasing winter runoff and decreasing spring runoff (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 10.3.5). This would reduce spring flood 
risks and provide more seasonally smooth hydroelectricity
Year
Figure 4-3: Simulation of the future decrease in the length of 
the snow season at Mt. Bogong in southeastern Australia, for 
best-case (solid) and worst-case (dashed) climate change sce­
narios. An indication of year-to-year variability is provided by 
superimposing the year-to-year climate anomalies for 1966-85. 
Further details can be found in Whetton et al. (1996c).
generation (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.2). Any changes in 
atmospheric circulation patterns also would cause changed sea­
sonality of rainfall and river flows, but there is less certainty 
about the nature of these changes.
Under the scenario of more frequent extreme rainfalls, hydro­
electricity systems would need to be managed more conserva­
tively, to avoid the risk of overtopping of dams in floods and 
running out of water during droughts. Increased sediment 
transport would accelerate the reduction of the storage capaci­
ties of hydro lakes. Increases in the temperatures of rivers 
would reduce the rivers’ capacity to cool thermal generating 
plants, with increased difficulty in meeting regulatory con­
straints on downstream river temperature (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 14.3.3).
Decreased snow amounts would most likely reduce the ameni­
ty value of mountain landscapes for the local population and 
tourists and reduce the viability of the region’s ski industry, 
whose options for relocation are very limited— by low altitude 
in Australia and by rugged terrain and conservation estate reg­
ulations in New Zealand (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.5; 
Whetton et al., 1996c).
4.3.2.4. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
The hydrological situations expected to be of most concern in 
the region are the water-limited drought-prone areas, the expo­
sure of the built environment to possible increases in flooding, 
the supply of potable water to remote indigenous populations 
in inland Australia and on low-lying islands, and the progres­
sive loss of snowfields.
Integrated catchment management provides an adaptation 
framework for the long-term management of catchment water 
and surface properties and the short-term tradeoffs between 
competing demands for water. Already, major systems such as 
Australia’s Murray-Darling River system are subject to inten­
sive management, but generally this does not include consider­
ation of possible decadal-scale changes or even of the pre­
dictable El Nino-related seasonal-to-annual variations. Water 
pricing and water efficiency initiatives may be used as an 
effective adaptation strategy (Fenwick, 1995; McClintock,
1997). The risk of landslides and soil erosion can be reduced 
through informed land management, particularly by avoiding 
vegetation clearance in vulnerable areas and by rehabilitating 
exposed areas that have been cleared.
Urban planning and management will be needed to deal with 
increased flooding risk— for example through provision of 
retention basins and zoning. Any slow change in mean rainfall 
or rainfall intensity, if well-enough known in advance, could be 
accommodated within the lead time of about 1 0  years needed 
for planning and constructing major facilities. Dams and flood- 
protection works can be redesigned and rebuilt and vulnerable 
buildings relocated, albeit at considerable cost. However, any 
slow increase in interannual rainfall variability may result in
126
Australasia
early stresses for supply systems designed to cope with exist­
ing rainfall variability; at such times, the adaptation options 
would be very limited, as was shown during the public water 
supply crisis in Auckland in 1994. Measures needed to 
improve the water supply situation of indigenous peoples in 
Inland Australia and on Australia’s low-lying coastal islands 
are discussed in Moss (1994).
Adaptations to change in snowfields and glaciers are very lim­
ited. Artificial snowmaking is a potential strategy for skifield 
operators, but only to a limited extent because of the strong 
impact of temperature increases on snow amount, the environ­
mental impacts of the large water storage dams required, and 
the costs involved.
Although many management and engineering adaptation 
options exist, the magnitude of the financial exposure and the 
considerable time and expense involved in adaptations indicate 
a high vulnerability with respect to hydrology.
4.3.3. 
Food and Fiber Production
Summary: Significant impacts on agriculture are likely, 
including crop and pasture performance increases from CO2 
rises; mixed effects o f temperature rises; changes in soil fer­
tility; changes in quality o f grain and pasture nutrition; shifts 
in the suitability o f districts fo r particular crops, such as 
kiwifruit; and possibly increased problems with weeds, pests, 
and diseases.
Impacts will vary widely from district to district, crop to crop, 
and decade to decade. Grain crops may gain in the first few  
decades because o f the immediate beneficial effect o f higher 
CO2, but that advantage may be eroded as the delayed rise in 
temperature becomes greater and reduces the grain-filling 
period. In Australia’s warm low latitudes, some crops are near 
their maximum temperature tolerance and are likely to suffer 
increasingly as the temperature increases. The possibility o f 
overall decreased rainfall in Australia would negatively affect 
rangeland pastoralism and irrigated agriculture (which is a 
major source o f production). Any changes in global produc­
tion, and hence international food commodity prices, would 
have major economic impacts.
Farming in the region is well adapted to dealing with variabil­
ity and change through a variety o f natural and market fac- 
tors—for example, by means o f plant breeding, diversification, 
seasonal climate prediction, and so forth. Such techniques are 
likely to be sufficient to adapt to climate change over the next 
few  decades; in some cases these techniques may facilitate 
expanded production. A s the time horizon extends, however, 
the changing climate is likely to become less favorable to agri­
cultural production in Australia, leading to a long-term 
increase in vulnerability.
Production forestry will be affected by changes in tree produc­
tivity; forest operational conditions; and pests, weeds, disease.
and wildfire incidence. The net impact is not clear. The longer 
time to reach maturity results in a relatively large exposure to 
financial loss from extreme events, fire, or any rapid change in 
climate conditions.
A  number o f climate sensitivities have been identified for fish­
eries, but the impacts cannot be predicted with any confidence. 
It appears that freshwater and near-shore fisheries will be 
more affected than open-ocean fisheries. The principal adap­
tation option is scientifically based integrated fisheries man­
agement and coastal zone management.
4.3.3.1. 
Agriculture and Horticulture
The possible interactions among atmospheric CO 2 , climate, 
soil, plants, animals, and humans in the agricultural system are 
very complex, which makes it difficult to draw firm conclu­
sions about agricultural responses to projected climate changes 
(Warrick et a l, 1996). However, research has indicated that 
increased CO 2  fertilization, higher temperatures, and changed 
rainfall characteristics are likely to lead to changes in produc­
tivity and crop yield; changes in grain quality and animal pas­
ture feed quality; changes in the incidence of diseases, pests, 
and weeds; and changes in the suitability of districts for partic­
ular crop types and farming systems (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 13). Furthermore, it can be expected that climate 
change impacts on other countries’ agriculture will lead to 
changes in global food markets and that these external changes 
may have as great an effect on the region’s agricultural indus­
tries as internal changes.
The yield responses reported for studies of Australasian crops 
and pasture (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.4 and Table 13-7) 
cover a wide range of values, depending on the situation stud­
ied and the research assumptions. Considering atmospheric 
CO 2  concentration and temperature rises (but not necessarily 
rainfall changes) and ignoring adaptive measures, it appears 
that pasture productivity may generally increase (e.g., Greer et 
a i, 1995), but annual crop yield may increase only slightly or 
remain about constant (e.g., Wang et al., 1992; Rawson, 1995; 
Wang and Connor, 1996), or even reduce slightly (Muchow and 
Sinclair, 1991). As long as slower-maturing grain cultivars are 
available, crop yields may benefit, with the beneficial effects of 
higher CO 2  concentrations outweighing the reductions in yield 
expected from shorter grain-filling periods associated with 
warmings (Wang et a l, 1992; Wang and Connor, 1996). 
However, if sufficiently longer-maturing cultivars cease to 
become available due to greater warmings, yields may 
decrease. This would happen first at low latitudes, and the effect 
would increase as further warming occurs later in the next cen­
tury (Pittock, 1995,1996).
An empirically based study by Nicholls (1997) has attributed 
30-50%  of the observed increase in Australian wheat yield 
since 1952 (which was about 45%) to observed climatic trends, 
with increases in minimum temperature the dominant influ­
ence. The method excludes the direct physiological effects of
Australasia
127
increasing COj concentration on yield but could be confound­
ed if farmers used more fertilizer in climatically favorable 
years.
The interaction of climate change and increasing CO 2  concen­
trations on pasture quality and subsequent animal productivity 
remains uncertain (Owensby, 1993). Pasture plants grown 
under elevated CO 2  concentration always seem to have lower 
protein (Arp and Berendse, 1993) and higher nonstructural car­
bohydrate contents (Lutze, 1996), which implies an impact on 
the nutritional quality of the forage. In high-rainfall temperate 
regions, particularly early in the growing season, most forage 
is eaten as green sward (or products preserved from green 
material), in which case the increased soluble carbohydrate 
content would increase the digestibility and nutritional value of 
the forage (Smith et al., 1997). Reductions in feed quality may 
occur through reductions in digestibility and increase in lignin 
content of tropical grasses grown at higher temperatures 
(Wilson, 1982) and increased stem-to-leaf ratios of plants 
grown under high CO 2  levels (e.g., Morison and Gifford,
1984). Thus, rangeland forage quality is likely to decrease at 
some times of year— suggesting an increased need for feed 
supplements or legume pastures. However, higher plant water- 
use efficiency under elevated CO 2  levels may result in more 
“green days” each year, partly offsetting the above effects 
(McCown, 1980).
In Australia’s rangelands, scenarios of climate change suggest 
alterations in the temporal and spatial components that are like­
ly to increase variability and unpredictability in plant produc­
tivity and community composition. Increased competition 
from woody weed species in mixed pasture may have a signif­
icant negative effect on grass growth (Scanlan, 1992) and 
hence livestock production (Stafford Smith et al., 1994). It is 
anticipated that in temperate areas of Australia and New 
Zealand, encroachment of subtropical grasses into pastures 
may be exacerbated not only by the warming conditions but 
also by the strong response of C 4  growth during recurring peri­
ods of water stress (Campbell et al., 1996). This would affect 
the types of possible grazing activity and would require greater 
consideration of land management issues, such as the use of 
fire for woody weed control and pest animal management 
(Stafford Smith et al., 1994).
Aborigines have a large and increasing role in land manage­
ment in the pastoral zone (Young et a l, 1991; Ross et a i,
1994). Aboriginal land supports a wide range of uses, includ­
ing pastoralism, hunting and gathering, horticulture, conserva­
tion, cultural tourism, and mining. Climate change may affect 
native bush food supplies and sacred biota, as well as water 
resources for remote Aboriginal communities.
Temperature increases will very likely lead to an increase in 
pasture production in mid-latitudes, with corresponding 
increases in livestock production. However, if most of the 
increase in pasture growth comes in summer, winter feed may 
remain the limiting factor unless there is increased feed con­
servation or changes in livestock production systems.
Increased pasture production may not occur if there is an 
increase in the frequency of extreme events, such as summer 
droughts or late-winter snowstorms in lowland sheep areas of 
New Zealand. Any increases in production also would depend 
on farmers’ attitudes toward risk and on the signals reflected 
back to producers from the effect of economic and climate 
changes on customers and competitors (Martin et a i, 1991).
Livestock— ^which in this region are largely unhoused— are 
expected to benefit from warmer winters, possibly extended 
growing seasons, and possible minor improvements in feed 
quality in temperate high-rainfall zones. In some circum­
stances, however, they may be negatively affected by lower 
nutritional quality of feed (Owensby, 1993) and greater sum­
mer heat stress (Russell, 1991; McKeon et al., 1993). There 
may be increases in diseases of tropical origin but decreases in 
cold-weather diseases (Sutherst et al., 1996). In the New 
Zealand high country, it is not uncommon for huge losses of 
livestock to result from cold, wet weather and heavy snowfalls 
during winter and early spring. Warmer winters may lead to 
reductions in the numbers of animals lost.
Grain quality may decline as a result of increases in the frequen­
cy of high-temperature extremes during grainfill (Blumenthal et 
al., 1991a,b), and increased atmospheric CO 2  may reduce grain 
protein contents under some circumstances (e.g., Gifford et al.,
1996). Any reduced protein content of grains would be detri­
mental for some grain products (like bread wheat), reducing 
their value, but advantageous for others (like brewing barley).
There is also the possibility of an increase in the incidence of 
pests and diseases and in some areas an increase in competition 
from weed growth (Farrow et al., 1993; Sutherst et a i, 1996). 
However, Sutherst et al. (1996) noted the general lack of quan­
titative research on the effects of climate on weed species 
dynamics and the current inability to predict such interactions.
Temperature rises are expected to result in a general poleward 
shift in preferred crops and production systems, though there 
will be many subregional variations depending on the total cli­
matic and soil requirements of a crop.
Higher temperatures will reduce the viability of existing tem­
perate horticultural areas, especially with respect to winter 
chilling requirements for apples, stone fruit (Hennessy and 
Clayton-Greene, 1995), kiwifruit, and some vegetables and 
cereals such as winter wheat and barley. There are likely to be 
positive effects for tropical fruits and warm-climate crops such 
as maize and sweet corn. For these crops, the longer growing 
seasons, increased availability of “growing degree days,” and 
reduced risk of early- or late-season frost damage will allow 
the use of later maturing cultivars with higher yield potential. 
Warmer conditions will accelerate crop development, allowing 
crops to avoid early- and late-season climatic risks and perhaps 
providing better timing of harvesting to meet market needs 
(e.g., Gifford et a l, 1996b). However, unless cultivars are 
changed, the shorter growth duration will allow less opportu­
nity for yield accumulation and hence lower yield.
128
Australasia
Recent work using a simple model developed by Salinger and 
Kenny (1995) shows that a critical change in kiwifruit produc­
tion in New Zealand may occur around the year 2050 (Warrick 
et a i, 1996), although there are large uncertainties and caveats. 
Increased winter temperatures would reduce winter chilling, 
requiring the greater use of chemicals to manage the breaking 
of dormancy, but overseas market resistance may require 
reduction in the use of such chemicals in the future. Ongoing 
work using the CLIMPACTS model (see Section 4.4) also indi­
cates that warmer conditions will lead to later maturity of 
kiwifruit. Changes in maturity dates, especially for temperate, 
perennial fruit crops, may make it more difficult to match the 
timing of harvesting to market needs.
Biological risks are a major concern for the region’s agricultur­
al industries. As long-isolated island countries, Australia and 
New Zealand are extremely vulnerable to invasion by foreign 
weeds, insects, and pathogens for which there are no natural 
local biological controls (Sutherst et a l, 1996). These invaders 
can directly affect the productivity and quality of pastoral lands, 
horticultural crops, and forest products and cause the closure of 
foreign markets to exports. Vulnerability to biological risks may 
alter under a changed climate, both from the direct effects on 
biota and ecosystems and indirectly from any adaptations that 
involve changes to crop types and farming systems.
Any changes in rainfall or rainfall reliability— for example, 
from changes in ENSO characteristics or other regional synop­
tic circulations— causing increased drought in drought-prone 
areas of either country could seriously affect pastoral and dairy 
production (e.g., McKeon et a i, 1993). Irrigated agriculture 
produces a significant part of Australia’s agricultural income, 
and rainfall decreases would have a major impact on the 
demand for and the relative availability of irrigation water 
(Pittock, 1995; Schreider et a l, 1996; Hassall and Associates,
1997). Conversely, wetter conditions may result in the expan­
sion of cropping and pastoralism (McKeon et al., 1988). Some 
crops that require dry conditions at certain stages, like grapes, 
could be harmed by any increased frequency of unseasonal 
rainfall (Boag et a l, 1988).
There may be increased risk of soil erosion in agricultural areas 
from the expected increase in the frequency of intense rainfalls 
(Yu and Neil, 1995). This will require improved soil surface 
management to reduce runoff rates (McKeon et al., 1988).
4.3.3.2. 
Production Forestry
The production of wood and paper products is a major indus­
try in the region. In New Zealand, the industry is primarily 
based on plantations of fast-growing exotic species, whereas in 
Australia there is still a considerable forest industry based on 
native eucalypt forests in addition to expanding plantation 
forests. A  rising world population, combined with increased 
living standards, may (at current prices) demand more wood 
than can be supplied from global resources by the year 2050. 
Temperate forest products are expected to play an important
role in meeting demand (IPCC 1996, W G II, Sections 15.2.3,
15.4.3). There also is an increasing trend to see plantation 
forests as a means of sequestering carbon in the region 
(Maclaren, 1996).
CO 2  fertilization is likely to increase growth, especially when 
trees are water limited. However, growth enhancements due to 
increased temperature may occur only in trees not subject to 
water limitations (Landsberg, 1996). As already noted, howev­
er, the CO 2  impact on tree growth decreases with time for many 
species (Gunderson and Wullschleger, 1994). Any overall 
reductions in rainfall or changes in seasonality that result in 
water limitations or prolongation of droughts would negatively 
affect production and plantation seedling establishment. On the 
positive side, in New Zealand forestry many of the worst exot­
ic weeds are C4  plants, so the competitive effects may be 
reduced if elevated CO 2  concentration favors growth of C3  over 
C 4  plants in temperate zones. Again, however, this gain might 
be negated by the relative advantage of C 4  plants at higher tem­
peratures. Changes in tree and forest water use would alter the 
catchment hydrological characteristics, particularly runoff and 
extreme events (IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 14.2,14.4).
The exposure of forests and forest operations to fire risk may 
increase, particularly in Australia, and there is potential for 
changes in the frequency and intensity of damaging events 
from wind and storm, particularly in New Zealand. More 
intense rainfall events would exacerbate soil erosion and pol­
lution of streams during forestry operations and make these 
operations more difficult to carry out. Warmer and wetter con­
ditions could provide the opportunity for increased incidence 
of arthropod pests and pine needle blight {Dothistroma pini). 
Pinus radiata constitutes 91% of the exotic plantation forests 
in New Zealand and 6 8 % in Australia, so this blight is a major 
potential risk to production forestry.
An important distinguishing feature of forestry is the long time 
scale of the tree lifecycle and the very large investment in the 
standing crop relative to the annual yield. W hereas a wheat 
farmer stands to lose one year’s production in a climatic disas­
ter, a forester may have at risk a full 30 years’ growth. Thus, 
more so than with agricultural crops, global change has the 
potential to adversely affect the substantial accumulated capi­
tal of a standing forest. Furthermore, the long time scale means 
there are less frequent opportunities to apply adaptation 
options to any particular forest. The slower growing indige­
nous forests will be even more affected than the fast-rotation 
exotic forest plantations.
4.3.3.3. 
Fisheries
Relatively little is known about how climate affects marine 
fishes— particularly in the Southern Hemisphere, where data 
series tend to be short. Thus, it is extremely difficult to predict 
how climate change may affect Australasia’s fish stocks and 
fishing industry, particularly in the context of the present 
stresses on fish stocks. There is some evidence, however, that
Australasia
129
climate impacts can be quite profound. The IPCC Second 
Assessment Report (SAR) concluded that although global 
marine fisheries production may remain about the same—  
despite possible changes in dominant species— there are likely 
to be collapses and expansions of specific regional fisheries 
(IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 16.2.2). These conclusions may 
likewise apply to large oceanic regions like Australasia, though 
current knowledge is not adequate to predict the impacts— pos­
itive or negative— on total productivity for the region.
In these circumstances, mobile high-seas fishing fleets are less 
likely to be affected, provided that access regulation is not tied 
to geographical areas. However, among the more localized 
small-scale fishers, who are dependent on specific in-shore 
fisheries, there may be large gains and large losses if fish pop­
ulations shift their areas of abundance (IPCC 1996, W C II, 
Chapter 16). In addition, in-shore fisheries and marine stocks 
that need to reproduce in freshwater, estuaries, or mangroves 
may be negatively affected by changes in terrestrial and coastal 
processes, such as increased pollution and sediment discharge 
or loss of habitat. The economic impacts are unclear but could 
be significant for some parts of the industry.
Climate conditions are a factor in the outbreaks of bloom- 
forming algae and shellfish diseases that periodically occur in 
Australasian waters. These organisms include naturally occur­
ring species and exotic species introduced by discharge of 
ships’ ballast water. In the region’s non tropical waters, some of 
the organisms are likely to be at the margins of suitable tem­
perature conditions, and warming may give them increased 
opportunities to survive, spread, and form problem populations 
(IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 16.2.4).
Aquaculture and freshwater fisheries at mid-latitudes may ben­
efit from longer growing seasons, lower natural winter mortal­
ity, and faster growth rates. Studies for New Zealand suggest 
that rising sea level and temperatures may increase oyster farm 
areas and productivity— but that sea temperatures may become 
excessive for salmon farming. Any increases in rainfall inten­
sity over land are likely to increase coliform bacteria counts in 
runoff and result in more frequent closures of shellfish beds 
(IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 16.2.3).
43.3.4. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
Agriculture is an intrinsically adaptive activity. Farming in the 
region is highly decentralized, technologically well-supported, 
and market-responsive and routinely deals with variability on a 
variety of time scales, arising from climatic, biological, and 
market factors. Operational decisions on the variety of crop 
and animal options are made annually or more frequently; 
structural investment decisions on the farm or orchard, and at 
processing plants, have a currency of a decade or so. Although 
adjusting production systems to changing climate will not be 
without cost and will require systematic awareness-raising and 
information dissemination (Stafford Smith et a i, 1994), it is 
very likely to be a smaller and slower influence than changes
arising from markets, prices, and technology. Furthermore, 
gains in production in some areas may offset or even exceed 
costs.
Adaptation options include plant breeding and cultivar choice, 
adjustment of planting times to realign thermal and vernaliza­
tion requirements, changes in crop sequences, improved soil 
management, diversification of crops, adoption of sustainable 
farming methods, monitoring and prediction of seasonal cli­
mate and associated crop and pasture/livestock modeling, and 
regional monitoring and management of drought (Cifford et 
al., 1996b). Adaptation strategies will need to go hand in hand 
with mitigation strategies to reduce farm system emissions of 
greenhouse gases where there may be significant opportunities 
to act as a carbon sink (Ash et al., 1996) or reduce methane 
emissions (Howden et al., 1994).
In rangeland agriculture, more flexible management responses 
to enable adjustment to fluctuating forage supplies would be 
required if there were changes in the frequency or intensity of 
extreme events (McKeon et al., 1993). The resulting land-use 
change may have considerable regional socioeconomic 
impacts— as well as raising issues relating to sustainable use of 
land and water resources. Approaches to soil erosion control, 
pest animal management, weed control, and tree-clearing may 
have to be adjusted as climate changes. Seasonal to interannu­
al climate prediction, particularly of rainfall in the FNSO- 
affected agricultural areas, is an adaptation option that offers 
increasing potential to manage climate variability.
Fxisting trends of diversification and specialization also pro­
vide a basis for the development of adaptation strategies 
(Stafford Smith et a l, 1994). Many potential adaptation 
options already will exist in particular farming systems or par­
ticular localities, but their widespread use may require further 
research and coordination at different scales, from land man­
agers to governments (McKeon et a l, 1993). Adaptations 
involving changes to crop types, farming systems, and adjacent 
ecosystems may change vulnerability to biological risks; such 
risks also may be minimized by the introduction of less vul­
nerable species or increased diversification in farming systems.
The existing diversity of uses of Aboriginal land will provide 
resilience in coping with change, though some traditional man­
agement approaches such as the use of fire and harvesting of 
native foods may need to be modified. There will be a need to 
develop awareness of climate change among Aboriginal man­
agers, and to learn from the traditional Aboriginal manage­
ment, which has survived past climatic changes (Stafford 
Smith et a l, 1994).
Recent policy changes by the region’s governments have shift­
ed a greater part of the responsibility for agricultural risk man­
agement to farmers and the private sector. This shift was effect­
ed partly to cut the cost and overheads of government payouts 
to 
farming 
com munities 
during 
droughts 
and 
other 
weather-related disasters and partly to promote more econom­
ically and environmentally rational decisions in land use and
130
Australasia
farm investment; the goal was to encourage decisions that 
properly account for the long-run risks involved. Although this 
approach is sound in principle and should improve outcomes 
over the medium term, there probably will be many individual 
farmers who will be unable to appraise, cost, or insure against 
a widespread very extreme event, an increased frequency of 
extreme events, or the generally uncertain effects of climate 
change. These risks inevitably become shared by the whole 
community and so remain a responsibility for community 
cooperation and government leadership. Few farmers in the 
region make use of commercial crop insurance.
The capacity of the region’s agricultural industry to adapt to 
climate change will depend on the magnitude of change and 
hence the time frame. Over the next few decades— when the 
warming will be relatively small and the rainfall perhaps little 
changed— adaptation techniques are likely to be sufficient to 
cope without great consequences, and vulnerability will be 
small. However, as the time horizon extends and the climate 
changes become larger, there is likely to be a trend toward 
reduced production and increasing aridity in many areas (main­
ly in Australia). The greatest vulnerability appears to lie in the 
context of this long-term outlook, in the uncertainty of possi­
ble changes in rainfall associated with synoptic weather pat­
terns and the ENSO phenomenon, and in possible external 
market responses and biological risks.
The forestry industry has some degree of vulnerability to cli­
mate change but may also gain from productivity increases. 
Greater attention to forest management— particularly with 
respect to seedling establishment, soils, fire risk, and disease—  
may be a required adaptation. In exotic production forestry, the 
multidecadal crop cycle is still sufficiently short to allow some 
adaptation through choice of species and of areas for planting.
The principal adaptation option for all categories of fisheries is 
integrated management through international and national 
mechanisms as appropriate and including consideration of 
habitat and all life-cycle stages. The greatest vulnerability is 
expected for freshwater fisheries generally— owing to direct 
temperature and hydrological effects and limited adaptation 
possibilities in the confines of rivers and lakes— and for fish­
eries dependent on estuaries and mangroves that may become 
subject to sea-level rise, flooding, and pollution by organisms, 
chemicals, and sediment from runoff (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 16).
4.3.4. 
Coastal Systems
face faster rates o f change, and in many cases landward 
migration will be blocked by human land uses and infrastruc­
ture. Impacts will be complex, both physically and socioeco­
nomically, and will vary greatly from place to place. There is 
potential for considerable damage to the region’s low-lying 
coastal settlements and infrastructure where populations, 
tourism, and capital investment are large and growing. New 
Zealand also is exposed to impacts on its Pacific island terri­
tories, including the eventual possibility o f environmental 
refugee fluxes. Some parts o f Australasia’s coastline, including 
a number o f coastal cities, and indigenous communities in low- 
lying coastal settlements and islands are highly vulnerable.
Adaptation options include integrated coastal zone manage­
ment; redesign, rebuilding, or relocation o f capital assets; pro­
tection o f beaches and dunes; development zone control; and 
retreat plans.
4.З.4.1. 
Coastal Zones and Responses
The Australasian region contains diverse coastal zones span­
ning tropical to subantarctic latitudes and including continental 
coasts and small islands. The habitats of coastal zones and their 
adjacent small islands support a great range of ecosystems and 
complex food networks. A variety of economic activities are 
located in the coastal zone, which also provides important 
landscape and recreation values. Direct modification of the 
coastline through structural works is confined to limited areas 
of industrial, urban, and resort developm ent. However, 
changes in sediment processes as a result of upstream land-use 
change and modification of areas adjacent to the shoreline and 
of coastal dune systems have resulted in some significant mor­
phological changes in coastal areas. In addition, discharge of 
nutrients, sediments, and pollutants from agricultural and 
urban runoff and domestic and industrial wastes affects the 
composition and quality of some coastal and estuarine waters 
(Zann, 1995; Larcombe et a l, 1996).
The Australian coastline is about 70,000 km in length (at the 
0.1 km scale); it includes 12,000 islands and 783 major estuar­
ies, 415 of which are in the tropics. About 24% of the 
Australian coast consists of dunes and beaches, and there are 
large areas of intertidal and supratidal mud, alluvium, man­
groves, and seagrass, as well as thousands of kilometers of 
coral reefs (Zann, 1995). The New Zealand coastline is approx­
imately 15,000 km— of which 25% is eroding, 19% accreting, 
and 56% (mostly hard-rock cliffs) static (Gibb, 1980); it is 
more tectonically active than the Australian coast.
Summary: The impacts on coastal zones o f sea-level rise and 
climate change include inundation, riverine flooding, saline 
intrusion, erosion, and wave damage. The impacts o f changes 
in weather conditions (winds, waves, storms, and storm surge) 
may be comparable to those o f sea-level rise alone. Beaches, 
estuaries and coastal wetlands, and reefs— including the Great 
Barrier Reef—have adapted naturally to past changes in cli­
mate and sea level. However, in the future they are likely to
The potential impacts of climate change on the coastal zone 
include the direct effects of rising sea level; rising tempera­
tures; and possible changes in weather, storminess, and wave 
characteristics, together with the indirect impacts of changes 
on adjacent lands and rivers— resulting in altered inputs of 
freshwater, floodwaters, sediments, nutrients, and biota to the 
coastal seas. Global sea level is projected to rise 15-110 cm 
above current levels by the year 2 1 0 0 , with a central estimate
Australasia
131
of about 50 cm (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.5.2). The esti­
mated rate of rise is about two to five times faster than that 
experienced over the past 1 0 0  years.
Actual rates of rise at specific coastal locations can vary sub­
stantially due to local rise or fall of the land, different rates of 
oceanic warming and expansion between regions, and changes 
in oceanic and atmospheric circulation under climate change 
(Pittock et a i, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.2; IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 9.3.1). It is likely that storminess will 
increase in some regions and decrease in others, with parallel 
increases and decreases in impacts.
The coasts of Australia and New Zealand are not simple, pas­
sive systems but respond dynamically to sea level and climate 
in a range of ways depending on local circumstances. Weather 
elements and related processes such as wind speed and direc­
tion, rainfall intensities, ocean wave energies, and storm surge 
have major roles in coastal geomorphology with respect to the 
mean state and extreme events. Even small changes in weath­
er patterns may cause impacts commensurate with those of sea- 
level rise alone (Cowell et a i, 1996; IPCC 1996, WG II, Box 
9.4; Mclnnes and Hubbert, 1996). Recent reviews of climate 
change impacts and adaptations for the region may be found in 
Chappell et al. (1996) and Kay et al. (1996).
Global research indicates that estuaries and coastal wetlands 
have coped with historical sea-level rise— for example, by 
migration landward. Salt marshes and mangroves have sur­
vived where the rate of sedimentation approximates the rate of 
local sea-level rise; beaches have grown or decayed according 
to changes in prevailing winds and seas; and coral reefs have 
demonstrated the capacity to grow vertically in response to 
past sea-level rise (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.4). However, 
these past rates of natural adaptation may be insufficient for 
higher rates of future sea-level rise; in many cases, landward 
migration will be blocked by human infrastructure such as 
causeways, flood protection levees, and urban development, 
leading to a reduction in the area of the wetland or mangrove.
Sea-level rise will Increase the penetration of the saltwater 
wedge in the many tidal estuaries, leading to salinity changes 
and consequent effects on estuarine ecosystems (see Section
4.3.2.1). Some coastal aquifers also may be affected by saline 
intrusion (Ghassemi et al., 1991).
Natural responses may be complex. For example, in macrotidal 
estuaries in northern Australia, channel widening from sea- 
level rise may contribute sediment to adjacent estuarine plains, 
enhancing vertical accretion. Backwater swamps and freshwa­
ter ecosystems on the estuarine plains may be endangered 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.4.2). In these sediment-rich 
areas, where strong tidal currents redistribute sediments, man­
grove communities have a better chance of survival (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 9.4.4; see also Section 4.3.4.3 below). 
However, losses of coastal wetlands for Australia are expected 
to be greater than the global average (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 9.5.2.3).
The potential impacts of climate change on Australia’s coral 
reefs, including the Great Barrier Reef, have been discussed in 
Section 4.3.1.5. Coral reefs face the types of coastal impacts 
described above, questions about whether reef growth can keep 
pace with sea-level rise, and the problems of coral bleaching 
and algal invasions. For small coral islands, the higher sea 
level will erode inhabited coral cays and contaminate water 
tables to an extent that is likely to be prohibitively expensive to 
combat or rectify (Wilkinson and Buddemeier, 1994). On 
many of Australia’s coral reef islands, the Impacts are likely to 
be highly visible and would have significant consequences for 
tourism activities.
Climate change impacts on the coasts will be compounded by 
rapid growth in environmental stresses arising from existing 
population growth and increasing tourism.
4.3.4.2. Coastal Infrastructure and Human Impacts
The vast majority of the population and infrastructure of both 
Australia and New Zealand lies in the coastal zone (Resources 
Assessment Commission, 1993; Zann, 1995). Thus, potential 
damage to coastal settlements and infrastructure from rising 
sea level, coupled with possibly increased storminess and more 
intense flooding events, is a major concern in view of the mag­
nitude of capital investment (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
12.3.4) and the nature and potential cost of adaptation options. 
The exposure of such areas is increasing as coastal populations 
continue to grow. Ports, harbors, and low-lying tourism and 
recreational developments such as beach resorts and marinas 
are most at risk.
Shipping and offshore oil and gas facilities in Australia’s Bass 
Strait and Northwest Shelf and off New Zealand’s Taranaki 
coast are exposed to any increased storminess. Populated areas 
already are vulnerable to pollution from human activity of ter­
restrial and marine origin, including sewage wastes, industrial 
wastes, agricultural runoff, oil spills, and ballast water dis­
charge (Zann, 1995). Changes in weather patterns, especially if 
accompanied by increased intensity of rainfall or increased 
frequency of damaging storms, and sea-level rise could 
increase the risk and magnitude of pollution events.
Vulnerable inhabited Australian islands include the Cocos 
(Keeling) Islands (Jacobson, 1976); Millingimby in the 
Northern Territory; and Boigu, Saibai, Masig, Poruma, and 
Waraber Islands in the Torres Strait (Mulrennan, 1992). Boigu 
and Saibai are low mud islands, the second of which suffered 
flooding during exceptional high tides in the 1940s; Masig, 
Poruma, and Waraber are low coral cays subject to active ero­
sion and dune development.
In the tropical Pacific, New Zealand has responsibility for 
Tokelau, a populated atoll group, and constitutional ties with 
Niue and the Cook Islands. Potential impacts of climate change 
for such small islands are elaborated in Chapter 9 of this report; 
impacts for Tokelau are considered in Hooper (1990). Tropical
132
Australasia
cyclones or other severe weather events, even if unchanged, 
superimposed on rising sea levels may progressively stress the 
habitability of the Pacific islands and lead to impacts on New 
Zealand with respect to emergency disaster responses and 
migration.
Coastal areas and estuaries have particular importance to 
Maori (indigenous people of New Zealand) (Fraser, 1990), and 
much Maori land and economic enterprise is on or near low- 
lying areas. Coastal seafood is of immense cultural value and 
is important as an economic resource and for recreation. Land 
is the principal element of iwi (tribal/family) identity; together 
with coasts, rivers, and forests, it is central to the cultural, spir­
itual, and economic life of Maori. Detailed impact studies are 
not available, but any loss or damage to traditional land, sacred 
ancestral or archaeological sites, or food-gathering areas and 
other natural resources over which Maori have traditional 
domain would have large ramifications for the Maori (Fraser, 
1990).
4.3.4.3. 
Vulnerability Assessments and Case Studies
In Australia, vulnerability assessments were carried out for 
Cocos (Keeling) Island (an Australian Territory), Ceographe 
Bay in Western Australia, and Kiribati in response to the first 
version of the IPCC Common Methodology (IPCC, 1991). 
This led to recommendations for changes to the Common 
Methodology (McLean and Mimura, 1993).
Meanwhile, a major vulnerability study was carried out by the 
Port of Melbourne Authority (1992) on the impact of projected 
greenhouse changes on the 3,000 km of the Victorian coast. 
Quantitative assessment was carried out for selected beaches for 
0.3- and 0.5-m rises in mean sea level, without considering 
other changes. The largest recession rates were indicated for 
beaches west of Cape Otway, due to the relatively fine sand and 
more severe wave conditions. Shoreline recession rates also 
were significant in parts of Port Phillip Bay and the Cippsland 
Lakes, due to generally narrower beaches. Detailed assessments 
identified beaches, barriers, estuaries, mudflats, swamps, and 
sedimentary cliffs that are particularly vulnerable.
A series of nine case studies initiated by the Australian 
Department of the Fnvironment, Sport and Territories (DFST) 
on coastal vulnerability to climate change and sea-level rise 
was undertaken during 1994 and 1995 (Waterman, 1996). 
Impacts considered included sea-level rise, temperature and 
rainfall variation, changes in storm intensity and frequency, 
and saltwater intrusion into surface and groundwater supplies. 
Case studies were undertaken for Mackay, Queensland; 
Batemans Bay, New South Wales; Cippsland Lakes and Port 
Phillip Bay, Victoria; South Arm, Hobart, Tasmania; Northern 
Spencer Culf, South Australia; Perth, Western Australia; and 
the Darwin and Alligator Rivers regions in the Northern 
Territory. Fmphasis in the studies was placed on the wider 
socioeconomic, environmental, aesthetic, and cultural aspects, 
as well as strategies for integration of vulnerability assessment
into coastal management and planning processes. The main 
aim in most of the studies, however, was to test the methodol­
ogy rather than to produce definitive assessments of the vul­
nerability in the regions.
The studies found that vulnerability to climate change is diffi­
cult to determine in the context of the inherent variability of 
natural systems and the impacts of development on the coastal 
zone. In addition, the effects of change are poorly understood, 
and the implications for coastal management are not well 
appreciated by the wider community. The researchers conclud­
ed that community consultation, along with serious attempts to 
address the complex jurisdictional issues concerning coastal 
management, was essential.
Several of the studies, such as those for Port Phillip Bay and 
Hobart, noted the high degree of variability in potential 
impacts, even over distances of a few kilometers. The basis for 
identifying vulnerable areas was a geomorphological study that 
identified the main coastal landforms. At the broadest scale of 
generalization, the whole coast of Australia has been catego­
rized by Chappell et al. (1996) according to several overlap­
ping geomorphological and greenhouse hazard criteria, partly 
based on the work of Bird (1988, 1993) and Thom (1984). 
High wave energy coasts in the southern parts of the west and 
east of the continent are vulnerable to shifts in wave direction 
and energy, especially on beach coasts. Across most of north­
ern Australia, rising sea level and changes in tropical cyclone 
activity are the greatest threats, whereas the Great Barrier Reef 
may benefit in some respects from moderate sea-level rises.
Severe limitations applied in quantitatively assessing likely 
impacts in the DFST case studies because of the wide range of 
uncertainty in the scenarios for sea-level rise, temperature and 
rainfall changes, and changes in storm intensity and frequency. 
Moreover, even in well-studied areas— such as the Alligator 
Rivers region in the Northern Territory, where rapid changes 
(such as saltwater intrusion into the Kakadu freshwater flood 
plains) (Knighton et a i, 1991; Woodroffe and Mulrennan, 
1993) have occurred in historical times— processes of natural 
change are not well understood. Nevertheless, it is clear that 
Kakadu National Park, which is a World Heritage Area and 
major tourist attraction as well as Aboriginal hunting and fish­
ing grounds, would be almost totally transformed into man­
grove forest by a sustained 1 -m rise in mean sea level.
In several of the areas studied, towns such as Port Augusta, 
Port Pirie, Lakes Fntrance, and Mackay have experienced par­
tial flooding from the sea due to extreme events in the recent 
past, so they are very vulnerable to effects of sea-level rise. 
This was highlighted for Mackay by Smith and Greenaway 
(1994), who note a high sensitivity of flood damage to any 
change in the climatology of storm surges.
Potential vulnerability to health effects, particularly due to 
increases in standing water (see Section 4.3.6.1), also were 
noted. The study of the Perth metropolitan coastline noted the 
natural “breakwater effect” of the offshore reef system and
Australasia
133
concluded that “climate change, natural or greenhouse- 
induced, appears to be more important to future changes ... 
than projected rises in mean-sea level.” Saltwater penetration 
into the coastal aquifer also is an issue in the Perth region, as it 
is in some other coastal aquifers (Ghassemi et a i, 1991).
Small, low-lying coastal and island communities are particu­
larly vulnerable to sea-level rise and changes in climatic forc­
ing of extreme events. These communities include several of 
the Torres Strait islands (Mulrennan, 1992), the Australian ter­
ritory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands, and several Aboriginal 
coastal communities across northern Australia. Unlike cities 
such as Darwin, these small communities usually do not abide 
by strict building codes or have evacuation procedures. 
Development of such codes and procedures therefore is neces­
sary for effective adaptation.
The DEST project (Waterman, 1996) identified a number of 
issues concerning how policy and management decisions are 
made about the effects of climate change and sea-level rise by 
authorities and groups in coastal areas. Common methodolog­
ical elements that should form part of a region-specific 
approach to vulnerability assessment were identified. Specific 
recommendations included capacity-building at governmental 
and community levels, including awareness raising; the devel­
opment of a better appreciation of insurance, legal, and land- 
use planning implications, including professional and public 
liability; the development of a guide to best practice in inte­
grated coastal zone management; and the development of 
benchmarks, monitoring programs, and databases for coastal 
zones.
In New Zealand, there has been no comprehensive national 
assessment of coastal vulnerability to climate and sea-level 
changes. Nonetheless, under the Resource Management Act 
(RMA) of 1991, local authorities are obligated to ensure the 
“avoidance or mitigation of natural hazards,” including coastal 
flood and erosion hazards. Subsequent legal rulings have con­
firmed that future sea-level rise should be taken into account in 
coastal hazard analyses in connection with resource consent 
(permit) procedures as specified under the RMA. Furthermore, 
the New Zealand Coastal Policy Statement (Department of 
Conservation, 1994), which contains policies aimed at achiev­
ing the single purpose of the RMA (the “sustainable manage­
ment of natural and physical resources”), includes specific ref­
erence to the possibility of a “rise in sea level” and its impacts 
on the subdivision, use, and development of the coast.
As a consequence of this policy framework, numerous coastal 
hazard studies have been commissioned by local authorities 
and developers in New Zealand for planning, policy develop­
ment, and environmental impact assessment purposes. On the 
whole, these analyses— mostly in the form of unpublished con­
sultants’ reports— suggest that a considerable portion of the 
existing built environment of the New Zealand coast would be 
endangered by a future rise in sea level of the order of 0.5-1 m, 
especially along sandy beach and dune coasts. Where develop­
ment pressures are high, such as in the Bay of Plenty, the
potential increase in vulnerability is large unless adaptive mea­
sures are taken.
4.3.4.4. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
The specific options for adaptation are wide-ranging. Often the 
existing capital assets could be used to the end of their design 
life and rebuilt to suit higher sea levels and increased risks of 
coastal erosion and flooding. In some cases, however, there 
may be a need for costly raising or relocation of railways, 
ports, bridges, dams, highways, electricity lines, and so forth; 
in other cases, the preferred option may be to build protective 
dikes, seawalls, and pumping systems. “Softer” options 
include setbacks of development zones, beach nourishment, 
dune protection, and phased retreat plans— options that 
increasingly are perceived as viable alternatives, especially in 
coastal zones facing high development pressures. These 
options are set out in guidelines issued by the Australian 
Institution of Engineers (1991).
The time frame for response to sea-level rise is sufficient, in 
principle, to allow for the development of suitable coastal poli­
cies and management practices to adjust. At present, however, 
in Australia coastal hazards are generally not well accommo­
dated within current coastal management planning frame­
works. This was highlighted for Australia in the Report of the 
Coastal Zone Enquiry (Resource Assessment Commission,
1993), which recommended a National Coastal Action Plan. 
The approaches to coastal hazard management of the six 
Australian states are summarized in Kay et al. (1996). In most 
cases, there is some way to go to factor in the relatively long­
term issue of climate change.
In New Zealand, the overarching national policies attempt to 
guide and encourage adaptation at the local level. The RMA 
requires that alternative options be systematically evaluated 
during local resource consent procedures (s.32). The New 
Zealand Coastal Policy Statement directs that a “precautionary 
approach” should be adopted and states that reliance on coastal 
protection works should be avoided; an emphasis should be 
placed instead on the enhancement of natural protective fea­
tures of coastal systems and on the location and design of new 
developments to avoid hazardous situations. This policy 
framework in New Zealand is a potentially powerful mecha­
nism for promoting adaptation to reduce the impacts of climate 
change in the coastal zone. However, it is too soon to assess its 
effectiveness because very few regional and district policies 
and plans have completed the lengthy public submission and 
appeal processes required.
For the future, a key strategy for the Australasia region will be 
to consider adaptation options within the context of integrated 
coastal zone management (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.6.4). 
Within this increasingly accepted approach, the necessary 
detailed hazard mapping, monitoring, and policy development 
can occur, and a range of sociocultural, structural, legal, finan­
cial, economic, and institutional measures can be developed to
134
Australasia
deal with any additional climate-related risks. Such advance 
planning may substantially reduce the later costs of adaptation.
4.3.5. 
Human Settlements
Summary: In addition to possible changes in the frequency and 
magnitude o f “natural disaster” type events such as urban 
fringe fires, floods, and extreme sea-level events, urban areas 
and industry will experience a variety o f other direct climatic 
impacts on water and air quality, water supply and drainage, 
waste disposal, energy production and distribution, minerals 
production, transport operations, insurance, and tourism. The 
effects o f the direct impacts are likely to be small relative to 
other economic influences, but the sectors are very large, and 
the impacts and necessary adaptations may represent major 
losses and costs. Thus, a moderate degree o f vulnerability is 
present. Adaptations will include improved planning, zoning, 
and engineering standards that take climate change and sea- 
level rise into account.
Any increase (decrease) in high rainfall events and runoff 
would increase (decrease) the risk of breach in sewerage sys­
tems (which in some cities, such as Sydney, already are subject 
to overflow), as well as other waste collection facilities and 
chemical storage facilities. Conversely, any reduced water 
flows may result in increased concentrations of chemical and 
biological toxins in waterways, and vice versa. Nonurban 
water pollution has been discussed in previous sections; urban- 
rural interactions may be important with respect to water 
sources for cities and pollution of natural environments down­
stream of cities.
As with most other environmental issues, there are many fac­
tors involved in air and water pollution, many of which are 
either more significant or more rapidly changing than climate, 
and there is great uncertainty about likely climate impacts. In 
general, the technical means to appraise, monitor, and manage 
the potential impacts of climate change on air and water quali­
ty already are available, if not in place.
4.3.5.1. 
Energy
Rising temperatures will lead to reduced heating demand in 
winter and increased air conditioning demand in summer. 
Because of the temperate marine climates of coastal Australia 
and New Zealand, there are relatively smaller demands for 
heating and air conditioning than in continental climates, and 
the net impact on the economy is likely to be relatively small. 
In New Zealand, the expected smaller seasonal variation in 
demand for electricity would provide an operational gain for 
the electricity industry. In Australia, the summer seasonal 
peak from air conditioning would increase, requiring addi­
tional peak plant capacity. The efficiency of thermal genera­
tion plants decreases with increasing temperature, as does the 
maximum carrying capacity of transm ission lines. Any 
increase in weather extremes would decrease system reliabili­
ty (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 11.5.3). Any changes in rain­
fall characteristics in hydroelectricity catchments would have 
impacts on electricity generation operations (see Section
4.3.2.3).
4.3.5.3. 
Minerals
The minerals industry (predominantly in Australia) will expe­
rience some impacts— depending on the extent of climate 
change, the environmental conditions at the site, and the nature 
of the operations. Temperature has a role in process design and 
operation; rainfall and evaporation affect materials handling, 
the design and operation of civil structures (pits, drainage sys­
tems, tailings and mineral waste disposal, roads, and railways), 
supplies of surface and groundwater, the quality and disposal 
of wastewater, management of dust and air quality, and site 
rehabilitation and revegetation. Storm events (in coastal sub­
tropical regions) and sea level have impacts on ports and other 
materials transport facilities. Positive and negative impacts 
may be expected. These impacts also will depend on minerals 
demand; government policy, especially in respect to fuels and 
climate change; and knowledge of the impacts and possible 
adaptation options. Because of the size of the industry, any 
impacts would have significant consequential effects on the 
Australian economy.
4.3.5.2. 
A ir and Water Pollution
Air pollution from vehicle emissions and industrial processes 
is primarily a problem of the region’s urban areas. The climate 
affects the photochemical production of secondary pollu­
tants— through sunlight, humidity, and temperature— and the 
dispersal of source pollutants and photochemical products 
through winds, rainfall, and atmospheric stability. The severity 
of photochemical smog episodes is increased by higher tem­
peratures, more sunshine, and lighter winds. Reviews of the 
impacts of climate change on air pollution for New Zealand 
(Wratt, 1990) and Australia (SOEC, 1996) note a variety of 
possible effects, the most certain being the role of increased 
temperature.
4.3.5.4. 
Insurance
Because of the region’s relatively high frequency of climatic 
and other natural hazards (Pittock et al., 1997), insurance 
against extreme events is especially important; the cost of 
insured catastrophes in Australia is at least 12% of the costs of 
non-life insurance premiums, whereas globally the correspond­
ing figure is only 2.5% (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 17.5). 
However, in Australia, private insurance has never been avail­
able for flood damage to domestic dwellings and small busi­
nesses, presumably because the risks are too high— though 
assistance may be made available under National Disaster 
Relief arrangements. The cost of insurance in the region has 
risen already because of increasingly large losses in the interna­
tional reinsurance market from recent, mainly weather-related.
Australasia
135
disasters. The common perception that there is a global trend 
toward increased frequency of severe climatic events is not well 
substantiated by meteorological evidence (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 17.4.1), apart from the evidence of increases in the fre­
quency of heavy rainfall (Karl et al., 1995; Suppiah and 
Hennessy, 1996, 1997). However, there is some evidence for 
possible future increases in flood and fire risks (Pittock et al., 
1997; see also Sections 4.3.1.3 and 4.3.2.2).
It is likely that climate change will adversely affect property 
insurance, where such insurance is available, but current 
knowledge is insufficient to allow the industry to quantify its 
changed exposure (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 17.4.2). Even if 
the mean long-run losses were to remain unchanged, the 
greater uncertainty in quantifying the risk would demand a 
higher premium. Adaptation options include primary risk man­
agement through hazard assessment (such as Australia’s 52 
zones for cyclone, thunderstorm, wildfire, and earthquake) 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 17.3.2), land-use regulation, 
building design and construction permits, retrofitting in high- 
risk areas, and public education (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
17.6).
An important feature of the region is the very high level of 
individual home ownership. Personal assets often are closely 
tied to the market value of a person’s home and the land it is 
built on, and equity usually is highly leveraged with mort­
gages. Typically, the real long-term risks of urban flooding and 
coastal inundation in a locality are not transmitted into market 
values or into insurance premiums, and an adverse event can 
cause large personal and insurance losses, withdrawal of insur­
ance coverage, and dramatic declines in property values and 
personal equity. By way of example, residential losses in 
Florida constituted 65% of the insurable losses from Hurricane 
Andrew (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 12.3.4).
4.3.5.5. 
Transportation
The transportation industry has long time frames for invest­
ment, is very sensitive to weather, and may be affected by cli­
mate change in various ways (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
11.4.4). Any changes in production systems, such as in agri­
culture and mining, would alter the patterns of demand for 
transport services. Higher temperatures would reduce maxi­
mum takeoff payloads for aircraft and increase problems with 
buckling of railway lines and melting or softening of road tar 
surfaces— but also would reduce the risks of winter snow and 
ice on roads. Any changes in winds at flight levels would affect 
aircraft operations and economics. More intense rainfalls 
would cause more frequent landslides and blockages to rail and 
road routes and might increase flooding impacts on airports, 
roads, rail tracks, and bridges. Any increase in storm frequen­
cy or intensity would negatively affect all transport operations, 
especially shipping and airways.
Australia and New Zealand are particularly dependent on effi­
cient, reliable transport within their relatively sparse domestic
markets and for international trade. Impacts on transport ser­
vices therefore could affect tourism and exports, in addition to 
the direct effects on transport safety and costs.
Because virtually all transport services are fossil fuel-driven, 
CO 2 emission management will result in further impacts on the 
industry. A detailed consideration of Australia’s options with 
respect to transport and climate change mitigation (BTCE,
1996) noted several “no regrets” strategies that would have 
benefits for air quality and urban congestion. Adaptation to the 
potential direct impacts of climate change could be dealt with 
similarly through normal engineering design and operations 
responses, but some residual vulnerability may remain.
4.3.5.6. 
Tourism
Tourism is the fastest-growing sector of world trade, and 
Australasia’s share of this rising market has been increasing. It 
represents the most important economic use of the region's 
landscape, biodiversity, and climate— ahead of agriculture (it 
was worth about US$4fl billion in 1995-96). The industry is 
vulnerable to climate change in several ways. Coastal resorts, 
particularly buildings and infrastructure, may be vulnerable to 
sea-level rise and changes in storm surge magnitude and fre­
quency, as well as consequential changes in beach extent. Ski 
resorts could be adversely affected (see Section 4.3.2.3) by 
shorter snow seasons and an increased need for artificial snow, 
and resorts on the Queensland coast may be affected by any 
damaging Impacts on the Great Barrier Reef from coral bleach­
ing or any increased damage from tropical cyclones or riverine 
runoff (see Section 4.3.1.5). On the other hand, moderate rates 
of sea-level rise could invigorate coral reef growth, increasing 
the reefs’ attractiveness.
Changes also could occur in the prevalence of insect pests and 
vector-borne diseases, affecting tourist health and comfort and 
resulting in stricter quarantine precautions. Human comfort 
also may change adversely, particularly by warmer and possi­
bly more humid conditions, including the number of days of 
rain, and the length of the monsoon and tropical cyclone sea­
sons in northern Australia. Any increase in heat and humidity 
discomfort would increase the demands for air conditioning at 
resorts and could lead to a shift of demand away from tropical 
resorts to cooler locations such as Tasmania or the South Island 
of New Zealand.
4.3.5.7. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
A wide range of potential “direct” climatic impacts on settle­
ments and industry, largely located in urban areas, has been 
identified in this section. Several other vulnerabilities have 
been identified elsewhere in this chapter— notably, possible 
increased exposure to fires in the urban fringes (Section
4.3.1.3), increased riverine flooding (Section 4.3.2.2). and 
extreme sea-level events (4.3.4.3). The potential additional 
cost of these “natural disaster” events attributable to climate
136
Australasia
change is very difficult to quantify at present, but it may be 
very large, and the possibility heightens the need for effective 
current planning, zoning, and engineering standards and for 
improved disaster management.
Most of the direct impacts identified here are relatively small 
compared to other economic influences, and their likely slow 
development would allow adaptation through normal process­
es of planning, management, and engineering design. 
However, the sectors involved (e.g., energy, mining, transport, 
tourism, and insurance) are very large; therefore, small frac­
tional impacts and small adaptation responses could represent 
substantial total losses and costs. On this basis, a moderate 
degree of vulnerability is present.
4.3.6. 
Human Health
Summary: Increases are likely in heat stress mortality (partic­
ularly in Australia), tropical vector-borne diseases such as 
dengue, and urban pollution-related respiratory problems. 
These impacts are small compared to the total burden o f ill- 
health, but they have the potential to cause significant commu­
nity impact and cost. Indigenous communities and economi­
cally disadvantaged persons appear to be more at risk. 
Adaptation responses include strengthening existing public 
health infrastructure and meeting the needs o f vulnerable 
groups. A moderate degree o f vulnerability is apparent with 
health.
4.З.6.1. 
Health Impacts
Average life expectancy in Australia and New Zealand is rela­
tively high, and access to medical care is relatively good by 
international standards. There are considerable inequalities in 
health status and access to services, however. Disadvantaged 
groups such as indigenous peoples and the poor are likely to be 
most at risk from the effects of climate change.
In parts of urban Australia, the frequency of very hot days 
(over 40°C) is expected to increase by 50-100%  for a 2°C 
increase in mean temperature (Hennessy and Pittock, 1995). 
This is likely to lead to an increase in deaths, especially in 
cities such as Melbourne that are subject to wide variability in 
temperature, but insufficient information is available at present 
to quantify this impact. There may be fewer deaths in winter 
with warmer temperatures. For example, the winter excess in 
coronary heart disease mortality in Australia and New Zealand 
appears to be related in part to ambient temperature 
(Enquselassie et al., 1993). However, studies in other parts of 
the world suggest that reduced mortality from cold extremes 
would probably only partly offset the heat stress effect (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 18.2.1).
In both Australia and New Zealand, there are significant 
food- and waterborne diseases that occur more commonly in 
warmer conditions (IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 18.3.5). For
example, in parts of Australia, an amoeba that causes m enin­
goencephalitis proliferates in water pipes that are heated in 
summer as the water travels overland (IPCC 1996, W G II, 
Section 18.3.2). Hotter weather also will exacerbate urban air 
pollution due to photochemical oxidants (Woodward et al.,
1995), possibly leading in the m ajor cities (Sydney, 
Melbourne, Auckland) to increased frequency of respiratory 
problems and deaths (IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 18.3.5). 
Australia and New Zealand have rates of asthma and other 
allergic conditions that are higher than elsewhere in the 
Pacific or in many parts of Europe, and these diseases may be 
exacerbated by warmer and more humid climates (Pearce et 
a l, 1993).
Any increase in extreme events and flooding, including those 
associated with sea-level rise, would increase deaths, injury, 
infectious diseases, and psychological disorders and may 
increase road accidents. Other waterborne illnesses— such as 
viral, bacterial, and protozoal diarrhoea and cyanobacterial 
poisoning— ^would be affected by any changes in water avail­
ability (due to flooding, droughts, and public water shortages). 
Some disease vectors also are influenced by changes in water 
availability. New Zealand currently is free of human arbovirus 
infections (i.e., viruses borne by arthropods— ticks, mites, 
etc.), but if temperature and rainfall alter it may become sus­
ceptible to infections that currently are common in Australia 
(Weinstein et al., 1995). Vectors for dengue and malaria 
already exist in Australia, and southward expansion of the vec­
tor populations with temperature increases would increase the 
potential for insect-borne diseases to become more widely 
established. These diseases are very sensitive to climate vari­
ability— for example, outbreaks of dengue are much more 
common in the western Pacific islands during relatively warm 
and wet La Nina years (Hales et al., 1996).
Conditions forecast under climate change could alter the distri­
bution and proliferation of arthropod vectors and/or natural 
vertebrate hosts. Warmer and wetter conditions would lead to 
increased incidences of insect-borne infections such as 
Japanese Encephalitis virus, Murray Valley Encephalitis virus, 
Ross River virus, and dengue. In southeastern Australia, epi­
demics of Murray Valley Encephalitis and Ross River virus 
infection follow heavy rain in the Murray-Darling basin 
(Nicholls, 1986; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 18.3.1.7), so addi­
tional cases might be expected if the frequency or duration of 
heavy rainfall events increased. However, the relationship 
between climate, vector distribution, and disease are complex. 
For example, although the incidence of infection with Ross 
River virus may increase with increased rainfall, the incidence 
of symptomatic disease may actually fall because individuals 
who are infected as children remain asymptomatic and are 
immune for life.
The indigenous peoples of Australia and New Zealand—  
Australian Aborigines, Torres Strait Islanders, and Maori—  
may be more vulnerable to climate change because their health 
status in general is worse than for other Australians (Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, 1997) and other New Zealanders (Pomare
Australasia
137
et al., 1995). These health status differences result largely from 
social and economic disadvantage, which itself is a cause for 
susceptibility. For example, many Australian Aborigines live in 
remote areas, in poor housing, and are particularly susceptible 
to infections related to deficiencies in water supply and sewage 
disposal (Moss, 1994). Under some scenarios, these conditions 
could worsen due to higher temperatures, changes in rainfall, 
higher water tables, and rising sea levels. Reduced freshwater 
supply, increased standing water, or both could increase expo­
sure to microbial and viral infections and vector-borne diseases 
(Kolsky, 1993; Hales et al., 1995; Henderson et al., 1995; 
Jacobson and Graham, 1996).
The health impacts of climate change will include economic 
and social costs. These costs are difficult to quantify, but the 
evidence suggests that the health impacts for the region are like­
ly to be relatively small compared to impacts from other dis­
eases and sources of mortality. At the same time, it should be 
cautioned that there is considerable uncertainty in our current 
knowledge of not only the likely direct impacts but also the 
complexities of social responses to change and interaction with 
other sectors. For example, there could be changes in the inci­
dence of zoonoses (vertebrate animal-mediated diseases) such 
as leptospirosis, a concern in New Zealand, as farming systems 
and zoonoses transmission alter in response to climate change. 
Heat stress impacts will be affected by housing choices and 
changing attitudes to air conditioning. More difficult to estimate 
precisely— but possibly of greater importance to public health 
in the long term— are the indirect effects of climate change, 
such as any adverse social and economic effects, especially on 
vulnerable groups, arising from impacts on other sectors and 
any large population shifts of “environmental refugees” (for 
example, from Pacific atolls) (Moore and Smith, 1996).
4.3.6.2. 
Adaptation and Vulnerability
Major adaptation responses include strengthening the existing 
public health infrastructure (such as disease monitoring, vector 
management, and primary health care); improving protective 
systems where deficiencies are apparent already (for example, 
comprehensive infectious disease surveillance and border 
quarantine controls to 
reduce 
introduction of exotic 
pathogens); and meeting the needs of the most vulnerable 
groups in the population who will be at greatest risk from new 
climate-related threats to health (Woodward, 1996), including 
through improvements in water supply and sewerage systems 
(Moss, 1994). Adaptations to deal with the indirect socioeco­
nomic effects arising in other sectors may require significant 
policy responses at the national and international levels.
4.4. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential Impacts
Summary: Some preliminary studies o f impacts for limited 
areas or issues have been attempted fo r the region, but com­
prehensive integrated analyses are not available. A  cross-sec­
tor economic costing approach indicates substantial impacts
on Australasia’s GDP (several percent per annum for a dou­
bling o f CO2), but the method involved is subject to consider­
able criticism. The New Zealand CLIMPACTS and Australian 
OzClim software packages have been developed as national- 
scale, integrated assessment methodologies to enable the pro­
gressive exploration o f sensitivities, impacts, adaptation 
options, and so forth as knowledge develops.
Research is needed on better climate scenarios; the dynamic 
responses o f ecological systems; impacts on marine, aquatic, 
and coastal ecosystems; possible changes in the magnitude 
and frequency o f “natural disasters”; impacts on settlements, 
industries, and health; cross-sector and multinational interac­
tions; and potential adaptations and their ameliorating effects.
In summary, Australia’s relatively low latitude makes it partic­
ularly vulnerable through impacts on its scarce water 
resources and on crops presently growing near or above their 
optimum temperatures, whereas New Zealand—a cooler, wet­
ter, mid-latitude country— may gain some benefit from the 
ready -availability o f suitable crops and the likely increased 
agricultural production. In both countries, however, there is a 
wide range o f situations in which vulnerability is thought to be 
moderate to high—particularly in ecosystems, hydrology, 
coastal zones, settlements and industry, and health.
A  comprehensive integrated analysis of impacts for the region 
is not possible at present, mainly because of the large uncer­
tainties in each of the three stages of analysis: first, in the mag­
nitude and direction of change in the climate elements; second, 
in the estimations of potential impacts for individual compo­
nents of systems; and third, concerning possible interactions 
between components. Instead, we discuss preliminary attempts 
to develop Integrated assessment methodologies and present 
results from two case studies.
Integrated assessments of climate change are attempts to inte­
grate three components or dimensions of the problem (Weyant 
et al., 1996; IPCC 1996, WG III, Chapter 10):
• 
The chain of effects, from changes in atmospheric 
composition and climate to changes in biophysical 
systems to socioeconomic consequences (the “verti­
cal” dimension)
• 
The interactions between systems, sectors, and activ­
ities (the “horizontal” dimension)
The context of other trends and changes in society, 
such as population, technology, land-use, and eco­
nomics (the “time” dimension).
New Zealand was one of the first countries in the world to carry 
out such an assessment of the effects of climate change at the 
national scale, based on the work of expert panels and integrat­
ed through a national committee (Mosley, 1990a). In Australia, 
the idea of integrated climate impact assessments has been 
developed, to some extent, in the context of climatic variability 
rather than climate change, to better adapt Australian agricul­
ture to the large year-to-year climatic variability associated with
138
Australasia
Box 4-2. Climate Change and Cattle Ticks in Australia: An Integrated Assessment
Sutherst et al. (1996) carried out an integrated assessment of the national socioeconomic impact of climate change on the 
cattle tick (Boophilus microplus), which is an important parasite of cattle in northern Australia. There is concern that 
global warming will result in a spread of ticks and an increase in their numbers, as indicated by an earlier study for both 
New Zealand and Australia (Sutherst et al., 1996). The cattle tick causes losses in productivity through feeding in large 
numbers and by transmitting a blood pathogen that causes high rates of mortality in nonimmune cattle. The southern 
limit of the ticks currently is maintained by a quarantine and eradication program at the border between NSW and 
Queensland, at a cost of several million dollars per year.
A population model of the cattle tick was used first to estimate current national losses of productivity of beef cattle due 
to the ticks in each part of the country. These impacts were costed using an economic model of the cattle Industry, after 
which the exercise was repeated using the changed climate scenarios derived from the CSIRQ9 global climate model 
(experiment F I, Table 1-1). Potential costs were estimated on the basis that the quarantine line would not be economically 
sustainable because of the recurrent development of strains of ticks that are resistant to the chemicals used to control 
them and the increasing difficulty of eradication under more favorable climatic conditions.
The maps in the accompanying graphic illustrate the estimated potential costs under current and 2070 climate scenarios. 
The number of ticks was estimated to increase in the southern part of the existing range— where they are limited by the 
shortness of the warm season, which allows reproduction, and by severe winter mortality. Both of these constraints were 
reduced by global warming; as a result, most of the estimated increases in costs would be sustained within the current 
tick-infested area in Queensland. There was a parallel increase in the potential area affected by ticks in NSW. The final 
estimates of potential national costs, in terms of net present value, ranged from A$18 million to A$192 million, but these 
estimates will vary with discount rates.
The analysis was unique in Australia in that it was one of the first to use a fully integrated hierarchical approach to 
assessing impacts of climate change on pests, diseases, and weeds, including climate change scenarios generated by 
CSIRQ; simulation of the target species (ticks) with a population model; and calculation of economic impacts on the 
national beef industry, estimated using a beef industry model developed by the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and 
Resource Economics. To achieve these objectives, an interdisciplinary team of climate modellers, ecologists, and econo­
mists was needed. The results are available at http;//www.modeling.ctpm.uq.edu.au/dest_public/ on the World Wide Web.
0.0 0 -
0 . 10 -
0.50-
1.0 0 -
2.0 0 -
5.00-
10.00
20.00
30.00
0.10
0.50
1.00
2.00
5.00
10.00 
-  20.00
- 30.00
- 50.00
Estimated costs o f cattle tick, in Australian dollars per head o f cattle, for current (left panel) and 2070 (right 
panel) climate, using a three-level integrated approach composed o f climate scenario, tick!cattle model, and 
economic model o f the national beef industry.
Australasia
139
ENSO fluctuations. Collaborative projects involving climatolo­
gists, agricultural scientists, rural economists, and stakeholders 
have led to the development of crop-, farm-, and industry-level 
models that facilitate the application of ENSO-derived season­
al climate forecasting to improve farm and industry manage­
ment (Stone et al., 1993; BRS, 1994; Stafford Smith et al.,
1994). The ability to better predict and manage this short-term 
climate variability is itself an important adaptation tool.
Two Initial efforts at integrated assessment in Australia are 
described in Box 4-1, on the impacts of climate change on the 
management of the scarce water resources of the Macquarie 
River basin in northern NSW, and in Box 4-2, on the impacts 
of climate change on the cattle tick.
These Integrated assessments in Australia and New Zealand 
are subject, however, to large uncertainties arising from con­
tinually evolving GCM-based scenarios of regional climate 
change. Indeed, the remarkable contrast between the rainfall 
change scenarios for Australia (and also by implication for 
New Zealand— see Section 4.2.3) emerging from simulations 
using slab-ocean GCMs and from the more comprehensive 
coupled-ocean models (Whetton et al., 1996a) has increased 
the uncertainty regarding the “correct” scenario to use in 
impact analyses (CSIRO, 1996a) and has thrown considerable 
doubt on the predictions of many early impact studies (though 
they remain valuable as sensitivity studies). As a consequence, 
there is a growing recognition that integrated assessments for 
Australia and New Zealand need to be carried out within a 
versatile framework that allows the range of uncertainties to 
be explored and the effects of changing scenarios (due to sci­
entific, economic, or policy changes) to be readily assessed in 
an iterative fashion. For this approach, integrated models are 
required.
Methods for integrated assessment have been explored at sev­
eral recent workshops involving Australian and New Zealand 
participants (Pittock and Mitchell, 1994; Braaf et al., 1995; 
Hennessy and Pittock, 1996a, b). In New Zealand, a major 
research program known as COMPACTS has been under way 
since 1993, Involving more than seven different laboratories 
(Kenny et a i, 1995; Warrick et al., 1996). This project has cou­
pled the MAGICC model (Wigley, 1994)^w hich generates a 
global average warming curve for given input assumptions— to 
a regional pattern of climate change per 1°C global warming, 
which is based on a range of GCM simulations and local sta­
tistical interpolation techniques. A number of impacts models 
are now being coupled to this framework, in order to examine 
the sensitivity of the New Zealand environment to climate vari­
ability and change. First-order impacts and sensitivities have 
been assessed for grain maize, pasture, wheat, and kiwifruit.
In Australia, CSIRO has begun developing an Australian ver­
sion of COMPACTS called OzClim (CSIRO, 1996b). This is 
part of a broad-based climate impacts “tool kit” that has been 
adopted as a goal of the CSIRO Climate and Atmosphere 
Sector. A comprehensive model for assessing the effect of cli­
mate change on pests and diseases also has been applied in
Australia (Sutherst, 1995; Sutherst et al., 1996) and could be 
part of an impacts tool kit.
These integrated models provide flexible, evolving tools for 
comprehensive assessments of vulnerability and adaptation 
options. They are especially useful in performing “diagnostic” 
analyses of environmental and socioeconomic sensitivities to 
climate change and variability under the shadow of the large 
scientific uncertainties in GCM-based predictions of regional 
climate change.
Another way to estimate integrated effects is to calculate a 
comprehensive monetary estimate, where all known impacts 
are expressed in a dollar value and then added (IPCC 1996, 
WG III, Chapter 6 ). There is considerable room for criticism of 
this method’s assumptions, data, and results. Shortcomings 
aside, however, the estimates available for the Australasian 
region using this approach indicate very significant impacts on 
total GDP (See Box 4-3).
The Australasian region is subject to high climate variability, 
especially associated with the ENSO phenomenon. Therefore, a 
better understanding of how the region’s unique ecosystems are 
affected by climate variability, extremes, and chaotic sequences 
of climate conditions— as well as small, slow changes in mean 
conditions— is needed to enable us to understand how ecosys­
tems might respond to future changes in this variability. The 
issues of climate variability; time characteristics of physical and 
biological components of ecosystems, including hydrology, 
soils, and weeds; and the resulting dynamic, nonlinear behavior 
of ecosystems are key issues, both generally and for predicting 
the impacts of climate change.
Research also is needed on vulnerability to present-day climate 
fluctuations in the region and on how people and systems 
respond to and cope with these fluctuations. The emerging 
ability to predict interannual climate variations, especially 
those arising from the ENSO phenomenon, and to use those 
predictions to optimize management strategies (McKeon and 
Howden, 1993; Stone et al., 1993) is an example of an 
approach that not only serves immediate needs but also can 
become a tool for adaptation to long-term change.
Australia and New Zealand also are extremely vulnerable to 
international influences arising from climate change: through 
their high levels of international trade in food commodities 
whose supply, demand, and prices will alter in a warmer world; 
from climate-mediated risks of imported biological pests and 
diseases that have the potential to decimate food production 
systems; from the consequences of international greenhouse 
gas mitigation policies on the region’s coal industry, energy- 
intensive industries (transport fuels, smelting), and possibly 
agricultural industry; and through their special responsibilities 
to assist South Pacific island communities in the event of cli­
matic disaster and loss of habitability.
To improve the prediction of climate change Impacts for 
Australasia, additional research and information is needed on
140
Australasia
Box 4-3. Estimation of Integrated Economic Impacts of Climate Change
In principle, the total potential economic impact of climate change on the world (or a region or country) can be found by 
deriving a comprehensive monetary estimate— ^where all of the known impacts, positive and negative, are expressed in a 
dollar value and combined (IPCC 1996, WG 111, Section 6.1.2.). For marketed goods and services (for example, 
increased agricultural production, land loss due to sea-level rise, or energy savings in winter), this calculation is more or 
less straightforward because the prices are known. In the case of nonmarketed goods and services (for example, wetland 
loss or mortality changes), monetary estimates of impacts can be obtained through examining market transactions where 
such goods or services are implicitly traded (e.g., the higher price of a house with a good view) or through interviewing 
people for their preferences. That is, human preferences are expressed by people’s willingness to pay to secure a benefit 
or their willingness to accept compensation in exchange for a loss. In OFCD countries, such valuation techniques are 
well established and have been widely applied.
When applied to agriculture, energy, water supply, sea-level rise, mortality, and species losses, the method shows that 
with an equilibrium doubling of COj, the impacts amount to an annual reduction of several percent of GDP in many 
regions of the world (IPCC 1996, WG III, Section 6.2.15). The calculations are carried out under current economic con­
ditions and include some account of international trade effects in agriculture but not of interactions between the different 
impacts or adaptation responses. It should be noted that these results have been strongly criticized— first on the basis of 
inadequate representation of the full range of impacts and second because many researchers hold the view that the 
importance of nonmarket goods, especially lives and quality of life, cannot be expressed in monetary terms.
Updated values of the SAR estimates of the annual impact for Australia and New Zealand combined fall in the range of 
-1.2% to -3.8% of GDP, depending on economic model assumptions (Fankhauser and Toi, 1997). The real uncertainty in 
these estimates is much greater than the range given. Most of the impact arises from health and environmental effects, 
which do not appear in national economic accounts. At face value, these figures indicate substantial negative effects on 
Australasia’s economy. Furthermore, they may seriously underestimate the true total impact because they do not include 
a number of impacts that are potentially important to Australasia— such as changes in weeds, pests, and diseases; storm 
surges; and urban flooding. In addition, damages may increase nonlinearly with increased global warming, so the 
impacts and costs could rise faster than the rate of warming. On the other hand, adaptations to climate change, which 
will act to reduce total costs, also are not included in the calculations.
more accurate and region-specific climate scenarios; the 
dynamics and internal interactions of ecological systems, as 
noted above; impacts on marine, aquatic, and coastal ecosys­
tems; possible changes to the magnitude and frequency of “nat­
ural disasters” such as droughts, floods, tropical cyclones, fire, 
and extreme sea-level events (Pittock et al., 1997); impacts and 
costs for human activities (settlements, industries, and health); 
cross-sector and multinational interactions; and potential adap­
tation options (Henderson-Sellers, 1996) and their impact- 
ameliorating effects.
The important role of fire in Australian ecosystems 
The lack of substantial cooler alpine or higher-latitude 
zones to which heat-intolerant Australian species, 
crops, or activities could retreat 
The fragmented nature of many of the remaining 
Australian native ecosystems
The large role of commodity exports in the Australian 
economy, which makes Australia extremely vulnera­
ble to changes in world trade and commodity prices—  
which in turn may be affected by climate change.
In broad summary, climate change impacts in Australia are 
likely to be dominated by the following factors. Some of these 
factors are more similar to those operating in low-latitude 
developing countries than to those in the more developed coun­
tries of the OFCD:
The effects of climate change on water resources, due 
to the arid and semi-arid nature of much of the country 
Potential changes in rainfall variability associated 
with the FNSO phenomenon, tropical cyclones, and 
the increased water-holding capacity of warmer air 
The fact that much of Australia lies in the tropics and 
subtropics, where many crops grow near or above 
their optimum temperatures
On the other hand. New Zealand is a mid-latitude country with 
relatively large alpine areas and greater water resources. 
Despite New Zealand’s large dependence on export commodi­
ties— which may be affected by world commodity prices—  
general warming would allow adaptation through the introduc­
tion of more heat-tolerant crops or the migration of species and 
activities to higher elevations or latitudes. Increased agricul­
tural production appears likely. One of the most obvious 
impacts of warming in New Zealand would be the retreat of 
snowfields and glaciers, which may have impacts on tourism, 
water resources, and hydroelectric power generation.
For both countries, it is clear that studies of potential impacts 
are still very preliminary, with little work to date based on the
Australasia
141
latest scenarios from the coupled-ocean GCMs. Further, there 
has been relatively little integration across sectors, few 
attempts to take account of other components of global change, 
and few systematic studies of potential adaptations.
Despite these serious shortcomings, preliminary indications 
are that in both countries many activities and ecosystems are 
quite sensitive to climate change, with positive and negative 
effects. Australia’s relatively low latitude makes it particularly 
vulnerable through impacts on its scarce water resources and 
on crops presently growing near or above their optimum tem­
peratures. The effects may be quite nonlinear, with small 
warmings having benign effects but larger warmings produc­
ing more negative impacts.
High priority must be given in the future to studies that take a 
more integrated approach and facilitate assessment of the 
impacts of a wide range of climatic, socioeconomic, and other 
scenarios, as well as potential adaptations. Until then, any 
quantitative estimates of the potential cost of climate change 
must be regarded as highly uncertain.
References
A IM , 1997: A s i a n - P a c i f i c  I n t e g r a t e d  M o d e l . AIM  Project Team, National 
Institute for Environm ental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan, 83 pp.
Allan, R.J. and M .R. Haylock, 1993: Circulation features associated w ith the 
w inter rainfall decrease in southw estern A ustralia. J .  
C l i m a t e , 6, 
1356-1367.
Allden, W.G., 1981: Energy and protein supplem ents for grazing livestock. In: 
G r a z i n g  
A n i m a l s  [M orley, F.H.W . (ed.)]. Elsevier, A m sterdam , 
Netherlands, pp. 89-307.
Arp, W. and F. Berendse, 1993: Plant grow th and nutrient cycling in nutrient 
poor ecosystem s. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  C r o p s  a n d  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s  
[van de G eijn, 
S.C ., J. 
G oudriaan, and F. B erendse (eds.)]. 
A grobiologische Them as 9, CABO-DLO, W ageningen, The Netherlands, 
pp. 109-124.
Ash, A.J., S.M. Howden, and J.G. M clvor, 1996: Im proved rangeland m an­
agement and its im plications for carbon sequestration. In: R a n g e l a n d s  i n  
a  S u s t a i n a b l e  B i o s p h e r e . Vol. 1, Proceedings o f the Fifth International 
Rangelands Congress [West, N.E. (ed.)], 23-28 July 1995, Salt Lake City, 
Utah, USA, pp. 19-20.
Australian Bureau o f Statistics, 1997: T h e  H e a l t h  a n d  W e l f a r e  o f  A u s t r a l i a ’s  
A b o r i g i n a l  a n d  T o r r e s  S t r a i t  I s l a n d e r  P e o p l e s . A ustralian Bureau of 
Statistics Catalogue No. 4704.0, Canberra, 9 pp.
Australian Institntion o f Engineers, 1991: G u i d e l i n e s  f o r  R e s p o n d i n g  t o  t h e  
E f f e c t s  o f  C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  C o a s t a l  E n g i n e e r i n g  D e s i g n . National 
Committee on Coastal and Ocean Engineering, Barton, ACT, 446 pp.
Ayers, G .P and R. Boers, 1996: Clim ate, Clouds and the sulfur cycle. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e ;  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e , [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, 
and M.R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, 
A ustralia, pp. 27-41.
Bates, B.C., A.J. Jakem an, S.P. Charles, N.R. Summ er, and PM . Fleming, 
1996. Im pact of clim ate change on A ustralia’s surface w ater resources. 
In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
C o p i n g  
w i t h  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. 
Pearman, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, 
Victoria, Australia, pp. 248-262.
BCTE, 1996: T r a n s p o r t  a n d  G r e e n h o u s e :  C o s t s  a n d  O p t i o n s  f o r  R e d u c i n g  
E m i s s i o n s , Bureau of Transport and C om m unications Econom ics, 
A ustralian Govt. Pub. Service, Canberra, 541 pp.
Beer, T. and A. W illiams, 1995: Estim ating Australian forest fire danger under 
conditions of doubled carbon dioxide concentrations. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e ,  
29, 169-188.
Benson, L.J. and R.G. Pearson, 1987: The role of drift and the effect of season 
on m acroinvertebrate colonization of implanted substrata in a tropical 
Australian stream. F r e s h w a t e r  B i o l o g y , 18, 109-116.
Bird, E.C.F., 1988: Physiographic indications of a sea-level rise. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
P l a n n i n g  f o r  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Pearman, G.I. (ed.)]. 
CSIRO, M elbourne, Australia, pp. 60-73.
B ird, E.C .F., 1993: S u b m e r g i n g  C o a s t s :  T h e  E f f e c t s  o f  R i s i n g  S e a - L e v e l  
o n  C o a s t a l  E n v i r o n m e n t s . John W iley and Sons, C hichester, UK, 184
pp.
Blum enthal, C.S., I.L. Batey, F. Bekes, C.W. Wrigley, and E.W.R. Barlow, 
1991a: Seasonal changes in wheat-grain quality associated w ith high 
tem peratures during grain filling. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  A g r i c u l t u r a l  
R e s e a r c h , 42, 21-30.
Blum enthal, C.S., F. Bekes, I.L. Batey, C.W. Wrigley, H.J. Moss, D.J. Mares, 
and E.W.R. Barlow, 1991b: 1п1ефге1а1юп of grain quality results from 
w heat variety trials w ith reference to high tem perature stress. A u s t r a l i a n  
J o u r n a l  o f  A g r i c u l t u r a l  R e s e a r c h , 43, 325-334.
Boag, T.S., L. Tassie, and K. Hubick, 1988: The greenhouse effect: implica­
tions for the A ustralian grape and w ine industry. A u s t r a l i a n  a n d  N e w  
Z e a l a n d  W in e  I n d u s t r y  J o u r n a l , 3, 30-36.
Boon, P., J. Frankenberg, T. Hillm an, R. Oliver, and R. Shiel, 1990: 
Billabongs. In: T h e  M
u r r a y  [Mackay, N. and D. Eastbum  (eds.)]. M urray 
Darling Basin Commission, Canberra, Australia, pp. 182-198.
Boulton, A.J. and PS . Lake, 1988: A ustralian tem porary stream s —  some 
ecological 
characteristics. 
V e r h .  
I n t e r n a t .  
V e r e i n .  
L i m n o l .  
23, 
1380-1383.
Boulton, A.J. and PS . Lake, 1992: The ecology of two intermittent streams in 
Victoria, A ustralia. III. Tem poral changes in faunal com position. 
F r e s h w a t e r  B i o l o g y , 27, 123-138.
Braaf, R., A. Henderson-Sellers, G. Holland, and W. Howe (eds.), 1995: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
P r e d i c t i o n ,  
I m p a c t s  
E v a l u a t i o n  
a n d  
I n t e g r a t e d  
A s s e s s m e n t . Proceedings o f U sers of Clim ate Change Predictions 
Experts’ W orkshop, 31 M ay -  1 June 1995. Climatic Impacts Centre, 
M acquarie University, Sydney, Australia, 56 pp.
B rereton, R., S. B ennett, and I. M ansergh, 1995: Enhanced G reenhouse 
clim ate change and its potential effect on selected fauna o f south­
eastern A ustralia: a trend analysis. B i o l o g i c a l  
C o n s e r v a t i o n , 72, 
3 39-354.
Brown, B.E., 1997: A daptations of reef corals to physical environmental 
stresses. A d v a n c e s  i n  M a r i n e  B i o l o g y , 31, 221-299.
Brown, B.E., 1997: Coral bleaching: causes and consequences. C o r a l  R e e f s  (in 
press).
BRS, 1994: Climate and Risk. Bureau of Resource Sciences, special issue of 
A g r i c u l t u r a l  S y s t e m s  a n d  I n f o r m a t i o n  T e c h n o l o g y , 6(2), 1-75.
Bunn, S.E. and P.M. Davies, 1990: W hy is the stream fauna of south-western 
A ustralia so im poverished? H y d r o b i o l o g i a , 194, 169-176.
B ureau o f M eteorology, 1989: 
T h e  
C l i m a t e  
o f  A u s t r a l i a .  A ustralian 
Governm ent Publishing Service, Canberra, 49 pp.
Burgm an, M .A. and B.B. Lamont, 1992: A  stochastic model for the viability 
o f B a n k s i a  c u n e a t a  populations: environm ental, demographic and genet­
ic effects. J o u r n a l  o f  A p p l i e d  E c o l o g y , 29, 719-727.
Burns, N.M . and D.S. Roper, 1990: Estuaries. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  
o n  N e w  Z e a l a n d  [Mosley, M .P (ed.)]. M inistry for the Environment, 
W ellington, pp. 81-84.
Busby, J.R., 1988. Potential impacts of climate change on A ustralia’s flora and 
fauna. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  P l a n n i n g  f o r  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Pearman, G.I. 
(ed.)]. CSIRO, M elbourne, pp. 387-398.
Cam pbell, B.D. and R.J.M . Hay, 1993: W
i l l  s u b t r o p i c a l  g r a s s e s  c o n t i n u e  t o  
s p r e a d  t h r o u g h o u t  N e w  Z e a l a n d ! Proceedings o f the XVII International 
Grassland Congress, 13 February 1993. Palm erston North, New Zealand,
pp. 1126-1128.
Cam pbell, B.D., G.M . M cKeon, R.M . Gifford, H. Clark, D.M . Stafford- 
Smith, P. Newton, and J.L. Lutze, 1996: Impacts of atm ospheric compo­
sition and climate change on temperate and tropical pastoral agriculture. 
In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
C o p i n g  
w i t h  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. 
Pearman, and M.R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, 
Victoria, Australia, pp. 171-189.
Ceulem ans, R. and M. M ousseau, 1994: Effects of elevated atm ospheric CO 2  
on woody plants. N e w  P h y t o l o g i s t , 127, 425-446.
142
Australasia
C happell, J., P.J. Cowell, C.D. W oodroffe, and I.G. Eliot, 1996: Coastal 
im pacts o f enhanced greenhouse climate change in A ustralia: im plica­
tions for coal use. In; 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
C o p i n g  
w i t h  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
[Boum a, W.J., G.I. Pearm an, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 220-234.
C hicw , F.H.S., P.H. W hetton, T.A. M cM ahon, and A.B. Pittock, 1995: 
Sim ulation of the impacts of clim ate change on runoff and soil moisture 
in A ustralian catchments. J .  H y d r o l ,  167, 121-147.
C hristensen, P.E. and P.C. Kimber, 1975: Effect of prescribed burning on the 
flora and fauna of south-west A ustralian forests. P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  
E c o l o g i c a l  S o c i e t y  o f  A u s t r a l i a ,  9 , 85-106.
Closs, G.P. and P.S. Lake, 1996; Drought, differential m ortality and the coex­
istence o f a native and an introduced fish species in a south east 
A ustralian interm ittent stream. E n v .  B i o l .  F i s h . , 47, 17-26.
Colem an, R.A., B.J. McAvaney, J.R. Fraser, and S.B. Power, 1994: Annual 
m ean m eridional energy transport m odelled by a general circulation 
model for present and 2 x CO 2 equilibrium  climates. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s ,  
10, 221-229.
Cowell, P.J., P.S. Roy, T.Q. Zeng, and B.G. Thom , 1996; P r a c t i c a l  r e l a t i o n ­
s h i p s  f o r  p r e d i c t i n g  c o a s t a l  g e o m o r p h i c  
i m p a c t s  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e .  
Proceedings of Ocean and Atm osphere Pacific [Aung, Т.Н. (ed.)]. 
National Tidal Facility, The Flinders University of South Australia, 
Adelaide, South A ustralia, pp. 16-21.
Crocombe, G.T., N.J. Enright, and M.E. Porter, 1991: U p g r a d i n g  N e w  Z e a l a n d ’s  
C o m p e t i t i v e  A d v a n t a g e , Oxford University Press, Oxford, 235 pp.
C SIR O , 1991: C u r r e n t  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o  f o r  t h e  A u s t r a l i a n  R e g i o n  —  
2 0 3 0 . Clim ate Im pact Group, CSIRO Division of A tm ospheric Research, 
M elbourne, Australia, 4 pp.
C SIR O , 1992; C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o s  f o r  t h e  A u s t r a l i a n  R e g i o n . Climate 
Im pact Group, CSIRO D ivision of A tm ospheric Research, M elbourne, 
Australia, 6 pp.
C SIR O , 1996a: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o s  f o r  t h e  A u s t r a l i a n  R e g i o n . Climate 
Impact Group, CSIRO D ivision of A tm ospheric Research, M elbourne, 
Australia, 8 pp.
CSIRO, 1996b: O z C l i m :  A  C l i m a t e  S c e n a r i o  G e n e r a t o r  a n d  I m p a c t s  P a c k a g e  
f o r  A u s t r a l i a .  Issued Novem ber 1996,4 pp. A lso available on the Internet 
at http;//www.dar.csiro.au/pub/programs/climod/impacts/ozcUm.htm
D avis, J.A., S.A. Harrington, and J.A. Friend, 1993. Invertebrate com m unities 
of relict stream s in the arid zone: the George Gill Range, central 
Australia. A u s t .  J .  M a r .  F r e s h w a t e r  R e s . , 44, 483-505.
Departm ent o f C onservation, 1994: N e w  Z e a l a n d  C o a s t a l  P o l i c y  S t a t e m e n t .  
Departm ent of Conservation, W ellington, New Zealand, 26 pp.
Dexter, E.M ., A.D. Chapm an, and J.R. Busby, 1995; T h e  I m p a c t  o f  G l o b a l  
W a r m i n g  o n  t h e  D i s t r i b u t i o n  o f  T h r e a t e n e d  V e r t e b r a t e s . Available on the 
Internet at http://w w w .erin.gov.au/life/end_vuln/anim als/clim ate/cli- 
m ate_change/cc_exe.htm l
Done, T.J., 1983: Coral zonation: its nature and significance. In: P e r s p e c t iv e s  
o n  C o r a l  R e e f s .  A u s t r a l i a n  I n s t i t u t e  o f  M a r i n e  S c i e n c e  [Barnes, D.J. 
(ed.)]. Brian Cluston Publisher, M anuka, ACT, Australia, pp. 107-147.
Dubinsky, Z. and N. Stambler, 1996: M arine pollution and coral reefs. G l o b a l  
C h a n g e  B i o l o g y ,  2 , 511-526.
E am us, D., 1991: The interaction of rising CO 2 and tem perature w ith water 
use efficiency. P l a n t ,  C e l l ,  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t , 14, 843-852.
Enquselassie, F., A.J. Dobson, H.M . Alexander, and P.L. Steele, 1993: 
Seasons, tem perature and coronary disease. I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  
E p i d e m i o l o g y , 137, 331-341.
Fankhauser, S. and R.S.J. Toi, 1997: The social costs of climate change; the 
IPCC Second Assessm ent Report and beyond. M i t i g a t i o n  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  
S t r a t e g i e s  f o r  G l o b a l  C h a n g e , 1, 385-403.
Farrow, R.A., G. M cDonald, and P.D. Stahle, 1993: Potential im pact of rapid 
clim ate change through the greenhouse effect on the pests of pastures in 
southeast A ustralia. In: P e s t s  o f  P a s t u r e s  [Delfosse, E.S. (ed)]. CSIRO, 
M elbourne, pp. 142-151.
F enner, J., L. Carter, and R. Stewart, 1992: Late Guatem ary paleoclim atic and 
paleooceanographic change over northern Chatham Rise, New Zealand. 
M a r i n e  G e o l o g y , 108, 3 8 3 ^ 0 4 .
Fenwick, T , 1995: W ater m anagem ent —  a new age. In: J a c k  B e a l e  W a t e r  
R e s o u r c e s  L e c t u r e  S e r i e s  1 9 9 0 - 1 9 9 4 . W ater Research Foundation of 
Australia, c/o A ustralian National University, Canberra, pp. 3 5 ^ 7 .
Finlayson, B.L. and T.A. M cM ahon, 1988: A ustralia vs the world; A  com par­
ative analysis of stream flow characteristics. In: F l u v i a l  G e o m o r p h o l o g y  
o f  A u s t r a l i a  [Warner, R.J. (ed.)]. A cadem ic Press, Sydney, pp. 1 7 ^ 0 .
Fitzharris, B.B., 1992: The 1992 electricity crisis and the role of clim ate and 
hydrology. N e w  Z e a l a n d  G e o g r a p h e r , 48(2), 79-83.
Fitzharris, B. and C. Garr, 1996: Clim ate, w ater resources and electricity. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.L Pearman, 
and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, 
Australia, pp. 263-280.
Flem ing, P.M., 1995: A ustralian w ater resources are different. A u s t r a l a s i a n  
S c i e n c e , 16(2), 8-10.
Folland, C.K. and M.J. Salinger, 1995: Surface tem perature trends and varia­
tions in N ew  Z ealand and the surrounding ocean, 1871-1993. 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y , 15, 1195-1218.
Fowler, A.M . and K.J. Hennessy, 1995; Potential im pacts of global w arm ing 
on the frequency and m agnitude of heavy precipitation. N a t u r a l  H a z a r d s ,  
11, 283-303.
Fraser, T., 1990: M aori and Their Resources. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  o n  
N e w  Z e a l a n d , N.Z. M inistry for the Environment, Wellington, pp. 215-218.
Garr, C.E. and B.B. Fitzharris, 1994; Sensitivity of m ountain runoff and 
hydroelectricity to changing climate. In: M o u n t a i n  E n v i r o n m e n t s  
i n  
C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e s  [Beniston, M. (ed.)]. Routledge, London, United 
Kingdom, pp. 366-381.
G arratt, J.R., M .R. Raupach, and K.G. M cNaughton, 1996: Clim ate and the 
terrestrial biosphere. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
C o p i n g  
w i t h  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
[Boum a, W .J., G.I. Pearm an, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, A ustralia, pp. 42-55.
Ghassem i, F., G. Jacobson, and A.J. Jakeman, 1991: M ajor Australian aquifers: 
potential climatic change impacts. W a t e r  I n t e r n a t i o n a l ,  16, 38-44.
Gibb, J.G., 1980: L a t e  Q u a t e r n a r y  S h o r e l i n e  M o v e m e n t s  i n  N e w  Z e a l a n d . Ph. 
D. Thesis, Victoria University o f W ellington, W ellington, 217+ pp.
Gifford, R.M ., 1992: Interaction of carbon dioxide and grow th-lim iting envi­
ronm ental factors in vegetation productivity; Im plications for the global 
carbon cycle. A d v a n c e s  i n  B i o c l i m a t o l o g y , 1, 24-58.
Gifford, R.M ., D.J. Barrett, J.L. Lutze, and A.B. Sam arakoon, 1996a: 
A griculture and global change: Scaling direct carbon dioxide im pacts and 
feedbacks through time. In: G l o b a l  C h a n g e  a n d  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s  
[Walker, B., and W. Steffen (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, 
Cam bridge, UK, pp. 229-259.
G ifford, R.M ., B.D. Cam pbell, and S.M. Howden, 1996b; Options for adapt­
ing agriculture to clim ate change: A ustralian and N ew  Zealand examples. 
In; 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
C o p i n g  
w i t h  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. 
Pearman, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, 
Victoria, A ustralia, pp. 3 9 9 ^ 1 6 .
Gill, A.M . and R.A. Bradstock, 1995; Extinction of biota by fires. In 
C o n s e r v i n g  B i o d i v e r s i t y :  T h r e a t s  a n d  S o l u t i o n s , [Bradstock, R.A., T.D. 
Auld, D.A. Keith, R.T. Kingsford, D. Lunney, and D.P. Sivertsen (eds.)] 
Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, New South W ales, Australia, 
pp. 309-322.
Glova, G.J., 1990: Freshwater fisheries. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  o n  N e w  
Z e a l a n d  [Mosley, M.P. (ed.)]. M inistry for the Environm ent, W ellington, 
pp. 78-80.
Glynn, P.W., 1996; Coral reef bleaching: facts, hypotheses and implications. 
G l o b a l  C h a n g e  B i o l o g y ,  2 , 495-509.
Gordon, H.B., B.J. M cAvaney, and J.L. M cGregor, 1996: Perspectives on 
m odelling global clim ate change. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e , [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Australia, pp. 56-80.
Green, T.R., B.C. Bates, P.M. Flem ing, and S.P. Charles, 1997: Sim ulated 
impacts of climate change on groundw ater recharge in the subtropics of 
Gueensland, Australia. In: S u b s u r f a c e  H y d r o l o g i c a l  R e s p o n s e s  t o  L a n d  
C o v e r  a n d  L a n d  U s e  C h a n g e s , [Taniguchi, M. (ed.)]. Ю uwer Academic, 
Boston, M assachusetts, pp. 187-204.
Greer, D.H., W.A. Laing, and B.D. Cam pbell, 1995: Photosynthetic respons­
es of thirteen pasture species to elevated CO 2  and tem perature. A u s t .  
J o u r n a l  o f  P l a n t  P h y s i o l o g y ,  2 2 , 713-722.
Griffiths, G.A., 1990: W ater resources. In; C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  o n  N e w  
Z e a l a n d  [Mosley, M.P. (ed.)]. M inistry for the Environm ent, Wellington, 
pp. 3 8 ^ 3 .
Australasia
143
G underson, C.A. and S.D. W ullschleger, 1994: Photosynthetic acclim ation in 
trees to rising atm ospheric C O y . a broader perspective. P h o t o s y n t h e t i c  
R e s e a r c h , 39, 369—388.
Hales, S., P. W einstein, and A. W oodward, 1996: Dengue fever epidem ics in 
the South Pacific: driven by El Nino Southern Oscillation? L a n c e t , 348, 
1664-1665.
Hales, S., A. W oodward, and C. Guest, 1995: Clim ate change in the South 
Pacific: priorities for public health research. A u s t .  J o u r n a l  o f  P u b l i c  
H e a l t h , 19, 543-545.
H art, B.T., P. Bailey, R. Edwards, K. Hortle, K. Jam es, A. M cM ahon, C. 
M eredith, and K. Swadling, 1991: A  review of the salt sensitivity of the 
Australian freshw ater biota. H y d r o b i o l o g i a ,  210, 105-144,
Hassall an d  A ssociates, 1997: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o s  a n d  M a n a g i n g  t h e  
S c a r c e  
W a t e r  
R e s o u r c e s  
o f  t h e  
M a c q u a r i e  
R i v e r . Report for the 
Departm ent of the Environm ent, Sport and Territories, under the Climate 
Impacts and A daptation G rants Program, Canberra (in press).
H eathcote, R.L,, 1994: A ustralia. In: D r o u g h t  F o l l o w s  t h e  P l o u g h  [Glanz, 
M.H. (ed.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 
pp. 91-102.
H eathcote, R.L., 1996: Settlem ent advance and retreat: a century of experi­
ence on the Eyre Peninsula of South Australia. In: C U m a t e  V a r i a b i l i t y  
a n d  V u l n e r a b i l i t y :  C a u s a l i t y  a n d  R e s p o n s e  [J.C. Ribot, A.R. M agalhaes, 
and S.S. Panagides (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, 
United Kingdom , pp. 109-122.
H enderson, G, P. M cKenna, A, Kingsley, R. Little, A. Sorby, G. Jacobson, and 
G. Fisher, 1995: H epatitus A  and w ater supply in the Torres Strait Area. 
A b o r i g i n a l  a n d  T o r r e s  S t r a i t  I s l a n d e r  H e a l t h  I n f o r m a t i o n  B u l l e t i n ,  21, 
48-58.
H enderson-Sellers, A., 1996: A daptation to clim atic change: its future role in 
Oceania. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J.,
G.L Pearm an, and M .R. 
M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO  Publishing, 
Collingwood, Victoria, A ustralia, pp. 349-376.
H enderson-Sellers, A. and H. Zhang, 1997: T r o p i c a l  C y c l o n e s  a n d  G l o b a l  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e . Report from  the W M O /CA S/TM RP Com m ittee on 
Climate Change Assessm ent (Project TC-2), W orld M eteorological 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 47 pp. (also accessible via Internet at 
http://www.bom.gov.au/bmrc/).
Hennessy, K.J. and K. Clayton-Greene, 1995: Greenhouse w arm ing and ver­
nalisation o f high-chill fruit in southern Australia. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 30, 
327-348.
Hennessy, K.J. and A.B. Pittock, 1995: Greenhouse w arm ing and threshold 
tem perature events in V ictoria, A ustralia. 
I n t e r n a l .  
J o u r n a l  
o f  
C l i m a t o l o g y , 15, 591-612.
Hennessy, K.J. and A .B. Pittock, 1996a: 
C l i m a t e  
I m p a c t s  A s s e s s m e n t  
W o r k s h o p  R e p o r t :  
D e v e l o p m e n t  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
S c e n a r i o s . , CSIRO Division of A tm ospheric Research, M elbourne, 
Australia, 4 -5  Dec. 1995, 47 pp.
Hennessy, K.J. and A.B. Pittock, 1996b: 
C l i m a t e  
I m p a c t s  A s s e s s m e n t  
W o r k s h o p  A b s t r a c t s :  D e v e l o p m e n t  a n d  A p p l i c a t i o n  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
S c e n a r i o s . CSIRO Division of A tm ospheric Research, M elbourne, 
Australia, 4 -5  Dec. 1995, 117 pp.
Hennessy, K.J., P.H. W hetton, X. Wu, J.L. M cGregor, J.J. Katzfey, and K. 
Nguyen, 1997: F i n e  R e s o l u t i o n  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o s  f o r  N e w  
S o u t h  
W a l e s , N.S.W . Environm ent Protection A uthority, Sydney, 
Australia, 42 pp.
H illm an, T.J. and R.J. Shiel, 1991: M acro- and m icro-invertebrates in 
Australian billabongs. V e r h .  I n t e r n a t .  V e r e in .  L i m n o l . ,  24, 1581-1587.
Hobbs, I.E., 1988: Recent clim ate change in Australia. In: R e c e n t  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Gregory, S. (ed.)]. Belhaven Press, London, United Kingdom, 
pp. 285-297.
H olbrook, N.J. and N.L. Bindoff, 1997: Interannual and decadal temperature 
variability in the southwest Pacific Ocean between 1955 and 1988. J .  
C l i m a t e , 10, 1035 -1049.
H olland, G.J., 1997: The m axim um  potential intensity of tropical cyclones. J .  
A t m o s p h e r i c  S c i e n c e , 54, 2519-2541.
H ooper, A., 1990: Tokelau. In: C l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  o n  N e w  Z e a l a n d ,  
N.Z. M inistry for the Environment, W ellington, pp. 238-242.
H opkins, L.C. and G.J. Holland, 1997: A ustralian heavy-rain days and associ­
ated east coast cyclones: 1958-1992. J .  C l i m a t e , 10, 621-635.
H ow den, М ., D.H. W hite, G.M . M cKeon, J.C. Scanlan, and J.O. Carter, 1994: 
M ethods for exploring m anagem ent options to reduce greenhouse gas 
em issions from  tropical grazing systems. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 27, 49-70. 
H u n t, I.E., F.M. Kelliher, and D.L. M cNeil, 1996. Response in chlorophyll a  
fluorescence of six New Zealand tree species to a step-wise increase in 
ultraviolet-B irradiance. N e w  Z e a l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  B o t a n y , 34, 4 0 1 ^ 1 0 . 
IP C C , 1990: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  T h e  I P C C  S c i e n t i f i c  A s s e s s m e n t [Houghton,
H.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cam bridge University 
Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 365 pp.
IP C C , 1991: C o m m o n  M e t h o d o l o g y  f o r  A s s e s s i n g  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  t o  S e a - l e v e l  
R i s e . Intergovernm ental Panel on Clim ate Change, Coastal Zone 
M anagem ent Group, M inistry of Transport and Public Works, The 
Hague, Netherlands.
IP C C , 1996a: Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change. 
Contribution of W orking Group I to the Second A ssessm ent Report of the 
Intergovernm ental Panel on Climate Change [Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge and New York, 572 pp.
Schimel, D., D. Alves, I. Enting, M. Heimann, F. Joos, D. Raynaud, 
T.M.L. Wigley, E. Sanhueza, X. Zhou, P. Jonas, R. Charlson, H. 
Rodhe, S. Sadasivan, K.P. Shine, Y. Fouquart, V. Ramaswamy, S. 
Solom on, J. Srinivasan, D. Albritton, R. Derwent, Y. Isaken, M. 
Lai, and D. W uebbles, Chapter 2. R a d i a t i o n  F o r c i n g  o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e , pp. 65-131.
-  
Nicholls, N.. G.V. Gruza, J. Jouzel, T.R. Karl, L.A. Ogallo, and 
D.E. Parker, Chapter 3. O b s e r v e d  C l i m a t e  V a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  C h a n g e ,  
pp. 133-192.
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. M eehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver, and T.M.L. Wigley, Chapter 
6. C l i m a t e  M o d e l s  —
P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  F u t u r e  C l i m a t e , pp. 289-357. 
W arrick, R.A., C. I.e Provost, M.F. Meier, J. Oerlemans, and P.L. 
W oodworth, Chapter 7. C h a n g e s  i n  S e a  L e v e l , pp. 359-405.
Santer, B.D., T.M.L. Wigley, T.R Bamett, and E. Anyamba, Chapter 8. 
D e t e c t i o n  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  A t t r i b u t i o n  o f  C a u s e s , pp. 407-443. 
IP C C , 1996b: Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations, and M itigation of 
Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change [Watson, R.T., M.C. Zinyowera, and R.C. Moss 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York, 878 pp.
-  
Kirschbaum , M .U .F, Chapter A. E c o p h y s i o l o g i c a l ,  E c o l o g i c a l ,  a n d  
S o i l  P r o c e s s e s  i n  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s :  A  P r i m e r  o n  G e n e r a l  
C o n c e p t s  a n d  R e l a t i o n s h i p s , p.57-74.
Kirschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  o n  F o r e s t s , pp. 95-130.
Allen-Diaz, B., Chapter 2. R a n g e l a n d s  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  
I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n ,  pp. 131-158.
Bullock, P. and H. Le Houérou, Chapter 4. L a n d  D e g r a d a t i o n  a n d  
D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n , pp. 170-189.
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
o n  M o u n t a i n  R e g i o n s , pp. 191-213.
Fitzharris, B.B., Chapter 7. T h e  C r y o s p h e r e :  C h a n g e s  a n d  t h e i r  
I m p a c t s , pp. 240-265.
-  
Bijlsma, L, Chapter 9. C o a s t a l  Z o n e s  a n d  S m a l l  I s l a n d s , pp. 289-324. 
Arnell, N.. B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. H y d r o l o g y  a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  E c o l o g y , pp. 325-364. 
Acosta-M oreno, R. and J. Skea, Chapter 11. I n d u s t r y ,  E n e r g y ,  a n d  
T r a n s p o r t a t i o n :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 365-398.
Scott, M .J., Chapter 12. H u m a n  
S e t t l e m e n t s  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 399-426.
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. A g r i c u l t u r e  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  
a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 427-467.
-  
Kaczmarek, Z., Chapter 14. W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  M a n a g e m e n t , pp. 
469-486.
Solom on, A.M ., Chapter 15. W o o d  P r o d u c t i o n  u n d e r  C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e  a n d  L a n d  U s e , pp. 487-510.
Everett, J., Chapter 16. F i s h e r i e s , pp. 511-537.
Dlugolecki, A.F., Chapter 17. Financial Services, pp.539-560. 
M cM ichael, A., Chapter 18. 
H u m a n  
P o p u l a t i o n  
H e a l t h , pp. 
561-584.
144
Australasia
IP C C , 1996c: Clim ate Change 1995: Econom ic and Social Dim ensions of 
Climate Change. Contribution of W orking Group III to the Second 
A ssessm ent Report of the Intergovernm ental Panel on Clim ate Change 
[Bruce, J.P , H. Lee, and E.F. H aites (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
Cam bridge and N ew  York, 448 pp.
Pearce, D .W , W.R. Cline, A.N. Achanta, S. Fankhauser, R.K. 
Pachauri, R.S.J. Toi, and P. Vellinga, Chapter 6. T h e  S o c i a l  C o s t s  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  G r e e n h o u s e  D a m a g e  a n d  B e n e f i t s  o f  C o n t r o l , pp. 
179-224.
Weyant, J., Chapter 10. I n t e g r a t e d  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  
A n  
O v e r v i e w  
a n d  
C o m p a r i s o n  
o f  A p p r o a c h e s  
a n d  
R e s u l t s ,  
pp.367-396.
Jacobson, G., 1976: The freshw ater lens on Home Island in the Cocos 
(Keeling) Islands. B M R  J o u r n a l  o f  A u s t r a l i a n  G e o l o g y  a n d  G e o p h y s i c s ,  
1, 335-343.
Jacobson, G., 1996: The interrelationship of hydrology and landform  in cen­
tral Australia. In: E x p l o r i n g  C e n t r a l  A u s t r a l i a :  S o c i e t y ,  t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t  
a n d  t h e  1 8 9 4  H o r n  E x p e d i t i o n  [M orton, S.R. and D.J. M ulvaney (eds.)]. 
Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, New South W ales, pp. 
249-266.
Jaco b so n , G., G.E. Calf, J. Jankow ski, and P S . M cD onald, 1989: 
Groundwater chem istry and palaeorecharge in the A m adeus Basin, 
Central A ustralia. J o u r n a l  o f  H y d r o l o g y , 109, 237-266.
Jacobson, G. and T. Graham, 1996: Groundw ater discharge to coastal swam ps 
in the Torres Strait Islands: high w ater table and m osquito habitat. In: 
G r o u n d w a t e r  D i s c h a r g e  i n  t h e  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  [Buddemeier, R.W. (ed.)]. 
L O I C Z  R e p o r t s  a n d  S t u d ie s , 8, pp. 55-61.
Jen k in so n , D.S, D.E. Adam s, and A. W ild, 1991: M odel estimates of CO 2  
em issions from  soil response to global warm ing. N a t u r e , 351, 304—306.
Jones, P.A., 1991: Historical records o f cloud cover and clim ate for Australia. 
A u s t r a l i a n  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  M a g a z i n e , 39 ,1 8 1 -1 8 9 .
K arl, T.R., P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight, G. Kukla, N. Plummer, V. Razuvayev, 
K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay, R.J. Charlson, and T.C. Peterson, 1993: 
A sym m etric trends o f daily m axim um  and m inim um  temperature. 
B u l l e t i n  A m e r i c a n  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  S o c i e t y , 74, 1007-1023.
K arl, T.R., R.W. Knight, and N. Plum mer, 1995: Trends in high-frequency cli­
mate variability in the twentieth century. N a t u r e , 377, 217-220.
K atzfey, J.J. and K.L. M clnnes, 1996: GCM  sim ulations of eastern A ustralian 
cutoff lows. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 9, 2337-2355.
K ay, R., A. Kirkland, I. Stewart, J. Bailey, C. Berry, B. Caton, J. Dahm, I.E. 
Eliot, E.J.A. Ю everlaan, G. M orvell, D. Slaven, and P. W aterman, 1996: 
Planning for future clim ate change and sea-level rise induced coastal 
change in A ustralia and New Zealand. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. 
CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 377-398.
K eith, D., 1996: Fire-driven extinction o f plant populations: a synthesis of 
theory and review of evidence from  Australian vegetation. P r o c e e d i n g s  
o f  t h e  L i n n e a n  S o c i e t y  o f  N e w  S o u t h  W a le s , 116, 37-78.
K enny, G. J., R.A. W arrick, N.D, M itchell, A.B. M ullan, and M.J. Salinger, 
(1995): CLIM PACTS: A n Integrated M odel for Assessm ent of the 
Effects of Clim ate Change on the New Zealand Environm ent. J o u r n a l  o f  
B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 883-895.
K nighton, A.D., K. M ills, and C.D. W oodroffe, 1991: Tidal creek extension 
and salt w ater intrusion in northern A ustralia. G e o l o g y , 19, 831-834.
K n o tt, G.G. and PS . M cDonald, 1983: Groundwater for Central Australian 
A boriginal 
com m unities. 
A u s t r a l i a n  
W a t e r  
R e s o u r c e s  
C o u n c i l ,  
C o n f e r e n c e  S e r i e s , 3, 141-150.
K olsky, P.J., 1993: Diarrhoeal disease: current concepts and future challenges. 
W ater sanitation and diarrhoea; the limits of understanding. T r a n s .  R o y a l  
S o c i e t y  o f  T r o p i c a l  M e d i c i n e  a n d  H y g i e n e , 87, 4 3 ^ 6 .
L ake, PS . 1995: O f floods and droughts: river and stream  ecosystem s of 
A ustralia. In: E c o s y s t e m s  o f  t h e  W o r l d  2 2 .  R i v e r  a n d  S t r e a m  E c o s y s t e m s  
[Cushing, C.E., K.W. Cummins, and G.W. MinshaU (eds.)]. Elsevier, 
A m sterdam , Netherlands, pp. 659-694.
L andsberg, J.J., 1996: Im pact o f clim ate change and atmospheric carbon diox­
ide concentration on the growth of planted forests. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  
C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, and M.R. 
M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, 
pp. 205-219.
L an d sb erg , J. and M. Stafford Smith, 1992: A  functional schem e for predict­
ing the outbreak potential o f herbivorous insects under global atm os­
pheric change. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  B o t a n y , 40, 565-577.
L arcom be, P., K. W oolfe, and R. Purdon (eds.), 1996: G r e a t  B a r r i e r  R e e f :  
T e r r i g e n o u s  S e d i m e n t  F l u x  a n d  H u m a n  I m p a c t s , CRC R eef Research 
Centre, Current Research, Townsville, Queensland, Australia, 2nd ed., 
174 pp.
L avery, B.M ., G. Joung, and N. N icholls, 1997: A n extended high-quality 
rainfall data set for A ustralia. Austr. M e t .  M a g . , 46, 27-38.
L eighton, R.M ., K. Keay, and I. Sim m onds, 1997: Variation in annual 
cyclonicity across the A ustralian region for the 29-year period 
1965-1993 and the effect on annual all-A ustralia rainfall. In: 
P r o c e e d i n g s ,  
W o r k s h o p  
o n  
C l i m a t e  
P r e d i c t i o n  f o r  A g r i c u l t u r e  
a n d  
R e s o u r c e  M a n a g e m e n t . Bureau of Resource Sciences, Canberra.
L onsdale, W.M. 1994: Inviting trouble: introduced pasture species in northern 
Australia. A u s t .  J o u r n a l  o f E c o l o l o g y , 19, 345-354.
L ough, J.M ., 1994: Clim ate variation and El N ino —  Southern O scillation 
events on the G reat B arrier Reef: 1958-1987. 
C o r a l  
R e e f s , 13, 
181-195.
L unkeit, F , R. Sausen, and J.M . Oberhuber, 1994: Clim ate sim ulations with 
the global coupled atm osphere-ocean m odel ECH A M /OPY C, part I: pre­
sent-day clim ate and ENSO events. M
P I  R e p o r t  N o .  1 3 2 , M ax-Planck- 
Institut, Hamburg, Germany, 47 pp.
L utze, J.L., 1996: C a r b o n  a n d  n i t r o g e n  r e l a t i o n s h i p s  i n  s w a r d s  o f D a n t h o n i a  
r i c h a r d s o n i i  i n  r e s p o n s e  t o  c a r b o n  d i o x i d e  e n r i c h m e n t  a n d  n i t r o g e n  s u p ­
p l y . Ph.D. Thesis, A ustralian National University, Canberra, Australia.
M aclaren, J.P , 1996: Plantation forestry: its role as a carbon sink. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  P l a n n i n g  f o r  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Pearman, G.I. (ed.)]. E.J. 
Brill Publishers, Leiden, N etherlands and CSIRO Publishing, East 
M elbourne, Victoria, A ustralia, pp. 417-436.
M acu m b er, P.G., 1990: The salinity problem . In: T h e  M
u r r a y  [Mackay, N. 
and D. Eastbum  (eds.)]. M urray D arling Basin Com m ission, Canberra, 
Australia, pp. 110-125.
M anning, M .R., G.I. Pearm an, D.M . Etheridge, P.J. Fraser, D.C. Lowe, and 
L.P. Steele, 1996: The changing com position of the atm osphere. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e ;  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, 
and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, 
Australia, pp. 3-26.
M artin , R.J., C.J. Korte, D.G. M cCall, D.B. Baird, P.C.D. Newton, and N.D. 
Barlow, 1991: Im pacts of potential change in clim ate and atmospheric 
concentration of carbon dioxide on pasture and anim al production in 
N ew  Zealand. P r o c e e d i n g s  
o f  t h e  N e w  Z e a l a n d  S o c i e t y  
o f  A n i m a l  
P r o d u c t i o n , 51, 25-33.
M au n d er, W.J., 1971: The clim ate of New Zealand —  physical and dynamic 
features. In: W o r l d  S u r v e y  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y  [GentilH, J. (ed.)]. Elsevier, 
Am sterdam , Netherlands, 13, 213-227.
M cB ride, J. and N. Nicholls, 1983: Seasonal relationships betw een Australian 
rainfall and the Southern O scillation. M o n t h l y  W e a t h e r  R e v i e w , 111, 
1998-2004.
M cC lintock, 1997: Irrigation in the M urray-D arling Basin. А В А Л Е  U p d a t e ,  
April 1997. A ustralian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 
Canberra, pp. 14—15.
M cC ow n, R.L., P. Gillard, L. W inks, and W.T. W illiam s, 1981: The climatic 
potential for beef cattle production in tropical A ustralia: Part II —  
Livew eight change in relation to agro-clim atic variables. A g r i c u l t u r a l  
S y s t e m s , 7, 1-10.
M cC reary, J.P. and D.L.T. A nderson, 1991: A n overview  of coupled ocean- 
atm osphere m odels of El Nino and the Southern O scillation, J .  G e o p h y s .  
R e s . , 96, supplem ent, 3125-3150.
M cDowell, R.M ., 1992: Global clim ate change and fish and fisheries: what 
m ight happen in a tem perate oceanic archipeligo like N ew  Zealand. 
G e o J o u r n a l , 28, 29-37.
M cG lone, М ., G. Hope, J. Chappell, and P. Barrett, 1996: Past clim atic change 
in Oceania and A ntarctica. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
[Bouma, W .J., G.I. Pearm an, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, A ustralia, pp. 81-99.
M cG uckin, J., J.A. A nderson, and R.J. Gasior, 1991: S a l t - A f f e c t e d  R i v e r s  i n  
V i c t o r i a . A rthur Rylah Institute for Environm ental Research, Technical 
Report Series No. 118, M elbourne, Victoria, A ustralia.
Australasia
145
M cinnes, K.L. and G.D. Hubbert, 1996: E x t r e m e  e v e n t s  a n d  t h e  i m p a c t  o f  c l i ­
m a t e  c h a n g e  i n  V i c t o r i a 's  c o a s t l i n e . Environm ent Protection Authority 
and M elbourne Water, M elbourne, Australia, 69 pp.
M cK eon, G.M . and S.M. Howden, 1993: A dapting the m anagem ent of 
Queensland’s grazing system s to climate change. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  
I m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  N a t u r a l  R e s o u r c e  
C o n s e r v a t i o n  [Burgin, S. (ed.)]. 
University of W estern Sydney, O ccasional Paper No. 1, pp. 123-140.
McKeon, G.M ., S.M. Howden, N.O.J. Abel, and J.M . King, 1993: C l i m a t e  
c h a n g e :  a d a p t i n g  t r o p i c a l  a n d  s u b t r o p i c a l  g r a s s l a n d s . Proceedings of 
the XVII International Grassland Congress, 13-16 February 1993, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand, pp. 1181-1190.
M cKeon, G.M ., S.M. Howden, D.M. Silbum , J.O. Carter, J.F. Clewett, G.L. 
Hammer, P.W. Johnston, P.L. Lloyd, J.J. M ott, B. Walker, E.J. Weston, and 
J.R. W illcocks, 1988: The effect of climate change on crop and pastoral 
production in Queensland. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  P l a n n i n g  f o r  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
[Pearman, G.I. (ed.)]. E.J. Brill Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands and 
CSIRO Publishing, East M elbourne, Victoria, Australia, pp. 546-563.
M cLean, R. and N. M im ura (eds.), 1993: V u l n e r a b i l i t y  A s s e s s m e n t  t o  S e a -  
L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  M a n a g e m e n t . Proceedings IPCC Eastern 
Hemisphere W orkshop, Tsukuba, Japan, 3 -6  A ugust 1993, 429 pp.
M cM ahon, T.A. and B.L. Finlayson, 1991: A ustralian surface and groundw a­
ter hydrology —  regional characteristics and implications. In: W a t e r  
A l l o c a t i o n  a n d  t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t [Pigram, J.J. and B.P. H ooper (eds.)]. 
Centre for W ater Policy Research, University of New England, Armidale, 
New South Wales, pp. 2 1 ^ 0 .
M cM urtrie, R.E. and H.N. Comins, 1996: The tem poral response of forest 
ecosystem s to doubled atm ospheric CO 2 concentration. G l o b a l  C h a n g e  
B i o l o g y ,  2 , 49-57.
M etzeling, L., T. Doeg, and W. O ’Connor, 1995: The impact of salinization 
and sedim entation on aquatic biota. In: C o n s e r v i n g  B i o d i v e r s i t y :  T h r e a t s  
a n d  S o l u t i o n s  [Bradstock, R.A., T.D. Auld, D.A. Keith, R.T. Kingsford,
D. Lunney, and D.P. Sivertsen (eds.)]. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping 
Norton, New South Wales, Australia, pp. 126-136.
M iller, I.E. and C.G. W ilson, 1995: W eed threats to Northern Territory w et­
lands. In: 
W e t l a n d  
R e s e a r c h  
i n  
t h e  
W e t - d r y  
T r o p i c s  
o f  A u s t r a l i a  
[Finlayson, C.M . (ed.)]. Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers 
Region, Canberra, pp. 190-195.
M inncry, J.R., and D.I. Smith, 1996: Clim ate change, flooding and urban 
infrastructure. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, 
W.J., G.I. Pearm an, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, 
Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 235-247.
M itchell, C.D., K.J. Hennessy, and A.B. Pittock, 1994: R e g i o n a l  I m p a c t  o f  t h e  
E n h a n c e d  G r e e n h o u s e  E f f e c t  o n  t h e  N o r t h e r n  T e r r i t o r y ,  F i n a l  R e p o r t .  
Northern Territory Governm ent and CSIRO D ivision of Atm ospheric 
Research, Aspendale, Victoria, A ustralia, 85 pp.
M itchell, N.D. and J.E. W illiam s, 1996; The consequences for native biota of 
anthropogenic-induced clim ate change. In: G r e e n h o u s e ;  C o p i n g  w i t h  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.L Pearman, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. 
CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 308-324.
M oore, E.J. and J.W. Smith, 1996: M igration response to climate change. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, 
and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, 
Australia, pp. 325-348.
M orison, J.I.L. and R.M. Gifford, 1984: Plant grow th and w ater use w ith lim ­
ited w ater supply in high CO 2  concentrations. II Plant dry w eight, parti­
tioning and w ater use efficiency. A u s t .  J .  P l a n t  P h y s i o l o g y , 11, 375-384.
M orrison, D.A., G. Cary, S.M. Pengelly, D.G. Ross, B.J. M ullins, C.R. 
Thomas, and T.S. A nderson, 1995: Effects of fire frequency on plant 
species com position of sandstone com m unities in the Sydney region: 
inter-fire interval and tim e-since-fire. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  E c o l o g y , 20, 
239-247.
M orton, S.R., D.M . Stafford Smith, M .H. Friedel, G.F. Griffin, and G. Pickup, 
1995: The stewardship of arid A ustralia; ecology and landscape m anage­
ment. JoMrnaJ o f  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  M a n a g e m e n t , 43, 195-217.
Mosley, M.P. (ed.), 1990a: 
C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  
o n  
N e w  Z e a l a n d ,  
M inistry for the Environm ent, W ellington, 244 pp.
Mosley, M.P., 1990b: W ater industry. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  o n  N e w  
Z e a l a n d  [Mosley, M.P. (ed.)]. M inistry for the Environment, W ellington, 
pp. 133-139.
M oss, I., 1994: W a t e r :  A  r e p o r t  o n  t h e  p r o v i s i o n  o f  w a t e r  a n d  s a n i t a t i o n  i n  
r e m o t e  A b o r i g i n a l  a n d  T o r r e s  S t r a i t  I s l a n d e r  c o m m u n i t i e s . Federal Race 
D iscrim ination C om m issioner, A ustralian G overnm ent Publishing 
Service, Canberra, 487 pp.
M ott, J.J., J. W illiams, M.H, Andrew, and A.N. Gillison, 1985: Australian 
savanna ecosystem s. In: 
E c o l o g y  
a n d  M a n a g e m e n t  
o f  t h e  
W
o r l d ’s  
S a v a n n a s  [Tothill, J.C. and M ott, J.J. (eds.)]. Australian Academy of 
Science, Canberra, pp. 56-82.
M uchow , R.C. and T.R. Sinclair, 1991: W ater deficit effects on maize yields 
modeled under current and “Greenhouse” climates. A g r o n o m y  J o u r n a l ,  
83, 1052-1059.
M ullan, A.B., 1994: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o s  f o r  N e w  Z e a l a n d :  S t a t e m e n t  
f o r  G r e e n h o u s e  9 4 , NIWA, W ellington, New Zealand, 9 pp.
M u lren n an , M .E., 1992; C o a s t a l  m a n a g e m e n t :  C h a l l e n g e s  a n d  C h a n g e s  i n  
t h e  
T o r r e s  
S t r a i t  I s l a n d s . Discussion Paper No.5, North Australian 
Research Unit, Australian National University, Canberra, 40 pp.
Nias, R., 1992: G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  B i o l o g i c a l  D i v e r s i t y . World W ide 
Fund for Nature, Sydney, Australia, pp. 23.
Nicholls, N., 1986: A  method for predicting M urray Valley Encephalitis in 
southeast A ustralia using the Southern Oscillation. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  
E x p e r i m e n t a l  a n d  B i o l o g i c a l  M e d i c a l  S c i e n c e , 64, 587-594.
Nicholls, N., 1997: Increased Australian w heat yield due to recent climate 
trends. N a t u r e , 387, 484-485.
Nicholls, N. and B. Lavery, 1992; Australian rainfall trends during the twenti­
eth century. I n t .  J .  C l i m a t e , 12, 153-163.
N icholls, N., C. Landsea, and J. Gill, 1997; Recent trends in A ustralian region 
tropical cyclone activity. M e t e o r o l o g y  a n d  A t m o s p h e r i c  P h y s i c s , Special 
Edition on Tropical Cyclones (in press).
N icolas, M .E., R. M unns, A.B. Samarakoon, and R.M. Gifford, 1993: Elevated 
CO 2  im proves the growth of wheat under salinity. A u s t .  J o u r n a l  o f  P l a n t  
P h y s i o l o g y , 20, 349-360.
Nix, H.A., 1982: Environm ental determinants of biogeography and evolution 
in Terra Australis. In: E v o l u t i o n  o f  t h e  F l o r a  a n d  F a u n a  o f  A r i d  A u s t r a l i a  
[Barker, W.R. and P.J.M. Greenslande (eds.)]. Peacock Press, Adelaide, 
pp. 47-66.
O w ensby, C.E., 1993: 
C l i m a t e  
c h a n g e  
a n d  
g r a s s l a n d s :  
e c o s y s t e m - l e v e l  
r e s p o n s e s  
t o  
e l e v a t e d  
c a r b o n  
d i o x i d e . Proceedings o f the XVII 
International Grassland Congress, 13-16 February 1993, Palmerston 
North, New Zealand, pp. 1119-1124.
Paul, L.J., 1990: M arine fish, fisheries, and aquaculture. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  
I m p a c t s  
o n  
N e w  
Z e a l a n d  [M osley, M.P. (ed.)]. M inistry for the 
Environm ent, W ellington, pp. 85-94.
P earce, N., S. W etland, U. Keil, P. Langridge, H.R. Anderson, D. Strachan, et 
al., 1993: Self-reported prevalence of asthm a sym ptom s in children in 
Australia, England, Germany and New Zealand: an international com ­
parison using the ISA A C  protocol. 
E u r o p .  
R e s p i r .  
J o u r n a l ,  6, 
1455-1461.
P earson, R.G., L.J. Benson, and R.E.W. Smith., 1986: Diversity and abun­
dance of the fauna of Yuccabine Creek, a tropical rainforest stream. In: 
L i m n o l o g y  i n  A u s t r a l i a  [De Deckker, P. and W.D. W illiams (eds.)]. 
CSIRO, M elbourne, Victoria, and W, Junk, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 
329-342.
Peck, A.J. and G.B. Allison, 1988: Groundwater and salinity response to cli­
mate change. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  P l a n n i n g  f o r  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Pearman, 
G.I. (ed.)]. CSIRO Publishing, East M elbourne, Victoria, Australia, and
E.J. Brill Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 238-251.
Peters, R.L., 1992: Conservation o f biological diversity in the face o f climate 
change. In: G l o b a l  W a r m i n g  a n d  B i o l o g i c a l  D i v e r s i t y  [Peters, R.L. and 
T.E. Lovejoy (eds.)]. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, USA and 
London, United Kingdom, pp. 15-26.
Peters, R.L. and Darling, J.D.S., 1985: The greenhouse effect and nature 
reserves. B i o s c i e n c e , 35, 707-717.
P ittock, A.B., 1988: Actual and anticipated changes in A ustralia’s climate. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e :  
P l a n n i n g  f o r  
C l i m a t i c  
C h a n g e  [Pearman, G.I. (ed.)]. 
CSIRO Publishing, East M elbourne, Victoria, Australia, and E.J. Brill 
Publishers, I-eiden, Netherlands, pp. 35-51.
Pittock, A.B., 1995: Report on reports “Climate Change” and “World Food 
Supply” and Special Issues of “Global Environm ent Change” and “Food 
Policy,” E n v i r o n m e n t , 37(9), 25-30.
146
Australasia
Pittock, A.B., 1996: A d a p t i n g  a g r i c u l t u r e  t o  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  a  c h a l l e n g e  f o r  
t h e  
2 1 s t  
c e n t u r y . C onference o f Proceedings, Second A ustralian 
Conference on Agricultural M eteorology, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, 1-4  O ctober 1996, pp. 28-34.
P ittock, A.B., R.J. Allan, K.J. Hennessy, K.L. M clnnes, R. Suppiah, K.J. 
W alsh, P.H. W hetton, H. M cM aster, and R. Taplin, 1997: Climate 
change, clim atic hazards and policy responses in Australia. In: C l im a t e ,  
C h a n g e  a n d  R i s k  [Downing, T.E., R.J.S. Toi, and A.A. Olsthoorn (eds,)]. 
Routledge, Irondon, United Kingdom  (in press).
Pittock, A.B., M .R. Dix, K.J. Hennessy, J.J. Katzfey, K.L. M clnnes, S.P. 
O ’Farrell, I.N. Smith, R. Suppiah, K.J. Walsh, P.H. W hetton, and S.G. 
W ilson, 1995: Progress towards clim ate change scenarios for the south­
west Pacific. W e a t h e r  a n d  C l i m a t e , 15, 2 1 ^ 6 .
P ittock, A.B. and C.D. M itchell, 1994: T o w a r d s  a n  I n t e g r a t e d  A p p r o a c h  t o  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  I m p a c t  A s s e s s m e n t , Report of W orkshop 26 A pril 1994, 
CSIRO  D ivision of A tm ospheric R esearch, A spendale, V ictoria, 
Australia, 72 pp.
P ittock, A.B., K.J. Walsh, and K.L. M clnnes, 1996: Tropical cyclones and 
coastal inundation under enhanced greenhouse conditions. W a te r , A
i r  a n d  
S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  9 2 , 159-169.
P lum m er, N., 1996: Temperature variability and extrem es over A ustralia: part 
1 —  recent observed changes. A u s t r a l i a n  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  M a g a z i n e , 45, 
233-250.
P lum m er, N., N. Nicholls, B.M. Lavery, R.M. Leighton, and B. Trewin, 1997: 
Twentieth century trends in A ustralian climate extrem es indices. In: 
P r o c e e d i n g s  
o f  
C L I V A R / G C O S / W
M O  
W o r k s h o p  
o n  
I n d i c e s  
a n d  
I n d i c a t o r s  f o r  
C l i m a t e  
E x t r e m e s . 3-6 June 1997, Asheville, North 
Carolina, USA.
Pom are, E., V. Keefe-Ormsby, C. Ormsby, et al. (1995). H a u o r a .  
M
a o r i  
S t a n d a r d s  o f  H e a l t h  I I I .  A  S t u d y  o f  t h e  Y e a r s  1 9 7 0 - 1 9 9 1 . W ellington. Te 
Ropu Rangahau a Era Pomare. W ellington School of M edicine. 200 pp.
P o rt of M elbourne A uth o rity , 1992: V i c t o r i a n  C o a s t a l  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  S t u d y .  
C oastal Investigations U nit, Port o f M elbourne A uthority, Port 
M elbourne, Victoria, Australia, 170 pp.
R adford, D., R. Blong, A.M . d ’Aubert, I. Kuhnel, and P. Nunn, 1996: 
O c c u r e n c e  
o f  T r o p i c a l  
C y c l o n e s  
i n  
t h e  
S o u t h w e s t  
P a c i f i c  
R e g i o n  
J920-J994.'G reenpeace International, Am sterdam , Netherlands, 35 pp.
R asm usson, E.M . and J.M. W allace, 1983: M eteorological aspects of the El 
Nino/Southern Oscillation, S c i e n c e ,  2 2 2 , 1195-1202.
R aw son, H.M ., 1995: Yield responses of two w heat genotypes to carbon diox­
ide and tem perature in field studies using tem perature gradient tunnels. 
A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  P l a n t  P h y s i o l o g y , 22, 23-32.
R esource A ssessm ent C om m ission, 1993: 
C o a s t a l  Z o n e  E n q u i i y :  
F i n a l  
R e p o r t . Com m onwealth of Australia, A ustralian G overnm ent Publishing 
Service, Canberra, 664 pp.
R esource M an ag em en t A ct, 1991, No. 69, W ellington, New Zealand 
Government. 382 pp.
R intoul, S., G. M eyers, J. Church, S. Godfrey, M. M oore, and B. Stanton, 1996: 
Ocean processes, climate and sea level. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, and M .R, M anning (eds.)]. 
CSIRO Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 127-144.
Ross, H., E. Young, and L. Liddle, 1994: M abo: an inspiration for Australian 
land m anagem ent. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  M a n a g e m e n t , 1, 
24-41.
R osser, Z.C. and R.G. Pearson, 1995: Responses of rock fauna to physical dis­
turbance in two Australian tropical rainforest stream s. J o u r n a l  N o r t h  
A m e r i c a n  B e n t h o l .  S o c i e t y , 14, 183-196.
R ussell, J.S., 1991: Likely clim ate changes and their im pact on the northern 
pastoral industry. T r o p i c a l  G r a s s l a n d s , 25, 211-218.
Salinger, M .J., 1995: Southwest Pacific temperatures: trends in maximum and 
m inimum tem peratures. A t m o s p h e r i c  R e s e a r c h , 37, 87-100.
Salinger, M .J., R. Allan, N. Bindoff, J. Hannah, N. Plummer, and S. Torok, 
1996: Observed variability and change in climate and sea level in Australia, 
New Zealand and the South Pacific. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., C.l. Pearman, and M.R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 100-127.
Salinger, M .J., R.E. Basher, B.B. Fitzharris, J.E. Hay, P.D. Jones, J.-P. 
M acVeigh, and 1. Schm idely-Leleu, 1995: Clim ate trends in the 
Southwest Pacific, I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y , 15, 285-3Ô2.
Salinger, M .J. and D.M. Hicks, 1990a: The scenarios. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e :  
I m p a c t s  
o n  
N e w  
Z e a l a n d . N.Z. M inistry for the Environm ent, 
W ellington, pp. 12-18.
Salinger, M.J. and D.M. Hicks, 1990b: A ppendix 1: Regional clim ate change 
scenarios. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t s  o n  N e w  Z e a l a n d , N.Z. M inistry 
for the Environm ent, W ellington, pp. 238-242.
Salinger, M .J. and G.J. Kenny, 1995: Clim ate and kiwifruit cv. “H ayward,” 2. 
R egions in New Zealand suited for production. N e w  Z e a l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  
C r o p  a n d  H o r t i c u l t u r a l  S c i e n c e , 23, 173-184.
Salinger, M .J., A.B. M ullan, and J.G. Gibb, 1987: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  S c e n a r i o .  
A  w orking scenario prepared for the sem inar Clim ate Change: The New 
Zealand Response, N.Z. M inistry for the Environm ent, W ellington, 
Decem ber 1987, 4 pp.
Salinger, M.J, and A.B. Pittock, 1991: Climate scenarios for 2010 and 2050 
AD A ustralia and New Zealand. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 18, 259-269.
S aunders, D.A. and R.J. Hobbs, 1992: Im pact of biodiversity of changes in 
land-use and climate. In: B i o d i v e r s i t y  o f  M e d i t e r r a n e a n  E c o s y s t e m s  i n  
A u s t r a l i a  [Hobbs, R.J. (ed.)]. Surrey Beatty and Sons, Chipping Norton, 
New South Wales, pp. 61-75.
S canlan, J.C., 1992: A  model of woody-herbaceous biom ass relationships in 
eucalypt and m esquite com m unities. J .  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , 45, 5-80.
S cbreider, S.Y., A.J. Jakem an, A.B. Pittock, and P.H. W hetton, 1996: 
Estim ation of possible clim ate change im pacts on w ater availability, 
extreme flow events and soil m oisture in the G oulburn and Ovens basins, 
Victoria. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 34, 513-546.
S inclair, M.R., 1993a: Synoptic-scale diagnosis of the extratropical transition 
of a Southwest Pacific tropical cyclone. M o n t h l y  W e a t h e r  R e v i e w , 121, 
941-960.
S inclair, M .R,, 1993b: A  diagnostic study of the extratropical precipitation 
resulting from  tropical cyclone Bola. M o n t h l y  W e a t h e r  R e v i e w , 121, 
2690-2707.
Sm ith, D.I. and M.A. Greenaway, 1994: T r o p i c a l  S t o r m  S u r g e ,  D a m a g e  A s s e s s m e n t  
a n d  E m e r g e n c y  P l a n n i n g :  A  P i l o t  S t u d y  f o r  M a c k a y ,  Q u e e n s la n d . Resource 
and Environmental Studies No. 8, Centre for Resource and Environmental 
Studies, Australian National University, Canberra, 59 pp.
Sm ith, K.P.H., F.M. Reed, and J.Z. Foot, 1997: A n assessm ent of the relative 
im portance of specific traits for the genetic im provem ent of nutritive 
value in dairy pasture. G r a s s  a n d  F o r a g e  S c i e n c e , 52, 167-175.
SO E C , 1996: A u s t r a l i a ,  
S t a t e  o f  t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t  1 9 9 6 : A n Independent 
Report Presented to the Com m onwealth M inister for the Environm ent by 
the State of the Environm ent Advisory Council, CSIRO Publishing, 
Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, 539 pp.
S tafford Sm ith, М ., 1994: 
S u s t a i n a b l e  p r o d u c t i o n  
s y s t e m s  
a n d  
n a t u r a l  
r e s o u r c e  m a n a g e m e n t  i n  t h e  r a n g e l a n d s . Proceedings of the ABARE 
Outlook Conference, Canberra, A ustralia, February 1994, pp. 148-159.
S tafford Sm ith, M „ B. Cam pbell, W, Steffen, and S. A rcher (eds.), 1994: 
State-of-the-science assessm ent of the likely im pacts o f global change on 
the Australian rangelands. G C T E  W o r k i n g  D o c u m e n t  N o .  1 4 , GCTE Core 
Project Office, Canberra, Australia, 72 pp.
S teering C om m ittee o f the C lim ate C hange Study, 1995: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
S c i e n c e :  C u r r e n t  U n d e r s t a n d i n g  a n d  U n c e r t a i n t i e s . A ustralian Academy 
of Technological Sciences and Engineering, Canberra, 100 pp.
Stone, R.C., G.L. Hammer, and D. W oodruff, 1993.' A s s e s s m e n t  o f  r i s k  a s s o ­
c i a t e d  w i t h  c l i m a t e  p r e d i c t i o n  i n  m a n a g e m e n t  o f  w h e a t  i n  n o r t h - e a s t e r n  
A u s t r a l i a . Proceedings of the 7th A ustralian A gronom y Conference, 
Adelaide, 19-24 Septem ber 1993. A ustralian Society of Agronomy, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia, pp. 174—177.
S tu rm an , A.P. and N.J. Tapper, 1996: T h e  W e a t h e r  a n d  C l i m a t e  o f  A u s t r a l i a  
a n d  N e w  Z e a l a n d . Oxford University Press, M elbourne, 476 pp.
S uppiah, R., R. Allan, K. Hennessy, R. Jones, B. Pittock, K. Walsh, 1. Smith, 
and P. W hetton, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  u n d e r  E n h a n c e d  G r e e n h o u s e  
C o n d i t i o n s  i n  N o r t h e r n  A u s t r a l i a .  S e c o n d  A n n u a l  R e p o r t ,  1 9 9 5 - 1 9 9 6 .  
CSIRO Division of A tm ospheric Research, A spendale, Victoria, 63 pp.
S uppiah, R. and K.J. Hennessy, 1996: Trends in the intensity and frequency of 
heavy rainfall in tropical A ustralia and links w ith the Southern 
Oscillation. A u s t r a l i a n  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  M a g a z i n e , 45, 1-17.
S uppiah, R. and K.J. Hennessy, 1997: Trends in total rainfall, heavy rain 
events and num ber of dry days in Australia, 1910-1990. i n t e r n a t i o n a l  
J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y  (in press).
Australasia
147
Sutherst, R.W., 1995: The potential advance of pests in natural ecosystem s 
under clim ate change: im plications for planning and m anagement. In: 
I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  o n  E c o s y s t e m s  a n d  S p e c i e s :  
T e r r e s t r i a l  
E c o s y s t e m s  [Pernetta, J.C., R. Leem ans, D. Elder, and S. Humphrey 
(eds.)]. lU CN , Gland, Switzerland, pp. 83-98.
Sutherst, R.W., T. Yonow, S. Chakraborty, C. O ’Donnell, and N. W hite, 1996: 
A  generic approach to defining im pacts of climate change on pests, 
weeds and diseases in A ustralasia. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 281-307.
Tate, K.R., D.J. Giltrap, A. Parshotam, A.E. Hewitt, D.J. Ross, G.J. Kenny, and 
R.A. W arrick, 1996: Im pacts of clim ate change on soils and land system 
in New Zealand. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Bouma, 
W.J., G.I. Pearm an, and M .R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO Publishing, 
Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 190-204.
Tate, K.R. and D.J. Ross, 1997: Elevated CO 2 and m oisture effects on soil car­
bon storage and cycling in tem perate grasslands. G l o b a l  C h a n g e  B i o l o g y ,  
3, 225-235.
Thom , B.G., 1984: C o a s t a l  G e o m o r p h o l o g y  i n  A u s t r a l i a .  A cadem ic Press, 
Sydney, 349 pp.
Thom as, J.F. and B.C. Bates, 1997: R e s p o n s e s  t o  t h e  v a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  i n c r e a s ­
i n g  u n c e r t a i n t y  o f  c l i m a t e  i n  A u s t r a l i a .  Proceedings of the George 
K ovacs 
C olloquium , 
19-21 
Septem ber 
1996, 
Paris, 
France. 
UNESCOflHP, Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, UK (in press).
Thom pson, C., S. Ready, and X. Zheng, 1992: T r o p i c a l  c y c l o n e s  i n  t h e  
S o u t h w e s t  
P a c i f i c :  
N o v e m b e r  
1 9 7 9  
t o  
M
a y  
1 9 8 9 . N ew  Zealand 
M eteorological Service, W ellington, New Zealand, 35 pp.
Thornley, J.H.M . and M .G.R. Cannell, 1996: Temperate forest responses to 
carbon dioxide, tem perature and nitrogen: a model analysis. P l a n t  C e l l  
a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t , 19, 1331—1348.
Torok, S. J. and N. N icholls, 1996: A  historical annual tem perature dataset for 
Australia. A u s t r a l i a n  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  M a g a z i n e , 45, 251-260.
T renberth, K.E., 1991: General characteristics of El Nino —  Southern 
Oscillation. In: T e l e c o n n e c t i o n s  L i n k i n g  W o r l d w i d e  C l i m a t e  A n o m a l i e s  
[Glantz, M .H., R.W. Katz, and N. Nicholls (eds.)]. Cam bridge University 
Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 1 3 ^ 2 .
V arallyay, G., 1994: Clim ate change, soil salinity and alkalinity. In: S o i l  
R e s p o n s e s  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Rounsevell, M.D.A. and P.J. Loveland 
(eds.)]. NATO A SI Series I, Global Environm ental Change, Vol. 23. 
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 39-54.
Veron, J.E.N., 1995: 
C o r a l s  
i n  S p a c e  a n d  
T im e .  
T h e  B i o g e o g r a p h y  a n d  
E v o l u t i o n  o f  t h e  S c l e r a c t i n i a . University of New South Wales Press, 
Sydney, Australia, 321 pp.
W alker, K.F., 1992: The River M urray, A ustralia: A  sem iarid lowland river. In: 
T h e  R i v e r s  H a n d b o o k .  
V o l u m e  1 [Calow, P. and G.E. Petts (eds.)]. 
B lackw ell S cientific Publications, O xford, U nited K ingdom , pp. 
4 7 2 ^ 9 2 .
W alsh, K. and I.G. W atterson, 1997: Tropical cyclone-like vortices in a lim it­
ed area m odel: com parison w ith observed climatology. J o u r n a l  
o f  
C l i m a t e , 10, 2240-2259.
W ang, Y.P and D.J. Connor, 1996: Optim al developm ent for spring w heat at 
two locations in southern A ustralia under present and changed climate 
conditions. A g r i c u l t u r a l  a n d  F o r e s t  M e t e o r o l o g y , 79, 9-28.
W ang, Y.P, J.R, Handoko, and G.M . Rimmington, 1992: Growth sensitivity to 
air temperature, rainfall and am bient carbon dioxide concentration of a 
w heat crop in Victoria, A ustralia —  a sim ulation study. 
C l i m a t e  
R e s e a r c h ,  2 , 131-149.
W arrick, R.A., R.M . Gifford, and M.L. Parry, 1986: CO 2 , clim ate change and 
agriculture. In: T h e  G r e e n h o u s e  E f f e c t ,  C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  a n d  E c o s y s t e m s  
[Bolin, B., B.R. Doos, J. Jaeger, and R.A. W arrick (eds.)]. John Wiley 
and Sons (SCOPE 29), Chichester, UK, pp. 393-473.
W arrick, R.A., G.J. Kenny, G.C. Sims, N.J. Ericksen, Q.K. Ahmad, and M.Q. 
Mizra, 1996: Integrated m odel system s for national assessm ents of the 
effects of clim ate change: A pplications in New Zealand and Bangladesh. 
J o u r n a l  o f  W a t e r ,  A
i r  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n , 19, 215-227.
W aterm an, P., 1995: A ssessing the vulnerability of the coastlines of the wet- 
dry tropics to natural and hum an-induced changes. In: W e t l a n d  R e s e a r c h  
i n  t h e  W e t - d r y  T r o p i c s  o f  A u s t r a l i a  [Finlayson, C.M. (ed.)]. Supervising 
Scientist for the A lligator Rivers Region, Canberra, pp. 218-226.
W aterm an, P., 1996: A u s t r a l i a n  C o a s t a l  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  A s s e s s m e n t  P r o j e c t  
R e p o r t . 2 volum es and CD-ROM . Departm ent of the Environment, Sport 
and Territories, Australian Government, Canberra.
W einstein P., M. Laird, and L. Calder, 1995: Australian arboviruses: at what 
risk N ew  Zealand? A u s t r a l i a  N e w  Z e a l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c i n e , 25, 
666-669.
W estoby, М ., В. Walker, and I. Noy-M eir, 1989: Opportunistic management 
for rangelands not at equilibrium . J .  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , 42, 266-274.
W betton, PH ., M .H. England, S.P. O ’Farrell, I.G. W atterson, and A.B. Pittock, 
1996b: Global comparison of the regional rainfall results of enhanced 
greenhouse coupled and m ixed layer ocean experiments: implications for 
climate change scenario development. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 33, 497-519.
W hetton, P.H., A.M . Fowler, C.D. M itchell, and A.B. Pittock, 1992: R e g i o n a l  
i m p a c t  o f  t h e  e n h a n c e d  g r e e n h o u s e  e f f e c t  o n  V i c t o r i a :  a n n u a l  r e s e a r c h  
r e p o r t  1 9 9 0 - 9 1 , CSIRO Division of A tm ospheric Research and EPA 
Victoria, Victorian Government, M elbourne, Australia, 68 pp.
W hetton, PH ., M.R. Haylock, and R. Galloway, 1996c: Climate change and 
snow-cover duration in the Australian Alps. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 32,447-479.
W hetton, PH ., K.J. Hennessy, X. Wu, J.L. McGregor, J.J. Katzfey, and K. 
Nguyen, 1997: F i n e  R e s o l u t i o n  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  E n h a n c e d  G r e e n h o u s e  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  i n  V i c t o r i a :  P a r t  2 , Department of Natural Resources and 
Environment, Victorian Government, M elbourne, Australia (in press).
W hetton, P., A.B. M ullan, and A.B. Pittock, 1996a: Climate change scenarios 
for Australia and New Zealand. In: G r e e n h o u s e :  C o p i n g  w i t h  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Bouma, W.J., G.I. Pearman, and M.R. M anning (eds.)]. CSIRO 
Publishing, Collingwood, Victoria, Australia, pp. 145-170.
W hetton, P H . and A.B. Pittock, 1990: R e g i o n a l  I m p a c t  o f  t h e  E n h a n c e d  
G r e e n h o u s e  E f f e c t  o n  V i c t o r i a :  A n n u a l  R e s e a r c h  R e p o r t  1 9 9 0 , CSIRO 
D ivision o f A tm ospheric R esearch and EPA V ictoria, Victorian 
Governm ent, M elbourne, 70 pp.
W hetton, P., A.B, Pittock, J.C, Labraga, A.B. M ullan, and A. Joubert, 1996d: 
Southern hemisphere climate: com paring m odels with reality. In: C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e :  D e v e l o p i n g  S o u t h e r n  H e m i s p h e r e  P e r s p e c t iv e s  [Giambelluca, 
T.W. and A. Henderson-Sellers, (eds.)], John W iley and Sons, Chichester, 
UK, pp. 89-129.
W hetton, PH ., P.J. Rayner, A.B. Pittock, and M.R. Haylock, 1994: An assess­
m ent of possible climate change in the Australian region based on an 
intercomparison of general circulation modeling results. J o u r n a l  
o f  
C l i m a t e , 7, 4 4 1 ^ 6 3 .
W hitehead, D., J.R. Leathwick, and J.F.F. Hobbs, 1992: How will New 
Zealand’s forests respond to climate change? Potential changes in 
response to increasing temperature. N e w  Z e a l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  F o r e s t r y  
S c i e n c e , 22, 39-53.
W igley, T.M .L., 1994: M A G I C C :  
U s e r ’s  G u i d e  
a n d  S c i e n t i f i c  R e f e r e n c e  
M a n u a l . National Center for A tm ospheric Research, Boulder, CO, USA. 
23 pp.
W ilkinson, C.R., 1996: Global change and coral reefs: impacts on reefs, 
econom ies and human cultures. G l o b a l  C h a n g e  B i o l o g y ,  2 , 547-558.
W ilkinson, C.R., R.W. Buddemeier, 1994: G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  C o r a l  
R e e f s .  I m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  P e o p l e  a n d  R e e f s . Report of the UNE-IOC- 
A SPIE-IU CN  G lobal Task Team on Coral Reefs. lU CN , Gland, 
Switzerland, 124 pp.
W illiam s, J.E. and A.M . Gill, 1995: T h e  I m p a c t  o f  F i r e  R e g i m e s  o n  N a t i v e  
F o r e s t s  i n  E a s t e r n  N e w  S o u t h  W a le s . Forest Issues 1. Environmental 
Heritage M onograph Series No 2. New South Wales National Parks and 
W ildlife Service. 68 pp.
W illiam s, I.E., T.W. Norton, and H.A. Nix, 1994: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  t h e  
M a i n t e n a n c e  o f  C o n s e r v a t i o n  V a lu e s  i n  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s . Report to 
the Climate Change and M arine Branch, Department of the Environment, 
Sport and Territories, Canberra, A ustralia (also available on the Internet 
at http://www.environment.gov.au/air/climate/clim _change/eco).
W ilson, J.R., 1982: Environmental and nutritional factors affecting herbage 
quality. In: N u t r i t i o n a l  L i m i t s  
t o  A n i m a l  P r o d u c t i o n  f r o m  
P a s t u r e s  
[Hacker, J.B. (ed.)]. CAB International, Farnham  Royal, UK, pp. 
111-131.
W oodroffe, C.D. and M.E. M ulrennan, 1993: G e o m o r p h o l o g y  o f  t h e  L o w e r  
M a r y  R i v e r  p l a i n s ,  N o r t h e r n  T e r r i t o r y . Australian National University, 
North Australian Research Unit and Conservation Commission of the 
Northern Territory, Darwin, 152 pp.
148
Australasia
W oodw ard, A., 1996: W hat m akes populations vulnerable to ill health? N e w  
Z e a l a n d M e d i c a l J o u r n a l ,  109, 265-267.
W oodw ard. A., C. Guest, K. Steer, A. Harman, R. Scicchitano, D. Pisaniello,
I. 
Calder, and A. M cM ichael, 1995: Tropospheric ozone: respiratory 
effects and Australian air quality goals. J o u r n a l  o f  E p i d e m i o l o g y  a n d  
C o m m u n i t y  H e a l t h , 49, 401-407.
W ratt, D.S., 1990: Atm osphere. In: 
C l i m a t i c  
C h a n g e :  
I m p a c t s  
o n  N e w  
Z e a l a n d  [Mosely, M.P. (ed.)]. M inistry of Environment, W ellington, pp. 
29-33,
W R I. 1996: W o r l d  R e s o u r c e s :  A  G u i d e  t o  t h e  G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t ,  1 9 9 6 - 9 7 .  
W orld 
R esources 
Institute/U nited 
N ations 
Environm ent 
Program m e/United Nations D evelopm ent Program m e/The World Bank. 
Oxford University Press, New York, 342 pp.
Young, E., H. Ross, J. Johnson, and J. Kesteven, 1991: C a r i n g  f o r  C o u n t r y :  
A b o r i g i n e s  
a n d  L a n d  M a n a g e m e n t . A ustralian National Parks and 
W ildlife Service, Canberra, 215-t pp.
Yu, B. and D. Neil, 1995: Im plications of a decreases in rainfall erosivity since 
the 1920s in the w et tropics of Queensland. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  S o i l  
a n d  W a t e r  C o n s e r v a t i o n , 8(3), 38-43.
Z ann, L.P., 1995: O u r  S e a ,  O u r  F u t u r e :  M
a j o r  F i n d i n g s  o f  t h e  S t a t e  o f  t h e  
M a r i n e  E n v i r o n m e n t  R e p o r t  f o r  A u s t r a l i a .  Departm ent of Environment, 
Sport, and Territories, Canberra, ACT, Australia, 112 pp.
Z heng, X., R.E. Basher, and C.S. Thom pson, 1997: Trend detection in region­
al-mean tem perature: m axim um , minim um , m ean tem perature, diurnal 
range and S S T .  J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 10, 317-326.
5
Europe
MARTIN BENISTON (SWITZERLAND)
AND RICHARD S.J. TOE (THE NETHERLANDS)
Lead Authors:
R. Delécolle (France), G. Hoermann (Germany), A. Iglesias (Spain), J. Innes 
(Switzerland), A J. McMichael (UK), W.J.M. Martens (The Netherlands),
I. Nemesova (Czech Republic), R. Nicholls (UK), F.L. Toth (Germany)
Contributors:
S. Kovats (UK), R. Leemans (The Netherlands), Z. Stojic (Slovenia)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
5.1.
Background Characterization/Current 
Baseline Conditions
5.1.1. Geography
5.1.2. Ecology
5.1.3. Population and Demographic Trends
5.1.4. Economics
5.1.4.1. Economic Sectors: Agriculture, 
Forestry, and Fishing
5.1.4.2. Economic Sectors: Mining, 
Manufacturing. Energy Patterns,
151
153
153
154 
154
154
155
5.3.3. Cryosphere, Hydrology, Water
Resources, and Water Management 
170
5.3.3.1. 
Snow and Ice 
170
5.3.3.2. 
Hydrology and Water Management 170
5.3.3.3. 
Adaptation Options 
172
5.3.4. Coastal Zones 
172
5.3.4.1. 
Adaptation 
173
5.3.5. Other Infrastructure/Activities/Settlement 
174
5.3.5.1. 
Energy Demand 
174
5.3.5.2. 
Water Supply 
174
5.3.5.3. 
Water Demand 
175
5.3.5.4. 
Air Pollution 
175
5.2.
5.3.
and Transportation
155
5.3.5.5. Construction and Infrastructure
175
5.3.5.6. Insurance
175
Regional Climate Characteristics
156
5.3.6.
Human Health
175
5.2.1. Current Climate
156
5.2.2. Climate Prends in This Century
157
5.4. 
Integrated Assessment of Potential
5.2.3. Projections for the Future
158
Vulnerabilities and Impacts
177
5.4.1.
Integrated Assessment Using Monetization
177
key Impacts
158
5.4.2.
Integrated Assessment Using
5.3.1. Ecological Systems
158
Integrated Modeling
178
5.3.1.1. Forests
159
5.4.3.
Integrated Assessment Using
5.3.1.2. Grasslands and Rangelands
161
Coupled Models and Expert Panels
179
5.3.1.3. Noncoastal Wetlands
162
5.3.1.4. Freshwater Ecosystems
162
References
180
5.3.1.5. Littoral and Pelagic Zones
163
5.3.1.6 . Adaptation Options
163
5.3.2. Agriculture and Fisheries
163
5.3.2.1. Agricultural Production
164
53.2.2. Fisheries
168
5.3.2.3. Adaptation Options
169
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
General Considerations
• 
Climate Change. Climate model projections suggest a 
general increase in temperature, greatest in northerly lati­
tudes. Precipitation changes are considerably more uncer­
tain, but one could expect generally wetter conditions in 
the north, drier conditions in the south, and increasingly 
drier conditions from west to east. Winter precipitation 
may be greater than today, while summer precipitation is 
likely to decrease.
Sensitive Regions. As water is one of the main integrat­
ing factors for many environmental and economic sys­
tems in Europe, currently sensitive areas in terms of their 
hydrology include the M editerranean region, the Alps, 
northern Scandinavia, certain coastal zones, and central 
and eastern Europe. A  changing climate is likely to 
enhance water-related stresses in these already sensitive 
regions.
Vulnerability and Potential Impacts
Hydrology, Snow and Ice, Water Supply and Demand
Evapotranspiration will increase in a warmer climate, with 
potential reductions in water availability; however, the 
response of hydrological systems depends on the distribu­
tion of precipitation (highly variable, as suggested above) 
and storage capacity.
• 
Many regions in the southern and interior parts of Europe 
could experience a general decrease in runoff, though the 
change in runoff may range between -5% and +12%. 
More droughts could be expected in southern Europe, and 
the potential for winter and springtime flooding could be 
greater in northern and northwestern Europe. However, 
this pattern is not the same for all general circulation mod­
els (GCMs).
• 
Intrusion of saline waters into coastal aquifers and the 
expected reduction in precipitation could aggravate the 
problem of freshwater supply in some areas.
• 
Snow and ice are likely to decrease in many places, with 
consequences for the timing and amount of runoff in river 
basins, as well as winter tourism.
Demand for water could increase in summer. Supply could 
decrease, though there may be regional differences in 
which storage capacity plays an important role.
• 
Pollution is a major stress factor for many European 
rivers, and a decrease in discharge would increase pollu­
tant concentrations, leading to reductions in water quality.
Current national and international policies and practices 
for water resources management will be put under stress 
by climate change.
Ecosystems
• 
With the exception of parts of Scandinavia and the 
Russian Federation, Europe has few genuine natural 
ecosystems. Natural ecosystems generally are confined to 
poor soils and are fragmented and disturbed; consequent­
ly, they tend to be more sensitive to climate change than 
agriculture, which occupies the most fertile soils.
• 
The reaction of European ecosystems to global change is 
difficult to predict because there are a number of interac­
tions and feedback loops between increasing temperatures, 
decreasing availability of soil water, and increasing carbon 
dioxide (CO 2 ) concentrations.
• 
Increasing CO 2  concentration increases the productivity of 
plants with C 3 metabolism under laboratory conditions 
(for most agricultural plants, except maize and millet). 
However, many other factors come into play under field 
conditions, such as water and nutrient stress, increased 
respiration losses, and interactions between species. 
Therefore, the overall change in productivity can only be 
predicted if these interacting environmental conditions are 
taken into account. Many studies indicate that CO 2  
increases alone may have relatively little impact under 
field conditions.
The forests in many parts of Europe are affected by high 
deposition rates of nitrogen. Their productivity is not 
only a function of climatic factors but of the change in 
nitrogen deposition, which can both act as a fertilizer 
and cause disturbances to many processes within the 
ecosystem.
Agriculture
• 
Crop mixes and production zones will be redistributed, 
and the use of water, fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides 
will shift with them.
• 
Conflicting demands for water— for instance, between 
irrigation and domestic supply in southern Europe— ^will 
need to be taken into account.
Changes in potential production translate in a complex 
way to farmer incomes and food prices, depending on 
technology, farmer adaptation, world markets, and agri­
cultural policies.
Coastal Zones
Health
Sea-level rise will place additional stress on coastal zones 
already stressed by other factors (urbanization, coastal 
developments, pollution, etc.).
The level of impact will depend on the adaptation capac­
ity (e.g., the ability of systems to move inland) and poli­
cies of individual countries (e.g., trade-offs between lands 
that are not considered important and those that need to be 
protected).
Sensitive zones include areas already close to or below 
mean sea level (such as the Dutch and German North Sea 
coastlines, the Po River delta, and the Ukrainian Black Sea 
coast), areas with low intertidal variation (such as the 
coastal zones of the Baltic Sea and the Mediterranean), 
and coastal wetlands.
Changes in the nature and frequency of storm surges, par­
ticularly in the North Sea, are likely to be of considerable 
importance for low-lying coastal areas.
While there are fewer heat-related deaths in Europe than in 
some other parts of the world, the risk of heat-related 
deaths would probably increase with summer warming. 
The risk of cold-related deaths would probably decline 
with winter warming. It is not clear what the net change in 
risk would be for Europe.
Warmer temperatures will exacerbate summer air pollu­
tion episodes and their health impacts in many cities. 
Some vector-borne infectious diseases will have the poten­
tial to extend their range; the adaptation capacity of indi­
vidual countries will depend on their level of environmen­
tal management, public health surveillance, and health 
care.
Other Infrastructure, Activities, Settlements
Energy. Changing hydrology will impact those energy and 
industrial production sectors that depend on water for 
cooling. There is a potential for increased energy demand 
related to cooling in summer, and decreased energy 
demand related to heating in winter. Such changes would 
lead to shifts in peak energy demand.
Urbanization. 
Infrastructure, 
buildings, 
and 
cities 
designed for cooler climates will have to be adjusted to 
warmer conditions, particularly heat waves, to maintain 
current functions.
Europe
153
5.1. 
Background Characterization/Current 
Baseline Conditions
5.1.1. 
Geography
Although referred to as a continent, Europe constitues only the 
western fifth of the Eurasian landmass, which is made up pri­
marily of Asia (see Figure 5-1 and Box 5-1). The Ural Mountains, 
the Ural River, and part of the Caspian Sea generally are recog­
nized as forming the main boundary between Europe and Asia. 
The second smallest of the seven continents, Europe has an area 
of 10,525,000 km2, but it has the second largest population of all 
the continents (about 685 million). The European mainland 
stretches from the North Cape in Norway (71°N) to Gibraltar 
(36°N). The western and eastern extremes are defined by the west 
coast of Iceland (24°W) and the Ural River in Russia (50°E).
Europe is a highly fragmented landmass consisting of a number 
of large peninsulas (e.g., Fennoscandia, Iberia, the Balkans, and 
Italy), as well as smaller ones such as Jutland (Denmark) and 
Brittany (France). It also includes a large number of islands—  
notably Iceland, Great Britain, and Ireland. Europe has coastlines 
on the Arctic Ocean and the North and Baltic Seas in the north; 
on the Caspian Sea to the southeast; on the Black Sea and the 
Mediterranean Sea in the south; and on the Atlantic Ocean to the 
west. A number of mountainous regions are located in Europe. 
The Alpine arc stretches from the Mediterranean coast of France
to central Europe; the Alps include the highest summits of west­
ern Europe, with about 90 peaks exceeding an altitude of 4,000 
m. The Pyrenees form the border of Spain and France; the 
Apennines are in Italy. Other mountain ranges include the 
Scandinavian range in Norway and Sweden, the Tatras in 
Slovakia, the coastal ranges of Slovenia and Croatia, and the 
Caфathians in Romania. Further east, the Caucasus range 
stretches northward from the Black Sea and forms a natural 
boundary between Europe and Asia. The highest point on the 
continent is located in this mountain range (Mt. Elbrus, 5,642 m).
One major geological region of Europe consists of a belt of 
sedimentary materials that sweeps in an arc from southeast 
England and southwest France into Belgium and the 
Netherlands and on into Germany, Poland, and western Russia. 
These sedimentary rocks, covered in places by a layer of till, 
form the Great European Plain. Some of the best soils of 
Europe are found here— particularly along the southern mar­
gin, which is rich in loess.
South of the Great European Plain are the central European 
Uplands— including the Jura, the Vosges and the Black Forest 
mountains, the Massif Central, and the Meseta; here, moun­
tains alternate with plateaus and valleys.
Most European streams flow outward from the core of the con­
tinent. The Alps are the location of the headwaters of major
0 С ч * а .  
Other M ^orC it
3- M uor Citiet - Pop. 199S COOOi) 
•  LaithanlOO O  
1000 - 2000 
у 2000-S000 
I  5000-10000
Ï  than 10000
B dow S m  
5 -lO O m  
l00 - 250m  
250 - 500Ш 
500-1000 m 
1000 - 2500Ш 
2500 - 5000Ш 
Grcflter than 5000 ts
N
200 
0 
200 400 Kilometers
Figure 5-1: The Europe region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic Information System (GIS) 
Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
154
Europe
Box 5-1. The Europe Region
Albania
Andorra
Armenia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Liechtenstein 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 
Macedonia, Former 
Yugoslav Republic of 
Moldova, Republic of 
Monaco 
Norway 
Poland 
Portugal 
Romania
Russian Federation
San Marino
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
The Netherlands
Ukraine
United Kingdom 
Yugoslavia, Federal 
Republic of
rivers such as the Rhone, the Rhine, the Danube, and the Po. 
The longest river in Europe, the Volga, flows southward into 
the Caspian Sea, whereas the Danube (Europe’s second 
longest) flows eastward to the Black Sea. The radial drainage 
pattern lends itself to the interconnection of rivers by canals. 
Lakes occur in mountainous areas— such as in Switzerland 
(the Lakes of Geneva and Constance are western Europe’s 
largest bodies of fresh water), Italy, and Austria— and in low­
land regions such as in Finland, Poland, and Hungary (Lake 
Balaton being central Europe’s largest lake). Europe’s largest 
freshwater lake is Lake Ladoga in northwest Russia.
5.1.2. 
Ecology
Although much of Europe— particularly the west— originally 
was covered by forest, natural vegetation patterns have been 
transformed by direct human interference through the clearing 
of land for agriculture and urbanization. Only in the most 
northerly mountains and in parts of northern and central 
European Russia has the forest cover been relatively unaffect­
ed by human activity. A  considerable amount of the continent, 
however, is covered by woodland that has been planted or has 
reoccupied cleared lands.
The largest vegetation zone in Europe— cutting across the 
middle portion of the continent from the Atlantic to the Urals—  
is a belt of mixed deciduous and coniferous trees (oak, maple, 
and elm interspersed with pine, fir, and spruce). The Arctic 
coastal regions of northern Europe and the upper slopes of its
highest mountains are characterized by tundra vegetation, 
which consists mostly of lichens, mosses, herbs, and shrubs. 
The milder but still cool temperatures of the inland parts of 
northern Europe create an environment favorable to a continu­
ous cover of coniferous trees— especially spruce and pine, 
although birch and aspen also occur (Larsen, 1980). Much of 
the Great European Plain is covered with prairies— areas of 
relatively tall grasses. Further to the east, Ukraine is character­
ized by steppe— a flat and comparatively dry region with short 
grasses. The Mediterranean regions are covered by vegetation 
that has adapted to generally dry and warm conditions; natural 
vegetation tends to be more sparse in the southern and eastern 
reaches of the Mediterranean basin, reflecting regional differ­
ences in precipitation and temperature regimes.
At one time Europe was home to a large variety of wild mam­
mals, including deer, elk, bison, boar, wolf, and bear. Many 
species of animals have become extinct or have been greatly 
reduced in number. Today, deer, elk, wolf, and bear occur in the 
wild in significant numbers only in northern Fennoscandia and 
Russia, as well as the Balkan Peninsula. Elsewhere, they exist 
mainly in protected preserves. Indigenous mountain animals 
have survived human encroachment on their habitats (to some 
extent); chamois and ibex are found in the higher elevations of 
the Pyrenees and Alps. Europe still has many smaller mammals 
and contains many indigenous bird species.
5.1.3. 
Population and Demographic Trends
Europe has the highest overall population density of all the 
continents. The most heavily populated area includes a belt 
originating in England and continuing eastward through 
Belgium and the Netherlands, Germany, the Czech Republic, 
Slovakia, Poland, and into the European part of Russia. 
Northern Italy also has a high population density. The average 
annual growth rate for the European population during the 
1980s was only about 0.3%; by comparison, in the same peri­
od, the population of Asia grew by about 1.8% per year and 
that of North America by about 0.9% annually. At the same 
time, wide variations in growth rate occurred from country to 
country in Europe. For instance, during the late 1980s, Albania 
had a yearly growth rate close to 1.9% and Spain about 0.5%, 
while the population of Great Britain did not change apprecia­
bly, and that of Germany declined slightly (particularly in the 
former East Germany). The overall slow rate of population 
increase in the latter half of the 2 0 th century has been the result 
primarily of a low birth rate.
Europeans generally enjoy some of the longest average life 
expectancies at birth: 75 years in most countries, compared 
with less than 60 years in India and most countries of Africa.
5.1.4. 
Econom ics
Europe does not have a homogeneous pattern of wealth and 
economic development. Western and northern Europe have
Europe
155
some of the highest standards of living in the world in terms of 
gross domestic product (GDP) per capita, life expectancy, lit­
eracy rate, level of health care, or other common criteria. The 
standard of living in southern Europe today is close to that in 
most western European countries. The new democracies of 
eastern Europe face major economic difficulties related to the 
rapid transition from the planned economies that prevailed into 
the early 1990s to the free-market economies of today; the 
Czech Republic, Poland, and Hungary have been most suc­
cessful in the transition to a free-market economy. Certain 
republics of the former Yugoslavia and Albania remain in polit­
ical turmoil, w hich has severely damaged the national 
economies of these countries. The emerging republics of the 
former Soviet Union— such as the Baltic states, Ukraine, 
Belarus, and the Russian Federation— are experiencing eco­
nomic difficulties following the collapse of industrial produc­
tion and guaranteed markets in the former Eastern Bloc. GDP 
per capita ranges from close to US$40,000 per annum in 
Switzerland and Luxemburg to less than US$1,000 per annum 
in Albania and Macedonia. The countries of western Europe 
have a high level of supranational organization— ^with institu­
tions such as the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD), the European Free Trade Association, 
and the European Union (EU). With the recent fall of commu­
nism, eastern European institutions have ceased to exist or 
have become ineffective, and most countries in this region now 
seek to join western institutions.
major fishing nations. The industry currently faces major prob­
lems, however, and is in a state of decline in many countries.
5.1.4.2. 
Economic Sectors: Mining, Manufacturing,
Energy Patterns, and Transportation
International trade is important in Europe. Much of the trade is 
intracontinental, especially among members of the European 
Union, but Europeans also engage in large-scale trade with 
nations of other continents. Germany, France, Great Britain, 
Italy, and The Netherlands are among the world’s greatest trad­
ing nations. A large portion of European intercontinental trade 
involves the export of manufactured goods and the import of 
raw materials.
Coal mining in areas such as the British Midlands, the Ruhr 
district of Germany, Ukraine, and the Silesian fields of Poland 
established industrial patterns that continue to exist today. 
Although coal mining is declining in Europe, it remains impor­
tant in some countries. Iron ore is produced in large quantities 
in northern Sweden, eastern France, and Ukraine. A wide range 
of other minerals— such as bauxite, copper, manganese, nick­
el, and potash— are mined in substantial amounts. Oil and nat­
ural gas are mined in the North Sea and its bordering areas, as 
well as in the southern part of European Russia (notably the 
Volga River basin) and Romania.
5.1.4.1. 
Economic Sectors: Agriculture,
Forestry, and Fishing
Mediterranean agriculture is dominated by the production of 
wheat, olives, grapes, and citrus fruit. In most of these coun­
tries, farming plays a more important role in the national econ­
omy than in the northern countries. Throughout much of west­
ern Europe, dairy and meat production are major agricultural 
activities. To the east, crops become more important. In the 
nations of the Balkan peninsula, crops account for 60% of agri­
cultural production; in Ukraine, wheat production overshad­
ows all other agriculture. Europe as a whole is particularly 
noted for its great output of wheat, barley, oats, rye, corn, pota­
toes, beans, peas, and sugar beets. Besides dairy and beef cat­
tle, large numbers of pigs, sheep, goats, and poultry are raised. 
Most of Europe is self-sufficient in basic farm products.
The boreal forests, which extend from Norway through north­
ern European Russia, are the main sources of forest products in 
Europe. Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Russia all have rela­
tively large forestry industries that produce pulpwood, wood 
for construction, and other products. In southern Europe, Spain 
and Portugal produce a variety of cork products from the cork 
oak.
All of the coastal European countries engage in some commer­
cial fishing, but the industry is especially important in the 
northern 
countries— particularly 
Norway, 
Iceland, 
and 
Denmark. Spain, Russia, Great Britain, and Poland also are
Manufacturing of a wide variety of goods, ranging from bulk 
chemicals to high-tech equipment, is concentrated in England, 
eastern and southern France, northern Italy, Switzerland, 
Belgium, The Netherlands, Germany, Poland, the Czech 
Republic, Slovakia, southern Norway, Sweden, European 
Russia, and Ukraine.
Europe consumes great quantities of energy, though per capita 
levels of energy consumption are lower than in North America. 
The leading energy sources are coal, lignite, petroleum, natur­
al gas, nuclear power, and hydropower. Norway, Sweden, 
France, Switzerland, Austria, Italy, and Spain all have major 
hydroelectric installations, which contribute much of the annu­
al output of electricity. Nuclear power is important in France, 
Great Britain, Germany, the former Soviet republics, Belgium, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Finland, and Bulgaria.
Europe has highly developed transportation systems, which are 
densest in the central part of the continent; Fennoscandia, the 
former Soviet Union, and southern Europe have fewer trans­
port facilities in relation to their land area. Europeans own 
large numbers of private cars, and much freight is transported 
by road. Rail networks are well maintained in most European 
countries and are important carriers of passengers as well as 
freight. High-speed train networks in France, Italy, and 
Germany make use of the most advanced technology. Water 
transport also plays a major role in the European economy. 
Several countries— such as Greece, Great Britain, Italy, 
France, Norway, and Russia— maintain large fleets of mer­
chant ships. Rotterdam, in The Netherlands, is one of the
156
Europe
world’s busiest seaports. Much freight is carried on inland 
waterways; European rivers with substantial traffic include the 
Rhine, Elbe, Danube, Volga, and Dniepr. In addition, Europe 
has a number of important canals. Almost all European coun­
tries maintain national airlines; several are major worldwide 
carriers. Most transportation systems in European countries are 
government-controlled, although a recent tendency toward pri­
vatization and deregulation has come into effect in many sec­
tors, including civil aviation.
5.2. 
Regional Climate Characteristics
5.2.7. 
Current Climate
Europe’s particular distribution of land and sea— which 
includes several major inland seas such as the Mediterranean, 
the Baltic, and the Black Sea— and its long coastline facing the 
eastern North Atlantic ocean are shaping factors of the numer­
ous regional climates of the continent. The presence of numer­
ous regions of high mountains, which act as a physical barrier 
to atmospheric flows, is responsible for substantial regional 
differences in precipitation patterns.
Although much of Europe lies in the northern latitudes, the rel­
atively warm seas that border the continent give most of central 
and western Europe a temperate climate, with mild winters and 
summers. European climate is determined essentially by the 
interactions among three pressure centers: the Icelandic Low, 
the Azores High, and continental highs (which predominate in 
winter) and lows (which generally are confined to summer
months). Indeed, in recent years, there has been increasing 
interest in the relative strengths of these systems, as well as their 
persistence. This is exemplified particularly by the North 
Atlantic Oscillation index (e.g., Hurrell and van Loon, 1997), 
which is a measure of the strength of atmospheric flows over 
the North Atlantic and their links to temperature and precipita­
tion patterns over Europe. The prevailing westerly winds, 
warmed in part by their passage over the North Atlantic ocean 
currents (the Gulf Stream), bring precipitation throughout most 
of the year. The strength of these winds varies, partly in 
response to the North Atlantic Oscillation. In the Mediterranean 
area (i.e., Spain, southern France, Italy, southern Croatia, 
Montenegro, Macedonia, Albania, and Greece), the summer 
months usually are hot and dry; almost all rainfall in this area 
occurs in the winter. From central Poland eastward, the moder­
ating effects of the seas are reduced; consequently, drier condi­
tions prevail, accompanied by a greater amplitude of annual 
variation of temperatures (i.e., hot summers and cold winters). 
Northwestern Europe is characterized by relatively mild win­
ters, with abundant precipitation along the Scottish and 
Norwegian coasts and mountains, and much colder winters and 
generally drier conditions in Sweden and Finland. In mountain 
regions such as the Alps, winters generally are cool, and snow 
remains on the ground for several months of the year; summers 
typically are cool and moist. The mountains intercept precipita­
tion driven by frontal systems and can trigger convective rain­
fall (summer thunderstorms) in the absence of major synoptic 
disturbances.
Table 5-1 provides some insight into the variety of European 
climates— ^which are determined not only by latitude or altitude
Table 5-1 : Climatological statistics for selected European stations.
Station
Latitude
Longitude
Altitude
(m)
January 
Temp (°Q
July 
Temp (°Q
Annual 
Range (°Q
Annual 
Precip (nun)
Sodankyla (Finland)
67.3 N
26.6 E
178
-13.5
14.7
28.2
508
Beigen (Norway)
60.4 N
5.3 E
43
1.5
15.0
13.5
1,958
Goteboig (Sweden)
57.7 N
12.0 E
40
-1 . 1
17.0
18.1
670
Moscow (Russia)
55.7 N
37.5 E
156
-9.9
19.0
28.9
575
Copenhagen (Denmark)
55.6 N
12.7 E
5
0 . 1
17.8
17.7
602
Berlin (Germany)
52.5 N
13.5 E
50
-0.5
19.4
19.9
556
Kev (Ukraine)
50.4 N
30.5 E
179
-6 . 1
20.4
26.7
615
Plymouth (UK)
50.3 N
4.1 W
27
6 . 2
16.2
1 0 . 0
990
Prague (Czech Rep.)
50.1 N
14.3 E
380
-2 . 6
17.9
20.5
508
Paris (France)
49 N
2.5 E
53
3.1
19.0
15.9
585
Vienna (Austria)
48.2 N
16.3 E
203
-1.4
19.9
21.3
660
Budapest (Hungary)
47.5 N
19.0 E
118
-1 . 1
2 2 . 2
23.3
630
Zurich (Switzerland)
47.3 N
8.5 E
569
-1 . 1
17.6
18.7
1,137
Santis (Switzerland)
47.3 N
9.3 E
2,496
-9.0
5.6
14.6
2,488
Zagreb (Croatia)
45.8 N
16.0 E
156
0 . 2
?10
2 1 . 8
864
Marseille (France)
43.5 N
5.2 E
2 0
5.5
23.3
17.6
546
Barcelona (Spain)
41.3 N
2.1 E
93
7.3
25.0
17.7
1,189
Athens (Greece)
38.0 N
23.7 E
107
9.3
27.6
18.3
402
Almeria (Spain)
36.8 N
2.3 W
2 1
11.4
25.3
13.9
226
Europe
157
Year
Figure 5-2: Annual winter (DJF) temperature anomaly over Europe during the period 1900-96.
but by proximity to the ocean or to one of the numerous inland 
seas. Annual temperature ranges vary from some 10°C in 
coastal regions of the United Kingdom and Ireland to about 
30°C in Finland and Russia. Annual precipitation totals range 
from as low as 200 mm in southern Spain and Greece to more 
than 2,000 mm in coastal regions of Scotland and Norway and 
at some locations in the Alps.
5.2.2. 
Climatic Trends in This Century
Although regional differences are relatively high, most of 
Europe has experienced increases in temperature of about 
0.8°C on average in this century (Schoenwiese et al., 1993; 
Brazdil et a l, 1996; IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 3; Onate and 
Pou, 1996; Schuurmans, 1996). The increase has not been 
continuous throughout the century; at most stations, an 
increase to about 1940 was observed, followed by a leveling 
off or even a decrease until about 1970, and then a renewed 
warming to the present period. These features are most pro­
nounced in middle to high latitudes. Some locations in 
southern Europe exhibit different trends— such as in Greece 
and parts of eastern Europe, where some stations show a 
cooling trend over much of the century (see Figure A-2 in 
Annex A). During the most recent decade (1981-1990), 
warming over most of Europe has been exceptionally great, 
with increases in yearly means of 0.25-0.5°C with respect to 
the long-term average. The warming is most apparent in a 
belt extending from Spain through central Europe into 
Russia. At some high-elevation sites in the Alps, temperature 
increases have been even more marked, exceeding 1°C in the 
1980s (Auer and Boehm, 1994; Beniston and Rebetez, 1995). 
The 1980s have exhibited annual temperature anomalies that
are systematically in excess of the long-term mean (see 
Figure A -1). Temperature rise has been most marked during 
the winter period (see Figure 5-2); much evidence suggests 
that minimum temperature increases have been far larger 
than changes in maximum temperatures (e.g., Beniston et 
a l, 1994; Brazdil et a l, 1996). In other words, the diurnal 
temperature range is decreasing, which is consistent with 
evidence from other regions of the world (e.g., Karl et a l,
1993). The geographical distribution of temperature trends 
emphasizes greater warming (2°C per century) in the south­
western part of Europe (Iberian Peninsula, south and central 
France) than in the British Isles or along the Baltic coastline 
(1°C per century). The northern and central parts of 
European Russia also have experienced greater warming 
than the European average— in some places exceeding 3°C 
per century (see Figure A-2).
Annual precipitation trends in this century are characterized 
essentially by enhanced precipitation in the nothern half of 
Europe (i.e., north of the Alps to northern Fennoscandia), with 
increases ranging from 10% to close to 50%. The region 
stretching from the Mediterranean through central Europe into 
European Russia and Ukraine, by contrast, has experienced 
decreases in precipitation by as much as 2 0 % in some areas 
(see Figure A-1). In time-series analyses of precipitation aver­
aged over the European region (see Figure A-1), it is difficult 
to determine a meaningful trend in precipitation, especially 
since the 1950s. The interannual variability seems to have 
decreased in the latter part of the record: The amplitude of 
departures in precipitation from long-term averages is far less 
than in the first half of the century. This pattern does not nec­
essarily mean that the amplitude of interannual variability has 
decreased at the regional scale or at specific sites.
158
Europe
GCM projections, though undergoing continuous improve­
ments, remain too uncertain over a region such as Europe to 
draw more than very tentative conciusions. Nested regional cli­
mate model (RCM) simulations also are too tenuous to provide 
firm 
conclusions 
about 
clim atic 
change 
in 
Europe. 
Temperature changes in large parts of Europe will be a function 
not only of positive radiative forcing resulting from increases 
in the atmospheric concentrations of a number of greenhouse 
gases but also of the countereffects of aerosols. Although the 
magnitude of the aerosol effects is still quite uncertain, the 
regional negative forcing of sulfate aerosols in central Europe 
could offset almost half the positive radiative forcing of CO 2  
(Mitchell et al, 1995). The summary of results that follows is 
based on GCM simulations without aerosol forcing that were 
published in the Working Group I volume of the Second 
Assessment Report (SAR) (IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 6 ).
Most GCM-based projections for the European region indicate 
that there may be an overall increase in winter annual temper­
atures (IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 6.32) and that this increase 
could be larger in boreal latitudes than in mid-latitude Europe. 
The diurnal temperature range, according to the model used, is 
2.5-4.5°C for northerly latitudes, compared with 1.5 ^.5 °C  for 
southern Europe. The range of summer temperatures forecast 
by the different models is larger than for the winter period, but 
the upper limit of the range is about 4.5°C increase in a 2 xC 0 2  
climate for southern and northern Europe.
Projected precipitation patterns are more uncertain. Most mod­
els show an increase in precipitation for Europe as a whole as 
a consequence of a higher content of water vapor in the atmos­
phere. Winter precipitation in high latitudes of Europe may 
increase by as much as 20% (IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 6.32), 
according to most models. Rainfall during the summer months 
may remain unchanged in many parts of Europe. Some models 
show decreases in the Mediterranean region and in central and 
eastern Europe, though others show increases; in northern 
Europe, most models suggest an increase in summer precipita­
tion. There is much uncertainty associated with future precipi­
tation trends, however; for instance, GCM simulations incor­
porating the aerosol effect provide conflicting evidence for 
future precipitation trends in parts of Europe, compared with 
greenhouse-gas-only simulations.
5.2.3. 
Projections fo r the Future
5.3. 
Key Im pacts
5.3.1. 
Ecological Systems
Europe has few genuine natural ecosystems. Natural ecosys­
tems generally are confined to small areas; agriculture and 
forestry occupy most soils. Many sites with intermediate soils 
are occupied by seminatural vegetation types.
Vegetation responds to climate change directly and indirectly. 
Direct effects include responses to temperature; indirect effects
occur primarily as soil-mediated phenomena, such as the influ­
ence of precipitation on soil moisture regimes. Indirect effects 
also may occur as a result of the responses of herbivores and 
pests to climate changes, changes in soil fauna, and changes in 
the frequency and severity of disturbances such as fire. In addi­
tion, vegetation responds directly and indirectly to atmospher­
ic CO 2  concentrations. The responses are species-dependent; 
no two taxa respond to climatic change in exactly the same 
way (e.g., Stirling et al., 1997). The main response of individ­
ual taxa to climatic change consists of changes in distribution; 
adaptive evolutionary changes are very rare (Huntley, 1991). 
At the ecosystem level, the impact of CO 2  on ecosystem 
processes remains very uncertain. Zaller and Arnone (1997) 
have documented an increase in surface-casting earthworm 
activity in Swiss grasslands exposed to 610 jul СО 2Л, but such 
studies are extremely rare.
In a warmer climate, the pattern of species response will be 
extremely complex within Europe (Grime, 1996) because a vari­
ety of temperature and moisture gradients exist. Although there 
is a general temperature gradient from south to north and from 
low to high altitudes, east-west gradients in temperature and pre­
cipitation also exist; the latter are associated with increasing con- 
tinentality toward central Europe. Further complications arise in 
the prediction of species responses to temperature changes 
because of the importance of the nature of the change. For exam­
ple, a rise in late-summer temperatures will have different 
impacts than a rise in early-spring temperatures or an average 
rise in temperatures spread evenly throughout the year (Fitter et 
a l, 1995). Similarly, the occurrence of late frost may play an 
important role in restricting the responsiveness of small-genome 
species to mean temperature changes (MacGillivray and Grime,
1995). This factor makes the prediction of species responses dif­
ficult; a general northward shift in species distributions is now 
recognized as too simplistic a hypothesis. Successful migration 
depends on a number of factors— in particular, the range of tol­
erance of a given plant or tree to heat and moisture stress, envi­
ronmental conditions at the new location, the rate of migration, 
the presence of competing species, and natural and human barri­
ers to migration (Thompson, 1994; Malanson and Cairns, 1997). 
Anthropogenic barriers are especially important for large por­
tions of western and central Europe, where land use is dominat­
ed by direct human intervention.
Short-term experiments suggest that many types of plants will 
respond positively to increases in CO 2  concentrations in the 
atmosphere (the so-called CO 2  fertilization effect), whereby 
their photosynthetic rates increase if other factors remain con­
stant; this is particularly the case for C3  plant types and all 
important European crops except maize (Semenov et a i, 1996; 
Wolf et al., 1996). Most experiments have been undertaken 
using isolated plants with optimum nutrient supply. Such 
experimental conditions are relevant to horticultural and agro­
industrial situations but are inapplicable to natural and semi­
natural plant communities (Korner, 1996). A  wide range of 
vegetation types may show little or no response to increasing 
CO 2  concentrations under field conditions (Korner, 1996). The 
responses, however, will be species-specific, especially when
Europe
159
other factors such as enhanced nitrogen deposition are taken 
into account (Hattenschwiler and Korner, 1996a). The net pri­
mary productivity of other plants may increase (provided that 
they are not water limited), but there are many uncertainties 
regarding the long-term responses of plants to increased COf, 
studies around natural sources of CO 2  have not revealed any 
gradients in the growth rates or biomass of Mediterranean 
grassland species (Korner and Miglietta, 1994). Studies of 
trees growing around natural sources of CO 2  revealed no 
changes in stomatal density, but the guard cells were reduced 
in size (Miglietta and Raschi, 1993). Downy oak (Quercus 
pubescens Willd.) growing close to a CO 2  source had lower 
stomatal conductance than those further away, but Holm oak 
(Quercus ilex L.) showed no such trend (Tognetti et al., 1996). 
In both species, the osmotic potential and apoplasmic fraction 
of water was elevated close to the CO 2 , Indicating that these 
trees were more tolerant of drought conditions (Chaves et al., 
1995; Tognetti et a l, 1996).
There is increasing evidence that traits other than photosyn­
thetic metabolism are more important in determining the 
response to elevated CO 2  of different species under field con­
ditions (e.g., Korner, 1993; Korner et a l, 1995; Diaz, 1995,
1996). For example, increased levels of CO 2  are likely to result 
in increased water-use efficiency in many species. Increased 
water-use efficiency may help many plants and trees resist the 
extremes of heat and drought that may occur more frequently 
in southern Europe and the Mediterranean region.
Studies of model ecosystems exposed to enhanced CO 2  and 
nitrogen deposition suggest the presence of nonlinear system- 
level adjustments (Hattenschwiler and Korner, 1996b). These 
adjustments include physiological down-regulation of photo­
synthesis at the leaf level, reduced leaf area index, and increas­
ing strength of below-ground carbon sinks. At the same time, no 
aboveground growth stimulation was observed. Changes were 
observed between CO 2  concentrations of 280 and 420 /г1Д; 
major changes in coniferous forest ecosystems may be under­
way already in response to increasing CO 2  concentrations.
The impact of climate change on biodiversity and the compo­
sition of ecosystems in Europe is extremely difficult to pre­
dict. A great deal depends on the impacts on ecosystem 
processes, such as the rates and magnitudes of disturbance. 
The resilience of many ecosystems to change also is very 
uncertain; many Norway spruce forests, for example, are like­
ly to persist for several hundred years in the absence of any 
major disturbance (Sykes and Prentice, 1996). This inertia, 
along with the possibility of species acclimation to changed 
environmental conditions (Kellomaki and Wang, 1996), may 
delay the onset of many changes in natural ecosystems 
(Woodward, 1993). Models that currently are available for 
predicting such changes generally are restricted to the most 
important components of vegetation (e.g., trees in forests); lit­
tle research has been done on possible future interactions 
between these and other ecosystem  com ponents under 
changed climatic and CO 2  conditions. The models suggest that 
in some cases, species arrivals may compensate for species
losses, whereas in others, human-induced changes in land use 
may delay the arrival of new species, causing a reduction in 
diversity. Consequently, there is a need to combine models 
that simulate changes in species distributions with models 
developed to look at species turnover at specific sites (com­
pare van der Maarel and Sykes, 1993; 0kland, 1995a,b; 
Froborg and Eriksson, 1997).
5.3.1.1. 
Forests
The species composition of forests in Europe is determined 
more by past management activities than by natural factors 
(Ellenberg, 1986). Because there currently is a tendency 
toward a more ecological approach to forest management (e.g., 
Innes, 1993; Lamas and Fries, 1995), it will be difficult to sep­
arate the influence of changing climates from the influence of 
changing management practices. The trend toward tree species 
compositions in forests that more closely mimic those occur­
ring naturally has been regarded as making the forests more 
adaptable to climate change. The evidence to support this 
hypothesis, however, is very limited (see, e.g.. Fries et a l,
1997). Current species combinations are based on today’s con­
ditions; future communities are likely to be composed of 
species assemblages that do not necessarily occur today 
(Lindner et a l, 1997). The successful establishment today of 
species mixes that will be appropriate for future climatic con­
ditions represents a major challenge for modern silviculture.
The range of European forests is limited primarily by climate, 
either through moisture availability or through temperature 
(both absolute amounts and seasonal distributions) (Beminger,
1997). A change in temperature or precipitation will affect the 
current distributions and productivity of forests (Bugmann, 
1996; Lindner et a l, 1996; Kellomaki et a l, 1997). The 
response can be predicted with greater ease at the northern 
boundaries of forests in Fennoscandia and northern Russia, 
where an expansion of Norway spruce and Scotch pine into 
tundra regions is likely to occur under warmer conditions 
(Sykes and Prentice, 1996). These changes would be accompa­
nied by a northward movement of the southern limit of these 
two species in Fennoscandia. Similar conclusions were 
reached by Krauchi (1995), whose model predictions indicated 
the replacement of Norway spruce by beech and other broad­
leaved species at a site in northern Germany (Soiling), associ­
ated with an increase in mean annual temperature of 
0.3°C/decade until the end of the 21st century.
The rate of northward extension of the forest limit and individ­
ual species is highly uncertain because it depends not only on 
the rate of climate change but also on associated rates of dis­
persal (Malanson and Cairns, 1997), soil development, species 
composition (e.g., spruce/pine/beech) (Sykes and Prentice,
1996), and age of the trees. Such changes in the distribution of 
species will be highly individualistic (Huntley and Webb, 
1989; Huntley, 1991)— with some species expanding their 
ranges, some showing little or no change, and others contract­
ing their ranges (Sykes and Prentice, 1995, 1996), possibly to
160
Europe
the point of extinction. Climate projections suggest a displace­
ment of climatic zones suitable for forests by 150-550 km over 
the next century (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 1). This shift is 
faster than the estimated potential of many species to migrate 
(20-200 km/century) (Davis, 1981; Birks, 1989) or the capa­
bility of many soils to develop a new structure.
In mountain regions, certain species and communities could 
disappear altogether because the upward displacement of 
species living close to the upper reaches of mountains will be 
constrained by the lack of any place in which they can become 
established (Kienast, 1991; Kienast et al., 1996). Modeling 
studies in Switzerland (Krauchi and Kienast, 1993) suggest 
that a temperature increase of 3°C would result in deciduous 
broad-leaved trees invading the subalpine belt and coniferous 
trees invading the alpine zone. Within the deciduous zone, 
colline Carpinion forests would expand at the expense of sub­
montane and low-montane beech forests (Brzeziecki et a l,
1995). The species composition of future forests would 
depend on changes in the continentality of each site. Such 
results have not yet been confirmed by empirical studies. 
Hattenschwiler and Korner (1995) found no indication of an 
upward movement in Scotch pine in the Swiss central Alps in 
response to summ er tem peratures during the period 
1982-1991— ^when temperatures were, on average, 0.8°C 
warmer than those of the period 30 years before. They argued 
that the primary control on the altitudinal distribution of 
Scotch pine and Arolla pine (Pinus cembra L.) was more like­
ly to be interspecific competition than temperature. However, 
some studies (e.g., Hofer, 1992; Grabherr et a l, 1994) have 
noted an upward shift in the distribution of some alpine 
species.
Changes in the forests of southern Europe are most likely to be 
driven primarily by changes in water availability, although 
changes in temperature (particularly reductions in frost occur­
rence) also may play a role in the expansion of some forest 
types (e.g., Quercus pyrenaica and Quercus rotundifolia). 
Changes in precipitation will determine the relative importance 
of sclerophyllous and deciduous species; water availability in 
the period April-June would be particularly important (Gavilan 
and Fernandez-Gonzalez, 1997).
Many changes in forests may occur as a consequence of subtle 
alterations in the competitive balance between species. For 
example, rising temperatures are likely to change the time 
interval between budburst and leaf fall, but the effects will dif­
fer among species. Kramer (1995) argues that the duration of 
the growing season is likely to decrease with increasing tem­
perature for European larch (Larvc decidua Miller) and pedun­
culate oak (Quercus robur L.), whereas it will increase for 
beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) and small-leaved lime (Tilia corda- 
ta Miller). There already is some evidence that a substantial 
(25-30% ) proportion of the forests in Switzerland is poorly 
adapted to the expected natural species distribution under cur­
rent climatic conditions— and that this proportion will increase 
with an increase in temperature (Kienast et a l, 1996). Similar 
patterns are likely elsewhere in Europe.
Increased climatic stress is likely to result in increased amounts 
of dead plant material within forests. At the same time, poten­
tial increased carbon-to-nitrogen ratios as a result of increased 
CO 2  may reduce decomposition rates; this effect remains 
uncertain, however: Some studies suggest no change (e.g., 
Norby et a l, 1995), whereas increased temperatures are likely 
to increase decomposition rates in areas such as northern 
Scandinavia (Johansson, 1994; Johansson et a l, 1995). The net 
effect of these different trends is largely unknown. Increased 
volumes of dead organic matter, combined with drier climatic 
conditions, would increase the fire hazard in many forests. The 
Mediterranean zone is likely to be particularly affected, but 
other areas also are likely to see an increase in the fire hazard. 
Boreal forests, which currently are mainly temperature-limited, 
could become soil moisture-limited if warmer temperatures in 
spring and summer lead to earlier melting of snowpack and 
drying of soil in summer. This shift would lead to increased 
risk of biomass loss through drought-driven mortality and fire. 
Reduced winter snowpacks also may increase the risk of win­
ter damage to trees during periods when air temperatures are 
above zero and the ground remains frozen. Cold winters in 
boreal zones and some temperate regions have protected 
forests from many of the insects and fungi that are common 
further south; a warmer climate is likely to change this situa­
tion (Cammell and bCnight, 1992; Straw, 1995).
Many forested regions of Europe have been cleared through 
human land-use practices— particularly in western, central, and 
southern Europe. In the Alps, for example, the timberline cur­
rently is as much as 2 0 0  m below its natural potential limit 
because of overgrazing by game and livestock and the removal 
of trees over several centuries to provide summer grazing areas 
(Holtmeier, 1994). If warming is accompanied by drier condi­
tions in the Alps and Pyrenees, a northward and upward pro­
gression of Mediterranean ecotypes is likely to occur.
There is a large degree of uncertainty regarding the sensitivity 
of soil respiration to changing heat and moisture conditions, as 
well as to nitrogen deposition rates. As a result, nutrient avail­
ability and hence overall ecosystem productivity could either 
increase or decline (see, e.g.. Heath and Kerstiens, 1997). A 
warmer climate, particularly in the form of warmer winters, 
may favor certain pests or pathogens— such as bark beetles, 
aphids (Straw, 1995), or fungi (Brasier, 1996). Because many 
of these species live in complex relationships with their hosts, 
as well as with predators and other animals, it is difficult to 
predict the broad-scale net effect of climate change on them.
Many European forests are subject to a variety of anthro­
pogenic influences— including direct management, nitrogen 
deposition and availability (Kinney and Lindroth, 1997), sulfur 
emission (Posch et a l, 1996; Slovik, 1996), ozone injury, and 
changes caused by unbalanced game populations. These fac­
tors are likely to interact with climatic change to bring about a 
complex series of responses that will differ from place to place 
(Thornley and Cannel, 1996; Bugman, 1997; Young, 1997). 
Many studies have failed to take such interactions into account; 
this limitation should be considered when interpreting the
Europe
161
results (Innes, 1994). There is some evidence, however, that 
the biomass of northern forests was growing during the last 
decades (Houghton, 1996; Lakida et al., 1997; Lelyakin et al., 
1997; Myneni, 1997).
The interactions between a general increase in winter tempera­
ture and the occurrence of frost damage have been studied in 
detail. The timing of budburst is triggered by temperature; it is 
a function of the chilling requirement and the critical tempera­
ture sum (although precipitation, photoperiod, CO 2  concentra­
tion, and the nutritional status of the tree also may play roles). 
There are differences in the timing of budburst between species, 
between genotypes, and between phenotypes. Consequently, 
some models have predicted an increase in frost injury, such as 
in central and northern Finland (Bach, 1987; Kellomaki et al.,
1995), whereas others— such as that developed by Kramer
(1994) for The Netherlands and Germany— suggest less injury. 
In Britain, Murray et al. (1989) have suggested that there may 
be no change in frost injury at lowland sites and an increase at 
upland sites for some species. There is likely to be considerable 
flexibility in budburst within a given population, providing 
some capacity for adaptation to climate change (Beuker, 1994). 
Because increased CO 2  concentrations may delay budburst, 
there appears to be an antagonistic effect between rising CO 2  
concentrations and temperatures that may reduce the increase in 
frost risk for some species in some areas (Murray et al., 1994).
The climatic changes that have been modeled are likely to have 
considerable direct and indirect impacts on plantation forests in 
Europe. Proe et al. (1996) have suggested, on the basis of an 
ecophysiological process model, that the general yield class 
(GYC) of Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis (Bong) Carrière) in 
Scotland would increase by 2.8 mVha/yr for each 1°C rise in 
temperature. This estimate was based on a uniform increase in 
temperature throughout the year. If there were greater warming 
during winter months, the GYC increase was 2.4 m^/ha/yr. The 
reduction is attributable to the negative correlation between 
winter temperature and growth rate in this species, which is 
believed to be caused by the increased activities of pests in 
warmer winters and the winter chilling requirements of the 
species. Similar negative relationships between GYC and win­
ter temperature have been identified in Scotland for Douglas fir 
(Pseudotsuga menziesii F. Mirb.) and Scotch pine {Pinus 
sylvestris L.), but not for Japanese larch (Larix kaempferi (L.) 
Carrière) (Tyler et a l, 1996). The winter chilling requirement 
seems to be a major factor in determining the distribution of 
many tree species (Sykes et a i, 1996).
The land area capable of supporting Sitka spruce with a GYC 
of more than 18 mVha/yr in Scotland is expected to double 
within 2 0  years and to show a similar increase during the sub­
sequent 40 years (Proe et al., 1996). The model did not include 
potential effects of increased CO 2  because these effects are 
considered less important for growth responses than changes in 
temperature (Prentice et al., 1991; Luxmoore et al., 1993).
Similar changes in yield have been predicted in Finnish 
forests (Kellomaki and Kolstrom, 1994), although the nature
of the changes varies with latitude. Yield increases for Scotch 
pine, silver birch (Betula pendula Roth) and downy birch 
(Betula pubescens Ehrh.) were predicted with increasing tem­
peratures, with the increases being greater in northern Finland 
than in the southern part of the country. The productivity of 
Norway spruce was predicted to decrease in the south but to 
increase substantially in the north. These changes did not take 
into account any changes in precipitation, the nature of which 
remains uncertain. However, other modeling work (Talkkari 
and Hypén, 1996) has suggested that any effects of precipita­
tion changes are likely to be much less important than the 
effects of tem perature changes, mainly because of the 
morainic soils (which tend to retain moisture) that predomi­
nate over much of northern Scandinavia. On sandy soils in 
southern Finland, soil moisture deficits may become a prob­
lem under future clim atic scenarios (Kellom aki, 1995; 
Kellomaki and Vaisanen, 1996).
There is considerable evidence that predicted changes in yield 
already are occurring in European forests (Spiecker et al.,
1996). No systematic studies have been undertaken, but growth 
increases have been recorded in forests in Austria, Denmark, 
France, Germany, Slovenia, Sweden, and Switzerland, with 
possible increases also occurring in Portugal and Spain. The 
causes of these growth increases were not evaluated, although 
climatic change, increasing CO 2  concentrations, increased 
nitrogen deposition, and changes in management practices 
were cited as possible causes.
5.3.1.2. 
Grasslands and Rangelands
Because of the likely shifts of phytoclimatic boundaries in a 
warmer world (based on GCM estimates for Europe of 
3±1.5°C in the next century), there will be changes in the dis­
tributions of Mediterranean and boreal grassland species. 
Changes in individual species will depend on the nature of the 
climate change in a given area. Because the ranges of many 
species are determined primarily by soil moisture patterns, 
changes in the absolute amounts of precipitation and the sea­
sonal distributions of precipitation will be important in deter­
mining vegetation responses. Some grassland species also may 
respond to increasing CO 2  concentrations— ^with the greatest 
responses among species characteristic of productive, undis­
turbed habitats and the lowest responses among species adapt­
ed to high environmental stress or rates of physical disturbance 
(Hunt et al., 1991, 1993). Experiments with alpine grassland 
species suggest, however, that any effects will be apparent only 
if CO 2  increases are accompanied by climatic warming or 
enhanced nitrogen supply; increases in CO 2  concentrations 
alone have little effect (Schappi and Korner, 1996).
In Mediterranean countries, displacement of grass and dwarf 
shrub steppes will occur at the expense of existing sclerophyl- 
lous shrubland. Extension of shrubland as a result of agricultur­
al release is expected— ^with a parallel rise in wildfire episodes, 
loss of water through enhanced évapotranspiration, and a 
decrease in livestock grazing (with concomitant increases in
162
Europe
game and other wildlife). Furthermore, shifts in carbon storage 
from soil to biomass are likely to occur.
In northern Europe, there is likely to be a reduction in the number 
and extent of mires and tundra and permafrost areas as forests 
expand into the tundra zone. In addition, changes in the concentra­
tion of atmospheric gases may alter competitive relationships in the 
plant community. A series of complex responses can be expected 
because of the interaction of different environmental factors. For 
example, an increase in temperature is likely to result in an increase 
in nutrient availability because of the greater mineralization of soil 
organic matter by soil microorganisms (Anderson, 1991; Bonan 
and Van Cleve, 1992). As with forests, the responses will be 
species-specific (Baxter et ai, 1994; Parsons et ai, 1994,1995).
5.3.1.3. 
Noncoastal Wetlands
Most of the major noncoastal wetland areas in Europe are con­
fined to northern Scotland, Fennoscandia, and northern Russia 
(Hartig et al., 1997). A changing climate is likely to have a sig­
nificant impact on peat formation and ecological function in 
such regions. An increase in temperature by 1-2°C accompa­
nied by decreases in soil moisture would lead to an estimated 
25% reduction in peat formation.
Tundra peatlands will be extremely vulnerable because higher 
temperatures will result in thawing of the permafrost layer in 
areas with discontinuous permafrost, as well as an enlargement 
of the active layer in continuous permafrost. This shift will 
have considerable implications because permafrost is a key 
factor in maintaining high water levels in these systems. 
Further, it is unlikely that new permafrost areas will develop. 
As a result, hydrology and landscape patterns will be affected, 
leading to lowered water tables in some areas and the overflow 
of flooded thaw lakes in others. Such melting may shift bogs 
on permafrost back to fens, from which they originated after 
the warm mid-Holocene period (5000-6000 years BP).
A rapid rate of climatic change— implied by climate model sim­
ulations for northern latitudes— may cause degradation of the 
southern boundaries of wetlands and peatlands much faster than 
the northward expansion potential of their northern boundaries. 
Such an imbalance between biomass loss on the one hand and 
biomass increase on the other is likely to have implications for 
the carbon cycle, whereby the wetlands could undergo a rever­
sal from sinks to sources of carbon. There also would be conse­
quences for methane fluxes in these regions. A change in the 
total methane flux from northern wetlands can be expected if 
the areal extent of wetlands changes, the duration of the biolog­
ically active period is modified, or the production or oxidation 
of methane per unit area changes. Because of uncertainties in 
the changes in water regimes as projected by climate models, 
however, it is difficult to obtain reliable quantitative estimates 
for shifts in methane fluxes to the atmosphere.
Many peatlands may be subject to increasing pressure from 
afforestation operations as a result of changes in land capability
classifications (Proe et a l, 1996). At the same time, degradation 
of peatlands is likely to increase the conservation value of the 
remaining intact areas, thereby creating the potential for more 
intense land-use conflicts.
Water draining from peatlands also is likely to be sensitive to 
climatic change, particularly in the form of summer droughts. 
Such droughts could increase autotrophy in the streams, lead­
ing to increases in the biofilm biomasses present in the water. 
Changes in nutrient content also may occur, with increases in 
inorganic nutrients and decreases in organic nutrients 
(Freeman et a l, 1994).
Studies indicate that wetlands in semi-arid regions of southern 
Europe can be very sensitive to climate warming; such warm­
ing has severe effects on their hydrological and ecological 
functions. They also are likely to be adversely affected by 
increased water demands. Biological reserves such as the Cota 
Donana in Spain are likely to come under increasing pressure.
5.3.1.4. 
Freshwater Ecosystems
Many of the ecological impacts on freshwater systems depend 
on hydrological responses to climatic change, which are rela­
tively uncertain given the current status of GCMs. The problem 
is one of scale; Many of the most significant impacts on fresh­
water ecosytems will result from hydrological changes at the 
scales of small catchments and drainage basins (which are 
unresolved by GCMs) and changes in hydrological variability 
rather than mean conditions, which is poorly taken into account 
by climate models.
Although the biodiversity of freshwater species may increase in 
a warmer climate— ^particularly in middle and high latitudes—  
there may be an initial reduction in species diversity in cool 
temperate and boreal regions (essentially Fennoscandia and 
northern Russia) if the northward migration of warm-water 
species cannot keep pace with the rate of loss of cool-water 
species because of physiological limitations, lack of north-south 
migration corridors, and limitations to genetic adaptation.
It is likely that the impacts of climate change will be more pro­
nounced in the littoral zones of lakes than in the pelagic zones. 
Because aquatic macrophytes have access to the nutrients con­
tained in sediments, they will be able to exploit higher temper­
atures; emergent vegetation is likely to benefit from higher 
CO 2  concentrations (Kankaala et a l, 1996).
Water levels in lakes and reservoirs are highly sensitive to 
weather conditions; in some regions of Europe, small lakes and 
reservoirs may fluctuate rapidly in response to changes in pre­
cipitation and évapotranspiration. Where water levels are likely 
to decline, inshore areas will change significantly. In shallow 
lakes and reservoirs in particular, inshore aquatic vegetation and 
surrounding wetlands would decrease in area. This decrease 
may result in changed habitats for aquatic biota, reduction of 
productivity, and even extinction of fish and invertebrate
Europe
163
species that are dependent on these types of biomes. Where 
lakes have extensive bordering wetlands, declining water levels 
would reduce productivity and impact negatively on popula­
tions of fish and invertebrates that are dependent on these types 
of wetlands for their survival. Even if lake levels remain con­
stant, decreasing throughflow may change the water quality of 
lakes.
Decreasing lake volumes and areas also would result in 
increased loading of nutrients (nitrogen, phosphorus, and oth­
ers) from catchments per unit lake area or volume. 
Correspondingly, increased eutrophication can be expected—  
with high production of aquatic biomass, decreasing species 
diversity, deterioration of oxygen conditions, and adverse 
effects on water quality. In regions where most drinking water 
comes from surface sources, decreasing lake volumes and lower 
water quality may cause serious problems for human use.
In areas where increased snowfall and rainfall is expected, 
loading by acidifying pollutants from the atmosphere may 
increase. This effect would be critical for lakes located on 
bedrock with low neutralizing capacity (as in parts of the Alps, 
the Pyrenees, the Caфathians, and Fennoscandia). With further 
acidification of lakes, reductions in species and trophic-level 
diversity might occur. In the past decade, however, emission 
reduction measures in Europe have resulted in a decrease in 
atmospheric sulfur deposition of up to 50%; nitrogen deposi­
tion levels have remained unchanged. As a result, sulfate con­
centrations in freshwaters are decreasing at most European 
sites, and alkalinity values are increasing (particularly in the 
1990s). Nitrate concentrations increased in European freshwa­
ters during the 1980s but have remained stable or decreased in 
the 1990s. It has been postulated that the changes in the 1990s 
may reflect a climatic influence rather than changes in nitrogen 
deposition rates (UNECE, 1997).
In many parts of Europe, hydrological systems are heavily 
impacted by human activities (e.g., water use, sewage efflu­
ents, channel modification, removal of vegetation that acts as 
réfugia for numerous plant and animal species, drainage, land- 
use changes, fertilization in catchment areas, soil erosion fol­
lowing deforestation). Such direct human interference, along 
with other environmental stress factors such as air pollution, is 
likely to exacerbate the impacts of climate change, with a con­
sequent reduction of biodiversity in most parts of the continent.
sphyraena, Balistes carolinensis, Sardinella aurita, and 
Pomatomus saltatrix.
5.3.1.6. 
Adaptation Options
Natural ecosystems may adapt to climatic change in one way or 
another—^but not necessarily in ways preferred by humans. 
Therefore, some kind of human intervention, in the form of man­
agement, may be necessary. Adaptation options for forests and 
plants could include the creation of réfugia; migration corridors 
and/or assisted migration; and improvements in integrated fire-, 
pest-, and disease-management techniques. This approach poses 
problems in many parts of Europe, where ecosystems have been 
so fragmented and the population density is so high that some of 
these options may be impossible to implement. Reforestation 
would be a viable adaptation option in some cases, as would 
afforestation of abandoned agricultural land— increasing habi­
tats and establishing corridors between fragmented nature 
reserves. For wetlands and peatlands, reducing the impacts of 
climate change could be achieved through wetland restoration or 
creation techniques; in boreal regions where permafrost is a 
major feature of wetland ecosystems, however, such techniques 
would not be of much use. Freshwater biological systems can be 
assisted in a number of ways that could help mitigate the impacts 
of climate change, particularly through the increase and protec­
tion of riparian vegetation and the restoration of river and stream 
channels to their natural, adaptive moфhologies. Such restora­
tion processes may take several decades.
For all ecological systems, the reduction of pollution and land- 
use stresses in more heavily populated regions of Europe 
would contribute to removing major stress factors. In some cir­
cumstances, this strategy might allow plants to adjust more 
easily to the negative effects of climatic change.
An increasingly determined effort toward protection and revital­
ization of freshwater ecosystems in developed countries already 
has shown positive achievements, particularly through improve­
ments in the water quality of watersheds. The protection of 
threatened aquatic habitats such as wetlands has facilitated the 
réintroduction of several endangered vertebrate species. This has 
been the case particularly in central Europe as a consequence of 
increased awareness of environmental problems.
5.3.1.5. 
Littoral and Pelagic Zones
Littoral and pelagic zones often are forgotten in studies of cli­
mate change impacts. However, important changes have 
already been observed (e.g., a significant increase in average 
temperatures of the waters in the western Mediterranean basin 
over the past 20-30 years) (Francour et al., 1994). Temperature 
changes are reflected in substantial changes in the relative 
abundance of thermophilic species; there have been increased 
catches of thermophilic fish species such as Diplodus cervinus, 
Epinephus marginatus, Pom adasys incisus, Sphyraena
5.3.2. 
Agriculture and Fisheries
The impacts of climate change on agriculture can be defined at 
different scales— including crop yield, farm or sector prof­
itability, regional economic activity, or hunger vulnerability. 
Impacts depend on biophysical and socioeconomic responses.
In the past decade, substantial amounts of research have 
focused on regional and national assessments of the potential 
effects of climate change on agriculture. Relatively little work, 
however, has included systematic assessments that identify vul­
nerable socioeconomic groups, integrate effects across sectors.
164
Europe
describe impacts at different spatial and temporal scales, or 
address the efficacy of the range of practical responses (see 
Parry et a l, 1992). For the most part, studies have treated each 
region or nation in isolation (see IPCC, 1996, for a complete 
reference list of studies to date; see also Sirotenko et al., 1997), 
without regard to changes in production in other places, and 
have not addressed in an integrated way interactions with other 
related systems (e.g., water resources, socioeconomy, policy). 
Global assessments of climate change impacts in agriculture 
and agricultural markets have been few to date (Parry et al., 
1988; Smit, 1989; Martin et al., 1990; Kane et a i, 1992; 
Rosenberg and Crosson, 1991; UK Department of the 
Environment, 1991; Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994; Darwin et 
a l, 1995). In addition, a major shortcoming of most climate 
impact assessments has been their lack of in-depth treatment of 
adaptation, in part because of its complexity and in part because 
of the lack of a suitable methodological framework.
5.3.2.1. 
Agricultural Production
Although agriculture on a global basis could remain unchanged 
relative to base production in a changed climate— as a result of 
technological improvements and more efficient agricultural 
practices (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 13)— there will be large 
regional discrepancies; these differences may be less acute in 
Europe, where agriculture is highly advanced.
Agricultural production can be described in terms of amount and 
quality. The reactions of an individual crop to global change will 
depend on the balance of shorter cycles resulting from increased 
air temperatures, shorter periods to accumulate yield products (at 
least in the case of determinate crops), higher potential yields 
resulting from increased assimilation of CO 2 , and increased 
water-use efficiency resulting from enhanced regulation of tran­
spiration with elevated CO 2 . This equilibrium could be quite 
subtle in the highly mechanized context of European agriculmre.
Projections of future European production derive from con- 
trolled-conditions experiments and from feeding crop simula­
tion models, with climatic observations adjusted according to 
scenarios of future climate. Quantitative results of simulations 
therefore are highly dependent on the type of climate scenario 
used (especially in terms of available precipitation), though 
qualitative indications (trends) generally are constant among 
published results.
Most simulation and experimental studies so far have used 
expected fluctuations of mean values for climate variables, but 
increasing emphasis is being put on possible consequences of 
a more variable interannual and intra-annual climate (i.e., with­
in and between years).
5.3.2.1.1. Annual crops
In the following paragraphs, crops are classified according to 
their main growing period: winter (i.e., late autumn, winter.
spring, and sometimes early summer) or summer (i.e., spring, 
summer, and early autumn). For Europe, winter crops include 
winter cereals, peas, and rapeseed; summer crops include maize 
(forage and grain), sunflowers, potatoes, sugar beet, and spring 
cereals. The results below need to be tempered by the physio­
logical characteristics of crops— ^for instance, the shortening of 
the crop season resulting from increasing temperature is far less 
marked on nondeterminate crops (peas, potatoes) than on deter­
minate crops (wheat).
Suitable areas
As a result of increasing air temperatures in winter, the risks 
associated with damaging frosts will be reduced as a whole. 
This factor will allow expansion of winter cereals and proba­
bly other winter crops (CLAIRE, 1996) in large areas such as 
southern Fennoscandia, western Russia, and the Alpine 
regions— topography, physiography, soils, and socioeconomic 
circumstances permitting. Increasing spring temperatures will 
accelerate soil temperature increases and extend suitable zones 
for most summer crops, allowing a reasonable length for their 
growth season. In the case of sunflowers (and probably for 
grain maize), the area of suitability would extend eastward to 
Belarus and northward to northern Germany and southern 
Fennoscandia for a specified climate change. As an illustrative 
example, the northern limit of reliable spring cereal cultivation 
in Finland has been estimated to shift northward by 100-150 
km for each 1°C of warming (Carter et a l, 1996). For a repre­
sentative range of temperature scenarios, the rate of northward 
shift is about 10-80 km per decade (Saarikko and Carter,
1996). Some northward shift also is simulated for vegetable 
crops like onion (CLAIRE, 1996). As far as temperature is con­
cerned, there is no region that would become completely 
unsuitable for agriculture— even in southern Europe under 
high-temperature climate change scenarios. Studies currently 
are being carried out to determine what damage can occur in 
crops at extremely high temperatures.
Crop duration
Expected increases in temperature will cause faster rates of 
development as a whole (see “Adaptive Responses” below) 
and shorten the length of growing periods for determinate 
crops, consequently shortening the length of the grain-filling 
period. The total growing season for these crops may be 
reduced by 15-30 days, depending on the climate scenarios 
used; in this respect, crop duration could be more reduced in 
central and eastern Europe (4 weeks) than in western Europe (3 
weeks). Cereal harvest dates therefore would occur sooner. 
Nevertheless, some indication is given by Miglietta et al.
(1995) that a lack of cold days could reduce vernalization 
effects and consequently lengthen the first part of the growing 
season for winter cereals. Because of faster rates of develop­
ment, nondeterminate crops would develop more potential har- 
vestable organs (theoretically during a longer period) because 
no development event would stop the process of production;
Europe
165
increasing temperatures, however, probably would favor an 
increased senescence rate of the crop and tend to mitigate the 
beneficial effect of increases in potential organs by reducing 
the length of crop photosynthetic life.
Temperature increases in spring and summer will accelerate 
the course of crop development more crucially on short-cycle 
crops that are sown in spring than on winter crops. This gener­
al rule must be adapted, however, to local conditions (see, e.g., 
Saarikko and Carter, 1996)— ^who show by simulation that the 
sowing-to-leading phase in spring cereals in Finland declines 
by about 1 day per 1°C warming, and the heading-to-yellow 
ripening shortens by 2-4 days per 1°C warming). A simulation 
exercise on sunflowers shows a reduction of the crop cycle by 
10-50 days with UKTR3140 scenario and 10-70 days with 
UKTR6675 (see Harrison and Butterfield, 1996 for extensive 
results on sunflower development under different GCM-based 
scenarios). This quite important change is likely to affect most 
of Europe, with a gradient from the southwest (low reduction 
in Spain and Italy, where cycles are already short) to the north­
east (Poland and Russia). This pattern can be extrapolated to all 
determinate summer crops. Nondeterminate crops would expe­
rience a faster rate of development as well, which would 
induce earlier senescence.
Crop yields
Accounting for the enhancement of growth resulting from 
increasing COj concentrations, the potential yield of winter 
crops (assuming that neither precipitation nor irrigation is lim­
iting) would increase almost everywhere (with central or south­
ern Europe experiencing the highest winter wheat yield boosts, 
depending on the climatic scenario). If water limitations are 
considered, crop response apparently would depend on the sce­
nario chosen for the time evolution of CO 2 concentrations. In 
the case of winter wheat, there is some indication that the rate 
of increase in yields across Europe could be 0.2-0.36 
T/ha/decade under the IS92a emission scenario and 0.13 
T/ha/decade with the IS92d emission scenario, under both the 
UKTR3140 and the UKTR6675 climate scenarios. The largest 
increases would occur in central and eastern Europe (regardless
of changes in management practices that may occur in some 
countries as a result of changes in economic structure) and in 
southern Europe (see Table 5-2). All winter crops probably 
would follow the pattern of winter wheat yield changes. The 
largest increases per country might occur in northern Europe 
because of increased possibilities for taking winter cereals into 
cultivation.
For summer crops, determinate crop yields would be affected 
by the shortened crop cycle and reduced time to assimilate sup­
ply and grain-filling periods. On the other hand, improvements 
in the rate of dry-matter production can be expected from 
enhanced CO 2 concentrations. This effect has been illustrated 
for sunflowers (CLAIRE, 1996), where simulation models sug­
gest a compensation between the negative effects of tempera­
ture and the positive effects of carbon fertilization. Under the 
IS92a emission scenario, yield benefits occur in central and 
eastern Europe and losses occur in western Europe— but all of 
them are small. With IS92d emissions, the gains are even 
smaller, but the losses are amplified (see Table 5-3). The same 
pattern can be expected for all determinate summer crops (even 
if the fertilizing effect of atmospheric CO 2  is less beneficial to 
C 4  crops such as maize). Similar results were obtained with 
onion, whose simulated yield increased 4-8%  with UKTR3140 
and GFDL2534 (IS92a emissions) and 15% (resp. 7%) with 
UKTR6675 and GFDL5564, IS92a (resp. IS92c)— CO 2  effects 
again counteracting a negative effect of reduced growth period 
on yield (see CLAIRE, 1996). For nondeterminate crops, Peiris 
et al. (1996) expect potato yields to increase by as much as 
35% under northern conditions as a result of the lengthening of 
the growing season, regardless of CO 2 fertilization effects.
Climatic risks
Climatic risks will be highly dependent on the expected pattern 
of time variability for weather variables. Increasing temperatures 
will promote the development rate of all winter crops, which 
therefore will face extreme events (cold spells) at a later stage 
(i.e., when they are more sensitive). Consequences depend as a 
whole on the probabilities of such extreme events and a higher 
intra-annual variability of minimum temperatures— yielding a
Table 5-2: M ean wheat yields (and standard deviation) simulated with EURO Wheat model for four predefined regions o f 
Europe fo r baseline climate (1961-90) and climate change scenarios (in TIha), reproduced from CLAIRE (1996).
Emission Scenario 
(CO 2  ppmv)
GCM
Scenario
Europe
E.U.
Region*
Northern E.U.
Southern E.U.
Base (353)
2 X CO 2  (560) 
IS92a (454) 
IS92a (617) 
IS92d (545)
Base
UKHI
UKTR3140
UKTR6675
UKTR6675
8.07 (2.34) 
8.43 (2.55) 
8.74 (2.50) 
1 0 . 2 1  (2 .2 2 ) 
9.28 (2.30)
7.77 (2.86) 
8.50 (2.55) 
8.61 (2.69) 
10.17 (2.62) 
9.21 (2.69)
9.25 (1.22) 
9.70 (1.37) 
9.86 (1.33) 
11.13 (1.37) 
10.33 (1.32)
5.94 (3.23) 
6.79 (3.49) 
6.91 (3.09) 
8.83 (3.28) 
7.64 (3.27)
“Regions are defined as follows: Europe is the large region from Scandinavia to North Africa and from Ireland to the Black Sea; E.U. is the 
15 countries of the European Union; Northern E.U. is all E.U. regions north of 45°N; and Southern E.U. is all E.U. regions south of 45°N.
166
Europe
Table 5-3: Mean sunflower yields (and standard deviation) simulated with EURO Sunflower model for four predefined regions 
o f Europe fo r baseline climate (1961-90) and climate change scenarios (in T/ha), reproduced from CLAIRE (1996).
Emission Scenario 
(CO 2  ppmv)
GCM
Scenario
Regioni
Europe
E.U.
Northern E.U.
Southern E.U.
Base (353)
2 X CO 2  (560) 
IS92a (454) 
IS92a (617)
Base
UKHI
UKTR3140
UKTR6675
1.53 (1.27) 
0.93 (0.77) 
1.37 (1.11) 
1.59 (1.22)
1.36 (1.22) 
0.98 (0.83) 
1.24 (1.05) 
1.47 (1.16)
2.41 (1.09) 
1.46 (0.77) 
1.94(1.11) 
2.15 (1.11)
0.78 (0.84) 
0.76 (0.74) 
0.86 (0.78) 
1.1 0 (1.01)
'Regions are defined as follows: Europe is the large region from Scandinavia to North Africa and from Ireland to the Black Sea; E.U. is the 
15 countries of the European Union; Northern E.U. is all E.U. regions north of 45°N; and Southern E.U. is all E.U. regions south of 45°N.
higher probability of crop failure from frost damage. The same 
problem arises with winter cereals, which face extreme temper­
ature maxima in early summer during the grain-filling period. 
Recent investigations show that the probabilities of extreme 
temperatures increase under all climate scenarios (CLAIRE,
1996) and that thermal shocks on poorly adapted genotypes lead 
to losses in grain yield and quality.
Higher temperatures in summer should not be a real challenge 
to summer crops (except spring cereals, if subjected to elevat­
ed temperatures during the grain-filling period) because they 
are more resilient than winter crops. Drought could be a major 
concern 
in 
the future, 
however, 
particularly 
in 
the 
Mediterranean zone and in central Europe. This is a genuinely 
complex problem; GCM-based scenarios do not agree on the 
magnitude of changes in space of at least one component of the 
water budget (precipitation), and changes in another compo­
nent— potential évapotranspiration (PET)— are extremely 
dependent on calculation methods. Le Houérou (1995) states 
that a 1°C increase in air temperature will induce 37 mm more 
PET south of 40°N (ECRASE, 1996)— an enormous 60% 
increase in PET in southern European countries. If simulated 
changes of - 1 0 % to -2 0 % in summer precipitation for western, 
southern, and central Europe are reliable, fully irrigated crops 
may become even larger competitors to domestic and industri­
al users for water resources stored in aquifers and rivers (a 2 0 % 
reduction represents a significant loss in currently moist areas).
Adaptive responses
Adaptive responses could be facilitated by increased knowl­
edge of weather patterns and climate-related variability 
through the use of climate forecast information.
To abate the shortening effect of temperatures on crop cycles, 
changed sowing dates and later-maturing genotypes could be 
used whatever the type of crop. This approach, however, may 
cause a problem with winter cereals whose cycle length often 
is linked with cold temperature requirements (vernalization) 
that may be not completely fulfilled during warmer winters. 
Later-maturing crops also should face climatic risks in the 
early summer. On the other hand, the sowing dates of winter
crops cannot be postponed to early fall because of the much 
higher probability of experiencing low temperatures at a sensi­
tive stage and because of the cost of fungal disease control dur­
ing periods in the early fall.
For summer crops, using earlier sowing dates or longer-matur­
ing varieties would counteract the detrimental effects of cli­
mate change in all cases— as was demonstrated for sunflowers 
throughout Europe in CLAIRE (1996), for spring wheat in 
Finland in Saarikko and Carter (1996), and for maize in Spain 
in CLAIRE (1996). Choosing adequate sowing dates also 
could help to synchronize full canopy development and maxi­
mum radiation availability on maize-type crops in northern 
European regions (Delécolle et al., 1996), which would 
enhance final production. Similarly, earlier sowing dates would 
allow the crop to develop during periods of lower PET 
demand, implying an improvement in global water-use effi­
ciency and a reduction in irrigation demand— as simulated in 
Spain by CLAIRE (1996).
5.3.2.1.2. 
Perennial crops
Perennial crops mostly include fruit trees, grapevines, and 
grasslands.
Cycle length
Assuming that climate variability does not increase, higher tem­
peratures in late winter and early spring will hasten develop­
ment stages. Concerning fruit trees, no experimental or simula­
tion results are known, but it can be expected that budbreak will 
be promoted, as will later stages. On the other hand, higher tem­
peratures could be detrimental to flowering quality for cold- 
requiring species and therefore could reduce fruit production.
With grapevines, simulation studies have shown that fruit bio­
mass would decrease consistently in northern Italy under 
weather conditions foreseen by equilibrium climate scenarios 
(but would increase with some transient scenario outputs), 
even if the fertilizing effect of CO 2  is accounted for. The pro­
moting effect of CO 2 has been experimentally demonstrated
Europe
167
under current conditions by Bindi et al. (1996), who show that 
berry weight and totai acidity increase, whereas totai sugars 
decrease.
Higher temperatures probably will be beneficial to grasslands 
(see, e.g., Tchamitchian, 1994 for perennial ryegrass), at least 
early in the season, through increased early biomass produc­
tion (earlier senescence also is expected). Higher temperatures 
during the summer may decrease the growth capabilities of 
grass. Higher CO 2  tends to abate the negative effects of tem­
perature, as demonstrated experimentally by Soussana et al.
(1994). The interaction between nitrogen level and carbon dis­
tribution in crops nevertheless is a key factor in forecasting the 
responses of grasses (Casella et al., 1996). Some recent years 
in Europe have illustrated the immediate impact of dry periods 
on grassland production because of low rooting depth, shallow 
soils, etc., leading to a reduction in yield. Similar events may 
become more common in the future. Through simulation 
experiments, Rounsevell et al. (1996) show that grassland pro­
duction in England and Wales is resilient to small increases in 
temperature and precipitation— and even stimulated at higher 
elevations. Experiments in northern and western Europe have 
shown positive responses in total biomass production across a 
range of grass species to increased temperature (+3°C) and ele­
vated CO 2  concentrations (Jones et al., 1996; Jones et al.,
1997). The interactive response may be less than additive, 
however, indicating a decline in response to elevated CO 2  as 
temperature increases. A  significant part of the temperature 
response is manifest through an extended growing period. The 
response of below-ground growth to elevated CO 2  appears to 
be greater than that of above-ground growth, and there are dif­
ferential responses between species— suggesting that sward 
conditions may change significantly in the future (Jones et al., 
1996; Jones et al., 1997).
For woody species, the influence of changing climates will 
really depend primarily on how long increasing CO 2  concen­
trations enhance growth and production (i.e., whether there is 
any acclimation, whether farmers are capable of adapting their 
strategy to such situations, etc.) and secondarily on the influ­
ence of CO 2 , temperature, and water shortage on fruit quali­
ty— which is the major issue in fruit production. No real infor­
mation is available on irrigation needs for fruit trees under 
changing climate conditions. Although grasslands show very 
different responses according to species, they apparently dis­
play no acclimation to increasing CO 2 .
Weeds, pests, and diseases
Weeds are expected to benefit from higher CO 2  concentrations. 
The expected result of the crop-weed competition will depend 
on their respective reactions to climate and atmospheric fertil­
ization. C 3 plant growth probably would be proportionally 
more enhanced than C 4  growth as a result of increasing CO 2  
concentrations. This difference can lead to various conse­
quences during the early crop vegetation period (fall or spring), 
depending on which species is weed and which is crop.
Chemical control of weeds obviously remains possible, but this 
approach must be considered in the context of increasing 
incentives for environment-friendly agriculture in Europe.
Increasing precipitation and temperature in the northern half of 
Europe probably will be linked to increasing air humidity and 
possibly leaf wetness duration. All factors are favorable to 
early (fall, spring) disease outbursts for annual and perennial 
crops; the same holds for early pest attacks (Harrington et al.,
1994). Sophisticated agricultural systems probably can cope 
with increasing weeds, pests, and diseases in a sustainable 
manner (better-targeted and more efficient chemicals, risk 
forecast models, adapted machinery, etc.). The global result 
will depend on how widespread such agriculture will be in 
Europe around 2050. Whether controls will be possible in 
autumn and spring (i.e., whether working days will be avail­
able) also is questionable and must be studied in more detail. 
(Some model results are available for Finland.) The risk of 
crop damage from pests and diseases increases in all regions 
under a warming of climate. Northward shifts in the distribu­
tion of certain pests could be of similar magnitudes and rates 
as those estimated for cereal crops. Additional generations of 
multivariate species also can be expected. The damage poten­
tial of diseases such as potato late blight could increase at a 
similar rate as the potential increase in yields of the crop host. 
This analysis implies an increased requirement for pest and 
disease control, with associated consequences for the environ­
ment (Carter et a i, 1996).
None of the models that have been used to predict future agri­
cultural yields have taken into account the possibility of future 
reductions in productivity associated with increased concentra­
tions of ozone. Depending on the supply of precursors, ozone 
concentrations are likely to increase in warmer temperatures. 
For example, Legge et al. (1996) have shown that current yield 
losses of spring wheat in Hessen, Germany, may be as high as 
15% in some years. Greater losses can be expected in parts of 
Europe where ozone concentrations are higher.
Soil erosion
Increasing precipitation probably will induce greater risks of 
soil erosion, depending on the intensity of rain episodes (such 
information is not currently available from available climate 
scenarios). This possibility needs to be examined, as does the 
expected evolution of soil organic matter. If soil organic matter 
content decreases with increasing temperature as a result of a 
higher mineralization rate, soils will be more susceptible to 
slaking; consequently, early development of crops will be ham­
pered. Some indication exists that the negative effect of tem­
perature will be more or less compensated under European 
conditions by a positive impact of carbon fertilization 
(Balesdent et a l, 1994) and that the temperature-dependent 
mineralization rate is larger for clay and sand soils than for 
loam (Houot et a l, 1995). Increased rainfall amounts also 
could increase fertilizer leaching in already wet areas; for 
example, Peiris et al. (1996) have simulated decreasing wheat
168
Europe
yields under Scottish conditions that are explained by such a 
lack of fertilizer. Changes in vegetation cover probably will 
play a role as well.
Concerning working days, Rounsevell and Brignall (1994) 
have suggested that opportunities for autumn soil tillage in 
Great Britain will be improved by global warming (as a result 
of increasing water demand), as long as the future precipitation 
increase is no more than 15%. This analysis must be verified 
for spring conditions and other areas.
5.3.2.1.3. 
General trends in agriculture
The general trend of simulation results for coming decades is 
an increase in crop yields, at least in the northern half of 
Europe. As an example, a raw application of yield projections 
to presently suitable areas and yield levels of 1990 for winter 
wheat in the EU suggests an average increase of 9-11 million 
tons per year for the years 2013-2036 (IS92 a and d emission 
scenarios, UKTR3140 and GFDL2534 climate scenarios, 
equivalent years based on climate sensitivity) and 24-26 mil­
lion tons per year for the years 2042-2100 (IS92a and d emis­
sion scenarios, UKTR6675 and GFDL5564 climate scenarios) 
(CLAIRE, 1996).
Increasing stress may be associated with a more variable cli­
mate (both intra-annual and interannual), with an increase in 
the probability of rare events. This effect is not obvious at all 
stages, however (e.g., winter temperature in high latitudes 
may become less variable where the meridional temperature 
gradient is reduced). Because European agriculture is highly 
adapted— that is, prepared to provide large outputs as a 
response to a restricted range of inputs— it could be severely 
impacted by more frequent sequences of such extreme events. 
As Semenov and Porter (1995) state, “Future climatic scenar­
ios derived from GCMs have described changes in mean 
weather, but nonlinear crop models require explicit incorpora­
tion of changes in climatic variability to assess the risks of 
agricultural production from climate change.” Breeding of 
new cultivars and planting of cultivars in previously less- 
suitable areas may be successful adaptation options, provided 
that farmers can distinguish between anomalous weather and 
climatic trends.
Increasing yields are related chiefly to increasing production of 
dry matter. Simulations show that only carbon weight is pro­
moted in this dynamic, and the carbon-to-nitrogen ratio 
increases in dry matter. This effect often is linked with a loss in 
product quality (for bakeries, breweries, animal feeding, etc.).
A northward change in temperature patterns may not necessar­
ily correspond to a simple shift in latitude of suitable areas for 
usual crops because many plants are sensitive to photoperiod 
and adapted to a combination of temperature and photoperiod 
ranges. New genotypes therefore might be necessary to meet 
this new agricultural frontier, provided that the available soils 
are suitable for the crop.
Any effects of climate change on fisheries will occur in a sec­
tor that already is characterized on a global scale by full uti­
lization, massive overcapacities of usage, and sharp conflicts 
between fleets and among competing uses of aquatic ecosys­
tems. Climate change impacts are likely to exacerbate existing 
stresses on fish stocks— notably overfishing, diminishing wet­
lands and nursery areas (perhaps aggravated by sea-level rise), 
pollution, and UV-B radiation.
The fishing industry is a significant income earner in Europe, 
but in recent decades the industry has experienced numerous 
problems related to fishing rights and quotas, dwindling stocks 
due to overfishing, and disputes as part of the European fishing 
fleet encroaches upon areas traditionally exploited by other 
nations (e.g., eastern Canada, the western African coast). 
Evidence in support of the view that environmental changes 
drive many changes in fish stocks has been accumulating in 
recent years (Mann and Lazier, 1991; Mann, 1992,1993; Mann 
and Drinkwater, 1994; Polovina et al., 1995). The question of 
whether overfishing, environmental change, or a combination 
of the two is responsible for major declines in fish stocks is still 
a matter for debate and is situation-specific.
About 70% of global fish resources depend on near-shore or 
estuarine habitats at some point in their life cycle (IPCC, 1990; 
Chambers, 1991). The growing rate of human occupation (with 
associated pollution) and the high property values of littoral 
areas, especially in western countries, will severely constrain 
the inland displacement of wetlands and other habitats as sea 
level rises. Fish production will suffer when wetlands and other 
habitats that serve as nurseries are lost (Costa etal., 1994). Fish 
habitats are downstream of many impacts, and fish integrate 
the effects. Fish are symbolic of the health of ecosystems and 
our ability to manage our resources.
Growing demands for fish, water, and space; encroachment by 
large-scale fishing and aquaculture operations; population con­
centrations; urban expansion; pollution; and tourism already 
have harmed small-scale fishing communities in shallow 
marine waters, lakes, and rivers. Persons engaged in this eco­
nomic sector have limited occupational or geographic mobili­
ty. With climate change, global and regional problems of dis­
parity between catching power and the abundance of fish 
stocks will worsen— particularly with regard to the interaction 
between large mobile fleets and localized fishing communities. 
Aquaculture will develop in new areas— sometimes assisting, 
sometimes disrupting existing traditional fishing techniques.
Many studies have related historical changes in the abundance 
and distribution of aquatic organisms to climate changes. 
These studies reveal that relatively small changes in climate 
often produce dramatic changes in the abundance of species—  
sometimes of many orders of magnitude— because of impacts 
on water masses and hydrodynamics (e.g., 8 Ьаф and Csirke, 
1983; Beukema et a l, 1990; Kawasaki et a l, 1991). The 
impacts of warming can be inferred from past displacements of
5.3.2.2. 
Fisheries
Europe
169
transition zones— ^for example, the Russell cycle in the western 
English Channel (Southward, 1980) and simultaneous discon­
tinuities in the local occurrence of pilchard and herring 
(Cushing, 1957,1982). Opposing fluctuations in these fisheries 
in the Channel and the Bay of Biscay have followed long-term 
changes in climate for three centuries (Binet, 1988b).
A general poleward extension of habitats and range of species 
is likely, but an extension toward the Equator may occur in 
eastern boundary currents. For example, the range of Sardina 
pilchardus prior to World War II was from south Brittany to 
Morocco. In warm years following the war, sardines were 
fished up to the North Sea. During the 1970s, new fisheries 
developed off the Sahara and Mauritania, with small amounts 
landed as far south as Senegal— perhaps as a consequence of 
upwelling and ecological processes related to tradewind accel­
eration (Binet, 1988a). Changes in the circulation pattern are 
likely to induce changes in the larval advection/retention rates 
in and out of favorable areas and may explain changes in abun­
dance and distribution (Binet, 1988a; Binet and Marchai,
1992). Areal overlaps in closely related species may change in 
unpredictable directions (Ntiba and Harding, 1993).
A poleward movement of species in response to climate warm­
ing is predictable on intuitive grounds (Shuter and Post, 1990). 
Habitat, food supply, predators, pathogens, and competitors, 
however, 
also constrain the distributions of species. 
Furthermore, there must be a suitable dispersion route, not 
blocked by land or some property of the water such as temper­
ature, salinity, structure, currents, or oxygen availability. 
Movement of animals without a natural dispersal path may 
require human intervention; in the absence of intervention, 
such movement may take hundreds or thousands of years 
(Kennedy, 1990).
As stresses intensify, impacts that for a long time were limited 
to freshwaters and littoral areas now are observed in closed and 
semi-enclosed seas (FAO, 1989; Caddy, 1993). Some semi­
enclosed seas— such as the Mediterranean, Black, Aegean, and 
northern Adriatic— already are eutrophic. The diversity of uses 
in these areas also has introduced some of the most pervasive 
and damaging anthropogenic impacts on the world’s ecosys­
tems in the form of the spread of nonindigenous species (Mills 
et a l, 1994).
53.2.3. 
Adaptation Options
Most studies show that if climate variability remains the same 
as at present, adaptive strategies (change in sowing dates, 
genotypes, crop rotation) will continue to offset expected pro­
duction losses, as long as such strategies are not counteracted 
by government or other policies in place. The outcome could 
be different if climate conditions become more variable; aver­
aging across years then would be less appropriate.
In economic terms, most model studies suggest that on aver­
age Europe would benefit from climate change because of an
overall increase in crop yields, potentially leading to lower 
consumer prices in a free market. Such studies have considered 
adaptation to climate change, in which adjustments at the farm 
level— including shifts in planting dates, changes in water use 
in irrigated areas, and changes in crop cultivars— are consid­
ered. Scenarios without such adaptations also have been under­
taken; the results of the model investigations clearly point to 
the beneficial effects of early adaptation to climatic change.
Other adaptation options include technological advances and 
socioeconomic options, such as land-use planning, watershed 
management, improved distribution infrastructure, information 
dissemination (including improved climate and weather fore­
casts), adequate trade policy, and national agricultural programs.
The ultimate impacts of climate on the agricultural sector may 
be determined by nonclimate factors that control the system. In 
Europe, a major concern— and the main driving force behind 
agricultural policy— are laws derived from the Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) for the countries in the EU. These 
laws also affect other countries in Europe. A  common aim in all 
countries is to reduce land degradation and environmental 
problems. In countries with water limitations, the growing 
competition for water, which leads to water-saving programs, 
is an additional concern. In Spain, for example, one of the main 
objectives of the future law on water use (Ley del Plan 
Hidrologico Nacional, MOPT, 1993) is to increase water-use 
efficiency to increase water availability; the specific water sav­
ings are reflected mainly in improvement of the irrigation sys­
tems and an efficient adjustment between crop water demand 
and supply.
Little concern has been devoted to the large percentage of the 
population working in agriculture in southern Europe. The con­
sequences of climatic variations in agronomic systems that are 
highly regulated, such as the systems in the countries of the 
EU, are difficult to predict because crops are highly subsidized 
and therefore crop prices are artificially high. For example, 
although agricultural production in Spain decreased in 1994 
(-4.3%) as a result of the drought conditions, the Spanish agrar­
ian rent increased (+14%, the largest increase in the EU) 
(МАРА, 1995) because of the increase in Spanish commodity 
prices and direct subsidies to Spanish farmers. From the 
Spanish perspective, it is clear that agricultural regulations and 
the devaluation of the national currency (peseta) had an initial 
positive effect on agricultural prices and on farmers’ subsidies 
(Matea, 1995).
Fisheries adaptation options could provide large benefits irre­
spective of climate change:
• 
Design and implement national and international fish­
ery management institutions that recognize shifting 
species ranges, accessibility, and abundances and bal­
ance species conservation with local needs for eco­
nomic efficiency and stability.
• 
Support innovation through research on management 
systems and aquatic ecosystems.
170
Europe
• 
Expand aquaculture to increase and stabilize seafood 
supplies, help stabilize employment, and conserve 
wild stocks.
• 
In coastal areas, integrate the management of fisheries 
with other uses of coastal zones.
Monitor health problems (e.g., red tides, ciguatera, 
cholera) that could increase under climate change and 
harm fish stocks and consumers.
Genetic engineering has the potential to increase the produc­
tion and efficiency of fish farming (Fischetti, 1991). However, 
resource managers are very concerned about accidental or 
intentional release of altered and introduced species that might 
harm natural stocks and gene pools. Around Fennoscandia, 
escapees and nonindigenous reproduction may have reached or 
exceeded the recruitment of salmon wild stocks (Ackefors et 
a l, 1991). Introduction of pathogenic organisms and antibiot­
ic-resistant pathogens also is of concern; this problem needs to 
be addressed in any long-term planning.
5.3.3. 
Cryosphere, Hydrology, Water Resources, 
and Water Management
5.3.3.1. 
Snow and Ice
As contributors to hydrological systems, snow and ice and 
their potential changes in a warmer global climate will have 
profound 
impacts 
on 
European 
streams 
and 
rivers. 
Mountains— in particular the Alps— are the source of most of 
Europe’s major rivers; the timing and amount of flow in rivers 
such as the Rhine, the Rhone, and the Danube (via the Inn 
River) are strongly dependent on the seasonal accumulation 
and melting of snow and, during the summer and fall, on melt- 
water from mountain glaciers. Changes in the mountain cryos­
phere in the Alps and the Fennoscandian mountains would 
have significant consequences for the flow regimes of rivers 
originating in these mountains. Changes in hydrological 
regimes would particularly affect populations living down­
stream of the mountains that depend on the water the moun­
tains provide for freshwater supply, industrial and energy 
usage, irrigation, and, in some cases, transportation— as on the 
Rhine and the Danube, both of which are particularly sensitive 
to flow changes. As the extensive flooding in Poland, 
Germany, and the Czech Republic in 1997 has demonstrated, 
many flood defense systems have a limited capacity, and any 
changes in hydrological regimes could have major impacts in 
floodplain areas.
Higher temperatures will push the snowline upwards by about 
150 m for every 1°C rise; the seasonal patterns of snowfall are 
likely to change, with the snow season beginning later and end­
ing earlier. The timing and amount of seasonal flow patterns 
currently experienced by European rivers also would change as 
a result of snowpack conditions in the mountains; peak flow 
would occur earlier in the season, and there could be shortfalls 
as a result of drier summer conditions over much of Europe 
and reduced river flow in the summer. The fact that winter
runoff is likely to increase and spring runoff probably will 
decrease could benefit the hydropower industry, however, 
because it would be in a more favorable position to generate 
electricity at the peak demand period of the year.
Mountain glaciers generally have been shrinking and are pro­
jected to lose about 25% of their mass worldwide by the mid­
dle of the 21st century. In the European Alps, about half of the 
original ice volume has been lost since 1850; as much as 95% 
of the existing glacier mass could disappear over the next 1 0 0  
years with anticipated warming, and many of the small glaci­
ers could disappear altogether within decades (Haeberli and 
Hoezle, 1995). Large reductions in glacier mass would impact 
most hydrological basins, with significant reductions in flow 
regimes during the summer and early fall. Accelerated glacier 
shrinkage and permafrost degradation also is likely to cause 
increasing slope stability problems in areas above the present 
timberline (Haeberli et al., 1997).
In terms of river and lake ice— which are particularly relevant 
to northern Sweden, Finland, and Russia, as well as high- 
altitude Alpine lakes— a warmer climate will lead to delayed 
freezing at the beginning of the winter season, while break-up 
will begin earlier. In Russia and Fennoscandia, the river-ice 
season could be shortened by up to one month. Many rivers in 
the temperate regions of central Europe will become ice-free or 
develop only intermittent or partial ice coverage.
5.3.3.2. 
Hydrology and Water M anagement
The main components of the hydrological cycle are precipita­
tion, evaporation, discharge, storage in reservoirs, groundwa­
ter, and soil. Because of many complex interactions between 
these factors in time and in space, changes in the hydrological 
cycle are more difficult to model and to analyze than tempera­
ture and precipitation data. A  detailed discussion is beyond the 
scope of this paper (see IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 3; IPCC 
1996, WG II, Chapter 10).
Potential changes in the hydrological cycle are easier to under­
stand if some basic mechanisms are kept in mind. Generally, 
higher temperatures lead to higher potential evaporation and 
decreased discharge (which also is a function of precipitation, 
storage, and topography). The storage of water in the soil 
serves as a buffer; in winter and spring, increasing precipitation 
normally generates higher discharge because the buffer is full 
and evaporation is low. During the summer, storage is reduced 
by évapotranspiration and must be refilled before discharge 
begins. Changes in the hydrological cycle therefore are more 
variable than changes in other climatic factors. Seasonal-to- 
interannual variability in precipitation and temperature also 
accounts for some of the variability in hydrological character­
istics in European river basins.
The hydrological cycle in Europe is strongly influenced by 
anthropogenic factors. During the past century, land-use pat­
terns have changed, the drainage conditions of rivers and land
Europe
171
have been altered, the proportion of impermeable (urban) areas 
has increased, and additional reservoirs have been built. 
Changes or trends in the discharge of rivers therefore are more 
difficult to analyze than temperature and precipitation trends, 
especially in densely populated areas (Forch et al., 1996; Holt 
and Jones, 1996; Giakoumakis and Baloutsos, 1997).
GCM-based analyses for the European continent (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Table 10-1) give a range of possible responses of river 
runoff in a warmer global climate— from decreases in some 
regions (e.g., Hungary, Greece) to increases in other regions 
(United Kingdom, Finland, Ukraine); these estimates are a 
function of precipitation, évapotranspiration, and soil moisture 
projections in the different GCMs. The uncertainties of climate 
model results, however, remain very large in terms of hydro- 
logical forecasting, particularly at the regional scale. This lim­
itation is particularly critical for water management practices 
in the future because water resource impacts occur at the local 
scale, not at regional or larger scales.
The river basin is the natural spatial unit for water resource 
management; because neighboring river basins can have quite 
different climate change impacts, making quantitative state­
ments about regional-scale climate impacts on water resources 
is difficult given that many regions include a wide range of 
hydroclimatic regions. The results of catchment-scale simula­
tions with conventional hydrological models driven by GCM 
data therefore are highly variable. Arnell and Reynard (1996), 
for example, simulated changes of ±2 0 % in annual runoff for 
21 catchments in Great Britain— with a tendency toward lower 
amounts of discharge, especially in sensitive areas and during 
the summer months.
Another consequence of increasing temperatures is a change in 
the distribution of water in the landscape. Especially in flat 
regions (e.g., lowlands in The Netherlands and northern 
Germany), catchment areas depend on groundwater recharge. 
Changes in percolation therefore can change the size of catch­
ments (Hoermann et a i, 1995). On a local catchment scale, 
distribution of water in the landscape can change even if annu­
al discharge remains unchanged: Whereas hilltops are severely 
stressed by drought, areas with high groundwater levels may 
remain largely unaffected.
The effects on different regions of Europe can be classified 
according to the climatic gradients from north to south and 
from west to east (the maritime-to-continental gradient). 
According to current and projected distributions of rainfall, 
there may be an increase in summer drought. Observed precip­
itation shows a decrease in summer and an increase in winter 
and spring. Such a change is likely to affect mainly areas that 
already are sensitive to drought: the southern and continental 
parts of Europe, especially the M editerranean region. 
Additional consumption of water for irrigation may create 
additional depletion of water reservoirs and groundwater.
Although the debate about changes in the frequency of floods 
is still open, an increase in rainfall during periods when soils
are saturated (i.e., winter and spring), along with earlier 
snowmelt, could increase the frequency and severity in floods. 
An increase in large-scale precipitation might lead to increased 
flood risks on large river basins in western Europe in winter. 
The increased temperatures expected in summer could lead to 
higher local precipitation extremes and associated flood risks 
in small catchment areas.
Another unknown factor is the effect of increased plant water- 
use efficiency (WUE) resulting from increased CO 2  in the 
atmosphere. Under laboratory and greenhouse conditions, 
plants seem to use less water for constant yield or exhibit high­
er productivity. In the field, however, predictions of WUE at 
the catchment or even ecosystem level are not yet feasible. In 
water-limited systems (e.g., in the Mediterranean region), a 
higher WUE can increase or maintain productivity— whereas 
in the humid areas of northern Europe, it could theoretically 
decrease evaporation and therefore increase discharge.
Warmer average and extreme temperatures will enhance the 
demand for freshwater, particularly for agriculture and direct 
human consumption, although the water-quality requirements 
are different for these two types of consumption. Changes in 
precipitation patterns, particularly over regions that already are 
sensitive (e.g., the Mediterranean basin), may lead to increased 
demand for water for irrigation purposes, especially for soils 
with low water-storage capacities. If precipitation were to 
undergo a decline in the Mediterranean basin (which is not 
always the case suggested by GCM simulations), countries such 
as Spain, Italy, and Greece would face substantially increased 
risks of summer water shortages. In such a situation, increases 
in storage capacity would be needed to maintain existing water 
and energy supplies. The Netherlands could face the desiccation 
of most of its wetland areas or be forced increasingly to rely on 
the Rhine to maintain present water levels. Groundwater 
aquifers could be affected by increased saltwater intrusion as 
sea level rises. Given a possible 4°C temperature increase and a 
rise in the Alpine snow line of 500-700 m in the summer, the 
flow of the Rhine could decline by 10% during this season. A 
temperature increase of only 0.5 °C and a daily rainfall decrease 
of a few percent would decrease runoff in Hungary by 25-30%. 
Despite projected wetter winters, drier summers and increased 
evaporation in southeastern England may reduce yields in 
impounding reservoirs by 8-15%. Aquifer yields, which are 
very important to the London area, may fall by 8 %. Supplies of 
water during warmer, possibly drier, summers would need to be 
maintained through larger storage or transfers from wetter 
regions. Water quality may deteriorate because there would be 
less river flow to dilute contaminants.
In terms of water management, system yields of river basins are 
likely to decrease as a result of changes in flow patterns; these 
river basins certainly will be sensitive to expected increases in 
floods and droughts. There may be a potential for conflict over 
environmental and economic uses of freshwater, especially for 
river basins that are shared by several countries. The high pop­
ulation density in western Europe does not allow for much flex­
ibility for major changes in flood-protection practices.
172
Europe
Floodplains in most countries already are overpopulated; thus, 
it will be extremely difficult to find the necessary areas for an 
effective flood-protection system.
5.3.3.3. 
Adaptation Options
Of all the systems that are sensitive to climatic change, the 
cryosphere may be the most vulnerable; no adaptation measure 
can counter the disappearance of snow and ice in an environ­
ment that is likely to experience more frequent episodes of 
above-freezing temperatures than at present. In very restricted 
situations, the use of snowmaking equipment may help to 
extend the skiing season in particular areas, but this solution is 
expensive, and its environmental impact has not been fully 
evaluated.
In terms of water resource management, technological mea­
sures— including land-use criteria and erosion control, reser­
voirs and pipelines to increase the availability of freshwater 
supply, and improvements in the efficiency of water use— can 
be envisaged. Socioeconomic options should include direct 
measures to control water use and land use, as well as indirect 
measures such as incentives or taxes; institutional changes for 
improved resource management also may be needed. Specific 
examples of possible options include supplementing rain-fed 
agriculture with irrigation; water-conserving irrigation prac­
tices; enhanced coordination of surface and groundwater man­
agement; changes in cropping patterns; watershed manage­
ment; structural and nonstructural flood-control management; 
and reallocation of water resources among water-use sectors 
and among nations.
5.3.4. 
Coastal Zones
Coastal zones are characterized by highly diverse ecosystems 
that are important as sources of food and habitats for many 
species. In many areas in Europe, population, economic activ­
ity, and arable land are concentrated in coastal zones, which 
has led to a decrease in their resilience and adaptability to vari­
ability and change. Some coastal areas— such as much of The 
Netherlands, the fens in eastern England, and the Po River 
plain (Italy)— already are beneath mean sea level; many more 
areas are vulnerable to flooding from storm surges. Fixed, rigid 
flood defenses and sea-level rise already are causing “coastal 
squeeze” (i.e., a decline in intertidal coastal habitats).
Sea-level rise and possible changes in the frequency and/or 
intensity of extreme events— such as temperature and precip­
itation extremes, cyclones, and storm surges— represent con­
sequences of climate change that are of most concern to 
coastal zones. Except for sea-level rise itself, there currently is 
little understanding of the possible interaction of different 
aspects of climate change in the coastal zone. Other possible 
changes in climate could be costly. In The Netherlands, the 
costs of protection against an adverse 
1 0 % change in the 
direction and intensity of storms may be worse than the costs
of a 60-cm rise in sea level (Peerbolte et a/., 1991; IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Chapter 9).
Under the IS92a scenario, global sea level is projected to rise 
by about 5 mm/yr (with an uncertainty range of 2-9 mm/yr). 
This increase is two to five times the rate experienced over the 
past century. Regional and local sea-level rise will not neces­
sarily be the same as the global average because of vertical 
land movements (glacial isostatic rebound, tectonic activity, 
subsidence) and possible changes in ocean water characteris­
tics (oceanic circulation, wind and pressure patterns, ocean 
water density). Other climatic change in Europe is uncertain. 
An increase in precipitation intensity seems likely, increasing 
the flood risk in low-lying coastal areas.
Without adaptation, a rise in sea level would inundate and dis­
place wetlands and lowlands, erode shorelines, exacerbate 
coastal storm flooding, increase the salinity of estuaries, threat­
en freshwater aquifers, and otherwise impact water quality. 
The impacts would vary from place to place and would depend 
on coastal type and relative topography. Areas most at risk 
would be tidal deltas, low-lying coastal plains, beaches, islands 
(including barrier islands), coastal wetlands, and estuaries. 
Tidal range also is a key factor: In general, the smaller the tidal 
range, the greater the response to a given rise in sea level. This 
pattern suggests that the Mediterranean and Baltic coasts, with 
their low tidal range, may be more vulnerable to sea-level rise 
than the open ocean coasts.
Examples of susceptible coasts include the Rhone, Po, and 
Ebro deltas (Jimenez and Sanchez-Arcilla, 1997; Sanchez- 
Arcilla and Jimenez, 1997). These areas already are subsiding 
because of natural and sometimes human factors, and they are 
sediment-starved as a result of changes in catchment manage­
ment. For example, the Ebro delta has lost 97% of its sand sup­
ply since the 1950s. Reduction or loss of these areas would 
impact important agricultural and natural values. Many of 
Europe’s largest cities— such as London, Hamburg, St. 
Petersburg, Thessaloniki, and Venice— are built on estuaries 
and lagoons (Frasetto, I99I). Such locations are exposed to 
storm surges, and climatic change is an important factor to con­
sider for long-term development. In Venice, a 30-cm rise in rel­
ative sea level this century has greatly exacerbated flooding 
and damage to this unique medieval city; permanent solutions 
to this problem are still being investigated. Beaches tend to 
erode given sea-level rise, which destroys a valuable resource 
and exposes human activities landward of the beach to 
increased wave and flood action. Intense recreational use of 
beaches in many coastal areas, particularly around the 
Mediterranean, makes this erosion a particular problem; some 
response to such changes often is essential. In higher latitudes, 
gravel beaches are more common than sand beaches (Carter 
and Orford, 1993). Gravel beaches often provide an important 
coastal protection function, which sea-level rise may disrupt.
The Global Vulnerability Analysis (GVA) was a first-order 
analysis that combined available global data sets with a num­
ber of assumptions to provide regional and global perspectives
Europe
173
on vulnerability to accelerated sea-level rise for a limited num­
ber of parameters (Hoozemans et al., 1993). GVA results are 
consistent with a number of national studies (Nicholls, 1995); 
the following results for Europe can be derived. In 1990, more 
than 30 million people were estimated to live below the 1,000- 
year storm surge level. These people generally are protected 
from flooding by structural measures and the low incidence of 
flooding. A  1-m rise in sea level relative to the 1990 conditions 
would increase the population living below the 
1 ,0 0 0 -year 
storm surge level by about 30%, to 40 million people. The inci­
dence of flooding will depend on human response: Proactive 
measures that anticipate the rise in sea level will maintain a 
low incidence of flooding.
Europe is estimated to have at least 2,860 km^ of salt marshes 
and 6,690 km^ of other unvegetated intertidal habitat (these 
estimates exclude the former Soviet Union). Based on coastal 
morphological type, the GVA estimates that coastal wetlands 
will decline given a 1-m rise in sea level, with 45% of salt 
marshes and 35% of other intertidal areas lost. Considering 
coastal squeeze increases the losses to 62% and 41%, respec­
tively. The characteristics of the surviving salt marsh and inter­
tidal areas may be greatly altered compared with current con­
ditions. The northern Mediterranean is most vulnerable to such 
losses; the Baltic Sea is most vulnerable to coastal squeeze. 
Such losses could have serious consequences for biodiversity 
in Europe, particularly for bird populations.
Table 5-4 presents what is known to date from national studies 
in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 9) and U.S. Country Studies 
Program (Lenhart et al., 1996) on European countries, supple­
mented by a national study of Germany (Sterr and 
Simmmering, 1996; Ebenhoe et al., 1997). A  regional study of
East Anglia in the United K ngdom  also is available (Turner et 
al., 1995). Although the results vary from country to country, 
they all emphasize the large human and ecological values that 
could be impacted by sea-level rise. Other values that may be 
impacted include cultural and archeological resources at the 
coast (Fulford et al., 1997). Historic cities, such as Venice, 
might be included in this category.
5.3.4.1. 
Adaptation
People tend to respond to the threat of sea-level rise. Three 
broad response strategies can be distinguished: planned retreat, 
accommodation, and protection. In the latter strategy, land is 
maintained as it is now, albeit with a decline in natural func­
tions and values. In the first strategy, coastal processes are 
allowed to occur naturally, but valuable developments are pre­
vented or withdrawn in time. The strategy of accommodation 
is intermediate; the response in this case is to control the 
impacts of sea-level rise by changing land use. The strategy 
chosen depends on national circumstances, including the eco­
nomic and ecological importance of the coastline, technical 
and financial capabilities, and the legislative and political 
structure of the countries concerned.
Because most low-lying coastal areas in Europe already are 
protected from flooding, a rise in sea level by itself will not 
cause serious inundation of human-occupied areas. Assuming 
other climatic factors remain constant, the protection offered 
by the flood defenses will decline as sea level rises, but its 
effectiveness will not disappear immediately (see, e.g., Kelly, 
1991, for a discussion of the Thames Barrier, which protects 
London). Based on the GVA, the reduction in flood protection 
will be largest around the Mediterranean (Nicholls and
Table 5-4: Social and economic impacts o f sea-level rise in The Netherlands, Germany, Poland, Estonia, and Ukraine.
Capital Value
Adaptation/
Sea-Level
People Affected
at Loss
Land at Loss
Wetland
Protection
Rise
# People
%
Million
%
%
at Loss
Million 
%
Country
(m)
(0 0 0 s)
Total
US$1
GNP
km2
Total
km2
US$1 
GNP
Netherlands^
1 . 0
1 0 , 0 0 0
67
186,000
69
2,165
5.9
642
17,300 
0.05
Germany^
1 . 0
ЗДЮ
4
7,500
0.05
13,900
3.9
2 , 0 0 0
23Л00 
0.2
Poland^
1 . 0
240
1
2 2 , 0 0 0
24
1,700
0.5
36
1,400 
0.02
PolancP
0 . 1
40
0 . 2
1 0 , 0 0 0
1 1
845
0 . 2
n.a.
2,300+10 
0.03
Poland''
2.5
235
1
75,000
82
2,203
0 . 6
n.a.
9,800+500 
0.15
Estonia^
1 . 0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
60
n.a.
n.a.
n.a. 
n.a.
Ukraine®
0.5
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
32
n.a. 
n.a.
Ukraine®
2 . 0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
370
n.a. 
n.a.
'All costs have been adjusted to 1990 US$.
^Source: IPCC 1996, WG П, Chapter 9. Results are for existing development. People affected, capital loss, land loss, and wetland loss assume no human 
response, whereas adaptation assumes protection except in areas with low population density.
^Sources: Stem and Simmering, 1996; Ebenhoch er a/., 1997.
''Source: U.S. Country Studies Program. Adaptation costs are full protection plus yearly maintenance. See also Zeidler, 1997.
^Source: Kont et al, 1997; estimates for two sites only.
^Estimates for wetland loss along Black Sea coastHne only.
174
Europe
Hoozemans, 1996). Anticipating accelerated sea-level rise in 
the design of new flood defenses will counter this effect (U.K. 
Department of the Environment, 1996).
Analysts often employ simplifying assumptions regarding 
response strategies. The costs in Table 5-4, for example, 
assume that all densely populated areas will be protected. An 
alternative assumption is that the costs of protection (includ­
ing the monetary values of nature) will be balanced against the 
costs of land loss. Fankhauser (1994) analyzed this assump­
tion for countries in the OECD. He concludes that it is optimal 
to protect all harbors and cities. Open coasts and beaches need 
to be maintained and protected in densely populated areas 
(such as The Netherlands) and in areas where beach tourism is 
important (such as Greece, Italy, and Spain). On the other 
hand, areas with low population density (such as Norway and 
Iceland) and poorer areas (such as Turkey) have a lower opti­
mal level of protection. Turner et al. (1995) analyzed protec­
tion in East Anglia, England. At the regional scale, protection 
can be justified for the entire coast. When the 113 individual 
flood compartments were evaluated, however, the study indi­
cated that it may not be economically justifiable to continue to 
protect 2 0 % of compartments, even with modest rates of sea- 
level rise. This analysis assumes that there is no interaction 
between flood compartments— which may not always be the 
case. However, it suggests that a range of responses, rather 
than a single response, may be appropriate at regional and 
national scales.
Responses may be hindered by resource constraints. In Cyprus, 
the coast is almost totally sediment-starved as a result of catch­
ment regulation and management (Nicholls and Hoozemans, 
1996), and there are no ready sources of sand available for 
beach nourishment. Yet maintaining the beach is critical to the 
tourist industry. Therefore, external (and hence costly) sources 
of sand may be required for beach nourishment. Many other 
Mediterranean islands appear to have similar problems.
Some adaptation that anticipates climate change already is 
being implemented, despite the costs (U.K. Department of the 
Environment, 1996). In The Netherlands, national policies 
that outlaw erosion and mandate maintenance to the present 
shoreline position already are in place (Koster and Hillen,
1995). In the Ebro, Rhone, and Po deltas, conceptual and 
quantitative models of deltaic responses to sea-level rise are 
being developed (Jim enez and Sanchez-A rcilla, 1997; 
Sanchez-Arcilla and Jimenez, 1997). The ultimate goal of 
this work is to harness natural processes within deltas to 
counter global and local (due to subsidence) sea-level rise. 
However, other coastal settings often are not being managed 
with climate change in mind (Nicholls and Hoozemans,
1996). This approach often ignores numerous opportunities to 
use existing changes, such as the redevelopment cycle of 
coastal urban areas, to adapt to climate change (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Chapter 9). Planning for and responding to sea-level 
rise raise important questions of equity, such as who pays for 
eroded land (if retreat is a response). These issues remain to 
be addressed systematically.
A more strategic and integrated perspective regarding coastal 
management and shoreline protection has been triggered by 
climate change, although resulting efforts have to consider 
more than just climate change. In Britain, guidelines for estu­
ary management (English Nature, 1993) and shoreline man­
agement (U.K. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food et 
al., 1995) have been published, and a number of shoreline 
management plans and estuary management plans have been 
completed or are being formulated. Recognition of sediment 
cells and the benefits of erosion and beach nourishment in 
terms of sediment supply to other parts of the cell are being 
more fully realized (Bray et al., 1996). The flood-prevention 
benefits of coastal wetlands also are being assessed. In eastern 
Britain, some managed setback schemes have been carried out 
on a pilot basis. In these areas— ^which had previously been 
reclaimed for agriculture— the sea defense has been realigned 
and the seawall breached to recreate areas of salt marsh and 
intertidal habitat. This strategy is expected to assist in the 
restoration of natural balance in estuaries and to provide flood 
alleviation benefits. It is anticipated that larger-scale applica­
tion of such defense realignment, in appropriate locations, may 
be required to counter expected losses of intertidal habitat and 
relieve pressure on artificial defenses from sea-level rise. Such 
a policy may find more widespread application in Europe and 
would help minimize wetland losses resulting from sea-level 
rise.
5.3.5. 
Other Infrastructure!Activities!Settlement
5.3.5.1. 
Energy Demand
Energy demand will be affected by warming, but the direction 
and strength of the impact are unclear. Air conditioning (cool­
ing) is a relatively new but growing source of energy demand 
in northern Europe, and warmer summers would increase this 
demand. Such a tendency would enhance the urban heat island 
effect and thereby heat stress. Increased demand for irrigation 
water also would augment the demand for energy. On the other 
hand, warmer winters would reduce the demand for heating 
energy.
In the United Kingdom, peak demand for heating fuels might 
decline less than total annual demand (as a result of a shortened 
heating season), leading to a reduced demand load factor. On 
aggregate, UK demand for fossil fuels may decline by 5-10%  
and electricity demand by 1-3% for a 2.2°C temperature rise 
by 2050; Finnish electricity demand would fall by 7-23%  for a 
temperature increase of 1.2-4.6°C; Russian fossil fuel demand 
would fall by 5% and electricity demand by 1% for a 2.0°C 
temperature increase (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 11).
5.3.5.2. 
Water Supply
As discussed in Section 5.3.3, GCM-based analyses project a 
range of possible runoff trends— from slightly drier to slightly 
moister conditions in Europe in the future. Many European
Europe
175
rivers are likely to have less flow in dry periods of summer, 
aggravating problem s of water supply to m ajor cities. 
Numerous public supplies depend on groundwater (e.g., 94% 
of Portuguese supplies); any decrease in winter recharge could 
have serious implications. Reduced runoff also would nega­
tively affect cooling of electric-power and industrial plants, 
particularly if there are environmental constraints on waste- 
heat production. For example, several French nuclear power 
stations were forced to close down or operate well below 
design capacity during the 1991 drought (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 14).
Anticipated clim atic changes in Greece are likely to dramat­
ically increase the risk of sum m er w ater shortages. 
Significant increases in storage capacity would be needed to 
m aintain 
existing 
w ater 
and 
energy 
supplies. 
The 
Netherlands could face the desiccation of most of its wetland 
areas or be forced increasingly to rely on the Rhine to main­
tain present water levels. Groundwater aquifers could be 
affected by increased saltwater intrusion as sea level rises. 
Given a possible 4°C temperature increase and a rise in the 
Alpine snow line of 700 m in summer, the summer flow of 
the Rhine could decline by 10%. A  temperature increase of 
only 0.5°C and a daily rainfall decrease of 0.08 mm would 
decrease runoff in Hungary by 25-30% . Despite projected 
wetter winters, drier summers and increased evaporation in 
southeastern England may reduce yields in impounding 
reservoirs by 8-15% . Aquifer yields (which are very im por­
tant to the London area) may fall by 8 %. Supplies of water 
during warmer, possibly drier, summers would need to be 
maintained through larger storages or transfers from wetter 
regions. Water quality may deteriorate because there would 
be less river flow to dilute contaminants (IPCC 1996, W G II, 
Chapter 10).
5.3.5.3. 
Water Demand
Increasing temperatures intensify water demand— particularly 
for agriculture, human consumption (e.g., watering of gardens 
and lawns), cooling water for electric-power and industrial 
plants, and natural ecosystems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 
14). Changing precipitation also modifies demands for irriga­
tion, particularly in regions with soils of low water-storage 
capacity (e.g., northern Germany, Denmark, Poland).
5.3.5.4. 
A ir Pollution
More stable anticyclonic conditions in the summer would pro­
vide increased opportunities for ground-level ozone to build up 
and lead to deteriorating urban air quality. Existing problems in 
Mediterranean cities such as Athens will increase if conditions 
become drier. Summertime smog (largely ground-level ozone) 
has become a significant problem in many parts of Europe 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 12). The extent of these problems 
in the future will very much depend on future transport policies 
in affected areas.
In general, risks to construction and infrastructure are caused by 
extreme events (e.g., droughts, high winds) rather than average 
conditions. In northern Europe, the greatest negative impacts on 
construction are likely to arise from river floods. Studies by 
Kwadijk and Middelkoop (1994) and Penning-Rowsell et al.
(1996) show that small increases in winter precipitation could 
lead to drastic increases in flood depths. Unless adaptive mea­
sures are installed in time, flood damage also would increase 
dramatically. Increased summer drought would aggravate land 
subsidence induced by clay-shrinkage, affecting dwellings par­
ticularly in England and Poland (Brignall et al., 1996). 
Increased summer drought also would heighten fire danger, 
especially in the Mediterranean area. In temperate and northern 
climates, higher temperatures will result in lower road mainte­
nance costs, particularly if snowfall and the number of 
freeze-thaw cycles decrease (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 11).
5.3.5.5. 
Construction and Infrastructure
5.3.5.6. 
Insurance
Insurance companies are vulnerable to climate change through 
changes in windstorms, droughts, and floods that could affect 
covered property (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 17). Flood insur­
ance can be bought on the free market only in the United 
Kingdom; other European countries have government-backed 
insurance or none at all (Albala-Bertrand, 1993). Thus, possible 
increases in flood magnitudes and frequencies are unlikely to 
seriously affect the insurance sector. Droughts affect insurance 
only through the impact of land subsidence on buildings. 
Damage to buildings from windstorms is widely covered by 
insurance in Europe. Dorland et al. (1996) show that an increase 
of a few percent in storm intensity (not inconsistent with GCM 
results) could double or triple storm damages, most of which 
are insured. This effect occasionally could lead to troubles in 
the insurance sector—^witness the total insured losses of $ 1 0  bil­
lion (compared with $15 million total losses) during the first 
months of 1990. Storm damage insurance, however, accounts 
for only a tiny fraction of total property insurance (Toi, 1996).
Europe is home to the largest reinsurance companies in the 
world. Reinsurers insure other insurance companies from all 
over the world for large losses— for instance, losses resulting 
from natural disasters. Thus, increases in floods or tropical 
cyclones in highly developed areas may affect Europe’s finan­
cial sector. Experience in the early 1990s shows that the rein­
surance market is capable of rapid reform under stress— which 
indicates that climate change could well lead to incidental tur­
moil but is unlikely to cause structural problems (Toi, 1996).
5.3.6. 
H um an Health
Global climate change over the coming decades could have 
various effects on the health of human populations within the 
European region. Because of the nature and scale of the expo­
sures involved, such effects generally would apply to entire
176
Europe
populations or communities rather than to small groups or indi­
viduals. Climate change could affect human health through six 
major pathways.
1) An increased frequency or severity of heat waves would 
cause an increase in heat-related mortality and illness. In con­
trast, less-severe cold weather would reduce the documented 
seasonal excess of deaths in winter. Many studies have shown 
that instances of heat Ьурефугех 1а and overall death rates rise 
during heat waves, particularly when the temperature rises 
above the local population’s physiological threshold and the 
temperature increases are accompanied by high humidity. 
Several U.S. studies indicate that, on average, approximately 
one-third of these deaths would occur 2-3 weeks after the heat 
wave in susceptible persons, whereas other deaths apparently 
are unexpected. By applying these documented heat wave- 
associated risks to transient climate change scenarios associat­
ed with C 0 2 -doubling, U.S. researchers have estimated that the 
number of heat-related deaths may increase several-fold in 
very large U.S. cities by 2050 (Kalkstein, 1993). In such cities, 
this would represent up to several thousand additional deaths 
per year.
No European-equivalent estimates of additional heat-related 
deaths attributable to climate change, based on local empiri­
cal studies, are yet available. A clear rise in daily mortality 
was associated with the 1995 extreme heat wave in the United 
Kingdom; the increase was approximately twice as great 
within the urban London population (Rooney et a l, 1997). 
By simple extrapolation from a U.S. study, Fankhauser
(1995) concluded that about 9,600 additional heat-related 
deaths per year may occur in the European Union for a 2.5°C 
temperature rise, and about 8,400 additional deaths may 
occur in the former Soviet Union. In both cases, full physio­
logical acclimatization is assumed; population size, air con­
ditioning, and medical care are assumed to be unchanged 
from present conditions.
This heat-related increase in deaths would be partially offset by 
reductions in cold-related deaths (predominantly cardiovascu­
lar). A  recent study (Martens, 1997) estimated that in areas 
with temperate and cold climates— ^which includes large parts 
of the European continent— a globally averaged temperature 
increase of approximately 1°C could result in a reduction in 
winter cardiovascular mortality, especially in older people. 
Another British study (Langford and Bentham, 1995) has fore­
cast that approximately 9,000 fewer winter-related deaths 
would occur annually by the year 2050 in England and Wales 
under a 2-2.5°C increase in average winter temperature. On 
the other hand, Fankhauser (1995) arrives (again by extrapola­
tion from the United States) at about 800 fewer winter deaths 
for the entire EU. The EUROWINTER group (1997) assessed 
increases in mortality per 1°C decrease in temperature in vari­
ous European regions. This study shows that mortality 
increased to a greater extent with a given decline in tempera­
ture in regions with warm winters, in populations with cooler 
homes, and among people who wore fewer clothers and were 
less active outdoors. Apparently there still is insufficient
European information to quantify this trade-off between heat- 
associated losses and gains associated with milder winters. 
Furthermore, the balance will vary by location and adaptive 
response.
2) Changes in seasonal and daily temperatures and humidity 
are likely to affect the concentration of airborne materials that 
impinge on respiratory health. The production of photochemi­
cal smog proceeds more rapidly at higher temperatures. The 
concentrations and onset and duration of season of allergenic 
pollens and spores are related to cumulative temperatures and 
rainfall, though in a complex manner (Emberlin, 1994; 
Spieksma et a l, 1995). Alterations in the concentration of 
aeroallergens may affect the seasonality of certain allergic res­
piratory disorders. Relatively little research has been done on 
these processes and relationships within Europe or elsewhere, 
however. Interactive adverse effects on mortality have been 
reported from Athens in response to simultaneous high tem­
peratures and high levels of air pollution (Katsouyanni et al.,
1993).
3) Extreme weather events (floods, storms, fogs, etc.) cause 
deaths, injury, certain infectious diseases, and mental health 
disorders. The number of victims of such events is relatively 
low in Europe (Alexander, 1993; IDNDR, 1994); for instance, 
the extremely stormy first quarter of 1990 caused “only” 225 
casualties throughout Europe (Munich Re, 1993). Indications 
exist that flood incidence in the northern parts of Europe and 
storminess in the western and central parts of Europe (and 
hence health risks) may increase (Downing et a l, 1996); to 
date, no research has been reported that quantifies the impact 
on mortality and morbidity risks. Disease (e.g., hepatitis) may 
break out in areas affected by severe flooding, particularly if 
drinking water becomes contaminated by sewage.
4) Organisms and biological systems that determine the spread 
of infectious diseases typically are sensitive to climatic vari­
ables. Net climate change-related increases in the geographic 
distribution of vector organisms (e.g., ticks, mosquitoes, sand 
flies) of various infectious diseases, along with changes in the 
life-cycle dynamics of vectors and infectious parasites, would, 
in aggregate, increase the potential for transmission of many 
vector-borne diseases in Europe.
Summer conditions in Europe are warm enough in some coun­
tries for native mosquito species to transmit malaria. Indeed, 
until the third quarter of this century, the disease was present in 
southern Europe. Although malaria was successfully eradicat­
ed from most of Europe during the 1950s and 1960s, there have 
been recurrent outbreaks in Turkey and the former Soviet 
Union (Bruce-Chwatt and de Zulueta, 1980), and it is present 
in parts of North Africa. Different types of malaria are present; 
the severity of symptoms is related to the plasmodia involved. 
The most dangerous form is Plasmodium falciparum (other 
species are P. vivax, P. ovalum, and P. malariae). Climate 
change would increase the risk of malaria transmission (which 
currently is low). However, existing public-health resources—  
surface-water management, disease surveillance, and medical
Europe
177
treatment— would 
make 
re-emergent m alaria unlikely. 
Localized outbreaks of “airport malaria” may occur (because 
of increases in tourism, increased malaria in countries that 
Europeans visit, and warmer local conditions in Europe), so it 
is important to strengthen current policies. For example, about
2,000 cases of malaria were diagnosed in England in 1990, and 
there are 10-12 fatalities each year. A  troublesome trend is the 
increasing resistance of the plasmodia to prophylactics, which 
increases the chances of disease transmission.
Several existing tick-bome infectious diseases are significant in 
Europe (e.g., Lyme disease, which is caused by the bacterium 
Borrelia burgdorferi, and tick-bome viral encephalitis). The 
tick’s life cycle is sensitive to temperature and humidity, and 
tick populations depend on access to intermediate host animal 
species (especially rodents and deer). Unpublished data indicate 
that an earlier onset of spring and a later arrival of the winter 
season are related to increases in the incidence of tick-borne 
encephalitis in Sweden (Lindgren and Gustafson, submitted).
Leishmaniasis is endemic at a low level in all countries bor­
dering the Mediterranean, as well as Portugal (Gradoni et al.,
1995). The visceral form of the disease, known as kala-azar 
(which can be fatal), is limited by the distribution of its sand fly 
vectors. Climate change is likely to expand the distribution of 
the sand fly vectors. Higher temperatures also would acceler­
ate the maturation of the protozoal parasite, thereby increasing 
the risk of infection (Rioux et a i, 1985).
The mosquito Ae. albopictus is considered second only to Ae. 
aegypti in its importance as a disease vector of dengue and 
dengue hemorrhagic fever. The first sighting of the vector 
species in Europe (in 1979) came from Albania. However, it 
was only when Ae. albopictus was introduced into Italy in 
1990— through the importation of used tires— and subsequent­
ly spread that the species was considered a threat to public 
health. By the end of 1995, Ae. albopictus infestations had 
been reported in 10 Italian regions and 19 provinces. Other 
countries where climatic conditions meet such criteria and that 
may be vulnerable to a potential introduction of Ae. albopictus 
include Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, France, Albania, and 
the former Republic of Yugoslavia (Knudsen et al., 1996).
5) Increases in non-vector-borne infectious diseases also would 
occur because of the effect of higher temperatures on microor­
ganism proliferation. Many food-related infections are affected 
by ambient temperatures and have their annual peaks during 
the summer months (e.g., food poisoning from salmonellosis) 
(Bentham and Langford, 1995). Declining water availability 
and quality also would pose risks to health. Flooding and 
regional droughts would alter the mix of drinking water 
sources in some locations. Outbreaks of waterborne infectious 
diseases such as cryptosporidiosis— ^which have occurred in 
both the United Kingdom and the United States in recent 
years— may become more likely.
6 ) Climate change also could affect human health indirectly 
through other impacts. For example, a potentially important
health impact would result from deterioration in social and 
economic circumstances that might arise from effects of cli­
mate change on patterns of employment, wealth distribution, 
and population mobility and settlement.
The actual impact of climate change on human health is mod­
ulated by the susceptibility of the exposed population and the 
human ability to adapt. In general, the most vulnerable popula­
tions, communities, or subgroups would be people living in 
poverty or with a high prevalence of malnutrition, chronic 
exposure to infectious disease agents, and inadequate access to 
social and physical infrastructures. Within Europe, in general, 
the vulnerability to many health impacts is limited by existing 
material resources, public health measures, and systems of 
health care. Heat waves, other forms of extreme weather, air­
borne respiratory hazards, and vector-borne infectious diseases 
may have an impact, however.
5.4. 
Integrated Assessment of Potential 
Vulnerabilities and Impacts
In the foregoing sections, impact categories have been treated 
separately. Obviously, however, the impacts of climate change 
interact with one another— through the use of resources such as 
water and land and through economy, society, and politics. An 
integrated assessment tries to take these interactions into 
account. In addition, an integrated assessment tries to compare 
the diversity of impacts with respect to their seriousness (from 
a human viewpoint) and evaluate overall vulnerability to cli­
mate change.
Three approaches to integrated assessment have been applied 
to Europe: monetization, integrated modeling, and coupled 
models and expert panels. Each method has its advantages and 
disadvantages, which are discussed at length in Weyant et al. 
(IPCC 1996, WG III, Chapter 10). The focus here is on the 
results. Note, however, that integrated assessment is a young 
field, without a great number of well-established methodolo­
gies, let alone results.
5.4.1. 
Integrated Assessment Using Monetization
One way of integrating the range of potential impacts of cli­
mate change is to derive a comprehensive monetary esti­
mate, which adds all impacts expressed in their dollar value. 
This approach allows for comparison of the seriousness of 
climate change with other problems, comparison of vulnera­
bilities to climate change among regions and sectors, and 
comparison of the impact of climate change with the impact 
of greenhouse gas emission reduction. Expressing effects on 
marketed goods and services (e.g., land loss resulting from 
sea-level rise, energy savings in winter) in monetary terms is 
relatively straightforw ard because the price is known. 
Expressing damage to nonmarketed goods and services (e.g., 
wetland loss, mortality changes) in monetary terms can be 
accomplished by examining market transactions where such
Box 5-2. Integrated Regional Climate Impact Assessment in Brandenburg
The Brandenburg project (Stock and Toth, 1996) was an integrated regional climate impact study. A variety of statistical­
ly derived climate change scenarios were used as inputs to various types of ecosystem and forest growth models, plant 
development simulations, and hydrological analyses. Socioeconomic impacts were limited to human health and energy 
use. Integration across sectors and climate impacts was limited, however.
The observed climate of 1937-1992 served as a reference scenario. Six additional scenarios were developed to capture 
possible changes in climate under various assumptions about the frequency, length, and type of anomalous weather con­
ditions. A synthetic year was composed from a warm and wet spring, a hot and dry summer, a warm and wet fall, and a 
warm and wet winter. The frequency of these extreme years was increased by 20% in Scenario 2; Scenario 3 contained 
the same extreme year only. Scenarios 4 and 6  were created by modifying the frequency of extreme conditions by 20% 
in monthly patterns and summer weather conditions, respectively. Scenarios 5 and 7 contained only synthetic years 
derived from modified monthly and summer patterns, respectively.
Brandenburg is the driest region in Germany. This condition is aggravated by the predominance of sandy soils with low 
water-holding capacities and by the lack of substantial amount of water inflows to the region. Two regional water models 
were used to analyze the hydrological implications of climate change. Under all scenarios considered, critical low-flow 
values fall significantly. This result would create problems for water availability, water quality, and aquatic ecosystems.
Three different modeling approaches have been used to study possible impacts on the composition, productivity, and sta­
bility of forests and natural ecosystems. A global vegetation potential model projects a transition toward steppe as the 
dominant vegetation form as a consequence of increasing dryness; it is uncertain, however, that dryness will increase. On 
the other hand, two local forest succession models show that the simulated potential natural vegetation of beech will be 
replaced almost everywhere by mixed stands of oak, lime, and fir. Currently, forestry in Brandenburg relies mainly on fir 
stands; simulation results show that there is little chance for improved conditions at current sites even under optimistic 
projections of climates. Reduced water availability would result in substantially reduced yields. Unfavorable secondary 
impacts— such as more frequent forest fires and increased pest and insect damages— together with higher management 
costs and timber loss are likely to generate significant economic losses.
Additional components of the study looked at possible impacts on yields in agriculture, human health, and energy pro­
duction and use. In addition to preliminary results, the major conclusion in all these areas was that additional and more 
detailed studies are required to improve our understanding of possible threats, as well as the benefits and disadvantages 
associated with possible adaptation strategies.
I jg  
Europe
goods or services are implicitly traded (e.g., landscape beau- 
assumptions underlie these best guesses; the uncertainties
ty) or by interviewing people about their preferences. That 
are large, yet unknown,
is, human preferences are expressed by people’s willingness 
to pay to secure a benefit or their willingness to accept com­
pensation for a loss. In western Europe, valuation techniques 
5.4.2. 
Integrated Assessm ent Using Integrated M odeling 
are well established and widely applied. Numerous theoreti­
cal and empirical problems remain, however. Based on the 
An integrated assessment model combines climate change sce-
SAR (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ), Fankhauser and Toi 
narios with models of various impacts of climate change in a
(1997) report best estimates for the annual impact resulting single computer code (i.e., hard-linking of models). One advan-
from a doubling of atmospheric concentrations of carbon 
tage of this approach is that consistency is ensured (e.g., land or
dioxide of about -1.6% to -1.4% of the GDP in western water used for agriculture is not used in the domestic sector). A
Europe, using a mix of earlier GCM scenarios standardized disadvantage is that modeling and computational requirements
to a 2.5°C increase in the global mean temperature. Best esti- entail simplifications of the state-of-the-art. Only two integrated
mates for eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union vary assessment models are even somewhat useful for climate change
between -0.4% and +0.4% (a benefit) of GDP. These figures impact assessment in Europe; the other twenty-odd models
compare with an estimated world impact of -1.8% to -1.2% reviewed in IPCC (1996, WG III, Chapter 10) have other aims
of GDP. National differences may be hidden by the regional or are based on monetization. The first integrated assessment
average, but only one country-specific study has been car- model is the ESCAPE model (Rotmans et a l, 1994), which was
ried out to date. Using similar methods and scenarios as developed specifically for the EU. It includes a variety of
Fankhauser and Toi (1997), Kuoppomaeki (1996a, b) con- impacts on natural and human systems; since its completion in
eludes that Finland may gain about 1% of GDP. Many 1991, however, the model has not been updated. The second
Box 5-3. Integrated Study: Effects of Increasing 
Temperatures on the Ecosystems of the Bornhoved Lake District
The Bornhoved lake district is located in the north of Germany, near the Baltic Sea; it includes agroecosystems, beech 
forest, alder bog, grassland, and a lake. The surface of the catchment is about 5 km^, including 1 km^ of lake surface.
The dominating soil types are dystric arenosols on the hills.
All results are based on a climate data set of 60 years with a maximum increase of 2.7^C; rainfall was assumed to be 
unchanged. Potential évapotranspiration (pET) would increase by about 100 mm, but actual évapotranspiration (aET) 
would differ only slightly from observed values because soil water storage would become a limiting factor. During sum­
mer, there may be considerably more drought stress. Soil moisture repletion in autumn and winter would take consider­
ably longer: The profile would not be filled until January. As a result, farmers would have to change their land use from 
spring cereals to winter crops or install irrigation systems on the light soils.
The extent of the relatively flat catchment area depends on the amount and spatial distribution of groundwater recharge. 
Because of higher évapotranspiration, groundwater recharge would be reduced by 25% (100 mm/year), and the catch­
ment area of the lake would decrease. Overall, the inflow into Lake Belau could decline by about 50%.
The discharge of the rivers could drop by about 30% compared with present conditions. The frequency of low water lev­
els could increase, causing additional stress for flora and fauna in the rivers. Water quality in the eutrophic Lake Belau is 
determined by the load of the river that flows through the lake. As a result of decreasing discharge, there would be high­
er nutrient concentrations in the groundwater and the river water; the overall nutrient load will increase substantially.
Under unchanged management, nitrogen concentrations in the soil solution would rise, but the overall loss would 
decrease slightly. However, a change in the crop rotation and a reduction of fertilization from the present 340 kg N/ha to 
163 kg N/ha would affect the nitrogen leaching much more.
Vegetation studies were conducted for primary production of alder, vegetation structure in grassland, soil respiration, 
changes in the length of the growth period in beech forest, and production of beech and Carex acutiformis. Zoological 
case studies were carried out for molluscs, birds, mice, several invertebrates, and the food chain of the robin. Particularly 
interesting is the decrease in the number of long-distance (trans-Sahara) migratory birds— a phenomenon that also has 
been observed in other regions of Germany. One possible explanation could be that with increasing temperatures, the 
nests and territories of these birds already have been occupied by nonmigratory birds and birds with short passage that 
can respond more quickly to the changing conditions of rising temperatures.
Changes in agricultural yield were simulated for wheat, corn, rape, grassland, and beans. Because of the light soils in the 
research area, corn yield will decrease dramatically under scenario conditions, and the risk of bad harvests will increase.
An earlier seed time and the use of other varieties of corn has almost no effect on yields. Because the agriculture of the 
region is dominated by dairy production, food for cattle has the highest priority. To minimize the risk of bad harvests, 
farmers should irrigate or replace corn with grassland, which uses winter rainfall more efficiently.
Under scenario conditions, rivers and lakes will be more severely affected than terrestrial ecosystems. The structure of 
the landscape will be more pronounced between dry uphill patches and downhill regions with access to groundwater. The 
soil water storage capacity will become much more limiting and will increase the local risk of bad harvests; adaptation of 
land-use practices would be necessary. Despite numerous efforts to predict species composition in terrestrial and aquatic 
ecosystems, predictions on a local scale are not possible. Changes should be evaluated by a combination of models and 
monitoring programs (predictive monitoring).
Source: Hermann et ai, 1995.
Europe 
179
such model is the IMAGE2 model (Alcamo, 1994). This model 
5.4.3. 
Integrated Assessment Using 
is up-to-date. It models the whole world, with a focus on land 
Coupled Models and Expert Panels
use. The resolution is 0.5°x0.5°, with east and west Europe
grouped into two economic regions. The socioeconomic model- A third form of integrated impact assessment is the use of cou-
ing of agriculture and human infrastructure— the dominant land- pled models and expert panels. The knowledge of a range of
use tupes in Europe— ^requires further work. 
experts on various impacts— supported, where possible, by a
180
Europe
suite of models— is combined; consistency is attempted 
through common scenarios, soft-linking of models (i.e., using 
output from one model as input to another), and discussion. 
This approach better reflects the full richness of the literature 
and the complexity of the issues (including nonmodeled 
parts), but it lacks the solid outcome of a model. This 
approach has been used for the United Kingdom (CCIRG, 
1991, 
1996), 
Finland 
(SILM U, 
1996), 
the state 
of 
Brandenburg in Germany (see Box 5-2), the Bornhoved lake 
district in Germany (see Box 5-3), and land use in England 
and Wales (Parry et a l, 1996). Ensuring consistency only in 
scenarios, the UK and Finland studies are least ambitious in 
integration yet most comprehensive in areas and topics cov­
ered; relevant findings are discussed elsewhere in this chapter. 
The Brandenburg and Bornhoved studies consider only small 
areas, focusing on the impact of climate change on ecosys­
tems. The study on England and Wales uses world food prices 
(from Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994) and climate change sce­
narios to investigate land-use changes; a major result is that, 
although the aggregate agricultural output of this region is 
unlikely to change drastically, the spatial distribution of activ­
ities may well change substantially.
References
Ackefors, H., N. Johansson, and B. W alhlberg, 1991: The Swedish com pen­
satory program m e for saim on in the Baltic: an action plan with biologi­
cal and econom ic considerations. In: Ecology and M anagem ent Aspects 
o f Extensive M ariculture: A  Sym posium  H eld in N antes [Lockwood, S. 
(ed.)]. ICES Mar. Sci. Symp., 248 pp.
Albala-Bertrand, J.M., 1993, Political Econom y o f Large N atural Disasters. 
Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 259 pp.
Alcam o, J., 1994: IM AG E 2.0 —  Integrated M odeling o f Global Climate 
Change. Kluwer Academ ic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands,321 pp.
Alexander, D., 1993: N atural Disasters. University College, Ixmdon Press, 
London, United Kingdom, 632 pp.
Anderson, J.M ., 1991: The effects of climate change on decom position 
processes in grassland and coniferous forests. Ecological Applications, 1, 
326-347.
A m ell, N.W. and N.S. Reynard, 1996; The effects of climate change due to 
global warm ing on river flows in Great Britain. J. Hydrology, 1 8 3 (3 ^ ), 
397-424.
A uer, I. and R. Bohm, 1994: Com bined temperature-precipitation variations in 
A ustria during the instrum ental period. Theoretical and A pplied 
Climatology, 49, 161-174.
Bach, W. 1987. D evelopm ent of clim ate change scenarios: A. From general 
circulation models. In.' The im pact o f climatic variations on agriculture, 
vol. I: Assessm ent in cool temperature and cold regions [Parry, M.L., 
T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijn (eds.)]. Ю uwer Academ ic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 125-157.
Baiesdent, J., S. Houot, and S. Recous, 1994: Réponse des m atières 
organiques des sols aux changem ents atm osphériques globaux. IV. 
Sim ulation des effets d ’un réchauffem ent et d ’une production carbonée 
accrue sur les stocks de carbone des sols cultivés. In; Ecosystèm es et 
Changements globaux [Perrier, A. and B. Saugier (eds.)]. INRA, Paris, 
France, 8 , 91-95.
Baxter, R., T.W  A shenden, T.H Sparks, and J.F. Farrar, 1994: Effects of 
elevated carbon dioxide on three m ontane grass species. I. Grow th 
and dry m atter partitioning. Journal o f E xperim ental Botany, 45, 
305-315.
Beniston, M. and M. Rebetez, 1995: Regional behavior of minimum tem pera­
tures in Switzerland for the period 1979-1993. Theor. and Appl. Clim., 
53, 231-243.
Beniston, М., M. Rebetez, F. Giorgi, and M .R. M arinucci, 1994: A n analysis 
of regional climate change in Switzerland. Theor. and A ppl. Clim., 49, 
135-159.
Bentham , G. and I.H. Langford, 1995: Climate change and the incidence of 
food poisoning in England and W ales. International Jo u rn a l o f 
Biometeorology, 39, 81-86.
Berninger, F., 1997: Effects of drought and phenology on GPP in Pinus 
sylvestris: A  sim ulation study along a geographical gradient. F unctional 
Ecology, 11(1), 33-12.
Beukem a, J.L., W.J. W olff, and J.J.W .M . Brouns (eds.), 1990; Expected effects 
of clim atic change on m arine coastal ecosystem s. In: D evelopm ents in 
H ydrobiology 57. K luw er A cadem ic Publishers, D ordrecht, The 
Netherlands, 221 pp.
Beuker, E., 1994: A daptation to clim atic changes of the tim ing of bud burst in 
populations of Pinus sylvestris (L.) and Picea abies (L.) Karst. Tree 
Physiology, 14, 961-970.
Bindi, М., L. Fibbi, B. Gozzini, S. Orlandini, and F. M iglietta, 1996: M odeling 
the im pact of future clim ate scenarios on yield and yield variability of 
grapevine. Climate Research, 7, 213-224.
Binet, D., 1988a: Rôle possible d ’une intensification des alizés sur le change­
m ent de répartition des sardines et sardinelles le long de la côte ouest 
africaine. Aquat. Living Resour., 1, 115-132.
Binet, D., 1988b: French sardine and herring fisheries: a tentative description 
o f their fluctuations since the XVIIIth century. In: L ong Term Changes in 
M arine F ish Populations [W yatt, T. and M .G. Larraneta (eds.)]. 
Sym posium  held 18-20 Novem ber 1986, Bayona Im prenta REAL, Vigo, 
Spain, pp. 253-272.
Binet, D. and E. M archai, 1992: Le développem ent d ’une nouvelle population 
de sardinelles devant la Côte d ’Ivoire a-t-il été induit par un changem ent 
de circulation? Ann. Inst, océanogr, 68(1-2), 179-192.
Birks, H.J.B., 1989; Holocene isochrone maps and patterns of tree-spreading 
in the British Isles. Journal o f Biogeography, 16, 503-540.
Bonan, G.B. and K. Van Cleve, 1992: Soil-tem perature, nitrogen m ineraliza­
tion, and carbon source sink relationships in boreal forests. Canadian 
Journal o f Forest Research, 22, 629-639.
Brasier, C.M., 1996: Phytophthora cinnam om i and oak decline in southern 
Europe. Environm ental constraints including clim ate change. A nnates 
D es Sciences Forestières, 53(2-3), 347-358.
Bray, M .J., D.J. Carter, and J.M . Hooke, 1996: Littoral Cell Definition and 
Budgets for Central Southern England, Journal o f Coastal Research, 11, 
295-570.
Brazdil, R., M. Budikova, I. Auer, R. Bohm, T. Cegnar, P. Fasko, M. Lapin, 
M. Gajiccapka, K. Zaninovic, E. Koleva, T. N iedzwiedz, Z. U stm ul, S. 
Szalai, and R.O. Weber, 1996: Trends of m axim um  and m inim um  daily 
temperatures in central and southeastern Europe. InternationalJournal o f 
Climatology, 16(7), 765-782.
Brignall, A.R, M .J. Gawith, J. Orr, and P.A. Harrison, 1996: Towards an Index 
for Assessing the Potential Effects of Climate Change on Clay Shrinkage 
Induced Land Subsidence. In: Climate Change and Extrem e Events —  
Altered Risk, Socio-economic Im pacts and Policy Responses [Downing, 
T.E., A.A. Olsthoorn, and R.S.J. Toi, (eds.)]. Institute for Environm ental 
Studies, Vrije U niversiteit and Environm ental Change Unit, University of 
Oxford, Amsterdam , Netherlands and Oxford, U nited Kingdom , pp. 
35-50.
Bruce-Chwatt, L.J. and J. de Zulueta, 1980: The rise and fa ll o f malaria in 
Europe. Butler and Tanner Ltd., London, United Kingdom , 240 pp.
Brzeziecki, B., F. Kienast, and O. W ildi, 1995: M odelling potential im pacts of 
climate change on the spatial distribution of zonal forest com m unities in 
Switzerland. Journal o f Vegetation Science, 6 , 257-268.
Bugm ann, H., 1996: A  sim plified forest model to study species com position 
along climate gradients. Ecology, 77(7), 2055-2074.
Bugmann, H., 1997; Sensitivity of forests in the European Alps to future cli­
matic change. Climate Research, 8(1), 35—i4.
Caddy, J.F., 1993: Toward a com parative evaluation of hum an im pacts on 
fishery ecosystem s of enclosed and sem i-enclosed seas. Reviews and 
Fisheries Science, 1(1), 57-95.M .25.
Cammell, M.E. and J.D. Knight, 1992: Effects of clim ate change on the pop­
ulation dynamics of crop pests. Advances in Ecological Research, 22, 
117-162.
Europe
181
C arter, T.R., R.A. Saarikko, and K.J. Niem i, 1996: Assessing the Risks and 
U ncertainties of Regional Crop Potential under a Changing Climate in 
Finland. Agriculture and F ood Science in Finland, 5, 329-320.
Casella, E., J.F. Soussana, and P. Ixiiseau, 1996: Long-term  effects of CO 2  
enrichm ent and tem perature increase on a tem perate grass sward. 1 . 
Productivity and w ater use. Plant and Soil, 182(1), 83-99.
CCIRG (Clim ate Change Im pacts Review Group), 1991: The Potential 
E ffects o f Clim ate Change in the U nited Kingdom. HM SO, London.
CCIRG, 1996: The Potential Effects o f Climate Change in the United 
Kingdom. HM SO , London.
C ham bers, J.R., 1991: Coastal degradation and fish population losses. In: 
Stem m ing the Tides o f C oastal F ish H abitat Loss: Proceedings o f the 
M arine R ecreational F isheries Sym posium  [Stroud, R.H. (ed.)]. 
National C oalition for M arine Conservation, Savannah, GA, USA, pp. 
45-51.
C haves, M .M ., J.S. Pereira, S. Cerasoli, J. Clifton-Brown, F. M iglietta, and A. 
Raschi, 1995: L eaf m etabolism  during sum m er drought in Quercus ilex 
trees w ith lifetim e exposure to elevated CO 2 . Journal o f Biogeography, 
22, 255-259,
CLAIRE, 1996: Clim ate Change and A griculture in Europe: A ssessm ent o f 
Im pacts and Applications [Harrison, P., R. Butterfield, and T. Downing 
(eds.)]. Research Report No. 9, Environm ental Change Unit, University 
of Oxford, 411 pp.
Costa, M .J., J.L. Costa, P.R. A lm eida, and C.A. A ssis, 1994: Do eel grass beds 
and salt m arsh borders act as preferential nurseries and spawning grounds 
for fish? A n exam ple o f the M ira estuary in Portugal. Ecological 
Engineering, 3, 187-195.
C ushing, D.H., 1957: The num ber of pilchards in the Channel. Fish. Invest. 
Ser. II, 21(5), 1-27.
Cushing, D.H., 1982: Climate and Fisheries. A cadem ic Press, London, United 
K ingdom, 373 pp.
Darwin, R., M. Tsigas, J. Lewandrowski, and A. Raneses, 1995: World 
Agriculture and Clim ate Change: Econom ic Adaptations. Econom ic 
Research Service, USDA, A ER-703, W ashington, DC, pp. 1-86.
Davis, M .B., 1981: Quaternary history and the stability of forest communities. 
In: F orest succession [West, D.C., H.H. Shugart, and D.B. Botkin (eds.)]. 
Springer-Verlag, N ew  York, NY, USA, pp. 132-153.
Delécolle, R., F. Ruget, D. Ripoche, and G. Gosse, 1996: Possible effects of 
climate change on w heat and maize crops in France. Climate Change and 
A griculture: Analysis of Potential International Impacts. A SA  Special 
Publications, 59, 241-257.
Diaz, S. 1995. E levated-C Q j responsiveness, interactions at the community 
level, and plant functional types. Journal o f Biogeography, 22, 289-295.
Diaz, S. 1996. The effects of elevated CQ 2 on root symbionts m ediated by 
plants. P lant and Soil, 187, 309-320.
Dorland, C., R.S.J. Toi, A .A. Q lsthoora, and J.P. Palutikof, 1996: A n Analysis 
of Storm Im pacts in The Netherlands. In: Clim ate Change and Extreme 
Weather — A ltered Risk, Socio-economic Im pacts and Policy Responses 
[Downing, T.E., A.A. Qlsthoom , and R.S.J. Toi (eds.)]. Institute for 
Environm ental Studies, Vrije Universiteit and Environm ental Change 
Unit, U niversity o f Qxford, A m sterdam , The Netherlands and Dxford, 
United Kingdom , pp. 157-184.
Downing, T.E., A.A. Qlsthoom , and R.S.J. Toi, 1996: Climate Change and 
Extreme E vents — A ltered Risk, Socio-economic Im pacts and Policy 
Responses. Institute for Environm ental Studies, Vrije U niversiteit and 
Environm ental Change Unit, University of Qxford, A m sterdam , The 
N etherlands and Oxford, United Kingdom, 309 pp.
Ebenhoe, W., H. Sterr, and F. Sim m ering, 1997: Potentielle Gefaehrdung und 
Vulnerabilitaet der deutschen N ord- und O stseekueste bei fortschreiten- 
den Klim awandel, unpublished report, 138 pp.
Ellenberg, H., 1986: Vegetation M itteleuropas m it den Alpen. Ulmer, Stuttgart, 
Germany, 4th ed., 989 pp.
Emberlin, J., 1994: The effects of patterns in climate and pollen abundance on 
allergy. Allergy, 94, 15-20.
English Nature, 1993: Strategy fo r the Sustainable Use o f E ngland’s 
Estuaries. English Nature, Peterborough, United Kingdom, 43 pp.
European Clim ate Snpport N etw ork (ECSN), 1995: Climate o f Europe —  
recent variation, p resen t state and future prospects. 
N ational 
M eteorological Services 1995. KNMI, De Bilt, The Netherlands, 73 pp.
EURO W INTER Group, 1997: Cold exposure and winter m ortality from 
ischaem ic heart diseases, cerebrovascular disease, respiratory disease, 
and all causes in warm  and cold regions of Europe. Lancet, 349, 
1341-1346.
Fankhauser, S., 1994: Protection versus retreat: estim ating the costs of sea- 
level rise. Environm ent and Planning A., 27, 299-319.
Fankhauser, S., 1995: Valuing Clim ate C hange —  The Econom ics o f the 
G reenhouse. EarthScan Publications, London, U nited Kingdom , 180 
pp.
Fankhauser, S. and R.S.J. Toi, 1997: The social costs o f clim ate change: the 
IPCC Second A ssessm ent Report and beyond. M itigation and Adaptation 
Strategies fo r Global Change, 1, 3 8 5 ^ 0 3 .
FAO, 1989: Recent Trends in M editerranean Fisheries, X lX th Session of the 
GFCM, Livorno (Italy), 27 Febm ary-3 M arch 1989 [Caddy, J.R , (ed.)]. 
GFCM /RM /7/89/3, FAO, Rome, Italy, 71 pp.
Fischetti, М., 1991: A  feast of gene-splicing down on the fish farm. Science, 
253, 512-513.
Fitter, A.H., R.S.R. Fitter, I.T.B. Harris, and M .H. W illiamson, 1995: 
Relationships between first flow ering date and tem perature in the flora of 
a locality in central England. Functional Ecology, 9, 55-60.
Forch, G., F. Garbe, and J. Jensen, 1996: Clim atic change and design criteria 
in w ater resources m anagem ent —  A  regional case study. Atmospheric 
Research, 42(1-4), 33-51.
Francour, P., C.F. Boudouresque, J.G. Harmelin, M .L. Harmelin-Vivien, and 
J.P. Quignard, 1994: Are the M editerranean waters becom ing warmer? 
Inform ation from  biological indicators. M arine Pollution Bulletin, 28, 
523-526.
Freem an, C., R. Gresswell, H. Guasch, J. Hudson, M .A. Lock, B. Reynolds, 
F. Sabater, and S. Sabater, 1994: The role of drought in the impact of cli­
m atic change on the m icrobiota o f peatland streams. Freshwater Biology, 
32, 223-230.
Fries, C., O. Johansson, P. Pettersson, and B. Simonsson, 1997: Silvicultural 
m odels to m aintain and restore natural stand structures in Swedish bore­
al forests. Forest Ecology and M anagement, 94(1-3), 89-103.
Froborg, H. and O. Eriksson, 1997: Local colonization and extinction of field 
layer plants in a deciduous forest and their dependence upon life history 
features. Journal o f Vegetation Science, 8 , 3 9 5 ^ 0 0 .
Fulford, М., T. Cham pion, and A. Long (eds.), 1997: E ngland’s Coastal 
Heritage. Royal Com m ission on the Historical M onuments of England 
and E nglish N ature, A rchaeological R eport 15, London, U nited 
Kingdom, 268 pp.
Gavilan, R. and F. Fem ândez-Gonzâlez, 1997: Climatic discrimination of 
M editerranean broad-leaved sclerophyllous and deciduous forests in cen­
tral Spain. Journal o f Vegetation Science, 8 , 377-386.
Giakoum akis, S.G. and G. Baloutsos, 1997: Investigation of trend in hydro- 
logical time series of the Evinos river basin. Hydrological Sciences 
Journal — Journal D es Sciences Hydrologiques, 42(1), 81-88.
Grabherr, G., M. Gottfried, and H. Pauli, 1994: Climate effects on mountain 
plants. Nature, 369, 448.
Gradoni, L., A. Bryceson, and P. Desjeux, 1995: Treatm ent of M editerranean 
visceral leishmaniasis. Bulletin o f the World H ealth Organization. 73(2), 
191-197.
Grime, J.P., 1996: The changing vegetation of Europe: W hat is the role of ele­
vated carbon dioxide? Carbon Dioxide, Populations, and Communities. 
In: Physiological Ecology —  A  Series o f M onographs, Texts, and 
Treatises (1996), pp. 85-92.
Haeberli, W. and M. Hoezle, 1995: Application of inventory data for estim at­
ing characteristics of regional climate change effects on m ountain glaci­
ers: a pilot study w ith the European Alps. A nnals o f Glaciology, 21, 
206-212.
H aeberli, W., M. W egmann, and D. Vonder M uhll, 1997: Slope stability prob­
lems related to glacier shrinkage and perm afrost degradation in the Alps. 
Ecologae Geologicae H elvetiae (in press).
H arrington, R., M. Tatchell, and J. Bale, 1994: Aphid problems in a changing 
climate. In: Insects in a changing climate [Harrington, R. and N.E. Stork 
(eds.)]. Royal Entom ological Society, London, United Kingdom.
Harrison, P.A. and R.E. Butterfield, 1996: Effects of climate change on 
E urope-w ide w inter w heat and sunflow er productivity. C lim ate 
Research, 1, 225-241.
182
Europe
Hartig, E.K., О. Grozev, and С. Rosenzweig, 1997: Climate change, agricul­
ture and wetlands in Eastern Europe: Vulnerability, adaptation and poli­
cy. Climatic Change, 36(1-2), 107-121.
H attenschwiler, S. and C. Kom er, 1995: Responses to recent climate w arm ­
ing of Pinus sylvestris and Pinus cem bra w ithin their montane transition 
zone in the Swiss Alps. Journal o f Vegetation Science, 6 , 357-368.
H attenschwiler, S. and C. Korner, 1996a: Effects of elevated C O j and 
increased nitrogen deposition on photosynthesis and growth of understo­
ry plants in spruce model ecosystem s. Oecologia, 106, 172-180.
Hattenschwiler, S. and C. Korner, 1996b: System-level adjustments to elevat­
ed CO 2 in model spruce ecosystems. Global Change Biology, 2,377-387.
Hofer, H.R., 1992: Veranderungen in der Vegetation von 14 Gipfeln des 
Berninagebietes zwischen 1905 und 1985. Ber. Geobot. Inst. Eidg. Tech. 
Hochsch. Stift. R übelZ ür, 58, 39-54.
Holt, C.R and Jones, J.A.A., 1996: Equilibrium and transient global, warm ing 
scenario implications for water resources in Wales. Water Resources 
Bulletin, 32(4), 711-721.
H oltm eier, F.-K., 1994: Ecological aspects of clim atically-caused timberline 
fluctuations. Review and outlook. M ountain environments and changing 
climates [Beniston, M. (ed.)]. Routledge, Iztndon, United Kingdom, pp. 
220-233.
H oozem ans, F.M.J., M. M archand, and H.A. Pennekamp, 1993: A  Global 
Vulnerability Analysis -  Vulnerability Assessm ent fo r Population, Coastal 
Wetlands and Rice Production on a Global Scale. Delft Hydraulics and 
Rijkswaterstaat, Delft and The Hague, The Netherlands, 2nd ed., 184 pp.
H erm ann, G., C. Ebrecht, M. Herbst, K. Geffers, W. Ю uge, E-W. Reiche, and 
P. W idmoser, 1995: A uswirkungen einer Temperaturerhoehung auf den 
W asserhaushalt der Bornhoeveder Seenkette. EcoSys, 5, 21-49.
Houghton, R.A., 1996: Terrestrial sources and sinks of carbon inferred from 
terrestrial data. Tellus Series В —  Chemical and Physical Meteorology, 
48(4), 420-432.
Houot, S., V. Bergheaud, J.N. Rampon, and J. Balesdent, 1995: Réponse des 
matières organiques des sols aux changements atmosphériques globaux. 
III. Thermodépendance de la minéralisation des fractions de matière 
organique de biodégradabilité différente. In: Ecosystèmes et Changements 
globaux [Perrier, A. and B. Saugier, (eds.)]. INRA, Paris, France, 8,87-90.
Hunt, R., D.W. Hand, M .A. Hannah, and A.M . Neal, 1991: Response to CO 2  
enrichment in 27 herbaceous species. Functional Ecology, 5, 410-421.
Hunt, R., D.W. Hand, M .A. Hannah, and A.M . Neal, 1993: Further responses 
to CO 2 enrichm ent in British herbaceous species. Functional Ecology, 7, 
661-668.
Huntley, B. 1991. How plants respond to climate change: m igration rates, 
individualism and the consequences for plant communities. A nnals o f 
Botany, 67 (Supplem ent 1), 15-22.
Huntley, B. and T. Webb III, 1989: M igration: species responses to climatic 
variations caused by changes in the earth ’s orbit. Journal o f 
Biogeography, 16, 5-19.
Hurrell, J.W. and H. Van Loon, 1997: Decadal variations in climate associat­
ed with the North Atlantic oscillation. Climatic Change, 36, 301-326.
ID N D R, 1994: N atural Disasters in the World — Statistical Trends on Natural 
Disasters, National Land Agency, Tokyo, Japan.
Innes, J.L., 1993: New perspectives in forestry: a basis for a future forest m an­
agement policy in Great Britain? Forestry, 6 6 , 3 9 5 ^ 2 1 .
Innes, J.L., 1994: Climatic sensitivity of temperate forests. Environmental 
Pollution, 83, 237-243.
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change, The IP CC  Im pacts Assessment. Australian 
Government Publishing Service, Canberra, A ustralia, 268 pp.
IPCC, 1996. Climate Change 1995: The Science o f Clim ate Change. 
Contribution o f Working Group I  to the Second Assessm ent Report o f the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Houghton, J.J., L.G. M eiro 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
Nicholls, N., G.V. Gruza, J. Jouzel, T.R. Karl, L.A. Ogallo, and 
D.E. Parker, Chapter 3. O bserved Climate Variability and Change, 
pp. 133-192.
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B, Mitchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver, and T.M.L. Wigley, Chapter 
6 . Climate M odels — Projections o f Future Climate, pp. 289-357.
IPCC, 1996. Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations, and M itigation o f 
Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution o f Working 
G roup II to the Second Assessm ent Report o f the Intergovernm ental 
P anel on Climate Change [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, U nited Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
Kirschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. Climate Change 
Im pacts on Forests, pp. 95-130.
Bijlsma, L, Chapter 9. Coastal Zones and Sm all Islands, pp. 
289-324.
A rnell, N.. B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. H ydrology and Freshwater Ecology, pp. 325-364. 
M oreno, R.A. and J. Skea, Chapter 11. Industry, Energy, and 
Transportation: Im pacts and Adaptation, pp. 365-398.
Scott, M .J., Chapter 12. H um an Settlem ents in a Changing 
Climate: Im pacts and Adaptation, pp. 399-426.
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. A griculture in a Changing Climate: Im pacts 
and Adaptation, pp. 427-467.
Kaczmarek, Z., Chapter 14. Water Resources M anagem ent, pp. 
469-486.
Dlugolecki, A.F., Chapter 17. F inancial Services, pp. 539-560.
IPCC, 1996. Climate Change 1995: Econom ic and Social D im ensions o f 
Climate Change. Contribution o f Working G roup III to the Second 
Assessm ent Report o f the Intergovernm ental P anel on Clim ate Change 
[Bruce, J.R, H. Lee, and E.F. Haites (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, 
Cam bridge, United Kingdom  and New York, NY, USA, 448 pp.
Pearce, D.W., W.R. Cline, A.N. A chanta, S. Fankhauser, R.K. 
Pachauri, R.S.J. Toi, and P. Vellinga, Chapter 6 . The Social Costs o f 
Climate Change: Greenhouse D am age and Benefits o f Control, pp. 
179-224.
-  
W eyant, J., Chapter 10. Integrated Assessm ent o f Clim ate Change: 
A n  Overview and Comparison o f A pproaches and Results, pp. 
367-396.
Jim enez, J.A. and A. Sanchez-Arcilla, 1997: Physical im pacts of climatic 
change on deltaic coastal systems (II): driving terms. Clim atic Change, 
35, 95-118.
Johansson, M.-B., 1994: D ecom position rates of Scots pine needle litter relat­
ed to soil properties, litter quality, and climate. Canadian Journal o f 
Forest Research, 24, 1771-1781.
Johansson, M .-B., B. Berg, and V. M eentemeyer, 1995: Litter m ass-loss rates 
in late stages of decom position in a clim atic transect of pine forests. 
Long-term decom position in a Scots pine forest. IX. Canadian Journal 
o f Botany, 73, 1509-1521.
Jones, M .B., M. Jongen, and T. Doyle, 1996: Effects of elevated carbon diox­
ide concentrations on agricultural grassland production. Agricultural and 
Forest Meteorology, 79(4), 243-252.
Jones, R. G., J.M . Murphy, M. Noguer, and A.B. Keen, 1997: Sim ulation of 
climate change over Europe using a nested regional-clim ate model. 2. 
Comparison of driving and regional model responses to a doubling of 
carbon dioxide. Quarterly Journal o f the R oyal M eteorological Society 
(in press).
Kalkstein, L.S., 1993: Health and clim ate change: direct im pacts in cities. 
Lancet, 342, 1397-1399.
Kane, S., J, Reilly, and J. Tobey, 1992: A n em pirical study o f the economic 
effects of climate change on w orld agriculture. Clim atic Change, 21, 
17-35.
Kankaala, P., A. Ojala, T. Tulonen, J. Haapamaki, and L. A rvola, 1996: Impact 
of climate change on carbon cycle in freshw ater ecosystem s. In: The 
Finnish Research Programme on Climate Change. F inal Report. [Roos, 
J. (ed.)]. Publications of the Academ y of Finland, Helsinki, A pril 1996, 
pp. 196-201.
Karl, T.R., P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight, G. Kukla, N. Plum mer, V. Razuvayev, 
K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay, R.J. Charlson, and T.C. Peterson, 1993: 
Asym m etric trends of daily maxim um  and m inim um  tem perature. Bull. 
Am erican Meteorol. Soc., 74, 1007-1023.
Katsouyanni, K., A. Pantazopoulu, G. Touloumi, I. Tselepidaki, K. M oustris, 
D. A sim akopoulos, G. Poulopoulou, and D. T richopolous, 1993: 
Evidence of interaction between air pollution and high tem peratures in 
the causation of excess mortality. Arch. Env. Health, 48, 235-242.
Europe
183
Kawasaki, T., S. Tanaka, Y. Toba, and A. Taniguchi (eds.), 1991: Long-Term 
Variability o f Pelagic P ish P opulations and Their Environm ent. 
Pergamon Press, Tokyo, Japan, 402 pp.
Kellomaki, S., H. Hânninen, and M. Koistrom, 1995: Com putations on frost 
dam age to Scots pine under clim atic w arm ing in Boreal conditions. 
Ecological Applications, 5, 42-52.
Kellomaki, S., T. Karjalainen, and H. Vaisanen, 1997: M ore tim ber from bore­
al forests under changing clim ate? Forest Ecology and M anagement, 
94(1-3), 195-208.
Kellomaki, S. and M. Koistrom , 1994: The influence of clim ate change on the 
productivity of Scots pine, Norway spruce, Pendula birch and Pubescent 
birch in southern and northern Finland. F orest E cology and 
M anagement, 65, 201-217.
K ellomaki, S. and H. Vaisanen, 1996: M odel com putations on the effect o f ris­
ing tem perature on soil m oisture and w ater availability in forest ecosys­
tems dom inated by Scots pine in the Boreal zone in Finland. Climatic 
Change, 32, 423—i45.
K ellomaki, S. and K.-Y. W ang, 1996: Photosynthetic responses to needle 
w ater potentials in Scots pine after a four-year exposure to elevated CO 2  
and tem perature. Tree Physiology, 16, 765-772.
Kelly, M.P., 1991: Global W arming: Im plications for the Tham es Barrier and 
Associated D efences. In: Im pact o f Sea L evel Rise on Cities and Regions. 
Proceedings of the First International M eeting “Cities on W ater,” Venice, 
D ecem ber 1989 [Frasetio, R. (ed.)]. M arsilio Editori, Venice, Italy, pp. 
93-98.
Kennedy, V S., 1990: Anticipated effects of climate change on estuarine and 
coastal fisheries. Fisheries, 15(6), 16-24.
Ю епа$к F., 1991: Sim ulated effects o f increasing atm ospheric CO 2 and chang­
ing clim ate on the successional characteristics of Alpine forest ecosys­
tems. Landscape Ecology, 5, 225-238.
Kienast, F., B. Brzeziecki, and 0 . W ildi, 1996: Long-term  adaptation potential 
o f Central European m ountain forests to clim ate change: a GIS-assisted 
sensitivity a s s e s s m e n t .  Forest Ecology and M anagement, 80, 133-153.
Kinney, K.K. and R.L. Lindroth, 1997: Responses of three deciduous tree 
species to atm ospheric CO 2 and soil N O 3 - availability. Revue 
Canadienne de Recherche Forestière, 27(1), 1-10.
Knudsen, A.B., R. Romi, and G. M ajori, 1996: Occurrence and spread in Italy 
of A edes albopictus, w ith im plications for its introduction into other parts 
of Europe. 7. Am. Mosq. Control Assoc., June 12(2 Pt 1), 177-183.
K o m er, C., 1993: CO 2 fertilisation: the great uncertainty in future vegetation 
developm ent. In: Vegetation dynam ics and global change [Solomon, 
A.M. and H.H. Shugart (eds.)]. Chapm an and Hall, New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 53-70.
Korner, C., 1996: The response of com plex m ultispecies system s to elevated 
CO 2 . In: G lobal change and terrestrial ecosystem s [Walker, B.H. and 
W.L. Steffen (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United 
Kingdom, pp. 20-42.
K orner, C. and F. M iglietta, 1994: Long term  effects o f naturally elevated CO 2  
on m editerranean grassland and forest trees. Oecologia, 99, 343-351.
Korner, C., S. Pelaez-Riedl, and A .J.E. Van Bel, 1995: CO 2 responsiveness of 
plants: a possible link to phloem loading. Plant, Cell and Environment, 
18, 595-600.
Koster, M.J. and R. Hillen, 1995: Com bat Erosion by Law: Coastal Defence 
Policy for The N etherlands. Jo u rn a l o f C oastal R esearch, 11, 
1221-1228.
Kramer, K., 1994: A  m odelling analysis o f the effects of clim atic w arm ing on 
the probability of spring frost dam age to tree species in the Netherlands 
and Germany. Plant, Cell and Environment, 17, 367-377.
Kramer, K., 1995: Phenotypic plasticity o f the phenology of seven European 
tree species in relation to clim atic w arming. Plant, Cell and Environment, 
18, 93-104.
Krauchi, N., 1995: Application of the model FORSUM  to the Soiling spruce 
site. Ecological M odelling, 83, 219-228.
Krauchi, N. and F. Kienast, 1993: M odelling subalpine forest dynamics as 
influenced by a changing environm ent. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 6 8 , 
185-197.
K uoppom aeki, P., 1996a; Im pacts o f Climate Change from  a Sm all Nordic 
Country Perspective. ETLA —  The Research Institute of the Finnish 
Economy, Series B119, Helsinki, Finland, 156 pp.
Kuoppom aeki, P., 1996b: The Impacts of Climate Change on the Finnish 
Economy. In: The Finnish Research Programme on Climate Change —  
Final Report [Roos, J. (ed.)]. Publications of the Academ y of Finland, 
April 1996, pp. 460-465.
K w adÿk, J. and H. M iddelkoop, 1994: Estim ation of Im pact of Climate 
Change on the Peak Discharge Probability of the River Rhine. Climatic 
Change, 21, 199-224.
Lakida, P., S. Nilsson, and A. Shvidenko, 1997: Forest phytom ass and carbon 
in European Russia. Biomass & Bioenergy, 12(2), 91-99.
L âm âs, T. and C. Fries, 1995: Em ergence of a biodiversity concept in Swedish 
forest policy. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 82, 57-66.
Langford, I.H. and G. Bentham, 1995: The potential effects of climate change 
on w inter mortality in England and Wales. International Journal o f 
Biometeorology, 38, 136-145.
Larsen, J.A ., 1980; The Boreal Ecosystem. Academ ic Press, New York, NY, 
USA.
Leem ans, R., 1996; Incorporating land-use change in Earth system  models 
illustrated by IM AGE 2. In: G lobal change and terrestrial ecosystems. 
[Walker, B.H. and W.L. Steffen (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 484—510.
Legge, A.H., L. Grünhage, M. Nosal, H.-J. Jager, and S.V. Krupa, 1996; 
A m bient ozone and adverse crop response: an evaluation of North 
A m erican and European data as they relate to exposure indices and crit­
ical levels. In: Exceedance o f critical loads and levels. Spatial and tem ­
poral interpretation o f elements in landscape sensitive to atmospheric 
pollutants [K noflacher, М ., J. Schneider, and G. Soja (eds.)]. 
U m weltbundesam t, Vienna, Austria, pp. 18-46.
LeH ouérou, H.N., 1995: Climate change, drought and desertification. Tourna/ 
o f A rid Environments, 34(2), 133-185.
Lelyakin, A.L., A.O. Kokorin, and I.M. Nazarov, 1997: Vulnerability of 
Russian forests to climate changes. M odel estimation of CO 2 fluxes. 
Climatic Change, 36(1-2), 123-133.
Lenhart, S., S. Huq, L.J. Mata, I. Nemesova, S. Toure, and J.B. Smith (eds.), 
1996: Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate Change— A Synthesis o f 
Results from  the U.S. Country Studies Program. Interim Report. January 
1996, U.S. Country Studies Program, W ashington, DC, USA, 366 pp.
Lindgren, E. and R. G ustafson, subm itted: Clim ate and tick-borne 
encéphalites in Sweden.
Lindner, М., H. Bugmann, P. Lasch, M. Flechsig, and W. Cramer, 1997: 
Regional impacts o f climatic change on forests in the state o f Brandenburg, 
Geunaay. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 84(1-2), 123-135.
Lindner, М., P. Lasch, and W. Cramer, 1996: Application of a forest succes­
sion model to a continentality gradient through Central Europe. Climatic 
Change, 34(2), 191-199.
Luxm oore, R.J., S.D. W ullschleger, and P.J. Hanson, 1993; Forest responses 
to CO 2 enrichm ent and climate warming. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 
70, 309-323.
M acG illivray, C.W. and J.P. Grime, 1995: Genome size predicts frost resis­
tance in British herbaceous plants: im plications for rates of vegetation 
response to global warming. Functional Ecology, 9, 320-325.
M alanson, G.P. and D.M . Caim s, 1997: Effects of dispersal, population 
delays, and forest fragm entation on tree migration rates. Plant Ecology, 
131, 67-79.
M ann, K.H., 1992: Physical influences on biological processes: how im por­
tant are they? Benguela trophic functioning jPayne, A.L., K.H. Mann, 
and R. Kilborn (eds.)]. S. Afr. J. Mar. Sci., 12, 107-121.
M ann, K.H. and K.F. Drinkwater, 1994: Environm ental influences on fish and 
shellfish production in the Northwest Atlantic. Envir. Rev., 2, 16-32.
M ann, K.H. and J.R.N. Lazier, 1991; D ynamics o f M arine Ecosystems 
Biological Physical Interactions in the Oceans. Blackwell Scientific 
Publications, Boston, MA, USA, 466 pp.
M artens, W.J.M., 1997: H ealth Im pacts o f Climate Change and Ozone 
D epletion: A n Eco-Epidem iologicat M odelling Approach. M aastricht 
University, The Netherlands, 158 pp.
Matea, M.L., 1995: La reforma de la politica agricola comun; el sistema agromon- 
etario. Boletin Economico, Banco de Espana, Mayo 1995, pp. 33-43.
M iglietta, F. and A. Raschi, 1993: Studying the effect of elevated CO 2 in the 
open in a naturally enriched environment in central Italy. Vegetatio, 
104/105, 391-402.
184
Europe
M iglietta, F., M. Tanasescu, and A. M arica, 1995: The expected effects of cli­
m ate change on w heat developm ent. Global Change Biology, 1(6), 
407-415.
M ills, E.L., J.H. Leach, J.T. Carlton, and C.L. Secor, 1994: Exotic species and 
the integrity of the Great Lakes. Biosci., 44(1), 666-676.
M itchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram, and C.A. Senior, 1995: On surface 
temperature, greenhouse gases and and aerosols: models and observa­
tions. J. Climate, 10, 2364-2386.
M OPT, 1993: Plan Hidrologico Nacional. Memoria. M inisterio de Obras 
Publicas y Transportes. Secretaria de estado para las Politicas del A gua y 
el M edio Ambiente. M adrid. Anteproyecto de Ley del Plan Hidrologico 
Nacional. M inisterio de Obras Publicas y Transportes. Secretaria de esta­
do para las Politicas del A gua y el M edio Ambiente. M adrid, Spain.
M unich Re, 1993: Winter Storms in Europe A n Analysis o f 1990 Losses and 
Future L oss Potential, M uenchener Rueckversicherungs-Gesellschaft, 
M unich, Germany, 55 pp.
M u rray , M .B., M .G.R. Cannell, and R.T. Smith, 1989: Date of budburst o f fif­
teen tree species in Britain following climatic warming. Journal o f 
A pplied Ecology, 26, 693-700.
M urray, M .B., R.L Smith, I.D. Leith, D. Fowler, H.S.J. Lee, A.D. Friend, and 
P.G. Jarvis, 1994: Effects of elevated CO 2, nutrition and clim atic w arm ­
ing on bud phenology in Sitka spruce {Picea sitchensis) and their impact 
on the risk of frost damage. Tree Physiology, 14, 691-706.
M yneni, R.B., C.D. Keeling, C.J. Tucker, G. Asrar, and R.R. Nemani, 1997: 
Increased plant growth in the northern high latitudes from  1981 to 1991. 
Nature, 386, 698-702.
N icholls, R.J., 1995: Synthesis of V ulnerability A nalysis Studies. In: 
P reparing to M eet the C oastal C hallenges o f the 
Century. 
Proceedings of the World Conference, Noordwijk, Novem ber 1993, 
Rijkswaterstaat, The Hague, The Netherlands, pp. 181-216.
Nicholls, R.J. and F.M.J. Hoozemans, 1996: The M editerranean: Vulnerability 
to C oastal Im plications o f Clim ate Change. O cean and C oastal 
M anagement, 31, 105-132.
N orby, R.J., E.G. O ’Neill, and S.D. W ullschleger 1995: Belowground 
responses to atm ospheric carbon dioxide in forests. In: Carbon form s and 
functions in forest soils [M cFee, W.W. and J.M . Kelly (eds.)]. Soil 
Science Society of A m erica, M adison, W I, USA, pp. 397-418.
N tiba, M.J. and D. Harding, 1993: The food and the feeding habits of the long 
rough dah Hippoglossoides platessoides (Fabricius, 1780), in the North 
Sea. Neth. J. Sea Res., 31, 189-199.
0klan d, R.H., 1995a: Persistence of vascular plants in a Norwegian boreal 
coniferous forest. Ecography, 18, 3-14.
0k lan d , R.H., 1995b: Changes in the occurrence and abundance of plant 
species in a N orwegian boreal coniferous forest, 1988-1993. Nordic 
Journal o f Botany, 15, 415-438.
O liver, J.E. and R.W. Fairbridge, 1987: The encyclopedia o f climatology. Van 
N ostrand Reinhold Company, N ew  York, NY, USA, 986 pp.
O nate, J.J. and A. Pou, 1996: Temperature variations in Spain since 1901: A  
prelim inary analysis. Int. Journal o f Climatology, 16(7), 805-815.
Parry, M .L., T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijin (eds.), 1988: The Im pact o f 
Climatic Variations on Agriculture. Vol. 2, Assessm ents in Sem i-Arid 
Regions. Kluwer Academ ic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 764
pp.
Parry, M .L., T.R. Carter, J.R. Porter, G.J. Kenny, and P.A. Harrison, 1992: 
Climate Change and Agricultural Suitability in Europe. Environmental 
Change Unit, University of Oxford. Report No. 1. Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
P a rry , M .L., J.E. Hossell, P.J. Jones, T. Rehm an, R.B. Tranter, J.S. M arsh, C. 
R osenzw eig, G. Fischer, LG. C arson, and R.G.H. B unce, 1996: 
Integrating global and regional analyses of the effects of climate change: 
a case study of land use in England and Wales. Climatic Change, 32, 
185-198.
Parsons, A.N., M .C. Press, P.A. Wookey, J.M . Welker, C.H. Robinson, TV. 
Callaghan, and J.A. Lee, 1995: Growth responses of Calamgrostis lap- 
ponica to simulated environmental change in the Sub-arctic. Oikos, 72, 
61-66.
Parsons, A.N., J.M . Welker, M.A. Wookey, M.C. Press, TV . Callaghan, and 
J.A. Lee, 1994: Growth responses of four sub-Arctic dwarf shrubs to 
simulated environmental change. Journal o f Ecology, 82, 307-318.
Peerbolte, E.B., J.G. de Ronde, L.P.M. de Vrees, M. M ann, and G. Baarse, 
1991: Im pact o f Sea L evel Rise on Society: A  Case Study fo r  the 
Netherlands. Delft Hydraulics and Rijkswaterstaat, D elft and The Hague, 
The Netherlands, 404 pp.
Peiris, D.R., J.W. Crawford, C. Grashoff, R.A. Jefferies, J.R. Porter, and B. 
M arshall, 1996: A  sim ulation study of crop growth and developm ent 
under climate change. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology. 79(4), 
271-287.
Penning-Rowsell, E., J.W. Handmer, and S. Tapsell, 1996: Extrem e Events 
and Climate Change: Floods. In: Climate Change and Extreme Events —  
Altered Risk, Socio-economic Im pacts and P olicy Responses [Downing, 
T.E., A.A. Olsthoorn, and R.S.J. Toi (eds.)]. Institute for Environm ental 
Studies, Vrije Universiteit and Environm ental Change Unit, U niversity of 
Oxford, Amsterdam , The Netherlands and Oxford, England, pp. 97-128.
Polovina, J.J., G.T. M itchum, and G.T. Evans, 1995: D ecadal and basin-scale 
variation in mixed layer depth and the im pact on biological production in 
the Central and N orth Pacific, 1960-88. In: D eep Sea Research (in 
press).
Posch, М ., J.P. Hettelingh, J. Alcam o, and M. Krol, 1996: Integrated scenarios 
of acidification and clim ate change in A sia and Europe. G lobal 
E nvironm ental C hange —  H um an and P olicy D im ensions, 6(4), 
375-394.
Prentice, I.C., M.T. Sykes, and W. Cramer, 1991: The possible dynamic 
response of northern forests to global warming. G lobal Ecology and 
Biogeography Letters, 1, 129-135.
Proe, M .R, S.M. Allison, and K.B. M atthews, 1996: A ssessm ent of the impact 
of climate change on the growth of Sitka spruce in Scotland. Canadian 
Journal o f Forest Research, 26, 1914-1921.
Rioux, J-A., J. Boulker, G. Lanotte, R. Killick-Hendrick, and A. M artini- 
Dumas, 1985: Ecologie des leishm anioses dans le sud de France. 21 —  
Influence de la tem pérature sur le développem ent de Leishm ania infan­
tum Nicolle, 1908 chez Phlebotom us ariasi Tonnoir, 1921. Etude expéri­
m entale. A nnales de Parasitologic, 60(3), 221-229.
Rooney, С., A.J. M cM ichael, R.S. Kovats, and M. Coleman, 1997: Excess 
M ortality in England and W ales, and in Greater London, During the 1995 
Heatwave. Journal o f Epidem iology and Com munity H ealth (in press).
Rosenberg, N.J. and P.R. Crosson, 1991: Processes fo r Identifying Regional 
Influences o f and Responses to Increasing Atm ospheric CO 2 and Climate 
Change: the M IN K  Project, A n  Overview. Resources for the Future. 
Dept, of Energy DOE/RL/01830T-H5. W ashington, DC, USA, 35 pp.
Rosenzweig, C. and M .L. Parry, 1994: Potential im pact o f clim ate change on 
w orld food supply. Nature, 367, 133-138.
R otm ans, J., M. H ulm e, and T.E. D ow ning, 1994: C lim ate Change 
Implications for Europe: A n A pplication of the ESCA PE M odel. Global 
Environmental Change, 4(2), 97-124.
Rounsevell, M.D.A. and A.P. Brignall, 1994: The potential effects of climate 
change on autumn soil tillage opportunities in England and Wales. Soil 
and Tillage Research, 32, 275-289.
Rounsevell, М., P. Brignall, and P. A. Siddons, 1996: Potential climate 
changes effects on the distribution of agricultural grassland in England 
and Wales. Soil Use and M anagement, 12(1), 44-51.
Saarikko, R.A. and T.R. Carter, 1996: Estim ating Regional Spring W heat 
Developm ent and Suitability in Finland under Climate W arming. Climate 
Research, 7, 243-252.
Sanchez-Arcilla, A. and J.A. Jim enez, 1997: Physical im pacts of climatic 
change on deltaic coastal systems (I): an approach. Clim atic Change, 35, 
71-93.
Schappi, B. and C. Komer, 1996: Growth responses of an alpine grassland to 
elevated CO 2 . Oecologia, 105, 43-52.
Schappi, B. and C. Korner, 1997: In situ effects of elevated CO 2 on the carhon 
and nitrogen status of alpine plants. Functional Ecology, 11(3), 290-299.
Schoenwiese, C.-D., J. Rapp, T. Fuchs, and M. Denhard, 1993: Klimatrend- 
A tlas Europa 1891-1990. ZUF-Verlag, Frankfurt, Germany, 210 pp.
Schuurm ans, C.J.E., 1996: Climate variability in Europe. In: Climate 
Variability and clim ate change —  vulnerability and adaptation. 
Proceedings of the Reg. Clim. W orkshop, Septem ber 1996. Prague, 
Czech Republic, pp. 25-33.
Semenov, M.A. and J.R. Porter, 1995: Climatic variability and the modelling 
of crop yields. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 73, 265-283.
Europe
185
S h arp , G.D. and J. C sirke (eds.), 1983: P roceedings o f the E xpert 
Consultation to Exam ine the Changes in A bundance and Species 
Composition o f N eritic Fish Resources 1 8-29 A pril 1983, San Jose, 
Costa Rica. FAO Fish. Rep. Sen, Rome, Italy, 291(2-3), 1294.
S huter, B.J. and J.R. Post, 1990: Climate, population viability, and the zoo­
geography o f tem perate fishes. Trans. Amer. Fish. Soc., 119, 314-336.
SILM U , 1996: Clim ate Change and F inland —  Sum m ary o f the Finnish 
Research Program m e on Climate Change. Helsinki University Press, 
Helsinki.
Sirotenko, O.D., H.V. Abashina, and V.N. Pavlova, 1997: Sensitivity o f the 
Russian agriculture to changes in clim ate, CO 2 and tropospheric ozone 
concentrations and soil fertility. Climatic Change, 36(1-2), 217-232.
Slovik, S., 1996: Early needle senescence and thinning o f the crown structure 
of Picea abies as induced by chronic SO 2  pollution. 1. M odel deduction 
and analysis —  2. Field data basis, m odel results and tolerance limits. 
Global C hange Biology, 2(5), 459-477.
Soussana, J.F., E. Casella, and P. Loiseau, 1994: Long-term  effects of CO 2  
enrichm ent and tem perature increase on a tem perate grass sward 2. Plant 
nitrogen budgets and root fraction. Plant and Soil, 182(1), 101-114.
S outhw ard, A.J., 1980: The western English Channel: an inconstant ecosys­
tem? Nature, 285, 361-366.
Spiecker, H., K. M ielikainen, M. Kohl, and J. Skovsgaard (eds.), 1996: 
Growth trends in European forests. Studies from  12 countries. Springer- 
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 372 pp.
Spieksm a, F.T.M., J. Em berlin, M. H jelm roos, S. Jager, and R.M. Leuschner, 
1995: A tm ospheric birch (Betula) pollen in Europe: trends and fluctua­
tions in annual quantities and the starting dates o f the seasons. Grana, 34, 
51-57.
S terr, H. and F. Sim m ering, 1996: Die Kuestenregionen im 21. Jahrhundert. 
In: Beitrage zur aktuellen Kuestenforschung [Sterr, H. and C. Preu 
(eds.)]. 
V echtaer 
Studien 
ziir 
A ngew andten 
G éographie 
und 
Regionalwissenschaft (VSAG), 18, 181-188.
Stirling, C.M ., P.A. Davey, T.C. W illiams, and S.P. Long, 1997: Acclim ation 
of photosynthesis to elevated CO 2 and tem perature in five British native 
species o f contrasting functional type. Global Change Biology, 3(3), 
237-246.
Stock, M . and F. Toth (eds.), 1996: M oegliche A usw irkungen von 
Klim aaenderungen a u f das L and Brandenburg. PIK, Potsdam, Germany, 
166 pp.
Straw , N.A., 1995: Clim ate change and the impact of the green spruce aphid, 
Elatobium  abietinum  (W alker), in the UK. Scottish Forestry, 49, 
134-145.
Sykes, M.T. and I.C. Prentice, 1995: Boreal forest futures: m odelling the con­
trols on tree species range lim its and transient responses to climate 
change. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 82, 4 1 5 ^ 2 8 .
Sykes, M.T. and I.C. Prentice, 1996: Clim ate change, tree species distributions 
and forest dynam ics: a case study in the m ixed conifer/northern hard­
woods zone of N orthern Europe. Clim atic Change, 34, 161-177.
T alkkari, A. and Hypén, H., 1996: Developm ent and assessm ent of a gap-type 
model to predict the effects of clim ate change on forests based on spatial 
forest data. Forest Ecology and M anagement, 83, 217-228.
T cham itchian, М ., H. Colas, and J. Roy, 1994: M odélisation des effets à long 
terme du CO 2 , de la tem pérature et de la fertilisation sur la photosynthèse 
de la feruille de ray-grass anglais (Lolium  perenne, L.). In: Ecosystèm es 
et C hangem ents globaux. [Perrier, A. and B. Saugier (eds.)]. INRA, Paris, 
France, 8 , 99-106.
Thom pson, K., 1994: Predicting the fate of temperate species in response to 
hum an disturbance and global change. In: Biodiversity, temperate 
ecosystems, and global change [Boyle, T.J.B. and C.E.B. Boyle (eds.)]. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 61-76.
T ho m ley , J.H.M . and M .G.R. Cannell, 1996: Temperate forest responses to 
carbon dioxide, tem perature and nitrogen: A  model analysis. Plant Cell 
and Environment, 19(12), 1331-1348.
Tognetti, R., A. Giovannelli, A. Longobucco, F. M iglietta, and A. Raschi, 
1996: W ater relations of oak species grow ing in the natural CO 2 spring 
of Rapolano (central Italy). A nnales D es Sciences Forestières, 53, 
475-485.
Toi, R.S.J., 1996: The W eather Insurance Sector. In: Climate Change and 
Extreme Events — A ltered Risk, Socio-economic Im pacts and Policy 
Responses [Downing, T.E., A.A. Olsthoorn, and R.S.J. Toi (eds.)]. 
Institute 
for 
Environm ental 
Studies, 
Vrije 
U niversiteit 
and 
E nvironm ental C hange U nit, U niversity o f O xford, A m sterdam , 
Netherlands and Oxford, United Kingdom, pp. 209-250.
Ih r n e r , R.K., P. Doktor, and W.N. Adger, 1995: Assessing the Costs of Sea 
Level Rise. Environm ent and Planning, A27, 1777-1796.
Tyler, A.L., D.C. M acmillan, and J. Dutch, 1996: M odels to predict the 
General Yield Class of Douglas fir, Japanese larch and Scots pine on bet­
ter quality land in Scotland. Forestry, 6 9 ,1 3 -2 4 .
U K  D ep artm en t o f th e E nvironm ent, 1991: The Potential Effects o f Climate 
Change in the United Kingdom. United Kingdom Climate Change 
Impacts Review Group, HM SO, London, United Kingdom, 124 pp.
U K  D ep artm en t o f the E nvironm ent, 1996: Review o f the Potential Effects 
o f Climate Change in the United Kingdom. HM SO, London, United 
Kingdom, 247 pp.
U K  M inistry o f A griculture, Fisheries a n d  Food, The Welsh Office, 
A ssociation of D istrict Councils, English Nature and the National Rivers 
Authority, 1995: Shoreline M anagem ent Plans: A  Guide fo r Coastal 
D efence Authorities, M inistry of A griculture, Fisheries and Food, 
London, United Kingdom, 24 pp.
U N EC E, 1997: International cooperative program m e on assessment and m on­
itoring o f acidification o f rivers and lakes. The nine year report: 
Acidification o f surface water in Europe and N orth Am erica — long-term 
developm ents (1980s and 1990s). Program m e Centre, N orw egian 
Institute for W ater Research, Oslo, Norway, 168 pp.
van d e r M aarel, E. and M.T. Sykes, 1993: Sm all-scale plant species turnover 
in a lim estone grassland: the carousel model and some com m ents on the 
niche concept. Journal o f Vegetation Science, 4, 179-188.
W olf, J., L.G. Evans, M .A. Semenov, H. Eckersten, and A. Iglesias, 1996: 
Comparison of w heat simulation models under climate change: 1. Model 
calibration and sensitivity analyses. Clirrmte Research, 7(3), 253-270.
W oodw ard, F.I., 1993: The lowland-to-upland transition —  modelling plant 
responses to environm ental change. E cological A pplications, 3, 
404-408.
Young, J.W .S., 1997: A  fram ework for the ultimate environm ental index 
putting 
atm ospheric 
change 
into 
context 
w ith 
sustainability. 
Environm ental M onitoring and Assessment, 46(1-2), 135-149.
Z aller, J.G. and J.A. A m one, 1997: Activity of surface-casting earthworms in 
a calcareous grassland under elevated atmospheric CO 2 . Oecologia, 111, 
249-254.
'■ f S
4.
# * 3 1 ^
т-тз 
m m
штр
I L - C î ' w
î . :
b ^ :
6
Latin America
OSVALDO F. CANZIANI (ARGENTINA) AND SANDRA DIAZ (ARGENTINA) 
Lead Authors:
E. Calvo (Peru), M. Campos (Costa Rica), R. Carcavallo (Argentina), C.C. Cerri 
(Brazil), C. Cay-Carcia (Mexico), L.J. Mata (Venezuela), A. Saizar (Uruguay)
Contributors:
P. Aceituno (Chile), R. Andressen (Venezuela), V. Barros (Argentina), M. Cabido 
(Argentina), H. Fuenzalida-Ponce (Chile), C. Funes (Argentina), C. Calvao 
(Brazil), A.R. Moreno (Mexico), W.M. Vargas (Argentina), E.F. Viglizzo (Argentina), 
M. de Zuviria (Bolivia)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
189
6.3.4. Agriculture
2 1 2
6.3.5. Human Health
215
6 .1 .
Regional Characteristics
192
6.З.5.1. Direct Impacts of Climate Change 215
6.3.5.2. Indirect Impacts of Climate Change 216
6 .2 .
Regional Climate Information
194
6.3.6. Human Settlements
218
6.2.1. Current Climate
194
6.3.7. Industry, Energy, and Transportation
219
6.2.2. Trends in Climate
195
6.2.3. Climate Variability
195
6.4. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential Impacts and
6.2.4. Climate Change
196
Adaptation Options
2 2 0
6.3.
Sensitivity, Adaptability, and Vulnerability
198
6.5. 
Monitoring and Research Needs
2 2 1
6.3.1. Terrestrial Ecosystems;
Vulnerability and Impacts
199
Acknowledgments
2 2 1
6.3.1.1. Forests
2 0 1
6.З.1.2. Rangelands
203
References
224
6.З.1.З. Deserts
204
6.З.1.4. Mountain Ecosystems
For Further Reading
229
and Cryosphere
205
6.3.2. Hydrology, Water Resources,
and Freshwater Fisheries
206
6.3.3. Oceans, Saltwater Fisheries,
and Coastal Zones
209
6.3.3.1. Oceans and Saltwater Fisheries
209
6.3.3.2. Sea-Level Rise
2 1 0
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Latin America includes all continental countries of the 
Americas from Mexico to Chile and Argentina, as well as adja­
cent seas. The region is highly heterogeneous in terms of cli­
mate, ecosystems, human population distribution, and cultural 
traditions. Most Latin American production activities are based 
on the region’s extensive natural ecosystems. Land use is a 
major force driving ecosystem change at present; it interacts 
with climate in complex ways. This complexity makes the task 
of identifying common patterns of vulnerability to climate 
change very difficult. Major sectors in which the impacts of 
climate change could be important are natural ecosystems 
(e.g., forests, rangelands',' wetlands), water resources, coastal 
zones, agriculture, and human health. The relative importance 
attributed to each of these projected impacts varies among 
countries.
Changes in climate over the past century have included a rise 
in the mean surface temperature, particularly at middle and 
high latitudes, and changes in precipitation rates and intensities 
in various countries of the region (e.g., southern Brazil, 
Paraguay, Argentina). Climate change could modify present 
conditions, with beneficial or adverse impacts— as presently 
occurs as a result of the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
phenomenon. Natural climate variability at the time scale of 
seasons to several years has produced significant effects on 
Latin American countries, suggesting that climate change pro­
jections become an important element for national and region­
al planning. However, climate change should be considered not 
in isolation but in close interaction with other important factors 
for development, such as land-use practices and land-use 
change, population growth, economic situations, and commu­
nity behavior.
Latin Am erica’s geographical location and geomorphology 
contribute to its large variety of climates, ranging from hyper- 
arid desert climates to humid tropical forest climates. The 
regional climate distribution is defined by interactions among 
the predominant atmospheric circulation patterns and the 
region’s topographical features, radiation budgets, and heat and 
water balances— ^which, in turn, depend on the vast range of 
soil/vegetation types of the region. The extensive central por­
tion of Latin America is characterized largely by humid, tropi­
cal conditions; important areas (e.g., in Brazil) are subject to 
drought, floods, and freezes. Atmospheric circulation and 
ocean currents are causal factors of extensive deserts in north­
ern Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, Chile, and Argentina.
The relationship between the ENSO phenomenon and changes 
in precipitation and temperature has been well documented for
countries of the Central American isthmus and South America. 
ENSO events associated with massive fluctuations in the 
marine ecosystems off the coasts of Ecuador, Pem, and north­
ern Chile (which are among the richest fisheries in the world) 
would have adverse socioeconomic consequences on fishing 
and fishmeal production. Experimental El Nino forecasts have 
been applied, with remarkable success, in Peru and Brazil to 
reduce economic disruptions in agriculture. Climate variability 
also determines important changes in the distribution and inten­
sity of rainfall and snow. This variability represents an addi­
tional stress on already limited freshwater availability in Chile 
and western Argentina at latitudes between 25°S and 37°S.
The surface area of Latin America is occupied by natural 
ecosystems whose genetic resources are among the richest in 
the world. The Amazon rainforest contains the largest number 
of animal and plant species in Latin America. Temperate and 
arid zones in this region— which, until recently, have received 
less attention— also contain important genetic resources, in 
terms of wild and domesticated genotypes.
The Latin American contribution to global emissions of green­
house gases is low at present (approximately 4%). However, 
potential future impacts of climate and land-use changes could 
be large and costly for this region. In addition, the release of 
carbon to the atmosphere as a consequence of massive and 
continued deforestation in Latin America would have the 
potential to alter the global carbon balance. On the other hand, 
some studies suggest that technologically simple adaptation 
options could improve the capacity for carbon sequestration, as 
well as economic productivity, in some ecosystems.
Latin American forests— ^which occupy approximately 22% of 
the region and represent about 27% of global forest coverage—  
have a strong influence on local and regional climate, play a 
significant role in the global carbon budget, contain an impor­
tant share of all plant and animal species of the region, and are 
economically very important for national and international 
markets. Vulnerability studies indicate that forest ecosystems 
in many countries (e.g., Mexico, countries of the Central 
American isthmus, Venezuela, Brazil, Bolivia) could be affect­
ed by projected climatic changes. Deforestation in the Amazon 
rainforest is likely to have a negative impact on the recycling 
of precipitation through évapotranspiration. Rainfall would be 
markedly reduced, leading to important runoff losses in areas 
within and beyond this basin.
Rangelands cover about one-third of the land area of Latin 
America. Rangeland productivity and species composition are
directly related to the highly variable amount and seasonal dis­
tribution of precipitation; they are only secondarily affected by 
other climate variables (with the exception of high-temperature 
persistence in wildfire-prone areas). Temperate grasslands are 
vulnerable to drought; therefore, livestock production would 
drop drastically if precipitation decreased substantially or if 
higher temperatures led to increased évapotranspiration rates. An 
increased frequency of extreme events is likely to have larger 
impacts than changes in mean temperature or precipitation. The 
preservation of large-scale range management units and protect­
ed areas may assist migration and recolonization by native 
species in response to changing environmental conditions.
Mountain ranges and plateaus play an important role in deter­
mining Latin America’s climate, hydrological cycle, and biodi­
versity. They are source regions of massive rivers (e.g., the trib­
utary rivers of the Amazonas and Orinoco basins) and represent 
important foci of biological diversification and endemism— and 
they are highly susceptible to extreme events. The cryosphere in 
Latin America is represented by glaciers in the high Andes and 
three major ice fields in southern South America. Warming in 
high mountain regions could lead to the disappearance of sig­
nificant snow and ice surfaces. In addition, changes in atmos­
pheric circulation resulting from the ENSO phenomenon and 
climate change could modify snowfall rates— ^with a direct 
effect on the seasonal renewal of water supply— and surface 
and underground runoff in piedmont areas. This could affect 
mountain sports and tourist activities, which represent an 
important source of income in some economies. Glaciers are 
melting at an accelerated rate in the Venezuelan and Peruvian 
Andes; however, the largest glaciers in the Patagonian Andes 
would continue to exist into the 2 2 nd century.
Approximately 35% of the world’s continental water (freshwa­
ter) is found in Latin America. However, its distribution with­
in and among countries is highly variable. Freshwater systems 
(i.e., rivers, lakes, reservoirs, nontidal wetlands) and their 
ecosystems are potentially very sensitive to climate change and 
vulnerable to short-term fluctuations in climate, such as those 
associated with the ENSO phenomenon.
In the humid tropics, extreme precipitation events would 
increase the number of reservoirs silting up well before their 
design lives have been reached. Other areas affected by the 
impact of climate change on water resources could be those 
that rely on freshwater ecosystems (i.e., lakes and inland wet­
lands and their biota), including commercial and subsistence 
fisheries. Climate change will interact strongly with anthro­
pogenic changes in land use, waste disposal, and water extrac­
tion; regional water resources will become increasingly 
stressed by higher demands to meet the needs of growing pop­
ulations and economies, as well as by temperature increases. 
Conflicts may arise among users and regions— and even 
among Latin American countries that share common river 
basins. The effects of climate change on agricultural demands 
for water, particularly for irrigation, will depend significantly 
on changes in agricultural potential, prices of agricultural pro­
duce, and water costs.
The vulnerability of Latin American countries to climate 
change strongly depends on the impacts of climate change on 
water availability, as shown by studies performed under the 
auspices of the U.S. Country Studies Program (USCSP) and 
the Global Environment Facility (GEF). Changes in precipita­
tion rates have consequences for hydropower production in 
Costa Rica, Panama, and western Argentina. ENSO events dur­
ing recent decades have led to a significant reduction in runoff 
and consequently to higher dependence on thermal energy pro­
duction, especially in areas with few energy alternatives. 
Alterations in hydrological balance resulting from climate 
change could reduce already impaired water supply and distri­
bution systems in major Latin American cities and rural areas. 
According to vulnerability studies carried out in Mexico and 
Peru, the combined impacts of global warming and population 
growth could result in major reductions in water availability in 
both countries in coming decades. Monitoring of the hydrolog­
ical cycle, sensitivity studies, development planning, and 
improved water management practices are key elements in 
preparing for projected water shortages.
Studies of vulnerability to sea-level rise have suggested that 
countries of the Central American isthmus as well as Venezuela 
and Uruguay could suffer adverse impacts leading to losses of 
coastal land and biodiversity, saltwater intrusion, and infra­
structure damage. Impacts likely would be multiple and com­
plex, with major economic implications.
Agricultural lands (excluding pastures) represent approximate­
ly 19% of the land area of Latin America. Over the past 40 
years, the contribution of agriculture to the gross domestic 
product (GDP) of Latin American countries has been on the 
order of 10%. Agriculture remains a key sector in the regional 
economy, however, because it occupies an important segment 
(30-40%) of the economically active population. It also is very 
important for the food security of the poorest sectors of the pop­
ulation. Studies in Brazil, Chile, Argentina, and Uruguay based 
on GCMs and crop models project decreased yields of a num­
ber of crops (e.g., barley, grapes, maize, potatoes, soybeans, 
wheat)— even when the direct effects of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) 
fertilization and the implementation of moderate adaptation 
measures at the farm level are considered. Global warming also 
could enhance the negative impacts of animal and plant diseases 
and pests, with further negative effects on production.
Large alterations in Latin American ecosystems resulting from 
climate change impacts would have the potential to endanger 
the livelihoods of subsistence farmers and pastoral peoples, 
who make up a large portion of the rural populations of the 
Andean plateaus and tropical and subtropical forest areas.
Projected changes in climate could increase the impacts of 
already serious chronic malnutrition and diseases affecting a 
large sector of the Latin American population. The geographi­
cal distribution of vector-borne diseases (e.g., malaria, dengue, 
Chagas’) and infectious diseases (e.g., cholera) would expand 
southward and to higher elevations if temperature and precipi­
tation increase. Increasing pollution and high concentrations of
ground-level ozone, aggravated by increasing surface temper­
atures and higher solar radiation rates, could negatively affect 
human health and welfare, especially in urban areas.
Although climate change may bring benefits for certain regions 
in Latin America, increasing environmental deterioration 
resulting from the misuse of land might be aggravated by the 
impacts of climate change on water availability and agricultur­
al lands, as a result of coastal inundation stemming from sea- 
level rise and riverine and flatland flooding. Socioeconomic 
and health problems could be exacerbated in critical areas, fos­
tering massive migrations of rural and coastal populations and 
deepening national and International conflicts.
Additional efforts in monitoring, research, and sensitivity 
analyses are needed to allow decision makers and other stake­
holders to understand the potential consequences of climate
change and variability, take advantage of potential benefits, 
minimize negative impacts, and seek adequate adaptation 
options. Specific priorities include organization and/or updat­
ing of biogeophysical observation networks and monitoring 
systems, development of regional circulation models, perfor­
mance of sensitivity analyses of key sectors— from ecosystems 
to infrastructure— that appear to be most vulnerable in each 
country or subregion, and development of suitable adaptation 
options. These efforts include the creation of new technologies 
and the adaptation of existing technologies generated within or 
outside the region. Promising options include horizontal coop­
eration initiatives among countries of this region and assistance 
from countries of other regions of the world— particularly 
Canada and the United States— as well as countries of the tem­
perate Southern Hemisphere that already are integrated into the 
Valdivia Group.
192
Latin America
6.1. 
Regional Characteristics
The Latin American region spans a vast geographic and eco­
logical range, from the subtropics of the Northern Hemisphere 
to the subpolar tip of the South American subcontinent; the 
region’s largest portion lies in the tropical zone. The region 
consists of 20 independent states and the territory of French 
Guiana (an overseas department of France) (see Box 6-1 and 
Figure 6-1).
The northern part of the region includes Mexico and the coun­
tries of the Central American isthmus, which are characterized 
by a broken relief of mountain ranges, tablelands or plateaus, 
shallow depressions, and numerous valleys— including desert 
(Baja California and Sonora) and semi-arid areas (Mexican 
highlands and coastal plains). South America is vertebrated by 
the Andean cordillera, a continuous mountain chain about
9,000 km long. The massive Andes host important glaciers 
and volcanoes, as well as a number of high plateaus. These 
high plateaus were the cradle of ancient civilizations and 
today host the region’s largest rural population. This remark­
able orographic barrier and the large oceans surrounding the 
subcontinent greatly influence the region’s climate and land- 
use patterns. The lower eastern slopes of the Andes, together 
with the Guianas Highlands and the Brazilian Plateau, make 
up the habitats of the Colombia-Venezuela Llanos and the 
Amazon rainforest— the most important humid forest of the 
world.
Major biogeographical areas to the south of the Amazon forest 
include the woody Cerrado/Cerradinho and Chaco ecosystems 
and, further south, the Pampean region of Argentina. Extending 
southward from a latitude of 40°S, the Patagonian tableland—  
a region of vast steppe-like plains— rises westward from about 
1 0 0  m on the coastline to about 1 , 0 0 0  m at the base of the 
Andes, with a surface area of about 670,000 km^. Other impor­
tant ecosystems in the region are the Yunga valleys in Bolivia 
and tropical/subtropical forests in Paraguay, Brazil, and 
Argentina. In recent decades, these forests have been subject to 
strong anthropogenic pressures to increase agricultural land
Table 6-1: Amazon watershed area.
Box 6-1. The Latin America Region
Country
Watershed
(km2)
% of 
National Territory
% of
Watershed
Bolivia
824,000
75.0
1 1 . 2
Brazil
4,982,000
58.5
67.8
Colombia
406,000
36.0
5.5
Ecuador
123,000
45.0
1.7
Guyana
5,870
2.7
0.08
Peru
936,751
74.4
13.0
Venezuela
53,000
5.8
0.7
Total
7,350,621
1 0 0 . 0
Argentina
Guyana
Belize
Honduras
Bolivia
Mexico
Brazil
Nicaragua
Chile
Panama
Colombia
Paraguay
Costa Rica
Peru
Ecuador
Suriname
El Salvador
Uruguay
French Guiana
Venezuela
Guatemala
Source: Commission on Development and Environment for 
Amazonia (CDEA), 1982.
area. For instance, only 4% of the tropical forest originally 
covering eastern Paraguay remained in the mid-1950s.
South America also has important coastal and inland wetlands 
with very high biodiversity; the combined biodiversity of these 
ecosystems and of Latin America’s tropical, subtropical, and 
temperate ecosystems represents the world’s largest genetic 
pool. Annex D of this report provides the number of known and 
endemic mammal, bird, and flowering plant species in each of 
the Latin American countries. The most important freshwater 
wetlands are those of El Pantanal (Brazil) and Ibera 
(Argentina). These wetlands are associated with the large inter­
national Rio de la Plata basin (embracing about 5.1 million 
km2), whose main component rivers— Paraguay, Parana, and 
Uruguay— have a discharge of 79,400 m^/s. Integration with 
the Orinoco (70,000 mVs) and Amazonas (180,000 m^/s) 
basins makes this area the largest running surface-water system 
in the world (329,400 m^/s), accounting for approximately 
35% of global runoff and covering an area of about 12 million 
km^. These very important river systems could be adversely 
affected by climate change and mismanagement of associated 
ecosystems, particularly further deforestation and, inter alia, 
deterioration of the buffer capacity of inland wetlands. The 
importance of the Amazon basin is depicted in Table 6-1. Table 
6 - 2  provides the estimated deforestation rate of each country 
within this basin.
The total surface of the Latin American region is approximate­
ly 19.93 million km2; the region’s unevenly distributed popu­
lation of approximately 446.2 million people has varied growth 
rates (see Annex D). Although the percentage of urban popula­
tion is the largest in the developing world (7 3 .6 %), there are 
still countries— for example, Bolivia, Ecuador, Paraguay, and 
some in Central America— that have large rural populations. 
Countries with high percentages of population living in cities 
and megalopolises are Mexico (75.2%), Venezuela (85.8%), 
Chile (84.4%), Argentina (88.3%), and Uruguay (94.6%). 
Metropolitan Mexico City, for example, has about 24 million 
people, and greater Sao Paulo’s population is expected to reach 
23 million people by the end of this century (Book of the Year, 
1995; Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1996). Socioeconomic and 
educational conditions vary widely among Latin American
Latin America
193
Figure 6-1: The Latin America region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic 
Information System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
194
Latin America
Table 6-2: Estimated deforestation rates in the tropical rainforest o f Amazonian countries, 1981—90.
Country
Remaining 
Rainforest Area 
1990 (Mha)
Rate of 
Deforestation 
(Mha/yr)
Total 
Deforestation 
1981-90 (Mha)
Total Deforestation 
1981-90 as % of 
Remaining Forest
Bolivia'
Brazil
Colombia
Ecuador
Guyana
Peru
Venezuela
Total
49,137
291,597
47,455
7,150
13,337
40,358
19,602
468,816
625
1,012
223
142
0.0
114
147
2,263
6,250
10,120
2,230
1,420
0.0
1,140
1,470
22,630
12.7
3.5
4.7 
19.9
0.0
2.8
7.5 
4.8
'Bolivia’s total forest area and total deforestation rate are given, because FAO (1993) reports that Bolivia has no tropical rainforest zone. 
Source: FAO, 1993.
countries. Poverty is widespread and may be aggravated by 
global warming if the impacts contribute to declines in the sus­
tainability of Latin America’s ecosystems, particularly in areas 
with marginal environmental and socioeconomic conditions 
(see Annex D).
Latin America’s contribution to global greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions is relatively low (see Box 6-2). In fact, Mexico is the 
only Latin American country on the list of the world’s 15 largest 
emitter countries; mainly as a result of thermal energy produc­
tion, it accounts for approximately 2 % of the carbon emitted by 
those countries (WRI, 1992). A large portion of Latin American 
emissions is caused by deforestation, mainly related to the 
expansion of agricultural lands (Gay-Garcia e ta l, 1995; Lebre- 
La Rovère, 1995; Massera et al., 1996; Perdomo, 1996). On a 
country-by-country basis, however, deforestation is not always 
the main source of GHG emissions. For example, carbon emis­
sions resulting from deforestation of Mexican tropical and tem­
perate forests has been estimated at 52,000-100,000 Gg/yr 
(Massera et al., 1996)— ^which represents less than 20% of the
country’s total emissions as estimated by Perdomo (1996) (see 
Box 6-2). The National Greenhouse Gas Inventories— recently 
undertaken by the majority of Latin American countries in 
response to UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) requirements— will soon enable a better estimate of 
the real situation in this region, where data availability still is 
inadequate.
6.2. 
Regional Climate Information
6.2.1. 
Current Clirrmte
Because Latin America spans a vast range of latitudes and con­
tains important high-elevation mountain ranges, it is hardly 
surprising that it has a wide variety of climates. Although it is 
the only southern continent to reach high latitudes, its broadest 
extent is in the equatorial zone; thus, tropical conditions prevail 
over the larger portion of the region. The large-scale climatic 
features of Central and South America are defined by the
Box 6-2. Latin America’s Contribution to Global Greenhouse Gas Fmissions
Estimates of Latin America’s contribution to global GHG emissions in 1990 are on the order of 902,000 Gg CO 2  equiva­
lent (about 4.28%). Within the region, the largest emitter is Mexico, followed by Brazil, Argentina, Venezuela, and, to a 
lesser degree, Colombia and Chile (Perdomo 1996, on the basis of Oak Ridge National Laboratory information).
Analysis of estimated emissions of CO 2 , 
methane (CH 4 ), and nitrous oxide (N 2 O) 
from the five countries for which detailed 
information is available revealed that most 
emissions are associated with the energy 
sector in Mexico, Venezuela, and Costa 
Rica and with land-use changes in Peru 
and Bolivia. Methane emissions from agri­
culture, especially from enteric fermenta­
tion and animal manure, occupy a second 
place in most cases (Perdomo, 1996).
Country
Total GHG 
Emission 
(Gg of C 0
2 -equiv)
CO2
% Distribution
CH4
N 2 O
Bolivia
69,987
78.6
2 1 . 0
0.4
Costa Rica
8,037
47.8
49.4
2 . 8
Mexico
531,906
81.5
17.9
0.5
Peru
138,573
74.3
24.3
1.4
Venezuela
269,951
70.6
28.8
0.55
Latin America
195
region’s predominant atmospheric circulation patterns and geo- 
morphological features. The main circulation features are rela­
tively low pressure at the equatorial belt (10°N-10°S), quasi­
permanent high-pressure cells over the north and south Atlantic 
and southeast Pacific Oceans, and a belt of low pressure defin­
ing the westerly flow on the southern portion of the South 
American subcontinent. Mexico and Central America are 
affected by the penetration of cold fronts and tropical cyclones 
over the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, whereas the Atlantic 
coast of South America is mostly free of high-intensity tropical 
storms.
The development of a thermal low located between 20°S and 
30°S over the high, dry lands to the east of the Andes introduces 
a monsoonal circulation pattern, bringing seasonal precipitation 
on the high Andean Plateau and influencing the positioning of 
the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in the region.
Latin America is characterized largely by humid, tropical con­
ditions. However, important areas (e.g., northeastern Brazil) 
are subject to droughts and floods, and others are affected by 
freezes— all of which have negative impacts on agricultural 
production (Magalhâes and Glantz, 1992).
Atmospheric circulation and cold ocean currents have remark­
able influence on the weather and climate in the southern part 
of the region— giving origin to the Peruvian, Atacama, and 
Patagonian deserts, which receive less than 100 mm of mean 
annual precipitation. The cold Humboldt ocean current— ^which 
flows northward along the west coast of South America—  
brings to the coasts of Ecuador, Peru, and Chile large masses of 
phytoplankton that originate in the Antarctic Ocean, supporting 
one of the world’s richest fisheries. This process is interrupted 
by the western displacement of the Humbolt current and the 
irruption (advection) of warmer waters caused by the weaken- 
'ing of the easterly surface winds (El Nino phenomenon), result­
ing in adverse conditions for fishing.
6.2.2. 
Trends in Climate
Climate trends over the past century have been investigated in 
the majority of countries that have the required amount of 
information (i.e., measured data and reliable proxy data). 
Studies are available on average and extreme values of tem­
perature, humidity, and precipitation for different regions of 
Latin America and different periods of time.
Some of these studies reveal significant warming in southern 
Patagonia east of the Andes, with increases in maximum, min­
imum, and daily mean temperatures of more than 1°C. 
According to some researchers, no warming has been observed 
north of about 42°S. These observations are consistent with 
changes in vapor pressure and precipitation— ^which have 
increased (north of 40°S) since 1940 (Hoffman et a l, 1996).
Similar studies peformed in Chile indicate that mean surface 
temperatures showed no increasing trend before 1900—^but
that, during the period 1900-90, the temperature in the 
Southern Hemisphere increased by a total of 0.4°C, at a fairly 
constant rate (Rosenbliith et al., 1997). These authors have 
reported a significant cooling in the southern half of Chile in 
1991 and 1992, coinciding with the eruptions of the Pinatubo 
and Hudson’s volcanoes (June and August 1991, respectively), 
as a result of the effect of the sulfate aerosols emitted into the 
stratosphere.
A trend analysis of 81 series of precipitation data in Central 
America (Brenes-Vargas and Trejos, 1994) shows that changes 
in general circulation influence precipitation rates and conse­
quently the availabilty of water on the isthmus, with related 
problems in hydroenergy production (see Section 6.3.2).
Further, an analysis of precipitation trends in the southern por­
tion of South America, east of the Andes cordillera, indicates 
that the mean annual precipitation in the humid Pampa has 
increased by about 35% in the past half-century (Forte-Lay, 
1987; Castaneda and Barros, 1996).
Trends in annual precipitation (in percentages), mean annual 
temperatures (in degrees centigrade per hundred years), and 
variations in annual precipitation and temperatures are provid­
ed in Annex A.
6.2.3. 
Climate Variability
Climate variability means the alternation between the “normal 
climate” and a different, but recurrent, set of climatic condi­
tions over a given region of the world. In the Latin American 
region, climatic variability is related, inter alia, to the Southern 
Oscillation (SO) and the El Nino phenomenon (EN). Studies 
on the SO effects, using an SO Index (SOI), have shown its 
connection with pressure, temperature, and rainfall, as well as 
with hydrometeorological anomalies (e.g., record river dis­
charges and lake levels) (Aceituno, 1987).
Prominent among SO-related anomalies in South America is 
the well-documented tendency for anomalously-wet conditions 
along the otherwise arid coast of northern Peru and southern 
Ecuador during El Nino episodes (Rasmuson and Carpenter, 
1982). The relationship between the SO and rainfall anomalies 
in northeastern Brazil has long been recognized (Walker, 1928; 
Doberitz, 1969; Caviedes, 1973; Hastenrath, 1976; Kousky et 
a l, 1984). Rainfall anomalies related to the SO in extratropical 
South America have been documented primarily for central 
Chile (Rubin, 1955). A  tendency for precipitation in subtropi­
cal Chile to be exceptionally abundant during El Nino years 
has been noted. This relationship is consistent with the signifi­
cant negative correlation between pressure differences (Tahiti 
minus Darwin) and annual precipitation in central Chile 
(Pittock, 1980) and snow accumulation in the southern Andes 
(Cerveny et al., 1987). Rainfall in the Central America- 
Caribbean domain also is related to the SO, as revealed by the 
tendency for drought conditions to occur during warm episodes 
off the Peruvian coast (Hastenrath, 1976).
196
Latin America
The strong El Nino episode in 1982-83, which coincided with 
a marked negative SO phase, was associated with extreme cli­
matic conditions in various parts of South America. Examples 
include the convection regime associated with flooding in 
northern Peru (Horel and Cornejo-Garrido, 1986), droughts in 
northeastern Brazil (Rao et a l, 1986), and the remarkable pre­
cipitation and circulation anomalies over South America 
(Nobre and De Oliveira, 1986; Minetti and Vargas, 1995).
During recent decades, the influence of the ENSO phenome­
non on the interannual variability of weather and climate in 
South America has been the research subject of other authors 
(Berlage, 1966; Burgos et a l, 1991; Santibanez and Uribe, 
1994; Vargas and Bishoff, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 4). 
During ENSO years, precipitation in some areas of northern 
South America is lower (Aceituno, 1987), increasing the like­
lihood of drought. ENSO events also can lead to higher pre­
cipitation and air temperature, as has occurred in the coastal 
deserts of Peru and Chile (Caviedes, 1973). In addition, these 
events are related to massive fluctuations in marine ecosystems 
of the southern Pacific and Atlantic Oceans, with adverse 
socioeconomic consequences for commercial fishing and fish­
meal production in Chile, Peru, Brazil, and Argentina (Pauly 
and Tsukayama, 1987; Pauly et a l, 1987; Pauley et a l, 1989; 
Yanez, 1991; Bakun, 1993; Sharp and McLain, 1993).
Records of precipitation in countries of the Central American 
isthmus show an important reduction in precipitation during 
the ENSO period, particularly along the Pacific watershed. 
This reduction has considerable effects on the most important 
economic activities and sectors in these countries (Campos et 
a l, 1996).
It is unclear whether the ENSO phenomenon would change 
with long-term global warming— and what the consequences 
would be of overlapping sources of climatic variability on the 
Earth’s systems. However, ENSO effects have been used by 
regional scientists to help define real scenarios that could be 
useful as analogs for climate change and for studies of poten­
tial responses of the countries and sectors affected (Campos et 
a l, 1996).
6.2.4. 
Climate Change
Annex В of this report provides information on the progress 
made with transient runs of atmosphere-ocean general circula­
tion models (AOGCMs), which allow— within certain limits 
and with reliable complementary data— climate projections at 
a regional scale. Annex В also provides information on differ­
ent regionalization techniques, which recently have been 
developed and tested to improve the coarse resolution in 
regional climate change simulation. However, the regions 
identified for this type of simulation do not include Latin 
America.
Whetton et al. (1996) analyzed the performance of models in 
South America to assess the ability of GCMs to reproduce key
climate features of the Southern Hemisphere, as well as the 
major gaps in their simulation capability. The authors consid­
ered several “mixed-layer ocean” experiments and several 
“coupled” or “full dynamic ocean” experiments. The correla­
tion between modeled and observed annual mean precipitation 
over the region ranges from 0.35 to 0.70 in mixed-layer GCM 
runs; slightly higher correlations are found in coupled GCM 
climate experiments.
In greenhouse climate experiments performed over South 
America and adjacent oceans (Labraga, 1997; Labraga and 
Lopez, 1997), mean temperature increases simulated in mixed- 
layer equilibrium experiments ranged between 1.5°C and 
4.0°C at the time of CO 2  doubling; transient experiments with 
coupled GCMs simulated mean temperature increases of 
1.2-1.7°C. According to the results of five coupled GCMs, 
temperatures in the semi-arid zone of central Chile and central- 
western Argentina during the Southern Hemisphere summer 
are simulated to increase by 1-3°C at the time of CO 2  dou­
bling. During the same season, precipitation in the area was 
projected to decrease by 10-15% per degree of global warm­
ing, according to the same set of experiments. There is con­
sensus among models that the semi-arid subtropical zone will 
experience intensified and extended dry conditions. In addi­
tion, the coupled GCMs all project increases in rainfall in the 
ITCZ in the eastern equatorial Pacific and the northwestern 
part of the continent, the South Atlantic Convergence Zone 
(SACZ) in the eastern part of Brazil and the adjacent Atlantic 
Ocean, and the southern tip of the continent.
Figures 6-2 and 6-3 reproduce maps showing expected season­
al changes in surface temperatures and precipitation, as pro­
jected by transient coupled AOGCM experiments performed at 
the Max Planck Institute (MPI, Germany) and the Bureau of 
Meteorology Research Centre (BMRC, Australia) (IPCC 1996, 
WG I, Chapter 6 ).
Because of the great climatic diversity of this region and the 
present limitations of GCMs in simulating Latin America’s 
regional climate, many studies that have estimated vulnerabil­
ity have used the GCMs as tools for obtaining reference sce­
narios, in order to perform sensitivity analyses (e.g., for differ­
ent crops at specific sites and water resources for specific 
basins). These analyses have included detailed knowledge of 
the local climate founded on sufficient and reliable real data 
and correctly evaluated proxy data. A  good example of this 
approach appears in a study on “Global Warming and Climate 
Change in Mexico” (Liverman and O ’Brien, 1991), in which 
the authors note the importance of acknowledging differences 
among climate model projections— as well as between model 
simulations and observed climates— ^because these differences 
underscore the uncertainties involved in assessing the regional 
impacts of global warming. A  range of possible outcomes is 
captured by using the results of different GCMs and undertak­
ing a sensitivity analysis of the results. Some of the conclu­
sions reached appear in the relevant sections of this chapter, 
which also provide information on the vulnerabilities of and 
potential impacts on natural and managed systems and human
Latin America
197
(a)
DJF
(b)
JJA
198
Latin America
DJF
-80 -
■ » r i
0
0.5
Figure 6-3: Seasonal changes in precipitation at the time of doubling COj following a 1%/yr increase. Contours are at ±0.5, 1, 
2, and 4 mm/day; negative contours are dashed and areas of increase areas stippled (IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 6.11).
6.3. 
Sensitivity, Adaptability, and Vulnerability 
this regard, the vulnerability of certain systems and activities—
such as mountain regions with snow/ice cover, low coastal 
As noted above, climate change is only one of the causes lead- 
areas, agriculture, water resources management and hydropow-
ing to global change. As happens when there are multiple stress- 
er generation, and human health— are recognized as vulnerable
es, different stresses may be prevalent in different situations. In 
under projected climate change scenarios. Furthermore, climate
Latin America
199
change may worsen some existing problems— such as desertifi­
cation and freshwater shortages (in certain regions)— and give 
rise to new problems, such as the expansion of the geographical 
and altitudinal range of some human diseases. Warming of the 
atmosphere also may result In some benefits, such as the 
enhancement of high-latitude agriculture and reductions in the 
effects of wintertime diseases. Politicians and decisionmakers 
need to be aware of the vulnerability and adaptability of ecosys­
tems and activities in their countries and their region, as well as 
elsewhere around the world, to design and implement sustain­
able development initiatives that take advantage of beneficial 
climate changes and to build strategies for international com­
mercial exchanges in light of differential climate change 
impacts around the world.
Regarding the assessment of climate change impacts on differ­
ent economic sectors, climatic projections at scales relevant to 
the production and management fields are still inadequate (as 
indicated in Annex B). The resolution of current GCMs is too 
coarse to allow reliable projections or cost/benefit analyses of 
possible adaptation options for the individual countries of 
Latin America. In some cases, however, appropriate downscal­
ing and other techniques are available, making possible the use 
of GCM outputs, and regional models suitable for impact and 
vulnerability analysis are now being developed for this region.
The largest impacts of climate change are likely to affect natur­
al ecosystems and sectors related to primary production, such as 
agriculture, livestock raising, and fisheries. Water resources are 
at risk in many areas. Human health and human settlements, 
especially in coastal lowlands and environmentally and socioe­
conomically marginal areas, also are vulnerable. Impacts are 
expected to be less severe for industry, transportation, and infra­
structure outside of flood-prone areas, although increased fre­
quency or severity of extreme events may affect these sectors.
6.3.1. 
Terrestrial Ecosystems: Vulnerability and Impacts
Virtually all of the w orld’s major types of ecosystems are pre­
sent in Latin America (Figure 6-4), which is characterized by 
high species and ecosystem diversity. Some Latin American 
countries— such as Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Bolivia, Brazil, and Peru— are among the w orld’s richest in 
terms of terrestrial plant and animal species (Annex D; see 
also WRI, 1990-91; LAC CDE, 1992). Forest biomes in this 
region include tropical rainforests, such as the Amazon; other 
tropical forests in eastern Mexico, Central America, and 
northern South America; and the endangered Mata Atlantica 
in Brazil. There also are important sectors of tropical decidu­
ous forests in the Yucatan; in the Pacific watershed of Central 
America, Venezuela, and Ecuador; and on the Brazilian coast 
from about 7°S to the Tropic of Capricorn. Mid-latitude 
deciduous or tem perate forests are established on low-ele- 
vation coastal mountains in southern Brazil and southern 
Chile and to a lesser extent in southern Argentina (in the 
piedmont area of the Patagonian Andes). A ustral forests are 
located on the southernmost tip of the subcontinent and on
Tierra del Fuego Island. G rasslands, shrublands, and 
deserts— the most extensive ecosystems in the region— are 
found on the Mexican Pacific and Venezuelan Caribbean 
coasts, in northeastern Brazil, and in inland areas between 
Brazil and Bolivia. The Gran Chaco ecosystem is located 
across parts of Bolivia, Paraguay, and Argentina. The chapar­
ral biome is on the central Chilean coast. Mid-latitude grass­
lands occupy extensive areas in southern Brazil, Uruguay, 
and central and eastern Argentina; tropical grasslands and 
savannas are present in Central America, the Guyanas, 
Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Paraguay, and Argentina. Arid 
shrublands occupy the west of Argentina and Patagonia, and 
hyper-arid areas exist along the west coast of Peru and north­
ern Chile, as well as in southern Bolivia and northwestern 
Argentina. The Latin American region includes almost 23% 
of the w orld’s potentially arable land, 
1 2 % of the current 
cropland, and 17% of all pastures (Gdmez and Gallopin,
1991). Table 6-3 lists the surface area of different biomes in 
South America, and Table 6-4 lists land-cover types by coun­
try; Figure 6-4 provides Information on the actual vegetation 
cover in South America, based on satellite imagery (Stone et 
al., 1994).
Biomass accounts for about 15% of the world’s enegy use and 
38% of the energy use in developing countries. In Latin 
America, however, most biomass is used inefficiently— mainly 
for cooking and heating— and often in much the same way it 
has been used for millenia (Velez et a i, 1990). Biomass can be 
converted into modem energy carriers, such as gaseous and liq­
uid fuels and electricity, that can be widely used in more afflu­
ent societies (see Section 6.3.7), and it has a number of other 
benefits for developing countries: Its large-scale use for energy 
can provide a basis for rural development and employment in 
developing countries, and sites used for plantations in these 
countries are deforested areas or otherwise degraded lands. 
Revenues from the sale of plantation biomass crops grown on 
degraded lands can help finance the restoration of these lands.
The expected vulnerability of terrestrial ecosystems to climate 
change is high. Changes in extreme events, which have been 
increasing in frequency since the end of the 19th century (Karl 
et al., 1995), are likely to be more disruptive than changes in 
mean values. Biogeographical models— based on local vegeta­
tion and ecophysiological and hydrological processes, as well 
as projections of future scenarios— have facilitated the simula­
tion of changes in vegetation distribution in a C 0
2 -rich world. 
Annex С describes the MAPSS (Neilson, 1995) and BIOME 3 
(Haxeltine and Prentice, 1996) biogeographical models, which 
have been run for the Latin American region under different 
scenarios. Under most scenarios, leaf area index (LAI)— an 
indicator of how much vegetation can live on the ground sur­
face— decreases or remains constant over southeast and north­
west Brazil, northeast Argentina, and Uruguay and increases 
slightly over central Brazil. Runoff decreases or remains con­
stant over the southern portion of South America. It should be 
stressed that these models are based on potential vegetation 
only, and their projections do not incorporate land-use changes. 
At present, some land-use practices are a major threat, and
200
Latin America
Ecoregions
tandice 
Tropical moist broadleaf forest 
Tit^ical dry broadleaf forest 
Conifer or tenqierate broadleaf forest 
Grassland/Savanna/Shrubland 
Wetlands and flood-prone grassland 
Montane vegetation 
Xeric and desert vegetation 
Restinga 
Mangrove
400
400 
800 
1200 1600 Klometers
Figure 6-4: Major biomes in Latin America [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic 
Information System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
their effects are liable to be more severe than those of climate 
change (Brinkman and Sombroek, 1996). Studies developed in 
Costa Rica and Nicaragua (Halpin et al., 1995a,b) observed 
that shifts may occur in climatic zones that are associated with 
particular vegetation types in these countries. The combined
impacts of long-term climate change, land-use practices, and 
an increasingly variable climate on an interannual scale would 
pose greater stresses to Latin America’s ecosystems. Therefore, 
designing and implementing adaptation measures is of prima­
ry importance for facing these combined impacts.
Latin America
Table 6-3: Surface area o f different biomes in South America.
201
Biome
A rea (km^)
Percent
Tropical moist forest and semideciduous tropical moist forest
5,858,100
33.13
Seasonally deciduous woodlands (e.g., chaco in Argentina and cerrado in Brazil)
2,300,100
13.01
Savanna/grasslands and pasture
2,296,900
12.99
Secondary seasonal forest with agricultural activity
979,000
5.54
Cool deciduous scrublands (especially Argentina)
905,000
5.40
Xerophytic woodlands (thornforest or caatinga in Brazil)
437,200
2.47
Tropical seasonal or deciduous forest
366,500
2.08
Agriculture
353,000
2 . 0 0
Recently cleared tropical moist forest
342,700
1.94
Desert
278,900
1.58
Unclassified
275,800
1.56
Montane degraded grasslands (especially Bolivia and Peru)
271,509
1.54
Degraded seasonally deciduous woodlands
266,700
1.51
Montane grassland, tundra, or polar grasslands
263,200
1.49
Degraded xerophytic woodlands (thornforest)
233,000
1.32
Secondary forest in the tropical moist forest region
220,800
1.25
Wet vegetation (generally mixed water and vegetation)
212,900
1 . 2 0
Mixed pine with secondary forest and agriculture (southern Brazil)
190,300
1.08
Degraded grasslands or grasslands with agricultural activity
184,100
1.04
Cool deciduous woodlands
173,800
0.98
Montane degraded woodlands
166,500
0.94
Water (open)
163,200
0.92
Deciduous temperate forest
121,600
0.69
Montane woodlands
120,800
0 . 6 8
Xerophytic scrublands
115,400
0.65
Seasonally flooded grasslands (Pantanal)
81,800
0.46
Tropical open forest mixed
77,000
0.44
Cool deciduous forest
66,600
0.38
Montane forest
64,100
0.36
Inland salt marsh community
52,700
0.30
Snow and rock
45,400
0.26
Degraded tropical seasonal forest
39,200
0 . 2 2
Tropical gallery forests
38,300
0 . 2 2
Degraded temperate deciduous forest
29,200
0.17
Tropical moist forest with bamboo (in Acre, Brazil, and Bolivia)
13,600
0.08
Mangroves
4,300
0 . 0 2
Bare soil and rock
3,500
0 . 0 2
Urban regions
2 , 2 0 0
0 . 0 1
Xerophytic littoral vegetation (Venezuelan coast)
700
0 . 0 0
Montane degraded forest
0
0 . 0 0
Total
17,680,200
1 0 0 . 0 0
Source: Stone et al., 1994.
6.3.1.1. 
Forests
Tropical forests represent about 40% of the world’s forested 
area and contain about 60% of global forest biomass. Latin 
American tropical forests— ^which represent about 2 2 % of the 
global forest coverage— have a strong influence on local and 
regional climate (Salati and Vose, 1984; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 1.4), play a significant role in the global carbon bud­
get (Dixon et al., 1994; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 24), and
contain a remarkably large share of all plant and animal 
species of the world (Annex D; see also Bierregaard et a i, 
1992; Mabberley, 1992; M yers, 1992; Riede, 1993). 
Moreover, Latin American tropical and subtropical forests are 
economically very important, providing commercial products 
for national and international markets. Large numbers of peo­
ple base their activities in these trades; many others, particu­
larly indigenous people, subsist mainly on the forests’ non- 
market products. Temperate forests in South America are
202
Latin America
Table 6-4: Generalized land-cover types for South America, by country.
Counby
Qosed
Thjp. 
Reomlly 
Degraded 
D^raded Savanna 
Desal, 
Siiow,
Moist 
D^raded Qosed 
Qosed 
Wood- 
Wood- 
Grass- 
Scrub- 
Bare 
Rodq
F«est 
TMF 
Forest 
Forest 
lands 
lands 
lands 
lands 
Sofl 
Wate- 
lœ  
OÜier
Aigentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Ecuador
French Guiana
Guyana
Paraguay
Pern
Suriname
Umguay
Venezuela
Total
1.2
323.5 
3,522.3
0.0
581.6 
115.5
78.8
150.4
0.3
620.8
136.0 
0.0
370.1 
5,908.5
0.0
12.7
519.7
0.0
5.4 
1.7 
0.0 
2.0 
0.0
19.1
2.5 
0.0 
0.2
563.4
96.8 
409.2
3,686.0
134.1
622.5 
121.0
79.8
171.6 
8.0
654.7
128.5 
2.1
415.5 
6,530.7
0.0
24.6
1,692.2
29.1 
11.4
1.7
2.4
2.4 
0.2
10.1 
10.0
0.0
0.0
1,803.7
645.4
345.1 
1,555.9
75.2
116.3
33.7
0.6
5.4
209.1 
88.0
0.5
0.9
33.9
3,109.8
15.2 
102.2 
330.0
29.6 
14.5
4.3
0.0
0.3
50.7
78.8 
0.3 
0.0
40.2 
666.9
755.4 
87.7
740.0
101.1
255.5 
41.9
0.2
18.4
104.0
139.0 
1.2
154.1 
243.3
2,642.0
1,126.8
91.0 
179.4 
100.9
64.0
16.5 
0.0 
1.5
26.5 
161.7
0.4
11.0 
109.2
1,889.0
37.9
34.0
31.4
35.7
16.5
1 1 . 0
1.4
0 . 0
80.9
0 . 0
124.0
186.8
7.0
16.6
3.8
0 . 0
3.1
0 . 0
2 2 . 8
2.5
0 . 6
0 . 0
0 . 8
0 . 0
0 . 1
0 . 0
1 . 0
0 . 0
1 . 2
0 . 0
3.7
0 . 0
0 . 6
0 . 0
1 . 1
8 8 . 0
8.3
0.7
5.6
0 . 0
1 . 1
0 . 0
3.3
0 . 0
3.0
0 . 0
5.9
0 . 0
11.4
0 . 0
8.4
331.7
163.2
48.9
217.2
Notes: All values are given in 1,000s km^; there are 314,200 km^ unclassified; IMF includes tropical moist, semi-deciduous, and gallery 
forests; grasslands includes those seasonally flooded; closed forest includes TMF, montane forests, cool and temperate deciduous forest, and 
tropical seasonal forest; scrablands also include degraded savanna grasslands and agriculture; desert, bare soil includes salt marsh communi­
ties; and other includes wet vegetation and mangroves.
Source: Stone et al, 1994.
important, to a much smaller extent, for the export economies 
of Chile and, to an even lesser extent, Argentina (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 15.4.3).
Forest cover in Latin America declined from 992 million ha in 
1980 to 918 million ha in 1990, with an annual deforestation 
rate of 0.8% over this period. Average annual deforestation 
rose from 5.4 million ha in 1970 to 7.4 million ha in 1990 
(FAO, 1993). Between 1980 and 1990, deforestation reduced 
tropical forest cover from 826 million ha to 753 million ha— a 
decrease of 0.9% (UNEP, 1992). The tropical forests of the 
Pacific coast of Central America once covered 55 million ha; 
less than 2 % of this forest now remains, although countries like 
Costa Rica have preserved and protected some of their forests 
under national park or reserve status. Similarly, only 4% of the 
original 100 million ha of the Atlantic forest of Brazil (also 
marginally present in Paraguay and northeastern Argentina) 
remains as relatively pristine forest. In Argentina, forests cov­
ered 106 million ha in 1914, but less than a third of that surface 
(32.3-35.5 million ha) remained by the 1980s (Di Pace and 
Mazzuchelli, 1993). High deforestation rates also have been 
observed in the subtropical Paranaense and Great Chaco 
forests, as well as in the Andean-Patagonian and Austral 
forests.
Latin American forests would face an additional threat from 
climate change, as indicated in vulnerability studies by 
USCSP and GEF projects. Unless appropriate action is 
taken, mismanagement of these ecosystems will, in turn.
make climate change impacts more severe. Wood harvesting 
is expected to increase, especially in tropical and subtropical 
countries; local communities w ill face serious shortages in 
forest products required for subsistence and traditional trad­
ing (IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 15.2.3). Forest clearing also 
is expected to increase in response to an increasing need for 
agricultural land (DENR-ADB, 1990; Starke, 1994; Zuidema 
et al., 1994).
Large-scale conversion of tropical forest into pasture will like­
ly lead to changes in local climate through increased surface 
and soil temperatures, diurnal temperature fluctuations, and 
reduced évapotranspiration (Salati and Nobre, 1991; Cerri et 
a i, 1995). A  considerable proportion of the precipitation over 
the Amazon basin originates from évapotranspiration (Molion, 
1975; Salati and Vose, 1984), which could be reduced by con­
tinued and large-scale deforestation. Such large-scale forest 
clearing could reduce the enormous runoff of the Amazon river 
system and result in other far-reaching, undesirable impacts 
beyond the cleared areas (Gash and Shuttleworth, 1991). 
According to projections by Shukla et al. (1990), if tropical 
forests were replaced by degraded pastures, there would be sig­
nificant increases in surface temperature and decreases in 
évapotranspiration and precipitation in the Amazon basin. 
Furthermore, increases in the length of the dry season would 
make reestablishment of forests difficult.
The global carbon cycle also could be altered. The potential of 
Latin American tropical forests to act as carbon sinks has been
Latin America
203
considered high (da Rocha, 1996; Massera et al., 1996; 
Molion, 1996). According to Batjes and Sombroek (1997), 
however, the effect of climate change on carbon sequestration 
in tropical soils can be very complex; it depends on air tem­
perature, CO 2  concentration, seasonal rainfall distribution, 
nitrogen deposition, and fires. Forest-to-pasture conversion 
during a 35-year sequence in Amazonia resulted in the creation 
of a net source of methane (Steudler et a l, 1996) and a net sink 
of CO 2 ; 9-18%  more carbon was stored in the soil under pas­
ture than under the original forest. However, the conversion 
process involves a large net organic carbon mineralization 
(Cerri et a l, 1995; Cerri et a l, 1996).
Tropical forests are likely to be more affected by changes in 
soil water availability (e.g., from seasonal droughts or soil ero­
sion and nutrient leaching resulting from heavy rainfall events) 
and possibly by CO 2  fertilization than by changes in tempera­
ture (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.4). Nutrient leaching, ero­
sion, and timber harvesting also are likely to result in decreased 
biomass and biodiversity (Whitmore, 1984; Jordan, 1985; 
Vitousek and Sanford, 1986).
Global vegetation models do not agree on whether climatic 
change (in the absence of land-use change) will increase or 
decrease the total area of tropical forests in Latin America. 
These forests are projected to expand their geographical range 
in the MAPSS and BI0M E3 models, although the results vary 
depending on the scenario (Annex C). When the IMAGE 2.0 
model (Alcamo, 1994) has been used to simulate the joint 
effects of climatic and land-use changes (Leemans, 1992; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.4), the projected net loss of trop­
ical forest is not very large. This result may reflect the fact that, 
in that model, land-use changes are driven by the dynamics of 
human population growth and economic development. In real­
ity, however, these variables are not necessarily directly relat­
ed to natural resource exploitation in many Latin American 
countries, where harvests often are determined by needs out­
side the region (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 15). Increased 
occurrence of droughts (as in the projections compiled by 
Greco et al., 1994) would affect natural forests and plantations 
in low-precipitation areas.
According to climate change projections, approximately 70% 
of the current temperate forest in Mexico could be affected by 
climate change (Villers, 1995). Other vulnerability studies 
(Gay-Garcia and Ruiz Suarez, 1996), carried out on the basis 
of CCC-Jl GCMs (Boer et a l, 1992; Boer, 1993; McFarlane 
et al., 1992; GDFL-A3, Wetherald and Manabe, 1988), sug­
gest that 10% of all vegetation types in northern M exico’s 
ecosystems— including forests and shrublands of southern 
Chihuahua, eastern Coahuila, northern Zacatecas, and San 
Luis Potosi— ^would be affected by drier and warmer condi­
tions, resulting in the expansion of dry and very dry tropical 
forests and xerophytic shrublands. Changes in precipitation 
intensity and seasonality are likely to have larger impacts on 
the future composition and distribution of Costa Rican and 
Nicaraguan forests than annual temperature changes alone 
(Halpin et al., 1995a,b). About 35 million ha in Venezuela have
been projected to change from subtropical forest to tropical 
forest, and 40-50 million ha could shift from moist to dry or 
very dry forest by the time atmospheric CO 2  concentration 
doubles, according to studies performed on the basis of sce­
narios derived from a number of models: GFDL (Manabe and 
W etherald, 1987), GISS (Hansen et a l, 1984), OSU 
(Schlesinger and Zhao, 1989), and UK M 0-H 2 (Mata, 1996; 
Mitchell and Warrilow, 1987).
In Bolivia, forests cover about 53.4 million ha (48% of the 
national territory). The deforestation rate over a period of 18 
years has been estimated to be on the order of 168,000 ha per 
year, as a result of the expansion of agricultural frontiers and 
the selective extraction of species with high commercial 
value. Changes in Bolivian forest characteristics resulting 
from climate change have been assessed on the bases of 
Holdridge’s model, and on the GISS-Gl (Hansen et a l, 1984) 
and UKM 0-H3 (Mitchell et al., 1989) GCMs, assuming a 
doubling of CO 2  concentrations. The resulting projections 
Indicate reductions in humid subtropical forests (8 6 .6 % under 
G ISS-G l, 95% under UKM 0-H3), and expansions of humid 
tropical forests (61.8% under GISS-Gl, 8.9% under UKMO- 
H3) (Tejada Miranda, 1996).
Middle- to high-latitude forests would be more strongly affect­
ed by temperature than tropical and subtropical forests; they 
also are believed to be more sensitive to the speed of climate 
change than to its magnitude (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.5). 
In Latin America, therefore, climate warming per se should 
have its greatest impact on the Austral forests of southern Chile 
and Argentina, especially at their northern boundaries with 
other ecosystem types.
The foregoing information has very important implications for 
governments, local communities, and other stakeholders in 
Latin American countries: It is apparent that the consideration 
of feedbacks between changes in climate and land-use prac­
tices is essential in the design of sustainable development poli­
cies. The study of linkages between the present climate and 
projected climate, in the context of seasonal-to-interannual 
variability, is the first step in this design process.
6.3.1.2. 
Rangelands
Rangelands— grasslands, shrublands, savannahs, and hot and 
cold deserts, excluding hyper-arid deserts— cover 33% of the 
area of Latin America (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 2.1). 
Rangeland productivity and species composition are directly 
related to the highly variable amounts and seasonal distribution 
of precipitation and only secondarily controlled by other cli­
mate variables. Because rangeland systems are driven by 
extremes, increases in the frequency and magnitude of extreme 
events (Easterling, 1990) may have a disproportionate effect on 
them (Westoby et a l, 1989). Because of their low productivi­
ty, rangeland management units usually are very large, often 
incorporating considerable spatial heterogeneity (Stafford 
Smith and Pickup, 1993).
204
Latin America
Latin American rangelands sustain pastoralist activities, subsis­
tence farming, and commercial ranching and are a key factor in 
the economy of many countries (e.g., Mexico, countries of the 
Central American isthmus, Brazil, Argentina, Uruguay). There 
are approximately 570 million animal units on the subcontinent, 
and over 80% of them feed from rangelands (Annex D).
Human activities may bring about more change in rangeland 
ecosystems than any other forces of global change and may 
interact strongly with climate change impacts, particularly in 
tropical and subtropical areas (IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 
2.3.3). In Argentine Patagonia, for example, the introduction of 
unsustainable numbers of sheep along with inappropriate man­
agement policies has resulted in major changes in pastureland 
composition and even desertification (Soriano and Movia, 
1986). This process is causing the loss of approximately 1,000 
km2 per year (LAC CDE, 1992); overall, 35% of the area’s pas­
tureland has been transformed into desert (Winograd, 1995). 
As a result, the number of sheep decreased by 30% between 
1960 and 1988— representing a loss of about US$260 million 
(Pamelo and Sala, 1992).
Boundaries between rangelands and other biomes are likely to 
be affected by climate changes both directly (e.g., changes in 
species composition) and indirectly, through changes in fire 
regimes, opportunistic cultivation, or agricultural release of 
less-arid margins of the rangeland territory.
Concerning possible climate impacts of tropical deforestation, 
Salati and Nobre (1991) pointed out that the large-scale con­
version of tropical forests into pastures will likely lead to 
changes in local climates of the Amazon region. This kind of 
land-use change increases surface and soil temperatures, the 
diumal fluctuation of temperature, and the specific humidity 
deficit and reduces évapotranspiration— there is less available 
radiative energy at the canopy level because grass has a higher 
albedo than forests (Cerri et a i, 1995).
Climate characteristics affecting soil moisture conditions, rela­
tive humidity, or drought stress— in conjunction with changes 
in fire and grazing regimes— ^will have the greatest influence on 
the boundaries of grassland and woody species. In Mexico, 
approximately 70% of xerophytic shrublands have been pro­
jected to shift their geographical distribution as a result of cli­
mate change (Villers, 1995). This projection is roughly in agree­
ment with outputs from MAPSS and BIOME 3 (Neilson, 1995; 
Haxeltine and Prentice, 1996; see Annex C), although these 
models suggest less dramatic suface reduction. The overall car­
rying capacity for herbivores may increase or decrease, depend­
ing on the balance between eventual increases in productivity 
and decreases in plant nutritional value. In some regions, 
warmer temperatures and increased summer rainfall, with fewer 
frost days, may facilitate the replacement of temperate grasses 
by tropical grasses (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 2.6). Although 
some laboratory experiments on plants grown individually have 
shown that C 3 (temperate) plants tend to respond more posi­
tively than C4  (tropical) plants to elevated CO 2 , differential 
effects can be offset or even reversed in the field because traits
other than photosynthetic pathways— such as architecture phe­
nology, water, and nutrient-use efficiency— tend to play more 
decisive roles in the field (Bazzaz and McConnaughay, 1992).
The net effect of elevated CO 2  on forage quality also is uncer­
tain. Elevated CO 2  usually results in higher C:N ratios in 
plants. This effect is reflected in increased herbivore consump­
tion and decreased herbivore fitness in laboratory experiments 
involving insect populations and individual plants (Lindroth,
1996). It is uncertain whether similar patterns would occur in 
systems involving rangelands and large vertebrate herbivores 
(Diaz, 1995). Any alteration of the standing capacity of grass­
lands will be economically important, given the scale of live­
stock production in Latin American tropical and temperate 
grasslands.
Fire has been a factor in the evolution of grasslands and many 
other types of rangelands (Medina and Silva, 1990; Eskuche, 
1992). Projected substantial increases in the frequency and 
severity of wildfires (Ottichilo et a i, 1991; Torn and Fried,
1992) could lead to vegetation and soil alterations (Ojima et 
al., 1990).
Temperate grasslands and the animal production depending on 
them are vulnerable to drought. Therefore, livestock produc­
tion could be negatively affected by higher temperatures or 
increased évapotranspiration rates. However, experience has 
shown that extreme events, such as large-scale floods or 
drought-erosion cycles, may pose the highest risks (Burgos et 
al., 1991; Suriano et a i, 1992).
Because of their large extent and important capacity to 
sequester carbon, temperate grasslands play an important role 
in the maintenance of the composition of the atmosphere. Sala 
and Paruelo (1997) have estimated the value of maintaining 
native grasslands to be US$200/ha; they stress that, once grass­
lands have been transformed into croplands, the reverse 
process of abandonment of croplands and their slow transfor­
mation into native grasslands sequesters only a modest amount 
of carbon over relatively long periods of time. Fisher et al. 
(1994) have proposed increasing the carbon sequestration 
capacity of grasslands through reduced burning frequency, 
nutritional supplementation of soils, and introduction of deep- 
rooted grasses and legumes, in combination with controlled 
stocking rates.
6.3.1.3. 
Deserts
Extremely arid (<100 mm annual precipitation) deserts in 
Latin America (i.e., the Chihuahuan, Sonoran, Peruvian, 
Atacama, Monte, Patagonian deserts) occupy a large propor­
tion of the region (see Figure 6-4); they have significant 
species richness and a high degree of endemism (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 4.4.2). On the other hand, their contribution to 
the region’s primary productivity and С and N pools is 
extremely low. Because they are driven by discrete events 
(e.g., rainfall) that occur at irregular intervals, deserts are
Latin America
205
described as pulse-driven ecosystems (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 3.3.2); soil instability, dune systems, and shifting 
boundaries are some of their typical features. In some of the 
driest coastal deserts (e.g., in northern Chile and Peru), fog 
banks (camanchaca) are particularly frequent and provide the 
largest, if not the entire, moisture supply in most years (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Figure 3-1 and Section 3.3.4). Harvesting of 
camanchaca— using frames with vertical nylon threads, either 
static or rotating at very low speeds— is a common activity 
among communities along the coast; such harvesting provides 
enough water to maintain some coastal rangelands and wood­
lands, which support seasonal grazing by sheep and goats.
Specific information on the vulnerability of Latin America’s 
extreme deserts is rather poor, and further research is required. 
As with all extreme deserts, however, these systems already 
experience wide fluctuations in rainfall and are adapted to cop­
ing with the consequences of extreme conditions. Initial 
changes associated with climate change are unlikely to create 
conditions significantly outside the present range of variation 
(IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 3.2).
Changes in precipitation projected under a set of climate sce­
narios assem bled for sensitivity studies in the Second 
Assessment Report (SAR) (Greco et al., 1994) (e.g., a 25% 
increase in the present mean of 2  mm/yr rainfall) are unlikely 
to produce major ecosystem changes. Regarding changes in 
temperature, increases projected in the Greco et al. (1994) sce­
narios typically are in the range of 0.5-2.0^C, with greater 
increases in the summer. A  rise of 2^C without an increase in 
precipitation would increase potential évapotranspiration by 
0.2-2 mm per day (IPCC 1996, W G II, Sections 3.3.2, 4.2.1).
Human-induced desertification at the boundary between arid 
and extremely arid areas has the potential to counteract any 
ameliorating effects of climate change on most deserts, unless 
appropriate management actions are taken. Even if wetter con­
ditions were to prevail, their effects may be overridden by pres­
sure from resource exploitation (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
4.4.2). Other arid and semi-arid areas in Latin America also suf­
fer from desertification; in Mexico, for example, water erosion 
alone affects 85% of the territory (Gligo, 1995). Vulnerability 
studies undertaken in Mexico under the USCSP (Gay-Garcia 
and Ruiz Suarez, 1996) show that drought in central Mexico 
could be severe, affecting various states in the area (such as 
Michoacan, where more than 50% of the land surface is highly 
vulnerable to desertification). Similar trends are expected in 
Jalisco, Colima, Nayarit, Queretaro, Hidalgo, and Guanajuato.
6.3.1.4. 
Mountain Ecosystems and Cryosphere
Latin America’s mountain chains strongly influence its climate, 
hydrological cycles, and biodiversity. They are source regions 
for massive rivers (e.g., the tributaries of the Amazonas and 
Orinoco basins) and represent major foci of biological diversi­
fication and endemism (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.1.4). 
Mountain areas are exposed to extreme weather and climate
events, such as unusually high or low temperatures or precipi­
tation. The Agroclimatological Study of the Andean Zone 
(Frère et al., 1978) provides detailed information on the partic­
ular limitations that climate imposes on development in the high 
South American plateaus and associated mountain ranges in the 
central Andes (Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia).
Although the present importance of mountain ecosystems in 
the national market economies varies from country to country, 
Andean and extra-Andean mountain ranges have sustained tra­
ditional subsistence agriculture for centuries to millennia. 
Athough the human population density is very low in the 
northern and southern Andes, the central Andes support the 
largest percentage rural population in the region.
The cryosphere in the Latin American region is represented by 
glaciers in the Andes; Patagonia’s ice fields (between 47°S and 
52°S); and the Darwin ice field in Tierra del Fuego, at about 
54^S. Seasonal snowfall on the high Andes is critical for the 
subsistence of communities in central Chile and large pied­
mont communities in Argentina, where water supply depends 
almost entirely on snowmelt.
At present, GCMs do not provide sufficiently accurate region­
al projections; therefore, scenarios of climate change for Latin 
American mountain areas are highly uncertain. An added 
drawback is the scarcity of continuous and reliable meteoro­
logical and hydrological records in most areas. If climate 
changes as projected in Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) scenarios (Greco et al., 1994), the length of 
time that snowpacks remain will be reduced, altering the tim­
ing and amplitude of runoff from snow/ice and increasing 
evaporation— hence altering ecosystems at lower elevations 
and affecting human communities that depend on this runoff. If 
extreme events increase in frequency or intensity, landslides, 
flash flooding, and fires would become more likely, and soil 
instability would increase. Even in subhumid mountain envi­
ronments, fires in the dry season followed by heavy rainfall 
events— before substantial vegetation recovery has taken 
place— usually lead to almost irreversible landscape modifica­
tion (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.1.3).
Warming in high-mountain regions would lead to the reduction 
or disappearance of significant snow and ice surfaces (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Sections 7.4.1 and 7.4.2). Furthermore, changes 
in atmospheric circulation stemming from global warming may 
modify snowfall rates, with a direct effect on the seasonal 
renewal of water supply and the variability of runoff and 
underground water supplies in piedmont areas (Del Carril et 
al., 1996). Glaciers are melting at accelerated rates in the 
Venezuelan and Peruvian Andes (Schubert, 1992; Hastenrath 
and Ames, 1995), as well as at the southern extreme of the sub­
continent (Aniya et al., 1992; Kadota et a i, 1992; Malagnino 
and Strelin, 1992). Nevertheless, larger glaciers, such as those 
in the Patagonian Andes, should continue to exist into the 22nd 
century. More water would be released from regions with 
extensive glaciers; as a result, some arid regions in their vicin­
ity would benefit from additional runoff. Based on seasonal
206
Latin America
patterns and extreme events in these regions, however, this 
runoff could trigger major erosion, flooding, and sedimentation 
problems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.2.2). Melting of 
Andean glaciers and ice fields in southern Patagonia and Tierra 
del Fuego would increase runoff, as well as the water levels of 
neighboring rivers and lakes on both sides of the Andes.
Expected impacts of climate change on the biological diversi­
ty of mountain ecosystems would include loss of the coolest 
climatic zones toward the peaks of the mountains and shifting 
of remaining vegetation belts upslope, resulting in a net 
decrease in biodiversity. Mountaintops may become more vul­
nerable to genetic and environmental pressure (Bortenschlager, 
1993; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.2.2).
Viable areas for crop production in mountainous regions 
would likely change as a result of clim ate change. 
Elevational shifts in vegetation and altered hydrological pat­
terns may have major implications for the use and conserva­
tion of multiple vegetation belts by traditional Andean peo­
ples. These shifts may lead to competition between alternative 
land uses (e.g., conservation of endangered species versus 
expansion of subsistence agriculture) toward the mountain- 
tops. Given the wide range of microclim ates in Latin 
A m erica’s mountain areas that have been exploited through 
the cultivation of diverse crops, direct negative effects of cli­
mate change on crop yields may not be extremely serious. 
However, continued adaptation to varied climates may be 
possible only if the remarkable diversity of local genotypes 
is conserved. Development planners and decision makers 
should be fully aware that the protection of the wide variety 
of wild and domesticated genotypes of major crops in the 
Andes also will be crucial for the production of new crop 
varieties in the face of changing climatic conditions in other 
areas of the world. In 1960, for example, the discovery of 
two varieties of tomato in Peru provided the industry with 
economic benefits estimated at US$5 million per year (LAC 
CDE, 1992). Decision makers also should be aware that, 
unless appropriate adaptation measures are taken, climate 
change could completely disrupt lifestyles in mountain vil­
lages by altering already marginal food production and the 
availability of water resources.
Shifts in crop and rangeland elevation belts may be dramatic in 
rural, densely populated areas of the central Andes; deep 
socioeconomic changes have been brought about by past cli­
matic pulses (Cardich, 1974; Frère et a l, 1978). Studies of the 
effects of climate change in Ecuador’s central Sierra (Parry, 
1978; Bravo et al., 1988) have shown that crop growth and 
yields are controlled by complex interactions among different 
climatic factors and that specific methods of cultivation may 
permit crop survival in sites where microclimates otherwise 
would be unsuitable. Such specific details cannot be included 
in GCM-based impact assessments— which have suggested 
positive impacts, such as decreasing frost risks in the Mexican 
highlands (Liverman and O ’Brien, 1991), and negative 
impacts, such as decreases in the productivity of upland agri­
culture (Parry et al., 1990).
In many mountain regions, tourist resorts and large urban areas 
close to the mountains have spread into high-risk areas; these 
areas will be increasingly endangered by slope instability and 
flood risk, particularly as a consequence of extreme events 
aggravated by climate change. Such situations already have 
been observed in Andean cities (Bogota, La Paz, Mendoza, 
Quito); cities on the Serra do Mar mountain range (Rio de 
Janeiro, Sao Paulo, Santos) and their outskirts; and Guatemala 
City, in Central America.
Runoff changes resulting from snow/ice melting and from 
changes in winter snowfalls on high-altitude mountains would 
affect important sectors and activities (freshwater supply, agri­
culture, industry, and power generation) in the Andes piedmont 
areas (e.g., Cuyo region in Argentina, Elqui Valley in Chile). In 
view of the economic importance of these activities, adaptation 
measures are likely to be necessary (Fuenzalida et al., 1993; 
Del Carril et a l, 1996; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.2.4).
6.3.2. 
Hydrology, Water Resources, 
and Freshwater Fisheries
Latin America (particularly its tropical region) is rich in fresh­
water systems. Large river basins, lakes, freshwater wetlands, 
and reservoirs distributed throughout the region have facilitat­
ed the development of thousands of human settlements— ^with 
associated agricultural and industrial activities— and the har­
nessing of rivers for energy production. In addition, important 
segments of national and international rivers permit fluvial 
transportation of people and merchandise. The opening of the 
international Paraguay-Parana Rivers Hydroway would expe­
dite the increasing commercial traffic arising from the devel­
oping regional market, Mercosur. Freshwater systems also are 
sources of income from fisheries, aquaculture, and tourism. 
Latin America’s extensive river basins, large numbers of lakes, 
and important freshwater wetlands (i.e., El Pantanal and Ibera) 
host a great number of fish species, amphibians, semiaquatic 
rodents, and reptiles, some of which— like the capybara 
(Hydrochoerus hydrochoeris) and yacaré (a type of Caiman 
latirostris), which are particular to this region— are important 
sources of income for local communities.
Tropical rivers in Latin America host about 1,500 species; in 
addition to their commercial value, these species are the basis 
for the yearly international Alto Parana river “dorado” fishing 
contest, an important tourist event. The wetlands also are 
stopover places for a number of bird species— especially 
waterfowl, which fly back and forth between the United States 
and Canada and Latin America. The longest waterfowl migra­
tion probably is that of the blue-winged teal {Anas discors), 
which nests as far north as 60°N in North America and winters 
south of 30°S, traveling a distance of more than 9,600 km.
Freshwater systems are potentially very sensitive to climate 
change (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.3) and vulnerable to 
interannual fluctuations in climate, such as those associated 
with the ENSO phenomenon. Increased climatic variability is
Latin America
207
expected to have greater ecological effects than changes in 
average conditions. Associated flash floods and droughts 
would reduce the biological diversity and productivity of 
stream ecosystems (IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 10.6) and 
affect living conditions and welfare in flood-prone areas as 
well as in arid and semi-arid regions. Thus, monitoring of asso­
ciated environmental variables is an urgent need.
Most Latin American countries, however, have inadequate 
hydrological and meteorological observation networks. Large, 
uninhabited areas have no surface observation systems, and the 
densities and operational practices of existing networks gener­
ally do not meet the recommended international and regional 
standards. As a result, records of variables that are important 
for the study of freshwater systems are scarce and suffer from 
incomplete areal and temporal coverage, particularly because 
of frequent closings of observation posts in recent decades. 
Under these conditions, water resources monitoring vis-à-vis 
climate change is very indequate. In fact, the 1992 
Supplementary Report to the IPCC First Assessment Report 
(FAR) concluded that, although significant progress has been 
made in hydrological sensitivity analyses in developed coun­
tries, large gaps exist for less-developed countries.
About 35% of the world’s continental waters (freshwater) are 
found in Latin America, but the distribution within and among 
countries is highly variable (see Annex D for data on water 
resources per capita and annual domestic and industrial water 
withdrawals). Many areas (e.g., northern Mexico, northeastern 
Brazil, coastal Peru, northern Chile) have great difficulty meet­
ing their water needs. About two-thirds of Latin America is arid 
or semi-arid, including large portions of Argentina, Bolivia, 
Chile, Peru, northeastern Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia, and cen­
tral and northern Mexico.
Climate change impacts on hydrological cycles are expected to 
be greatest in semi-arid and arid areas; on lakes and streams in 
high evaporative drainages; in basins with small catchments 
and relatively short retention times; in shallow lakes, streams, 
and rivers in which appropriate thermal réfugia are not avail­
able; and on irrigation systems that rely on isolated reservoirs 
or snowmelt from seasonal snowfall (IPCC 1996, W C II, 
Chapters 7 and 10). The implications of climate warming on 
the hydrological cycle and its consequences for precipitation 
distribution, intensity, and timing; surface runoff; and under­
ground water resources will be aggravated in certain areas by 
population growth and unsustainable development of water­
consuming activities. Country studies undertaken to satisfy 
commitments under the UNFCCC indicate the vulnerability of 
Latin American communities that are dependent on water 
resource availability. In this respect, reduced precipitation has 
had serious consequences for hydropower production in 
Central American countries; for example, ENSO events during 
the past decades in Costa Rica led to significant reductions in 
runoff and consequently to a higher demand for thermal ener­
gy production (Campos et a i, 1996) (see Figure 6-5). On the 
other hand, increased precipitation (up to 35% in the province 
of La Pampa) has been observed in the Pampas— the most
important area for grain and livestock production in Argentina 
(Canziani et a l, 1987; Forte-Lay, 1987; Vargas, 1987). The 
benefits from such an increase in precipitation have been off­
set by more frequent extreme precipitation events and higher 
risks of flooding.
Extreme precipitation events could Increase the number of 
reservoirs in the humid tropics that silt up well before their 
design lives have been reached. Poor management of a basin 
(e.g., severe deforestation in drainage areas, especially in the 
case of rivers flowing along deep valleys) would increase ero­
sion and interact with hydrological changes, causing siltation 
and decreasing the potential for hydroelectricity generation 
(Bruijnzeel and Critchley, 1994; Campos et a l, 1996).
Lakes have individualistic and often rapid responses to climate 
changes. Lake Titicaca, for example, experienced a 6.3-m rise 
in water level from 1943 to 1986 (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
10.5.2). This increase exceeds by a factor of 40 the change in 
mean sea level estimated from global warming. Fluctuations in 
lakes with large temporal changes in water level are expected 
to be aggravated by climate change. Changes in mixing 
regimes also are projected as a result of climate change in tem­
perate zones because of increases in winter air temperatures—  
with potentially large effects on biota.
Wetlands are distributed throughout the region but are more 
extensive in the tropics and subtropics. The effects of climate 
change on wetlands remain very uncertain (Gorham, 1991; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Figure 6-1). Human intervention may be 
more critical than climate change in affecting these ecosystems.
Freshwater fisheries and aquaculture generally could benefit 
from climate change, though there could be some significant 
negative effects, depending on the species and on climate 
changes at the local level. Positive factors associated with 
warming and increased precipitation at higher latitudes include 
faster growth and maturation rates, lower winter mortality rates 
from cold or anoxia, and expanded habitats as a result of ice 
retreat. Offsetting negative factors include increased summer 
anoxia, increased demand for food to support higher metabo­
lisms, possible negative changes in lake thermal structures, and 
reduced thermal habitat for cold-water species. Individual 
effects are difficult to integrate. However, warm-water lakes 
generally have higher productivity levels than cold-water lakes; 
because of the latitudinal distribution of projected warming, 
warm-water lakes will be in areas with the least change in tem­
perature. It is reasonable to expect higher overall productivity 
from freshwater systems. Finally, fishery managers heavily 
manipulate freshwater fisheries, and aquaculture is expanding 
in many Latin American countries. If species mixes continue to 
be changed to support angler and market preferences and 
changing habitats, climate-change damages may diminish while 
benefits increase.
Impacts on biota— including commercial and subsistence fish­
eries— are expected to be most pronounced in isolated systems, 
such as high-elevation Andean lakes or lakes in the far south of
208
Latin America
Year
Year
Figure 6-5: Precipitation and maximum temperature anomalies for the Pacific coast of Costa Rica resulting from ENSO 
phenomena and changes in electricity generation types.
Latin America
209
Argentina and Chile, as well as in areas in which species are 
close to their geographical distribution limits. Within large 
drainage systems, flexibility for migratory shifts to compatible 
temperatures will be greater in north-south flowing systems 
(Meisner, 1990; IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 10.6.1.2,16.2.1).
The effects of climate change on freshwater ecology will inter­
act strongly with anthropogenic changes in land use, waste dis­
posal, and water extraction. Regional water resources will 
become increasingly stressed because of higher demands to 
meet the needs of growing populations and economies, as well 
as temperature increases. These anthropogenic effects are 
expected to increase in Latin America, and there is a risk that 
these impacts will extend to tropical streams and wetlands that, 
owing to their remoteness, have so far escaped the impacts of 
human activities (Armentano, 1990; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Sections 6.3 and 10.2.2).
Conflicts may arise among users and regions and among Latin 
American countries that share common river basins. The effects 
of climate change on agricultural demands for water, particular­
ly for irrigation, will depend significantly on changes in agri­
cultural potential, prices of agricultural produce, and water 
costs (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 14), as well as on other con­
sumptive uses. Water availability in two countries of the region 
(Mexico and Peru; see Box 6-3) is expected to decline signifi­
cantly with respect to the present climate. Furthermore, as has 
happened in the past, reductions in or a lack of freshwater avail­
ability, or cases of excess leading to flood conditions, may lead 
to interstate or international conflicts or invasion of neighboring 
territories by “campesinos” in distress.
6.3.3. 
Oceans, Saltwater Fisheries, and Coastal Zones
6.3.3.1. 
Oceans and Saltwater Fisheries
The oceans function as regulators of the Earth’s climate and 
sustain planetary biogeochemical cycles. Natural fluxes of CO 2  
among the atmosphere, oceans, and land biota are much larger 
than anthropogenic perturbations (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section
2.1). The oceans are estimated to have absorbed about 30% of 
CO 2  emissions arising from fossil fuel use and tropical defor­
estation between 1980 and 1989 (Siegenthaler and Sarmiento,
1993), thus slowing the rate of greenhouse warming. The 
oceans also play a major role in the global hydrological cycle. 
Cycling of the oceanic freshwater fraction through advection, 
evaporation, precipitation and— in higher latitudes and eleva­
tions— the solid-ice phase is affected by changes in wind sys­
tems and oceanic current systems, as is the case with the Latin 
American climate (see Section 6.2). A  changing pattern of rain­
fall over the oceans would cause changes in the rainfall pattern 
over land— ^which would, in turn, have a considerable effect on 
the salinity of marginal seas.
Living marine resources include fish, crustaceans and shellfish, 
marine mammals, and seaweed. In 1990, the world’s fish catch 
was 97 million tons (14 Mt from inland sources and 83 Mt 
from marine sources) (FAO, 1992a). Latin America, which is 
located between two large oceans, has a recognized wealth of 
marine biotic resources, sustaining large schools of fish and 
enabling the development of some of the most important salt­
water fisheries in the world. The average annual catch by Latin 
American countries during the period 1985-87 was about 13 
Mt, or about 17% of the world’s catch (WRI, 1992). Although 
these figures do not include catches made by other nations ply­
ing the region’s seas, they provide a clear idea of the econom­
ic importance of the oceans in Latin America. Furthermore, 
krill— a pelagic member of the crustacean suborder 
Euphausiacea— is of great importance in the trophic chain of 
the oceans (as food for various fish, birds, and whales, partic­
ularly blue whales and finback whales). From January to April, 
swarms of krill {Euphausiacea superba) appear in the 
Antarctic Ocean and, because of the predominant sea currents, 
move northward into the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans sur­
rounding South America. They have a large impact on fisheries 
along the eastern and western coasts of the subcontinent. It 
should be stressed that, because of their vast numbers and 
nutritive qualities, krill have been regarded by ecologists as a 
potential food source for humans. During the Southern 
Hemisphere summer, the open waters of the Antarctic Ocean 
may contain as much as 2 0  kg/m^ of these animals.
Box 6-3. Water Availability (mVyr) in Mexico and Peru 
under Present Climatic Conditions in 1990 and 2050 and for Three Scenarios for 2050
The figures in column 2 show only the effect of population growth (no climate change is assumed). Column 3 summa­
rizes the combined impact of population growth and climate change on water availability. Calculations are based on 
IPCC (1992) socioeconomic scenarios and the outputs of three transient GCM runs: GDFL-X2, UKM 0-H3, and M PI-Kl 
(see Tables 1-1 and 1-2 in the Introduction).
Present Climate
Present Climate
Scenario Range
Country
1990
2050
2050
Mexico
4,720
2 , 1 0 0
1,740-2,010
Peru
1,860
880
690-1,020
210
Latin America
Currently, the annual rate of growth in the world marine catch is 
declining (FAO, 1992b) as a consequence of uncontrolled growth 
in fishing activities and overfishing of important stocks in the 
Atlantic Ocean, including the waters off the South American 
coasts. A  combination of human activities (e.g., overfishing; pol­
lution of estuaries and coastal oceans; and the destruction of habi­
tat, especially wetlands and seagrasses) currently exerts a far 
more powerful effect on marine fisheries than declines expected 
from climate change (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.2.2).
The oceans also are climate regulators: The combined effect of 
atmospheric and oceanic circulation defines particular weather 
and climate conditions throughout the region. The effect of sea 
currents is more evident during ENSO events, when resulting 
climatic variabilities have strong socioeconomic implications 
(see Section 6.2.3). The catastrophic effects of storms and 
storm surges are well-known, particularly for their role in exac­
erbating flooding in coastal areas and in erosion and restruc­
turing of coastal formations (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.4).
It is very probable that climate change would have significant 
negative impacts on human uses of the oceans— the most 
important resulting from impacts on biotic resources. It also is 
very likely that increased precipitation, river runoff, and 
atmospheric deposition from land-based activities would lead 
to increased loading of pollutants in coastal waters, with an 
adverse impact on fisheries, coral production, and tourism 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.4).
Global warming may lead to poleward shifts in species ranges 
and migration patterns within the seas along the South 
American coast; this shift could lead to increased survival of 
economically valuable species and increased yields in marine 
fisheries. Such cases have been observed as a result of the large 
and intense 1983 El Nino event (Wooster and Fluharty, 1985), 
which may be considered a test for future climate scenarios. 
However, the impacts of El Nino are not the same for different 
regions of the Pacific Ocean. In fact, in areas where productiv­
ity depends on upwelling (e.g., the Pacific coast of Peru and 
Chile), the El Nino phenomenon leads to a decrease in ocean 
productivity (Jordan Sotelo, 1986; Budyko and Izrael, 1987; 
Lapenis et a i, 1990; IPCC 1996, WG II, Box 16.6).
Under IPCC scenarios, saltwater fisheries production should 
remain about the same— or undergo a significant Increase, if 
management deficiencies are corrected. These conclusions 
depend on the assumption that Interannual and decadal natural 
climate variability and the structure and strength of winds and 
ocean currents will remain about the same. Changes in any of 
these variables are expected to have significant effects on the 
distribution of major fish stocks, although not on overall pro­
duction. Even without major changes in atmospheric and ocean­
ic circulation, local shifts in centers of production and mixes of 
species in marine and fresh waters are expected to occur as 
ecosystems are displaced geographically and change Internally.
Ecosystems and the services that they provide are sensitive to 
the rate and extent of changes in climate. The distribution of
the world’s major biomes, for example, is correlated with mean 
annual temperature and mean annual precipitation. The com­
position, dominances, and geographic distribution of many 
ecosystems will likely shift as Individual species respond to 
environmental change driven by changes in climate: There will 
likely be changes in biological diversity and in the goods and 
services that ecosystems provide. Some ecological systems 
may not reach a new equilibrium for several centuries after the 
climate achieves a new balance.
Changes in the extent and duration of sea ice, combined with 
changes in the characteristics of sea currents, may affect the 
distribution, abundance, and harvesting of krill— an important 
link in the ocean fauna in the southern oceans. If there is a 
rapid retreat of sea ice in Antarctica or if the sea ice is reduced 
in extent, the krill fishery could become more attractive to 
nations involved in krill fishing (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
16.2.2.2). Such a possibility could critically harm fishing activ­
ities in South America.
In tropical latitudes, most migratory organisms are expected to 
be able to tolerate climate warming, but the fate of sedentary 
species will be highly dependent on local climate changes. For 
example, corals are sensitive to changes in temperature; coral 
bleaching occurred during El Nino events in 1983 and 1987 
(Glynn, 1989; Brown and Odgen, 1993), when the ocean tem­
peratures were higher than normal. Therefore, under warmer 
environmental conditions resulting from climate change, the 
expectation is that corals and other sedentary species would be 
affected. Coral mortality is positively correlated with the inten­
sity and length of warming episodes (Glynn, 1989; Glynn and 
Cruz, 1990); recent paleoclimatic investigations of ENSO phe­
nomena show that coral records can be read as a proxy for 
increased sea-surface temperarures (SSTs), potentially over 
several thousand years (Cole et al., 1992; Shen, 1993). 
Researchers recognize, however, that other environmental 
stresses— such as pollution, sedimentation, or nutrient influx—  
also would affect corals and other sedentary species (Maul, 
1993; Milliman, 1993; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.4).
Regarding the impacts of climate change on navigation in the 
southern oceans, there is no clear consensus— despite recent 
high rates of iceberg calving (Doake and Vaughan, 1991; 
Skvarca, 1993, 1994)— on whether the abundance of icebergs 
and their danger to shipping would change with global warm­
ing (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.3).
6.3.3.2. 
Sea-Level Rise
Projections of sea-level rise reported by IPCC Working Group 
I (scenario IS92a) indicate that sea level could rise, on average, 
about 5 mm/yr, within a range of uncertainty of 2-9 mm/yr. An 
important point to bear in mind is that the current best esti­
mates represent a rate of sea-level rise that is about two to five 
times the rate experienced over the past 100 years (1.0-2.5 
mm/yr). Changes in sea level at regional and local levels will 
not necessarily be the same as the global average change
Latin America
211
because vertical land movements affect sea level and there are 
dynamic effects resulting from oceanic circulation, wind and 
pressure patterns, and ocean-water density that cause varia­
tions in the level of the sea surface with respect to the geoid 
(IPCC 1996, W C II, Section 9.4).
Biogeophysical effects of sea-level rise will vary greatly in dif­
ferent coastal zones around the world because coastal land­
forms and ecosystems are dynamic; they respond to and mod­
ify the variety of external and internal processes that affect 
them. For instance, flooding conditions in the Pampas, in the 
province of Buenos Aires, would be exacerbated by any level 
of sea-level rise because the effectiveness of the Salado river as 
the only drainage system for this flatland would be reduced by 
sea-level rise. Some coastal sectors in Central America and on 
the Atlantic coast of South America would be subject to inun­
dation risk. Flat areas— such as the Amazon, Orinoco, and 
Parana river deltas— and the mouths of other rivers, such as the 
Magdalena in Colombia, would be affected by sea-level rise 
(IPCC, 1990). Estuaries like the Rio de la Plata also would suf­
fer increasingly from saltwater intrusion, creating problems in 
freshwater supply. These effects will depend on the amount of 
sea-level rise and the characteristics of atmospheric and ocean­
ic circulation.
Actual land loss resulting from sea-level rise may represent a 
small fraction of national territories, but it may have major 
impacts in those areas where large human settlements, tourist 
resorts, and other activities and infrastructure are located. 
Synthesized results of country case studies are presented in 
Table 6-5, including the estimated impacts of a 1.0-m sea-level 
rise. Consideration of particular cases, such as that of Uruguay, 
shows that although the amount of land lost on the Uruguayan 
coast would be rather small, the capital risk is very important. 
The national tourist industry, which creates more than US$200
million per year in revenues and attracts more than one million 
people each summer, might be seriously affected. Protected 
coastal areas, such as Laguna de Tacarigua in Venezuela, could 
be altered dramatically (Perdomo et ai., 1996). The only areas 
of Argentina that are vulnerable to sea-level rise are the coasts 
of the province of Buenos Aires and the Rio de la Plata estuary 
(Perillo and Picccolo, 1992). The coastal aquifers also would 
be affected by sea-level rise and would suffer from seawater 
intrusion, affecting the supply of freshwater on both margins of 
the Rio de la Plata, including the densely populated Buenos 
Aires metropolitan area.
Most global fish resources depend on near-shore or estuarine 
habitats at some point in their life cycles (IPCC, 1990; 
Chambers, 1991). Fish production would suffer if coastal wet­
lands and other habitats that serve as nurseries were lost as a 
consequence of sea-level rise (Costa et ai., 1994). It also is 
apparent that mangrove communities starve in microtidal, sed­
iment-poor environments— such as around the Caribbean, 
where the lack of strong tidal currents does not permit sedi­
ment distribution (Parkinson et ai., 1994).
Coastal oceans already are under stress from a combination of 
factors, such as Increased population pressure, habitat destruc­
tion, increased land-based pollution, and increased river inputs 
of nutrients and other pollutants (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
9.2.2). Therefore, the effects of global climate change could 
represent a mixed, and probably synergistic, series of impacts 
on an already overstressed context. There also may be syner­
gistic effects between climate change and overfishing. These 
combined stresses would reduce fish quality and stocks in 
Latin American seas, increasing the vulnerability of the fishing 
industry— particularly on regional seas plied by countries out­
side the region. In addition to the aforementioned coastal zone 
vulnerability, sea-level rise and increasing storm activity
Tabie 6-5: Synthesized resuits c f country studies. Resuits are for existing deveiopment and a 1-m sea-ievei rise. Peopie affected capitai vaiue at 
loss, and wetland at loss assume no adaptive measures (Le., no human response), whereas adaptation assumes protection except in areas with 
low population density. All costs have been adjusted to 1990 US$ (adapted from Nicholls, 1995).
Capital Value
Adaptation/
People Affected
at Loss
Land at Loss
Wetland
Protection
# People
%
Milhon
%
%
at Loss
Mfflion
%
Country
(0 0 0 s)
Total
US$
GNP
km2
Total
km2
US$
GNP
Argentina
_
_
>5,0001
>5
3,400
0 . 1
1 , 1 0 0
>1,800
>0 . 0 2
Belize
70
35
—
1,900
8.4
—
Guyana
600
80
4,000
1,115
2,400
1 . 1
500
2 0 0
0.26
Uruguay
132
< 1
1,7001
26
96
0 . 1
23
> 1 , 0 0 0
>0 . 1 2
Venezuela
562
< 1
330
1
5,700
0 . 6
5,600
>1,600
>0.03
Venezuela
1533
0.46
124
0 . 2 2
—
—
—
'Minimum estimates- 
^Minimum estimates-
-capital value at loss does not include ports, 
-number reflects estimated people displaced.
^Including land and buildings.
Note: The two Venezuelan cases are based on different methodologies and refer to different places. 
Source: IPCC 1996, WG II, Table 9-3.
212
Latin America
would have adverse consequences for offshore extraction 
activities, marine transportation, human health, recreation, and 
tourism. An additional impact of sea-level rise on Latin 
American countries, particularly those with low population 
densities, would stem from political and cultural stresses aris­
ing from the relocation of immigrants from other regions (e.g., 
as a result of the inundation of low coastal zones and small 
islands) (Canziani, 1993).
In Central America, impacts associated with sea-level rise would 
have their greatest effects on infrastructure, agriculture, and nat­
ural resources along the coastline, with immediate effects on 
socioeconomic conditions in the isthmus countries. Sea-level 
rise would exacerbate the processes of coastal erosion and salin­
ization of aquifers and increase flooding risks and the impacts of 
severe storms along the coastline (Campos et a l, 1997).
6.3.4. 
Agriculture
Latin America has about 23% of the world’s potential arable 
land, although— in contrast with other regions— it maintains a 
high percentage of natural ecosystems (UNEP, 1992). The total 
cropland (about 134 million ha), excluding pastures, represents 
less than 10% of the total area of the Latin American region (see 
Annex D). About 306 million ha (72.7%) of the agricultural 
drylands in South America (i.e., irrigated lands, rain-fed crop­
lands, and rangelands) suffer from moderate to extreme deteri­
oration (UNEP, 1992), and about 47% of the soils in grazing 
lands have lost their fertility (LAC CDE, 1992). These land 
degradation figures include erosion and soil degradation on hill­
sides and in mountain areas, as well as desertification by over- 
grazing, salinization, and alkalinization of irrigated soils in 
tropical pasture lands. The area of irrigated land has increased 
substantially: Data for the periods 1966-68 and 1986-88 show 
that irrigated land has increased from 8,674,000 ha to
14,040,000 ha (UNEP, 1992). A preliminary calculation by the 
Global Assessment of Soil Degradation (GLASOD, 1990) sug­
gests that approximately 14% of the land area in South America 
is affected by some form of human-induced soil degradation. 
The percentage distribution of this land area, by type and degree 
of soil degradation, is summarized in Table 6 -6 .
Table 6-6: Type and degree o f human-induced soil degradation 
in South America.
Type
Slight
Degree (%)
Moderate 
Severe
Total
Water erosion
14
29
4
47
Nutrient decline
1 2
17
5
34
Wind erosion
9
6
15
Waterlogging
3
3
Salinization
1
Total
39
52
9
1 0 0
Source: GLASOD, 1990; UNEP, 1992.
Historical shifts in land-use patterns are important factors to 
consider in the design of adaptive strategies aimed at main­
taining or increasing production in the face of climate change 
while preventing soil erosion and other undesirable environ­
mental consequences (Viglizzo et al., 1995).
Studies of the dynamics of climate and land use during the past 
century have been performed by Viglizzo et al. (1997), with the 
aim of quantifying the impact of climate on land-use change 
and discussing adaptive land-use strategies for the Argentine 
Pampas. These studies show a high and positive degree of asso­
ciation between rainfall and crop growth in humid zones. This 
relationship declines, however, in the transition from humid to 
semi-arid zones. In these marginal environments, land-use 
change appears to be highly correlated to the crop yields (which 
are a combined function of climate and technology) and less 
correlated to the rainfall pattern (Viglizzo et a l, 1995; Viglizzo 
et a l, 1997).
The contribution of agriculture (10-12% ) to the GDP of Latin 
American countries in the past 40 years has been secondary to 
other human activities (Baethgen, 1994). Agriculture is still a 
key sector in the region’s economy, however, because it occu­
pies an important proportion (30-40% ) of the economically 
active population. Moreover, agriculture has generated the 
largest export income in countries having neither oil nor min­
eral production. Finally, in the smaller and poorer countries of 
the region, agriculture is the basis of subsistence lifestyles, the 
largest manpower user, and the main producing and exporting 
sector (Baethgen, 1994; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.7).
Because agricultural production in lower-latitude and lower- 
income countries is more likely to be negatively affected by 
climate change (IPCC 1996, WG I I , Section 13.8), large Latin 
American communities would be vulnerable to global warm­
ing. Climatic variations that result in shorter rainy seasons 
and/or increased frequency of rainless years would have 
extremely negative consequences for the region. However, 
yield impacts also depend on other factors, such as cultivars 
and specific environmental conditions.
In Mexico, any shift toward warmer, drier conditions could 
bring nutritional and economic disaster because agriculture 
already is stressed by low and variable rainfall. More than one- 
third of the Mexican population works in agriculture— a sector 
whose prosperity is critical to the nation’s debt-burdened econ­
omy. Although only one-fifth of M exico’s cropland is irrigated, 
this area accounts for half of the value of the country’s agri­
cultural production, including many export crops (Liverman 
and O ’Brien, 1991). The principal conclusion of Liverman and 
O ’Brien’s work is that Mexico is likely to be warmer and drier. 
According to each of the models used, potential evaporation is 
likely to increase; in most cases, moisture availability will 
decrease, even where the models project an increase in precip­
itation. Sensitivity analyses of evaporation and moisture- 
deficit calculations indicate that water availability would be 
expected to increase only if the model results produced much 
higher rainfall and relative humidities or significantly less solar
Latin America
213
Box 6-4. Assessment of the Vulnerability of Agricultural Activities in Belize to Climate Change
Under the coordination of the Proyecto Centroamericano de Cambios Climaticos (PCCC) and with the support of the 
USCSP, vulnerability studies were undertaken on the impact of climate change on the agricultural sector in Central 
America. The methodology considered the acquisition and analysis of data; the use of agroclimatological models; and 
the performance of biophysical studies, involving simulations under base and modified climates and the evaluation of 
results (t/ha, crop duration, évapotranspiration). Scenarios selected included a range of temperature changes between 
+1°C and +2°C and precipitation changes ranging from +20 mm to -20 mm, at 10-mm intervals.
Impacts of Climate Change on Maize. Red Kidney Beans, and Rice Production in Belize
The field experiment took place in two places: one rain-fed area, for maize and beans; and one dryland area, for rice. The 
basic data included detailed soil information, maximum and minimum temperatures, daily sunshine hours, and precipita­
tion; the model computed other required variables. The model also included management information (date, amount, 
type, fertilizer applications, depth and spacing of the plant, and planting date).
The conclusions of this assessment may be synthesized as follows: On the whole, simulated changes in crop yields are 
driven by two factors— changes in climate (temperature and precipitation) and COj enrichment. The interactions of these 
factors on baseline crop growth are often complex. However, yield decreases are caused primarily by the increase in tem­
perature, which shortens the duration of crop growth stages. New and fluctuating weather patterns could have a strong 
negative impact on economic activities in agriculture. The majority of Belizean people who are highly dependent on 
farming might well see their livelihoods destroyed by reduced rainfall and increased temperatures as a consequence of 
climate change. Agriculture continues to be a major part of the economy of Belize. Therefore, planning and evaluating 
strategies for adapting to climate change are important.
radiation and wind. Such changes are possible, of course, as the 
modeling of clouds and synoptic conditions improves; at pre­
sent, however, it seems that a moisture decrease is more likely.
American-Caribbean watershed, these crops could be addition­
ally stressed if climate change leads to increasing frequency of 
storms and heavy precipitation (Campos, 1996).
A series of studies in all of the countries of the Central 
American isthmus under the Central America Project on 
Climate Change— ^with the cooperation of the USCSP— esti­
mated the vulnerability of agricultural resources. These studies 
were based on scenarios generated through a set of GCMs, 
including CC C-Jl, U KM 0-H3, GISS-Gl, GFDL-Al, and 
GFDL-K2. The studies focused on specific crops (e.g., maize, 
rice, sorghum, beans)— surprisingly enough, however, not on 
export crops, such as bananas and coffee. A  full summary of 
the results of these studies would be tedious, and they are not 
highly reliable (as indicated in the Executive Summary of the 
report, the aforementioned GCMs, in general, are not quite fit­
ted for this type of specific study). Therefore, Box 6-4 presents 
a case study to provide information about the nature of the 
results achieved in this first exercise to fulfill the UNFCCC’s 
national reporting requirement.
Regarding the relationship between agriculture and water 
resources, the studies mentioned above are limited to the 
known impacts of water deficits on agricultural activities. 
However, information about some cash crops in countries of 
the Central American isthmus indicates that, under current cli­
mate conditions, the productivity of banana crops is historical­
ly affected, particularly in areas already subject to flooding, by 
environmental conditions associated with tropical storms. This 
preexisting condition would indicate that, along the Central
In climatic studies involving projections of GCMs and crop 
models of wheat, maize, barley, soybeans, potatoes, and grapes 
in Latin America (Table 6-7), crop yields decreased in the face 
of climate change— even when direct effects of elevated CO 2  
were taken into account— in 9 of 12 studies. Experience avail­
able with regard to the development and spread of pests and 
diseases permits the inference that climate change would trig­
ger many of them and extend their geographical ranges 
(Austin-Bourke, 1955; Omar, 1980; Pedgley, 1980).
One area that is highly vulnerable to climate change is the 
Brazilian northeast, which is strongly influenced by the ENSO 
phenomenon. Years with no rain are frequent; these periods are 
characterized by the occurrence of famine and large-scale 
migrations to metropolitan areas (Magalhaes and Glantz, 1992; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.7; IPCC 1996, WG III, Section 
6.5.9). In the global agricultural model of Rosenzweig et al.
(1993), yield impacts of climate change in Brazil are among the 
most severe for all regions. Under 2 xC 0 2  scenarios, yields are 
projected to fall by 17-53%, depending on whether direct 
effects of CO 2  are considered. Similar reductions also are pro­
jected for Uruguay and Mexico (Conde et a l, 1996; IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 13.6.6).
Agroindustries that depend on primary production will be vul­
nerable to climate changes (see Section 6.3.7). Capital-intensive
214
Latin America
Tabie 6-7: Agricuiturai yieids estimated from different GCMs under current conditions o f technology and management (see 
IPCC 1996, WG 11, Chapter 13 for complete reference information).
Source
Scenario
G eographic Scope
Crop(s)
Yield Im pact (% )
Baethgen (1992, 1994)
CISS
CFDL
u m o i
Uruguay
Barley
Wheat
-40 to -30 
-30
Baethgen and Magrin (1994)
U K M 0‘
Argentina
Uruguay
Wheat
-10 to -5
Siqueira et al. (1994) 
Siqucira (1992)
CISS
CFDL
UKMQi
Brazil
Wheat
Maize
Soybean
-50 to -15 
-25 to -2 
-10 to +40
Liverman etal. (1991, 1994)
CISS
CFDL
UKMO'
Mexico
Maize
-61 to - 6
Downing (1992)
+3°C 
-25% precip.
Norte Chico, Chile
Wheat
Maize
Potatoes
Crapes
decrease
increase
increase
decrease
Sala and Paruelo (1992. 1994)
CISS
CFDL
UKMQi
Argentina
Maize
-36 to -17
“These studies also considered yield sensitivity to +2°C and +4°C, and -20% and +20% changes in precipitation.
livestock operations, which depend on grassland production, 
also are likely to be negatively affected (Parry et al., 1988; 
Baker ct al., 1993; Klinedinst et al., 1993). Impacts may be 
minor, however, for relatively intense livestock production sys­
tems (e.g.. confined beef, dairy, poultry, swine) (IPCC 1996, 
WC II, Section 13.5).
Climate change also will affect the distribution and degree of 
infestation of Insects indirectly through climatic effects on 
hosts, predators, competitors, and insect pathogens. There is 
some evidence that the risk of crop loss will increase as a result 
of poleward expansion of insect distribution ranges. Insect 
species characterized by high reproduction rates generally are 
favored (Porter et al., 1991). Human alteration of conditions 
that affect host plant survival— irrigation, for example— also 
affects phytophagous (leaf-eating) insect populations.
The occurrence of plant fungal and bacterial pests depends on 
temperature, rainfall, humidity, radiation, and dew. Climatic 
conditions affect the survival, growth, and spread of pathogens, 
as well as the resistance of hosts. Friederich (1994) summa­
rizes the observed relationship between climatic conditions and 
important plant diseases. In Latin America, warm, humid con­
ditions lead to earlier and stronger outbreaks of late potato 
blight (Phytophthora infestons), as in Chile in the early 1950s 
(Austin-Bourke, 1955; Lopmeier, 1990; Parry et al., 1990).
Warmer temperatures would likely shift the occurrence of 
these diseases into presently cooler regions (Treharne, 1989).
As a result of these trends, farmers with limited financial 
resources and farming systems with few adaptive technologi­
cal opportunities to limit or reverse the impacts of climate 
change may suffer significant disruption and financial loss 
from relatively small changes in crop yield and productivity 
(Parry et al., 1988; Downing, 1992). Conflict is likely to arise 
between alternative uses of land areas under changing climate 
conditions— for example, competition for the same land may 
arise between expanding agriculture and other land uses (e.g., 
conservation, afforestation, population relocation).
Disparities in agricultural impact between developed and devel­
oping countries can be affected by international markets—  
which can moderate or reinforce local and national exchanges 
(Reilly et al., 1994; Rosenzweig and Parry, 1994). Countries 
whose economies rely strongly on agricultural production 
would face major imbalances between production costs and 
international prices. According to Rosenzweig and Parry
(1994), modeled yield changes in low-latitude countries are pri­
marily negative, even though direct effects of CO 2  on plants, 
moderate levels of adaptation at the farm level, and production 
and price responses of the world food system were considered. 
Hconomic limitations, social conflicts (e.g., farmers’ reluctance
Latin America
215
to abandon traditional practices), and environmental problems 
(e.g., salinization resulting from increased irrigation, which is 
not considered in the models) are likely to severely limit the 
capacity for adaptation and hinder the expansion of agricultural 
frontiers. Estimated net economic impacts of climate change on 
crops are negative for several Latin American countries ana­
lyzed by Reilly et al. (1994), even when modest levels of adap­
tation are considered. The only exception would be Argentina 
because, as a major exporter of grain, it should benefit from 
high world prices even if yields fall.
6.3.5. 
H um an H ealth
Health has been defined by the World Health Organization 
(WHO) as “a state of complete physical, mental, and social 
well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” 
Different aspects of this well-being are related to weather and 
climate; primarily, however, it depends fully on the communi­
ty’s welfare. Because Latin America has a large tropical and 
subtropical environment, its inhabitants already are exposed to 
a number of infectious diseases and pests typical of these 
zones. The most vulnerable communities are those living in 
poverty, those with a high prevalence of undernutrition, and 
those with chronic exposure to infectious disease agents (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 18.1.3). As a result, an increasing num­
ber of people who are living under these critical conditions in 
Latin America would be affected if, as expected, global warm­
ing aggravates disease and pest-transmission processes. Table 
6 - 8  provides data on the estimated number of undernourished 
people in Latin America.
The major potential health impacts have been classified as 
“direct” and “indirect” impacts, according to whether they 
occur predominantly via the direct effect of exacerbated values 
of one or more climate variables (e.g., temperature, precipita­
tion, solar radiation) on the human organism or are mediated by 
climate-induced changes in complex biogeochemical processes 
or climatic influences on other environmental health hazards.
6.3.5.1. 
Direct Impacts o f Climate Change
The direct impacts of climate change depend mainly on expo­
sure to heat or cold waves or extreme weather events. The for­
mer involves an alteration of heat- and cold-related illnesses 
and deaths. Although Latin America was not included in the 
five regions identified by IPCC (1990) for analysis of regional 
climate change simulation, Kattemberg et al. (IPCC 1996, 
WGI, Chapter 6 ) made generalized tentative assessments con­
cerning extreme events. Studies in temperate and subtropical 
countries have shown increases in daily death rates associated 
with extreme outdoor temperatures. Mortality increases much 
more steeply with rising temperatures than with falling tem­
peratures (Kalkstein, 1993). The lowest mortality occurs with­
in a range of intermediate comfortable temperatures and 
humidities (between 21°C and 26°C and below 60% relative 
humidity, in these countries).
Table 6-8: Estimated number o f undernourished people in 
Latin America for 1969-71, 1979-81, and 1983-85.
Period
Population
(millions)
Share of 
Population (%)
1969-71
51
18
1979-81
52
15
1983-85
55
14
Source: UN World Food Council (WFC), Thirteenth Ministerial 
Session, Beijing, China, 1987.
No references to studies and research on direct health impacts 
from projected warming in Latin America are included in the 
SAR; however, extrapolation of investigations performed in 
cities in the United States, China, The Netherlands, and the 
Middle East indicates that morbidity and mortality also could 
increase in this region as a result of the expected increase in the 
number of days with high daily temperatures (i.e., the persis­
tence of days with higher-than-normal maximum and mini­
mum temperatures) (Haines et al., 1993; Kalkstein, 1993; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 18.2.1). The impacts would be 
exacerbated by high humidity rates, intense solar radiation, and 
weak winds. All of these factors affect the physiological mech­
anisms of human adaptation.
High temperatures and air pollutants, especially particulates, 
act synergistically to influence human mortality. This effect is 
occurring in large cities, such as Mexico City and Santiago, 
Chile, where such conditions enhance the formation of sec­
ondary pollutants (e.g., ozone) (Escudero, 1990; Katsouyanni 
et al., 1993; Canziani, 1994).
Global warming could increase the number and severity of 
extreme weather events such as storms, floods, and droughts, 
and related landslides and wildfires. Such events tend to 
increase death and pathology rates— directly through injuries 
or indirectly through infectious diseases, as well as through 
social problems that stem from the dislocation of people, 
adverse psychological effects, and other stresses (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 18.2.2). A  number of slums and shanty towns 
located on hills, as well as human settlements located in flood- 
prone areas, are subject to periodic natural disasters that 
adversely affect human health (Section 6.3.6). These over­
crowded and poorly-serviced peri-urban settlements also pro­
vide a potential breeding ground for disease hosts (e.g., rats, 
mice, cockroaches, flies) and disease organisms, increasing the 
population’s vulnerability. Communities surrounded by these 
poverty belts also become more vulnerable to periodic disease 
outbreaks (WHO Commission on Human Health and 
Environment, 1992).
Climate variability also may aggravate diseases resulting 
from water contamination. Increases in Salmonella infections
216
Latin America
following a flood in Bolivia resulted from the El Nino event 
of 1983 (Telleria, 1986).
6.3.5.2. 
Indirect Impacts o f Climate Change
Infectious and parasitic diseases are important causes of mor­
bidity and mortality in Latin America, and the main cause of 
death in children (РАНО, 1994). Some infectious diseases are 
more common in tropical and subtropical areas than in temper­
ate or cold areas. Therefore, global warming would tend to 
extend their area of influence or increase the importance of 
outbreaks. Some of these diseases are food- or water-related 
infections; after they are introduced into a region, they show a 
tendency to spread over the whole region. Viral, bacterial, and 
protozoan agents of diarrhea can survive in water— especially 
in warmer waters— for long periods of time and thus spread at 
increased rates in rainfall periods, enhancing their transmissi- 
bility among people. An example is cholera, which was intro­
duced into Peru in 1993. It produced an outbreak that spread to 
most of the South American subcontinent, including places as 
far as Buenos Aires (РАНО, 1994). Cholera’s relation to the 
ENSO phenomenon was proposed by Colwell (1996). This dis­
ease and other diarrheas and dysenteries are associated with the 
distribution and quality of surface water, as well as with flood­
ing and water shortages. These conditions alter the population 
dynamics of organisms, impede personal hygiene, and impair 
local sewage systems. Increases in coastal algal blooming also 
may amplify the proliferation and transmission of Vibrio 
cholerae.
Algal blooming also may be associated with biotoxin contam­
ination of fish and shellfish (Epstein et al., 1993). With ocean 
warming, temperature-sensitive toxins produced by phyto­
plankton could cause contamination of seafood more often, 
resulting in an increased frequency of poisoning. Thus, cli­
mate-induced changes in the production of aquatic pathogens 
and biotoxins may jeopardize seafood safety.
Other infectious diseases not included in the SAR have now 
achieved importance and could reach critical levels in South 
America. Some viruses have had unexpected outbreaks— such 
as arenaviruses in Argentina and Bolivia (РАНО, 1996) and 
hantaviruses in the south of Argentina; their relationship to cli­
mate change is not yet well understood. Fungi such as 
Paracoccidiodes brasiliensis— ^which require high humidity 
and generally are associated with rainfall regim es of 
500-2,000 mm/yr and average temperatures of 14—30°C— are 
found in some areas of South America (e.g., Brazil, Venezuela, 
and northern Argentina) (Restrepo et a i, 1972), where this 
mycosis is becoming endemic. It may spread if climate change 
provides adequate conditions to start the epidemiological 
chain. In this connection, increasing surface traffic that has 
resulted from commercial activity stemming from the new 
regional common market— Mercosur— may call for the devel­
opment of appropriate sanitary barriers (e.g., disinfection of 
vehicles and their contents to block transport of harmful fungi) 
at borders.
A special category of infectious diseases— a group known as 
vector-borne diseases (VBDs)— already affect a large number 
of people in Latin America. These diseases could expand their 
geographic and elevational ranges because conditions would 
be more favorable for viruses and other living agents, reser­
voirs, and vectors as a result of global warming. The most 
important VBDs in Latin America are listed below, with indi­
cations of some of their main vectors:
Malaria: Vectors are several species of the mosquito 
genus Anopheles. M alaria’s incidence is affected by 
temperature, surface water, and humidity (Carcavallo 
et a l, 1995).
Dengue: Vectors are Aedes and other mosquito 
species. Dengue is expanding in Latin America 
(Koopman et al., 1991; Herrera-Basto et al., 1992). 
High temperatures, particularly in winter (Halstead, 
1990), promote the spread of this disease.
Yellow fever: Several species are vectors. Yellow 
fever has an urban epidemiology similar to dengue, 
but it also has cycles that develop in the wild 
(Martinez et al., 1967).
Chagas’ disease or American trypanosomiasis: Vector 
is Triatominae bug of the order Hemiptera. About 100 
million people in Latin America are at risk, and 18 
million people are infected (Hack, 1955; Carcavallo 
and Martinez, 1972; WHO, 1995).
• 
Schistosomiasis: The vector is the w ater snail 
(Grosse, 1993).
Onchocersiasis or river blindness: Vectors are several 
species of Simulildae от “blackflies” (WHO, 1985). 
Leishmaniasis: Vectors are several species of 
Phlebotominae or “sandfly” (Bradley, 1993).
• 
Limphatic filariasis: Vectors are several mosquito 
species (РАНО, 1994).
Other viruses also affect human beings in this region. One pro­
duces Venezuelan equine encephalitis; it is transmitted by sev­
eral mosquito species, and cases have been reported in 
Colombia and Venezuela (WHO, 1996). Its relation to climate 
change has not yet been demonstrated; however, warming 
could affect the geographical distribution and dispersion, as 
well as some behaviors and patterns, of vertebrate reservoirs 
(mammals and birds) and vectors.
Infective agents and vectors are sensitive to environmental 
changes, especially those conditioned by temperatures and 
humidity. Vectors also are sensitive to wind, soil moisture, sur­
face water, and changes in vegetation and forest distribution 
(Bradley, 1993). Temperatures and humidity influence the geo­
graphical and elevational dispersion of vectors (Burgos et a i, 
1994; Curto de Casas et al., 1994), as well as their population 
dynamics and behavior. Precipitation is an important factor for 
vectors with aquatic stages, such as mosquitoes and blackflies, 
because breeding places are increased and maintained by rain­
fall. Winds may contribute to the dispersion of some flying 
insects, such as mosquitoes, blackflies, and sandflies (Ando et 
al., 1996).
Latin America
217
Several years ago, VBDs were very critical in many areas of 
the region; during recent years, however, some of them have 
been almost entirely controlled or reduced in their endemicity. 
Malaria is prevalent in tropical and subtropical areas of the 
American continent, from south of Mexico to northern 
Argentina. Several species of mosquitoes of genus Anopheles 
are vectors of Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum, 
which are causal agents of the disease that cannot survive at 
temperatures below 14—18°C, depending on the Plasmodium 
species (see Figure 6 -6 ). The normal type of epidemiological 
curve of malaria in northeast Argentina has shown a peak in 
new cases every 1-4 years, particularly during the months of 
March to May or June, 
Anopheles darlingi has been pre­
sent. During the period 1991-93, however, there were cases 
every month of the year, and Anopheles darlingi were captured
or reported sighted during the whole period. Thus, more stud­
ies are needed to assess the influence of new dams on the 
behavior of vector species and the epidemiology of the disease, 
as well as the influence of increases in minimum temperatures 
(Carcavallo et al., 1995). Martens et al. (1995) have predicted 
that temperature increases of several degrees Celsius at higher 
elevations— which could occur in Andean ranges under pro­
jected climate change— may produce seasonal epidemic trans­
mission in areas currently free of paludism.
In the recent past, irrigation schemes and agricultural changes 
in Central America, which have been associated with an 
increased resistance of vectors to insecticides, have brought an 
increase in new cases of malaria. The most severe outbreaks, 
however, are registered in Brazil (particularly in the Amazon
Hi! A. darlinqi 
A. aquasalis 
A. freeborni 
A. quadrimaculatus
A. albimanus 
A. nuneztovari 
A. pseudopunctipennis
Figure 6 -6 : Distribution of principal malaria vectors in Latin America (WHO, 1996).
218
Latin America
basin)— where more than 50% of malaria cases in the 
Americas are reported, including 6,000-10,000 deaths per 
year, as a consequence of new settlements and mining activi­
ties developed in unhealthy locations of the Amazon forest 
(WHO, 1993).
Dengue and yellow fever involve similar viruses and epidemi­
ology; they are transmitted by the same urban vector, the Aedes 
aegypti mosquito. Although this species is recognized as the 
main vector, another (Aedes albopictus) has invaded the 
American continent, colonizing the United States and Brazil. 
In Latin America, dengue currently is more active than yellow 
fever. Dengue is a severe, influenza-like virus; it sometimes 
takes the form of hémorragie fever, and it is lethal about 15% 
of the time. Studies performed in Mexico have shown that an 
increase of 3-4°C in mean temperatures may double the trans­
mission rate (Koopman et a i, 1991), and transmission is com­
mon in areas with temperatures below 20°C (Halstead, 1990). 
Cases of dengue at 1,700 m above sea level— an elevation 
never before attained— ^were found in the state of Guerrero 
(Herrera-Basto et al., 1992) and have since been found at even 
higher elevations in other regions. Apparently, the thermal 
limit of Aedes aegypti could be a midwinter temperature of 
10°C (Shope, 1991). Junin et al. (1995) reported re-infestation 
of the city of Buenos Aires by this species— after 30 years of 
formally declared erradication. Temperature is considered to be 
a predictor of dengue outbreaks. Martens et al. (1997) have 
identified epidemiological areas too cold for the transmission 
of the virus, including those at the current temperature of 
Mexico City.
Chagas’ disease, or American trypanosomiasis, is a parasitic 
disease produced by the flagellate Trypanosoma cruzi. This 
infection is one of the most important public health scourges in 
Latin America. It affects the human digestive and nervous sys­
tems and especially the heart. Its vectors span latitudes from 
42°N to 46°S, with an elevational dispersion ranging from sea 
level to about 4,100 m above sea level (Bejarano, 1967). 
However, the disease’s endemic area is much smaller; it is con­
fined mainly to tropical and subtropical regions, especially in 
poverty-stricken areas. Triatoma infestans— the most impor­
tant vector of Tripanosoma cruzi— is found in Argentina, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay, Peru, and Uruguay. Most of 
the population of this vector lives within or around human 
habitats, particularly in poor rural dwellings that have mud 
walls and roofs made of tree branches, straw, or palm leaves. 
Colonies also exist outdoors in places with cold winters and 
warm summers (Carcavallo and Martinez, 1972). Climate 
change may influence the population dynamics of vectors 
(Hack, 1955; Burgos et al., 1994), as well as the number of 
blood-feedings and, therefore, the possibilities of infective 
indirect contacts (Catala, 1991; Catala et al., 1992).
The region also is affected by some rickettsial diseases, which 
are transmitted by ticks and have wild mammals as reservoirs. 
They could become increasingly important under climate 
change because they facilitate the coexistence of every link on 
the epidemiological chain.
Another indirect effect of climate change on human health 
would be the threat to food production (Rosenzweig et al., 
1993; Reilly et al., 1994)— particularly among populations 
already living in marginal conditions, which have minimal 
capacity for adaptive changes (Leemans, 1992). For example, 
climate variability and change could increase the adverse 
effects of plant and animal pests and diseases on the quality 
and quantity of food production. The ENSO phenomenon has 
had similar effects on anchovy and sardine fishing and the 
related fishmeal industry, both of which are important for 
human and livestock diets.
6.3.6. 
H um an Settlements
In Latin America, the region with the largest urbanization rate, 
a large spectrum of urban settlements has been established at 
different elevations (from sea level to mountain ranges exceed­
ing 3,000 m). These locations have a wide variety of geo­
graphic and topographic characteristics (see Figure 6-1). 
Because weather and climate events already are affecting envi­
ronmental conditions, climate change may be expected to have 
a host of direct and indirect effects on human settlements, even 
where urban migration is not a factor. However, such migra­
tion is significant in some countries of the region. In fact, large 
groups of people migrate internally and regionally from rural, 
drought-prone areas (Ezcurra, 1990) or poverty stricken com­
munities (Canziani, 1996) to modern, well-developed cities. 
Unemployment rates indicate that this tendency will continue, 
particularly because cities and urban/industrial/commercial 
nuclei in Latin America offer better opportunities for employ­
ment than do those in other regions. Such cities may become 
the kernels of Latin American megalopolises, attracting people 
from less-developed neighboring countries as well as from 
within. Population displacements are likely to have serious 
socioeconomic and cultural as well as health implications (also 
see Section 6.3.5). More than one poverty belt, such as those in 
the metropolitan areas of some Latin American cities, may 
arise around a single city.
Latin American cities already suffer from the impacts of sea- 
level rise, adverse weather, and extreme climate conditions 
(e.g., floods, flash floods, windstorms, landslides, and cold and 
heat outbreaks). They also suffer from indirect effects through 
impacts on other sectors, such as water supply, energy distribu­
tion, transportation, agriculture, and sanitation services. 
Thresholds beyond which impacts escalate quickly are unique 
to local situations and tend to depend on the degree of pre­
paredness for adaptive response (e.g., warning and alert systems 
and procedures; traffic rerouting procedures; flexible welfare 
systems) (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 12.2).
Global warming can be expected to further affect the availabil­
ity of water resources and biomass (for charcoal and fuel pro­
duction), both of which are important energy sources in many 
Latin American countries. Water and biomass resources already 
are under stress in many of these areas as a result of rising 
demand, which will increase because of the urban migration
Latin America
219
trend. The increasing urban population in the region also has 
generated difficulties in providing water of adequate quality to 
urban residents. In most cities, piped drinking water and sewage 
services are not available to everyone. In the Buenos Aires met­
ropolitan area, about 55% of the population obtains its drinking 
water from underground sources— some of which have serious 
levels of contamination from industrial waste dumps, agro­
chemicals, and, particularly, precarious sewage systems con­
sisting of pozos negros (excreta and fecal holes) (Gonzalez, 
1990; De Filippi et ai., 1994).
In mountain regions, hundreds of thousands of people live in 
precarious settlements on potentially unstable hillsides that are 
especially vulnerable to climatic impacts. In recent decades, 
hundreds of people have been killed or seriously injured and 
thousands left homeless by landslides in Rio de Janeiro, 
Guatemala City, Medellin, Mendoza, Mexico City, Santos, and 
Sao Paulo (W HO Commission on Human Health and 
Environment, 1992; Aguilar and Sanchez, 1993), as well as 
Caracas (Hardoy et ai., 1992). Shantytowns {barriadas, fave- 
ias, or viiias miseria) surrounding large cities in the region 
sometimes are established in the drainage valleys of rivers and 
streams— where flooding frequency already is increasing as a 
result of climatic variability (Canziani, 1996) and might be 
exacerbated as a result of global warming. Flooding and land­
slides have adverse effects on the welfare and health conditions 
of poorer communities.
Nonclimatic effects may be more important than climate 
change. Local environmental and socioeconomic situations are 
changing rapidly; the living standards of millions of people in 
Latin America are lower now than they were in the early 1970s. 
Poverty has become an increasingly urban phenomenon in 
recent decades. Migrants tend to live in informal, peri-urban 
settlements with serious infrastructure problems— ranging 
from unhealthy environments and water supplies and lack of 
sewage systems to difficult access to energy, transportation, 
communications, and even decent shelter. Some informal set­
tlements around large Latin American cities, especially around 
the capital cities, are homes for many hundreds of thousands of 
people, leading to impacts on human health (see Section 6.3.5).
6.3.7. 
Industry, Energy, and Transportation
Weather and climate play decisive roles in many artificial sys­
tems; climate variability and climate change would affect these 
activities, with beneficial and adverse impacts. These effects 
include direct impacts on the planning, implementation, and 
operation of industry; energy production; and transportation, as 
well as on the economics of corresponding systems. Climate 
affects markets for goods and services and the natural 
resources on which such economic activity depends (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 11.5). Activities directly sensitive to cli­
mate include construction, fossil fuel production (including 
offshore drilling), water-dependent manufacturing, hydropow­
er generation, space heating and air conditioning, tourism, and 
recreation. Industry located in coastal zones and flood-prone
areas also would likely be affected by climatic variations. 
Other activities that depend on climate-sensitive resources 
include agro-industries (food/drink, forestry-related activities, 
and textiles), production of energy from biomass fuels (see 
Section 6.3.4), and activities associated with the production of 
other renewable energy.
Agro-industry is of relatively greater significance in Latin 
American countries where activities associated with agriculture 
constitute the bulk of the economy, than elsewhere. Agro-indus­
tries that depend on the production and transportation of prod­
ucts such as grain, sugar, and rubber are vulnerable to changes 
in precipitation patterns and the frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events. Globalization undoubtedly will better 
define the future activities of some Latin American countries. 
The strategy of “dumping” industrialized products— ^which has 
been carried out by more developed countries and some of the 
Far East’s emerging economies— suggests that Latin American 
countries might well reorient their development toward agro- 
industry to take advantage of their natural resources and secure 
a place in international markets. The inception of regional mar­
kets would facilitate a combination of agricultural and agro­
industrial production capacities within the region, assuming that 
available natural resources are evaluated, through monitoring 
and research, in the light of projected climate change. This route 
could lead to the region’s sustainable development and the 
improvement of its productive capacity to satisfy the demands 
of an increasing global population.
An important domain within these agro-industries is the devel­
opment of energy sources through biomass exploitation (see 
Section 6.3.4). In Brazil, the Fuel-Alcohol Program— one of 
the largest commercial biomass-to-energy programs— has 
facilitated the substitution of ethanol for gasoline in passenger 
cars 
and 
light 
vehicles 
(Goldenberg 
et ai., 
1993). 
Technological advances, including more efficient production 
and processing of sugarcane, are responsible for the availabili­
ty and low price of ethanol. The transition to ethanol fuel has 
reduced Brazil’s dependence on foreign oil (thus lowering its 
import-export ratio), created significant employment opportu­
nities, and greatly improved urban air quality. In addition, 
because sugarcane-derived ethanol is a renewable resource 
(cane is replanted at the same time that it is harvested), the 
combustion of ethanol adds virtually no net CO 2  to the atmos­
phere— and thus helps reduce the threat of global warming. 
Hydropower production would be influenced by changes in 
precipitation; whether these changes would be beneficial 
depends heavily on the relationship between seasonal patterns 
of precipitation and electricity demand. In Costa Rica and the 
Cuyo region in Argentina, for example, energy production 
already is affected by climate variability. Whereas hydroelec­
tricity contributed 14.5% of the world’s generated electricity in 
1986, hydroelectric sources satisfied 53% of Latin America’s 
electrical energy demands in that year (of the rest, 34% was 
supplied through thermal generation and the remaining 13% 
was shared between nuclear and geothermal generation). Of 
the world’s technically exploitable hydroelectric potential, 
Latin America (excluding Mexico) accounts for 3,500 TWh per
220
Latin America
year. The region has an installed capacity of 86.69 GW, which 
in 1988 generated 367 TWh (Moreira and Poole, 1992); thus, 
about 20% of the potentially exploitable hydroenergy was 
used. Under these circumstances, the region would be in a 
position to increase its hydropower production to satisfy 
increasing demands during the coming century, even if climate 
change results in some reductions in power generation. (This 
hypothesis assumes the operation of new dams and stations, 
starting in the early 1990s— particularly in South America—  
and the installation of interconnected transmission networks 
among countries in the region.)
As noted in Section 6.5, sensitivity studies and monitoring of 
water resources are needed to prevent serious adverse climate 
change impacts. However, other factors affecting hydropower 
generation may have more weight than those resulting from cli­
mate change— such as social and environmental impacts, which 
may be the principal constraints and sources of uncertainty 
affecting hydropower development. Large storage reservoirs 
exacerbate many problems, particularly in tropical regions. The 
impacts of hydropower development can be categorized as 
direct— such as those that arise while constructing the dam, fill­
ing the reservoir, and changing the river flow— or indirect, such 
as effects on the health and well-being of the community and 
local ecosystems. However, many of these problems can be 
reduced by improved planning, in coordination with national or 
regional communities and their participatory social movements 
[e.g., non-govemmental organizations (NGOs)].
Although the energy, industry, and transportation sectors are of 
great economic importance and clearly are sensitive to climate 
change, the capacity for autonomous adaptation is relatively 
high, as long as climate change takes place gradually. The life­
times of most assets are relatively short compared with pro­
jected time scales for climate change (Campos et al., 1996).
6.4. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential 
Impacts and Adaptation Options
To fulfill the commitments arising from the UNFCCC, 
Conference of the Parties (COP) members in Latin America 
have initiated the preparation of national GHG inventories, with 
the assistance of the USCSP and the GEF. These inventories 
generally are associated with the performance of vulnerability 
studies aimed at defining the potential impacts of climate 
change on natural and human systems on which the economies 
and the well-being of the respective national communities rely. 
The resulting information is designed to assist Latin American 
governments in better understanding the urgency of developing 
more and better information on impacts and adaptation strate­
gies; as a tool for minimizing negative impacts and taking the 
best possible advantage of new opportunities under changing 
climatic conditions; and for achieving sustainable development 
practices. Vulnerability and impact assessments and adaptation 
options should consider interactions and feedbacks among dif­
ferent sectors. Some of the outputs of country studies are reports 
of vulnerability to climate change in selected areas in different
Box 6-5. Integrated Analysis and Possible 
Adaptation Options: Land Use and Climate Change
Considering that, under changing climate conditions, 
land use is a key factor for agricultural production as 
well as for environmental preservation, effective land- 
use regulations would be necessary to reduce the vul­
nerability of this type of human system to climate 
change. In this connection, an analysis of trade-offs 
among productivity, stability, and sustainability in low- 
output agricultural systems was undertaken by Viglizzo 
and Roberto (1997). It showed that the productivity of 
herbage and grain (primary products) clearly exceeds 
that of milk and beef (secondary products). However, 
the secondary activities involve processes that are less 
affected by environmental disturbances, whereas prima­
ry product processes are more extractive in terms of soil 
nutrients and, consequently, less sustainable in the long 
term. This analysis suggests that different combinations 
of cropping and cattle activities on agricultural lands 
may need to be regulated to prevent undesirable effects 
in regions with different vulnerability to climate 
change, like Argentina’s Pampas.
countries. Examples are the case study for Belize (reported in 
Box 6-4); other case studies cited in the bibliography, such as 
country studies in Venezuela (Perdomo et al., 1996) and Peru 
(Teves et al., 1996); and information included in the prelimi­
nary report of the National GHG Inventory in Mexico (Gay- 
Garcia et a l, 1996). Another interesting approach, which may 
be considered as an integrated analysis study with implications 
for some adaptation options, is summarized in Box 6-5.
Climate change under 2xC02 scenarios is projected to pro­
duce economic losses of 0.9-3.1%  of Latin Am erica’s GDP. 
These large losses— compared with global (1.1-1.8% ) and 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) (1.3-1.9% ) loss projections— are explained by the 
fact that primary production accounts for a higher share of 
GDP in Latin America (Fankhauser and Toi, 1997); therefore, 
a large output is directly exposed to climatic influences (IPCC 
1996, WG III, Section 6.5.9). It should be noted, however, that 
many assumptions underlie these best guesses— and that large 
uncertainties remain.
Many of the impacts of climate change may not be directly 
revealed in the marketplace. Nonmarket impacts on biodiversi­
ty, subsistence agriculture, traditional land-use patterns, and so 
forth may be no less important than market impacts (IPCC 
1996, WG III, Table 6-1 and Section 6.2.1). In addition, the 
impact of climate change on Latin American ecosystems needs 
to be considered in parallel with impacts caused by unsustain­
able land-management practices and the effects of increasing 
population. In most cases, it is impossible to separate the 
effects of these impacts, and land-use impacts and population 
growth are expected to result in more severe changes than are
Latin America
221
changes in climate. Desertification, for example, is a wide­
spread problem in Latin America arising from human abuse of 
the land and adverse climate conditions. Even if wetter condi­
tions were to prevail, human-induced desertification could 
increase the vulnerability of land to desertification and escalate 
the desertification process (see Section 6.3.1.3).
In most managed ecosystems and human systems, adaptation 
to climate change in Latin America is not as much an issue of 
scientific knowledge or technical feasibility as of socioeco­
nomic and cultural factors and political decisions. It is 
extremely difficult at this stage to analyze the viability of dif­
ferent options because their cost/benefit ratio depends on eco­
logical and social conditions and the integration of local and 
external markets. In virtually all cases, political measures (e.g., 
credits, subsidies); educational programs; and interactive com­
munication among experts, policymakers, and stakeholders are 
needed— especially within local communities— to implement 
viable adaptation options. Table 6-9 presents a very prelimi­
nary summary of possible adaptation options for different sec­
tors within Latin America.
6.5. 
Monitoring and Research Needs
Latin America has the expertise needed for the study of cli­
mate, climate variability, and climate change— as is apparent 
from the relatively ample bibliography of research by local 
authors. This expertise is important because recent observa­
tions have shown that the Southern Hemisphere, where the 
largest portion of the region lies, is warming more than the 
Northern Hemisphere. The very heavily-populated land mass­
es in the north produce more atmospheric pollution (in partic­
ular, sulfate aerosols and particulates), which dampens the 
heating capacity of solar radiation on the Earth. This situation 
is quite different from  that in the oceanic Southern 
Hemisphere, where the distribution and density of air pollu­
tants are remarkably lower. As a result, the absorption and 
reflection of incoming solar radiation do not counteract the 
background release of GHGs to the extent that they do in the 
north.
Other characteristics further differentiate the two hem i­
spheres. 
The 
geographical features 
of the 
Southern 
Hemisphere (and Latin America in particular) consist mainly 
of a solid continent on the South Pole (the Antarctic); a very 
large oceanic mass with a well-known thermal moderating 
capacity; a subcontinent (South America) extending to the 
southernmost latitudes; and a vertebral mountain chain (the 
Cordillerra de los Andes) running from north to south over the 
entire subcontinent— all sandwiched between the two largest 
oceans of the world. Another important difference affecting 
the middle atmosphere over this region is the seasonal and 
regional formation of the Antarctic ozone hole. This remark­
able stratospheric ozone depletion, combined with dynamic 
changes in middle atmospheric circulation, has the double 
impact of creating a window for infrared radiation— which 
globally compensates about 25% of GHG warming effects—
and increasing the amount of ultraviolet-B (UV-B) radiation 
that reaches the ground, with direct effects on the region’s ter­
restrial and marine ecosystems.
Thus, there is room not only for improving mathematical mod­
els to encompass hemispheric peculiarities (as is being done in 
Australasia) but also for developing appropriate regional cli­
mate models that should have the capacity, inter alia, to pro­
vide appropriate climate scenarios for running hydrological 
models for the region’s river basins.
This analysis once again underscores the fact that the region 
suffers from insufficiently dense and reliable observation net­
works and that other basic information— ^biological, economic, 
and social— necessary to build up complete and coherent 
regional scenarios is missing. Last but not least, appropriate 
coordination with the Australasian countries, as well as with 
the United States and Canada, is becoming more and more crit­
ical because of common factors affecting climate variability 
(e.g., the ENSO phenomenon) and climate change over these 
regions.
In summary, the situation in Latin America calls for specific 
research 
initiatives; 
com prehensive 
ecological 
and 
socioeconomic databases; appropriate data validation tech­
niques; proxy data capture, particularly regarding the neigh­
boring Antarctic continent (which began keeping regional 
records only after the 1958 geophysical year); and appropri­
ate training of personnel, particularly regarding integrated 
assessments and development of appropriate adaptation 
option methodologies. More fundamental research on ecosys­
tem functioning, hydrographic systems, and interactions 
between land use and technological approaches by different 
communities is indispensable for the region to thoroughly 
undertake integrated assessments of potential impacts of cli­
mate change and develop appropriate adaptation and mitiga­
tion alternatives. Therefore, combined actions with countries 
in neighboring regions, such as those already implemented 
through joint activities with the USCSP, and the organization 
of activities within the Valdivia Group— which associates 
Latin Am erican countries in the tem perate Southern 
Hemisphere with activities of common interest in Australia, 
New Zealand, and South Africa— are in order. The participa­
tion of grassroots organizations and NGOs also is essential 
for achieving sustainable development in the region vis-à-vis 
climate change.
Acknowledgments
We wish to acknowledge the valuable comments and kind 
cooperation of S. Basconcelo (Argentina), J.L. Buizer (USA), 
R. Basher (New Zealand), Rodolfo Dirzo (México), V. Falczuk 
(Argentina), D. Gray (World Bank), R. Neilson (USA), N. 
Pérez Harguindeguy (Argentina), A.B. Pittock (Australia), R. 
Street (Canada), R. Toi (The Netherlands), F.S. Vendramini 
(Argentina), and the entire staff of the IPCC WG II Technical 
Support Unit.
222
Latin America
Table 6-9: Summary o f adaptation options in response to climate change in Latin America, based primarily on the LPCC Technical Paper on 
Technologies, Policies, and Measures for Mitigating Climate Change (IPCC, 1996b).
Sector
Adaptation Option
Other Benefits
Difficulties to be Considered
Forests
Reduction of social pressure driving land 
conversion
Soil and biodiversity conservation, 
watershed benefits
National and international socioeconomic 
conflict
Large tree plantations on Mglily degraded 
areas; short-term rotation plantations for 
local fuel needs
Proper site and species selection for soil 
conservation and watershed benefits
Costs vary between countries 
(US$4-31/tQ
Assisted migration
Biodiversity conservation
High costs, uncertain success
Low-impact harvest practices
Soil and biodiversity conservation, 
watershed benefits
Rangelands
Preservation of an extensive spatial scale 
in management units
Preservation of traditional organization 
patterns of rural communities, soil and 
biodiversity conservation
Possible socioeconomic conflicts
Active selection of plant species and 
control of animal stocking rates
Increased productivity, biodiversity, soil 
conservation
Land tenure and market problems, 
cultural difficulties
Increase of the area devoted to capital- 
intensive improved pastures
Alleviation of pressure on larger areas of 
rangeland
High costs
Agroforestry, particularly involving 
legume tree species
Increased productivity, biodiversity, and 
soil conservation
Mountains
Conservation of traditional cultivation 
practices and genotypes
Conservation of local biodiversity and 
world’s genetic resources; promotion 
of indigenous knowledge
Market problems
Adjustment of infrastmcture (dams, 
pipelines, erosion protection, etc.)
High costs
Agriculture
Expansion of agricultural land area
Competition with other uses, high 
environmental impacts in forest areas, 
threatening for subsistence lifestyles
Changes in agricultirral practices (sowing 
dates, tillage, irrigation, fertilization, crop 
varieties, species)
Reduced soil erosion, increased yields in 
some cases
Market problems, including marketing 
difficulties in adopting new practices, and 
environmental impacts in case of irriga­
tion and fertilization
Freshwater
Systems
Assisted dispersal of ecologically and/or 
econontically important species to 
isolated locations
High costs
Restoration of rivers and stream channels 
to more natural moфhologies; large-scale 
hydrological engineering in floodplains
High costs, conflicting interests among 
stakeholders, ecological and cultural 
impacts
Latin America 
Table 6-9 continued
223
Sector
Adaptation Option
Other Benefits
Difficulties to be Considered
Freshwater
Systems
(cont.)
Augmentation of riparian vegetation to 
reduce negative effects of warming; 
decreased loading of nutrients to reduce 
eutrophication processes (which are 
beUeved to be exacerbated by increasing 
water temperature)
Hydw-
power
Constraction of new hydropower plants
Level supply and demand curve
Very high costs, increased need for inter­
national loans, potentially high ecological 
and sociological impacts
Reduced consumption; improved use effi­
ciency; improved electricity transmission
Lower energy costs
Raise reservoir capacity
Use of secondary water for other purposes 
(leisure activities)
Coastal 
Zones and 
Saltwater
Stmctural protection measures (dikes, 
seawalls, breakwaters, beach groins) in 
heavily populated areas
Very high costs
Retreat
Subject to land availability inland, socio­
cultural conflict and high environmental 
impact likely
Design and implementation of national and 
international fishery-management pohdes 
that recognize shifting species ranges, 
accessibility, and abundances and balance 
species conservation with local needs
Possible internal and intennational interests
Expansion of aquaculture to increase and 
stabilize seafood supphes, help stabilize 
employment, and carefully augment wild 
stocks
Human
Population
Introduction of protective technologies 
(e.g., insulated buhdings, air-conditioning, 
strengthened sea defenses, disaster 
warning systems); education efforts 
aimed at high-risk groups
High costs
Environmental management of 
ecosystems (e.g., freshwater resources, 
wetlands, and agricultural areas sensitive 
to invasion by vectors)
High costs, poorly understood 
consequences for other components of 
ecosystems
Improved primary health care for 
vulnerable populations, and pubUc health 
survefflance and control programs 
(especially for infectious diseases)
Table 6-9 continued
224
Latin America
Sector
Adaptation Option
Other Benefits
Difficulties to be Considered
Human
Settlements
Deœntralization of basic infrastracture to 
mitigate immigration into dries
High costs, conflict of interests, cultural 
problems
Better designed urban infrastructure 
(buildings, recreation areas, water 
delivery systems, etc.)
High costs
Improved treatment of sewage and 
industrial residues; fines to heavy polluters
Industty
Diversification of agroindustrial production
Sodoeconomic, marketing, and cultural 
problems
Alternative sources of energy
Reduction of air pollution in some cases
Cost-benefit ratios have to be evaluated 
case by case
“Adaptation to the impact of climate change on open oceans is limited by the nature of these changes, and their scale.
References
Aceituno, P., 1987: A s p e c t o s  
t r i - d i m e n s i o n a l e s  d e l  f u n c i o n a m i e n t o  d e  l a  
O s c i l a c i o n  
d e l  S u r  e n  e l  s e c t o r  s u d a m e r i c a n o . Anales del Segundo 
Congreso Interam ericano de M eteorologla, Novem ber 30-D ecem ber 4, 
1987, Centro A rgentino de M eteorôloges, Buenos Aires, Argentina, pp. 
5.1.1-5.1.6.
Aguilar, A.G. and M .L. Sanchez, 1993; Vulnerabilidad y riesgo en la ciudad 
de M exico. C i u d a d e s , 17, 31-39.
Alcam o, J. (ed.), 1994; I M A G E  2 :  I n t e g r a t e d  M o d e l  o f  G l o b a l  C h a n g e .  
H u w er A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 318 pp.
Ando, М ., R.U. Carcavallo, P R . Epstein, 1996: Climate Change and Human 
Health [M cM ichael, A.M ., A. Haines, R. Sloof, and S. Kovats (eds.)]. 
W HO, Geneva, Switzerland, 297 pp.
Aniya, М., R. Naruse, M. Shizukuishi, P. Skvarca, and G. Casassa, 1992: 
M onitoring recent glacier variations in the southern Patagonia Icefield, 
utilizing rem ote sensing data. I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A r c h i v e s  o f  P h o t o g r a m m e t r y  
a n d  R e m o t e  S e n s i n g , 29(B7), 87-94.
Arm entano, TV ., 1990: Soils and ecology; tropical wetlands. In; W e t l a n d s :  a  
T h r e a t e n e d  L a n d s c a p e  [W illiams, M. (ed.)]. The Alden Press, Ltd., 
Oxford, United Kingdom, pp. 115-144.
Austin-Bourke, P.M., 1955: T h e  F o r e c a s t i n g  f r o m  W e a t h e r  D a t a  o f  P o t a t o  
B l i g h t  a n d  O t h e r  P l a n t  D i s e a s e s . W M O TN 42, Technical Report, W M O, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
B aethgen, W.E., 1994: Im pact of climate change on barley in Uruguay: yield 
changes and analysis of N itrogen m anagem ent systms. In; I m p l i c a t i o n s  
o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  f o r  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A g r i c u l t u r e , [Rosenzweig, С and A. 
Iglesias (eds.)], U.S. Environm ental Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, 
pp. 1-15.
Baker, B.B., J.D. Hanson, R.M. Bourdon and J.B. Eckert, 1993: The potential 
effects of climate change on ecosystem s processes and cattle production 
on U.S. rangelands. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e ,  2 3 , pp. 27-47.
B akun, A. 1993; The California Current, Benguela Current, and Southwestern 
A tlantic Shelf ecosystem s: a com parative approach to identifying factors 
regulating biom ass yields. In: L a r g e  
M
a r i n e  
E c o s y s t e m s :  
S t r e s s .  
M i t i g a t i o n  a n d  S u s t a i n a b i l i t y  [Sherman, K., L.M. Alexander, and B.D. 
Gold (eds.)]. AAAS Press, W ashington, DC, pp. 199-221.
Batjes, N.H. and W.G. Sombroek, 1997: Possibilities for carbon sequestration 
in tropical and subtropical soils. G l o b a l  C h a n g e  B i o l o g y , 3, pp. 161-173.
Bazzaz, RA ., and K.D.M . M cConnaughay, 1992: Plant interactions in elevat­
ed CO 2 environments. A u s t r a l i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  B o t a n y , 40, pp. 547-563.
Bejarano, J.F.R., 1967: Lucha contra las enferm edades transm isibles por 
artropodos. Servicios especificos y servicios générales de salud. 
S e g u n d a s  J o r n .  E n t o m o e p .  A r g e n t i n a s ,  3 , 471-507.
Bierregaard, J.R., T.E. Lovejoy, V. Kapos, A.A. dos Santos, and R.W. 
Hutchings, 1992: The biological dynam ics o f tropical rainforest frag­
ments. B i o s c ie n c e , 42, 859-865.
Boer, G.J., 1993; Climate change and the regulation o f the surface moisture 
and energy budgets. C l i m .  D y n . , 8 , 225-239.
Boer, G.J., N.A. M cFarlane, and M. Lazare, 1992: G reenhouse gas-induced 
climate change sim ulated w ith the CCC second-generation general cir­
culation model. J .  C l i m a t e ,  5 , 1045-1077.
Bortenschlager, S., 1993: Das hochst gelegene M oor der O stalpen “M oor am 
Rofenberg” 2760 m Festschrift Zoller, Diss. Bot. 196, pp. 329-334.
Bradley, D.J., 1993: Human tropical diseases in a changing environm ent. In: 
E n v i r o n m e n t  C h a n g e  a n d  H u m a n  H e a l t h .  С Ш А  F o u n d a t i o n  S y m p o s i u m .  
СШ А Foundation, London, U nited Kingdom, pp. 146-162.
Bravo, A., e t  a l . , 1988:The effects of clim atic variations on agriculture in the 
Central Sierra of Ecuador. In: T h e  I m p a c t  o f  C l i m a t e  V a r i a t i o n s  o n  
A g r i c u l t u r e  I m p a c t ,  V o l  2 .  A s s e s s m e n t  i n  S e m i - a r i d  R e g i o n s  [Parry, M.L, 
T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijn (eds.)]. fCluwer A cadem ic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 3 8 1 ^ 9 3 .
Breues-Vargas, A., and V.R Savorido Trejos, 1994: Changes in General 
Circulation and their influence on precipitation trends in Central 
A m erica. C o s t a  R i c a  A m b i o , 87-90.
Brinkman, R. and W.G. Sombroek, 1996; T h e  E f f e c t s  o f  G l o b a l  C h a n g e  
C o n d i t i o n s  i n  R e l a t i o n s  t o  P l a n t  G r o w t h  a n d  F o o d  P r o d u c t i o n . In: F. 
Bazzaz and W.G. Sombroek (eds), Global Climatic Change and Agriculmral 
Production: Direct and Indirect Effects o f Changing Hydrological, Soil, and 
Plant Physiological Processes. John Wiley, Chichester, UK.
Brown, B.E. and J.C. Odgen, 1993: Coral bleaching. S c i e n t i f i c  A m e r i c a n , 268, 
44-50.
Bruijnzeel, L.A. and W.R.S. Critchley, 1994: E n v i r o n m e n t a l  I m p a c t s  
o f  
L o g g i n g  M o i s t  T r o p i c a l  F o r e s t s . IHP Hum id Tropics Program m e, Series 
7, UNESCO.
Budyko, M.L and Y.U.A. Izrael (eds.), 1987: Anthropogenic clim ate change. 
L e n i n g r a d  H y d r o m t e o i z d a t , 378 pp. (in Russian)
Burgos, J.J., S.L Curto de Casas, R.U. Carcavallo, and I. G alindez Giron, 
1994: Global climate change influence in the distribution of som e patho­
genic complexes (malaria and Chagas’ disease). E n t o m o l .  V e c t. 1, 69-78.
Burgos, J.J., J. Fuenzalida, and C.B. M olion, 1991; Climate change predic­
tions for South America. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e , 18, 223-229.
Latin America
225
Cam pos, М., A. Sanchez, and D. Espinoza, 1996: A d a p t a t i o n  o f  H y d r o p o w e r  
G e n e r a t i o n  i n  C o s t a  R i c a  a n d  P a n a m a  
t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e . Central 
American Project on Climate Change, Springer-Verlag.
Cam pos, М ., С. Herm iosilla, J. Luna, M. M arin, J. M edrano, G. M edina, M. 
Vives, J. Diaz, A. Gutierrez, and M. Dieguez, 1997: G l o b a l  W a r m i n g  a n d  
t h e  I m p a c t s  o f  S e a  L e v e l  R i s e  f o r  C e n t r a l  A m e r i c a :  a n  E s t i m a t i o n  o f  
V u l n e r a b i l i t y . W orkshop organized by U.S. EPA, Chinese Taipei, USCSP, 
G overnm ent of The N etherlands, and NOA A , February 24-2 8 , 
1997,Taipei, Taiwan.
Cam pos, М ., 1996: E s t i m a c i ô n  d e  l a  V u l n e r a b l l i d a d  d e  l o s  R e c u r s o s  H i d r i c o s ,  
M a r i n o s - C o s t e r o s  y  A g r i c o l a s  e n  C e n t r o a m e r r i c a ,  
a n t e  u n  P o t e n c i a l  
C a m b i o  C l i m â t i c o ,  U SCSP/Proyecto Centroam ericano sobre Cambio 
Climâtico (in press).
Canziani, O.F., 1993: Cam bio globales: posibles efectos socioeconom icos en 
la Argentina. In: E l e m e n t o s  d e  P o K t i c a  A m b i e n t a l . Honorable Câm ara de 
Diputados de la Provincia de Buenos Aires, pp. 779-789.
C anziani, O.F., 1994: L a  P r o b l e m â t i c a  A m b i e n t a l  U r b a n a .  S e m i n b a r i o  s o b r e  
G e s t i o n  M
u n i c i p a l  d e  R e s i d u o s  
U r b a n o s . UNDP/IEIM A, La Plata, 
Argentina, pp. 1 1 ^ 9 .
C anziani, O.F., 1996: 
U r b a n i z a t i o n  
a n d  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  P r o b l e m  
( w i t h  
E m p h a s i s  i n  M e r c o s u r  C o u n t r i e s ) . Sem inar on European Community, 
M ercosur and Environm ent, February 1996, B russels, B elgium , 
Environm ental European Bureau, Brussels, Belgium.
C anziani, O.F., R.M. Quintela, J.A. Forte-Lay, and A. Troha, 1987: E s t u d i o  d e  
G r a n d e s  T o r m e n t a s  e n  l a  P a m p a  D e p r i m i d a ,  e n  l a  P r o v i n c i a  d e  B u e n o s  
A i r e s  y  s u  I n c i d e n c i a  e n  e l  B a l a n c e  H i d r o l ô g i c o .  Proceedings of the 
Symposium on Hydrology of Large Plains, 1983, Olavarria, Argentina, 
UNESCO, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Carcavallo, R.U., S.I. Curto de Casas, and J.J. Burgos, 1995: Blood-feeding 
Diptera: epidem iological significance and relation to climate change. I: 
General aspects, genera A n o p h e l e s  and A e d e s . Experim ental and field 
data. E n t o m o l .  V e c t. 2, 35-60.
Carcavallo, R.U. and A. M artinez, 1972: Life cycles of some species of 
T r i a t o m a  (Hem ipt. Reduviidae). C a n a d i a n  E n t o m o l o g y , 104, 699-704.
C ardich, A., 1974: Los yacim ientos de la etapa agricola de Lauricocha, Perii, 
y los lim ites superiores del cultivo. R e l a c i o n e s  d e  l a  S o c i e d a d  A r g e n t i n a  
d e  A n t r o p o l o g t a , 8 , 27-48.
C astaneda, M .E. and V. Barros, 1996: S o b r e  l a s  c a u s e a s  d e  l a s  t e n d e n c i a s  d e  
p r e c i p i t a c i ô n  e n  e l  C o n o  S u r  d e  A m e r i c a  d e l  S u r  a l  e s t e  d e  l o s  A n d e s .  
Report 26-1996, Center for Ocean-Atm osphere Studies.
C atala, S.S., 1991: The biting rate of T r i a t o m a  i n f e s t a n s  in Argentina. M e d .  
V e t. E n t o m o l . , 5, 325-333.
C atala, S.S., D.E. Gorla, and M .A. Basombrio, 1992: Vectorial transmission 
of T r y p a n o s o m a  c r u z i an experim ental field study w ith susceptible and 
inmunized hosts. A m e r i c a n  J .  T r o p .  M e d .  H y g . , 47, 20-26.
Caviedes, C.N., 1973: Secas and El Nino, two sim ultaneous clim atic hazards 
in South A m erica. P r o c .  A s s o c .  A m e r .  G e o g r ,  5 , 44-49.
C erri, C.C., M. Bem oux, and B.J. Feigl, 1995: D e f o r e s t a t i o n  a n d  U s e  o f  S o i l  
a s  
P a s t u r e :  
C l i m
a t i c  
I m p a c t s . Interdisciplinary R esearch on the 
Conservation and Sustainable Use of the Am azonian Rainforest and its 
Information Requirem ents, Brasilia, Brazil, Novem ber 20-22, 1995, 
[Lieberei, R., C. Reisdorff, and A.D. M achado, (eds.)] M CT-CNPQ, pp. 
177-186.
C erri, C.C., M. Bem oux, B. Volkoff, and J.L  M oraes, 1996: Dinam ica do car- 
bono nos solos da Am azonia. In: О  s o l o  n o s  g r a n d e s  d o m i n i o s  m o r f o -  
c l i m d t i c o s  d o  B r a s i l  e  d e s e n v o l v i m e n t o  s u s t e n t a d o  [Alvarez, V.H., L.E. 
Fontes, and M.P.F. Fontes (eds.)]. Visosa, pp. 61-69.
Cerveny, R.S., B.R. Skeeter, and K.F. Dewey, 1987: A  prelim inary investiga­
tion of a relationship betw een South American snow cover and the 
Southern Oscillation. M o n .  W e a . R e v . , 115, 620-623.
C ham bers, J.R., 1991: Coastal degradation and fish population losses. In: 
S t e m m i n g  t h e  T i d e s  o f  C o a s t a l  F i s h  H a b i t a t  L o s s  [Stroud, R.H. (ed.)]. 
Proceedings of the M arine Recreational Fisheries Sym posium  National 
Coalition for M arine Conservation, Savannah, GA, USA, pp. 45-51.
Cole, J.E, G.T. Shen, and M. M oore, 1992: Coral m onitors of El Nino- 
Southern Oscillation dynamics aspects across equatorial Pacific. In: E l  
N i n o :  H i s t o r i c a l  a n d  P a l e o c l i m a t i c  A s p e c t s  o f  t h e  S o u t h e r n  O s c i l l a t i o n .  
Cam bridge University Press, New York, NY, USA, and London, United 
Kingdom, pp. 349-375.
Colwell, R.R., 1996: Global clim ate and infectious disease: the cholera para­
digm. S c i e n c e , 274, 2025-2031.
C onde, X., D. Liverman, M. Flores, and T.C. Ferrere, 1996: V u l n e r a b i l i d a d  d e l  
c u l t i v o  d e  m a i z  d e  t e m p o r a l  e n  M é x i c o  a n t e  e l  C a m b i o  C l i m â t i c o . Taller 
de Vulnerabilidad, 1996, M ontevideo, Uruguay.
C osta, M .J., J.L. Costa, P.R. Alm eida and C.A. Assis, 1994: Do eel grass beds 
and salt marsh borders act as preferential nurseries and spawning grounds 
for fish? An exam ple of the M ira estuary in Portugal. E c o l o g i c a l  
E n g i n e e r i n g , 3, pp. 187-195.
C u rto  de C asas, S.I., R.U. Carcavallo, C.A. M ena Segura, and I. Galindez 
Giron, 1994: Bioclim atic factors of T r i a t o m i n a e  distribution. Useful 
techniques for studies on clim ate change. E n t o m o l .  V e c t. 1, 51-68.
da R ocha, H.R., 1996: CO 2 flux over the Brazilian tropical rain forest and 
Cerrado vegetation. A  review of recent measurements, and modeling 
data. In: G r e e n h o u s e  G a s  E m i s s i o n s  U n d e r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s  P o i n t  
o f  V i e w  [Pinguelli, R.L. and M .A. dos Santos (eds.)]. COPPE, Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 68-75.
De Filippi e t  a l . , 1994: Los residuos sôlidos urbanos en ciudades pequefias y 
medianas. Sem inario de Gestion M unicipal de los Residuos Urbanos. La 
Plata, Provincia de Buenos Aires, Instituto de Estudios e Investigaciones 
sobre el M edio A m biente, lEIM A, Buenos Aires, pp. 51-62.
Del C arril, A., M. Doyle, V. Barros, and M .N. Nunez, 1996: S o b r e  e l  M i n i m o  
e n  l a  D e s c a r g a  d e  l o s  R i o s  C u y a n o s ,  a  P r i n c i p i o s  d e  l a  D é c a d a  d e l  7 0 . 
USCSP W orkshop on Vulnerability Studies in Latin America, February 
1996, M ontevideo, Uruguay.
D EN R-A D B, 1990: M a s t e r  P l a n  f o r  F o r e s t r y  D e v e l o p m e n t . Department of 
Environm ent and Natural Resources and the Asian Developm ent Bank, 
M anila, Philippines, 523 pp.
Diaz, S., 1995: Elevated CO 2 responsiveness, interactions at the community 
level and plant functional types. J .  B i o g e o g r . 22, 289-295.
Di Pace, M.J. and S.A. M azzuchelli, 1993: Desarrollo sustentable en la 
A rgentina. Im plicaciones régionales. In: 
E l e m e n t o s  
d e  
P o l U i c a  
A m b i e n t a l [Goin, F. and R. Goni (eds.)]. H onorable Cam ara de 
Diputados, Buenos Aires, pp. 869-890.
Dixon, R.K., S. Brown, R.A. Houghton, A.M . Solomon, M .C. Trexler, and J. 
W isneiwski, 1994: Carbon pools and flux of global forest ecosystems. 
S c i e n c e , 263, 185-190.
D oake, C.S.M. and D.G. Vaughan, 1991: Rapid disintegration o f the Wordie ice 
shelf in response to atmospheric warming. N a t u r e , 35(6316), pp. 328-330.
D oberitz, R., 1969: Cross spectrum and filter analysis of monthly rainfall and 
wind data in the Tropical Atlantic region. B o n n e r  M e t e r o l .  A b h a n d l . , 11, 
1-43.
D ow ning, T.E., 1992: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  V u l n e r a s b l e  p l a c e s :  G l o b a l  F o o d  
S e c u r i t y  a n d  c o u n t r y  s t u d i e s  i n  Z i m b a w e ,  K e n y a ,  S e n e g a l  a n d  C h i l e .  
Research Report 1, Environmental Change Unit, University of Oxford, 
U nited Kingdom, 54 pp.
E asterling, W.E., 1990: Climate trends and prospects. In: N a t u r a l  R e s o u r c e s  
f o r  t h e  2 1 s t  C e n t u r y  [Sampson, R.N. and D. Hair (eds.)]. Island Press, 
W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 32-55.
E pstein, PR ., T.E. Ford, and R.R. Colwell, 1993: M arine ecosystem s. L a n c e t ,  
342, 1216-1219.
E scudero, J., 1990: 
C o n t r o l  A m b i e n t a l  
e n  
G r a n d e s  
C i u d a d e s :  
C a s o  
d e  
S a n t i a g o  d e  C h i l e . Seminario Latinoamericano sobre M edio Ambiente y 
Desarrollo, Instituto de Estudios e Investigaciones sobre el Medio 
A m biente, October 1990, Bariloche, Argentina, lEM A, Buenos Aires, 
A rgentina, pp. 229-236.
E skuche, U., 1992: Sinopsis cenosistem atica prelim inar de los pajonales 
m esofilos sem inaturales del nordeste de la Argentina, incluyendo 
pajonales pam peanos y puntanos. P h y t o c c e n o l o g i a , 21, 287-312.
E zcu rra, E., 1990: The basin of M exico. In: T h e  E a r t h  a s  T r a n s f o r m e d  b y  
H u m a n  A c t i o n :  G l o b a l  a n d  R e g i o n a l  C h a n g e s  i n  t h e  B i o s p h e r e  o v e r  t h e  
P a s t  3 0 0  Y e a r s  [Turner, B.L, e t  a l  (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
New York, NY, USA, pp. 577-588.
F an k h au ser, S. and R.S. J. Toi, 1997: The Social Costs o f Climate Change: 
The IPCC Second Assessm ent Report and Beyond. M i t i g a t i o n  
a n d  
A d a p t a t i o n  S t r a t e g i e s  f o r  G l o b a l  C h a n g e , 1, pp. 385-403.
FAO, 1982: C o n s e r v a t i o n  a n d  D e v e l o p m e n t  o f  T r o p i c a l  F o r e s t  R e s o u r c e s .  
FAO Forest Paper 37, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, Rome, Italy, p. 122.
226
Latin America
FAO. 1992a, Yearbook o f Fishery Statistics. Catches and Landings 1990, 70, 
Departm ent of Fisheries, UN, Rome, Italy.
FAO. 1992b, Review  o f the Status o f Worid Fish Stocks, Department of 
Fisheries, UN, Rome, Italy.
FAO, 1993: Forest Resource Assessm ent 1990: Tropicai Countries. FAO 
Forest Paper 112, Food and Agriculture Organization at the United 
Nations, Rome, Italy, pp. 59.
Fisher, M.J., I.M. Rao, M .A. Ayerza, C.E. Lascano, J.I. Sanz, R.J. Thomas, 
and R.R. Vera, 1994: Carbon storage by introduced deep-rooted grasses 
in the South A m erican savannas. Nature, 266, pp. 236-248.
F orte-L ay, J.A, 1987: Evoiucion de tas Caracteristicas Hidrometeoroiôgicas 
de ta Lianura Pam peana Argentina. Sem inario Intem acional Hidrologîa 
de Grandes Llanuras. UNESCO Program a H idrolôgico Intem acional, 
Argentina. UNESCO, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Frère, M ., J.O. Rijks and J. Rea, 1978: Agrociim atotogicai Study o f the 
A ndean Zone. Inter-institutional Project FAO/UNESCO and W MO, 
W M O TN  161, Geneva, Switzerland, 298 pp.
Friedcrich, S., 1994: W irkung veraderter Ю1та115сЬег factorem  auf pflanzen- 
schaedlinge. In: Ktim averaenderungen und Landwirtschaft, Part II 
Landbauforsc, [Brunnert, H. and U. Dammgen (eds.)] Vlkenrode, 148, 
pp. 17-26.
Fuenzalida, P.H., B. Rosenbliith, and R. Sanguineti, 1993: Temperature 
Variations in Chiie and A ustrai South Am erica D uring the Present 
Century and its Retation With Rainfaii. The Quaternary of Chile 
International W orkshop, Novem ber 1-9, 1993, University of Chile.
Gallopin, G., M. W inograd, and Y. Gomez, 1991: Am biente у  D esarroiio en 
Am érica Latina y  et Caribe: Probtemas, O portunidades y  Prioridades. 
GASE, Bariloche, Argentina.
G ash, J.H.C. and W.J. Shuttleworth, 1991: Tropical deforestation: albedo and 
the surface-energy balance. Ciimatic Change, 19, 123-133.
Gay-Garci'a, C., L.G. Ruiz Suarez, 1996: UNEP Prelim inary Inventory o f 
GHG Em issions: M exico. (In press)
G L A SO D , 
1990, 
G tobai A ssessm ent o f Soit D egradation, 
Project 
UNEP/ISRIC/Intnl Reference and Inform ation Centre, Part 3: Natural 
Resources, UNEP 1992 Environmental Data Report, Nairobi, Kenya.
Gligo, N., 1995: Situacion y perspectivas am bientales en Am érica Latina y el 
Caribe. Revista de ta CEPAL, 55, 107-122.
G lynn, P.W. 1989: Coral mortality and disturbances to coral reefs in the trop­
ical eastern Pacific. In: Giobat Ecotogicai Consequences o f 1982-1983 
ENSG  [Glynn, P.W., (ed.)]. Elsevier Science Publishers, New York, NY, 
USA, pp. 55-126.
G lynn, P.W. and L.D. Cm z, 1990: Experim ental evidence of high temperature 
stress causes of El Nino-coincident coral mortality. Coral Reefs, 8 , 
181-191.
Goldenberg, L, L.C. M onaco, and I.C. M acedo, 1993: The Brazilian Fuei- 
A icohoi Program. Renewabie Energy, Sources o f Fuets and Eiectricity, 
UNCED [De Johansson, T.B., H. Kelly, A.K.N. Reddy, and R.H. 
W illiams (eds.)]. Island Press, W ashington, DC, pp. 841-863.
Gomez, I.A. and G.C. Gallopin, 1991: Estim acion de la productividad pri- 
maria neta de ecosistem as terrestres del mundo en relacion a factures 
ambientales. Ecologia Austrai, 1, 24-40.
G onzalez, N.. 1990: La Contaminacion deiA gua. PoUtica A m bietai y  Gestion 
M unicipal Instituto de Estudios e Investigaciones sobre el M edio 
Ambiente, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
G orham , E., 1991: Northern peatlands: role in the carbon cycle and probable 
responses to climate warm ing. Ecot. Appiic., 1(2), 182-195.
G reco, S., R.H. Moss, D. Viner, and R. Jenne (eds.), 1994; CUmate Scenarios 
and Socioeconom ic Projections fo r  IP C C  WG II  A ssessm ent. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change W orking Group II, IPCC- 
W M O and UNEP, W ashington, DC, 67 pp.
Grosse, S., 1993: Schistosomiasis and Water Resources D eveiopment: A 
Reevaiuation o f an Im portant Environment-Heaith Linkage. W orking 
paper of the Environm ent and Natural Resources Policy and Training 
Project, EPAT/MUCIA, Technical Series No. 2., M ay 1993, University of 
M ichigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 32 pp.
H ack, W.H., 1955: Estudios sobre biologie del Triatoma infestans (Klug, 
1834) (Hemiptera, Reduviidae). An. Inst. Med. Reg., 4, 125-134.
Haines, A., P.R. Epstein, P.R., and A. M cM ichael, 1993: Global health watch: 
monitoring impacts of environment change. Lancet, 342, 1464-1469.
Halpin, P.N., P.M. Kelly, C.M. Secrett, and T.M. Smith, 1995a: Climate 
Change and C entral Am erica Forest System. Background paper o f the 
Nicaragua Pilot Project.
Halpin, P.N., P.M. Kelly, C.M . Secrett, and T.M. Smith, 1995b: Climate 
Change and Central Am erica Forest System. Background paper of the 
Costa Rica Pilot Project.
Halstead, S.B., 1990: Dengue. In: Tropical and Geographical M edicine 
[Warren, K. and A.A.F. M ahm oud (eds.)]. M cGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 
USA, 2nd ed., pp. 675-685.
Hansen, J., A. L ads, D. Rind, G. Russell, P. Stone, I. Fung, R. Ruedy, and J. 
Lerner, 1984: Climate Sensitivity: A nalysis o f feedback mechanism s. In: 
C lim ate Processes and C lim ate Sensitivity [H ansen, J.E. and T. 
Takahashi (eds.)]. A m erican G eophysical U nion, W ashington, DC, 
130-163.
H ardoy, J.E., D. M itlin, and D. Satterthwaite, 1992: Environm ental Problems 
in Third World Cities. Earthscan, London, United Kingdom, 302 pp.
H astenrath, S., 1976: Variations in the low altitude circulation and extreme 
clim atic events in tropical America. J. Atm . Sc., 33, 202-215.
H astenrath, S. and A. Ames, 1995: Recession of Yanamarey Glacier in 
Cordillera Blanca, Peru, during the 20th century. Journal o f Glaciology, 
41(137), 191-196.
Haxeltine, A. and C.l. Prentice, 1996: B I0M E 3: A n equilibrium  terrestrial 
biosphere model based on ecophysiological constraints, resource avail­
ability and com petition am ong plant functional types. G lobal 
Biogeochem ical Cycles 10, pp. 693-710.
Herrera-Basto, E., D.R. Prevots, M.L. Zarate, J.L. Silva, and J.S. Amor, 1992: 
First reported outbreak of classical dengue fever at 1,700 m eters above 
sea level in Guerrero State, M exico, June 1988. Am erican Journal o f 
Tropical M edicine, 46(6), 649-653.
Hoffm an, J.J.A., W.M. Vargas, and S. Nunez, 1996: Temperature, humidity 
and precipitation variations in Argentina and adjacent sub-Antarctic 
region during the present century. M eteorologisches Zeitschrift, (in press)
Horel, J.D. and A.G. Com ejo-Garrido, 1986: Convection along the Coast of 
Northern Peru, during 1983: Spatial and Temporal variations of clouds 
and rainfall. M on. Wea. Rev., 114, 2091-2105.
IP C C , 1990: Clim ate Change: The IP C C  Scientific A ssessm ent [Houghton, 
H.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cam bridge University 
Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 365 pp.
IP C C , 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplem entary Report to The IPCC 
Scientific Assessm ent. Prepared by IPCC W orking Group I [Houghton, 
J.T., B.A. Callander, and S.K. Varney (eds.)] and W M O/UNEP. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 200 pp.
IPCC, 1996: Clim ate Change 1995: The Science o f Clim ate Change. 
Contribution o f Working Group I  to the Second Assessm ent Report o f the 
Intergovernm ental Panel on Climate Change [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom  and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
Schimel, D., D. Alves, I. Enting, M. Heimann, F  Joos, D. Raynaud, 
T.M.L. Wigley, E. Sanhueza, X. Zhou, P. Jonas, R. Charlson, H. 
Rodhe, S. Sadasivan, K.P. Shine, Y. Fouquart, V. Ram aswam y, S. 
Solom on, J. Srinivasan, D, Albritton, R. Derwent, Y. Isaken, M. 
Lai, and D. W uebbles, Chapter 2. Radiation Forcing o f CUmate 
Change, pp. 65-131.
-  
Dickinson, R.E., V. M eleshko, D. Randall, E. Sarachik, P. Silva- 
Dias, and A. Slingo, Chapter 4. Climate Processes, pp. 193-227.
-  
Kattenberg, A., F  Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. M eehl, J.F.B. Mitchell. 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver, and T.M.L. Wigley, Chapter 
6 . Climate M odels — Projections o f Future Climate, pp. 289-357.
IP C C , 1996: Climate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations, and M itigation o f 
Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution o f Working 
Group II to the Second Assessm ent Report o f the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
Kirschbaum, M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. Climate Change 
Im pacts on Forests, pp. 95-130.
Allen-Diaz, B., Chapter 2. Rangelands in a Changing Climate: 
Impacts, Adaptations and M itigation, pp. 131-158.
Latin America
227
Noble, I.R. and H. Gitay, Chapter 3. Deserts in a Changing 
Climate: Impacts, pp. 159-189.
Bullock, R and H. Le Houérou, Chapter 4. Land D egradation and 
Desertification, pp. 170-189.
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. Im pacts o f Climate Change 
on M ountain Regions, pp. 191-213.
Oquist, M .G. and B.H. Svensson, Chapter 6 . Non-Tidal Wetlands, 
pp. 215-239.
Fitzharris, B.B., Chapter 7. The Cryosphere: Changes and their 
Impacts, pp. 240-265.
Ittekkot, V., Chapter 8 . Oceans, pp. 266-288.
Bijlsma, L, Chapter 9. C oastal Zones and Sm all Islands, pp. 
289-324.
-  
A m ell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.L M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. Hydrology and Freshwater Ecology, pp. 325-364.
-  
Acosta-M oreno, R. and J. Skea, Chapter 11. Industry, Energy, and 
Transportation: Im pacts and Adaptation, pp. 365-398.
-  
Scott, M .J., Chapter 12. H um an Settlem ents in a Changing 
Climate: Im pacts and Adaptation, pp. 399-426.
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. A griculture in a Changing Climate: Im pacts 
and Adaptation, pp. 427-467.
Kaczm arek, Z., C hapter 14. Water Resources M anagement, pp. 
4 6 9 ^ 8 6 .
Solom on, A.M ., Chapter 15. Wood Production under Changing 
Clim ate and Land Use, pp. 487-510.
-  
Everett, J., Chapter 16. Fisheries, pp. 511-537.
-  
M cM ichael, A., C hapter 18. H um an Population H ealth, pp. 
561-584.
Brown, S., Chapter 24. M anagem ent o f Forests fo r M itigation o f 
Greenhouse G as Em issions, pp. 773-797.
IPC C , 1996: Clim ate Change 1995: Econom ic and Social D im ensions o f 
Climate Change. Contribution o f Working Group III to the Second 
Assessm ent Report o f the Intergovernm ental P anel on Climate Change 
[Bruce, J.P , H. Lee, and E.F. H aites (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
Cam bridge, U nited K ingdom  and N ew  York, NY, USA, 448 pp.
Pearce, D.W., W.R. Cline, A.N. Achanta, S. Fankhauser, R.K. 
Pachauri, R.S.J. Toi, and P. Vellinga, Chapter 6 . The Social Costs o f 
Clim ate Change: Greenhouse D am age and Benefits o f Control, pp. 
179-224.
IP C C , 1996b: Technologies, Policies, and M easures fo r M itigating Climate 
Change: IP C C  Technical P aper I. Intergovernm ental Panel on Climate 
Change, W orking Group II JWatson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. W orld M eterological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 
84 pp.
Junin, B., H. Grandinetti, J.M . M arconi, and R.U. Carcavallo, 1995: Vigilania 
del A edes aegypti en la ciudad de Buenos A ires (Argentina). Entomol. 
Vect., 2, 71-75.
K adota, T , R. Naruse, P. Skvarca, and M. Aniya, 1992: Ice flow and surface 
lowering of Tyndall Glacier, southern Patagonia. Bulletin o f Glacier 
Research, 10, 63-68.
K alkstein, A., 1993: Health and climate change: direct im pacts in cities.
Lancet, 342, 1397-1399.
K arl, T.R., R.W. Knight, and N. Plummer, 1995; Trends in high frequency cli­
mate variability in the X X  Century. Nature, 377, 217-220.
K atsouyanni, K., A. Pantazopoulu, and G. Touloumi, 1993: Evidence for 
interaction betw een air pollution and high temperature in the causation of 
excess mortality. Arch. Environm. Health, 48, 235-242.
K linedinst, P.L., D.A. W ilhite, G.L. Hahn and K.G. Hubbard, 1993: The 
potential effects of clim ate change on sum m er season dairy cattle milk 
production and reproduction. Climate Change, 23(1), pp. 21-36. 
K oopm an, J.S., D.R. Prevots, M.A.V. Marin, H.G. Dantes, M .L.Z. Aqino, I.M. 
Longini, and J.S. Amor, 1991: Determinants and predictors of dengue 
infection in M exico. Am erican Journal o f Epidemiology, 1 3 3 ,1168-1178. 
K ousky, V.E., M.T. Kagano, and LA. Cavalcanti, 1984, A  review of the 
Southern Oscillation: oceani-atm ospheric circulation change and related 
rainfall anomalies. Tellus, 36A, 490-504.
L abraga, J.C., 1997: The climate change in South America due to a doubling in 
the CO 2 concentration: intercomparison of general circulation model equi­
librium experiments. InternationalJournal o f Climatology, 17, 377-398.
Labraga, J.C. and M. I-opez, 1997: A  com parison of the climate response to 
increased carbon dioxide simulated by general circulation models with 
mixed-layer and dynamic ocean representation in the region of South 
America. InternationalJournal o f Climatology (in press).
LAC CDE, 1992: O ur Own A genda. Latin A m erica and Caribbean 
Commission on D evelopm ent and Environment. UNDP and IDB, in col­
laboration w ith ECLAC and UNEP, Santiago, Chile.
Lapenis, A .G., N.S. Oskina, M.S. Barash, N.S. Blyum, and Y.V. Vasileva, 
1990: The late quaternary changes in ocean biota productivity. 
OkeanologiyalOceanology, 30, 93-101. (in Russian)
Lebre-La Rovère, 1995; M itigation measures for reduction of GHG emissions 
in Brazil. Revista de la Facultad de Ingenierla de la Universidad Central 
de Venezuela, 10(1-2).
Leem ans, R., 1992: M odelling ecological and agricultural impacts of global 
change on a global scale. Journal o f Scientific and Industrial Research, 
51, 709-724.
Lindroth, R.L., 1996: C 0 2 -mediated changes in tree chem istry and tree-lepi- 
dopteran interaction. In: Carbon D ioxide and Terrestrial Ecosystems 
[Koch, G.W. and H.A. M ooney (eds.)]. Academ ic Press, San Diego, CA, 
USA, pp. 105-120.
Liverm an, D.M . and K.L. O ’Brien, 1991: Global w arm ing and climate change 
in M exico. G lobal Environm ental Change, 1(4), 351-363.
Lopm eier, F.J., 1990: raim aim paktforschung aus agrarm eteorologischer sicht. 
Bayer. Landw. Jarhb., 67(1), 185-190.
M abberley, D.J., 1992: Tropical Rainforest Ecology. Blackie and Son Ltd., 
Glasgow and London, United Kingdom, 2nd ed., 300 pp.
M agalhâes, A.R. and M.H. Glantz (eds.), 1992: Socioeconomic Im pacts o f 
Climate Variations and Policy Responses in Brazil. UNEP, SEPLAN, 
Esquel Brasil Foundation, Brasilia, Brazil.
M alagnino, E. and J. Strelin, 1992: Variations of Upsala glacier in Southern 
Patagonia, since the late Holocen to the present. In: GlaciologicalResearch 
in Patagonia (1996) [Namse, R. and M. Aniya (eds.)] pp. 61-85.
M anabe, S. and R.T. W etherald, 1987: Large scale changes of soil wetness 
induced by an increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide. J. Atmos. Sci., 44, 
1211-1235.
Martens, W.J.M., Т.Н. Jetten, and D.A. Focks, 1997: Sensitivity of malaria, aschis- 
tosomiasis and dengue to global warming. Climate Change, 3 5 ,145-156.
M artens, W .J.M ., L.W. N iessen, J. R otm ans, Т.Н. Jetten, and A.J. 
M cM ichaels, 1995: Potential im pact of global climate chance on malar­
ia risk. Environm. H ealth Perspect., 103, 458-464.
M artinez, A., R.U. Carcavallo, and A.F. Prosen, 1967: Los mosquitos posibles 
transm isores am arilicos en A rgentina. Segundas Jorn. Entomoep. 
Argentinas, 1, 7-26.
M assera, O.R., M .J. Ordonez, and R. Dirzo, 1996: Carbon emissions from 
M exican forests: current situation long-term scenarios. Climate Change 
(in press).
M aul, G.A. (ed.), 1993: C lim atic Change in the Intra-Am ericas Sea. 
иН ЕРД О С, E. Arnold, London, United Kingdom, 384 pp.
M cFarlane, N.A., G.J. Boer, J.P  Blanchet, and M. I.azare, 1992: The 
Canadian Climate Centre second general circulation model and its equi­
librium climate. J. Climate, 5, 1013-1044.
M edina, E. and J. Silva, 1990: Savannas of the northern South America; a 
steady state regulated by water-fire interactions on a background of low 
nutrient availability. Journal o f Biogeography, 17, 403-413.
M eisner, J.D., 1990: Effect of climatic warm ing on the southern margins of 
the native range of brook trout, Salvelinus fontinalis. Canadian Journal 
o f Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 47, 1067-1070.
M illim an, J.D., 1993: Coral reefs and their response to global climate change. 
In: Climatic Change in the Intra-Americas Sea [Maul, G.A. (ed.)]. 
UNEP/IOC, E. Arnold, London, United Kingdom, pp. 306-322.
M inetti, J.L. and W.M. Vargas, 1995: Trends and Jum ps in South American 
A nnual Precipitation South o f Parallel I5 ^S , (in press).
M itchell, J.F.B., C.A. Senior, and W.J. Ingram, 1989: CO 2 and climate: A 
m issing feedback? Nature, 341, 132-134.
M itchell, J.F.B. and D.A. Warrilow, 1987: Sum m er dryness in northern m id­
latitude due to increased CO 2 . Nature, 330, 238-240.
M olion, L.C.B., 1975: A  Ciimatonomy Study o f the Energy and M oisture 
Fluxes o f the Am azon Basin with Consideration o f Deforestation Effects. 
Diss., University of W isconsin.
228
Latin America
M olion, L.C.B., 1996: Global climate impacts of Am azonia deforestation. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e  G a s  E m i s s i o n s  U n d e r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s  P o i n t  o f  V i e w  
[Pinguelli, R.L. and M.A. dos Santos (eds.)]. COPPE, Federal University 
of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 78-89.
M oreira, J.R. and A.D. Poole, 1992; H y d r o p o w e r  
a n d  
i t s  
c o n s t r a i n t s .  
R e n e w a b l e  
E n e r g y .  
S o u r c e s  
o f  F u e l s  
a n d  E l e c t r i c i t y ,  
U N C E D  [De 
Johansson, T.B., H. Kelly, A.K.N. Reddy, and R.H. W illiams (eds.)]. 
Island Press, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 73-120.
M yers, N., 1992: Synergisms: joint effects of climate change and other forms 
of habitat destruction. In: G l o b a l  W a r m i n g  a n d  B i o l o g i c a l  D i v e r s i t y  
[Peters, R.L. and T.E. Lovejoy (eds.)]. Yale University Press, New 
Haven, CT, USA and London, United Kingdom, pp. 344-354.
Neilson, R.P., 1995: A  model for predicting continental-scale vegetation dis­
tribution and w ater balance. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 5, pp. 362-385.
O jim a, D.S., W.J. Parton, D.S. Schimel, and C.E. Owensby, 1990: Simulated 
im pacts o f annual burning on prairie ecosystem s. In: F i r e  i n  N o r t h  
A m e r i c a n  
T a l l g r a s s  P r a i r i e s  [Collins, S.L. and L.L. W allace (eds.)]. 
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, OK, USA, pp. 99-118.
O m ar, M.H., 1980: M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  F a c t o r s  A f f e c t i n g  t h e  E p i d e m i o l o g y  o f  t h e  
C o t t o n  L e a f  W o r m  a n d  t h e  P i n k  B o l l w o r m .  W M O TN  532, W MO, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
O ttichilo, W.K., J.H. Kinuthia, P.O. Ratego, and G. Nasubo, 1991: W e a t h e r i n g  
t h e  S t o r m :  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  I n v e s t m e n t  i n  K e n y a . ACTS Press, 
Nairobi, Kenya.
РА Н О , 1976: R e p o r t  o f  t h e  D i r e c t o r . W ashington, DC.
РАНО, 1994: H e a l t h  C o n d i t i o n s  i n  t h e  A m e r i c a s , Vols 1 and 2. Washington, DC.
РА Н О , 1996: R e p o r t  o f  t h e  D i r e c t o r . W ashington, DC.
P arkinson, R.W., R.D. De Laum, and J.R.W hite, 1994: Holocene sea level rise 
and the fate of m angrove forests within the W ider Caribbean region. 
J o u r n a l  o f  C o a s t a l  R e s e a r c h , 10, 1077-1086.
P arry, M.L., 1992: T h e  P o t e n t i a l  S o c i o - E c o n o m i c  E f f e c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  i n  
S o u t h - E a s t  A s i a . United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya.
P arry , М., T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijn (eds.), 1988; T h e  I m p a c t  o f  C l i m a t i c  
V a r i a t i o n s  o n  A g r i c u l t u r e .  
V o l. 
2 ,  A s s e s s m e n t  i n  S e m i - A r i d  R e g i o n s .  
Ю uwer Academ ic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 764 pp.
P a rry , M .L., J.H. Porter and T.R. Carter, 1990: Agriculture: climate change 
and its implications. T r e n d s  i n  E c o l o g y  a n d  E v o l u t i o n ,  5, pp. 318-322.
Paruelo, J.M . and O.E. Sala, 1992: El impacto de la desertificacion sobre la 
capacidad de carga de las estepas patagonicas: sus consecuencias 
econom icas. II Congreso Latinoam ericano de Ecologia, Caxambti, M ina 
Gerais, Brazil.
Pauly, D., D.P. M uch, J. M endo, and J. Tsukayam a, 1989: T h e  P e r u v i a n  
u p w e l l i n g  e c o s y s t e m :  d y n a m i c s  a n d  i n t e r a c t i o n s .  I C L A R M  C o n f e r e n c e  
P r o c e e d i n g s  1 8 . GTZ Gmbh. Eschbom, FRG, and International Center 
for Living Aquatic Resources M anagement, M anilla, Phillipines, 438 pp.
Pauly, D., M.L. Palomares, and E C . Gayanilo, 1987: VPA estim ates o f the 
monthly population length com position, recruitment, mortality, biomass 
and related statistics of Peruvian anchoveta, 1953 to 1981. In: I C L A R M  
S t u d ie s  a n d  R e v i e w s  1 5 , Instituto del M ar del Peru (IM ARPE), Callao, 
Peru; Deutsche Gesellschaft fiir Technische Zusam m enarbeit (GTZ), 
GmbH, Eschbom , Germany; and International Center for Living Aquatic 
Resources M anagem ent (ICLARM ), M anila, Philippines.
Pauly, D. and I. Tsukayama, 1987: The Peruvian anchoveta and its upwelling 
ecosystem: three decades of change. In: I C L A R M  S t u d ie s  a n d  R e v i e w s  
1 5 , Instituto del M ar del Pern (IM ARPE), Callao, Peru; Deutsche 
Gesellschaft fiir Technische Zusam m enarbeit (GTZ), GmbH, Eschbom , 
Germany; and International Center for Living A quatic Resources 
M anagement (ICLARM ), M anila, Philippines, 351 pp.
Pedgley, D.E., 1980: 
W e a t h e r  a n d  A i r b o r n e  
O r g a n i s m s . W M O TN  562, 
Geneva, Switzerland,
Perdom o, М., 1996: Regional synthesis chapter for Latin America. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e  G a s  E m i s s i o n  I n v e n t o r i e s  —  I n t e r i m  R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  U . S .  
C o u n t r y  
S t u d ie s  
P r o g r a m  [Braatz, B.V., S. Jallow, S. M olnar, D. 
M urdiyarso, M. Perdomo, and J.F. Fitzgerald (eds.)].
Perdom o, М., M.L. Olivo, Y. Bonduki, and L.J. Mata, 1996: Vulnerability and 
adaptation assessments for Venezuela. In: V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  t o  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Smith, J.B., S. Huq, L.J. Lenhart, L.J. Mata, I. 
Nemesova, and S. Toure (eds.)]. Kluwer Academ ic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
Netherlands, pp. 347-366.
Perillo, G.M . and M .C. Piccolo, 1992: I m p a c t  o f  S L R  o n  t h e  A r g e n t i n a n  
C o a s t l i n e . Proceedings o f the International W orkshop on Coastal Zones, 
M arch 9-13, 1992, Isla M argarita, Venezuela.
Pittock, A.B., 1980: Patterns o f clim atic variation in Argentina and Chile. 
Precipitation, 1931-1960. Mon. W e a . R e v . , 108, 1347-1361.
P o rter, J.H., M.L. Parry and T.R. Carter, 1991: The potential effects of climate 
change on agricultural insect pests. A g r i c u l t u r a l l F o r e s t  M e t e o r o l o g y , 57, 
pp. 221-240.
Rao, V.B., P. Satyamurty, and J.I.B. Brito, 1986: On the 1983 drought in 
Northeast Brazil. 7. C l i m . , 6 , 43-51.
R asm uson, E.M . and Т.Н. СафепГег, 1982: Variations in tropical sea surface 
tem perature and surface w indfields associated w ith the Southern 
Oscillation/El Nino. M o n .  W e a . R e v . , 109, 1163-1168.
Reilly, J., N. Hohmann, and S. Kane, 1994: Climate change and agricultural 
trade: who benefits, who loses? G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  C h a n g e , 4(1), 
24-36.
R estrepo, М ., A., Greer, D.F., and M oncada, L.H., 1972: R e l a t i o n s h i p  b e t w e e n  
t h e  
e n v i r o n m e n t  
a n d  
t h e  
p a r a c o c c i d i o i m y c o s i s .  
Proc. 
Symp. 
Paracoccidioim ycosis, РАНО Publication 254, 84 pp.
Riede, K., 1993: M onitoring biodiversity: analysis of A m azonian rainforest 
sounds. A m b i o , 22, 546-548.
R osenbliith, B.H., H. Fuenzalida-Ponce, and P. Aceituno, 1997: Recent tem ­
perature variations in southern South A m erica. I n t l .  J .  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y , 17, 
1-19.
R osenzw eig, C., M.L. Parry, G. Fischer, and K. Frohberg, 1993: C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  W o r l d  F o o d  S u p p l y . Research Report No. 3, Environmental 
Change Unit, Oxford University, Oxford, U nited Kingdom , 28 pp.
Rosenzw eig, C. and M .L. Parry, 1994: Potential impact of clim ate change on 
world food supply. N a t u r e , 367, 133-138.
R ubin, M .J., 1955: A n analysis of pressure anom alies in the Southern 
Hemisphere. N o t o s , 4 ,1 1 -1 6 .
Sala, O.E. and J.M . Paraelo, 1997: Ecosystem  services in grasslands. In: G.C. 
D aily (de.), N a t u r e ’s  
S e r v i c e s :  
S o c i e t a l  D e p e n d e n c e  
o n  
N a t u r a l  
E c o s y s t e m s , pp. 237-252. Island Press, W ashington, DC.
Salati, E. and C.A. Nobre, 1991: Possible clim atic im pacts o f tropical defor­
estation. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e , 19, 177-196.
Salati, E. and P.B. Vose, 1984: Am azon Basin: a system  in equilibrium. 
S c i e n c e , 225, 129-138.
Santibanez, F. and J. Uribe, 1994: E l  C l i m a  y  l a  D e s e r t i f i c a c i o n  e n  C h i l e . En 
Taller en Nacional del Plan Nacional de A ccion para Com batir le 
Desertificacion, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, pp. 17-24.
Schlesinger, M.E. and Z.C. Zhao, 1989: Seasonal clim ate changes induced by 
doubled CO 2 as sim ulated in the OSU atm ospheric GCM /m ixed layer 
ocean model. J .  C l i m a t e , 2, 459-495.
S c h u b e rt, C., 1992: The glaciers of the S ierra N evada de M erida 
(V enezuela): a photographic com parison o f recent deglaciation. 
E r d k u n d e , 46, 59-64.
S h arp , G.D. and D.R. M cLain, 1993: Fisheries, El N ino-Southem  Oscillation 
and upper ocean tem perature records: an eastern Pacific example. 
O c e a n o g , 5(3), 163-168.
Shen, G.T., 1993: Reconstruction of El Nino history from  reef coral. B u l l ,  o f  
I n t i .  F r a n c e  é t u d e s  a n d e a n , Vol 112, pp. 125-158.
Shope, R.E., 1991: Global climate change and infectious diseases. E n v i r o n m .  
H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t . , 96, 171-174.
Shukla, J., C. Nobre, and P. Sellers, 1990: Am azon deforestation and climate 
change. S c i e n c e  247, pp. 1322-1325.
Siegenthaler, U. and J.L. Sarmiento, 1993: A tm ospheric carbon dioxide and 
the ocean. N a t u r e , 365, 119-125.
S kvarca, P., 1993: Fast recession of the northern Larsen Ice Shelf monitored 
by space images. А ллаЬ  o f  G l a c i o l o g y , 17, 317-321.
Skvarca, P., 1994: Changes and surface features of the Larsen Ice Shelf, 
Antarctica, derived from  the Landsat and Kosm os m osaics. A n n a l s  o f  
G l a c i o l o g y , 20, 6-12.
Soriano, A. and C. M ovia, 1986: Eroson у desertizaciôn en la Patagonia. 
I n t e r s c i e n c i a  11, pp. 77-83.
S tafford Sm ith, D.M. and G. Pickup, 1993: Out of Africa, looking in: under­
standing vegetation change. In: 
R a n g e  E c o l o g y  
a t  D i s e q u i l i b r i u m  
[Behnke, R., I. Scoones, and C. Keerven (eds.)]. O verseas Developm ent 
Institute, London, United Kingdom, pp. 196-244.
Latin America
229
Starke, L. (éd.), 1994: State o f the World 1994A Worldwatch Institute Report 
on Progress Toward a Sustainable Society. W.W. Norton and Company, 
New York, NY, USA, and London, United Kingdom, 265 pp.
Stone, T.A., P. Schlesinger, R.A. Houghton, and G.M . W oodwell, 1994: A  M ap 
o f Vegetation o f South Am erica B ased on Satellite Imagery. American 
Society for Photogram m etric Rem ote Sensing, W oods Hole Research 
Center, W oods Hole, MA, USA, pp. 541-551.
Suriano, J.M ., L.H. Perpozzi, and D.E. M artinez, 1992: El cam bio global: ten- 
dencias clim ticas en la Argentina y el mundo. Ciencia Hoy, 3, 32-39.
T ejada M iran d a, F., 1996: Evaluaciôn de la vulnerabilidad de los bosques al 
cambio clim âtico en Bolivia. Clim ate Change National Programme, 
M inistry of Sustainable D evelopm ent and Environm ent, La Paz, Bolivia.
Telleria, A.V., 1986: Health consequences of floods in Bolivia in 1982. 
Disasters, 10, 88-106.
Teves, N.. G. Laos, C. San Rom an, S. Carrasco, and L. Clemente, 1996: 
Vulnerability and adaptation assessm ents for Venezuela. In: Vulnerability 
and Adaptation to Clim ate Change [Smith, J.B., S. Huq, S. Lenhart, L.J. 
Mata, I. Nem esova, and S. Toure (eds.)]. Kluw er A cadem ic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, N etherlands, pp. 347-366.
Torn, M.S. and J.S. Fried, 1992: Predicting the im pacts of global w arm ing on 
w ildland fire. Clim atic Change, 21, 257-274.
T reharne, K., 1989: The im plications of the “greenhouse effect” for fertilizer 
and agrochem icals. In: The G reenhouse E ffect and U K Agriculture 19 [de 
Bennet, R.M. (ed.)]. Centre for Agricultural Strategy, University of 
Reading, U nited Kingdom , pp. 67-78.
UNEP, 1992: Environm ental D ata R eport 1991-1992, prepared by GEM S 
M onitoring and A ssessm ent Research Centre, London, UK, in co-opera­
tion w ith W orld R esources Institute, W ashington, D C and UK 
Departm ent of the Environm ent, London. B. Blackwell Ltd, Oxford, UK, 
408 pp.
Vargas, W.M., 1987: El Clim a y sus Impactos, Im plicancias en las inudaciones 
del N oroeste en Buenos Aires. Boletin Inform ative Techint, 250, Buenos 
Aires, 12 pp.
Vargas, W.M. and S. Bishoff, 1995: Statistical study of clim atic jum ps in the 
regional zonal circulation over South A m erica. Journal o f the 
M eteorological Society o f Japan, 73(5), 849-856.
Vargas, W.M. and J.L. M inetti, 1996: Trends and jum ps in South America annu­
al precipitation south of the 15°S parallel. Climate Change (submitted).
Velez, S.A., N. Nassif, J. Togo, and S. W ottips, 1990: Energetico socio-ali- 
m entario. S em inario sobre L atino-A m erica, M edio A m biente y 
Desarroiio, Instituto de Estudios e Investigaciones sobre el M edio 
Ambiente, O ctober 1990, Bariloche, Argentina, lEIM A, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.
Viglizzo, E.F. and Z.E. Roberto, 1997: On trade-offs in low input agroecosys­
tems. Agricultural System s (in press).
Viglizzo, E.F., Z.E. Roberto, M .C. Filippin, A.J. Pordomingo, 1995: Climate 
variability and agroecological change in the C entral Pam pas of 
Argentina. Agriculture, Ecosystem s and Environment, 55, pp. 7-16.
Viglizzo, E .F , Z.E. Roberto, F. Lértora, Gay E. Lopez, J. Bernardos, 1997: 
Climate and land-use change in field-crop ecosystem s of Argentina. 
Agriculture, Ecosystem s and Environment. (In press)
Villers, L., 1995: Vulnerabilidad de los Ecosistem as Forestales. Country 
Study M exico Report 6 .
Vitousek, P.M. and R.L. Sanford, Jr., 1986: Nutrient cycling in moist tropical 
forest. A nnual Review  o f Ecology and Systematics, 17, 137-167.
W alker, G.T., 1928: Cera (Brazil) fam ines and the general air movement. 
Beitr. Phys. d. Frein. Atmosph., 14, 88-93.
W estoby, М ., В. Walker, and I. Noy-M eir, 1989: O pportunistic m anagem ent 
for rangelands not at equilibrium . Journal o f Range M anagement, 42, 
26-274.
W etherald, R.T. and S. M anabe, 1988: Cloud feedback processes in a general 
circulation model. J. Atm os. Sci., 45, 1397-1415.
W FC, 1987: Proceedings o f the Thirteenth M inisterial Session. Beijing, 
China.
W hetton, P H ., A.B. Pittock, J.C. Labraga, A.B. M ullan, and A. Joubert, 1996: 
Southern hem isphere clim ate com paring m odels w ith reality. In: Climate 
Change, D eveloping Southern H emisphere Perspectives [Henderson- 
Sellers, A. and T. G iam belluca, (eds.)]. W iley and Sons, Chichester, 
United Kingdom, pp. 89-130.
W hitm ore, 1984: Tropical Rain Forests in the F ar East. Clarendon Press, 
Oxford, United Kingdom, 2nd ed., 352 pp.
W H O , 1985: Ten Years o f Onchocerciasis Control in West Africa: Review o f Work 
o f the O CP in the Volta River Basin Area from  1974 to 1984. 
OCP/GVA/85.1B, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 113 pp.
W H O  C om m ission on H um an H ealth an d  E nvironm ent, 1992: Report o f 
the P anel on U rbanization. W orld H ealth O rganization, Geneva, 
Switzerland, pp. 127.
W H O , 1993: A  Global Strategy fo r M alaria Control, Geneva, Switzerland.
W H O , 1995: The World H ealth Report 1995: Bridging the Gaps. W orld Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 118 pp.
W H O , 1996: The World H ealth Report 1996: Fighting D isease Fostering 
Development. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
W inograd, М., 1995: Environmental Indicators fo r Latin Am erica and the 
Caribbean: Toward Land Use Sustainability. GASE, in collaboration 
w ith OAS, IICA/GTZ, and WRI.
W ooster, W.S. and D.L. Fluharty (eds.), 1985: E l N ino North: N ino Effects in 
the Eastern Subarctic Pacific Ocean. W ashington Sea Grant Program, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
W R I, 1990-1991: Special Focus on Latin Am erica, O xford University Press, 
New York, NY, pp. 33-64.
W R I, 1992: World Resources 1992-93: A  Guide to the Global Environment. 
Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, 385 pp.
W R I, 1996: World Resources 1996-97: A  Guide to the Global Environment. 
World Resources Institute/United Nations Envirom nent Programme/ 
United Nations D evelopm ent Program m e/The World Bank. Oxford 
University Press, New York, 342 pp.
Yanez, E., 1991: Relationships between environm ental changes and fluctuat­
ing m ajor pelagic resources exploited in Chile (1950-1988). In: Long- 
Term Variability o f Pelagic Fish Populations and Their Environment 
[Kawasaki, T., S. Tanaka, Y. Toba, and A. Taniguchi (eds.)]. Pergamon 
Press, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 301-309.
Z uidem a, G., G.J. van den Born, J. Alcam o, and G.J.J. Kreileman, 1994: 
D eterm ining the potential distribution of vegetation, crops and agricul­
tural productivity. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 76(1/2), 163-198.
For Further Reading
A ceituno, P., 1988: On the functioning o f the Southern Oscillation in the South 
A m erica sector. Part I: Surface climate. Mon. Wea. Rev., 116, 505-524.
A nderson, J.M ., 1992: Responses of soils to climate change. A dvances in 
Ecological Research, 22, 163-210.
Biggs, G.R., 1993: Com parison of coastal wind and pressure trends over the 
tropical A tlantic: 1946-1988. Intl. J. Climatol., 13, 4 1 1 ^ 2 1 .
Binet, D., 1988: Rôle possible d ’une intensification des alizés sur le change­
ment de repartition des sardines et sardinelles le long de la côte ouest 
africaine. А^иаГ. Living Resources, 1, 115-132.
B rinkm an, R. and W.G. Sombroek, 1993: The Effects o f Global Change on 
Soil Conditions in Relation to Plant Growth and Food Production. 
Expert Consultation Paper on Global Climate Change and Agricultural 
Production: Direct and Indirect Effects of Changing Hydrological, Soil 
and Plant Physiological Processes. Food and Agriculture Organization, 
Rome, Italy, Decem ber 1993, 12 pp.
B usby, J.R., 1988: Potential im plications of climate change on A ustralia’s 
flora and fauna. In: Greenhouse Planning fo r Climate Change [Pearman, 
G.L (ed.)]. CSIRO, M elbourne, Australia, pp. 387-398.
C am pbell, B.D. and R.M. Hay, 1993: W ill subtropical grasses continue to 
spread through New Zealand? In: Proceedings o f the X V II International 
G rassland Congress, pp. 1126-1128.
Caviedes, C.N., 1984: El Nino 1982-1983. Geographical Review, 74,268-290.
Cole, J.E., R.G. Fairbanks, and G.T. Shea, 1993: Recent variability in the 
Southern Oscillation. Isotopic results from Tarawa A toll coral. Science, 
260, 1790-1793.
D ’O liveira, A.S. and C.A. Nobre, 1986: Interactions Between F rontal Systems 
in South Am erica and Tropical Convection over the Am azon. Preprints of 
the Second International C onference on Southern H em isphere 
M eteorology, 1986, W ellington, New Zealand, AM S.
230
Latin America
E akin, C.M ., 1995: P o s t - E l  N i n o  P a n a m a n i a n  r e e f s :  L e s s  A c c r e t i o n ,  M o r e  
E r o s i o n  a n d  D a m s e l f i s h  P r o t e c t i o n . Proceedings of the Seventh Corai 
R eef Symposium, voi. 1, June 22-27, 1992, Guam, University of Guam 
Press, M anqiiao, Guam, USA, pp. 387-396.
E hleringer, J.R. and C.B. Fieid (eds.), 1993: S c a l i n g  P h y s i o l o g i c a l  P r o c e s s e s :  
L e a f  t o  G l o b e . Academ ic Press, New York, NY, USA, 388 pp.
E pstein, PR ., 1992: Cholera and the environment. L a n c e t , 339, 1167-1168.
Flenley, J.R., 1979: The late quaternary vegetational history of the equatorial 
mountains. P r o g r e s s  i n  P h y s i c a l  G e o g r a p h y , 3, 488-509.
F rasier, G.W., J.R. Cox, and D.A. W oolhiser, 1987: W et-dry cycle effects on 
w arm -season 
grass 
seedling 
establishm ent. 
J o u r n a l  
o f  
R a n g e  
M a n a g e m e n t , 40, 2-6.
G arn is, R., J.F. Walsh, and J.B. Davis, 1979: Studies on the reinvasion of the 
O nchocerciasis Control Program m e in the Volta River Basin by 
S u m u l i u m  d a m n o s u m  s.l. w ith em phasis on the Southwestern areas. 
T r o p i c a l  M e d i c i n e  a n d  P a r a s i t o l o g y , 30, 345-362.
Gilles, H.M ., 1993: Epidemiology of malaria. In B r u c e - C h w a t t ’s  E s s e n t i a l  
M a l a r i o l o g y  [Giles, H.M . and D.A. W arrell (eds).]. Edward Arnold, 
London, United Kingdom, pp. 124-163.
H en d erso n -S ellers, A. and A. H ansen, 1995: A t l a s  
o f  R e s u l t s  f r o m
 
G r e e n h o u s e  
M o d e l  
S i m u l a t i o n s . M odel Evaluation Consortium  for 
Climate Assessm ent, Climate Impacts Centre, M acquarie University, 
Kluwer A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
H enderson-S ellers, A. and K. M cGuffie, 1994: Land surface characterisation 
in greenhouse climate simulations. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y ,  
14, 1065-1094.
H orel, J.D. and J.M . W allace, 1981: Planetary seal eatm ospheric phenom enas 
associated w ith the Southern Oscillation. M o n .  W e a . R e v . , 109, 813-823.
M ar del P eru  (IM A R PE ), Callao, Peru; Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische 
Zusam m enarbeit (G TZ), G m bH , E schborn, Federal R epublic of 
Germ any; and International Center for Living A quatic Resources 
M anagement (ICLARM ), M anila, Philippines, pp. 142-178.
M artinelli, L.A., A.V. Krusche, and R.L. Victoria, 1996: Changes in carbon 
stock associated to land-use/cover changes and emissions of CO 2 . In: 
G r e e n h o u s e  G a s  E m i s s i o n s  U n d e r  D e v e l o p i n g  C o u n t r i e s  P o i n t  o f  V i e w  
[Pinguelli, R.L. and M .A. dos Santos (eds.).]. CO PPE, Federal 
University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 90-101.
M asera, O.R., 1995: M itigation options in forest sector w ith reference to 
M exico. Latin America GHG em issions and mitigation options. R e v i s t a  
d e  l a  P a c u l t a d  d e  I n g e n i e r i a  d e  l a  U n i v e r s i d a d  C e n t r a l  d e  V e n e z u e la ,  
10(1- 2).
M ata, L.J., 1996: A  smdy of climate change im pacts on the forests of 
Venezuela. In; A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  A s s e s s m e n t  a n d  i s s u e s  
[Smith, J., N. Bhatti, G. M enzhulin, R. Benioff, M. Budyko, M. Campos, 
B. Jallow, and F. Rijsberm an (eds.)]. Springer-Verlag.
M edina, E., 1982: Physiological ecology o f neotropical savanna plants. In; 
E c o l o g y  o f  T r o p i c a l  S a v a n n a s  [Hyntley, B.J. and B.H. W alker (eds.)]. 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 308-335.
M ills, D.M ., 1995: A  clim atic w ater budget approach to blackfly population 
dynamics. P u b l i c a t i o n s  i n  C l i m a t o l o g y , 48, 1-84.
M yers, N., 
1993: 
Q uestions o f m ass extinction. 
B i o d i v e r s i t y  
a n d  
C o n s e r v a t i o n , 2, 2-17.
P a rk e r, C. and J.D. Fryer, 1975: Weed control problem s causing m ajor reduc­
tions in world food supplies. P A G  P l a n t  P r o t e c t i o n  B u l l e t i n , 23, 83-95.
Peters, R.L., 1992: Conservation of biological diversity in the face of climate 
change. In; G l o b a l  W a r m i n g  a n d  B i o l o g i c a l  D i v e r s i t y  [Peters, R.L. and 
T.E. Lovejoy (eds.)]. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, USA, and 
London, United Kingdom, pp. 59-71.
R auh, W , 1985: The Peruvian-Chilean deserts. In: E c o s y s t e m s  o f  t h e  W o r l d :  
H o t  D e s e r t s  a n d  A r i d  S h r u b l a n d s , vol. 12A [Evenari, М., I. Noy Meir, 
and D. G oodall (eds.)]. Elsevier Science Publishers, A m sterdam , 
Netherlands, pp. 239-267.
Reibsam e, W.E., 1990: Anthropogenic climate change and a new paradigm  of 
natural resource planning. P r o f e s s i o n a l  G e o g r a p h e r , 42(1), 1-12.
Reilly, J. and N. Hohmann, 1993: Clim ate change and agriculture: the role of 
international trade. A m e r i c a n  
E c o n o m i c  
A s s o c i a t i o n  
P a p e r s  
a n d  
P r o c e e d i n g s , 83, 306-312.
Reynolds, R.E. 1987: Breeding duck population, production and habitat sur­
veys, 1979-1985. T r a n s .  N .  A m .  W i l d l .  N a t .  R e s o u r .  C o n f ,  52, 186-205.
Reynolds, J.F. and P.W. Leadley, 1992: M odelling the response o f arctic plants 
to changing climate. In: A r c t i c  E c o s y s t e m s  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e ,  a n  
E c o p h y s i o l o g i c a l  P e r s p e c t i v e  [Chapin III, F.S., R.L. Jefferies, J.F. 
Reynolds, G.R. Shaver, and J. Svoboda (eds.)]. A cadem ic Press, San 
Diego, CA, USA, pp. 4 1 3 ^ 3 8 .
R iebsam e, W .E., 1989: A s s e s s i n g  
t h e  
S o c i a l  
I m
p l i c a t i o n s  
o f  C l i m a t e  
P l u c t u a t i o n s . United Nations Environm ent Program m e, Nairobi, Kenya.
R iebsam e, W.E., 1990: The U nited States G reat Plains. In: T h e  E a r t h  a s  
T r a n s f o r m e d  b y  H u m a n  A c t i o n :  G l o b a l  a n d  R e g i o n a l  C h a n g e s  i n  t h e  
B i o s p h e r e  o v e r  t h e  P a s t  3 0 0  Y e a r s  [Turner, B.L.
R iebsam e, W.E. e t  a l . ,  1995: Com plex river basins. In: As C l i m a t e  C h a n g e s :  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  I m p a c t s  a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s  [Strzepek, K.M. and J.B. Smith 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom , pp. 
57-91.
R iebsam e, W.E., W.B. M eyer, and B.L. Turner II, 1994; M odeling land use 
and cover as part of global environm ental change. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 28, 
45-64.
S harkey, T.D., 1985: Photosynthesis in intact leaves of C3 plants: physics, 
physiology and rate lim itations. B o t a n i c a l  R e v i e w , 51, 53-105.
Sm ayda, T.J., 1990: Novel and nuisance phytoplankton bloom s in the sea: evi­
dence for a global epidemic. In: T o x i c  M a r i n e  P h y t o p l a n k t o n  [Graneli, E. 
e t  a i  (eds.)]. Elsevier Science Publishers, New York, NY, USA, pp. 
29-40.
Sm ith, T.M. and H.H. Shugart, 1993; The transient response of terrestrial car­
bon storage to a perturbed climate. N a t u r e , 361, 523-526.
Sollcy, W.B., C.F. M erk, and R .P Pierce, 1988: E s t i m a t e d  U s e  o f  W a t e r  i n  t h e  
U n i t e d  
S t a t e s  
i n  
1 9 8 5 . C ircular 1004, U .S. G eological Survey, 
W ashington, DC.
Solom on, A.M ., 1992a: A  global biom e m odel based on plant physiology and 
dominance, soil properties and climate. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 19, 
117-134.
Solom on, A.M ., 1992b: The nature and distribution of past, present and future 
boreal forests. In: A S y s t e m s  A n a l y s i s  o f  t h e  G l o b a l  B o r e a l  F o r e s t  
[Shugart, H.H., G.B. Bonan, and R. Leem ans (eds.)]. Cam bridge 
University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 291-307.
Toi, R.S.J., 1994: The dam age costs o f clim ate change: A  note on tangibles and 
intangibles applied to DICE. E n e r g y  P o l i c y , 22, 436-438.
TVoadec, J.-R, 1989: Elements pour une autre strategic. In: L
’h o m m e  e t  le s  
r e s s o u r c e s  h a l i e u t i q u e s ,  
e s s a i  s u r  l ’ u s a g e  d ’ u n e  
r e s s o u r c e  c o m m u n e  
r e n o u v e l a b l e  [Troadec, J.-P. (sous la dir.)]. IFREM ER, Paris, France, pp. 
747-795.
U N EP, 1997: G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  O u t l o o k . United N ations Environmental 
Program m e, W RI, USA, Distributed by Oxford University Press and 
UNEP, 265 pp.
U N ESC O , 1978: T r o p i c a l  F o r e s t  E c o s y s t e m s :  A  S t a t e - o f - K n o w l e d g e  R e p o r t .  
UNESCO, UNEP, and FAO, Paris, France, 683 pp.
Van d e r H am m en, T., 1974; The Pleistocene changes of vegetation and cli­
mate in tropical South America. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 1, 3-26.
W alsh, J.F., J.B. Davis, and R. Garms, 1981: Further studies on the reinvasion 
of the Onchocerciasis Control Programme by S i m u l i u m  d a m n o s u m  s.l. 
T r o p i c a l  M e d i c i n e  a n d  P a r a s i t o l o g y , 32(4), 269-273.
W arren, C.R., 1994: Against the grain; a report on the Pio XI glacier 
Patagonia. G e o g r a p h i c a l  M a g a z i n e , 66(9), 28-30.
W H O , 1992: O u r  P l a n e t ,  O u r  H e a l t h . World Health Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
W H O , 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  H u m a n  H e a l t h . Fide,[ M cM ichael, A.J., A. 
Haines, R. Siloff and S. Kovats (eds.)] W HO/EHG/96.7. W orld Health 
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 297 pp.
7
Middle East and Arid Asia
HABIBA GITAY (AUSTRALIA) AND IAN R. NOBLE (AUSTRALIA)
Lead Author:
O. Pilifosova (Kazakstan)
Contributors;
B. Alijani (Iran) and U.N. Safriel (Israel)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
7.1. 
Regional Characterization 
and Baseline Conditions
7.2. 
Regional Climate
7.2.1. Observed Temperature 
and Future Projections
7.2.2. Observed Precipitation 
and Future Projections
7.2.3. Observed Moisture Availability 
and Future Projections
7.3. 
Sensitivities, Adaptations, and 
Vulnerabilities of Key Sectors
7.3.1. General Impacts
7.3.2. Ecosystems
7.З.2.1. Grasslands, Rangelands, 
Woodlands, and Deserts 
13.2.2. Mountain Regions 
7.3.2.3. Biodiversity
7.3.3. Water Resources
7.3.4. Food and Fiber for Human Consumption
233
235
236
236
236
236
236
238
238
239 
239 
241 
241 
243
7.3.4.1. Food and Fiber Production Systems 243
7.3.4.2. Land Degradation and Other 
Environmental Problems Affecting 
Food and Fiber Production 
244
7.3.4.3. Climate Change and 
Desertification 
245
7.3.5.
7.3.6.
7.3.7.
7.3.8.
Coastal Systems
Human Settlements and Urbanization
7.3.6.1. Domestic Energy Consumption
7.3.6.2. Energy, Industry, 
and Transportation
Human Health
Socioeconomic Impact of Climate Change
7.4. 
Possible Approaches to Integration
7.4.1. Economies in Transition
7.4.2. Impact of Human Activity and 
Climate Change on Ecosystems
7.5. 
Research Needs 
Acknowledgments 
References
245
246
246
247
247
248
248
248
249
250 
250 
250
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Middle East and Arid Asia includes 21 countries of the pre­
dominantly arid and semi-arid region of the Middle East and cen­
tral Asia. The region extends from Turkey in the west (26°10’E) 
to Kazakstan in the east (86°30’E) and from Yemen in the south 
(12°40’N) to Kazakstan in the north (50°30’N). Although the 
relief is mostly low, there are several peaks of 7,500 m or more in 
the Hindu Kush and Tien Shan mountain ranges; the lowest point 
is the Dead Sea in Israel (-395 m). Many of the region’s countries 
are landlocked. The total population is 433 million, with half liv­
ing in urban centers; six of the 2 1  countries have urban popula­
tions of over 80%. Countries of the region vary greatly in gross 
national product (GNP)— ^they include relatively resource rich, 
oil exporting countries and several poorer countries.
Climate-. Average monthly mean daily temperatures in the 
region range from -10°C to 25°C in January to 20°C to >35°C 
in July. The rainfall in the region is low but highly variable. 
Average monthly rainfall ranges from 0 mm to 200 mm in 
January and from 0 mm to 500 mm in July.
Climate trends: Records of annual temperatures during the peri­
od 1900-96 show almost no change for most of the Middle East 
region, but a l-2°C/century increase for central Asia. There was 
a 0.7°C increase from 1900 to 1996 for the region as a whole. 
There was no discernible trend in annual precipitation during
1900-95 for the region as a whole, nor in most parts of the 
region— except in the southwestern part of the Arabian penin­
sula, where there was a 200% increase. This increase, however, 
is in relation to a very low base rainfall ( < 2 0 0  mm/yr).
Climate scenarios: Climate models project that temperatures in 
the region will increase by 1-2°C by 2030-2050, with the 
greatest increases in winter in the northeast and in summer in 
part of the southwest. Precipitation is projected to increase 
slightly in the winter throughout the region and in the summer 
to remain the same in the northeast and increase in the south­
west (i.e., the southern part of the Arabian peninsula). These 
precipitation projections vary from model to model and are 
unlikely to be significant. Because of projected increases in 
temperatures, higher evaporation is expected. Soil moisture is 
projected to decrease in most parts of the region, which may 
lead to increased areas of soil degradation.
Because of the arid nature of the region, some sectors will be 
particularly affected by climate change. The impacts on these 
sectors are summarized below.
Ecological systems: The region is mostly arid and semi-arid and 
is dominated by grasslands, rangelands, deserts, and some
woodlands. Vegetation models project little change in most arid 
(or desert) vegetation types under climate change projections. 
The impacts may be greater in the semi-arid lands of the region 
than in the arid lands, especially in composition and distribution 
of vegetation types. The projected small increase in precipita­
tion is unlikely to improve land conditions in the next century, 
partly because soil conditions take a long time to improve and 
partly because human pressure on these systems may contribute 
to land degradation. Improved water-use efficiency by some 
plants under elevated carbon dioxide (CO 2) may lead to some 
improvement in plant productivity and changes in ecosystem 
composition. Grasslands, livestock, and water resources are 
likely to be most vulnerable to climate change in this region 
because they are located mostly in marginal areas. Management 
options, such as better stock management and more integrated 
agroecosystems, could improve land conditions and counteract 
pressures arising from climate change.
Forests/woodlands are important resources, although they 
cover only a small area. They will have to be safeguarded, 
given the heavy use of wood for fuel in some countries.
The region has a large area dominated by mountains, such as the 
Hindu Kush, Karakoram, and Tien Shan mountains in the east­
ern part of the region. Mountain areas are under pressure from 
human use, which is leading to land degradation in some areas. 
Some of the mountains have permanent glaciers, which will be 
affected by climate change. Glacial melt is projected to increase 
under climate change, leading to increased flows in some river 
systems for a few decades; this will be followed, however, by 
a reduction in flow as the glaciers disappear— creating larger 
areas of arid, interior deserts in low- and mid-lying parts of 
central Asia.
A tenth of the world’s known species of higher plants and ani­
mals occur in this region. Many countries are centers of origin 
for crop and fruit tree species of critical importance to world 
food production; thus, they are important sources of genes of 
wild relatives. Few studies have assessed the impact of climate 
change on biodiversity in the region. Current human activity, 
however, is causing a loss of biodiversity.
Water resources: Water shortages already are a problem in 
many countries of this predominantly arid region, and are 
unlikely to be reduced and may be exacerbated by climate 
change. Projected precipitation increases are small, and tem­
peratures and evaporation are projected to rise. Rapid develop­
ment is threatening some water supplies through salinization 
and pollution, and expanding populations are increasing the
demand for water. Adaptation strategies might include more 
efficient organization of water supply, treatment, and delivery 
systems for urban areas and, in arid Asia, increased use of 
groundwater. Measures to conserve or reuse water already 
have been implemented in some countries; such strategies may 
overcome some shortages, especially if they are adopted wide­
ly throughout the region. Changes in cropping practices and 
improved irrigation practices could reduce water use signifi­
cantly in some countries, especially those of the former Soviet 
Union (FSU).
Food and Fiber: Land degradation problems and limited water 
supplies constrain present agricultural productivity and threat­
en the food security of some countries. Though there are few 
projections of the impacts of climate change on food and fiber 
production for the region, studies in Kazakstan and Pakistan 
have suggested some negative impacts on wheat yields. There 
are also projected increases (e.g., winter wheat in Kazakstan). 
Many of the options available for combating existing problems 
will contribute to reducing the anticipated impacts of climate 
change. Food and fiber production concentrated on more inten­
sively managed lands could lead to greater reliability in food 
production and reduce the detrimental impacts of extreme cli­
matic events, such as drought, on rangeland systems. 
Implementation of more flexible risk-management strategies 
(e.g., long-term and appropriate stocking rates, responding to 
variations in precipitation by changing animal numbers annu­
ally)— along with the use of a wider variety of domestic ani­
mals, game ranching, and multiple production systems—  
would provide greater food security to the region.
Health: Human health in the region is variable, reflecting the 
economies of the countries. Some countries, where poverty is 
high, have high infant mortality rates and low life expectancies.
The impacts of climate change are likely to be detrimental to the 
health of the population, mainly through heat stress and possi­
ble increases in vector-borne (e.g., dengue fever and malaria) 
and waterborne diseases. Decreases in water availability and 
food production (especially if there is a shortage of water for 
irrigation) would lead to indirect impacts on human health asso­
ciated with nutritional and hygiene issues.
Integration: Countries of the FSU are undergoing major eco­
nomic changes, resulting in changes in agricultural systems 
and management. This transition is likely to provide significant 
“win-win” opportunities for the conservation of resources, to 
offset the impacts of climate change. Opportunities to change 
crop types and introduce more efficient irrigation are among 
the most promising. Human activity can exacerbate the effect 
of climate change in this arid/semi-arid region, leading to long­
term detrimental effects on ecosystems and human health. The 
Aral Sea is an illustrative example of the multiplicative effects 
of resource overuse, which can lead to local environmental and 
even climate change. Extensive redirection of water from feed­
er rivers to irrigated agriculture since 1960 has led to a reduc­
tion in the surface area of the lake, as well as damage to the 
surrounding wetlands and the species that depend on them. Air 
temperature in the vicinity of the lake has increased. Saline and 
polluted dust from the exposed lake bed has been implicated in 
significant health problems and increases in infant mortality.
There are some obvious research needs. Clearly, many basic 
physiological and ecological studies of the effects of changes 
in atmospheric and climatic conditions are necessary. The most 
pressing need over much of the region is for sound assessment 
and monitoring programs to establish current baselines and 
identify rates of change.
Middle East and Arid Asia
235
This chapter addresses 21 countries of the predominantly arid 
and semi-arid region of the Middle East and central Asia (see 
Figure 7-1 and Box 7-1). The region extends from Turkey in 
the west (26°10’E) to Kazakstan in the east (86°30’E), and 
from Yemen in the south (12°42’N) to Kazakstan in the north 
(50°30’N). The relief is mostly low. The highest point is 
Communism Peak in Tajikistan (7,495 m); the lowest point is 
the Dead Sea in Israel (-395 m). Many countries in the region 
are landlocked.
Although it is common to separate semi-arid, arid, and 
extreme arid parts of a country/region, they are amalgamated 
for most purposes in this chapter and (for conciseness) 
referred to as “arid” unless a specific distinction is needed. In 
the Second Assessment Report (SAR), much of this region 
was discussed in the chapters on deserts (see IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 3) and rangelands (see IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 2).
Because there are few statistics specifically for arid parts of the 
region, statistics for whole countries have been used. Data col­
lection is sparse for many countries in the region, for a range 
of social and physical reasons. Economic and social statistics 
often are unavailable for countries that were part of the FSU. 
In addition, with the exception of Kazakstan, few countries 
have studied the impacts of climate change in this region. The
7.1. 
Regional Characterization and Baseline Conditions
Box 7-1. Middle East and Arid Asia
Afghanistan
Pakistan
Bahrain
Qatar
Iran, Islamic Republic of
Saudi Arabia
Iraq
Syria
Israel
Tajikistan
Jordan
Turkey
Kazakstan
Turkmenistan
Kuwait
United Arab Emirates
Kyrgyz Republic
Uzbekistan
Lebanon
Yemen
Oman
brevity of this chapter reflects the lack of available published 
literature. This lack of data would have to be addressed in the 
near future, especially for some sectors (e.g., fisheries).
The region is vulnerable to climate change because it is dry and 
water availability is thus limited. In some countries, the ability 
to adapt to the impacts of climate change will be reduced by a 
lack of infrastructure.
The region covers approximately 9% of the world’s land area. 
It is dominated by arid (50%) and semi-arid (11%) lands. The 
total population is 433 million, or 8 % of the global population.
Figure 7-1: The Middle East and Arid Asia region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic 
Information System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
236
M iddle East and Arid Asia
Annual population growth rates range from -6.5% (Kuwait) to 
+5.8% (Afghanistan), compared with a world average of 1.6% 
for 1990-95. Half of the population lives in urban centers 
(compared with a world average of 45%), and 6  of the 21 coun­
tries are more than 80% urbanized. The population density 
varies between 
6  
persons/km2 
(Kazakstan) 
and 
831 
persons/km^ (Bahrain); the regional average of 38 persons/km^ 
is lower than the world’s mean density (44 persons/km2).
A regional summary of various economic, social, and environ­
mental statistics from the World Resources Institute (WRI, 
1994,1996) is presented in Table 7-1 (see Annex D-5 for coun­
try-based data on most of the variables listed).
Annual water consumption in the region is 1,710 m^ per capi­
ta, compared with the world average of 645 m^ per capita. In 
many countries, the dominant water use is for irrigation to sup­
port small— ^but economically important— permanent pasture- 
lands and croplands. The fraction of available water that is 
withdrawn annually for consumption varies from as little as 
10% in Syria to, effectively, more than 100% in countries heav­
ily reliant on desalinization.
The region is heterogeneous in terms of the countries’ 
economies. Because it includes some of the richest and some 
of the poorest countries in the world, regional average eco­
nomic performance statistics are misleading (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 13.7). Industry and services contribute 82% of the 
gross domestic product (GDP), and agriculture accounts for the 
remainder. Per capita GNP has fallen substantially over the 
past decade, in part as a result of declining oil prices and polit­
ical disruptions (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.7).
Climate models that include the effects of sulfate aerosols 
(GFDL and CCC) (IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 6.7) project that 
the tem perature in the region will increase 1-2°C  by 
2030-2050. The greatest increases are projected for winter in 
the northeast and for summer in part of the region’s southwest 
(IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 6.10).
7.2.2. 
Observed Precipitation and Future Projections
Rainfall is low in most of the region, but it is highly variable sea­
sonally and interannually. Average monthly rainfall ranges from 
0 mm to 200 mm in January and from 0 mm to 500 mm in July 
(Oxford World Atlas, 1994). There was no discernible trend in 
annual precipitation during 1901-95 for the region as a whole 
(see Annex A, Figure A-9), nor in most parts of the region—  
except in the southwestern part of the Arabian peninsula, where 
there was a 200% increase (see Annex A, Figure A-1). This 
increase, however, is in relation to a very low base rainfall ( < 2 0 0  
mm/yr). Precipitation tends to be very seasonal; in the Middle 
East countries, for example, precipitation occurs during winter, 
and the summer dry period lasts for 5-9 months (UNEP, 1997).
Winter precipitation is projected to increase slightly (<0.5 
mm/day) throughout the region; summer precipitation is project­
ed to remain the same in the northeastern part of the region and 
increase (0.5-1 mm/day) in the southwest (i.e., the southern part 
of the Arabian peninsula). These projected changes vary, how­
ever, from model to model and are unlikely to be significant.
7.2.3. 
Observed Moisture Availability 
and Future Projections
1.2. 
Regional Climate
Two-thirds of the region can be classified as hot or cold desert. 
In the northern part of the region, a steppe climate prevails, 
with cold winters and hot summers. A  narrow zone contiguous 
to the Mediterranean Sea is classified as a Mediterranean zone, 
with wet and moderately warm winters and dry summers. 
Permafrost zones exist in high mountain areas in the southeast 
part of the region.
7.2.1. 
Observed Temperature and Future Projections
Temperatures in the region range from -10°C to 25°C (January) 
to 20°C to >35°C (July) (Oxford World Atlas, 1994). The 
observed change in annual temperature in the region from 
1955-74 to 1975-94 was 0.5°C (IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 3.4). 
Temperature changes were smallest in December-February (0 to 
-0.25°C) and largest in September-November (~1°C). Annual 
temperatures in most of the Middle East region showed almost 
no change during the period 1901-96, but a l-2°C/century 
increase was discernible in central Asia (based on the 5°x5° grid; 
see Annex A, Figure A-2). There was a 0.7°C increase during 
1901-96 in the region as a whole (see Annex A, Figure A-9).
Soil moisture is projected to decrease in most parts of the 
region because projected precipitation increases are small and 
evaporation will increase with rising temperatures (IPCC 1996, 
WG I, Figure 6.12).
The ratio of precipitation to potential évapotranspiration 
(P:PET) is a measure of moisture availability and an indicator 
of the type of vegetation that an area can support. The Middle 
East and Arid Asian region has a P:PET ratio in the range of 
0.01-1.6; most of the area has a value of <0.45— typical of 
semi-arid and arid climates that support grasslands, shrublands, 
and some woodlands. Projected changes in P:PET for different 
model runs show no consistent trend (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 14): Some models project a decrease (greater aridity) 
and some an increase. The lack of data specifically from the 
arid and semi-arid regions may contribute to this uncertainty.
7.3. 
Sensitivities, Adaptations,
and Vnlnerabilities of Key Sectors
This section discusses the region’s major vulnerabilities— 
particularly those that apply to large parts of the region; many 
impacts are common to the region as a whole. Later in the
Table 7-1: Summary o f socioeconomic, land, and biological data for the M iddle East and Arid Asia region.
Middle East and Arid Asia 
237
Variable
Worid
as% 
of the World
Middle East and Arid Asia R ^ o n
25th 
75th 
Average 
Percentile 
Percentile
Number of 
Countries 
Included
GNP total million US$
48,940
8,584
57,767
16
GDP PPP % growth 1983-93
3.1
1.5
4.4
1 2
GDP per capita PPP 1992 INT$
5,729
3347
8361
17
Distribution of GDP 1993, industry (%)
37
28
46
15
Distribution of GDP 1993, services (%)
45
41
53
15
Distribution of GDP 1993, agriculture (%)
18
5
28
15
Population 1995 (thousands)
5,716,426
7.6
20,622
3,009
20,141
2 1
Annual average population change 1990-95 (%)
1 . 6
2.7
2.3
3.7
18
Population density (#/km2) (mean-weighted)
44
38
24
79
2 1
Life expectancy 1990-95
64.7
66.4
6 6 . 8
69.9
2 0
Infant mortality (per 1,0(Ю live births 1990-95)
64.0
49.4
30.0
52.5
2 0
% uiban population
45
50
39
85
2 1
% in absolute poverty in rural areas
28
15
30
9
% urban population with access to safe water
91
92
1 0 0
18
% rural population with access to safe water
77
70
1 0 0
17
Total land area (Mha)
13,098,404
8 . 8
54,704
8 3 6 0
65309
2 0
% arid land (mean-weighted)
50
77
59
95
15
% arid land with soil constraints (mean-weighted)
90
13
% semi-arid land (mean-weighted)
9
15
% semi-arid with soil constraints (mean-weighted)
99.8
1 2
% forestAvoodland
31.8
1.4
4.7
0 . 8
4.9
16
% pastureland 1991-93 (mean-weighted)
25.7
42.8
6 . 8
44.7
2 0
% cropland (mean-weighted)
1 1 . 1
1 1 . 8
2.3
17.1
2 0
% domesticated land (% of land area)
38.0
40.3
23.5
57.0
19
% irrigated land (% of CTopland)
17.0
41.1
15.0
60.0
18
Cbastline (km)
6.5
1677
19
% grain-fed livestock
36.1
24.5
46.0
16
Annual average livestock numbers (СЮО)
3,268,787
407,450
20,369
1,334
16330
2 0
% of land area conserved under lUCN category I-V
7.1
2.5
0.3
3.8
19
Total # of known species of vertebrates and higher plants
295,299
10.3
1,697
157
2,126
18
% of these species classed as threatened
1 0 . 8
1 . 0
17.8
18
% of these species classed as endemic
5.3
0 . 0
5.0
18
% water use for agriculture (1987)
69.0
78.7
79.0
91.5
19
% water use by industry (1987)
23.0
8 . 6
4.5
9.5
19
% domestic water use (1987)
8 . 0
1,271
3.3
13.5
19
% annual withdrawal of water (1975-89)
8 . 0
63.0
24.0
70.0
18
Annual renewable water resource per capita 1995 (m^)
7,176
4,613
637
5307
19
Total internal renewable water resource 1995 (km^)
41,022
3.5
76.3
3.4
1,05.3
19
Annual water withdrawal per capita (m^)
645
1,710
466
2374
19
Total energy production 1993 (PJ)
337,518
13.6
2,859
6 8
2,904
16
Traditional fuel consumption
as % of total energy consumption
6
5.9
0 . 0
1 . 0
17
Notes:
1) Data from World Resources 1996-97 (WRI, 1996).
2) Data for the following countries (maximum 21), when available, were included in the above table: Afghanistan, Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, 
Israel, Jordan, Kazakstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyz Republic, Lebanon, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tajikistan, Turkey, 
Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, and Yemen.
3) Country-by-country data are presented in Annex D.
238
M iddle East and A rid Asia
section, some sector-specific impacts (e.g., those affecting 
agriculture or uplands), adaptations, and vulnerabilities for 
smaller parts of the region are highlighted.
7.3.1. 
General Impacts
The region is mostly semi-arid and arid, with significant areas 
of extreme aridity (i.e., deserts, as defined in IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 3). All areas experience wide fluctuations in rainfall, 
and their native plants and animals are adapted to coping with 
sequences of extreme climatic conditions. In many of these eco­
logical systems, the initial climatic changes are unlikely to cre­
ate conditions significantly outside the present range of varia­
tion (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 3); thus, impacts from climate 
change may not be apparent for several decades.
Models that project changes in global vegetation in response to 
a doubled-C 0
2 -driven climate suggest little change in desert 
(arid) communities. One study, which used four general circu­
lation model (GCM) climate projections, concluded that 
deserts were the most stable of the 16 vegetation types consid­
ered (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 3); it estimated that only 
59-66%  of all combined vegetation types for the world would 
remain in the same category, whereas 82-92% of existing 
deserts would retain this classification. The impact of climate 
change may be greater in the semi-arid areas of the region than 
in the arid areas. Agriculture, natural grasslands, livestock, and 
water resources in marginal areas are most likely to be vulner­
able to climate change (Smith et al., 1996).
Although precipitation is projected by some models to increase 
slightly, this increase will have little impact because most of 
the region will remain arid. In rangelands or semi-arid lands, 
increased precipitation eventually may lead to improved soil 
conditions, including larger accumulations of organic matter, 
improved soil field capacity, enhanced moisture availability, 
and changed runoff patterns (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 3). 
This process is slow (taking 400 years or more), however, so 
little advantage will accrue to these ecosystems during the next 
century. A more important process may be the demonstrated 
increase in the water-use efficiency of plants when high levels 
of CO 2 are present in the atmosphere (Bazzaz et al., 1996). In 
atmospheres rich in CO 2 , plants can take up the CO 2  necessary 
for photosynthesis with less water loss from their stomatal 
pores. This efficiency gain has been demonstrated to be most 
advantageous in plants growing in water-limited circum­
stances— and thus may lead to higher productivity throughout 
much of the region. The response of individual species and 
communities varies considerably, however. In high-C 0 2  condi­
tions, some species conserve water by using less water to main­
tain previous rates of productivity (i.e., photosynthesis); other 
species increase their productivity and maintain relatively high 
rates of water use. There is little understanding about how 
whole communities of plants respond, and, unfortunately, few 
studies have been done within the region. Nevertheless, the net 
result of increased water-use efficiency should be increased 
plant productivity in arid and semi-arid ecosystems; this effect
probably will outweigh any direct effects stemming from 
increased precipitation resulting from climate change.
The processes associated with changed climatic and atmos­
pheric conditions are expected to lead to changes in the com­
position of many plant communities— such as the mix between 
grasses and shrubs or weeds and non-weeds (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapters 2 and 3). There also is evidence that the forage 
quality (e.g., the ratio of nitrogen to carbon) and the protein 
content of some cereals may decline. Although it has not been 
possible to test the effects of high CO 2  atmospheres on exten­
sive areas of crops and pastures with large grazing animals 
(Diaz, 1995), it is possible that they may affect farm manage­
ment systems significantly.
Even where wetter conditions prevail, however, any “green­
ing” of the deserts and rangelands often might be counteracted 
by pressure from the expanding human population and associ­
ated desertification problems. Climatic conditions and social 
pressures vary greatly in a region that ranges from 
Mediterranean climate to extreme deserts, with economies as 
varied as those of the oil producing states, Israel, and the coun­
tries of the FSU. In the latter group of countries, the impacts of 
climate change are likely to be relatively small compared with 
the impacts of economic transitions on agricultural systems 
and the environment (see Section 7.3.4.1).
7.3.2. 
Ecosystems
• 
The region is characterized by arid and semi-arid lands, on 
which it depends for much o f its economic activity (e.g., 
agriculture and livestock grazing in rangelands). These 
ecosystems are under extreme pressure from human activi­
ties and current climatic conditions (e.g., high temperatures 
and prolonged droughts). Because o f the current marginal- 
ity o f soil-water and nutrient reserves, some ecosystems in 
semi-arid regions may be among the first to show the effects 
o f climate change. However, a number o f management 
options (e.g., better stock management, more-integrated 
agroecosystems) could improve land conditions.
The relatively hospitable mountain regions are under par­
ticular pressure from human settlements and commercial 
cultivation, which have led to land degradation and adverse 
effects on water supply. Glacial melt is forecast to increase 
under climate change, which would lead to increased sum­
mer flows in some river systems for a few  decades, followed 
by a reduction in flow as the glaciers disappear.
A  tenth o f the world’s known species o f higher plants and 
animals occurs in this region. Some countries (particular­
ly Turkey and Tajikistan) are centers o f origin for many 
crop and fruit-tree species; as such, they are important 
sources o f genes for the wild relatives. Few studies are 
available to assess the impact o f climate change on the 
biodiversity o f the region; given its importance, however, 
there is a need for such studies. Biodiversity is being lost 
in the region because o f human activities, especially land 
degradation and the overuse o f resources.
Middle East and A rid Asia
239
7.3.2.1. 
Grasslands, Rangelands, Woodlands, and Deserts
Half of the region (see Table 7-1) is classified as arid land, much 
of which is true desert (i.e., extremely arid, as defined in IPCC 
1996, WG II, Chapter 3). Another tenth of the region is classi­
fied as semi-arid rangeland, dominated by grasslands or shrub­
lands. About 10% of the arid and semi-arid land is classified as 
having some soil constraints, indicating either that it shows sig­
nificant soil degradation or that it is desertified (see Table 7-1). 
The region’s major deserts and some of their characteristics are 
listed in Table 7-2, along with their classification (i.e., semi- 
arid, arid, or extremely arid, as defined in IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 3). For comparative purposes, deserts in adjoining 
regions (e.g., the Gobi desert from the Temperate Asia region) 
are included. Deserts are classified as cold deserts (e.g., upland 
deserts of Middle Asia that are 1,200 m above sea level) or hot 
deserts (e.g., those in the Middle East). The seasonality of the 
deserts’ rainfall varies; some receive predominantly winter rain, 
whereas others receive mostly summer rain. Deserts with very 
sporadic rain events are classified as aseasonal.
Most semi-arid lands in the region are classified as rangelands, 
with a cover of grassland or shrubland. Moister areas are cov­
ered mostly by woodlands; the few forested areas account for 
only 5% of the land area in the region. Together, these areas 
represent 1% of the world’s woodlands/forests (see Table 7-1). 
The region’s forests and woodlands nevertheless are important 
resources that will have to be safeguarded, given the heavy use 
of wood as fuel in some countries.
Many desert organisms already are near their limits of temper­
ature tolerance, and some may not be able to persist under hot­
ter conditions. Because of the current marginality of soil-water 
and nutrient reserves, some ecosystems in semi-arid regions 
may be among the first to show the effects of climate change 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 4). Higher temperatures in arid 
regions that experience cold winters are likely to allow spring 
growth to begin earlier. In some cases, this effect may result in 
earlier depletion of water reserves accumulated over the cool­
er winter period— leading to an even longer period of potential 
drought (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 3) and a potential reduc­
tion in animal productivity, including wool production.
The influence of climate change on large-scale events, such as 
wildfires, can be inferred only indirectly. However, some 
authors have suggested that an increase in climate variability 
may increase the frequency and severity of wildfires in grass­
lands and rangelands (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). Even 
without an increase in climate variability, fire frequencies may 
increase in some areas as a result of warmer weather. Fires may 
further reduce local precipitation because fire-emitted aerosols 
increase the number of cloud condensation nuclei, producing 
smaller cloud droplets that are less likely to fall as rain (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 1.4.2).
In arid and semi-arid rangelands, annual net primary produc­
tivity is strongly influenced by fire and climate. Fires alter the 
structure of vegetation and affect nutrient cycling. By making
nitrogen and other nutrients more available to soil microorgan­
isms, fire may result in enhanced emissions of nitrous oxide 
(N 2 O) from soil. Most of these emissions are short-term effects 
that occur immediately following the fire (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 2). Parts of the region that become subject to more fre­
quent fires also could suffer long-term effects, such as decreas­
es in soil organic matter, changes in species composition, and 
long-term losses of nitrogen through volatilization (i.e., loss to 
the atmosphere during the fire) and immobilization (as very 
stable compounds in the soil). These effects would exacerbate 
any nitrogen limitation, which often is a factor in arid and 
semi-arid areas (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2).
The MAPSS and ВЮМЕЗ models of vegetation cover classi­
fy the region as arid lands dominated by shrub/woodland/ 
grasslands; these models project little change in cover under 
the climate scenarios used (see Figure C-1), although they pro­
ject a 1-10% decrease in leaf area index (see Figure C-4). 
However, these models— ^which are based on a simple match­
ing of vegetation to climate— are unable to take into account 
many of the more complex interactions described above.
A vulnerability assessment of the productivity of semi-desert 
rangelands in the Aral Sea region shows that this region is very 
sensitive to changes in precipitation. Under a temperature 
increase of 2°C and a precipitation increase of 0.2-0.3 mm/day, 
grassland productivity is projected to increase by 20-55%. 
Under a temperature increase of 0.5°C and reduced precipita­
tion, however, productivity could be reduced by 6-32%; tem­
perature increases of 2-3°C, combined with reduced precipita­
tion, could reduce grassland productivity by 40-90%  (Smith et 
a l, 1996).
7.3.2.2. 
Mountain Regions
Although most of the region is relatively flat, mountains (e.g., 
Hindu Kush, Karakoram, and Tien Shan) exist in the eastern 
part. Afghanistan, Kazakstan, Pakistan, Tajikistan, and 
Uzbekistan all have mountains of up to 5,000 m; the highest 
point in the region is Communism Peak in Tajikistan. The Kazak 
uplands in Kazakstan reach 1,560 m. Much of the Arabian 
peninsula has upland areas of 1 ,0 0 0 - 2 , 0 0 0  m, and some areas in 
Yemen and Oman reach 3,700 m and 3,000 m, respectively. 
Areas in western Pakistan are above 2,000 m, and the uplands in 
Iran and Turkey reach 2,000 m and 3,000 m, respectively. 
Countries with very few or no uplands (i.e., areas above 500 m) 
include Iraq, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates.
In this arid region, the mountainous areas are wet, cool, and 
hospitable for human dwelling and commercial cultivation. 
Human encroachment in mountain regions has reduced vegeta­
tion cover, which has increased soil-moisture evaporation, ero­
sion, and siltation—^with adverse effects on water quality and 
other resources (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.1.5).
Some mountains in the region have permanent glaciers that 
will be affected by climate change. There will be pronounced
240
M iddle East and A rid Asia
lO
T-H
I
1 1
в
i
z
é
a  
a
I I
I
О
1Я
U1 in
cn r-
s^s I S I I I § o
i  i  si i  i  . i  «
z z z z z
о 
о 
о 
о 
o_
z z z
О О О
9  s  ? 
t  t
E: ÇJ 
en
i i |  
l i l r ï s ?
lA >A T  
m a  a  
' 
' 
'
а д  
0 0  
а д  
а д  
а д  
а д
ÜÜ=s 
’I,'I,-я ‘I,-a '1.13
g  
S S m g w g f f l
ffi m 
m ffl 
й 
m
I I I  
1 1  
1
e •■§ :§ e a  :§ :§ a
f
g  g
à à i  
è è è ü é é ^
n
z z 
z z z
çn ^  CN
a  a  ro a  + 2
î î ^ s s î
Л
s s l l ^ ï ï
^  é  é
§
O) ^  ^
S  
^  
?k
2  I  g> 
t
I I I
^
 z  &
l l l g
40
5S
04
«Ü
>О
-gpa
in
00On
a
•cЛ
c0)
tâСЛ
00
0\
40
r-
04
00
40
04
cо
‘5b
«Л
!я
(3
I #
Middle East and Arid Asia
241
alterations in glacier-melt runoff as climate warms in the 
region. Glaciers will provide extra runoff as ice melts. In most 
mountain regions, this increase in runoff will last for a few 
decades, then decrease as the glaciers disappear. For countries 
with very large glaciers, the extra runoff may persist for a cen­
tury or more and substantially increase regional water 
resources. Tentative estimates have been made for central Asia, 
based on mass balances from a small number of Tien Shan 
glaciers for the period 1959-1992 (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
7.4.2). Extrapolation to the whole of central Asia suggests that 
glacier mass has decreased by 804 km^ over that time, repre­
senting a 15% increase in glacial runoff.
A decrease in snowfall and glacier ice would influence the sea­
sonality of river flow by reducing the production of meltwater 
in the warm season. The expected smoothing of the annual 
runoff amplitude could be beneficial (e.g., energy production 
in winter, reduction of summer flood peaks) and detrimental 
(e.g., reduced water supply for summer irrigation in dry areas). 
As mountain glaciers begin to disappear, the volume of sum­
mer runoff eventually will be reduced as a result of loss of ice 
resources. Consequences for downstream agriculture, which 
relies on this water for irrigation, will be unfavorable in some 
places. For example, low- and mid-lying parts of central Asia 
are likely to change gradually into more-arid, interior deserts 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.5.1).
In parts of central Asia, regional increases in temperature will 
lead to an increased probability of events such as mudflows 
and avalanches that could affect human settlements (lafiazova, 
1997).
7.3.2.3. 
Biodiversity
About 10% of the world’s known species of higher plants and 
animals occur in this region; half of these species are found 
only within the region. About 10% of the region’s known 
species are listed as threatened. In 1995, approximately 2.5% 
of the land in the region was protected under some conserva­
tion status (lUCN categories I-V; Table 7-1).
Some of the countries in the region (particularly Turkey and 
Tajikistan) are centers of origin for many crop and fruit-tree 
species; as such, they are important sources of genes for the wild 
relatives of these species, and even for new varieties that may be 
resistant to drought or disease. These species also provide a liv­
ing laboratory for looking at possible new varieties, which may 
arise in response to climate change (World Bank, 1995b).
There is a general lack of detailed and coordinated information 
on biodiversity and environment in the region, resulting in 
temporal and spatial gaps and a lack of quality control in the 
available information (UNEP, 1997). Most of the available 
information is on vertebrates, with emphasis on birds and 
mammals. Some countries of the Middle East are rectifying 
information gaps by setting up database networks. In addition, the 
Middle Eastern countries have set up joint programs to protect
biodiversity across political boundaries and to carry out biodi­
versity inventories.
In the Middle East, biodiversity is being lost as a result of 
development activities; land degradation (especially overgraz­
ing and deforestation, leading to loss of plant cover); marine 
pollution; overfishing; hunting; and the overuse of freshwater, 
which affects the plants and animals of oases and wetlands 
(UNEP, 1997). Factors that are threatening biodiversity in cen­
tral arid Asia include rapid changes in land use, extensive but 
poorly managed irrigation, more-intensive use of rangelands, 
medicinal and food-plant collection, dam building, and fuel- 
wood collection (Bie and Imevbore, 1995; Kharin, 1995; 
World Bank, 1995b).
Wetlands, especially ephemeral wetlands, are an important part 
of this region culturally and economically, as well as in terms 
of its biodiversity (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 3). The impor­
tance of particular wetlands to birds in semi-arid areas varies 
greatly from year to year, depending on local and regional con­
ditions (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 6.5.2), especially because 
the source of the water in some wetlands is thousands of kilo­
meters away (e.g., the Tigris and Euphrates). In recent years, 
irrigation and artificial storage of water has created new habi­
tats for water birds in central Asia, leading to an increase in 
their population (Bie and Imevbore, 1995). Few data are avail­
able to assess the impact of climate change on these systems; 
because the region has such limited rainfall, however, the wet­
lands may be among the most sensitive ecosystems to changes 
in the amount and seasonality of rainfall and evaporation. Such 
changes may lead to local extinction of some populations 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 6.5.2).
Many countries (especially in the Middle East) are aware of 
these pressures and are implementing programs to conserve 
their biodiversity (UNEP, 1997).
7.3.3. 
Water Resources
• 
In an area dominated by arid and semi-arid lands, water 
is a very limited resource. Droughts, desertification, and 
water shortages are permanent features o f life in many 
countries in the region. Rapid development is threatening 
some water supplies through salinization and pollution, 
and increasing standards o f living and expanding popula­
tions are increasing demand. Water is a scarce resource—  
and will continue to be so in the future. Projections o f 
changes in runoff and water supply under climate change 
scenarios vary. Some countries are developing programs 
to conserve and reuse water or to achieve more efficient 
irrigation. Some countries are vulnerable to reductions in 
runoff; because they rely heavily on hydropower produc­
tion, their energy supply is likely to be affected.
In semi-arid and arid environments, rainfall is short-lived and 
often very intense. Because soils tend to be thin, much of the 
rainfall runs directly off of the surface, only to infiltrate deeper
242
M iddle East and A rid Asia
soils downslope or along river beds (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.2.1). Thus, water availability is a major concern in 
most countries of the region (Middle East Water Commission, 
1995; UNEP, 1997). Some countries (e.g., Syria, Iraq, Jordan, 
Lebanon) have reliable sources of surface water; the majority, 
however, depend either on groundwater or on desalinization 
for their water supply— ^both of which enable them to use water 
in amounts far exceeding the estimated renewable fresh water 
in the country (World Bank, 1995c; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 4; GEO, 1997). Wetlands can retain water, especially 
during dry periods, and thus can enhance recharge to major 
aquifers (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 6.3.3.2.3). However, in 
semi-arid and arid areas, where groundwater recharge occurs 
after flood events, changes in the frequency and magnitude of 
rainfall events will alter the number of recharge events (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 10.3.6). Water from glacial melt is an 
important contribution to the flow of some river systems, and 
changes in seasonality and amount from this source are likely 
to occur as a result of climate change (see Section 7.3.2.2). 
Fossil aquifers are important water sources in many deserts; 
they will not be affected on a time scale relevant to humans 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 3).
As a result of rapid increases in the income of some coun­
tries— with resulting increases in living standards— the 
demand for water has increased, such that many countries in 
the Middle East will experience chronic water shortages (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 14.2.2; UNEP 1997). The list of nations 
with water supply problems is likely to expand as a conse­
quence of the accelerated pace of urbanization. In some coun­
tries (e.g., Kuwait), monitoring programs for water quality 
have been established in an attempt to maintain water quality 
in accordance with World Health Organization (WHO) stan­
dards (UNEP, 1997). It is projected that the population without 
safe drinking water will almost double by 2030, assuming a 
“business-as-usual” scenario (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
14.2.2).
Many countries in the region have highly urbanized popula­
tions, for whom it is easier and more efficient to organize water 
supply, treatment, and delivery systems than it is for rural pop­
ulations. Moreover, demand can be more easily managed to 
promote water-use efficiency in urban areas. In most countries 
in the region, a large proportion of the population has running 
water in their homes. Although municipal and industrial water 
use will grow, per capita domestic use is likely to decrease and 
the quality of drinking water to increase with centralized treat­
ment. However, future urban water demands are likely to com­
pete with the irrigated agricultural sector (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 14.2.2); 15 of the countries in the region use more than 
75% of their water for Irrigation (see Table 7-1).
There are other problems associated with some water bodies in 
the region, especially in areas of high human density. In these 
areas, habitat degradation often is important, causing many 
semi-enclosed water bodies to become eutrophic (Kharin, 
1995; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 16.1.1). Dryland salinization 
also is having an impact on water quality in some countries
where groundwater is contaminated with salt; in other coun­
tries (e.g., Oman and United Arab Emirates), seawater has 
intruded into freshwater aquifers (UNEP, 1997).
Efforts are being made in some countries to use wastewater 
(Sarikaya and Eroglu, 1993; Abdelrahman and Alajmi, 1994; 
Shelef et al., 1994; Shelef and Azov, 1996)— and to use water 
more efficiently, especially for agriculture. The Middle East 
Water Commission (1995) suggests that, for some countries, a 
reduction of 30% in water use for agriculture would alleviate 
some water crises. Increased recycling of water is being 
explored in areas where there are shortages of water, either 
perennially (e.g., Israel and Oman) or during some seasons 
(e.g., Turkey in the summer, when shortages are exacerbated 
by tourist demand) (Middle East Water Commission, 1995; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 14.2.2). In many of the countries 
of the FSU, plans are underway to increase the efficiency of 
irrigation practices, with savings of over 2 0 % expected in some 
regions (see Section 7.4.1).
Populations in many countries of the region are vulnerable 
because they depend on water supplies from outside their polit­
ical boundaries. Formal agreements are in place, or are being 
developed, to share the water resources of rivers flowing across 
political boundaries (e.g., Euphrates, Tigris, Jordan, and 
Indus); such agreements would reduce the potential for future 
conflicts over water (Blaikie et a l, 1994; Middle East Water 
Commission, 1995).
River-basin runoff is very sensitive to small variations in cli­
matic conditions and in the vegetation cover of its catchment. 
Riebsame et a l (1995) used two GCMs (GISS and GFDL) to 
assess the effect of climate change on various rivers through­
out the world, including the Indus. The GCM climate scenarios 
projected an increase of 11-16% in annual runoff for the Indus. 
The authors also assessed the effect of a 2°C temperature 
increase with +2 0 %, 0 %, and -2 0 % changes in precipitation 
and found that runoff is more sensitive to changes in precipita­
tion than to changes in temperature.
The effect of climate change on runoff has been studied for 
some river basins in the region. Based on two GCM runs 
(CCC-Jl and GFDL-A3) with 2хС0г equilibrium climate sce­
narios, several mountain and plains watersheds experienced 
30-35%  reductions in runoff in years of water shortages and 
20-25%  reductions in years of excess water. A  projection based 
on a third GCM run (GFDL-X2g transient model) confirms the 
tendency for a reduction in water resources during years of 
plentiful water supply for mountainous watersheds (Pilifosova 
et a l, 1996). In the short term, however, some studies suggest 
increases in water resources. For example, the above simula­
tion projects increases of up to 1 2 % in the water resources of 
some watersheds in 2000 and 2030 (Golubtsov et a l, 1996).
Some countries in the region produce large amounts of 
hydropower; Tajikistan, for example, is the third-highest pro­
ducer in the world (World Bank, 1995b). Changes in runoff to 
the system could have a significant effect on the power output
Middle East and A rid Asia
243
of these countries. One of the bigger river systems in the 
region, the Euphrates and Tigris, has a number of dams that are 
used for irrigation and water supply as well as for hydropower. 
To date, no studies have assessed the effect of climate change 
on these systems. However, if there is a reduction in total 
runoff as a result of climate change, the increased demand for 
agricultural and hydropower activities could place more pres­
sure on water resources.
7.3.4. 
Food and Fiber fo r H um an Consumption
• 
Many countries in the region are highly dependent on 
agriculture. Land degradation problems and limited water 
supplies restrict present agricultural productivity and 
threaten the food security o f some countries. There are few  
projections o f the impacts o f climate change on food and 
fiber production for the region. However, many o f the 
options available for combating existing problems will 
contribute to reducing the anticipated impacts o f climate 
change. A  shift in reliance toward more suitable and more 
intensively managed land areas fo r food and fiber produc­
tion— along with selected plant and animal introduc­
tions— could be beneficial, allowing greater reliability in 
food production; such approaches also would reduce the 
detrimental impacts o f extreme climatic events, such as 
drought, on rangeland systems. Implementation o f more 
flexible risk-management strategies (e.g., long-term and 
appropriate stocking rates, responding to variations in 
precipitation by changing animal numbers annually)—  
along with the use o f various kinds o f domestic animals, 
game ranching, multiple production systems, commercial 
hunting, and tourism— would facilitate socioeconomic 
activity and provide some food security to the region. 
These strategies can be viewed as “no regrets” options 
that might be adopted by many countries in the region 
because they would be beneficial even without any climate 
change.
7.3.4.1. 
Food and Fiber Production Systems
The climate of the region greatly limits the portion of land 
presently suitable for livestock production and crop agricul­
ture. Two-thirds of the domestic livestock are supported on 
rangelands (IPCC 1996, WG II, Table 2-1), although in some 
countries, large percentages of animal fodder come from crop 
residues (e.g., 70% in Pakistan) (Pakistan Country Report,
1994). In many countries, crop agriculture is highly dependent 
on irrigation because rainfall is low and highly variable 
(Khan, 1985; UNEP, 1997). Only 8  of the 21 countries of the 
region have more than the world average area of arable land 
per person (0.26 ha/person); some countries have effectively 
no arable land. (Kazakstan is an exception, with more than 2 
ha of arable land per person.) Nevertheless, agriculture is an 
important sector in the region as a whole, contributing a high 
proportion of the GDP in about half of the countries (>10% 
net added value in agriculture as a percent of GDP, compared
with the world average of about 5%; World Bank, 1997). 
About a third of the GDP of the Kyrgyz Republic, Syria, 
Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan can be attributed to agriculture.
Many countries in the region (e.g., the countries of the FSU, 
Syria, Israel), are highly dependent on local agriculture for food; 
although some (e.g., Turkey and Kazakstan) are major food 
exporters, most countries are net importers of food (World Bank, 
1997). Some countries (e.g., Tajikistan) rely heavily on imports 
of grain, both for human consumption and for livestock produc­
tion (World Bank, 1995b). Land degradation and the consequen­
tial need to move to even more marginal lands threaten food 
security and the economies of countries that are highly depen­
dent on agriculture.
In some countries, up to 89% of the croplands are irrigated 
(41% for the region as a whole; see Table 7-1). Improved irri­
gation practices (e.g., wider use of drip and underground irri­
gation) could save up to 50% of the water used in convention­
al irrigation systems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 4). 
Adoption of such conservation techniques could become 
increasingly important if climate change leads to reduced 
water availability. The expansion of winter-growing crops that 
demand much less water (and would use more of the project­
ed precipitation in the region) may be another option (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Chapter 4). Some of the FSU countries are mak­
ing major changes in agricultural practices and would be able 
to incorporate new varieties that might respond better to low- 
water conditions (e.g., cotton in Tajikistan) (World Bank, 
1995b).
Increasing populations in areas with limited arable land have 
led some countries (e.g., Jordan, Iraq, Syria, and Yemen) to use 
irrigated farming throughout the year, as well as to increase 
their use of fertilizers and pesticides (UNEP, 1997); these 
trends may add to the land degradation problem.
Little quantitative work has been done on the impacts of cli­
mate change on this sector. National and local assessments pro­
viding a detailed understanding of crop-specific responses and 
regional impacts for this region are still lacking (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 13.6.1).
General assessments have suggested a range of positive and 
negative impacts of climate change on agriculture. Positive 
examples include decreasing frost risks and more productive 
upland agriculture, provided water availability does not decline 
(or irrigation is available) and appropriate cultivars are used. 
Increasing populations of pests and disease-causing organ­
isms— many of which have distributions that are climatically 
controlled— may have a negative impact (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 5.2.4.1). A number of factors affect the vulnerability of 
agricultural systems:
Agro-industry, biomass production, and renewable 
energy sources depend heavily on climate-sensitive 
resources and therefore are potentially vulnerable to 
climate change.
244
M iddle East and A rid Asia
• 
Climate change could have a severe impact on coun­
tries that are dependent on single crops. Diversification 
of economic activity could be an important precaution­
ary response.
• 
The burden of climate change may affect lower- 
income households disproportionately.
Studies for sub-Saharan Africa suggest that there are critical 
thresholds related to precipitation and the length of the grow­
ing season that may affect agricultural practices. The yield of 
cereals in the Mediterranean climatic region is projected to 
decline as a consequence of increased drought resulting from 
the combination of increased temperature and decreased pre­
cipitation (or precipitation increases that are insufficient to 
counter higher évapotranspiration) (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 13.6.7). In Kazakstan, where wheat is a major crop, 
spring wheat yields are projected to decrease by almost 60% 
under CCC-Jl and GFDL-A3 2хС0г equilibrium climate sce­
narios; winter wheat yields are projected to increase by about 
20%. Because only 1% of the total cropland is suitable for win­
ter wheat, this increase is not likely to significantly affect over­
all wheat yields, and the overall effect would be a decrease in 
wheat yield (Pilifosova et a l, 1996).
Studies in Pakistan project a decline in wheat yields under 
GISS and UKMO scenarios with 2хС0г equivalent, while 
under a GFDL scenario with 2 xC 0 2  equivalent an increase is 
projected (Qureshi and Iglesias, 1994). However, the results 
are highly dependent on assumptions made about the respon­
siveness of crops to high CO 2  levels.
If there is a decrease in rangeland productivity in the region as 
a result of temperature increases, the overall contribution of the 
agricultural industry to national economies would decline. 
Such a decrease also would have serious implications for the 
food policies of many countries— and for the lives of thou­
sands of pastoral people (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2).
kinds of domestic animals, game ranching, multiple production 
systems, and commercial hunting and tourism (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 4) are management options that also may facilitate 
socioeconomic activity in the region. These strategies could be 
viewed as “no regrets” options by many countries in the region 
because they would be beneficial even without climate change.
A  shift in reliance toward more suitable and more intensively 
managed land areas for food and fiber production could have 
the dual benefits of allowing greater reliability in food produc­
tion and reducing the detrimental impacts of extreme climatic 
events, such as drought, on rangeland systems (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 2). Runoff farming— a form of water management 
that originated about 3,000 years ago in parts of the region— has 
been largely abandoned in some countries. It may provide 
opportunities, however, for sustainable cropping and horticul­
ture under changed climates (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 4).
In some countries, marine and/or freshwater fish are important 
sources of protein. The demand for fish is increasing along 
with increasing populations; this demand is expected to at least 
double by 2020, compared with 1995 levels. The increase in 
demand is expected to be met through inland aquaculture in 
earthen ponds, through mariculture in the Mediterranean 
(Mires, 1996), and through imports (e.g., Israel already imports 
60% of its fish protein).
Many freshwater wetlands of great importance to agriculture 
and wildlife occur in the floodplains of lakes and rivers (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 6.5.2). Water levels that fluctuate as a 
result of either human activity or climate-related changes may 
cause lakes to become separated from their bordering wetlands 
more frequently. Because a number of lake fish use these wet­
lands for spawning and nursery areas (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.6.2.2), fish productivity may be affected— thus 
affecting the whole food chain.
Some options to minimize the adverse effects of climate 
change are available. For example, rangelands in Kazakstan 
support sheep and goats, which are important for wool produc­
tion. According to the CCC-Jl and GFDL-A3 2хСОг equilib­
rium climate scenarios, wool production in this country is pro­
jected to decrease by 10-25% (Pilifosova et a l, 1996). 
Possible adaptations identified from modeling studies include 
changing the current lambing and sheep shearing dates; how­
ever, this approach would be feasible only after considerable 
reeducation efforts were undertaken in the region.
In the rangelands of the Middle East and Arid Asia region, active 
selection of forage plants and greater control of animal stocking 
rates are the most promising management options for decreasing 
the negative impacts of projected climate changes (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Chapter 2). Introducing or selecting some legume 
species in grassland systems— ^which would reduce reliance on 
fertilizer inputs and improve the nutritive value of forage—  
could make these systems more sustainable and resilient under 
climate change (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). Use of various
7.3.4.2. 
Land Degradation and Other Environmental
Problems Affecting Food and Fiber Production
Land degradation and desertification are major problems that 
are caused by natural factors (e.g., prolonged droughts) and by 
human activities— particularly overgrazing, uncontrolled culti­
vation, fuelwood gathering, inappropriate use of irrigation, 
uncontrolled urbanization, and tourism development (Kharin, 
1995; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2; Schreiber and 
Shermuchamedov, 1996; UNEP, 1997). Urbanization and relat­
ed activities (e.g., road construction) have resulted in losses of 
permanent pasture and increases in the agricultural use of mar­
ginal lands, leading to further degradation (UNEP, 1997). 
Dryland salinity and waterlogging, especially in low-lying 
countries in the Middle East and parts of central Asia (e.g., 
around the Aral Sea), also are contributing to land degradation 
(Kharin, 1997; UNEP, 1997).
The full extent of land degradation in the region is not known, 
although an estimated 1 0 % of the arid and semi-arid land is
Middle East and A rid Asia
245
classified as having some soil constraints (see Table 7-1). 
Future erosion risk is more likely to be influenced by increas­
es in population density, intensive cultivation of marginal 
lands, and the use of resource-based and subsistence farming 
techniques than by changes in climate (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 4).
Various options are available for reducing soil degradation by 
improving the carbon and water storage capacity of the soil 
(see below). Unfortunately, because of low surface-water 
availability, some of these practices might not be helpful for all 
of the countries in the region. However, other soil conservation 
and soil protection measures can be implemented in these 
areas.
Agro-ecosystems. Water availability is the main determinant of 
productivity; the use of reduced tillage and mulching to 
increase available water and reduce surface erosion can pro­
mote increased soil carbon. In areas where cropping and live­
stock are closely integrated, more-efficient use of manure and 
commercial fertilizer also can increase productivity and soil 
carbon. In temperate parts of the region, eliminating or reduc­
ing summer fallow through better water management in non­
irrigated areas could significantly increase carbon and decrease 
soil erosion in semi-arid croplands (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 23.2.2).
Reduction in animal density. In much of the semi-arid area, the 
predominant land use is pastoral, and grazing control is an 
important option for the maintenance of soil carbon. Reduction 
in animal numbers can increase carbon storage by enhancing 
plant cover. This practice can have a positive effect on the 
ecosystem if there is sufficient rainfall, but reductions in ani­
mal numbers on rangelands may require alternative sources of 
food for humans— and thus changes in national or regional 
food production policies.
Changing animal distribution. Changing animal distribution 
through salt placement, development of water sources, or fenc­
ing can lead to the more even use of pastures and consequent­
ly to increases in overall plant cover, improved status of the 
root system (as a consequence of less-intense grazing), and 
increased carbon sequestration. Appropriate animal-manage- 
ment practices will be specific to local and regional production 
systems; for example, fencing or salt placement may not be 
useful in herding systems and may interfere with wildlife 
migration.
Watershed-scale projects. Practices involving the development 
of dams with large-scale water-storage capacity may increase 
long-term carbon storage by improving animal management 
and food production systems. Such projects are expensive, 
however, and they can result in social and cultural dislocation, 
local extinctions of wildlife, and increases in human and ani­
mal population density. Because 6-89%  of the region’s crop­
land area already is irrigated (see Table D-5), watershed man­
agement with additions of dams may not be a suitable 
response.
7.3.4.3. 
Climate Change and Desertification
Desertification may occur in any area where the potential évap­
otranspiration is greater than 70% of the total precipitation— as 
is the case for parts of this region. It is feasible that desertifi­
cation itself can exacerbate climate change. Changes in land- 
use practices can affect surface temperatures through boundary 
changes in vegetation cover, which lead to differences in albe­
do and thus to temperature differences (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapters 3 and 4). It has been suggested that where these 
changes occur over large areas, they could affect global mean 
temperatures. The effect is mediated in the short term by sur­
face soil moisture and in the longer term by changes in soil 
conditions and in carbon sequestration, which lead to changed 
emissions of N 2 O and methane. There are no specific data from 
this region to support or refute this possibility.
There also is a great deal of variation in assessments of the 
nature and severity of the desertification problem, mainly 
because of the lack of adequate data. Many large-scale studies 
have suggested that the annual rate of expansion of desertified 
lands in central Asia ranges from 0.5% to 0.7% of the arid 
zone. Approximately 570 million ha in the region are classified 
as arid land. Assuming a conservative rate of expansion of 
0.5% per annum, 3 million ha of land are becoming desertified 
every year. Arid-land desertification could occur faster if 
human and livestock populations continue to increase and par­
ticularly if the resilience of arid regions is negatively affected 
by climate change. Some recent research, however, has not 
supported the expanding-desert hypothesis. During favorable 
or “wet” years, there is little evidence to suggest that the deser­
tification front has expanded. The different views regarding the 
importance of human abuse versus adverse climatic conditions 
in causing desertification and the lack of agreement on the 
scale of the problem point to the need for a better understand­
ing of the problem and, in particular, better and more compre­
hensive data on its nature and extent. There is little doubt that 
desertification is an important environmental problem that 
needs to be addressed urgently-—^and that climate change will 
have an impact on it (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 4), with 
environmental and economic repercussions.
Some of the Middle Eastern countries recently have launched 
action plans to reduce the effects of desertification (UNEP, 
1997), though the results of these actions remain to be seen. 
There also are many technical programs in the Middle East to 
assist in desertification problems (UNEP, 1997).
7.3.5. 
Coastal Systems
• 
Coastal systems in the region are under threat from pollu­
tion and development, resulting in the deterioration offish 
populations in some countries. No scenarios suggest that 
projected changes in sea level will have significant effects 
on the region as a whole. Certain coastlines o f the region 
(e.g., around the Caspian Sea and Karachi) are predicted 
to be threatened by development.
246
M iddle East and A rid Asia
Seven of the 21 countries in the region are landlocked; the oth­
ers have a total of 2 1 , 0 0 0  km of coastline, mainly on the 
Mediterranean Sea and the Gulf of Oman. Coastal zones in this 
region are not identified as significantly affected by sea-level 
changes (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 12). The major pressures 
on them will be related to development rather than the direct 
result of climate change.
Part of the Mediterranean Sea, the northwestern part of the 
Gulf of Oman, the southern part of the Caspian Sea, and the 
coast of Karachi are classified as coastlines under high poten­
tial threat from development (WRI, 1996; McMichael et al,
1996). This development includes large cities (>100,000 peo­
ple), major ports, roads, and pipelines— all of which contribute 
to pollution in coastal areas.
Many countries in the region are major oil producers. Oil pro­
duction is mostly land-based and is not as vulnerable to the 
impacts of climate change as offshore oil production in other 
regions. Transportation of oil also is less likely to be affected 
than some higher-latitude areas, which are projected to experi­
ence an increase in storm activity and icebergs (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 8.2). However, coastal oil production areas are 
likely to be affected by storm surges (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Sections 8.3.1 and 9.3.1).
Coastal pollution is a major problem in some countries of the 
Middle East. Some countries (e.g., Syria, Lebanon) have inte­
grated coastal management programs to overcome some of 
these problems (UNEP, 1997). Despite such programs, the Red 
Sea and the Kuwait/Oman areas sustain more oil pollution than 
anywhere else in the world. In addition, coastal zones of the 
Middle Eastern countries experience oil spills from ships and 
pipelines, as well as land-based pollution discharges (UNEP,
1997)— all of which lead to the deterioration of coastal areas.
Fishery industries are important in some countries (e.g., the 
Persian Gulf countries in the Middle East). Overfishing and 
marine pollution have led to a decrease in fish catches. The loss 
of mangroves and intertidal areas (e.g., from dredging/infilling) 
probably has added to the problem by affecting breeding 
grounds (UNEP, 1997).
Preliminary studies and estimates show that if climate change 
were to cause an increase in flow from the Volga river, the 
resulting rise in the level of the Caspian Sea would significant­
ly increase the vulnerability of its coastal zone, requiring some 
adaptation measures (Golubtsov and Lee, 1995).
7.3.6. 
Н ипш п Settlements and Urbanization
• 
The region is highly urbanized, and rapid development o f 
the urban areas has led to increased air and water pollu­
tion. In many countries, urbanization and development 
have been driven by the oil industry, although there also 
has been migration from rural to urban areas as a result 
o f land degradation. Although no specific studies o f the
effects o f climate change on urbanization have been done 
for this region, it is likely that increased land degradation 
and intensification o f agricultural systems will increase 
population movement to urban centers.
A  high proportion (a mean of 50%; see Table 7-1) of the 
region’s population lives in urban areas; the region contains 2  
of the world’s 25 megacities (Karachi, with a population of 9.9 
million, and Istanbul, with a population of 7.5 million) (WRI, 
1996). In many countries in the Middle East, rapid urbaniza­
tion has increased the demand for resources, along with waste 
generation and management problems (UNEP, 1997). With 
increasing urbanization, problems of urban poverty, access to 
clean water and sanitation, food security, and air pollution—  
and thus general health— are issues that will have to be con­
sidered. In Middle Eastern countries, most urban houses have 
running water (approximately 90% of the population sur­
veyed), as well as some sort of sewer and septic system for 
sewage disposal (WRI, 1996); rural areas, however, are not so 
well served.
Industrial development has resulted in major pollution prob­
lems in some countries, especially in the Middle East. Water 
and air pollution have affected the health of the population. 
Pesticide and herbicide use in agriculture also have increased, 
leading to contamination of food and water.
Political unrest has caused large populations to migrate to mar­
ginal lands, leading to further land degradation and water 
resource problems. In addition, the expansion of urban areas 
has encroached on some of the most productive lands, espe­
cially in countries in the Middle East— thus increasing the agri­
cultural use of marginal lands. The introduction of modern pro­
duction techniques, combined with industrialization, has had a 
negative impact on the lifestyles of nomadic populations in 
parts of the region. As a result of land degradation, there has 
been an increase in migration to urban areas, which has been 
detrimental to rural and urban areas (UNEP, 1997).
Although no specific studies of the effects of climate change on 
urbanization have been done for this region, it is likely that 
increased land degradation and intensification of agricultural 
systems will continue to increase population movement to 
urban centers.
7.3.6.1. 
Domestic Energy Consumption
In general, decreasing rainfall will lead to a decrease in the pro­
duction of biomass, which remains a major component of fuel 
use in some countries of the region. In some countries, popula­
tion growth and land degradation may make adaptation neces­
sary even before climate change becom es perceptible. 
Adaptation could take the form of either switching to new fuels 
or more efficient production and conversion of biomass (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 16.2.3). It has been suggested that saline 
lands in coastal zones and arid regions could produce biomass 
using halophyte species. Although halophytes could assist in
Middle East and Arid Asia
247
slowing degradation or rehabilitating degraded arid lands, their 
productivity is too low for them to be a significant source of 
biomass (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 25.3.2).
7.3.6.2. 
Energy, Industry, and Transportation
The region contains major fossil fuel reserves; it produced 14% 
of the world’s energy in 1993 (Table 7-1). The energy sector in 
the region encompasses a range of activities, including coal, 
oil, and natural gas production; coke manufacture; production 
of refined petroleum products; and production of biomass fuels 
and renewable energy. Traditional fuels (e.g., fuelwood, animal 
dung, and crop residues) account for only 6 % of the energy 
used in the region as a whole, compared with the world aver­
age of 12-15%. Nevertheless, up to 70% of the domestic ener­
gy consumption in some countries of the region (e.g., 
Afghanistan) is derived from traditional fuels.
In terms of the future economy of the region, oil exports from 
the Middle East are projected to decline absolutely but to grow 
as a percentage of global oil consumption— from about 2 0 % in 
1990 to more than 25% in 2025 and 33% in 2100. Total ener­
gy exports from the Middle East will double between 1990 and 
2050, before declining to their 1990 level by the year 2100 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Figure 19-14). The Middle East is expect­
ed to increase its exports of natural gas and hydrogen derived 
from natural gas and solar electricity via electrolysis (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 19.2.5).
The sensitivity of industry to climate change is widely believed 
to be low in relation to that of natural ecosystems and agricul­
ture, and its adaptability is high.
7.3.7. 
H um an H ealth
• 
Human health in the region is variable, reflecting the 
economies o f the different countries. In countries where 
poverty is prevalent, infant mortality rates are high and 
life expectancies are low. The population o f the region is 
increasing by 2.7% per year; this trend may affect human 
health (e.g., through the spread o f waterborne diseases 
associated with high population densities). The impacts o f 
climate change are likely to be detrimental to the health o f 
the population, mainly through heat stress and possible 
increases in vector-borne (e.g., dengue fever and malaria) 
and waterborne diseases. Decreases in water availability 
and food production (especially if there is a shortage o f 
water for irrigation) would indirectly affect the health o f 
the population.
Human health in the region is variable, reflecting the economies 
of the different countries. The proportion of a population living 
in absolute poverty is considered to be an indication of human 
health. Nearly half of the developing world’s poor— and nearly 
half of those in extreme poverty— live in south Asia; the next- 
largest numbers are (in order) in sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle
East, and north Africa (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 12.2.1.3). 
Estimates of rural poverty are available for nine countries of 
this region; they range from 6 % (Oman) to 60% (Afghanistan). 
Access to safe drinking water in urban areas varies from 39% in 
Afghanistan to almost 100% in 13 countries in the region; in 
rural areas, the equivalent figures are 5% in Afghanistan to 
almost 100% in several countries (WRI, 1996). Because a high 
percentage of the population lives in urban areas, a high pro­
portion of the population has access to safe drinking water, 
which diminishes the risk of waterborne infectious diseases.
Infant mortality rates and the prevalence of infectious diseases 
also are considered to be indicators of human health (WRI, 
1996). Figures for infant mortality for 1970-75 varied between 
23 deaths per 1,000 live births (Israel) to 194 deaths per 1,000 
live births (Afghanistan), with a mean of 94 (the world average 
was 93). The equivalent figures for 1990-1995 varied from 9 
to 163 (for the same countries), with a mean of 50 (the world 
average is 64). These statistics suggest that the health of the 
population has improved since the 1970s, in part as a result of 
better primary health care (Bener et a l, 1993). During 
1990-95, life expectancy varied between 43.5 years 
(Afghanistan) and 76.5 years (Israel), with a mean of 6 6 . 6  
(compared with the world average of 52.8).
Generally, the health of the population in the region has been 
improving faster than the world average— ^with a few excep­
tions related to civil unrest (e.g., Afghanistan). Given the nat­
ural wealth, in terms of petroleum deposits, of many countries 
in the region, this trend should continue in the near future. 
However, political tensions remain high in parts of the region, 
and much of the region is subject to major earthquakes; both of 
these factors could cause major setbacks in public health.
The population of the region is increasing by an average of 
2.7% annually; as the population increases, air pollution, waste 
management, and sanitation will become important issues. 
Given global trends, there may be an increase in motor vehicle 
ownership, which is likely to add to the problem of air pollu­
tion. Photochemical smog produced by the reaction of sunlight 
with ozone and photochemical oxidants— such as peroxyacetal 
nitrate (PAN) from nitrogen oxides (N0^) and hydrocarbon 
emissions— is particularly prevalent in cities in semi-arid 
regions with a high density of industrial pollution-producing 
industries (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 12.3.3). This smog may 
lead to respiratory problems in the urban populations.
Climate change will have direct impacts (e.g., through heat 
stress) as well as indirect effects (e.g., through reductions in 
food, leading to poor nutrition and increased susceptibility to 
diseases) on human health. The overall impact of climate 
change on human societies will vary, depending on many fac­
tors— such as the amount of low-lying or arid land they occu­
py and their degree of dependence on agriculture or aquatic 
resources (IPCC 1996, WG III, Section 2.2.3).
Climate change is projected to increase the frequency of very 
hot days. Extensive research has shown that heat waves cause
248
M iddle East and A rid Asia
excess deaths (Larsen, 1990; McMichael et ai, 1996). Recent 
analyses of concurrent meteorological and mortality data in 
cities in the Middle East provide evidence that overall death 
rates rise during heat waves, particularly when the temperature 
rises above the local population’s threshold value. Therefore, it 
can be predicted that climate change would cause additional 
heat-related deaths and illnesses in the region via increased 
exposure to heat waves (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 18.2.1).
In some areas— especially where access to safe drinking water 
is poor—^waterborne gastrointestinal diseases related to fecal 
contamination (e.g.. Giardiasis, diarrhea) are a problem. Such 
diseases often lead to high infant mortality in Saudi Arabia 
(Jarallah et al., 1993; Altukhi et a i, 1996); Afghanistan, 
Jordan, and Pakistan (Azim and Rahaman, 1993; Nazer et ai, 
1993; Chavasse et ai, 1996); and Turkey. Waterborne diseases 
also occur in tourist resorts (Kocasoy, 1995) in Israel 
(Lowenthal, 1993), Tajikistan (World Bank, 1995b), and 
Turkmenistan (World Bank, 1995c). Some countries of the 
region have made efforts to control these diseases through var­
ious programs— some implemented in the early 1970s. If 
flooding occurs as a result of more intense rainfall events, 
waterborne diseases may become frequent, mostly because of 
the overloading of sewage systems (McMichael, 1997).
Other waterborne diseases not related to fecal contamination 
(e.g.. Schistosomiasis) are linked to dams and irrigation pro­
jects (Hairston, 1973; Grosse, 1993; Hunter et a i, 1993). These 
types of projects may increase, depending on water manage­
ment responses in the region.
Under current climate change projections, vector-borne dis­
eases— particularly dengue fever— are expected to increase 
globally. The A edes mosquito, which transm its dengue 
(McMichael et ai,. 1996), is sensitive to temperature and 
rainfall; the incidence of the disease has been increasing 
globally in recent years, probably in response to changes in 
climate (Hales et a i, 1996). Dengue fever was reported on 
the eastern edge of the region in 1995; its spread will depend 
on whether climate changes produce moister and warmer 
conditions that favor the vector— even if only seasonally. 
Dengue can survive where the winter isotherm is above 10°C, 
and it can become epidemic when temperatures are above 
20°C (Shope, 1991).
Malaria is endemic in certain parts of the region (e.g., in 
humid areas), even in arid countries such as Saudi Arabia 
(Annobil et a i, 1994). In parts of the arid/semi-arid areas, 
malaria epidemics are associated with high rainfall and floods 
(Akhtar and McMichael, 1996); in Pakistan, malaria epi­
demics are associated with El Nino events (McMichael et ai, 
1996). Based on a climate scenario using the ECHAM l-A 
GCM, with a global mean temperature rise of 1.16°C, Martens 
et a i (1995) did not find indications of immediate increases in 
malaria cases in the region— but did project an expansion of 
malaria into adjoining areas by 2100. In addition, the present 
nonmalarial, higher-elevation areas in the region may experi­
ence seasonal epidemics.
The sand fly is a vector for sand fly fever and Leishmaniasis. 
Sand flies occur in parts of the region (e.g., the northwestern 
part of the Arabian peninsula and southwest Asia). With a tem­
perature increase of 1°C, Cross and Hyams (1996) predict that 
there will be a seasonal and spatial (e.g., in uplands) expansion 
of sand flies— and thus potential increases in the diseases that 
they transmit. Monitoring the vector could form a basis for 
detecting the impact of climate change on human health.
There also are populations in the region that rely on nonirri­
gated (rain-fed) agriculture, which is likely to be vulnerable to 
climate change. Changes in nutrition may make these popula­
tions more vulnerable to disease, with an indirect effect on 
their health. No data are available to estimate the size of this 
vulnerable population.
7.3.8. 
Socioeconomic Impact o f Climate Change
Very little socioeconomic information about the impacts of 
climate change is available fo r the region. The best avail­
able estimates indicate that impacts on GDP may be high­
er than the world average.
One way of expressing the potential impacts of climate change 
is to derive a comprehensive monetary estimate, which sums all 
known impacts and is expressed as a monetary value. 
Estimating effects on marketed goods and services (e.g., com­
mercial or residential land loss resulting from sea-level rise, 
energy savings in winter) in monetary terms is relatively 
straightforward because the prices are known. Estimating dam­
age to nonmarketed goods and services (e.g., wetland loss, mor­
tality changes) in monetary terms is possible either through 
examining market transactions where such goods or services 
are implicitly traded (e.g., sites of landscape beauty) or through 
interviewing people to determine their preferences (i.e., their 
willingness to pay to secure a benefit or willingness to accept 
compensation for a loss). In Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, such valua­
tion techniques are relatively well established and have been 
widely applied, although the results often are contentious. 
Estimates for non-OECD countries are based on extrapolation 
from studies in the OECD. The best estimate of the annual 
impact of a doubling of the CO 2  concentration in the atmos­
phere is about 0.9-5.5% of GDP for the Middle East, compared 
with 1.4-1.9% of GDP for the world. Many assumptions under­
lie these best guesses, however, and large uncertainties remain. 
Nevertheless, the impact on this region appears to be greater 
than that on the world as a whole (Fankhauser and Toi, 1977).
7.4. 
Possible Approaches to Integration
7.4.1. 
Economies in Transition
• 
Countries o f the ESU  are undergoing major economic 
changes and consequential changes in agricultural sys­
tems and management. This transition is likely to provide
Middle East and A rid Asia
249
“win-win” opportunities to offset the impacts o f climate 
change, particularly in the areas o f agriculture and 
resource management.
The countries of the FSU are undergoing radical economic tran­
sitions, with great impacts on many sectors likely to be affected 
by climate change. Much of the agriculture of the Middle East 
and Arid Asia region developed in response to the agricultural 
plans of the FSU. Irrigated cotton production, for example, 
expanded from the 1960s through the 1980s, with significant 
impacts on water resources, the environment, and human health. 
Water resources were overcommitted to agriculture and were 
transferred unsustainably from several river systems. The drying 
of the Aral Sea (see Section 7.4.2) was one consequence; the 
salinization of many cropping areas was another. The heavy use 
of fertilizers and overuse of pesticides has left a legacy of pol­
luted soils and water supplies. Recent assessments (World Bank, 
1995a-d) conclude that agricultural practices are likely to change 
because agricultural products now are being traded on world 
markets. Changes include more targeted use of fertilizers, better 
use of integrated pest management, more efficient irrigation sys­
tems in existing systems, and changes in crop species and vari­
eties. These changes will dominate policy development in this 
region, but they also offer opportunities to adapt to climate 
change by reducing water use and adopting new crop varieties.
In particular, targets for improved efficiency in irrigation could 
lead to savings in water use, which would be more important 
than any changes likely to result from climate change over the 
next few decades. Throughout the states of the FSU, options to 
reduce water use include lining more irrigation canals to reduce 
seepage losses (up to 40% of diverted water is lost in arterial 
channels) and reducing the area of crop and pasture irrigated by 
inefficient flooding methods while increasing the area of more- 
valuable fruit and vegetable crops irrigated by efficient drip and 
below-ground irrigation systems. In Turkmenistan, for exam­
ple, cotton irrigation currently requires 1 2 , 0 0 0  m^ water/ha; 
more modem techniques would require only 7,000 m^/ha 
(World Bank, 1995a-d). More than one-third of all water used 
in Turkmenistan is applied to irrigated cotton; thus, moderniz­
ing techniques could save 2 0 % of the country’s current water 
use. Uzbekistan plans to reduce water consumption in agricul­
ture by 20% during 1990-2005, and similar opportunities for 
such large savings probably apply in Tajikistan.
In many countries of the FSU, there also has been a decrease 
in pressure on the environment. These effects are apparent in 
the case of water resources, as well as in other sectors; for 
example, the total livestock population in Kazakstan (many 
existing in rangelands) decreased by 50% between 1990 and 
1996 (Mizina et al, 1997).
7.4.2. 
Impact of Human Activity and
Climate Change on Ecosystems
• 
The Aral Sea is a case study o f the multiplicative effects o f
resource overuse, which can lead to local environmental
and even climate change. Extensive redirection o f water 
from feeder rivers to irrigated agriculture since 1960 has 
led to a reduction in the surface area o f the lake and dam­
age to the surrounding wetlands and the species that 
depend on them. A ir temperature in the vicinity o f the lake 
has increased. Saline and polluted dust from the exposed 
lake bed has been implicated in significant health prob­
lems and increases in infant mortality.
No integrated assessments have been carried out on the 
impacts of human activity and climate change on the natural, 
economic, or social systems of the region. However, the recent 
history of the Aral Sea may serve as an illustrative case study 
of some of the multiple factors involved and the multiple 
effects that are likely to result.
The Aral Sea is a dramatic example of how inappropriate 
human activities— exacerbated by adverse impacts of climate 
change— can affect natural ecosystems and coastal systems, 
water supply, food production, human settlements, and human 
health (Popov and Rice, 1997). Since 1960, extensive irriga­
tion development projects and intensive use of agricultural 
chemicals have resulted in regional environmental deteriora­
tion. The water level has dropped 16 m since 1960, and the 
open-water area has decreased by almost 50%. In the past 36 
years, the Aral coastline has retreated by 50-100 km (Schreiber 
and Shermuchamedov, 1996). Schreiber and Shermuchamedov 
have detailed the resulting degradation in the region and sug­
gested some measures to minimize the effects.
Surface water resources of the Aral basin originate from sever­
al large river basins; the most important are the Amudaria and 
Syrdaria basins. A  period of low precipitation, which has 
reduced the flow of river water, has caused a 26% decrease in 
the water level of the Aral Sea. Runoff water regulations and 
intensive use of irrigation water for cotton and rice, along with 
the inflow of polluted water (i.e., sewage, industrial effluent, 
and mineralized pollutants) into the rivers, has changed the his­
toric function of the Aral Sea, which used to be the main water 
and salt accumulation basin for Middle Asia. Currently, the 
waters of the Amudaria and Syrdaria Rivers are used primarily 
for irrigation; runoff into the Aral Sea has practically halted. 
Regulation of river runoff and its extensive use for irrigation 
also have caused dramatic changes in the rivers’ hydrological 
regimes.
General degradation of floodplain and delta soils has taken 
place in the region since river flow regulations were imple­
mented. The drying off process and subsequent desertifica­
tion and salinization of soils have accelerated, resulting in an 
observed temperature increase of 1.5°C within 100-150 km 
of the edge of the sea. The process of desertification is 
accompanied by significant losses of soil organic matter 
(through wind erosion), particularly in marsh soils. The water 
in the main rivers of the region is contaminated by salts; 
other pollutants, such as nitrates, pesticides, organic and oil 
products; and increased bacterial contaminants and is not 
presently acceptable for drinking or irrigation use. The social.
250
M iddle East and A rid Asia
economic, and ecological consequences of the Aral Sea cata­
strophe are extensive: The infant mortality rate in the area is 
46 deaths per 1,000 live births, and 80% of all human dis­
eases in the region near the Aral Sea have been linked direct­
ly with drinking polluted water. The changes also are leading 
to a major loss of biodiversity of the region (Bie and 
Imevbore, 1995).
Because water is such a valuable resource in the area and 
affects all ecosystems— as well as human food and fiber pro­
duction and health— it will have to be managed carefully to 
reduce the catastrophic and possibly long-term negative 
impacts in situations such as those illustrated by the Aral 
Sea. Several protective measures have been implemented in 
the area, especially to reduce wind erosion (which has 
decreased in recent years). Water quality monitoring, pollu­
tion control, and water protection zones have been set up in 
an attempt to minimize some of these effects.
Nissenbaum (1994) provides a similar reconstruction of rapid 
environmental degradation and impacts on the surrounding 
population— in an account of the collapse of the cities of the 
southern basin of the Dead Sea 4,000 years ago.
7.5. 
Research Needs
There are some obvious research needs. Clearly, many basic 
physiological and ecological studies of the effects of changes 
in atmospheric and climatic conditions are necessary. Plant 
and animal species show a great deal of variation in their 
responses to these changes, and local research at this level is 
always necessary. However, the most pressing need over much 
of the region is for sound assessment and monitoring pro­
grams to establish current baselines and identify rates of 
change.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Tony McMichael, Sandra Diaz, M. Mirza, and the 
government review teams for their constructive comments 
and to Alison Saunders and Margo Davies for help with the 
literature.
References
A b d e lra h m a n , H.A. and H. A lajm i, 1994: H eavy m etals in som e w ater- 
irrigated and w astew ater-irrigated soils o f O m an. C o m m u n i c a t i o n s  i n  
S o i l  S c i e n c e  a n d  P l a n t  A n a l y s i s ,  25, 605-613.
A k h tar, R. and A. J. M cM ichael, 1996: Rainfall and m alaria outbreaks in 
western Rajasthan. L a n c e t , 48, 1457-1458.
A ltukhi, M.H., M.N. Alahdal, J.R Ackers, and W. Peters, 1996: Prevalence of 
G i a r d i a  l a m b l i a  infection in the city of Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. S a u d i  
M e d i c a l  J o u r n a l , 17, 482-486.
A nnobil, S.H., T.C. Okeahialam, G.A. Jam joom , and W.A. Bassuni, 1994: 
M alaria in children —  experience from A sir region, Saudi-Arabia. 
A n n a l s  o f  S a u d i  M e d i c i n e , 14, 467-470.
A zim , S.M.T. and M.M . Rahaman, 1993: Hom e m anagem ent o f childhood 
diarrhoea in rural Afghanistan —  a study in Urgun, Paktika province. 
J o u r n a l  o f  D i a r r h o e a l  D i s e a s e s  R e s e a r c h , 11, 161-164.
B abaev, A.G., N.N. Drozdov, I.S. Zonn, and Z.G. Friekin, 1986: Deserts. In: 
W o r d  N a t u r e . M ysl, Moscow, Russia, 318 pp.
B azzaz, F.A., S.L. Bassow, G.M . Bem tson, and S.C. Thom as, 1996: Elevated 
CO 2 and terrestrial vegetation: im plications for and beyond the global 
carbon budget. In: G l o b a l  C h a n g e  a n d  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s  [Walker, 
B.H. and W.L. Steffen (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, pp. 43-76.
B ener, A., S. Abdullah, and J.C. M urdoch, 1993: Prim ary health care in the 
United-Arab-Em irates. F a m i l y  P r a c t i c e , 10, 444-448.
Bie, S.W. and A.M .A. Im evbore, 1995: Executive summary. In: B i o l o g i c a l  
D i v e r s i t y  i n  t h e  D r y l a n d s  o f  t h e  W o r l d  [Bie, S.W. and A.M .A. Imevbore 
(eds.)]. United Nations, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 5-21.
B laikie, P., T. Cannon, I. Davis, and B. W isner, 1994: A t  R i s k ,  N a t u r a l  
H a z a r d s ,  
P e o p l e ’s  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  D i s a s t e r s . Routledge Publishers, 
London, United Kingdom, pp.57-79.
C havasse, D., N. Ahmad, and T. Akhtar, 1996: Scope for fly control as a diar­
rhoea intervention in Pakistan —  a com m unity perspective. S o c i a l  
S c i e n c e  a n d  M e d i c i n e , 43, 1289-1294.
C ross, E.R. and K.C. Hyams, 1996: The potential effect of global w arm ing on 
the geographic and seasonal distribution of P h l e b o t o m u s  p a p a t a s i in 
southwest Asia. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s , 104, 724-727.
Diaz, S., 1995: Elevated CO 2 responsiveness, interactions at the community 
level and plant functional types. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 289-295.
E vanari, М ., I. Noy Meir, and D. Goodall (eds.), 1985: Hot deserts and arid 
shrublands. In: E c o s y s t e m s  o f  t h e  W o r ld ,  
V o l u m e  I 2 A .  Elsevier Press, 
Amsterdam , The Netherlands.
F an k h au ser, S. and R.S.J. Toi, 1997: The social costs of clim ate change: the 
IPCC Second Assessm ent Report and beyond. M
i t i g a t i o n  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  
S t r a t e g i e s  f o r  G l o b a l  C h a n g e , 1, 3 8 5 ^ 0 3 .
G olubtsov, V.V. and V.I. Lee, 1995: On calculation of the Caspian Sea level 
with regard to potential climate change. H y d r o m e t e o r o l o g y  a n d  E c o l o g y ,  
1, 28-38 (in Russian).
G olubtsov, V.V., V.I. Lee, and I.I. Scotselyas, 1996: Vulnerability assessment 
of the w ater resources of K azakstan to anthropogenic clim ate change and 
the structure of adaptation m easures. W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  D e v e l o p m e n t , 12, 
193-208.
G rosse, S., 1993: S c h i s t o s o m i a s i s  a n d  W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  D e v e l o p m e n t :  a  R e -  
e v a l u a t i o n  
o f  
a n  
I m
p o r t a n t  
E n v i r o n m e n t - H e a l t h  
L i n k a g e . 
The 
Environm ent and N atural Resources Policy and Training Project, 
W orking Paper, EPAT/MUCIA, Technical Series No, 2, W ashington, DC, 
USA.
H airston, N.G., 1973: The dynamics of transm ission. In: E p i d e m i o l o g y  a n d  
C o n t r o l  o f  S c h i s t o s o m i a s i s  [Ansari, N. (ed.)] Karger, Basel, Switzerland, 
pp. 250-336.
H ales, S., P. W einstein, and A. W oodward, 1996: Dengue fever epidem ics in 
the South Pacific: driven by El Nino Southern O scillation? L a n c e t , 348, 
1664-1665.
H u n ter, J.M .L., L. Rey, K.Y. Chu, E.O. Adekolu-John, and K.E. M ott, 1993: 
P a r a s i t i c  D i s e a s e s  
i n  
W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  D e v e l o p m e n t :  
t h e  N e e d  f o r  
I n t e r s e c t o r a l  
N e g o t i a t i o n .  W orld H ealth O rganization, 
Geneva, 
Switzerland.
lafiazova, R.K., 1997: Climate change impact on mud flow  form ation in 
Trans-Ili Alatay mountains. H y d r o m e t e o r o l o g y  a n d  E c o l o g y , 3, 12—23, 
(in Russian)
IP C C , 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
1 9 9 5 :  
T h e  
S c i e n c e  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  G r o u p  I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United K ingdom  and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
Nicholls, N., G.V. Gruza, J. Jouzel, T.R. Karl, L.A. Ogallo, and 
D.E. Parker, Chapter 3. O b s e r v e d  C l i m a t e  V a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  C h a n g e ,  
pp. 133-192.
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A, M eehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver, and T.M .L. Wigley, Chapter 
6 . C l i m a t e  M o d e l s  —
P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  F u t u r e  C l i m a t e , pp. 289-357.
Middle East and Arid Asia
251
IPCC, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s ,  a n d  M
i t i g a t i o n  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  S c i e n t i f i c - T e c h n i c a l  A n a l y s e s .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  
G r o u p  I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
Moss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
Kirschbaum, M.U.F. and A. Fischiin, Chapter 1. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  o n  F o r e s t s , pp. 95-130.
-  
Ailen-Diaz, B., Chapter 2. R a n g e l a n d s  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  
I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n , pp. 131-158.
Nobie, I.R. and H. Gitay, Chapter 3. 
D e s e r t s  
i n  a  C h a n g i n g
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s , pp. 159-189.
Bullock, P. and H. Le Houérou, Chapter 4. L a n d  D e g r a d a t i o n  a n d  
D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n , pp. 170-189.
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
o n  M o u n t a i n  R e g i o n s , pp. 191-213.
Oquist, M .G. and B.H. Svensson, Chapter 6. N o n - T i d a l  W e t la n d s ,  
pp. 215-239.
-  
Fitzharris, B.B., C hapter 7. T h e  C r y o s p h e r e :  C h a n g e s  a n d  t h e i r  
I m p a c t s , pp. 240-265.
-  
Ittekkot, V., Chapter 8. O c e a n s , pp. 266-288.
-  
Bijlsma, L, C hapter 9. 
C o a s t a l  Z o n e s  
a n d  S m a l l  I s l a n d s , pp.
289-324.
-  
Arnell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. H y d r o l o g y  a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  E c o l o g y , pp. 325-364.
-  
Scott, M .J., C hapter 12. 
H u m a n  
S e t t l e m e n t s  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 3 9 9 ^ 2 6 .
-  
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. A g r i c u l t u r e  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  
a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 427-467.
Kaczm arek, Z., Chapter 14. W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  M a n a g e m e n t , pp. 
4 6 9 ^ 8 6 .
Everett, J., Chapter 16. F i s h e r i e s , pp. 511-537.
-  
M cM ichael, A., C hapter 18. H u m a n  
P o p u l a t i o n  
H e a l t h , pp. 
561-584.
Ishitani, H. and T.B. Johansson, C hapter 19. E n e r g y  
S u p p l y  
M
i t i g a t i o n  O p t i o n s , pp. 587-648.
Cole, V., Chapter 23. A g r i c u l t u r a l  
O p t i o n s  f o r  
M i t i g a t i o n  
o f  
G r e e n h o u s e  G a s  E m i s s i o n s , pp. 745-771.
-  
Ixem ans, R., Chapter 25. M
i t i g a t i o n :  C r o s s - S e c t o r a l  a n d  O t h e r  
I s s u e s , pp. 799-819.
IPCC, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  E c o n o m i c  a n d  S o c i a l  D i m e n s i o n s  o f  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  
o f  W o r k i n g  G r o u p  I I I  t o  
t h e  S e c o n d  
A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
[Bruce, J.P., H. Lee, and E.F. Haites (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
Cam bridge, U nited K ingdom  and New York, NY, USA, 448 pp.
Arrow, K.J., J. Parikh, and G. Fillet, Chapter 2. D e c i s i o n - M a k i n g  
F r a m e w o r k s  f o r  A d d r e s s i n g  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e , pp. 53-124.
Jarallah, J.S., S.A. A lsham m ari, T.A. Khoja, and M. Alsheikh, 1993: Role of 
primary health care in the control o f S c h i s t o s o m i a s i s  —  the experience in 
Riyadh, Saudi A rabia. 
T r o p i c a l  
a n d  
G e o g r a p h i c a l  M e d i c i n e , 45, 
297-300.
K han, S.M., 1985: M anagem ent of river and reservoir sedim entation in 
Pakistan. W a t e r  I n t e r n a t i o n a l , 10, 18-21.
K harin, N.G., 1995: Change of biodiversity in ecosystem s of central Asia 
under the im pacts of desertification. In: B i o l o g i c a l  D i v e r s i t y  i n  
t h e  
D r y l a n d s  o f  t h e  W
o r l d  [Bie, S.W. and A.M .A. Invebore (eds.)]. United 
Nations, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 23-31.
Kocasoy, G., 1995: W aterborne disease incidences in the M editerranean 
region as a function of m icrobial pollution and t-90. W a t e r  S c i e n c e  a n d  
T e c h n o l o g y , 32, 257-266.
Larsen, U., 1990: The effects of monthly tem perature fluctuations on m ortal­
ity in the United States from  1921 to 1985. I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  
B i o m e t e o r o l o g y , 38, 141-147.
Lowenthal, M. N., 1993: W ater quality, w aterborne disease and enteric dis­
ease in Israel, 1976-92. 
I s r a e l  J o u r n a l  
o f  M e d i c a l  S c i e n c e s ,  
1 9 ,  
783-790.
M artens, W .J.M., L.W. Niessen, J. Rotmans, Т.Н. Jetten, and A.J. M cM ichael, 
1995: Potential im pact of global change on malarial risk. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s , 103, 4 5 8 ^ 6 4 .
M cG innies, W.G., B.J. Goldman, and P. Paylore (eds.), 1968: Introduction. In; 
D e s e r t s  o f  t h e  W o r l d :  a n  a p p r a i s a l  o f  R e s e a r c h  i n t o  t h e i r  P h y s i c a l  a n d  
B i o l o g i c a l  E n v i r o n m e n t s . University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, 
USA, pp. 3-17.
M cM ichael, A.J., 1997: C h a n g e s  i n  I n c i d e n c e  o f  V e c t o r - B o r n e  D i s e a s e s  d u e  
t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e . Paper presented at Asia Pacific Network W orkshop 
on Human Dimension, 20-23 January 1997, Delhi, India.
M cM ichael, A.J., A. Haines, R. Slooff, and S. Kovaks, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
a n d  H u m a n  H e a l t h . World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 
297 pp.
M iddle E ast W ater C om m ission, 1995: Observations regarding w ater shar­
ing and management: an intensive analysis of the Jordan River Basin 
with references to long distance transfers. I n t e r n a t i o n a l J o u r n a l  o f  W a t e r  
R e s o u r c e s  D e v e l o p m e n t , 11, 351-376.
M ires, D., 1996: Expected trends in fish consum ption in Israel and their 
impact on local production. I s r a e l i  J o u r n a l  o f  A q u a c u l t u r e  ( B a m i d g e h ) ,  
48, 186-191.
M izina, S.V., O.V. Pilifosova, and E.F. Gossen, 1997: GHG mitigation poten­
tial in non-energy sector of Kazakstan. H y d r o m e t e o r o l o g y  a n d  E c o l o g y ,  
3, 30-41. (in Russian)
N azer, H., I. Aljobeh, H. Qubain, and D.A. Latif, 1993: Diarrhoea —  a con­
tinuing health problem  in Jordanian infants. J o u r n a l  
o f  T r o p i c a l  
P e d i a t r i c s , 39, 195-196.
N issenbaum , A., 1994: Sodom, Gomorrah and the other lost cities of the plain 
—  a clim atic perspective. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 26, 435^146.
T h e  O x f o r d  W
o r l d  A t l a s , 1994: Oxford University Press. Oxford, United 
Kingdom.
P akistan C o u n try  R eport, 1994: R e g i o n a l  S t u d y  o n  G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
I s s u e s . Asian D evelopm ent Bank, M anila, Philippines.
Pilifosova, O., e t  a l . , 1996: Vulnerability and adaptation assessment for 
Kazakstan. In: V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  I n t e r i m  
R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  U . S .  C o u n t r y  S t u d ie s  P r o g r a m  (Smith, J.B., S. Huq, S. 
Lenhart, L.J. M ata, I. Nemesova, and S. Toure (eds.)]. Kluwer Academ ic 
Publishers, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 161-181.
Popov, Y.M. and T J. Rice, 1997: Aral Sea. 1. Ecological and econom ic prob­
lems of the Aral Sea Region during transition to a m arket economy. 
E c o l o g y  a n d  H y d r o m e t e o r o l o g y ,  2 , 24-36.
Q ureshi, A. and A. Iglesias, 1994: Implications of global climate change for 
agriculture in Pakistan: impacts on sim ulated w heat production. In: 
I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  f o r  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A g r i c u l t u r e :  
C r o p  
M o d e l i n g  S t u d y . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 230-B-94- 
003, W ashington, DC, USA.
R iebsam e, W.E. e t  a i ,  1995: Complex river basins. In: A s  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e s :  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  I m p a c t s  a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s  [Strzepek, K.M. and J.B. Smith 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 
57-78.
S arikaya, H.Z. and V. Eroglu, 1993. W astewater reuse potential in Turkey —  
legal and technical aspects. W a t e r  S c i e n c e  a n d  T e c h n o l o g y , 27, 131-137.
S chreiber, W. and P. Shermuchamedov, 1996: T u r k e s t a n  — O u r  C o m m o n  
H o m e .  E c o l o g i c a l  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  P r o b l e m s  i n  t h e  R e g i o n  o f  C e n t r a l  
A s i a . Konrad Adenauer Foundation and the International Commitee for 
Ecology and Environmental Conservation of the Central Asia Region.
Shelef, G., Y. Azov, A. Kanarek, G. Zac, and A. Shaw, 1994: The Dan region 
sewerage wastew ater treatment and reclamation scheme. W a t e r  S c i e n c e  
a n d  T e c h n o l o g y , 30, 229-238.
Shelef, G. and Y. Azov, 1996: The com ing era of intensive w astewater reuse in 
the M editerranean region. W a t e r  S c i e n c e  a n d  T e c h n o l o g y , 33, 115-125.
Shope, R.E., 1991: G lobal clim ate change and infectious diseases. 
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s , 96, 171-174.
Sm ith, J.B., S. Huq, S. Lenghart, L.J. M ata, I. Nemesova, and S. Toure, 1996: 
W ater resources. 1. In: V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  
a  S y n t h e s i s  o f  R e s u l t s  f r o m  t h e  U . S .  
C o u n t r y  S t u d ie s  P r o g r a m . U.S. 
Country Studies Program, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 161-181.
U N EP, 1997: G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  O u t l o o k . United Nations Environmental 
Programme and Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 106-115 and 
201- 210.
W alter, H., E.O. Box, and W. Hilbig (eds.), 1983: The deserts of central Asia. 
In: E c o s y s t e m s  o f  t h e  W o r ld ,  
V o l u m e  5 ,  T e m p e r a t e  D e s e r t s  a n d  S e m i -  
D e s e r t s . Elsevier Press, Amsterdam , The Netherlands, pp. 193-236.
252
M iddle East and A rid Asia
W ilson, A.W., 1976; 
T h e  
S o n o r a n  D e s e r t :  
t h e  
I m p a c t  
o f  U r b a n i z a t i o n .
Canberra, ACT, Australia.
W orld Bank, 1995a: W o r l d  B a n k  C o u n t r y  S t u d y — K a z a k h s t a n :  t h e  T r a n s i t i o n  
t o  a  M a r k e t  E c o n o m y . W orld Bank, W ashington, DC, USA, 233 pp. 
W orld Bank, 1995b: W o r l d  B a n k  C o u n t r y  S t u d y — T a j i k i s t a n . World Bank, 
W ashington, DC, USA, 240 pp.
W orld Bank, 1995c: W o r l d  B a n k  C o u n t r y  S t u d y — T u r k e m i n i s t a n . World Bank, 
W ashington, DC, USA, 244 pp.
W orld Bank, 1995d: W o r l d  B a n k  C o u n t r y  S t u d y — U z b e k i s t a n :  a n  A g e n d a  f o r  
E c o n o m i c  R e f o r m . W orld Bank, W ashington, DC, USA, 318 pp.
W orld Bank, 1997: W
o r l d  D e v e l o p m e n t  I n d i c a t o r s . W orld Bank, Washington, 
DC, U SA  (CD-ROM ).
W RI, 1994: W o r l d  R e s o u r c e s . Basic Books, New York, USA.
W RI, 1996: W o r l d  R e s o u r c e s :  A  G u i d e  t o  t h e  G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t ,  1 9 9 6 - 9 7 .  
World Resources Institute/United Nations Environm ent Programme/ 
United Nations D evelopm ent Program m e/The World Bank. Oxford 
University Press, New York, 342 pp.
8
North America
DAVID S. SHRINER (USA) AND ROGER B. STREET (CANADA)
Lead Authors:
R. Ball (USA), D. DAmours (Canada), K. Duncan (Canada), D. Kaiser (USA),
A. Maarouf (Canada), L. Mortsch (Canada), R Mulholland (USA), R. Neilson 
(USA), J.A. Patz (USA), J.D. Scheraga (USA), J.G. Titus (USA), H. Vaughan 
(Canada), M. Weltz (USA)
Contributors:
R. Adams (USA), R. Alig (USA), J. Andrey (Canada), M. Apps (Canada),
M. Brklacich (Canada), D. Brooks (USA), A.W. Diamond (Canada), A. Grambsch 
(USA), D. Goodrich (USA), L. Joyce (USA), M.R. Kidwell (Canada), G. Koshida 
(Canada), J. Legg (Canada), J. Malcolm (Canada), D.L. Martell (Canada),
R.J. Norby (USA), H.W. Polley (USA), W.M. Post (USA), M.J. Sale (USA), M. Scott 
(USA), B. Sohngen (USA), B. Stocks (Canada), W. Van Winkle (USA),
S. Wullschleger (USA)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
255
8.3.7.
Coastal Systems
298
8.З.7.1. Physical Effects and
8.1.
Regional Characterization
262
Their Implications
298
8.3.7.2. Adapting to Sea-Level Rise
302
8.2.
Regional Climate Information
265
8.3.8.
Human Settlements and Industry
304
8 .2 .1 .
Current Climate
265
8.3.8.1. Impacts on Transportation
304
8 .2 .2 .
Climate Trends
266
8.3.8.2 
Recreation and Tourism
305
8.2.3.
Climate Scenarios
268
8.3.8.3. Extreme Weather Events
305
8.3.8.4. Energy Supply Systems
306
83.
Impacts and Adaptation
269
8.3.8.5. Energy Demand
307
8.3.1.
Ecosystems: Nonforest Terrestrial
269
8.3.9.
Human Health
309
8.3.1.1. Distribution and Sensitivities
269
8.З.9.1. Thermal Extremes
309
8.3.1.2. Impacts, Vulnerabilities,
8.3.9.2. Air Quality and
and Adaptation
269
Ground-Level Ozone
310
8.3.2.
Ecosystems: Forested
273
8.3.9.3. Extreme Weather Events
312
8.З.2.1. Distribution and Sensitivities
273
8.3.9.4. Biological Agents: Vector- and
8.3.2.2. Key Impacts on Forested
Waterborne Diseases
312
Ecosystems of North America
275
8.3.3.
Hydrology and Water Resources
279
8.4. 
Integrative Issues
315
8.З.З.1. Hydrological Trends and Variability 279
8.4.1.
Limitations of Climate Scenarios
8.3.3.2. Impacts, Adaptations, and
for Regional Analyses
315
Vulnerabilities
280
8.4.2.
Regional Texture of Impacts
315
8.3.4.
Food and Fiber: Agriculture
284
8.4.3.
The Role of Adaptation
315
8.З.4.1. Description of the Resource
284
8.4.4.
Water as a Common Resource Across
8.3.4.2. Potential Impacts of Climate
Sectors and Subregions
316
Change on Agriculture
285
8.4.5.
Systemic Nature of the Problem
316
8.3.4.3. Climate Variability
8.4.6.
Integrated Nature of the Problem
316
and Extreme Events
285
8.3.4.4. Direct and Indirect Effects
285
References
318
8.3.4.5. Yield and Production Changes 
by North American Subregion
8.3.4.6. Adaptation
8.3.4.7. Vulnerabilities
8.3.5. Food and Fiber: Production Forestry
8.3.6. Food and Fiber: Fisheries 
and Aquatic Systems
8.3.6.1. Freshwater Ecosystem Impacts, 
Adaptations, and Vulnerabilities
8.3.6.2. Oceans
8.3.6.3. Impacts, Adaptations, and 
Vulnerabilities of Ocean Fisheries 
Resources
286
288
289
289
291
292 
294
295
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Within the North American region (defined for the purposes of 
this report as the portion of continental North America south of 
the Arctic Circle and north of the U.S.-Mexico border), vul­
nerability to climate change varies significantly from sector to 
sector and from subregion to subregion. Recognition of this 
variability or subregional “texture” is important in understand­
ing the potential effects of climate change on North America 
and in formulating viable response strategies.
The characteristics of the subregions and sectors of North 
America suggest that neither the impacts of climate change nor 
the response options will be uniform. This assessment suggests 
that there will be differences in the impacts of climate change 
across the region and within particular sectors. In fact, simply 
considering the relative climate sensitivity of different sectors 
or systems within a particular subregion (i.e., climate-sensitive, 
climate-insensitive, or climate-limited) would suggest differ­
entiated impacts. This diversity also is reflected in the available 
response options. Sectors and subregions will need to adopt 
response options to alleviate negative impacts or take advan­
tage of opportunities that not only address the impacts but are 
tailored to the needs and characteristics of that subregion.
Comprising most of Canada and the contiguous United States, 
this large area is diverse in terms of its geological, ecological, 
climatic, and socioeconomic structures. Temperature extremes 
range from well below -40°C in northern latitudes during the 
winter months to greater than +40°C in southern latitudes during 
the summer. The regional atmospheric circulation is governed 
mainly by upper-level westerly winds and subtropical weather 
systems, with tropical storms occasionally impacting on the Gulf 
of Mexico and Atlantic coasts during summer and autumn. The 
Great Plains (including the Canadian Prairies) and southeastern 
U.S. experience more severe weather— in the form of thunder­
storms, tornadoes, and hail— than any other region of the world.
Our current understanding of the potential impacts of climate 
change is limited by critical uncertainties. One important 
uncertainty relates to the inadequacy of regional-scale climate 
projections relative to the spatial scales of variability in North 
American natural and human systems. This uncertainty is com­
pounded further by the uncertainties inherent in ecological, 
economic, and social models— which thereby further limit our 
ability to identify the full extent of impacts or prescriptive 
adaptation measures. Given these uncertainties, particularly the 
inability to forecast futures, conclusions about regional 
impacts are not yet reliable and are limited to the sensitivity 
and vulnerability of physical, biological, and socioeconomic 
systems to climate change and climate variability.
Within most natural and human systems in North America, cur­
rent climate— including its variability— frequently is a limiting 
factor. Climate, however, is only one of many factors that 
determine the overall condition of these systems. For example, 
projected population changes in North America and associated 
changes in land use and air and water quality will continue to 
put pressure on natural ecosystems (e.g., rangelands, wetlands, 
and coastal ecosystems). Projected changes in climate should 
be seen as an additional factor that can influence the health and 
existence of these ecosystems. In some cases, changes in cli­
mate will provide adaptive opportunities or could alleviate the 
pressure of multiple stresses; in other cases, climate change 
could hasten or broaden negative impacts, leading to reduced 
function or elimination of ecosystems.
Virtually all sectors within North America are vulnerable to cli­
mate change to some degree in some subregions. Although 
many sectors and regions are sensitive to climate change, the 
technological capability to adapt to climate change is readily 
available, for the most part. If appropriate adaptation strategies 
are identified and implemented in a timely fashion, the overall 
vulnerability of the region may be reduced. However, uncer­
tainties exist about the feasibility of implementation and effi­
cacy of technological adaptation.
Even when current adaptive capability has been factored in, 
long-lived natural forest ecosystems in the east and interior 
west; water resources in the southern plains; agriculture in the 
southeast and southern plains; human health in areas current­
ly experiencing diminished urban air quality; northern 
ecosystems and habitats; estuarine beaches in developed 
areas; and low-latitude cold-water fisheries will remain 
among the most vulnerable sectors and regions. West coast 
coniferous forests; some western rangelands; energy costs for 
heating in the northern latitudes; salting and snow clearance 
costs; open-water season in northern channels and ports; and 
agriculture in the northern latitudes, the interior west, and 
west coast may benefit from opportunities associated with 
warmer temperatures or potentially from carbon dioxide 
(CO 2 ) fertilization.
The availability of better information on the potential impacts 
of climate change and the interaction of these impacts with 
other important factors that influence the health and productiv­
ity of natural and human systems is critical to providing the 
lead time necessary to take full advantage of opportunities for 
minimizing or adapting to impacts, as well as for allowing ade­
quate opportunity for the development of the necessary institu­
tional and financial capacity to manage change.
Key Impacts to Physical, Biological, 
and Socioeconomic Systems
Ecosystems: Nonforest Terrestrial (Section 8.3.1). The com­
position and geographic distribution of many ecosystems will 
shift as individual species respond to changes in climate. There 
will likely be reductions in biological diversity and in the 
goods and services that nonforest terrestrial ecosystems pro­
vide to society.
Increased temperatures could reduce sub-arctic (i.e., tundra 
and taiga/tundra) ecosystems. Loss o f migratory wildfowl and 
mammal breeding and forage habitats may occur within the 
taigaltundra, which is projected to nearly disappear from 
mainland areas. This ecozone currently is the home of the 
majority of the Inuit population. It also provides the major 
breeding and nesting grounds for a variety of migratory birds 
and the major summer range and calving grounds for Canada’s 
largest caribou herd, as well as habitat for a number of eco­
logically significant plant and animal species critical to the 
subsistence lifestyles of the indigenous peoples. Current bio- 
geographic model projections suggest that tundra and 
taiga/tundra ecosystems may be reduced by as much as two- 
thirds of their present size, reducing the regional storage of 
carbon in the higher latitudes of North America— which may 
shift the tundra region from a net sink to a net source of CO 2  
for the tundra region.
The relatively certain northward shift o f the southern boundary 
o f permafrost areas (projected to be about 500 km by the mid­
dle o f the 21st century) will impact ecosystems, infrastructure, 
and wildlife in the altered areas through terrain slumping, 
increased sediment loadings to rivers and lakes, and dramati­
cally altered hydrology; affected peatlands could become 
sources rather than sinks fo r atmospheric carbon. Projections 
suggest that peatlands may disappear from south of 60°N in the 
Mackenzie Basin; patchy arctic wetlands currently supported 
by surface flow also may not persist.
Elevated CO2 concentrations may alter the nitrogen cycle, 
drought survival mechanisms (e.g., the rate o f depletion o f soil 
water by grasses), and fire frequency—potentially decreasing 
forage quality and impacting forage production on rangelands. 
Increases in CO 2  and changes in regional climate could exacer­
bate the existing problem of loss of production on western range­
lands related to woody and noxious plant invasions by acceler­
ating the invasion of woody C3 plants (many crop and tree 
species) into mostly C 4  (tropical grasses, many weed species ) 
grasslands. Mechanisms include changes in water-use efficiency 
(WUE), the nitrogen cycle (increase in carbon-to-nitrogen ratio 
and concentrations of unpalatable and toxic substances), drought 
survival mechanisms, and fire frequency. Growth and reproduc­
tion of individual animals could decrease as CO 2  concentrations 
rise, without dietary supplementation. However, the data are 
ambiguous, and production may increase in some grassland 
ecosystems. Uncertainty exists in our ability to predict ecosys­
tem or individual species responses to elevated CO 2  and global 
warming at either the regional or global scale.
Arid lands may increase. Current biogeographical model simu­
lations indicate up to a 2 0 0 % increase in leaf area index in the 
desert southwest region of North America and a northern migra­
tion and expansion of arid-land species into the Great Basin 
region of North America. Although uncertainty exists in predic­
tions of regional climate changes and simulations of ecosystem 
responses to elevated CO 2  and global warming, long-term 
change in ecosystem structure and function is suggested.
Landslides and debris flow s in unstable Rocky Mountain areas 
and possibly elsewhere could become more common as winter 
wet precipitation increases, permafrost degrades, and/or glaci­
ers retreat. Water quality would be affected by increased sedi­
ment loads. Fish and wildlife habitat, as well as roads and other 
artificial structures, could be at increased risk.
Ecosystems: Forested (Section 8.3.2). Changes are likely in 
the growth and regeneration capacity of forests in many subre­
gions. In some cases, this process will alter the function and 
composition of forests significantly.
Forests may die or decline in density in some regions because 
o f drought, pest infestations, and fire; in other regions, forests 
may increase in both area and density. Models suggest that 
total potential forest area could increase by as much as 
2 5 ^ 4 % . For some individual forest types, however, range 
expansions could be preceded by decline or dieback over 
19-96% of their area while the climate and ecosystems are 
adjusting, but before an equilibrium is attained. Even though 
total forest area could increase, northward shifts in distribution 
could produce losses in forest area in the United States.
Geographic ranges o f forest ecosystems are expected to shift 
northward and upward in altitude, but forests cannot move 
across the land surface as rapidly as climate is projected to 
change. The faster the rate of climate change, the greater the 
probability of ecosystem disruption and species extinction. 
Climate-induced dieback could begin within a few decades 
from the present and might be enhanced by increases in pest 
infestations and fire. Alternatively, forest growth might 
increase in the early stages of global warming, followed by 
drought-induced forest dieback after higher temperatures have 
significantly increased evaporative demand. Migration into 
colder areas may be limited by seed dispersal (e.g., barriers 
may exist because of urbanization and changing land-use pat­
terns), seedling establishment, and poor soils. As forests 
expand or contract in response to climate change, they will 
likely either replace or be replaced by savannas, shrublands, or 
grasslands. Imbalances between rates of expansion and con­
traction could result in a large pulse of carbon to the atmos­
phere during the transition.
Longer fire seasons and potentially more frequent and larger 
fires are likely. Because of decades of fire suppression— 
resulting in higher forest densities and increased transpira­
tion— forests in the continental interior are experiencing 
increased drought stress; pest infestations; and catastrophic, 
stand-replacing fires, potentially resulting in changes in
species composition. Future climate could result in longer fire 
seasons and potentially more frequent and larger fires in all 
forest zones (even those that currently do not support much 
fire), due to more severe fire weather, changes in fire man­
agement practices, and possible forest decline or dieback.
Hydrology and Water Resources (Section 8.3.3). Water is a 
linchpin that integrates many subregions and sectors. Water 
quantity and quality will be directly affected by climate 
change. Available water supplies also will be affected by 
changes in demand from multiple sectors competing for water 
resources. Changes in the hydrological cycle will cause 
changes in ecosystems— ^which will, in turn, affect human 
health (e.g., by altering the geographic distribution of infec­
tious diseases) and biological diversity.
Increases or decreases in annual runoff could occur over much 
of the lower latitudes and in midcontinental regions o f mid and 
high latitudes. Increases in temperature lead to a rise in évapo­
transpiration— ^which, unless offset by large increases in pre­
cipitation or decreases in plant water use, results in declines in 
runoff, lake levels, and groundwater recharge and levels. The 
greatest impact of declines in supply will be in arid and 
semi-arid regions and in areas with a high ratio of use relative 
to available renewable supply, as well as in basins with multi­
ple competing uses. Alternatively, regions that experience sub­
stantial increases in precipitation are likely to have substantial 
increases in runoff and river flows.
Climate projections suggest increased runoff in winter and 
early spring but reduced flow s during summer in regions in 
which hydrology is dominated by snowmelt. Glaciers are 
expected to retreat, and their contributions to summer flows 
will decline as peak flow s shift to winter or early spring. In 
mountainous regions, particularly at mid-elevations, warming 
leads to a long-term reduction in peak snow-water equivalent; 
the snowpack builds later and melts sooner. Snow- or glacier- 
fed river and reservoir systems that supply spring and summer 
flow during the critical periods of high agricultural and munic­
ipal demand and low precipitation may tend to release their 
water earlier in the year, which would reduce supplies during 
summer droughts. Water supplies and water quality, irrigation, 
hydroelectric generation, tourism, and fish habitat, as well as 
the viability of the livestock industry, may be negatively 
impacted. The Great Plains of the United States and prairie 
regions of Canada and California are particularly vulnerable.
Altered precipitation and temperature regimes may cause 
lower lake levels, especially in midcontinental regions and, 
along with the seasonal pattern and variability o f water levels 
o f wetlands, thereby affect their functioning— including flood 
protection, water filtration, carbon storage, and waterfowl! 
wildlife habitat. The response of an affected wetland varies; it 
might include migration along river edges or the slope of a 
receding lake and/or altered vegetation species composition. 
Long-term lake levels would decline to or below historic low 
levels in the Great Lakes under several climate change sce­
narios. Prairie pothole lakes and sloughs may dry out more
frequently in the north-central regions of North America. 
These wetlands currently yield 50-75%  of all waterfowl pro­
duced annually in North America. In the Mackenzie delta of 
arctic Canada, many lakes could disappear in several decades 
because of decreased flood frequency and less precipitation.
Ice-jam patterns are likely to be altered. In New England, the 
Atlantic provinces, the Great Lakes, and central Plains areas, as 
well as northern regions susceptible to spring flooding, 
changes in late winter-early spring precipitation patterns could 
result in diminished frequency of ice jams and flooding. 
Damages caused by these events currently are estimated to cost 
Canadians CAN$60 million and Americans US$100 million 
annually, though northern deltas and wetlands appear to 
depend on the resulting periodic recharge. Depending on the 
specific pattern of altering climate, mid-latitude areas where 
ice jams presently are uncommon— such as the prairies; central 
Ontario and Quebec; and parts of Maine, New Brunswick, 
Newfoundland, and Labrador— may suffer from an increase in 
frequency and/or severity of winter breakup and associated 
jamming.
Increases in hydrological variability (larger floods and longer 
droughts) are likely to result in increased sediment loading and 
erosion, degraded shorelines, reductions in water quality, 
reduced water supply for dilution o f point-source water pollu­
tants and assimilation o f waste heat loads, and reduced stabil­
ity o f aquatic ecosystems. Projected changes in snowfall and 
snowmelt— as well as suggested increases in warm-period 
rainfall intensity— could shift the periodicity of the flood 
regime in North America, possibly stressing the adequacy of 
dams, culverts, levees, storm drains, and other flood prevention 
infrastructures. The impacts of flooding are likely to be largest 
in arid regions, where riparian vegetation is sparse; in agricul­
tural areas during winter, when soils are more exposed; and in 
urban areas with more impervious surfaces. Increases in hydro- 
logical variability may reduce productivity and biodiversity in 
streams and rivers and have large impacts on water resources 
management in North America, with increased expenditures 
for flood management. Increases in water temperature and 
reduced flows in streams and rivers may result in lower dis­
solved oxygen concentrations, particularly in summer low- 
flow periods in low- and mid-latitude areas.
Projected increases in human demand for water would exacer­
bate problems associated with the management o f water sup­
ply and quality. Managing increased water demands will be 
particularly problematic in regions experiencing increases in 
variability and declines in runoff. Improved management of 
water infrastructure, pricing policies, and demand-side man­
agement of supply have the potential to mitigate some of the 
impacts of increasing water demand.
Food and Fiber: Agriculture (Section 8.3.4). As the climate 
warms, crop patterns will shift northward. Most studies of 
these shifts have focused on changes in average climate and 
assume farmers effectively adapt. They have not fully account­
ed for changes in climate variability, water availability, and
imperfect responses by farmers to changing climate. Future 
consideration of these factors could either increase or decrease 
the magnitude of changes projected by these earlier studies.
Climate modifications that lead to changes in daily and inter­
annual variability in temperatures and, in particular, precipi­
tation will impact crop yields. Although changes in average 
temperature and precipitation can be expected to impact agri­
culture, few studies have considered the effects of increased 
climate variability on crop and livestock production. Increased 
variability in daily and interannual temperature and precipita­
tion are likely to be as important or more important than the 
effects of mean changes in climate. Droughts, floods, and 
increased risks of winter injury will contribute to a greater fre­
quency and severity of crop failure. An increased reliance on 
precision farming has increased vulnerability to climate vari­
ability outside a narrow range of change. These impacts are 
projected to be both site- and crop-specific; reliable forecasts 
for such occurrences, however, are not yet regionally available.
The direct effects o f a doubling o f CO 2 on crop yields are large­
ly beneficial. Food and fiber production for crops like cotton, 
soybean, and wheat are expected to increase an average of 30% 
(range - 1 0 % to +80%) in response to a doubling of CO 2  con­
centration. The magnitude of this response will be highly vari­
able and will depend on the availability of plant nutrients, tem­
perature, and precipitation.
Crop losses due to weeds, insects, and diseases are likely to 
increase and may provide additional challenges for agricultur­
al sector adaptation to climate change. Less severe winters due 
to climate change may increase the range and severity of insect 
and disease infestations. Increasing pressure to reduce chemi­
cal inputs (i.e., pesticides) in agriculture will necessitate a 
greater emphasis on concepts of integrated pest management 
and targeted application of agricultural chemicals through pre­
cision agricultural technologies.
Recent analyses o f issues o f long-run sustainability associated 
with agricultural adaptation to climate change from an arbi­
trary doubling o f equivalent CO2 concentrations have con­
cluded that there is considerably more sectoral flexibility and 
adaptation potential than was found in earlier analyses. Much 
of this reassessment arises from a realization that the costs and 
benefits of climate change cannot be adequately evaluated 
independently of behavioral, economic, and institutional 
adjustments required by changing climate. Although scientific 
controversy over the nature and rate of climate change remains, 
most existing scenarios suggest gradual changes in mean cli­
mate over decades— providing ample opportunities for adapta­
tion measures to be implemented within vulnerable subregions 
of North America. However, uncertainties remain about the 
implications of changes in climate variability, as well as crop 
responses to increases beyond a doubling of equivalent atmos­
pheric CO 2  concentrations.
Existing studies that have looked at changes in mean tempera­
ture and precipitation suggest that climate change is not likely
to harm agriculture enough to significantly affect the overall 
economy o f North America. The economic consequences of cli­
mate change to U.S. agriculture are expected to be both posi­
tive and negative, depending on the nature of temperature and 
precipitation changes that occur in specific subregions. 
Subregions of North America that are dependent on agriculture 
may be more vulnerable than areas offering economic diversi­
ty. The Great Plains area, for example, relies heavily on crop 
and livestock production and, as a result, is potentially vulner­
able to climate change, with negative consequences projected 
for southern extremes and potential positive impacts in north­
ern areas as temperatures rise. Warmer temperatures at north­
ern latitudes may lessen the adverse effects of frost damage, 
but the risk of early- and late-season frost will remain a barri­
er to the introduction of new crops.
Consumers and producers could gain or lose; the long-term 
stability o f the forest-products market is uncertain. Consumer 
prices could increase by 100-250% with severe forest dieback, 
producing losses of 4—20% of the net value of commercial 
forests. Alternatively, consumer prices could decrease with 
increased forest growth and harvest in Canada, and producers 
could sustain economic losses. With exports from Canada to 
the United States, however, the net changes (consumers plus 
producers) could be negative for Canadians and positive for the 
U.S. market.
Food and Fiber: Production Forestry (Section 8.3.5). The
most intensively managed industry and private forestlands may 
be least at risk o f long-term decline from the impacts o f climate 
change because the relatively high value o f these resources is 
likely to encourage adaptive management strategies. Private 
forest managers have the financial incentive and the flexibility 
to protect against extensive loss from climate-related impacts. 
They can use several available techniques: short rotations to 
reduce the length of time that a tree is influenced by unfavor­
able climate conditions; planting of Improved varieties devel­
oped through selection, breeding, or genetic engineering to 
reduce vulnerability; and thinning, weeding, managing pests, 
irrigating, improving drainage, and fertilizing to improve gen­
eral vigor. Such actions would reduce the probability of mois­
ture stress and secondary risks from fire, insects, and disease. 
However, the more rapid the rate of climate change, the more 
it may strain the ability to create infrastructure for seeding or 
planting of trees, or to support the supply of timber if there is 
a large amount of salvage. A fast rate of warming also may 
limit species constrained by slow dispersal rates and/or habitat 
fragmentation, or those that are already stressed by other fac­
tors, such as pollution.
Food and Fiber: Fisheries and Aquatic Systems (Section
8.3.6). Aquatic ecosystem functions will be affected by climate 
change, although the effects are likely to vary in magnitude and 
direction depending on the region.
Projected increases in water temperature, changes in freshwa­
ter flows and mixing regimes, and changes in water quality 
could result in changes in the survival, reproductive capacity.
and growth o f freshwater fish and salmonid and other anadro­
mous species. In larger, deeper lakes— including the Great 
Lakes and many high-latitude lakes— increases in water tem­
perature may increase the survival and growth of most fish 
species. In smaller, mid-latitude lakes and streams, however, 
increased water temperatures may reduce available habitat for 
some cold-water and cool-water species. Increased production 
rates of food (e.g., plankton) with warmer water temperature 
(e.g., plankton production increases by a factor of 2-4 with 
each 10°C increase) also may increase fish productivity. 
However, shifts in species composition of prey with warming 
may prevent or reduce productivity gains if preferred prey 
species are eliminated or reduced. Warmer freshwater temper­
atures and changes in the pattern of flows in spawning 
streams/rivers could reduce the abundance of salmon, although 
individual size may increase from improved growth in the 
warmer water. Increases in temperature in freshwater rearing 
areas and increased winter flows may increase mortality for 
stocks in southern rivers on the west coast.
Freshwater species distributions could shift northward, with 
widespread!subregional species extinction likely at the lower 
latitudes and expansion at the higher latitudes o f species 
ranges. For example, a 3.8°C increase in mean annual air tem­
perature is projected to eliminate more than 50% of the habitat 
of brook trout in the southern Appalachian mountains, where­
as a similar temperature increase could expand the ranges of 
smallmouth bass and yellow perch northward across Canada 
by about 500 km. Whether fish are able to move or will 
become extinct in response to changes in or loss of habitat will 
depend on the availability of migration routes.
Recreational fishing is a highly valued activity that could incur 
losses in some regions resulting from climate-induced changes 
in fisheries. The net economic effect of changes in recreational 
fishing opportunities is dependent on whether the gains in cool- 
and warm-water fish habitat offset the losses in cold-water fish 
habitat. The loss of fishing opportunities could be severe in some 
parts of the region, especially at the southern boundaries of fish 
species’ habitat ranges. Although gains in cool- and warm-water 
fishing opportunities may offset losses in cold-water fishing 
opportunities, distributional effects will cause concern.
There will likely be relatively small economic and food supply 
consequences at the regional!national level as a result o f the 
impacts on marine fisheries; however, impacts are expected to 
be more pronounced at the subregional and community levels. 
The adaptability of fisheries to current climate variability and 
the relatively short time horizons on capital replacement (ships 
and plants) will minimize the regional- and national-level 
impacts of projected climate change. At the subregional and 
community levels, however, positive and negative impacts can 
be significant as a result of suggested shifts in the centers of 
production and ensuing relocation of support structures, 
processors, and people.
Projected changes in water temperatures, as well as salinity 
and currents, can affect the growth, survival, reproduction, and
spatial distribution o f marine fish species and the competitors 
and predators that influence the dynamics o f these species. 
Growth rates, ages of sexual maturity, and distributions of some 
marine fish species are sensitive to water temperatures (e.g., 
cold temperatures typically result in delayed spawning, where­
as warm temperatures result in earlier spawning), and long-term 
temperature changes can lead to expansion or contraction of the 
distribution ranges of some species. These changes generally 
are most evident near the northern or southern species bound­
aries (i.e., warming resulting in a distributional shift northward, 
and cooling drawing species southward).
The survival, health, migration, and distribution o f many North 
American marine mammals and sea turtles are expected to be 
impacted by projected changes in the climate through impacts 
on their food supply, sea-ice extent, and breeding habitats. 
Although some flexibility exists in their need for specific habi­
tats, some marine mammals and sea turtles may be more 
severely affected than others by projected changes in the avail­
ability of necessary habitat, including pupping and nesting 
beaches; in food supplies; and in associated prey species. 
Concerns are the result primarily of projected changes in sea­
sonal sea-ice extent and accelerated succession or loss of 
coastal ecosystems as a result of projected rises in sea level.
Coastal Systems (Section 8.3.7). The implications of rising 
sea level are well understood, in part because sea level has 
been rising relative to the land along most of the coast of North 
America for thousands of years. Some coastal areas in the 
region will experience greater increases in sea level than oth­
ers. Adaptation to rising seas is possible, but it comes at eco­
logical, economic, and social costs.
In the next century, rising sea level could inundate approxi­
mately 50% o f North American coastal wetlands and a signifi­
cant portion o f dry land areas that currently are less than 50 
cm above sea level. In some areas, wetlands and estuarine 
beaches may be squeezed between advancing seas and engi­
neering structures. A  50-cm rise in sea level would cause a net 
loss of 1 7 ^3 %  of U.S. coastal wetlands, even if no additional 
bulkheads or dikes are erected to prevent new wetland creation 
as formerly dry lands are inundated. Furthermore, in the United 
States, 8,500-19,000 km2 of dry land are within 50 cm of high 
tide, 5,700-15,800 km^ of which currently are undeveloped. 
Several states in the United States have enacted regulations to 
adapt to climate change by prohibiting structures that block the 
landward migration of wetlands and beaches. The mid- 
Atlantic, south Atlantic, and Gulf coasts are likely to lose large 
areas of wetlands if sea-level rise accelerates.
Coastal areas in the Arctic and extreme North Atlantic and 
Pacific are less vulnerable, except where sea ice andlor per­
mafrost currently is present at the shoreline. Recent modeling 
suggests that projected increases in ocean fetches as a result of 
decreases in the period and extent of sea-ice cover could 
increase wave heights by 16-40% and therefore increase 
coastal erosion during the open-water season. Maximum 
coastal erosion rates are expected to continue in those areas
where permafrost contains considerable pore, wedge, or mas­
sive ice or where the permafrost shoreline is exposed to the sea.
Rising sea ievei is iikeiy to increase flooding o f iow-iying 
coastal areas and associated human settlements and infrastruc­
ture. Higher sea levels would provide a higher base for storm 
surges; a 1-m rise would enable a 15-year storm to flood many 
areas that today are flooded only by a 100-year storm. Sea-level 
rises of 30 cm and 90 cm would increase the size of the 
100-year floodplain in the United States from its 1990 estimate 
of 50,500 km2 to 59,500 km^ and 69,900 km^, respectively. 
Assuming that current development trends continue, flood dam­
ages incurred by a representative property subject to sea-level 
rise are projected to increase by 36-58% for a 30-cm rise and 
by 102-200% for a 90-cm rise. In Canada, Charlottetown, 
Prince Edward Island appears to be especially vulnerable, with 
some of the highest-valued property in the downtown core and 
significant parts of the sewage systems at risk.
Saltwater is likely to intrude further inland and upstream. 
Higher sea level enables saltwater to penetrate farther upstream 
in rivers and estuaries. In low-lying areas such as river deltas, 
saltwater intrusion could contaminate drinking water and 
reduce the productivity of agricultural lands.
Human Settlements and Industry (Section 8.3.8). Climate 
change and resulting sea-level rise can have a number of direct 
effects on human settlements, as well as effects experienced 
indirectly through impacts on other sectors.
Potential changes in climate could have positive and negative 
impacts on the operation and maintenance costs o f North 
American land and water transportation systems. Higher tem­
peratures are expected to result in lower maintenance costs for 
northern transportation systems, especially with fewer freeze- 
thaw cycles and less snow. However, some increased pavement 
buckling is a possibility because of projected longer periods of 
intense heat. Problems associated with permafrost thawing in 
the Bering Sea region could be particularly severe and costly. 
River and lake transportation could be somewhat more diffi­
cult, with increases in periods of disruption as a result of pro­
jected decreases in water levels (e.g., the Mississippi River and 
the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway system). Increases in the 
length of the ice-free season could have positive impacts for 
commercial shipping on the inland waterways and in northern 
ports (e.g., Arctic Ocean ports).
Projected changes in climate could increase risks to property 
and human healthllife as a result o f changes in exposure to nat­
ural hazards (e.g., wildfire, landslides, and extreme weather 
events). A large and increasing number of people and their 
property in North America are vulnerable to natural hazards. 
Projected changes in wildfires and landslides could increase 
property losses and increase disruptions and damages to urban 
and industrial infrastructure (e.g., road and rail transportation 
and pipeline systems). Although some questions remain 
regarding the extent and regional reflections of changes in 
extreme weather events as a result of climate changes, project­
ed changes in the frequency or intensity of these events are of 
concern because of the implications for social and economic 
costs in a number of sectors. For example, extreme weather 
events can cause direct physical harm to humans; disrupt 
health infrastructure, causing contamination of water systems 
and creating breeding sites for insects or favorable conditions 
for rodents that carry diseases; and affect construction costs, 
insurance fees and settlement costs, and offshore oil and gas 
exploration and extraction costs.
Climate warming could result in increased demand fo r cooling 
energy and decreased demand fo r heating energy, with the 
overall net effect varying among geographic regions. Changes 
in energy demand for comfort, however, are expected to result 
in a net saving overall fo r North America. Projected increases 
in temperature could reduce energy use associated with space 
heating [e.g., a 1°C increase in temperature could reduce U.S. 
space-heating energy use by 1 1 % of demand, resulting in a cost 
saving of $5.5 billion (1991$US)]. It also has been projected 
that a 4°C warming could decrease site energy use for com- 
mercial-sector heating and cooling by 13-17%  and associated 
primary energy by 2-7% , depending on the degree to which 
advanced building designs penetrate the market. If peak 
demand for electricity occurs in the winter, maximum demand 
is likely to fall as a result of projected temperature changes, 
whereas if there is a summer peak, maximum demand will rise.
The technological capacity to adapt to climate change is like­
ly to be readily available in North America, but its application 
will be realized only if the necessary information is available 
(sufficiently far in advance in relation to the planning horizons 
and lifetimes o f investments) and the institutional and financial 
capacity to manage change exists. Some adaptations can be 
made without explicit climate predictions through increasing 
the resilience of systems, such as greater flood control, larger 
water reservoirs, and so forth, but these approaches are not 
without social and economic costs. Rapid changes in climate 
and associated acceleration of sea-level rise would limit adap­
tation options, thereby putting considerable strain on social and 
economic systems and increasing the need for explicit adapta­
tion strategies.
Human Health (Section 8.3.9). Climate can have wide-ranging 
and potentially adverse effects on human health through direct 
pathways (e.g., thermal stress and extreme weather/climate 
events) and indirect pathways (e.g., disease vectors and infec­
tious agents, environmental and occupational exposures to toxic 
substances, and food production).
Direct health effects include increased heat-related mortality 
and illness and the beneficial effects o f milder winters on 
cold-related mortality. Under a warmer North America, cur­
rent models indicate that by the middle of the next century, 
many major cities could experience as many as several hun­
dred to thousands of extra heat-related deaths annually. The 
elderly, persons with preexisting health conditions, and the 
very young (0 ^  years) are most vulnerable to heat stress. 
Gradual acclimatization to increasing temperatures, the use of
air conditioners, and an adequate warning system for heat 
waves may help reduce heat-related deaths. Conversely, it has 
been suggested that winter mortality rates may decrease in the 
future with warmer winter temperatures.
Climate warming may exacerbate respiratory disorders asso­
ciated with reduced air quality and affects the seasonality o f 
certain allergic respiratory disorders. Concurrent hot weather 
and exposure to air pollutants can have synergistic impacts on 
health. Recent studies show a positive correlation between 
ground-level ozone and respiratory-related hospital admissions 
in the United States and Canada. Increased temperatures under 
climate change could lead to a greater number of days on 
which ozone levels exceed air quality standards. Global warm­
ing also may alter the production of plant aero-allergens, inten­
sifying the severity of seasonal allergies.
Changing climate conditions may lead to the northward spread 
o f vector-borne infectious diseases and potentially enhanced 
transmission dynamics due to warmer ambient temperatures. 
Vector-borne infectious diseases (e.g., malaria, dengue fever, 
encephalitis) and waterborne diarrheal diseases currently cause 
a large proportion of global fatalities. Temperature increases 
under climate change are expected to enlarge the potential 
transmission zones of these vectors into temperate regions of 
North America. Some increases in waterborne diseases may 
occur due to changes in water distribution, temperature, and 
microorganism proliferation under climate change. However, 
the North American health infrastructure likely would prevent 
a large increase in the actual number of vector-bome and 
waterborne disease cases.
Integrative Issues (Section 8.4). Taken individually, responses 
to any one of the impacts discussed here may be within the capa­
bilities of a subregion or sector. The fact that they are projected
to occur simultaneously and in concert with changes in popula­
tion, technology, and economics and other environmental and 
social changes, however, adds to the complexity of the impact 
assessment and the choice of appropriate responses.
This assessment highlights a number of the uncertainties that 
currently limit our capability to understand the vulnerability of 
subregions and sectors of North America and to develop and 
implement adaptive strategies to reduce that vulnerability. The 
following research and monitoring activities are considered 
key to reducing these uncertainties:
• 
Improve regional and subregional projections of cli­
mate change that consider the physiographic charac­
teristics that play a significant role in the North 
American climate (e.g., the Great Lakes, the nature of 
the coasts, and mountain ranges), and incoфorate 
biosphere-atmosphere feedbacks.
• 
Improve projections of changes in weather systems 
and variability, including extremes.
• 
Develop a better understanding of physiological and 
ecosystem processes, with particular emphasis on 
direct CO 2  effects and how the CO 2  effects might be 
enhanced or diminished by nitrogen-cycle dynamics. 
Identify sensitivities and relative vulnerabilities of 
natural and social systems, including the availability 
of the necessary physical, biological, chemical, and 
social data and information.
Identify beneficial impacts or opportunities that may 
arise as a result of climate change.
• 
Develop integrated assessments of impacts.
• 
Define viable response options that recognize the dif­
ferentiated and integrative nature of the impacts and 
response options and the specific needs of sectors and 
subregions of North America.
262
North America
8.1. 
Regional Characterization
North America, for the purposes of this regional assessment, is 
defined as continental North America north of the border 
between the United States and Mexico and south of the Arctic 
Circle. Comprising most of Canada and the United States, this 
area totals approximately 19.42 million km^, with a combined 
population of approximately 292.7 million in 1995 (Annex D, 
Table D-6 ). Canada is the second-largest country in the world 
but one of the most sparsely populated, with nearly 90% of the 
population located along the border with the United States 
(Figures 8-1 and 8-2). The United States is the world’s fourth- 
largest country in both area and population. Approximately 
75% of the North American population is urban. North 
America is geologically and ecologically diverse and spans a 
full spectrum of land cover types and physiography (Figure 8-3 
and Annex C). About 12% of the land area of the North 
American region is cropland, and 32% is forest and woodlands; 
the rest is divided among rangelands and other lands, including 
mountains, desert, wetlands and lakes, and wilderness. As 
such, management of croplands, forests, and rangelands with­
in North America is a key part of sustainable development.
Canada and the United States rank among the wealthiest coun­
tries in the world in terms of per capita income and natural 
resources. In fact, there is a strong link between the region’s 
economic prosperity and well-being and that of its natural 
resources. For example, Canada, more than most industrial­
ized nations, depends on the land for its economic well-being, 
with one in three workers employed directly or indirectly in 
agriculture, forestry, mining, energy generation, and other 
land-based activities (Government of Canada, 1996). In the
United States, although dependence on primary production is 
lower, agricultural production and marketing account for 16% 
of employment, and almost half of the total land area (exclud­
ing Alaska) is dedicated to agriculture-related purposes 
(PCSD, 1996).
North America has abundant energy resources— including ura­
nium, oil, natural gas, and coal— and leads the world in the pro­
duction of hydropower. It also is the world’s largest consumer 
of energy, but because of more rapid growth in other regions of 
the globe, emissions from North America have shrunk from 
45.1% of the global total in 1950 to 24.3% in 1994. The region 
historically and currently leads the world in greenhouse gas 
emissions, contributing 1509 million metric tons of carbon in 
1994 (Canada, 122 million metric tons; the United States, 1387 
million metric tons) (Marland and Boden, 1997).
Water availability and quality are among the most common 
concerns expressed by North Americans (UNEP, 1997). 
Despite an overall abundance, water shortages occur periodi­
cally in some localities (e.g., arid sections of the western 
United States, the Canadian prairies, and some of the interior 
valleys of the Rocky Mountains). Compared with people in 
most other regions. North Americans are among the world’s 
leaders in per capita water consumption, and the region 
enjoys relatively good water quality. Nevertheless, the avail­
ability of safe water remains a problem in a number of areas, 
particularly in rural and remote areas. Improper agricultural 
practices and by-product and waste disposal practices in 
some areas have contributed to impaired water quality of 
rivers, lakes, and estuaries. For example, large concentrations 
of industrial capacity and agricultural production (nearly 25%
Figure 8-1: The North America region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic Information 
System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
North America
263
Figure 8-2: North American population density [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic 
Information System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
of the total Canadian agricultural production and 7% of the 
U.S. production) are located within the Great Lakes-St. 
Lawrence basin and have contributed to the reduced quality 
of the water contained within that basin (U.S. EPA and 
Environment Canada, 1995).
As in other regions of the globe, a number of pressures are 
being brought to bear on North America that are affecting the 
region’s progress toward sustainability (e.g., population 
dynamics, land-use changes, changes in the global and region­
al economy, air and water pollution, consumption, and techno­
logical changes). Modern social and ecological systems, for the 
most part, have evolved and adapted to the prevailing local cli­
mate and its natural variability. Climate change, however, is an 
additional factor that will affect the evolution and adaptation 
(i.e., sustainability) of these systems. It acts in combination 
with these other pressures, resulting in either a negative impact 
or, in some cases, an opportunity that could benefit an area or 
sector. Climate change impacts and the ability of North 
America to adapt, therefore, must be assessed within the broad­
er context of these other changes and development trends.
Another factor for consideration is the relative sensitivity of 
any activity, resource, or area of the region to climate and how 
these other changes and pressures will affect that sensitivity. 
Population growth, changing demographics, and the move­
ment of a large proportion of that population to coastal com­
munities are projected to increase the sensitivity of North 
Americans to climate change and variability. For example, by 
the year 2000, more than 75% of the U.S. population (PCSD,
1996) and approximately 25% of the Canadian population 
(Government of Canada, 1996) will reside in coastal commu­
nities. Projected increasing demands on water resources— in 
terms of absolute amounts and multiplicity of demands— are 
expected to increase the climate sensitivity of these resources. 
On the other hand, increased energy efficiency and related 
technological advances are projected to decrease climate sensi­
tivity through their positive impacts on reducing energy 
demands (e.g., energy for lighting, heating, and cooling).
Some of the key issues that need to be considered when inter­
preting the results of this assessment or deciding how to 
respond are as follows.
There are uncertainties associated with climate change and 
with the responses o f natural and social systems to climate 
change, particularly at the regional and subregional scales 
(IPCC 1996, WG I, Summary for Policymakers). Because of 
inherent uncertainties in our knowledge of the processes 
affected, our understanding of the magnitude of the responses 
is equally, or more, uncertain. These uncertainties are com­
pounded further by uncertainties about how landowners and 
other decision makers will respond to associated risks. 
Assumptions about how people will respond to risks associat­
ed with climate change can significantly affect estimates of 
associated socioeconomic impacts.
Differentiated impacts can occur across North America. As 
this assessment notes, particular areas and sectors within North 
America are projected to experience negative impacts, where­
as other areas and sectors could benefit from the projected 
changes. Similarly, because of differences in adaptive capacity 
within North America, different areas and sectors will be bet­
ter able to respond to climate change.
264
North America
Figure 8-3: Ecoregions for North America (courtesy of R.A. Washington-Allen/ORNL), based on data provided by the 
National Geophysical Data Center (see Annex E for a color rendition).
Climate change is a dynamic process that will occur over time. 
Although most of the literature on impacts, including the analy­
sis in this assessment, has focused on a 2 xC 0 2  world, it is rea­
sonable to expect that some of the kinds of impacts that have 
been discussed would begin to manifest themselves before 
atmospheric concentrations of CO 2  doubled. It also is important 
to recognize that 2 xC 0 2  is not a magic concentration; it is like­
ly that, unless action is taken, we will pass 2 xC 0 2  on our way to 
even higher concentrations. It is not unreasonable to suggest that 
at these higher levels the negative and beneficial impacts (e.g., 
the benefits of CO 2  fertilization effects on vegetation) could be 
significantly different, even a nonfactor, in a 4 xC 0 2  world.
Many o f the changes in climate that currently are being 
observed are consistent with the changes one would expect 
with greenhouse gas-induced climate change (IPCC 1996, WG 
I, Summary for Policymakers).
Many o f the actions that might be taken today to address exist­
ing stresses might also help reduce vulnerability to potential 
climate change and variability. Options include, but are not 
limited to, actions such as the following:
• 
Improve management of water infrastructure, pricing 
policies, and demand-side management of supply to 
support the competing needs of domestic water sup­
ply, agriculture, industrial cooling, hydropower, navi­
gation, and fisheries and habitat.
• 
Introduce accommodating adaptation options in the 
transportation sector, as the industry copes with other 
significant changes, through new technologies, mar­
kets, and products.
• 
Introduce effective land-use regulations that also help 
reduce vulnerabilities and direct population shifts 
away from vulnerable locations such as floodplains, 
steep hillsides, and low-lying coastlines.
Failure to consider climate change when making long-range 
decisions to manage stress response in any sector could 
increase the risk o f taking actions that would prove ineffective 
or even counterproductive in the long run. Examples where 
consideration of climate change could prove prudent are:
• 
Actions taken currently that would reduce weather- 
related deaths associated with heat waves in urban 
areas also could reduce vulnerability to potential cli­
mate change that might increase the frequency and 
intensity of heat waves (IPCC 1996, WG I, Summary 
for Policymakers).
Introducing sustainable water-supply management 
concepts today, whether to deal with shortages or 
excesses of water, could reduce vulnerability to 
potential climate change.
The concept o f “effective” adaptation by any given sector 
assumes that those affected have the ability and the foresight to
North America
265
discern changing climate trends from short-term weather pat­
terns and to make strategic anticipatory adaptations accord­
ingly- It is not clear that, if changes in climate and weather pat­
terns or variables fall outside people’s experience, they will be 
able to adapt effectively in the near term. If they are not able, 
there may be short-term transitional impacts on those individ­
uals and decision makers (e.g., resource managers, farmers, 
fishermen, loggers, or ranchers).
8.2. 
Regional Climate Information
8.2.1. 
Current Climate
North America possesses a multitude of diverse regional cli­
mates as a consequence of its vastness, its topography, and its 
being surrounded by oceans and seas with widely varying ther­
mal characteristics. The North American region as analyzed in 
this report (see Figure A-3 in Annex A) extends latitudinally 
from approximately the Arctic Circle to the Tropic of Cancer 
and longitudinally from the Aleutian Islands in the west to the 
Canadian maritime provinces in the east. The regional atmos­
pheric circulation is dominated by disturbances (waves) in the 
upper-level westerly winds. The development of these waves 
defines the position of the main upper-level jet stream over the 
continent and thus the position of the so-called Polar Front at 
the surface, which generally separates colder, drier air to the 
north from warmer, moister air to the south. In the colder half 
of the year, the position of the Polar Front can vary greatly, from 
southern Canada to the southern reaches of the United States. 
Such large shifts in the Polar Front are associated with long, 
high-amplitude waves that often cause one part of the continent 
to experience warm, moist, southerly airflow while another part 
experiences a blast of dry and cold Arctic air (meridional flow). 
These conditions may persist for lengthy periods because of the 
typically slow movement of these longer waves. At other times, 
however (mainly in the fall and spring), shorter, weaker waves 
move more quickly across the continent— producing highly 
variable weather with rapidly changing, but not extremely high 
or low, temperatures and short wet and dry periods. In the sum­
mer, the Polar Front retreats well into Canada, for the most part, 
and two oceanic semipermanent high-pressure systems tend to 
dominate the North American weather; as a result, there typi­
cally are fewer and weaker synoptic-scale disturbances in the 
westerlies. In summer and autumn, tropical storms of Atlantic, 
Caribbean, or Gulf of Mexico origin occasionally impact the 
Atlantic and Gulf coasts.
The temperature regime over North America varies greatly. 
Over all seasons, mean temperatures generally increase from 
the extreme north along the Arctic Ocean to the southern 
United States. Mean annual and wintertime temperatures along 
the west coast of the continent generally are higher than at 
equivalent latitudes inland or on the east coast because of the 
warming influence of Pacific air. During the winter in the far 
north, the long polar nights produce strong radiative cooling 
over the frozen Arctic Ocean and the typically snow-covered 
reaches of Alaska and Canada. This results in very cold surface
temperatures and a temperature inversion that acts to inhibit 
cloud development, creating a positive feedback on the radia- 
tional cooling process. In this way, vast pools of cold, dense air 
(Arctic high-pressure systems) are formed and move over cen­
tral and eastern North America; they sometimes move south­
ward as far as the Gulf of Mexico. These extreme cold air out­
breaks usually are confined to areas east of the Rocky 
Mountains; they often can produce temperatures below -40°C 
in the heart of the continent, with attendant sea-level pressure 
readings in excess of 1050 mb. To the west of the Rockies, 
warmer maritime airflow off the Pacific Ocean produces 
milder winters along the coast; the western cordillera effec­
tively restricts this mild air from reaching and thus modifying 
temperatures in the interior. The eastern maritime regions of 
the continent enjoy much less warming influence from the 
Atlantic Ocean during these cold air outbreaks because the pre­
vailing air flow is off the land (Schneider, 1996). Nevertheless, 
in winter the east and west coastal regions of Canada and the 
United States usually are warmer than inland regions, with the 
Pacific and Gulf coasts and Florida experiencing the shortest 
and mildest winters (Schneider, 1996).
In summertime, the large amount of insolation received over 
the very long days in the northern reaches of North America 
acts to raise temperatures there so that these areas are more in 
line with much of the rest of the continent, thus decreasing the 
north-south temperature gradient. The coldest areas are found 
in the western Canadian mountains and along the Labrador 
coast (Schneider, 1996). The highest continental temperatures 
are found in the U.S. desert southwest and southern plains 
states, where temperatures routinely exceed 38°C (~100°F). 
Occasionally, extreme summer heat waves spread over much 
of the central United States and parts of central and eastern 
Canada. These conditions can persist for days or weeks when 
occasional blocking high-pressure ridges form; these ridges 
may extend from the central United States to the western 
Atlantic. The hot air can be extremely humid because of 
low-level southerly airflow off warm Gulf of Mexico waters. 
The combination of heat and humidity produces dangerous 
health conditions that have resulted in significant numbers of 
fatalities (e.g., the July 1995 heat wave over the midwestern 
United States).
Annual precipitation amounts over North America show large 
spatial variations. The wettest regions He along the Pacific 
coast, extending generally from Oregon to southern Alaska—  
with mean annual totals exceeding 300 cm at several Canadian 
locations (Environment Canada, 1995). The other main conti­
nental maximum in annual precipitation is located in the 
southeastern United States. It is centered mainly along the 
central Gulf coast states during winter, spring, and autumn and 
over Florida in the summer (Higgins et a l, 1997). Mean annu­
al precipitation amounts along the central Gulf coast exceed 
150 cm.
Another precipitation maximum typically is observed over the 
midwestern United States (centered roughly over Missouri and 
Iowa) (Higgins et al., 1997) in the summer months, where
266
North America
mean rainfall (mainly convective in nature) typically exceeds 
25 cm. This feature is associated with convection that often is 
fueled by a strong low-level southerly jet stream bringing 
abundant moisture from the Gulf of Mexico. The active con­
vection often begins in the spring and continues through the 
summer, causing severe local- to reglonal-scale flooding. The 
convective activity observed over the Midwest, the Great 
Plains, and the southeastern United States also is responsible 
for the fact that this part of the United States experiences more 
severe weather (in the form of thunderstorms, tornadoes, and 
hail) than any other part of the world. Although North 
American annual precipitation is much more climatologically 
consistent than in many other parts of the world (e.g., northern 
Africa and eastern Australia), extremely damaging large-scale 
droughts and floods sometimes occur, often in association with 
blocking patterns in the large-scale circulation.
many areas. Over North America, Karl et al. (1993) found that 
Tnjin increased greatly over the western half of the continent 
from 1951 to 1990— in many locales by as much as 2-3°C/100 
years. Increases in T„,ax were smaller, for the most part, with 
T ^ 3,( actually decreasing somewhat in the desert Southwest. 
The combined effect of these changes resulted in decreases in 
DTR of 1-3°C/100 years for much of western North America 
over the period 1951-90. [Trends are reported in Karl et al.
(1993) as degrees per century to allow for direct comparison 
between regions with slightly different periods of record and 
should not be construed as representing actual trends over the 
past century.] Environment Canada (1995) also found that, 
over a longer period of record (1895-1991), maximum and 
minimum temperatures for Canada have been changing at dif­
ferent rates (Figure 8-4), with the minimum temperatures ris­
ing more than twice as much as maximum temperatures for the 
country as a whole.
8.2.2. 
Climate Trends
A number of studies have examined long-term (century-scale) 
records of climate variables over the North American region. 
Most of this work has pertained to analyses of near-surface air 
temperature and precipitation. Gridded analyses of annual 
near-surface North American air temperatures for the period 
1901-96 (see Figure A-2 in Annex A) show trends toward 
increasing temperatures 
over most of the continent. 
Temperature increases over land are greatest over an area 
extending from northwestern Canada, across the southern 
Canada/northern United States region, to southeastern Canada 
and the northeastern United States. These increases range 
mainly from 1-2°C/100 years. Decreases in annual tempera­
ture on the order of 1°C/100 years are observed along the Gulf 
coast and on the order of 0.5°C/100 years off the northeast 
coast of Canada (Environment Canada, 1995). Sea-surface 
temperatures appear to have warmed off both the west and east 
coasts of the continent, especially in the Gulf of Alaska.
The time series of anomalies in mean annual temperature for 
the entire North American region is depicted in Figure A-10 in 
Annex A. The record reveals temperatures increasing through 
the 1920s and 1930s, peaking around 1940, and then gradually 
decreasing through the early 1970s. From this point through 
the late 1980s, temperatures increased to levels similar to the 
1940 era; they have remained mainly above normal since, with 
the exception of 1996. The more recent warmth has been 
accompanied by relatively high amounts of precipitation (see 
below), unlike the dry and warm 1930s. The value of the over­
all linear trend for 1901-96 is 0.57°C/100 years, a trend sig­
nificant at better than the 99% confidence level.
The generally increasing temperatures of recent decades, both 
around the globe and across North America, have been found 
to result mainly from increases in daily minimum temperature 
(T’min)i increases in daily maximum temperature (T^^^,;) have 
less influence on the observed increase in the daily mean tem­
perature (Karl et al., 1993; Horton, 1995). This trend has 
caused the diurnal temperature range (DTR) to decrease in
Annual precipitation amounts from 1901 to 1995 over North 
America as a whole show evidence of a gradnal increase since 
the 1920s, reaching their highest levels in the past few decades 
(see Figure A-10 in Annex A). Figure A-1 (Annex A) indicates 
that the regions experiencing the largest increases are portions 
of northwestern Canada (>20%), eastern Canada (>20%), and 
the Gulf coast of the United States (10-20% ). The increases in 
eastern Canada shown in Figure A-1 are corroborated by 
Groisman and Easterling (1994) and Environment Canada 
(1995). The analysis of U.S. Historical Climatology Network 
data by Karl et al. (1996) for 1900-94 reveals the increases 
along the U.S. Gulf coast and also shows 10-20%  increases 
over the central and northern Plains states, much of the 
Midwest and Northeast, and over the desert Southwest.
Year
Figure 8-4: Canadian annual average maximum and minimum 
temperature trends for 1895-1991 (adapted from Environment 
Canada, 1995).
North America
267
Figure 8-5: Conterminous U.S. precipitation trends for 1900-94 (converted to %/century), centered within state climatic divisions. 
The trend magnitude for each climatic division is reflected by the diameter of the circle. Solid circles represent increases, and open 
circles decreases.
Decreases of 10-20%  are apparent over California and the 
northern Rocky Mountain states (Figure 8-5).
As part of an effort to monitor extreme weather events around 
the globe, some recent studies have examined the intensity of 
rainfall events. Karl et al. (1995) found a trend toward higher 
frequencies of extreme (>50.8 mm) 1-day rainfalls over the 
United States. The results pertained to the period 1911-92; the 
increasing frequency of such events was found to be a product 
mainly of heavier warm-season rainfall. Karl et al. (1996) also 
found a steady increase from 1910 to 1995 in the percentage 
area of the contiguous United States with a much above-nor­
mal (defined as the upper decile of all daily precipitation 
amounts) proportion of total annual precipitation coming from 
these extreme 1-day events (Figure 8 -6 ). This area increased by 
2-3%, and it was determined that there is less than 1 chance in 
1 0 0 0  that this change could occur in a quasi-stationary climate. 
To date, however, there is no similar evidence of an increase in 
the proportion of Canadian precipitation from extreme 1-day 
events (Hogg and Swail, 1997).
Although sea-level rise usually is not considered a climatic 
variable, it is arguably one of the most important potential 
impacts of global climate change in terms of environmental
and social consequences (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.1). 
Therefore, a brief summary of sea-level trends is appropriate. 
Global mean sea level is estimated to have risen 10-25 cm 
over the past 100 years (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.2). These
Figure 8 -6 : Percentage of the conterminous U.S. area with a 
much above normal proportion of total annual precipitation 
from 1-day extreme (more than 2 in. or 50.8 mm) events 
(Karl et al., 1996).
268
North America
estimates are based on tide gauge records; the increase is 
thought to result largely from the concurrent increase 
observed in global temperatures, which causes thermal expan­
sion of the ocean and contributes to the melting of glaciers, ice 
caps, and ice sheets. In general, there is broad agreement that 
both thermal expansion and glaciers have contributed to the 
observed sea-level rise, but there are very large uncertainties 
regarding the role of the ice sheets and other hydrological fac­
tors (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.4). There are differences in 
century-scale sea-level trends across regions of the globe 
because of vertical land movements such as “postglacial 
rebound.” Figure 8-7 depicts sea-level trends for several North 
American sites. Sea level has risen 2.5-3.0 mm/year along 
parts of the U.S. Gulf coast and along the Atlantic coast south 
of Maine. Along the Texas-Louisiana coasts, sea level has 
been increasing about 1 0  mm/year as a result of rapid land 
subsidence in this region. Sea level is stable or dropping along 
much of the Canadian and Alaskan coasts because of post­
glacial rebound.
8.2.3. 
Climate Scenarios
As discussed in IPCC (1996, WG I, Section 6 .6 ), output from 
transient runs of atmosphere-ocean general circulation models 
(hereafter referred to simply as GCMs) has become available 
that can be used as the basis for improved regional analysis of 
potential climate change. The main emphasis of current analy­
ses is on the simulation of seasonally averaged surface air tem­
perature and precipitation. Climate scenario information for 
North America is available from several GCMs. In IPCC 
(1990, WG I), one of the five regions identified for analysis of 
regional climate change simulation was central North America
Figure 8-7: Relative sea-level trends for selected North 
American sites (adapted from Titus, 1997).
(35-50°N, 85-105°W ). Output for this region from different 
coupled model runs with dynamic oceans was analyzed by 
Cubasch et al. (1994) and Kittel et al. (1998). Results for cen­
tral North America, as well as the other identified regions, are 
depicted in Figure B-1 (Annex B), which shows differences 
between region-average values at the time of CO 2  doubling and 
the control run, as well as differences between control run 
averages and observations (hereafter referred to as bias) for 
winter and summer surface air temperature and precipitation. 
These model results reflect increasing CO 2  only and do not 
include the effects of sulfate aerosols. The biases in Figure B-1 
(Annex B) are presented as a reference for interpretation of the 
scenarios because it can be generally expected that the better 
the match between control run and observed climate (i.e., the 
lower the biases), the higher the confidence in the simulated 
change scenarios. A  summary of these transient model experi­
ments is given in Table B-1 (Annex B). Most experiments use 
a rate of CO 2  increase of 1  %/year, yielding a doubling of CO2  
after 70 years.
Scenarios produced for central North America by these tran­
sient experiments vary quite widely among models for temper­
ature but less so for precipitation. GCM simulations also have 
been conducted that consider the effect of combined green­
house gas- and direct sulfate aerosol-forcing on temperature, 
precipitation, and soil moisture (see Annex B). For central 
North America, the inclusion of sulfate aerosols results in a 
projected warming of 0-0.5°C in the summer and 1.4-3.4°C in 
the winter by the year 2100. In the case of precipitation, the 
inclusion of sulfate aerosol-forcing has little effect on the pro­
jections (see Annex B).
Using the Canadian Climate Centre (CCC) GCM (see Annex 
B), Lambert (1995) found a 4% decrease in cyclones in the 
Northern Hemisphere, though the frequency of intense 
cyclones increased. Lambert hypothesized that the latent heat 
effect is responsible for the greater number of intense storms. 
No change in storm tracks was evident. A few areas showed 
increased frequencies, such as off Cape Hatteras, over Hudson 
Bay, and west of Alaska. These results are similar to those of 
Rowntree (1993), who found a 40% increase in Atlantic gales, 
though fewer intense storms over eastern North America. Hall 
et al. (1994) and Carnell et al. (1996) found an intensification 
and northward shift of storm tracks.
Regarding sea-level rise scenarios, for IPCC Scenario IS92a, 
global mean sea level is projected to be about 50 cm higher by 
2 1 0 0  than today, with a range of uncertainty of 2 0 - 8 6  cm 
(IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.5). It is possible that for much of 
the North American coastline, future sea-level rise will be 
greater than the global average, given the higher historical rates 
of sea-level rise along the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic coasts 
(see Section 8.2.2). By contrast, future sea-level rise along the 
Pacific coast may be less than the global average rise because 
of this region’s generally lower historical rates. Fven less sea- 
level rise might be expected in extreme northern North 
America, given the historical drop in sea levels at many loca­
tions (Titus and Narayanan, 1996).
North America
269
8.3.1. 
Ecosystems: Nonforest Terrestrial
8.3.1.1. 
Distribution and Sensitivities
Nonforest terrestrial ecosystems are the single largest type of 
land surface cover (>51%) in North America. They are 
extremely diverse and include nontidal wetlands (bogs, fens, 
swamps, and marshes), ecosystems of the polar domain (tundra 
and taiga), traditional rangeland ecosystems (grasslands, 
deserts, and savannas), and improved pastures. These ecosys­
tems are major components of every region of North America; 
they constitute about 80% of the land cover of western North 
America and nearly 100% of the land cover above the 75th par­
allel. They provide forage for 80 million cattle, sheep, and 
goats and 25 million deer, elk, antelope, caribou, and buffalo, 
as well as most of the breeding and feeding grounds for water­
fowl in North America (Child and Frasier, 1992; WRI, 1996). 
Nonforest ecosystems are the source of most surface flow and 
aquifer recharge in the western Great Plains and the extreme 
northern regions of North America. Municipal, agricultural, 
and industrial sectors in these regions depend on nonforest 
ecosystems for the quantity and quality of water required for 
economic sustainability. The quality and quantity of water 
derived from nonforest ecosystems depend on the management 
these lands receive and the average annual and extreme cli­
matic events they encounter.
Nontidal wetlands in North America include a variety of 
ecosystems such as bogs, fens, swamps, marshes, and flood- 
plains. Classification systems are many and varied. These wet­
lands are distributed throughout North America, principally in a 
band extending from the New England states to Alaska. There 
are additional significant areas in the Mississippi Valley, the 
“Prairie Pothole” region, the many coastal wetlands (e.g., the 
Mississippi River delta, the Everglades, and the Okefenokee), 
the Atlantic coastal marshes and Fraser River estuary, the for­
mer Great Kankakee and Great Blackwater swamps, the 
Hudson Bay Lowlands, the Peace-Athabasca-Slave delta, the 
Mackenzie delta, and the Queen Maud Gulf on the Arctic Ocean 
(Mitsch and Gosselink, 1986; Ecological Stratification Working 
Group, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ). See Section 8.3.3 
for a more detailed discussion of wetlands impacts.
Rangelands are characterized by native and introduced vegeta­
tion—predominantly grasses, grasslike plants, forbs, shrubs, 
and scattered trees. These lands are extremely varied: They 
include the tallgrass, mixed, and shortgrass prairie regions of 
central North America; tundra and taiga areas in the polar 
domain; annual grasslands of California; chaparral regions of 
Arizona and California; sagebrush shrub steppe and pinyon- 
juniper woodlands in the intermountain region of western North 
America; and the Chihuahuan, Sonoran, and Mojave deserts in 
the southwestern portion of North America. The associated 
ecosystems are complex and are affected by many interacting 
biotic and abiotic components, and their health depends on the 
interaction of climate, soils, species competition, fire, grazing.
8.3. 
Impacts and Adaptation
and management. These ecosystems provide a wide array of 
goods and services, including forage, water, and habitat for 
wildlife and domesticated livestock and open space for recre­
ational activities, and they are the source of many of the raw 
materials needed to sustain our industrial society (i.e., pharma­
ceuticals, precious metals, minerals, construction materials, nat­
ural gas, oil, and coal) (Heady and Child, 1994).
Although some rangelands are fragile and easily disturbed by 
anthropogenic activity (Belnap, 1995), others are resistant to 
change. Semi-arid and arid ecosystems are considered among 
the most sensitive because these ecosystems often are water- 
limited and have marginal nutrient reserves (OIES, 1991; IPCC 
1996, WG II, Chapter 2).
Current levels of uncertainties associated with the functioning 
and adaptive capacity of nonforest ecosystems under variable 
and changing climate and the possibility of critical thresholds 
limit our ability to identify the relative sensitivities of these 
ecosystems (and the potential impacts of changing climates). It 
is understood, however, that these ecosystems are sensitive to 
climate variability and that the impacts can vary depending on 
the resilience and resistance of the ecosystem to the stresses 
applied (e.g., changes in precipitation, CO 2 , temperature, fire, 
land use, and land cover and management). Researchers also 
believe that the impacts of CO 2  enrichment and shifts in temper­
ature and precipitation regimes are likely to be greatest when 
they are reinforced by other destabilizing forces. Lack of infor­
mation about how these other factors interact with climate 
change also limits our understanding of ecosystem response. 
Also of concern are the relative sensitivities of species at the eco- 
tones between vegetation types, such as between grasslands and 
woodlands and between woodlands and forests (Polley, 1997).
8.3.1.2. 
Impacts, Vulnerabilities, and Adaptation
The projected northward shift o f the southern boundary o f per­
mafrost areas will alter ecosystem structure and functioning, 
with subsequent impacts on associated infrastructure and 
wildlife through terrain slumping, increased sediment loadings 
in rivers and lakes, and dramatically altered hydrology.
Approximately half of the wetland areas of North America are 
located in Alaska, the Northwest Territories, and the Yukon 
(Table 8-1). Most of these wetlands rest on continuous or dis­
continuous permafrost, the distribution of which would be 
altered by climate warming.
The northward shift of the southern boundary of discontinuous 
and continuous permafrost areas is projected to be about 500 
km by the middle of the 21st century (Anisimov and Nelson, 
1996; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7; Prowse, 1997). This shift 
would have profound effects within the altered areas (as sum­
marized by Prowse, 1997). The melting of widespread ground 
ice will result in downslope soil movement, bank failure, and 
massive terrain slumping, leading to increases in sediment loads 
to rivers and lakes. This process will in turn affect spawning
270
North America
areas, oxygen levels, and stream/wetland sediment budgets. A 
deeper active layer will reduce overland flow as Infiltration and 
active layer storage capacity increase. Peatlands are projected to 
disappear from south of 60°N in the Mackenzie Basin (Cohen, 
1997a); patchy arctic wetlands currently supported by surface 
flow would not persist. Lakes and ponds, which have per­
mafrost hydrological divides, are more likely to drain laterally 
or to groundwater systems.
Landscape alteration on this scale has serious implications for 
hydrology, wildlife, cultural values, and lifestyles. The effects 
will likely extend to infrastructure and transportation— including 
the integrity of foundations (pipelines, bridges, and buildings), 
water-control structures, ice-roads, and tailings. Altered flooding 
patterns and sediment loadings will impact internationally sig­
nificant wetland habitat such as the Peace-Athabasca-Slave 
delta, the Mackenzie delta, and habitats associated with Hudson 
Bay and Queen Maud Gulf lowlands.
M any northern peatlands could become sources rather than 
sinks for atmospheric carbon.
A  primary impact of future climate change in nonforest terres­
trial ecosystems is the projected reduction of subarctic (tun­
dra/taiga) ecosystems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). Neilson 
et al. (see Annex C) estimate that tundra and taiga ecosystems 
may be reduced by as much as one- to two-thirds of their pre­
sent size. This reduction will have an impact on regional stor­
age of carbon in the higher latitudes of North America and may 
result in a shift from a net sink to a net source of CO 2  for the 
tundra region (Anderson, 1991; Oechel et al., 1993). Climate 
warming also may cause reduction in total species biodiversity 
and total surface area covered by tundra vegetation, as well as 
decreased releases of methane from tundra plant communities 
as a result of alterations in the hydrological cycle, drier surface 
soils, and an increase in surface oxidation (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 2).
Loss o f migratory wildfowl and mammal breeding and forage 
habitats will occur within the southern Arctic ecozone, which 
is projected to nearly disappear from mainland areas.
The Queen Maud Gulf lowlands contain one of the largest sites 
(over 6  million ha) designated under the Ramsar Convention
Table 8-1: Estimated wetland area in North America.
A rea
(M ha)
Reference
Alaska
90.0
QTA, 1984
Yukon and NWT
29.3
Environment Canada, 1986
Subtotal
119.3
U.S. Lower 48
40.1
Frayer et a l, 1983
Rest of Canada
97.9
Environment Canada, 1986
Subtotal
138.0
on Wetlands of International Importance. They are part of the 
southern Arctic ecozone, a transitional area between the taiga 
forest to the south and the treeless arctic tundra to the north. 
The ecozone includes the major summer range and calving 
grounds for Canada’s largest caribou herds, as well as habitat 
for bear, wolf, moose, arctic ground squirrels, and lemmings. It 
is a major breeding and nesting ground for a variety of migra­
tory birds, including yellow-billed, arctic, and red-throated 
loon; whistling swan; snow goose; oldsquaw; gyrfalcon; 
ptarmigan; and snowy owl (Ecological Stratification Working 
Group, 1995). It also is home to Canada’s Inuit, whose subsis­
tence lifestyle includes a diet dependent on this wildlife diver­
sity. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
Forest Service MAPSS biome model using a variety of GCM 
simulations, this ecozone will nearly disappear from mainland 
North America under a climate brought about with CQ 2  dou­
bling (Neilson, 1993a,b„ 1995; Neilson and Marks, 1994; see 
also Annex С in this report).
Elevated CO2 concentrations may have a negative influence on 
forage quality and species diversity within North American 
rangeland ecosystems.
Based on studies of plants grown in CQ 2 -enriched environ­
ments (Qwensby et al., 1993; IPCC 1996, W G II, Chapter 2), it 
has been suggested that forage quality in rangeland ecosystems 
may decrease with increasing CQ 2  levels as a result of associat­
ed increases in carbon-to-nitrogen ratios and in concentrations 
of unpalatable and toxic substances, as well as decreases in min­
eral concentrations in the forage. There is evidence from field 
studies that low soil nitrogen— a common constraint on range­
lands (McNaughton et al., 1988; Seastedt et al., 1991)— can 
limit plant growth responses to elevated CQ 2  (Qwensby et ai, 
1994; Schappi and Korner, 1996). Several studies have sug­
gested that litter produced at increased levels of CQ 2  will be 
nitrogen poor or that increased CQ 2  concentrations slow nitro­
gen mineralization and reduce nitrogen availability to plants 
(Diaz et a l, 1993; Morgan et a l, 1994; Gorissen et a l, 1995). 
This decreased decomposition, mineralization, and uptake of 
nitrogen could initiate a negative feedback on nitrogen avail­
ability that reduces plant growth and forage production.
Without dietary supplementation, the growth and reproduction 
of individual animals could decrease as CQ 2  concentrations rise 
(Qwensby et a l, 1996). Rates of nitrogen input, litter quality, 
and frequency of events (like fire) that promote substantial nitro­
gen loss all mediate how quickly nitrogen accumulation and 
cycling approach the maximum at any given CQ 2  concentration 
(Aber et a l, 1991). Potential production and forage quality on 
many rangelands therefore may be constrained by management 
practices that promote nitrogen loss or preclude nitrogen accu­
mulation by limiting species change (Polley, 1997).
The existing data on the effect that rising CQ 2  concentrations 
will have on the nitrogen cycle are ambiguous. Rising CO2 
may increase nitrogen input to rangelands directly or indirect­
ly by promoting nitrogen fixation. Some of the most success­
ful woody invaders in grasslands are legumes (e.g., species of
North America
271
the Acaw and Prosopis genera). Symbiotic fixation of nitrogen 
in these species can be significantly stimulated (+400%) by 
elevated CO 2  concentrations (Policy et a l, 1994; Policy et al.,
1997). By adding fixed nitrogen to rangelands in litterfall or 
root turnover, these woody invaders could potentially increase 
productivity if the nitrogen gains are not offset by losses or 
conversion of nitrogen to recalcitrant forms (Policy, 1997). 
Kemp et al. (1994) reported that the ambient CO 2  concentra­
tion at which plants were grown had little effect on the decom­
position of standing dead material of three tallgrass prairie 
species. O ’Neill and Norby (1996) concluded that decompos- 
ability of naturally abscissed leaf litter was not greatly affected 
by the CO 2  concentration at which the litter was produced.
On grasslands where the effects of increased WUE are not 
negated by an increase in leaf temperature and leaf area, rising 
CO2 concentration should slow the depletion of soil water by 
grasses and potentially favor shrubs/woody plants that other­
wise might succumb to water stress (Policy et a i, 1997). There 
is evidence that rising CO 2  also could contribute to species 
change by altering seedling survival rates during drought. 
Policy et al. (1996) found that more than twice as many honey 
mesquite tree seedlings survived soil-water depletion at elevat­
ed CO 2 levels than at ambient CO 2 levels. In the absence of fire 
or browsing, woody plants likewise would be expected to 
increase in size and abundance by exploiting the greater avail­
ability of soil water (Policy, 1997). Grass production and tran­
spiration often decline following woody plant invasion 
(Vallentyne, 1971; Scifres, 1980; Knoop and Walker, 1985; 
Sala et a l, 1989).
By increasing the growth rates of woody seedlings or improving 
their ability to survive drought, rising CO 2  could act as a posi­
tive feedback to overgrazing in promoting woody plant invasion 
(Policy et a l, 1997). An increase in woody plants may result in 
decreased forage availability in mid-latitude grassland ecosys­
tems and increased soil erosion, leading to a nearly irreversible 
loss of productive potential of the soil (Parton et a l, 1993).
Since the turn of the century, mesic and arid grasslands in 
North America have had increases in C 3 woody plants 
(Branson, 1985; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). This change 
often has been accompanied by changes in runoff, accelerated 
soil erosion, and loss of the grazing resource (Rauzi and Fly, 
1968; Spaeth et a l, 1996). Increases in CO 2  and changes in 
regional climate could exacerbate the existing problem of loss 
of production on western rangelands by accelerating the inva­
sion of woody plants. Mayeux et al. (1991) discuss evidence 
that C4  grasslands are being increasingly invaded by C3 woody 
plants— a process that may have been abetted by the rise in 
CO2 and changes in WUE over the past two centuries. 
However, conclusive evidence for this effect is not available 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2).
Consistent with trends from individual plants, many natural 
ecosystems (including grasslands) show little or no increase in 
standing crop or production at elevated CO 2  when tempera­
tures are low or nutrients are limiting (Oechel et a l, 1993;
Fredeen et a l, 1995; Schâppi and Korner, 1996). In the Arctic 
tundra there is little expected change in plant growth from 
increased CO 2 , although there is an expected decrease in 
insect-pollinated forbs (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). 
However, elevated CO 2  has been shown to increase above­
ground net primary productivity in tallgrass prairies, shortgrass 
steppe, and coastal salt marshes (Curtis et a l, 1989; Owensby 
et a l, 1993; Hunt et a l, 1996) and root biomass in grasslands 
(Owensby et a l, 1993; Jongen et a l, 1995; Newton et a l, 
1995) when essential elements like nitrogen are plentiful or 
water begins to limit growth and the positive effects of CO 2  on 
water relations are expressed.
Changes in species composition emerge as a major unknown 
with the potential to affect ecosystem processes (productivity, 
forage quality, and nitrogen cycling) in ways that are not evi­
dent from studies that consider the direct effects of elevated 
CO 2  concentration alone. Given that the geographic distribu­
tion of rangeland vegetation and aboveground net primary pro­
ductivity are highly correlated with precipitation, temperature, 
nutrient status, and soil-water availability on rangelands (Sala 
et a l, 1988; Stephenson, 1990; Bailey, 1996; IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 2; Myneni et a l, 1997; Policy et a l, 1997), inter­
actions among global warming, changes in precipitation, graz­
ing, fire, rising CO 2  concentration, and species competition 
must be more clearly understood before we will be able to pre­
dict with confidence changes in forage quantity for North 
American rangelands.
On improved pastures, the alteration of species composition 
through reseeding with adapted grass species or the introduction 
of legumes to grass-dominated pastures is the most likely 
method to reduce the impacts of climate change. This approach 
would have the additional benefit of improving forage value for 
livestock while possibly reducing the average methane emis­
sion per head of livestock because of improved forage quality 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). For native rangelands, active 
interventions to reduce impacts from increases in temperature 
or CO 2  or changes in precipitation frequency and amount are 
limited because of the large areal extent of rangelands and the 
low economic return per acre of land. Introduction of nonnative 
adapted species may be able to compensate for the loss of some 
forage production and watershed protection if native species 
decrease. However, the application and extent of this technolo­
gy on federal lands may be limited by existing rules, regulation, 
and pending and future court cases.
Climate-induced variability and extreme events will increase 
the complexity o f managing rangelands.
Rangeland vegetation is found where precipitation, tempera­
ture, and soil development provide suitable habitat for grasses, 
forbs, shrubs, and open stands of trees. Generally, these lands 
are characterized by extremes in temperature or in the timing, 
intensity, and amount of precipitation the site receives; these 
extremes drive rangeland ecosystems (Griffin and Friedel, 
1985; Westoby et a l, 1989). Precipitation is the major deter­
minant of the structure, function, and sustainability of natural
272
North America
ecosystems (Branson et al., 1981). Current human activity on 
rangelands significantly alters plant species abundance and dis­
tribution and the hydrological cycle, accelerates erosion rates, 
and can overwhelm any change in regional or global climate 
(Thurow et a l, 1986; Weltz and Wood, 1986; IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Chapter 2; Williams and Balling, 1996). Small changes in 
the frequency or extent of extreme events may have a dispro­
portionate effect on what management must cope with to sus­
tain rangeland ecosystems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 2). 
Short-term variations in local or regional precipitation— upon 
which management planning often is based— are greater than 
the predicted change in the mean value of precipitation for 
North America (Shuttleworth, 1996). With the addition of cli­
mate change to existing stresses on rangelands, they may 
become more sensitive to extreme events such as drought, 1 0 0 - 
year floods, and insect outbreaks that could reduce their long­
term sustainability and escalate the desertification process in 
arid and semi-arid lands in North America (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapters 2 and 4).
The most promising adaptive approach is to provide incentives 
to use management techniques that reduce the risk of these 
lands becoming degraded during extreme climatic events (i.e., 
droughts). The most cost-effective strategy is to improve lands 
already under stress and to strengthen their resistance to future 
extreme events. This approach could include changes in live­
stock type and number, changes in season of use, complete 
rest, or the development of additional infrastructure (new 
watering locations, fencing, etc.) to achieve proper stocking 
density.
A  second promising avenue of adaptation is to provide arid and 
semi-arid land managers with more accurate predictions of 
regional precipitation on a seasonal to interannual basis. This 
information is particularly important prior to droughts or 
extremely wet years. Provision of these types of predictions is 
becoming more likely because recent research indicates that 
improvements in coupled ocean-atmosphere models make it 
possible to predict climatic conditions related to the El Nino- 
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon more than a year 
before the event (Chen et al., 1995). Predicted precipitation 
patterns can be used as inputs to ecological and hydrological 
models and thereby could provide the capability to assess the 
impacts of changing rainfall on flood frequency, surface 
hydrology, soil erosion, and forage and crop production and 
allow managers to develop mitigation plans to reduce degrada­
tion to rangeland ecosystems by altering grazing systems and 
purchasing supplemental feed before the onset of droughts.
Arid lands may increase.
Lane et al. (1994) reported that trend analyses for the period
1901-87 suggest that mean annual temperatures increased 
globally at the rate of 0.5°C per century, in the United States at 
0.3°C per century, and in the southwestern desert region at 
about 1.2°C per century. Early climate change predictions sug­
gested that a temperature increase of up to 17% in desert lands 
could occur in North America (Emanuel et al., 1985). VEMAP
Members (1995) considered climate change and doubled COj 
from computer simulations of three different biogeographie 
models (see Annex C) and three different climate scenarios; a 
general result was that grasslands would contract and move 
eastward into the broadleaf forest and that shrublands would 
decrease within the United States. Potentially large increases 
(185%) in subtropical arid shrublands could occur in the south­
west region of North America. Depending on the model and 
climate scenario, however, there could be a potential decrease 
(-56%) in subtropical arid shrublands (VEMAP Members,
1995). The most recent projections from the MAPSS model 
(Annex C) indicate up to a 200% increase in leaf area index in 
the desert southwest region of North America and a northern 
migration and expansion of arid-land species into the Great 
Basin region of North America. Various combinations of vege­
tation redistribution and altered biogeochemical cycles could 
result in novel plant communities and increases in arid regions.
Desertification is a function of human activities and adverse 
climate conditions. Recovery of desert soils from disturbance 
and desertification is a slow process. More than 50 years may 
be required to reestablish the nitrogen fixation capability of the 
soil, and 2 0 0  years may be required to completely reestablish 
the vegetation community in the arid southern region of North 
America (Belnap, 1995). During the recovery period, the site is 
at increased risk of wind and water erosion (Belnap, 1995; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 4). Although long-term measures 
may need to be developed to cope with climate change, 
research that deals with annual and interannual fluctuations in 
precipitation must continue to receive attention because pre­
cipitation fluctuations directly affect North American strategic 
food and fiber supplies (grain production and forage for 
wildlife and livestock) (Oram, 1989).
Box 8-1. Examples of Effects on Birds
The distribution of birds in Canada shows strong corre­
lation with habitat distribution, which in turn is influ­
enced by climate as well as human land-use practices. 
Thus, changes in climate are expected to have signifi­
cant effects on breeding and winter distributions. A 
combination of temperature and moisture considerations 
is the best predictor of the beginning of the nesting 
period, defining a “climate space” that can be extended 
to describe the limits of the breeding range (James and 
Shugart, 1974). In winter, the northern boundaries of 
many species coincide with January isotherms, reflect­
ing daily energy requirements. For marine birds, shifts 
in the distribution of water masses of different tempera­
ture and salinity characteristics— supporting different 
species of prey— are expected to generate the most 
obvious responses to changing climates (Brown, 1991). 
For arctic nesting birds, such as geese and many shore 
birds, the timing of snowmelt is a critical variable that 
drives the success of nesting, as well as its timing 
(Boyd, 1987).
North America
273
Box 8-2. Examples of Effects on Wildlife
Changes in the amount, type, and timing of winter pre­
cipitation will have considerable consequences for large 
ungulates (e.g., moose, caribou, elk, deer, and bison), as 
well as their most important predators (wolves and coy­
otes). Current distributions of ungulate communities 
correspond well with their adaptations to the type and 
depth of snow in the regions in which they occur. Shifts 
in winter climate could, based on past experience, lead 
to shifting suitability of ranges for these species. 
Predator-prey relations also could shift with changing 
distributions of snow types and amounts; wolves floun­
der in deep snow that caribou can cross, but moose are 
no better suited to travel through soft snow.
Landslides in mountain areas could be more frequent.
Catastrophic geomorphic processes in mountain terrain are 
heavily influenced by climate (e.g., precipitation). As a result, 
the occurrence of these processes— which include landslides 
and outburst floods— is sensitive to climate change. The fre­
quency of debris flows and other landslide types can be expect­
ed to increase under conditions of increased precipitation, 
debuttressing of mountain slopes due to glacier ice losses, and 
the decay of mountain permafrost during recent and projected 
warming. As in the past, these events should be expected to 
impact on settlements, infrastructural elements, resources, and 
the environment, resulting in human and financial losses. 
Water quality would be affected by increased sediment loads. 
Fish and wildlife habitat, as well as roads and other structures, 
could be at increased risk. The nature of the landslide response 
is complicated by factors such as forest harvesting and other 
land-use changes (Eybergen and Imeson, 1989; IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Chapter 5; Evans and Clague, 1997).
8.3.2. 
Ecosystems: Forested
The forests of North America north of Mexico occupy about 
732 million hectares, representing about 17% of all global 
forested lands. Approximately 60% of the North American 
forests are Canadian (Brooks, 1993). The United States has 
ahout 13% of the world’s temperate forests and almost half of 
the world’s coastal temperate rainforest (Brooks, 1993). Nearly 
half of U.S. forests are privately owned, compared to only 
about 6 % in Canada (Brooks, 1993).
Conifers constitute nearly 70% of the world’s commercial tim­
ber harvest. In North America, conifer species dominate the 
boreal forests of Canada, Alaska, and the Pacific Northwest 
and share dominance with hardwoods in the southeastern and 
northeastern United States. W ood-based manufacturing 
accounts for about 2% (US$129 billion) of the U.S. gross 
domestic product (GDP) and about 3% (CAN$23 billion) of 
the Canadian 
GDP (Canadian Forest 
Service, 
1996;
International Monetary Fund, 1996; U.S. Department of 
Commerce, 1996).
Forests provide habitats for wildlife and fish, store and regulate 
freshwater supplies, are the repository of substantial plant and 
animal genetic resources, and satisfy aesthetic and spiritual 
values. Recreation activity associated with forests contributes 
to income and employment in every forested region of North 
America. Nontimber commodities gathered in forests are 
sources of income and recreation.
Forests hold about 62-78%  of the world’s terrestrial biospher­
ic carbon (Perruchoud and Fischlin, 1995), about 14-17% of 
which is in the forests of North America; about 8 6 % of that is 
in the boreal forest (Apps et al., 1993; Heath et a i, 1993; 
Sampson et al., 1993).
Forests play a large role in global water and energy feedbacks 
(Bonan et al., 1995) and account for most of the world’s ter­
restrial évapotranspiration, which is about 64% of the precipi­
tation (Peixoto and Oort, 1992; Neilson and Marks, 1994). 
Most of the world’s freshwater resources originate in forested 
regions, where water quality is directly related to forest health.
8.3.2.1. 
Distribution and Sensitivities
Three broad forest types are recognized in this assessment of 
North American forests: boreal, temperate evergreen, and tem­
perate mixed forests. The boreal forest (Annex C, Figure C-1) 
is constrained by cold temperatures to the north that limit tree 
height and reproduction (Lenihan and Neilson, 1993; Starfield 
and Chapin, 1996). The southern limits of the boreal forest 
generally are defined by their juxtaposition with temperate 
forests or with interior savanna-woodlands and grasslands. 
Boreal tree species generally are not limited from growing fur­
ther south. Rather, temperate hardwoods and conifers are lim­
ited by cold temperatures from spreading further north; where 
temperate species can flourish, they outcompete boreal species. 
Fire and herbivore browsing also are important constraints on 
forest distribution and species composition (Bergeron and 
Dansereau, 1993; Landhauser and Wein, 1993; Suffling, 1995; 
Starfield and Chapin, 1996). Wildfire and insect outbreaks 
limit forest productivity and can produce considerable mortal­
ity: Annual tree mortality losses from insect outbreaks in 
Canada are about 1.5 times the losses from wildfire and 
amount to about one-third of the annual harvest volume 
(Fleming and Volney, 1995). Annual losses from insects and 
fire in the United States also are about one-third of the annual 
harvest (Powell et al., 1993). Warming-induced changes in the 
timing of spring frosts may be important in ending or prolong­
ing outbreaks. Increased drought stress also may enhance 
insect outbreaks, and changes in climate could extend the 
ranges of some insects and diseases.
Temperate evergreen forests (Annex C), such as in the Pacific 
Northwest, tend to occur in areas that are warm enough for 
photosynthesis during the cool parts of the year but often are
274
North America
too cold for deciduous species to fix sufficient carbon during 
the frost-free season (Woodward, 1987). Areas with dry sum­
mers also tend to favor conifers or hardwoods with water- 
conserving leaves (Waring and Schlesinger, 1985; Neilson, 
1995). Summer drought and winter chilling for frost hardiness 
are critical climate factors, rendering these forests sensitive to 
global warming (Franldin et al., 1991). Northwest conifers are 
long lived and need only successfully reproduce once during 
their life span for population sustainability (Stage and 
Ferguson, 1982; Parker, 1986; Savage et al., 1996). With glob­
al warming, however, establishment periods could become rare 
in some areas; after harvest, some forests may not be able to 
regenerate, even if mature trees could still survive the climate. 
Winter chilling may be required for adequate seed set or to 
confer frost-hardiness in some species (Burton and Gumming,
1995); because of the well-recognized spatial variation in the 
genetics of these species, however, such chilling requirements 
may not hold everywhere. Fire suppression in interior pine 
forests has left them in a sensitive condition with respect to 
drought, fire, and pests (Agee, 1990; Sedjo, 1991). Climate 
change could exacerbate all of these stressors (Williams and 
Liebhold, 1995). For example, increased drought stress could 
facilitate insect outbreaks; drought and infestation could lead 
to more fuel, increasing the risk of catastrophic fire.
Temperate mixed forests (mixed hardwood and conifer) are 
bound by cold temperatures to the north and subtropical dry 
regions to the south (the Caribbean coast in North America) 
and tend to occur in areas that are wet in both winter and sum­
mer. Temperate hardwood species also benefit from cold-hard­
ening; with warmer winter conditions and less insulating snow 
cover, they can be sensitive to spring frost damage, which can 
kill roots and further sensitize the species to drought stress and 
widespread mortality (Auclair et al., 1996; Kramer et al.,
1996). Southeastern U.S. pines within this type are among the 
most important commercial species on the continent. Natural 
southeastern pine stands historically relied on fire to maintain 
their composition (Komarek, 1974; Sedjo, 1991) but now are 
largely controlled by harvest. Compared to northwestern 
forests, southeastern conifers have a short rotation, which 
might confer more rapid adaptive capability through establish­
ment of new genotypes.
Flevated CO 2  affects the physiology of trees, possibly increas­
ing productivity, nitrogen-use efficiency and W UF (reduced 
transpiration per carbon fixed, conferring some drought resis­
tance), and other responses (Bazzaz et al., 1996; IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section A.2.3). A  review of 58 studies indicated an 
average 32% increase in plant dry mass under a doubling of 
CO 2 concentration (Wullschleger et al., 1995). Norby (1996) 
documented an average 29% increase in annual growth per 
unit leaf area in seven broadleaf tree species under 2 xC 0 2  sce­
narios over a wide range of conditions. WUE, examined in 
another review and indexed by reductions of leaf conductance 
to water vapor, increased about 30-40%  (Eamus, 1991). If 
such responses were maintained in forests over many decades, 
they would imply a substantial potential for increased storage 
of atmospheric carbon, as well as conferring some increased
tolerance to drought. However, some species or ecosystems 
exhibit acclimation to elevated CO 2 by downregulating photo­
synthesis (Bazzaz, 1990; Grulke et al., 1990; Grulke et al., 
1993); others do not exhibit acclimation (Bazzaz, 1990; 
Teskey, 1997). Understanding the sources of large uncertain­
ties in the linkages between forest physiology and site water 
balance is a research need; no two models simulate these com­
plex processes in the same way.
Most of the early CO 2  research was done on juvenile trees in 
pots and growth chambers, which may limit the usefulness of 
some conclusions. New research is beginning to emerge that 
focuses on larger trees or intact forested ecosystems. Recent 
reviews of this newer literature (Curtis, 1996; Eamus, 1996a) 
indicate that acclimation may not be as prevalent when roots 
are unconstrained; that leaf conductance may not be reduced; 
and that both responses depend on the experimental conditions, 
the length of exposure, and the degree of nutrient or water 
stress. These results imply that forests could produce more leaf 
area under elevated CO 2  but may not gain a benefit from 
increased WUE. In fact, with increased leaf area, transpiration 
should Increase on a per-tree basis, and the stand would use 
more water (Eamus, 1996a). Elevated temperatures would 
increase transpiration even further, perhaps drying the soil and 
inducing a drought effect on the ecosystem (Eamus, 1996a).
Nitrogen supply is prominent among the environmental influ­
ences that are thought to moderate long-term responses to elevat­
ed CO 2  (Kirschbaum et al., 1994; McGuire et al., 1995; Eamus, 
1996b). Unless CO 2 stimulates an increase in nitrogen mineral­
ization (Curtis et al., 1995; VEMAP Members, 1995), productiv­
ity gains in high CO 2  are likely to be constrained by the system’s 
nitrogen budget (Komer, 1995). Increased leaf area production is 
a common CO 2 response; however, nitrogen limitations may con­
fine carbon gains to structural tissue rather than leaves (Curtis et 
a l, 1995). Thus, in areas receiving large amounts of nitrogen 
deposition, a direct CO 2  response could result in large increases 
in leaf area, increasing transpiration and possibly increasing sen­
sitivity to drought via rapid soil-water depletion. Early growth 
increases may disappear as the system approaches carrying 
capacity as limited by water or nutrients (Komer, 1995). Shifts in 
species composition will likely result from different sensitivities 
to elevated CO 2  (Komer, 1995; Bazzaz et a l, 1996).
North American forests also are being subjected to numerous 
other stresses, including deposition of nitrogen and sulfur com­
pounds and tropospheric ozone, primarily in eastern North 
America (Lovett, 1994). The interactions of these multiple 
stresses with elevated CO 2  and climate change and with large 
pest infestations (of, for example, the balsam wooly adelgid, 
gypsy moth, spmce budworm, and others) are very difficult to 
predict; however, many efforts are under way to address these 
questions (Mattson and Haack, 1987; Loehle, 1988; Fajer et al, 
1989; Taylor et a l, 1994; Winner, 1994; Williams and Liebhold,
1995). Anthropogenic nitrogen fixation, for example, now far 
exceeds 
natural 
nitrogen 
fixation 
(Vitousek, 
1994). 
Atmospheric nitrogen deposition has likely caused considerable 
accumulation of carbon in the biosphere since the last century
North America
275
(Vitousek, 1994; Townsend et a i, 1996). However, nitrogen 
saturation in soils also can be deleterious, possibly causing for­
est dieback in some systems (Foster et a l, 1997). Tropospheric 
ozone also can damage trees, causing improper stomatal func­
tion, root death, membrane leakage, and altered susceptibility to 
diseases (Manning and Tiedemann, 1995). Such ozone-induced 
changes can render trees more sensitive to warming-induced 
drought stress (McLaughlin and Downing, 1995). There are 
many other stress interactions, and researchers think that, in 
general, multiple stresses will act synergistically, accelerating 
change due to other stresses (Oppenheimer, 1989).
Assessments of possible consequences of climate change rely 
on linked atmospheric, ecological, and economic models. 
Significant uncertainties are associated with each model type, 
and these uncertainties may amplify as one moves down the 
line of linked models. The model capabilities of GCMs have 
improved significantly from the older (IPCC 1990, WG I, 
Chapter 3) to the newer (IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 6 ) scenar­
ios, resulting in somewhat lower estimates of the potential 
2 xC0 2  climate sensitivity and shifting much of the burden of 
uncertainty to the ecological and economic models. Ecological 
models still carry large uncertainties in the simulation of site 
water balance (among many other issues), particularly with 
respect to the role of elevated CO 2  on plant responses to water 
stress, competition, and nutrient limitations. Economic models 
carry uncertainties with respect to future management and 
technology changes, future per-capita income and available 
capital, GDP, international trade, and how to couple land-use 
management with ecological model output, among others. 
Ecological and economic models are rapidly being enhanced to
narrow these uncertainties; improving the linkages between the 
many different model types necessary to permit fully time- 
dependent simulations for integrated regional assessments is an 
ongoing research need.
8.3.2.2. 
Key Impacts on Forested Ecosystems 
o f North America
Forest gains as well as forest dieback and decline are project­
ed, with regional differences in the expected response.
Biogeography models— including a direct physiological CO 2  
effect under three of the IPCC’s First Assessment Report 
(FAR) 2 xC 0 2  equilibrium GCM scenarios (Annex B)— simu­
late forest area gains of up to 2 0 % over the conterminous 
United States under the cooler (least warming) or wetter sce­
narios and forest area losses of as much as 14% under the 
hottest scenario (VEMAP Members, 1995). The models pro­
duced similar forest redistribution patterns, including some 
conversion of northwest conifers to broadleaf deciduous under 
potential future equilibrium climates. The models have equal 
skill in simulating potential natural forest distribution under 
the present climate; although they diverge to some extent 
under future climates, they produce similar spatial responses 
and likely bound the range of forest responses to global warm­
ing. Extending these results with the FAR scenarios from the 
conterminous United States to all of North America using one 
of the biogeography models indicates that total forest area 
could increase as much as 32%— but that regions of forest 
decline or dieback (partial or total loss of trees) could range
Table 8-2: Potential future forest area (percentage o f current) in North America simulated by the MAPSS and BI0M E3 bio­
geography models under three older (IPCC 1990, WG 1) equilibrium IxC O j GCM scenarios and under three newer (IPCC 
1996, WG I) transient simulations from which 2xC02 scenarios were extracted (Annex C). The reported ranges include both 
ecological models under several GCM scenarios. The baseline area estimates are outputs from each model. Because B10ME3 
does not differentiate TaigalTundra from Boreal Forest, two different aggregations are presented. The Boreal Conifer and Total 
Forest summaries are M APSS data only; the “Boreal + TaigalTundra” and “TotalForest + TaigalTundra” summaries are 
from both models. Numbers in parentheses are VEMAP results for the conterminous U.S. only, indicating some scenarios with 
losses in forest area over the U.S., and are based on MAPSS and BI0M E2 output (VEMAP Members, 1995).
Forest T^pe
Baseline A rea (Mha)
MAPSS 
BI0M E3
W ith CO 2
FAR Scenarios
, Effect
SAR Scenarios
W ithout CO 2  Effect
SAR Scenarios
Boreal Forest + Taiga/Tundra
594
620
65-105%
64-87%
28-86%
Boreal Conifer Forest
295
87-150%
115-116%
1 1 0 - 1 1 2 %
Temperate Evergreen Forest
127
1 1 0
130-180%
78-182%
82-129%
(82)
(8 6 )
(58-157%)
Temperate Mixed Forest
297
383
107-141%
146-198%
129-159%
(245)
(260)
(88-116%)
Total Temperate Forest
424
493
114-153%
137-171%
121-142%
Total Forest + Taiga/Tundra
1,019
1,113
102-116%
107-118%
99-105%
Total Forest
719
125-132%
142-144%
121-124%
(327)
(346)
(86-123%)
Note: FAR = First Assessment Report (IPCC 1990, WG I); SAR = Second Assessment Report (IPCC 1996, WG I).
Sources: Mitchell and Warrilow, 1987; Schlesinger et al, 1989; IPCC, 1990; Bengtsson et al, 1995; Mitchell et al, 1995; Bengtsson et al, 
1996; IPCC, 1996, WG I, Chapters 5 and 6; Johns et al, 1997.
276
North America
Table 8-3: Percentage area o f current forests that could undergo a loss o f leaf area (i.e., biomass decrease) as a consequence 
o f global warming under various older (IPCC 1990, WG I) and newer (IPCC 1996, WG II) GCM  scenarios, with or without 
direct CO2 effect (see Table 8-2 for details), as simulated by the MAPSS and BIOME3 biogeography models (ranges include 
both models). Losses in leaf area generally indicate a less favorable water balance (drought).
Forest Type
With CO 2  Effect
FAR Scenarios 
SAR Scenarios
Without CO 2  Effect
SAR Scenarios
Boreal Forest + Taiga/Tundra 
Boreal Conifer Forest 
Temperate Evergreen Forest 
Temperate Mixed Forest
19-40% 
37-80%
20-70%  
42-96%
0-9%
14-19%
2-14%
0-7%
4-45%
79-89%
41-69%
12-76%
Sources: Mitchell and Warrilow, 1987; Schlesinger et al., 1989; IPCC, 1990; Bengtsson et al., 1995; Mitchell et al., 1995; Bengtsson et al., 
1996; IPCC, 1996, WG I, Chapters 5 and 6; Johns et al., 1997.
from 19-96%  of the area of any individual forest type (Tables 
8-2 and 8-3). Under hotter scenarios, forests die back from 
large areas of the conterminous United States (expressing 
declines in U.S. forest area) but expand into northern Canada 
and Alaska— so that total North American potential forest area 
actually increases. These simulated potential forest distribu­
tions do not include current or possible future land-use pat­
terns, which will affect actual forest distribution. The models 
also do not simulate the differential rates of dieback and 
migration, which could produce near-term losses in total for­
est area in North America and a large pulse of carbon to the 
atmosphere.
Using more recent climate change scenarios (IPCC 1996, WG 
I, Chapter 6 ; Annex В and Annex С of this report), forest 
decline and dieback ranged only from 0-19%  of the individual 
forest areas (Table 8-3) when a direct CO 2  effect was included. 
However, if the direct CO 2  effect is withheld under the newer 
scenarios, dieback could be quite extensive in all forest types—  
with a range of 12-89% of the forest area— ^with large range 
contractions in all major forest zones. Results without a CO 2  
effect under the IPCC’s Second Assessment Report (SAR) sce­
narios are similar in magnitude to results with a CO 2  effect 
under the FAR scenarios (Annex B). Because the full 2 xC 0 2  
effect may be less than fully realized, the potential forest 
response is bounded by simulating forests with and without a 
CO 2  effect. It is worth noting that by including sulfate aerosols 
in one SAR scenario, warming over the temperate mixed for­
est type in eastern North America is reduced, and there is less 
simulated forest dieback.
The SAR scenarios were produced from GCMs operated in a 
fully transient mode with gradual increases in greenhouse gases 
while coupled to a dynamic three-dimensional ocean. The bio­
geography models can only simulate equilibrium conditions, so 
average climate statistics were extracted from the simulations 
for a current-climate period and a period representing the time 
of 2 xC 0 2  forcing. At the time of 2 xC 0 2  forcing in the SAR sce­
narios, however, the GCMs had not equilibrated because of 
thermal inertia of the oceans and had only attained about 
50-80%  of their potential equilibrium temperature change. 
Thus, the SAR scenarios tend to be somewhat cooler than the
FAR scenarios, which are run to equilibrium over a mixed-layer 
ocean. Nevertheless, when allowed to equilibrate to 2хС0г 
forcing, the SAR scenarios exhibit a global temperature sensi­
tivity that is similar to the FAR scenarios (Annex B). Thus, the 
less deleterious or even beneficial impacts simulated under the 
SAR scenarios may simply be precursors to the more severe 
impacts simulated under the equilibrium FAR scenarios.
Assessments using gap models under the equilibrium FAR 
GCM scenarios or sensitivity analyses have been completed 
for eastern North America (Solomon, 1986), the southeastern 
United States (Urban and Shugart, 1989), British Columbia 
(Cumming and Burton, 1996), central Canada (Price and Apps,
1996), and the Great Lakes region (Pastor and Post, 1988; 
Botkin et al., 1989). Gap models differ from equilibrium bio­
geography models by simulating temporal dynamics of forests 
at a point; they therefore are able to simulate forest decline, 
dieback, or enhanced growth, as well as changes in species 
composition. The different models showed either increases or 
decreases in biomass depending on the method used for water 
balance calculations (Bugmann et al., 1996). Slight variations 
in model structure, small differences in soil texture, or the 
method for implementing direct CO 2  effects can affect the 
magnitude and direction of change in simulated productivity 
and biomass storage (Martin, 1992; Post et al., 1992).
Gap model results using the FAR GCM scenarios indicate the 
potential for significant forest dieback related to high tempera­
tures, throughout the eastern United States— comparable to the 
more severe biogeography model simulations (Solomon, 1986; 
Pastor and Post, 1988; Botkin et a l, 1989; Urban and Shugart, 
1989). Given cooler SAR climate scenarios and improved gap 
model technology, however, these older dieback results may be 
too severe (Fischlin et a l, 1995; Bugmann et a l, 1996; Loehle 
and LeBlanc, 1996; Martin, 1996; Oja and Arp, 1996; Pacalaet 
a l, 1996; Post and Pastor, 1996; Shugart and Smith, 1996). 
Moreover, most of the gap model results do not include a direct 
CO 2  effect.
Studies using a regional forest-growth model suggest that 
forests in the northeastern United States might grow more 
(Aber et a l, 1995), while forests in the southeastern United
North America
277
States could experience considerable forest dieback (McNulty 
et a i, 1996). These simulations incorporate a direct COj effect 
but do not consider vegetation redistribution.
Gap model simulations in the boreal forest indicate increased 
biomass under cooler scenarios (less warming) but some 
dieback or shifts to drier types under the warmer scenarios 
(Price and Apps, 1996). Within the temperate evergreen zone 
of British Columbia (and throughout North America), gap 
models indicate that forests could shift upward in elevation and 
possibly disappear from some zones because of the lack of 
winter cooling for forest regeneration, increased sensitivity to 
spring frosts, and drought stress (Cumming and Burton, 1996). 
Where simulated dieback occurs in any of the forest zones, it 
tends to occur within a few decades of initial warming— ^with, 
for example, a 30% reduction in biomass within 50 years in the 
Douglas fir zone (Cumming and Burton, 1996).
Thus, two contrasting scenarios of the North American forest 
future must be considered: one with considerable forest 
dieback, another with much enhanced forest growth. These 
contrasting scenarios represent endpoints on a spectrum of pos­
sible responses. In general, however, the enhanced-growth sce­
narios occur under the least amount of simulated global warm­
ing, whereas the severe decline or dieback scenarios occur 
under the greatest projected global warming. With the incorpo­
ration of direct CO 2 effects, small temperature increases can 
produce increased growth, but larger temperature increases still 
produce declines. Without a direct CO 2  effect, forest decline 
simulations are far more widespread, even under the least 
warming scenarios. These results suggest the possibility that 
early forest responses to global warming could exhibit 
enhanced growth; later stages could produce widespread 
decline or dieback. Most combinations of scenarios and CO 2  
effects produce intermediate scenarios, with a regional mosaic 
of forest dieback and enhanced forest growth. When coupled 
with economic models, these internally consistent but poten­
tially opposite regional responses provide the basis for region­
al, national, and globally integrated assessments. Also, it is not 
clear that greenhouse gases will stabilize at the equivalent of 
2 xC0 2  forcing; they could increase to ЗхСОг or 4 xC 0 2  (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 2.1.3).
Forests cannot move across the land surface as rapidly as the 
climate can. The faster the rate o f climate change, the greater 
the probability o f ecosystem disruption and species extinction.
Were temperature-induced drought dieback to occur, it likely 
would begin shortly after observable warming; if accompanied 
by short-term precipitation deficits, it could occur very rapidly 
(Solomon, 1986; King and Neilson, 1992; Martin, 1992; Smith 
and Shugart, 1993; Vose et a l, 1993; Elliot and Swank, 1994; 
Auclair et a l, 1996; Martin, 1996). That is, dieback could 
begin within a few decades from the present and might include 
potential increases in secondary impacts from pests and fire. 
Alternatively, forest growth might increase in the early stages 
of global warming, only to revert to widespread and rapid 
drought-induced forest dieback after higher temperatures have
significantly increased evaporative demand. Vegetation change 
in areas of enhanced growth, especially previously unforested 
areas, would be more gradual (decades to hundreds of years), 
constrained by dispersal, establishment, and competition.
Under global warming the physical and biofic components of 
most animal habitats will likely change at different rates 
(Davis, 1986; Dobson et al., 1989; Malcolm and Markham, 
1996; Markham, 1996). The faster the rate of change, the 
greater the disequilibrium between physical and biotic habitat 
components and the higher the probability of substantial 
ecosystem disruption and species extinctions (Malcolm and 
Markham, 1996; Markham, 1996). However, species will 
respond differently than biomes (Neilson, 1993a,b; Lenihan 
and Neilson, 1995). The relative mixtures of species in forest 
communities will change— and under either forest expansion 
or contraction, some important species could be at risk.
Forest ecosystems are expected to shift northward and upward 
in altitude, but expansion may be limited by dispersal and poor 
soils.
All three major forest types within North America expand 
north and forested areas, with a few exceptions, increase under 
all scenarios with or without a direct CO 2  effect (biogeography 
models of potential natural forests under equilibrium condi­
tions). Total forest area increases by as much as 25-32%  as 
projected under the FAR 2 xC 0 2  GCM scenarios (including a 
direct, physiological CO 2  effect)— much less than the 42-44%  
under the SAR scenarios with a direct physiological CO 2  
effect. However, the projected forest-area increases under the 
SAR scenarios are reduced to 21-24% when a direct physio­
logical CO 2  effect is not included. In the long term, more car­
bon would be sequestered by forests under these scenarios. 
Before equilibrium conditions are reached, however, the 
processes of forest redistribution could cause a temporary 
reduction in forest area and a carbon pulse to the atmosphere.
Boreal forests displace most of the taiga/tundra region and 
increase in area under the SAR scenarios but are projected to 
increase or decrease under the FAR scenarios (Table 8-2). It 
has been projected that the temperate evergreen forests shift 
northward into Canada and Alaska and expand under the cli­
mate projected by the FAR scenarios (Annex C, Figures C-2 to 
C-5; Table 8-2). Temperate evergreen forests may expand or 
contract in area— due in part to conversion from conifers to 
broadleaf deciduous forests and in part to severe forest dieback 
under some scenarios (Annex C, Figures C-2 to C-5; Table 8-2; 
VEMAP Members, 1995). The temperate mixed forest is pro­
jected to invade the boreal forest to the north and experience 
gains in area under all simulations. Smaller gains in area of 
both temperate forest types occur under more xeric scenarios; 
forest expansions to the north are balanced by forest dieback in 
the southern zones. Because dieback in the southern zones 
might occur more rapidly than northward advances, there 
could be a short-term reduction in the area of important tem­
perate and boreal forests (King and Neilson, 1992; Smith and 
Shugart, 1993).
278
North America
Changes in leaf area can be used to infer changes in forest bio­
mass (Annex C, Figures C - 6  to C-9; Tables 8-3 and 8-4). 
Because taiga/tundra is a low-density, ecotonal region, expan­
sion of forests into that region always produces a dramatic 
increase in biomass. Under earlier FAR scenarios with a direct 
COj effect, all three forest types have subregions (ranging from 
only 3 % to slightly over half of the area) that undergo an 
increase in forest biomass (Table 8-4). Under newer SAR sce­
narios, however, the area of increased forest biomass is always 
well over 50%— ranging to as high as 97% in the temperate 
mixed forest (with a direct CO 2 effect). Without a direct CO 2  
effect under the newer scenarios, areas of increased forest bio­
mass range only from 2-49%  (usually in the lower end of the 
range) and are similar to those projected under the earlier sce­
narios, which included a CO 2  effect.
All studies agree that where forests are limited by cold they 
will expand beyond current limits, especially to the far north. 
Whether forests will expand into the drier continental interior 
or contract away from it, however, depends on hydrological 
factors and remains uncertain. Vegetation distribution models 
that incorporate a direct physiological CO 2  effect indicate con­
siderable expansion of all forest types into drier and colder 
areas and much enhanced growth over most areas— under the 
newer climate scenarios as well as some of the older studies. 
Under most of the FAR scenarios with a CO 2  effect and under 
the SAR scenarios without a CO 2  effect, however, forests 
would contract away from the continental interior because of 
increased drought stress.
Longer fire seasons and potentially more frequent and larger 
fires are likely.
Fire mediates rapid change and could increase in importance 
for vegetation change. Future climate scenarios could result in 
longer fire seasons and potentially more frequent and larger 
fires in all forest zones (even those that currently do not sup­
port much fire) because of more severe fire weather, changes 
in fire-management practices, and possible forest decline or 
dieback (Fosberg, 1990; Flannigan and Van Wagner, 1991; 
King and Neilson, 1992; Wotton and Flannigan, 1993; Price 
and Rind, 1994; Fosberg et al., 1996).
Fire suppression during much of the 20th century has allowed 
biomass in many interior forests to increase by considerable 
amounts over historic levels (Agee, 1990). With increased bio­
mass, forests transpire almost all available soil water; they 
become very sensitive to even small variations in drought 
stress and are very susceptible to catastrophic fire, even with­
out global warming (Neilson etal., 1992; Stocks, 1993; Stocks 
et al., 1996). Forests in the interior of North America are expe­
riencing increased frequencies of drought stress; pest infesta­
tions; and catastrophic, stand-replacing fires (Agee, 1990). 
This sequence of events is a reasonable analog for what could 
happen to forests over much larger areas in the zones project­
ed by biogeography models to undergo a loss of biomass or 
leaf area as a consequence of temperature-induced transpira­
tion increases and drought stress (Annex C, Figures C - 6  to C-9; 
Table 8-3) (Overpeck et al., 1990; King and Neilson, 1992).
Enhanced fire and drought stress will facilitate changes in 
species composition and may increase atmospheric carbon 
contributions from forests.
Given the ownership patterns and remote nature of much of the 
boreal forest lands, they are generally managed as natural sys­
tems. Fven highly managed temperate forests are of such large 
extent that a rapid, large-scale management response would be 
logistically quite difficult and expensive.
On managed lands, harvesting of dead or dying trees, more 
rapid harvesting or thinning of drought-sensitive trees, and 
planting of new species could reduce or eliminate species loss 
or productivity declines. However, identification of which 
species to plant (and when) under a rapidly changing climate 
will be difficult management issues. The more rapid the rate of 
climate change, the more it may strain the ability to create infra­
structure for seeding or planting of trees or support the supply 
of timber if there is a large amount of salvage. The fast rate of 
warming may limit some species that have slow dispersal rates 
or are constrained by human barriers, habitat fragmentation, or 
lack of suitable habitat— or already are stressed by pollution.
As fire-management agencies operate with increasingly con­
strained budgets, it is likely that any increases in fire frequency
Table 8-4: Percentage area o f current forests that could undergo a gain o f leaf area (i.e., biomass increase) as a consequence 
o f global warming under various older (IPCC 1990, WC I) and newer (IPCC 1996, WC II) CCM  scenarios, with or without 
direct CO2 effect (see Table 8-2 for details), as simulated by the MAPSS and BI0M E3 biogeography models (ranges include 
both models). Cains in leaf area generally indicate a more favorable water balance.
Forest Type
W ith CO 2
FAR Scenarios
Fffect
SAR Scenarios
W ithout C O 2  Fffect
SAR Scenarios
Boreal Forest + Taiga/Tundra
57-70%
74-91%
47-51%
Boreal Conifer Forest
16-42%
53-54%
1-3%
Temperate Evergreen Forest
11^9%
52-79%
7-16%
Temperate Mixed Forest
3-53%
92-97%
2-49%
Sources: Mitchell and Warrilow, 1987; Schlesinger et al., 1989; IPCC, 1990; Bengtsson et al., 1995; Mitchell et al., 1995; Bengtsson et al., 
1996; IPCC, 1996, WG I, Chapters 5 and 6; Johns et al., 1997.
North America
279
or severity will result in a disproportionately large increase in 
area burned (Stocks, 1993). More and larger boreal fires will 
result in a réévaluation of protection priorities, with likely 
increased protection of smaller, high-value areas and reduced 
protection over large expanses. If forests die back from drought, 
infestations, or fire in extensive, remote regions, the impacts 
could include large-scale changes in nutrient cycling and carbon 
sequestration, as well as loss of value for future timber harvests 
or as habitat for wildlife and biodiversity. Some adaptive prac­
tices— such as harvesting dead or dying trees or thinning—  
could impact biodiversity, soil erosion, stream quality, and non- 
market forest products, producing potentially conflicting man­
agement options.
Markham and Malcolm (1996) have concluded that ecological 
resiliency can be increased by conserving biological diversity, 
reducing fragmentation and degradation of habitat, increasing 
functional connectivity among habitat fragments, and reduc­
ing anthropogenic environmental stresses. They also indicate 
that adaptation strategies should include redundancy of eco­
logical reserves, reserves with much structural heterogeneity, 
and the flexibility to spatially relocate habitat protection 
depending on shifts in future climate (Peters and Darling, 
1985; McNeely, 1990). Current habitat fragmentation patterns 
and human barriers may hinder species migration. Thus, man­
agement of the “seminatural matrix” may play an increasing 
role in fostering species redistribution (Peters and Darling, 
1985; Bennett et a l, 1991; Franklin et a l, 1991; Parsons, 
1991; Simberloff et a l, 1992).
8.3.3. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
8.3.3.1. 
Hydrological Trends and Variability
Several reports of recent trends in precipitation and streamflow 
have shown generally increasing values throughout much of 
the United States; in Canada, total precipitation trends indicate 
an increase, but monthly streamflow analyses show varying 
seasonal changes. Lettenmaier et al. (1994) analyzed data over 
the period 1948-88 and found generally increasing trends in 
precipitation during the months of September to December and 
increasing trends in stream flow during the months of 
November to April, particularly in the central and north-central 
portions of the United States. Similarly, Lins and Michaels
(1994) report that streamflow has increased throughout much 
of the conterminous United States since the early 1940s, with 
the increases occurring primarily in autumn and winter. In 
Louisiana, precipitation and simulated runoff (streamflow per 
unit drainage area) have increased significantly over the past 
100 years (Keim et al., 1995).
Mekis and Hogg (1997) analyzed annual and seasonal precipi­
tation (total, rain and snow) trends for periods from 1948-96 to 
1895-1996 for regions of Canada and noted significant 
increases in total annual precipitation and snow for most 
regions. In Ontario, 41 hydrometric stations with a minimum 
of 30 years of data ending in 1990 were analyzed by Ashfield
et al. (1991). Mean monthly flows increased for the period 
September to January in more than 50% of the stations; 
approximately 25% of the stations show a downward trend in 
flow for the April to September period. Anderson et al. (1991) 
analyzed low-, average-, and maximum-flow time series for 27 
stations (unregulated flow) across Canada; the data show a 
decrease in summer low flows and an increase in winter aver­
age and low flows but little trend in seasonal maximum flows. 
Burn (1994) analyzed the long-term record of 84 unregulated 
river basins from northwestern Ontario to Alberta for changes 
in the timing of peak spring runoff. In the sample, the more 
northerly rivers exhibited a trend to earlier spring snowmelt 
runoff; the observed impacts on timing were more prevalent in 
the recent portion of data. These trends generally are consistent 
with climate models that produce an enhanced hydrological 
cycle with increasing atmospheric CO 2  and warmer air tem­
peratures, although some of the streamflow trends also may be 
the result of water-management or land-use changes that 
reduce surface infiltration and storage.
Recent investigations have shown how natural modes of vari­
ability at scales from seasons to years (e.g., ENSO, Pacific 
Decadal Oscillation) affect hydrological variability in different 
regions of North America and thereby have underlined the 
importance of increasing our understanding of the roles these 
features play in influencing hydrological characteristics. The 
ENSO phenomenon, a predictable climate signal, affects pre­
cipitation and streamflow in the northwestern, north-central, 
northeastern, and Gulf coast regions of the United States 
(Kahya and Dracup, 1993; Dracup and Kahya, 1994). For 
example. La Nina events (the cold phase of the ENSO phe­
nomenon) produce higher than normal precipitation in winter 
in the northwestern United States, whereas El Nino events (the 
warm phase of the ENSO phenomenon) cause drier winters in 
the Northwest on roughly a bidecadal time scale. Precipitation 
over a large region of southern Canada extending from British 
Columbia through the prairies and into the Great Lakes shows 
a distinct pattern of negative precipitation anomalies during the 
first winter following the onset of El Nino events; positive 
anomalies occur in this region with La Nina events. On the 
other hand, the northern prairies and southeastern Northwest 
Territories show significant positive precipitation anomalies 
with El Nino events (Shabbar et al., 1997). Variability in 
ENSO phenomena contributes natural variations in hydrology 
at decadal and longer time scales that are problematic for CO 2  
climate change analysis. Changes in ENSO behavior related to 
increasing CO 2  are highly uncertain but could produce 
enhanced variability in precipitation and streamflow for the 
regions most sensitive to ENSO fluctuations (IPCC 1996, WG 
I, Section 6.4.4).
Wetlands in North America traditionally have been viewed as 
wasted land available for conversion to more productive use. 
This opinion has contributed to the loss of millions of wetland 
hectares that have been drained or filled for agriculture, high­
ways, housing, and industry. In Canada, where wetlands occu­
py an estimated 14% of the landscape, 65-80%  of Atlantic 
coastal marshes, southern Ontario wetlands, prairie potholes.
280
North America
and the Fraser River delta have been lost— largely to agricul­
ture (Environment Canada, 1986,1988). Figures for the United 
States indicate that approximately 53% of the original wetland 
area in the lower 48 states has been lost, mostly (87% of this 
figure) to agriculture (Maltby, 1986). These losses are accom­
panied by the loss of ecological, hydrological, and cultural 
functions wetlands provide, including water purification, 
groundwater recharge/discharge, stormwater storage/flood 
control, sediment and pollutant sequestering, carbon storage, 
cycling of sulfur, and wildlife habitat (Mitsch and Gosselink, 
1986; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ).
Socioeconomically, wetlands provide direct benefits through the 
harvesting of timber, wild rice, cranberries, and horticultural 
peat— as well as through recreational activities such as hunting, 
fishing, and bird watching. The cultures and spiritual values of 
many First Nation peoples are linked to the health of wetlands.
8.3.3.2. 
Impacts, Adaptations, and Vulnerabilities
Important vulnerabilities of water resources to potential climate 
change scenarios involve changes in runoff and streamflow
regimes, reductions in water quality associated with changes in 
runoff, and human demands for water supplies.
Seasonal and annual runoff may change over large regions as 
a result o f changes in precipitation or évapotranspiration.
Runoff is simply the area-normalized difference between pre­
cipitation and évapotranspiration; as such, it is a function of 
watershed characteristics, the physical structure of the water­
shed, vegetation, and climate. Although most climate change 
models show increases in precipitation over much of North 
America, rates of evaporation and perhaps transpiration also 
are likely to increase with increasing temperatures. Therefore, 
regions in which changes in precipitation do not offset increas­
ing rates of evaporation and transpiration may experience 
declines in runoff and consequently declines in river flows, 
lake levels, and groundwater recharge and levels (Schindler,
1997). Alternatively, regions that experience substantial 
increases in precipitation are likely to have substantial increas­
es in runoff and river flows.
Projected changes in annual discharge (summarized in Table 8-5) 
for some river basins in North America using various climate
Table 8-5: Summary o f annual runoff impacts from climate change scenarios
Region/River Basin
Scenario M ethod
H ydrological 
Changes (annual)
Reference(s)
East-Central Canada
St. Lawrence, Ontario and Quebec
Opinaca-Eastmain, Quebec
La Grande, Quebec
Caniapiscau, Quebec
Moise, Quebec
Grand, Ontario
GCM: CCC92
GCM: GISS84, GFDL80
GCM: GISS84, GFDL80
GCM: GISS84, GFDL80
GCM: CCC92
GCM: GISS87, GFDL87,
CCC92
-34%
+20.2%, +6.7% 
+15.6%, +16.5% 
+13.0%, +15.7% 
-5%
- 1 1 %, -2 1 %, -2 2 %
Croley (1992)
Singh (1987)
Singh (1987)
Singh (1987)
Morin and Slivitzky (1992) 
Smith and McBean (1993)
Canadian Prairie 
Saskatchewan
GCM: G1SS871 
GCM: GFDL871 
GCM: OSU881
+28%, +35% 
-27%, -36% 
+2%, -4%
Cohen et al. (1989); Cohen 
(1991)
Northwest Canada 
Mackenzie
GCM: CCC92, GFDL-R30 
analog
-3 to -7% 
+7%
Soulis et al. (1994)
Mid-Atlantic USA 
Delaware
GCM: GISS, GFDL, OSU
-5 to -38%
(soil moisture index)
McCabe and Wolock (1992)
Western USA 
Upper Colorado
GCM: GISS, GFDL, UKMO
-33 to +12%
Nash and Gleick (1993)
includes low and high irrigation.
Sources: CCC92 (Boer et al., 1992; McFarlane et ai, 1992), OSU88 (Schlesinger and Zhao, 1988), GFDL87 (Manabe and Wetherald, 1987), 
GISS87 (Cohen, 1991), GISS84 (Cohen, 1991), GFDL80 (Cohen, 1991).
North America
281
change scenarios indicate potential increases as well as 
declines. (Many of these hydrological impact assessments, 
however, were developed using older climate change scenarios 
of somewhat larger increases in global air temperature than the 
most recent scenarios that include regional aerosol-cooling 
effects.) Seasonal changes in runoff also could be substantial. 
Most climate change scenarios suggest increased winter precip­
itation over much of North America, which could result in 
increased runoff and river flows in winter and spring. Several 
climate change scenarios show declines in summer precipita­
tion in some regions (e.g., the southeastern United States; IPCC 
1996, WG I, Figure 6.11) or declines in summer soil-moisture 
levels (e.g., over much of North America; IPCC 1996, WG I, 
Figure 6.12), which could result in significant declines in sum­
mer and autumn runoff in these regions. However, climate 
change scenarios showing summer declines in precipitation or 
soil-moisture levels in these regions generally are produced 
from simulations with doubled CO 2  forcing alone; when aerosol 
forcing is included, summer precipitation and soil-moisture lev­
els increase only slightly. This pattern highlights the large 
uncertainty in climate change projections of runoff.
Although large increases in annual runoff will affect flooding 
and flood management, large reductions may pose more seri­
ous threats to uses such as potable drinking water, irrigation, 
assimilation of wastes, recreation, habitat, and navigation. The 
greatest impact of declines in supply are projected to be in arid 
and semi-arid regions and areas with a high ratio of use relative 
to available renewable supply, as well as in basins with multi­
ple competing uses. For example, reductions in outflow of 
23-51% from Lake Ontario from assessments using four GCM 
scenarios suggest impacts on commercial navigation in the St. 
Lawrence River and the port of Montreal, as well as hydropow­
er generation (Slivitzky, 1993). Lower flows also may affect 
the ecosystem of the river by allowing the saltwater wedge to 
intrude further upstream.
Seasonal patterns in the hydrology o f mid- and high-latitude 
regions could be altered substantially, with runoff and stream- 
flows generally increasing in winter and declining in summer.
Higher air temperatures could strongly influence the processes 
of évapotranspiration, precipitation as rain or snow, snow and 
ice accumulation, and melt— ^which, in turn, could affect soil 
moisture and groundwater conditions and the amount and tim­
ing of runoff in the mid- and high-latitude regions of North 
America. Higher winter temperatures in snow-covered regions 
of North America could shorten the duration of the snow-cover 
season. For example, one climate change scenario (CCC, 
Annex B) indicates up to a 40% decrease in the duration of 
snow cover in the Canadian prairies and a 70% decrease in the 
Great Plains (Boer et al., 1992; Brown et a l, 1994). Warmer 
winters could lead to less winter precipitation as snowfall and 
more as rainfall, although increases in winter precipitation also 
could lead to greater snowfall and snow accumulation, partic­
ularly at the higher latitudes. Warmer winter and spring tem­
peratures could lead to earlier and more rapid snowmelt and 
earlier ice break-up, as well as more rain-on-snow events that
produce severe flooding, such as occurred in 1996-97 (Yarnal 
et a l, 1997).
Damages to structures, hydropower operations, and navigation 
and flooding caused by late-winter and spring ice-jam events 
are estimated to cost CAN$60 million annually in Canada and 
US$100 million in the United States. About 35% of flooding in 
Canada is caused by ice jams— principally in the Atlantic 
Provinces, around the Great Lakes, in British Columbia, and in 
northern regions (Beltaos, 1995). Northern deltas and wet­
lands, however, depend upon flooding for periodic recharge 
and ecological sustainability (Prowse, 1997). The 2 xC 0 2  GCM 
simulations (IPCC 1996, WG I, Summary for Policymakers) 
suggest milder winters in higher latitudes and a general pattern 
of increased precipitation, with high regional variability. 
Where warmer winters result in reduced ice thickness, less 
severe breakups and reduced ice-jam flooding can be expected. 
However, major changes in precipitation patterns also are pre­
dicted. In some regions, there is an increased likelihood of win­
ter or early spring rains. These climatic factors trigger sudden 
winter thaws and premature breakups that have the greatest 
potential for damage. Thus, although average conditions may 
be improved, the severity of extreme events in some regions 
appears likely to increase. In the more southern latitudes com­
monly affected by spring ice jams— such as the lower Great 
Lakes and central Great Plains areas, parts of New England, 
Nova Scotia, and British Columbia— there may be a reduction 
in the duration and thickness of the ice cover on rivers, as well 
as in the severity of ice jamming. In the north, similar effects 
are expected. In the intermediate latitudes— such as the 
prairies; much of Ontario and Quebec; and parts of Maine, 
New Brunswick, Newfoundland, and Labrador— spring jam ­
ming may become more common and/or severe. Such events 
are presently rare or completely unknown in some of these 
areas (Van Der Vinne et a l, 1991; Beltaos, 1995).
In mountainous regions, particularly at mid-elevations, warming 
could lead to a long-term reduction in peak snow-water equiva­
lent, with the snowpack building later and melting sooner 
(Cooley, 1990). Glacial meltwater also is a significant source of 
water for streams and rivers in some mountainous regions, with 
the highest flows occurring in early or midsummer (depending 
on latitude). For example, glacial meltwater contributes an aver­
age of 85% of the August flow in the Mistaya River near Banff, 
Alberta (Prowse, 1997). Accelerated glacier melt caused by tem­
perature increases means more runoff in the short term, but loss 
of glaciers could result in streams without significant summer 
flow in the future (IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 7.4.2 and 
10.3.7). Late-summer stream discharge could decrease suddenly 
within only a few years. A steady pattern of glacial retreat is 
apparent in the southern Rocky Mountains below central British 
Columbia and Alberta. Water supplies in small communities, 
irrigation, hydroelectric generation, tourism, and fish habitat 
could be negatively impacted (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 7; 
Brugman et a l, 1997; Prowse, 1997).
In Arctic regions, permafrost maintains lakes and wetlands 
above an impermeable frost table and limits subsurface water
282
North America
storage. As described in Section 8.3.1, discontinuous and con­
tinuous permafrost boundaries are expected to move poleward 
as a result of projected changes in climate. Thawing of per­
mafrost increases active-layer storage capacity and alters peat- 
land hydrology. Although climatic warming could have a large 
effect on Arctic hydrology, the changes are highly uncertain at 
this time.
In general, increases in winter and early spring temperatures 
under a ЗхСОг climate could shift hydrological regimes toward 
greater flows in winter and early spring and lower flows in 
summer in the mid- and high-latitude regions of North America 
(Ng and Marsalek, 1992; Soulis et al., 1994). River and reser­
voir systems that are fed by snowmelt or rely on glacier melt 
for spring and summer flow during critical periods of high 
agricultural and municipal demand and low precipitation may 
have critical supply-demand mismatches. California and the 
Great Plains and prairie regions of Canada and the United 
States could be particularly vulnerable (Cohen et al., 1989; 
Gleick, 1993).
Altered precipitation and temperature regimes will affect the 
seasonal pattern and variability o f water levels o f wetlands, 
thereby affecting their functioning—including flood protection, 
carbon storage, water cleansing, and waterfowl/wildlife habitat.
It is difficult to generalize about the sensitivity of wetlands to 
climate change (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ). It appears, 
however, that climate change will have its greatest effect 
through alterations in hydrological regimes— in terms of the 
nature and variability of the hydroperiod (the seasonal pattern 
of water level) and the number and severity of extreme events 
(Gorham, 1991; Poiani and Johnson, 1993). However, other 
variables related to changing climate may drive a site-specific 
response. Such variables include increased temperature and 
altered évapotranspiration, altered amounts and patterns of sus­
pended sediment loadings, fire, oxidation of organic sedi­
ments, and the physical effects of wave energy (Mitsch and 
Gosselink, 1986; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ).
There are many highly significant social and economic threats to 
wetlands, but there is insufficient information on the precise 
nature of anticipated local changes in climate. This difficulty 
prevents accurate assessment of risks or opportunities to adapt. 
The responses of affected wetlands are expected to vary; they 
might include migration of the wetland area along river edges or 
the slope of a receding lake and/or altered species composition. 
More serious effects would include altered physical characteris­
tics; degradation to a simpler, less diverse form; or complete 
destruction. There also could be a loss of desired attributes, such 
as their ability to provide suitable habitat for particular species; 
their ability to act as a feeding or breeding area in support of an 
adjacent open-water commercial or recreational fishery; or their 
ability to buffer occasional flooding (Mitsch and Gosselink, 
1986; IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6 ). Altering climate and acid 
depositions can cause declining levels of dissolved organic car­
bon (DOC) in wetlands— thus increasing the water volumes, 
sediment areas, and associated organisms exposed to harmful
ultraviolet-B (UV-B) irradiation. Potential effects include 
changes in aquatic communities and photoinhibition of phyto­
plankton (Schindler et a l, 1996; Yan et a l, 1996).
Additional losses o f prairie pothole wetlands could reduce 
migratory waterfowl and wildlife populations.
Occupying depressions in the landscape in dry climates with 
small watershed areas, prairie pothole wetlands are highly sus­
ceptible to a lack of moisture occurring through the effects of 
decreased snowpack and associated spring recharge, droughts, 
and increased climatic variability. Already strained by losses of 
71% in Canada (Environm ent Canada 1986, 1988) and 
50-60%  in the United States (Leitch, 1981), this area yields 
50-75%  of all the waterfowl produced in any year in North 
America (Leitch and Danielson, 1979; Weller, 1981). Trends in 
Canadian duck abundance already reflect the interactions 
between changing wetness regimes and landscape alterations 
(Bethke and Nudds, 1995). Any additional stress would be of 
great concern and could be accommodated only through active 
programs to protect, enhance, and increase wetland areas in 
this region.
Increases in the frequency or magnitude o f extreme hydrologi­
cal events could result in water quality deterioration and water 
management problems.
Hydrological variability (i.e., the frequency and magnitude of 
extreme events) is an extremely important issue for the man­
agement of water resources. Under a warmer climate, the 
hydrological cycle is projected to become more intense, lead­
ing to more heavy rainfall events (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section
6.5.6). Several 2хС0г GCM simulations have indicated an 
increase in the magnitude of mean rainfall events, particularly 
for central and northwest North America, even with small 
changes in mean annual rainfall (Cubasch et a l, 1995; Gregory 
and Mitchell, 1995; Mearns et a l, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG I, 
Section 6.5.7). In addition, these simulations indicate increas­
es in the length of dry spells (consecutive days without precip­
itation). However, few model sim ulation analyses have 
addressed the issue of variability in daily precipitation and 
increases in the frequency or severity of extreme hydrological 
events; as a result, issues surrounding variability and extreme 
hydrological events remain highly uncertain at this time.
In many regions, projected increases in hydrological variabili­
ty would result in greater impacts on water resources than 
changes in mean hydrological conditions (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Chapter 10 Executive Summary). Increases in the frequency or 
magnitude of extreme rainfall events would likely have their 
greatest impacts on water resources in the winter and spring, 
when the ground is frozen or soil moisture levels are high; 
severe flooding may be more likely. More severe or frequent 
floods could result in increased erosion of the land surface, as 
well as stream channels and banks; higher sediment loads and 
increased sedimentation of rivers and reservoirs; and increased 
loadings of nutrients and contaminants from agricultural and 
urban areas (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.5.5). Longer dry
North America
283
spells would likely have their greatest impact in the summer, 
when streamflows generally are low. Increases in the severity 
of summer droughts could result in reduced water quality (e.g., 
lower dissolved oxygen concentrations, reduced dilution of 
effluents) and impaired biological habitat (e.g., drying of 
streams, expansion of zones with low dissolved oxygen con­
centrations, water temperatures exceeding thermal tolerances) 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 10.5.3 and 10.5.4).
Projected increases in hydrological variability (e.g., more fre­
quent or larger floods) could lead to increased expenditures for 
flood management and disaster assistance (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 14.4.3). Flood-control structures might require modifi­
cations to accom modate larger probable maximum-flow 
events. Alternatives to structural flood-control measures can be 
instituted to reduce risk at a lower cost to society, but these 
strategies require significant political will. Even with the high 
frequency of extreme events that have occurred recently (and 
their attendant costs), changes to less-costly and more effective 
nonstractural methods of risk reduction are slow in gaining 
acceptance. Navigation also might be impaired by changes in 
hydrological variability, as illustrated by severe restrictions on 
navigation in the Mississippi River during the drought of 1988 
(IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 14.3.4). Hydropower generation 
could be severely restricted during droughts. It is estimated that 
hydropower production m ight decline 
2
0 % during the 
peak-load summer months in northern California as a result of 
more severe droughts (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 14.3.3). 
More severe summer droughts also could increase agricultural 
irrigation demands (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 14.3.1) and 
exacerbate current drinking water supply problems in some 
large urbanized areas, such as California and Houston, Texas 
(IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 12.3.5).
Lake water levels could decline in regions such as the Arctic 
and the Great Lakes where precipitation increases do not com­
pensate for warming-enhanced evaporation rate increases.
Lake levels are sensitive to changes in precipitation and evapo­
ration, which lead to changes in streamflow and groundwater 
flow. Changes in lake levels will depend on regional changes in 
temperature and precipitation (the latter of which is highly 
uncertain). In areas where climate change scenarios suggest that 
precipitation or soil moisture levels could decline, lake levels are 
likely to decline or to fluctuate more widely (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.5.2). Decreases in precipitation and/or soil moisture 
are indicated for the southeastern United States and much of the 
midcontinental region of North America in several 2 xC 0 2  GCM 
simulations with only CO 2  forcing. Water-level declines would 
be most severe in lakes and streams in dry evaporative drainage 
basins and basins with small catchments. Semipermanent prairie 
sloughs are fed by groundwater in addition to precipitation and 
spring snowmelt. Severe droughts deplete groundwater storage 
and cause these sloughs to dry out— resulting in turn in a decline 
of bird habitats (Poiani and Johnson, 1991, 1993). In the north- 
central United States, some drainage lakes and seepage lakes are 
highly responsive to precipitation; lake levels declined substan­
tially during the late-1980s drought (Eilers et a i, 1988).
High-latitude lakes also may be particularly vulnerable to 
changes in precipitation and temperature. For a 2 xC 0 2  climate 
change scenario with temperature increases of 3-5°C and pre­
cipitation increases of 10-15%, lake levels in the Mackenzie 
delta of arctic Canada fluctuate more widely. If precipitation 
were to decline by 1 0 % with these temperature increases, how­
ever, many lakes could disappear within a decade as a conse­
quence of decreased flood frequency (Marsh and Lesack, 1996).
The Great Lakes of North America are a critically important 
resource, and potential climate change effects are of great 
concern. Based on 2 xC 0 2  scenarios from several GCMs that 
indicated seasonal temperature increases of 2.6-9.1°C and 
seasonal precipitation changes of -30% to +40% (generally 
summer/autumn declines and winter increases), the following 
lake level declines could occur: Lake Superior -0.2 to -0.5 m. 
Lakes Michigan and Huron -1.0 to -2.5 m, and Lake Erie -0.9 
to -1.9 m; the regulation plan for Lake Ontario cannot meet the 
minimum downstream flow requirements and maintain lake 
levels (Croley, 1990; Hartmann, 1990; Mortsch and Quinn,
1996). Using the Canadian Climate Centre (CCC) GCM II sce­
nario (which generally has drier summer and autumn condi­
tions than other GCMs for this region), the surface area of Lake 
St. Clair decreases by 15%; its volume is reduced by 37%; the 
water level declines 1 . 6  m; and the shoreline may be displaced 
1-6 km lakeward, exposing lake bottom (Lee et a i, 1996). 
These Great Lakes water-level changes are based on climate 
change scenarios from models that produced global tempera­
ture increases that are at least twice as large and precipitation 
changes that generally are greater than the most recent climate 
change simulations with aerosols included. Nonetheless, 
although highly uncertain at this time, the potential declines in 
lake water levels shown in these analyses could have large 
effects on wetlands, fish spawning, recreational boating, com­
mercial navigation, and municipal water supplies in the Great 
Lakes area. Also of concern is the exposure of toxic sediments 
and their remediation with declines in lake levels (Rhodes and 
Wiley, 1993).
Responses to adapt to these large changes in lake levels in 
developed areas could be costly. Changnon (1993) estimated 
the costs for dredging, changing slips and docks, relocating 
beach facilities, and extending and modifying water intake and 
sewage outfalls for a 110-km section of the Lake Michigan 
shoreline including Chicago to range from $298-401 million 
for a 1.3-m decline and $605-827 million (1988 dollars) for a 
2.5-m decline.
Water quality could deteriorate during summer low flows in 
regions experiencing reduced summer runoff.
Changes in water quality as well as changes in hydrological 
regimes could occur as a result of climate warming. Increases in 
water temperature in streams and rivers reduce oxygen solubil­
ities and increase biological respiration rates and thus may 
result in lower dissolved oxygen concentrations, particularly in 
summer low-flow periods in low- and mid-latitude areas (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 10.5.4). Although temperature increases
284
North America
also may stimulate photosynthesis via increased nutrient 
cycling and thus prevent dissolved oxygen declines during the 
day, sharp nighttime declines could occur. Summer dissolved 
oxygen concentrations in the hypolimnion of lakes, particularly 
more eutrophic lakes, also may decline, and areas of anoxia 
may increase because of increased respiration rates in a warmer 
climate (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.5.4). However, reduc­
tion in the length of winter ice cover may reduce the incidence 
of winter anoxia in more northerly lakes and rivers. Increases in 
water temperature also will impact industrial uses of water, pri­
marily in the low and mid-latitudes, by reducing the efficiency 
of once-through cooling systems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
14.3.3). Increases in water temperature will have a positive 
impact on navigation in the mid- and high latitudes, especially 
in the Great Lakes, by increasing the length of the ice-free sea­
son (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 14.3.4)— perhaps compensat­
ing for reduced cargo capacity due to low water levels.
Changes in the seasonality of runoff also may affect water 
quality. In the middle and high latitudes, the shift in the high- 
runoff period from late spring and summer to winter and early 
spring might reduce water quality in summer under low 
flows. Extended droughts in boreal regions have been shown 
to result in acidification of streams due to oxidation of organ­
ic sulfur pools in soils (Schindler, 1997). However, acidic 
episodes associated with spring snowmelt in streams and 
lakes in the northeastern United States and eastern Canada 
might be reduced under a warmer climate with lower snow 
accumulation and lower discharges during the spring melt 
(IPCC 1996, W G II, Section 10.5.3; Moore et al., 1997). In 
general, water-quality problems (particularly low dissolved 
oxygen levels and high contaminant concentrations) associat­
ed with human impacts on water resources (e.g., wastewater 
effluents) will be exacerbated more by reductions in annual 
runoff than by other changes in hydrological regimes (IPCC 
1996, W G II, Section 14.2.4).
Increases in competition for limited water under a warmer cli­
mate could lead to supply shortfalls and water-quality prob­
lems, particularly in regions experiencing declines in runoff.
Under a warmer climate, more intensive water resource man­
agement will be required because population growth, econom­
ic development, and altered precipitation patterns will lead to 
more intense competition for available supplies (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Sections 12.3.5 and 14.4). Managing increased and 
diversified water demands will be particularly problematic in 
regions that currently have the lowest water availability (e.g., 
western-central North America) and those that will experience 
declines in runoff with climate change.
National water summaries by the U.S. Geological Survey pro­
vide comprehensive data on water availability and demand. 
Agriculture and steam electric generation account for approxi­
mately 75% of total water withdrawals in the United States; 
agricultural uses are most dominant west of the 1 0 0 th meridi­
an, where evaporation generally exceeds precipitation. When 
seasonal and interannual variability of regional climates are
considered, the most inadequate water supplies within the 
United States (70% depletion of available supplies by off- 
stream uses) are in the southwest— including the lower 
Colorado River basin, the southern half of California’s Central 
Valley, and the Great Plains river basins south of the Platte 
River.
A warmer climate will likely increase the demand for irrigation 
water by agriculture (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 14.3.1) and 
for industrial cooling water at the same time that urban growth 
will be increasing the demand for municipal water supplies. In 
addition, higher water temperatures will reduce the efficieney 
of cooling systems (Dobrowolski et al., 1995), and might make 
it increasingly difficult to meet regulatory constraints defining 
acceptable downstream water temperatures, particularly during 
extremely warm periods (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 14.3.3). 
Furthermore, growing instream flow requirements to protect 
aquatic ecosystems also will reduce effective water supplies. 
However, improved management of water infrastructure, pric­
ing policies, and demand-side management of supply have the 
potential to mitigate some of the impacts of increasing water 
demand (Frederick and Gleick, 1989; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 12.5.5).
8.3.4. 
Food and Fiber: Agriculture
8.3.4.1. Description o f the Resource
Agricultural land represents about 12% of the land area of North 
America. Approximately 3% of the population and 1.7% of the 
annual growth in gross national product (GNP) are related to 
agriculture. Agricultural land use comprises a total of approxi­
mately 233 million ha. Irrigated farmland represents 21 million 
ha in the United States, with much of this along the Mississippi 
River, the central Great Plains, and the western states. North 
America is characterized by an abundance of fertile soils and a 
highly productive agricultural sector that leads the world in the 
production of small grains. Within the United States, there are 10 
farm production regions, with 
6  corresponding regions in 
Canada (Adams et a l, 1995b; Brklacich et a l, 1997a).
Agriculture in North America has a long history of sensitivity 
to climate variability (e.g., the timing and magnitude of 
droughts and floods, extremes in heat and cold) and is subject 
to a wide array of other factors that can limit potential produc­
tivity (e.g., tropospheric ozone, pests, diseases, and weeds). 
Agriculture has an equally long history of developing strate­
gies to cope with the many factors capable of limiting produc­
tion. Climate change is an additional factor that could enhance 
or reduce the sensitivity of the agricultural sector to these cur­
rent stress factors. As world population grows, the demand for 
North American agricultural products is expected to increase, 
with possible increases in agricultural commodity prices (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 13.6.8). Should increased demand lead to 
further intensification of agriculture in North America, 
increased emphasis on sustainable agriculture is likely (Matson 
et a l, 1997).
North America
285
Potential impacts of climate change on agriculture will be 
reflected most directly through the response of crops, livestock, 
soils, weeds, and insects and diseases to the elements of climate 
to which they are most sensitive. Soil moisture and temperature 
are the climate factors likely to be most sensitive to change 
across large agricultural areas of North America. The differen­
tial response of species to elevated CO 2  concentrations is 
expected to show a generally positive but variable increase in 
productivity and WUE for annual crops; limited evidence sug­
gests less of a growth response for perennial crop species. Many 
weed species are expected to benefit from CO 2 “fertilization” 
and increased WUE, and increased temperatures may facilitate 
the expansion of warm-season weed species to more northerly 
latitudes (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.2). Insect pests and 
fungal and bacterial pathogens of importance to agricultural 
production are sensitive to climate change through the direct 
effects of changes of temperature and moisture on the pest or 
pathogen, on host susceptibility, and on the host-parasite inter­
relation (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.4). Livestock is sensi­
tive to climate through impacts on feed and forage crops, 
through the direct effects of weather and extreme events on ani­
mal health, and through changes in livestock diseases (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 13.5).
Long-term crop management strategies that increase soil 
organic matter will benefit agricultural lands by increasing soil 
nutrient status and water-holding capacity while increasing soil 
carbon storage (Matson et al., 1997).
8.3.4.2. 
Potential Impacts o f Climate Change
on Agriculture
8.3.4.3. 
Climate Variability and Extreme Events
Changes in mean temperature and precipitation will likely 
affect agricultural crop and livestock production. Climate 
modifications that lead to changes in daily and interannual 
variability in temperatures and, in particular, precipitation 
also will impact crop yields.
Mearns et al. (1996) used the Clouds and Earth’s Radiant 
Energy System (CERES)-Wheat model to demonstrate the 
impact of daily temperature variability on simulated wheat 
yields at two sites in Kansas. A doubling of daily temperature 
variability contributed to increased crop failures and lower 
yields as a consequence of cold damage and winter kill. 
Simulated wheat yields also decreased as variability in precip­
itation increased, although absolute reductions in yield were 
dependent on soil type and associated moisture-holding capac­
ity. Although these simulations illustrate the potential sensitiv­
ity of wheat production to increased variability in temperature 
and precipitation, they do not incorporate the beneficial role 
that elevated COj may play in modifying these responses, nor 
are extreme events considered in these analyses. Extreme 
events like drought, flooding, hail, hurricanes, and tornadoes 
also will impact agriculture, but reliable forecasts of such 
occurrences are not yet regionally available.
The results o f a large number o f experiments designed to exam­
ine the effects o f elevated CO2 concentrations on crops have 
generally confirmed high confidence in a net beneficial effect 
o f CO2 fertilization, up to some level. Sustained plant response 
under field conditions to concentrations beyond 2xC02 would 
likely be dependent on species as well as water and nutrient 
status and is highly uncertain.
A mean value yield response of C3 crops (most crops except 
maize, sugar cane, millet, and sorghum) to doubled CO 2  is 
reported to be approximately +30% (range -10% to +80%). 
There is reason to expect, however, that this value represents an 
upper estimate unlikely to be achieved under field conditions. 
Factors known to affect the magnitude of CO 2  response in crops 
include the availability of plant nutrients, the crop species, tem­
perature, precipitation, and other environmental factors, such as 
air pollution, soil quality, weeds, insect pests, and diseases 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.2.1). Increased WUE is a result 
of elevated CO 2  as well, though in many regions of North 
America, higher temperatures associated with elevated CO 2  can 
be expected to increase evaporative demand and transpiration, 
resulting in minimal benefit from the increase in WUE 
(Brklacich et a l, 1997b).
Changes in soils (e.g., loss of soil organic matter, leaching of 
soil nutrients, salinization, and erosion) are likely conse­
quences of climate change for some soils in some climatic 
zones. Cropping practices such as crop rotation, conservation 
tillage, and improved nutrient management are technically 
effective in combating or reversing such deleterious effects 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.3; Matson e ta l, 1997).
Livestock production could be affected by changes in grain 
prices, changes in the prevalence and distribution of livestock 
pests, and changes in grazing and pasture productivity. 
Livestock are sensitive to stress from warmer, drier conditions, 
as well as reduced range forage quality and water availability. 
Warmer winter temperatures may enhance winter survival of 
range livestock. Taking action to improve forage quality or 
water supply could benefit livestock. Analyses indicate that 
intensively managed livestock systems such as those in North 
America have more potential for adaptation than crop systems 
because of their mobility in terms of access to food and water 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.5).
The risk o f losses due to weeds, insects, and diseases is sensi­
tive to temperature and moisture (including rainfall, humidity, 
and dew); the risk is likely to increase in subregions where 
these factors become more favorable for specific disease 
organisms but may decrease under drier conditions. Increased 
climate variability may provide additional challenges for pest- 
management adaptation to climate change.
Elevated CO 2 levels may enhance the growth of C3 weeds, based 
on the results of controlled exposure experiments. Evidence also 
exists, however, that other factors determining plant productivity
8.3.4.4. 
Direct and Indirect Effects
286
North America
may be more important in controlling plant response in the field 
(e.g., water- and nutrient-use efficiency) than the differential COj 
response (Bazzaz and McConnaughay, 1992). There currently is 
little experimental evidence to directly evaluate the effects of ele­
vated CO 2 on weed infestation, insect pests, or plant diseases 
under field conditions. Less severe winters may increase the 
range and severity of insect and disease infestations. Temperature 
and moisture are critical to the spread and development of many 
plant diseases (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.4.3). Successful 
disease development requires convergence of a susceptible host, 
a virulent pathogen, and suitable environmental conditions. 
Increased variability of precipitation, for example, could affect the 
host-parasite interaction positively or negatively, leading to more 
or less disease development (Shriner, 1980). Increased climate 
variability also could render less effective disease-forecasting 
models currently used to manage some diseases and require 
increased reliance on pesticides. North American agriculture will 
need to address these concerns in the context of increasing pres­
sure on agriculmre to reduce chemical inputs.
8.3.4.5. 
Yield and Production Changes
by North American Subregion
Previous studies that have simulated the impact of climate 
change on the North American agriculture sector have taken a
variety of approaches. Tables 13-11 and 13-12 in the SAR 
(IPCC 1996, WG II) outline the range and variability of yield 
impacts that have been suggested across a number of studies 
looking at climate change impacts for the United States and 
Canada. For these studies (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.8), 
when biophysical and economic impacts were combined, mar­
ket adjustments were found to lessen the impacts of negative 
yield changes. More recent projections of increases in global 
mean surface temperatures in the future are lower than past 
estimates. These lower estimates are derived from new, tran­
sient GCM scenarios that take into account the interactions 
between the atmosphere and oceans and the cooling effects of 
sulfate and other aerosols in the troposphere (Darwin, 1997). 
Most of the impact studies currently available for review have 
not utilized the projections from these more recent climate 
model simulations as a background; as a result, they may over­
estimate the magnitude of expected temperature impacts.
The outcome of the net economic impact summarized in the 
SAR (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.8) was sensitive to 
assumptions about population, income, trade barriers, and insti­
tutions and ranged from negative to positive. For Canada, the 
vulnerability of the agricultural sector derives from the impor­
tance of agriculture to subregional (e.g., the prairies) and rural 
economies, the location of agriculture in a marginal climate 
with regard to temperature and precipitation, and limitations to
i 1
N ortheast '  Opcza-
JT
GISS
GFDL
□  UKMO
n
i 1
Figure 8 -8 : Effects of climate change on regional economic welfare (percentage change in total welfare from base, assuming 555 
ppm CO 2  and changes in export demand) (adapted from Adams, 1995b). See page 287 for details of the climate scenarios used.
North America
287
northward shifting of cropping by poor soil quality (Cohen et 
al, 1992).
Economic welfare may improve for more northerly farm pro­
duction regions— with potential benefits indicated for the lake 
states, the northern Plains, the mountain region, and the 
Pacific region.
Evaluation of the direct and indirect effects of climate on yield 
at the farm, regional, or higher level of aggregation requires inte­
grated models that consider system interactions. Changes in crop 
production, crop water demand, and regional water resources 
will arise as a consequence of climate change, although the 
impacts of these changes on agriculture will be modified by 
trends in world food production and commodity exports. These 
interactions can be modeled to estimate the economic conse­
quences of climate change for regions of the United States. 
Adams et al. (1995a,b) used three GCM scenarios to evaluate 
the economic consequences to crop production and regional wel­
fare if climate changes of similar magnitude were to occur. 
Figure 8 - 8  illustrates the subregional variability in economic 
welfare suggested by climate change, including a CO 2  fertiliza­
tion effect (and accounting for changes in export demand). 
Based on these analyses, eastern, southeastern, and com belt 
regions yielded estimates of negative impacts, while positive 
effects were projected for northern plains and western regions.
Subregional shifts in economic welfare with climate change 
will likely arise as a consequence o f impacts on crops with spe­
cific temperature requirements for growth.
Citrus production, for example, may shift slightly northward as 
temperatures rise in southern states. Yields are predicted to 
decline in southern Florida and Texas as a consequence of 
higher-than-favorable 
tem peratures 
during 
the 
winter 
(Rosenzweig et a l, 1996). Warmer temperatures experienced 
at slightly more northern locations may lessen the chance of 
freeze damage, but the overall risk of early- and late-season 
frost will remain a major factor in crop loss. It is worth noting 
that as a woody perennial, citrus offers little possibility of 
short-term adaptation to climate change through management 
because the timing of phenological events in citrus is not under 
the control of the orchard manager. Other simulation studies 
show that corn and soybean yields may decrease across much 
of the U.S. corn belt with a 2°C rise in temperature (Phillips et 
al, 1996) and that potato yields may decrease on average by 
22% across sites from Maine to Washington as temperatures 
increase 1.5-5°C (Rosenzweig et a l, 1996).
Experimental results in combination with knowledge of physi­
cal and biological processes, along with modeling of these basic 
physiological processes, provide information on potential 
changes in yield, which can in turn provide input to an agricul­
tural sector model capable of simulating sector-level impacts of 
alternative climate change scenarios (Adams et a l, 1995a,b).
Recent work has extended previous studies regarding the eco­
nomic effects of climate change on agriculture to address some
of the limitations in earlier studies. This new work (Adams et a l, 
1995b) looks at U.S. agriculture sector impacts by incorporating 
other crops such as fruits and vegetables into the regional crop 
alternatives for the southeastern region and other southerly loca­
tions; considering the impacts of farmer adaptations to climate 
change; allowing for crop migration into regions where those 
crops are not currently being grown; incorporating changes in 
forage production and livestock performance; and assessing the 
potential for technological change, as manifested in present and 
future yields, to offset climate change.
The analyses by Adams et al. (1995b) used estimates from uni­
form incremental climate change scenarios and from two 
GCM-based analyses to assess a wide range of potential tem­
perature and precipitation changes, as well as alternative levels 
for atmospheric CO 2  concentrations. The scenarios included 16 
combinations of alternative temperature and precipitation 
changes (0°C, 1.5°C, 2.5°C, and 5°C for temperature and 
-10%, 0%, +1%, and +15% for precipitation). In addition, the 
analysis considered four alternative levels for atmospheric 
CO 2  concentrations (355, 440, 530, and 600 ppm). This 
scheme produced a total of 64 incremental scenarios, which 
were evaluated for 1990 and 2060 conditions. These scenarios 
represented the data set for estimation of a climate change 
response function for 1990 and 2060 conditions of technologi­
cal development and agricultural demand. In addition to these 
uniform scenarios, the two GCM-based analyses used climate 
forecasts from the Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) 
and the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL)-R30 
GCMs (see Table 1-2). These analyses provided points of com­
parison with previous studies, as well as tests of the reason­
ableness of the economic effect response functions developed 
from the 64 uniform scenarios.
Estimation of the economic consequences of these scenarios 
required predictions of the impacts of climate change on yield 
levels for crops and forage, animal grazing requirements and 
performance, crop migration potentials, technology-based 
changes in yields, and changes in water resource availability. 
These predicted changes were then used in an economic model 
of U.S. agriculture. The economic model provided estimates of 
changes in social welfare, crop prices and quantities, resource 
use, and other measures of economic performance arising from 
the climate scenarios (Adams et a l, 1995b).
Under the majority of the climate change scenarios evaluated 
in the study, net welfare increased; only 34 of the 128 scenar­
ios showed welfare losses. In general, increases in precipitation 
and CO 2 increase welfare. Slight-to-moderate increases in tem­
perature also could increase welfare. The response function 
analysis also showed that increases in CO 2  and precipitation 
could offset the potentially negative effects of large tempera­
ture increases (Adams et a l, 1995b).
The magnitude o f welfare changes showed modest gains for an 
optimistic case and modest loss to modest gain from an adverse 
case for present and future technology and economic growth 
cases, respectively.
288
North America
The values represented very small percentage changes in total 
agriculture value (< 3% of the value of the base model solution). 
As a result, in the aggregate, Adams et ai. (1995b) concluded 
that climate appears to be a relatively small stress to agriculture 
in the United States. Welfare losses from adverse climate 
change also tended to be smaller than previous estimates, 
whereas gains from favorable climate change tend to be larger 
because of the more comprehensive treatment of adjustment 
possibilities such as the inclusion of new crops and migration 
possibilities that were used in the analysis. This study con­
cludes, as others have, that climate change of the type evaluat­
ed does not appear to be a food security issue for the United 
States (Adams et a l, 1995b). On the other hand, this study did 
not incorporate the costs of adaptations or the consequences of 
changes in subregional agricultural production for the 
economies of those subregions; it only addressed the conse­
quences of change in mean climate, without increased climate 
variability; and it did not evaluate the possible consequences of 
potential secondary effects on pests, pathogens, or soils that 
might result from climate change. These shortcomings repre­
sent important research needs with regard to integrated model­
ing of climate change impacts for the agricultural sector.
Sensitivity analyses performed in conjunction with the Adams 
et a l (1995b) analyses indicated that potential farmer adapta­
tions to climate change can play a major role in mitigating 
adverse effects of climate change, suggesting the Importance of 
technology and related assum ptions in future analyses. 
Sensitivity analyses of export assumptions reinforced the 
importance of world trade (exports) on the welfare of the U.S. 
agricultural sector. Global climate change is likely to increase 
the demand for U.S. commodities, with possible increases in 
welfare. Because of the importance of North American agri­
culture to world food production, trade issues are an important 
interregional consideration.
might shift the frontier for Canadian agriculture northward. 
About 1.2 million ha in the Peace River region of northern 
Alberta and British Columbia currently are devoted to 
spring-seeded cereals, forages, and pasture crops. Soils capable 
of supporting agricultural production north of the Peace River 
region (i.e., above 58°N latitude) are abundant, but these 
regions currently are too cool and too remote from markets.
Climate change scenarios derived from the GFDL and CCC 
2 xC 0 2  models were estimated to relax current constraints 
imposed by short, cool, frost-free seasons. However, it also was 
estimated that these benefits would be offset somewhat by 
declines in summer precipitation, with concomitant increases in 
crop moisture deficits (most notably under the CCC scenario).
The CFRFS-W heat model was used to estimate the combined 
effects of increasing CO 2  levels to 555 ppm and the GFDL and 
CCC climatic change scenarios on spring wheat yields. Under 
the GFDL scenario, modest increases in spring-seeded wheat 
yields were estimated. Increases in crop moisture stress under 
the CCC scenario were estimated to offset the benefits of ele­
vated CO 2  levels and longer, warmer, frost-free seasons; over­
all, modest declines in spring wheat yields were estimated.
Winter temperature increases were estimated at 3-4°C  and 4°C 
under the GFDL and CCC scenarios, respectively. Assessments 
using CERFS-W heat indicated that these temperature increas­
es would be sufficient to support winter wheat production at 
several locations within the Peace River region. It was also 
estimated that, for lands north of the Peace River region (i.e., 
north of the current climatic frontier for commercial agricul­
ture), these temperature increases would not be sufficient to 
remove the risk of winter crop damage. In these northern 
prairie regions, soil capability to sustainably support agricul­
ture may become more limiting than temperature.
When the GCM-based analyses were considered, climate 
changes according to the GISS forecasts led to net welfare 
increases of $12 billion for the 1990 base— approximately 20% 
larger than previous analyses of GISS climate change using the 
Agriculture Sector Model (Adams et ai., 1995b). The increase 
was related primarily to changes in the model allowing other 
mitigation activities that permit the agricultural sector to 
exploit more fully new climate conditions. The GFDL-R30 
analysis revealed losses of more than $14 billion (measured 
against the 1990 base). These losses arise from harsher climate 
conditions under the GCM. Results from the GCM cases did 
not compare well with estimates generated by response func­
tions resulting from the uniform change scenarios, indicating 
the importance of regional differences in climate as determi­
nants of estimates of national economic consequences.
Several global climate change scenarios imply modest 
improvements in the agroclimatic potential for high-latitude 
agriculture in North America.
Recent studies (Mills, 1994; Brklacich et al., 1996, 1997a) 
have investigated the extent to which global climate change
Development of the capability to simulate the agricultural 
impacts of multiple transient climate scenarios is a research 
need that must be met to deal credibly with the cost of adapta­
tion, 
about 
which 
there 
is 
significant 
uncertainty. 
Socioeconomic adjustment must be modeled to treat key 
dynamic processes— such as how the expectations of farmers 
change; whether farmers can easily detect climate change 
against a background of high natural variability; and how cur­
rent investments in equipment, education, and training will 
affect the costs of adjustment.
8.3.4.6. 
Adaptation
Historically, farming systems have adapted to changing eco­
nomic conditions, technology, and resource availability and 
have kept pace with a growing population (CAST, 1992; 
Rosenberg, 1992). Evidence exists that agricultural innovation 
responds to economic incentives such as factor prices and can 
relocate geographically (Hayami and Ruttan, 1985; CAST,
1992). A number of studies indicate that adaptation and adjust­
ment at all levels— ^but especially at the farm level— ^will be
North America
289
important to limit losses or to take advantage of improving cli­
matic conditions (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.9). Examples 
of technological options for adaptation by agriculture include 
seasonal changes in sowing dates; different crop varieties or 
species; new crop varieties; water supply and irrigation sys­
tems; management adjustments with fertilizer, tillage, and so 
forth; and improved short-term climate prediction (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 13.9.1; Darwin et al., 1995). Socioeconomic 
options for adaptation include improved training and general 
education of populations dependent on agriculture; assessment 
of currently successful strategies for responding to climate 
variability; improved agricultural research to increase the 
robustness of new farming strategies; interactive communica­
tion to bring research results to farmers and farmers’ problems 
to researchers; improved preservation and maintenance of 
genetic material critical to adaptation; and food programs to 
buffer against local supply changes. Transportation, distribu­
tion, and market integration provide additional flexibility for 
regions to respond to climate variability, and changes in poli­
cies could increase the adaptive capacity of agriculture (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 13.9.2).
Recent analyses o f issues o f long-run sustainability associated 
with agricultural adaptation to climate change from arbitrary 
doubling o f equivalent CO2 concentrations have concluded 
that there is considerably more sectoral flexibility and adapta­
tion potential than was found in earlier analyses.
Schimmelpfenning et al. (1996) concluded that the costs and 
benefits of climate change cannot be adequately evaluated 
independent of behavioral, economic, and institutional adjust­
ments required by changing climate. Smit et al. (1996) and 
Brklacich et al. (1997b), in their research into agricultural 
adaptation to climatic variability and change in Ontario, 
reached a similar conclusion and urged that future research into 
agriculture and climatic change be reframed to explicitly con­
sider agricultural decision making and adaptation processes. 
Although scientific controversy remains over the nature and 
rate of climate change and the importance of climate variabili­
ty, most scenarios suggest gradual changes in mean tempera­
ture and precipitation over decades, providing opportunities for 
farms and other parts of the sector to adapt. In addition, the 
time scale of 80-100 years makes other profound social 
changes inevitable. Income and population growth and techno­
logical innovation will accelerate or decelerate, depending on 
global location, at the same time that adaptation to climate is 
taking place. Social and cultural factors may influence the rate 
at which adaptation measures are implemented within some 
subregions of North America. There may be time lags between 
decisions to follow an adaptive strategy and subsequent adjust­
ments in the agricultural system. The costs and time required 
for such adjustments in infrastructure will need to be consid­
ered in planning adaptation options. Although none of these 
factors can be considered in isolation, recent research shows 
that the negative effects of climate change on agriculture prob­
ably are overestimated by studies that do not account for eco­
nomic adjustments or consider the broader economic and envi­
ronmental implications of such changes. However, uncertainties
remain about the implications of changes in climate variabili­
ty, as well as crop responses to increases beyond a doubling of 
equivalent atmospheric COj concentrations.
8.3.4.7. 
Vulnerabilities
Vulnerability to climate change-induced hunger or severe eco­
nomic distress for the overall economy o f North America as a 
result o f climate change impacts on the agricultural sector is 
relatively low.
The United States and Canada have high GNP per capita; the 
agricultural population is a small share of the total population; 
and agriculture is, in general, a small share of the economy. 
These areas are important for world food production. 
Midcontinental areas of the United States and Canada are 
prone to drought, which would be exacerbated if climate 
change reduced moisture availability or increased the demand 
for water (as occurs in several GCM scenarios). Economic dis­
location is likely to be limited to the agricultural sector or to 
subregions highly dependent on agriculture (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 13.7). Evidence suggests that yields of crops grown 
at the margin of their climatic range or in climates where tem­
perature or precipitation could easily exceed threshold values 
during critical crop growth periods are more vulnerable 
(Matthews et al., 1994a,b; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.7). A 
regional economy that offers only limited employment alterna­
tives for workers dislocated by the changing profitability of 
farming is relatively more vulnerable than those that are eco­
nomically diverse. As an example, the Great Plains area of 
North America is most dependent on agriculture and thus 
might be the most economically vulnerable to climate change 
(Rosenberg, 1993).
8.3.5. 
Food and Fiber: Production Forestry
Timber is one of the most valuable agricultural crops produced 
in North America. The forest products sector in the United States 
employs some 1.5 million people (1990) nationwide and adds 
approximately $80 billion to the GDP. Forest products are espe­
cially important to the economies of the Pacific Northwest and 
the southern United States. Two-thirds of U.S. forestlands (195 
million ha) are considered productive enough to potentially sup­
port timber management and accessible to harvest. Less than 
one-third of U.S. timberlands are publically owned; approxi­
mately 15% is owned by the timber industry, and 57% is held by 
other private landowners. Timberland ownership differs greatly 
by region, with western forests largely on public lands and east­
ern forests largely in private ownership (OTA, 1993).
In Canada, direct employment in 1996 for the forest sector was 
363,000; the sector contributed $16.177 billion to Canada’s 
GDP. In terms of contribution to GDP, the sector is important to 
British Columbia, Quebec, and New Brunswick. Thirty-five per­
cent of Canadian forestland is considered productive and acces­
sible enough for harvest, though there may be some constraints
290
North America
on harvesting. Ownership is 71% provincial, 23% federal 
(including territorial land), and 6 % private.
See section 8.3.2 for a detailed discussion of the impacts of cli­
mate change on forest ecosystems.
Consumers and producers couid gain or iose, and the iong-term 
stability o f the forest-products market could be jeopardized.
Enhanced forest growth scenarios and extensive forest 
dieback scenarios have been analyzed with respect to market 
processes. Under the most severe ecological scenarios—  
where forest dieback occurs relatively early and there are 
long-term reductions in timber inventories and harvest—  
consumer prices would Increase; producers would benefit 
from higher prices, but overall benefits to society would 
decrease. Under scenarios of more moderate dieback or forest 
expansion, consumers could benefit from lower prices; pro­
ducers might benefit or lose, depending on local forest 
responses to dieback, local demand, and access to national and 
international markets. Alternative management practices must 
be carefully considered if benefits are to be gained under mod­
erate forest dieback scenarios. However, the long-term sus­
tainability of forests and any benefits could vary considerably 
under different scenarios.
Analyses of the economic consequences of climate change 
have been based on a number of quite different ecological 
assessments and a variety of economic models, but all are 
based on the equilibrium FAR scenarios or on sensitivity 
analyses. One study coupled the FASOM forest sector model—  
incorporating flexible pricing and forest management— to out­
put from forest gap models over the conterminous United 
States (Callaway et al., 1995; Adams et al., 1996). The results, 
with severe forest dieback, indicated consumer price increases 
of 100-250%, with economic losses of 4-20%  of the net value 
of commercial forests.
A  study by Van Kooten and Arthur (1989) concluded that for­
est productivity could tend to increase in Canada but could 
increase or decrease in the United States. Consumer prices 
could decrease (largely as a consequence of increases in 
Canadian forest growth and harvest). Producers could sustain 
economic losses, but with exports from Canada to the United 
States, net changes (consumers plus producers) could be nega­
tive for Canadians and positive for the U.S. market.
Timber growth in the conterminous United States in one study 
generally increased over a 50-year projection period, pushing 
prices down by 6-35% (Joyce et al., 1995). A  study using a glob­
al trade model produced similar results, with general increases in 
global forest productivity (Perez-Garcia et al., 1997).
A study using a different forest-sector model in the United 
States incorporated management strategies that optimized pre- 
and post-dieback forest management practices (Sohngen and 
Mendelsohn, 1997). The value of the market (consumer plus 
producer surpluses) could increase by 1 - 1 1 % under scenarios
of either enhanced forest growth or moderate forest dieback 
The increased flow of green or salvage trees into the marke 
depressed prices, but overall losses to producers were mini 
mized by shifting biomes or altered yield functions 
Economically optimal management strategies (such as thin 
ning, salvage logging, and species transplanting), however, 
might be restricted by social and ecological constraints.
The most intensively managed industry and private forestlands 
may be least at risk o f long-term decline resulting from the 
impacts o f climate change because the relatively high value of 
these resources is likely to encourage adaptive management 
strategies (OTA, 1993).
Private forest managers have the financial incentive and the 
latitude to protect against extensive loss from climate-related 
impacts. They can use several available techniques: short rota­
tions to reduce the length of time a tree is influenced by unfa­
vorable climate conditions; planting of improved varieties 
developed through selection, breeding, or genetic engineering 
to reduce vulnerability; and thinning, weeding, managing 
pests, irrigating, improving drainage, and fertilizing to improve 
general vigor. Such actions would reduce the risk from mois­
ture stress and secondary risks from fire, insects, and disease. 
Thinning, for example, reduces competition for moisture and 
can effectively increase tolerance to drought; it also may speed 
development of a climate-adapted forest by removing trees that 
are growing poorly (OTA, 1993). However, some adaptive 
measures such as thinning or harvesting dead or dying trees 
could impact biodiversity, soil erosion, stream quality, and 
nonmarket forest products, generating potentially conflicting 
management options.
Binkley and van Kooten (1994) found that overall impacts on 
the Canadian forest sector would not be significant. This find­
ing was attributed to the ability of the production forest sector 
to adapt to whatever species prevail during and after climate 
change; to salvage-cut dying stands; to plant cut areas with 
species that are better adapted to the projected climate; and to 
move to locations where resources are more plentiful. Long- 
run sustainable yield levels, however, may be reduced as a 
result of increased losses to fire and insect outbreaks. For 
example, in the Mackenzie Basin Impact Study, a general 
decline in forest production has been suggested for the basin 
because of a combination of factors— including increased area 
burned, increased susceptibility to pests, and drought-related 
die offs (Cohen, 1997a).
A  healthy mixed-species, mixed-age forest probably is less sus­
ceptible to insect infestation than extensive areas o f even-aged 
forest stands.
Planting single-species forests might seem to pose increased 
threats of loss from insect pests or disease because of limited 
genetic diversity (Perry and Maghembe, 1989). However, com­
mercial tree species show a great deal of genetic diversity 
among individuals— even among trees from the same parents 
(Kitzmiller, 1993). This inherent diversity could make trees
North America
291
less likely to succumb to a single pest or disease than most 
agricultural crops (Kellison and Weir, 1987). Forest managers 
should attempt to ensure diversity in the seedlings they use to 
establish their forest stands even if they are planting single­
species forests (OTA, 1993).
Once a decline in forest health begins, less intensively man­
aged forests may face greater fire and pest damage. A t partic­
ular risk will be forests already subject to moisture stress and 
fire hazard.
Less-managed forests may not be at any greater inherent risk 
than actively managed forests, however. Once they are sub­
jected to stress, wilderness forests and National Parks may be 
at elevated risk of substantial decline because of policy restric­
tions imposed on silvicultural and pest-management activities. 
Similarly, because management currently is limited on most 
National Forest lands and less-productive nonindustrial private 
lands, those forests could be at risk of unchecked loss. If the 
general health of these forests declines, their vulnerability to 
large-scale mortality could increase (OTA, 1993).
Forests maintained for the production o f wood products and 
fiber would benefit from any near-term or long-term increase 
in productivity. Reduced growth or increased mortality would 
have a damaging effect. Managers o f industry forests and other 
private timberlands can be expected to respond with adaptive 
measures if and when they perceive changes in climate and 
market conditions.
Although no timber company is altering forest practices today, 
some are actively preparing for the types of risks posed by cli­
mate change. Weyerhaeuser, for example, is conducting exper­
imental silvicultural programs to examine the effects of thin­
ning practices in ameliorating the effects of droughts (OTA, 
1993). It also is sponsoring research on the genetics, physiolo­
gy, and biotechnology of heat- and drought-tolerant seedlings. 
Such technological development should help protect the timber 
industry and future wood supplies (OTA, 1993).
Despite the possibility o f some adaptive management respons­
es, climate change could be very costly to the timber industry.
In the southern United States, declining timber volumes could 
lead to $300 million in lost annual revenues, whereas the 
increased management measures needed to compensate for 
poorer conditions could add $ 1 0 0  million to the annual costs of 
production (Regens et al., 1989; Hodges et a l, 1992). A  sea- 
level rise could force the movement of coastal pulp and paper 
mills, further increasing the costs of climate change. Some of 
these mills would cost as much as $1 billion to replace. For the 
Pacific Northwest, an expanded upslope range of Douglas fir 
forests might add 5% to the regional timber harvest (Hodges et 
a l, 1992). However, the increased costs of logging at higher 
elevations could offset much of this potential gain.
A report by the Office of Technology Assessment of the U.S. 
Congress (OTA, 1993) identified a number of adaptation
strategies that should be considered to maintain and enhance 
commercial forest productivity under climate change. These 
strategies are largely measures that have value to the forest 
industry even without climate change but would serve to ame­
liorate the impacts of climate change as well:
• 
Establish an expanded forest seed-bank program to 
ensure maintenance of genetic diversity.
• 
Prepare to respond to major forest declines through 
improved forest health maintenance and measures to 
minimize risk of fire and pest and disease outbreaks. 
Develop new management strategies focused on 
adaptation to climate change.
• 
Improve incentives for maintaining and protecting 
private forestland.
8.3.6. 
Food and Fiber: Fisheries and Aquatic Systems
Although there is considerable uncertainty about the physical 
changes and response of the various freshwater and marine 
species, it is possible to suggest how certain species may 
respond to projected climate changes over the next 50-100 
years. The uncertainties highlight the importance of research 
to separate the impacts of changing climate from natural pop­
ulation fluctuations and fishing effects. Many commercial fin- 
fish populations already are under pressure (e.g., overexploit­
ed), and global change may be of minor concern compared 
with the impacts of ongoing and future commercial fishing 
and human use or impacts on the coastal zone. Further, 
changes in the variability of climate may have more serious 
consequences on the abundance and distribution of fisheries 
than changes in mean conditions alone (Katz and Brown,
1992), and changes in future climate variability are poorly 
understood at this time.
Fish, including shellfish, respond directly to climate fluctua­
tions, as well as to changes in their biological environment 
(predators, prey, species interactions, disease) and fishing 
pressures. Although this multiforcing sometimes makes it dif­
ficult to establish unequivocal linkages between changes in 
the physical environment and the responses of fish or shell­
fish stocks, some effects are clear (see reviews by Cushing 
and Dickson, 1976; Bakun et a l, 1982; Cushing, 1982; 
Sheppard et a l, 1984; Sissenwine, 1984; and Sharp, 1987). 
These effects include changes in the growth and reproduction 
of individual fish, as well as the distribution and abundance 
of fish populations. In terms of abundance, the influence 
occurs principally through effects on recruitment (how many 
young survive long enough to potentially enter the fishery) 
but in some cases may be related to direct mortality of adult 
fish.
Fish carrying capacity in aquatic ecosystems is a function of 
the biology of a particular species and its interrelationship with 
its environment and associated species. Specific factors that 
regulate the carrying capacity are poorly known for virtually 
all species, but some general statements can be made with
292
North America
some confidence. Fish are affected by their environment 
through four main processes (Sheppard et al., 1984):
Direct physiological effects, including metabolic 
processes influenced by temperature, salinity, and oxy­
gen levels— Fish often seek optimal temperature or 
salinity regimes or avoid suboptimal conditions. Thus, 
ocean and freshwater changes as a result of projected 
climate changes can lead to distributional changes. In 
suboptimal conditions, performance is reduced, leading 
to starvation or increased predation.
• 
D iseases— Certain environm ental conditions are
more conducive to diseases than others (e.g., warm 
waters can trigger disease outbreaks; likewise, cold 
temperatures can limit them).
Food—The environment affects feeding rates and 
competition, as well as abundance, quality, size, tim­
ing, spatial distribution, and concentration of food. 
Predators—^The environment affects predation through 
influences on the abundance and distribution of 
predators.
Fish are influenced not only by temperature and salinity condi­
tions but also by mixing and transport processes (e.g., mixing 
can affect primary production by promoting nutrient replenish­
ment of the surface layers; it also can influence the encounter 
rate between larvae and prey organisms). Ichthyoplankton (fish 
eggs and larvae) can be dispersed by the currents, which may 
carry them into or away from areas of good food production, or 
into or out of optimal temperature or salinity conditions— and 
perhaps, ultimately determine whether they are lost to the orig­
inal population.
scales, are likely to exacerbate existing stresses on fish stocks. 
The effectiveness of actions to reduce the decline of fisheries 
depends on our ability to distinguish among these stresses and 
other causes of change and on our ability to effectively deal 
with those over which we have control or for which we have 
adaptation options. This ability is insufficient at present; 
although the effects of environmental variability are increasing­
ly recognized, the contribution of climate change to such vari­
ability is not yet clear.
Recreational fishing is a highly valued activity that could incur 
losses in some regions as a result o f climate-induced changes 
in fisheries.
Recreational fishing is a highly valued activity within North 
America. In the United States, for example, 45 million anglers 
participate annually; they contribute to the economy through 
spending on fishing and related activities (US$24 billion in 
1991). The net economic effect of changes in recreational fish­
ing opportunities as a result of climate-induced changes in fish­
eries is dependent on whether projected gains in cool- and 
warm-water fisheries offset losses in cold-water fisheries. Work 
by Stefan et al. (1993) suggests mixed results for the United 
States, ranging from annual losses of US$85-320 million to 
benefits of about US$80 million under a number of GCM pro­
jections. A  sensitivity analysis (U.S. EPA, 1995) was conducted 
to test the assumption of costless transitions across these fish­
eries. This analysis assumed that best-use cold-water fishery 
losses caused by thermal changes were effectively lost recre­
ational services. Under this assumption, all scenarios resulted in 
damages, with losses of U S$619-!,129 million annually.
Climate is only one of several factors that regulate fish abun­
dance. Managers attempt to model abundance trends in relation 
to fishing effects in order to sustain fisheries. In theory, a suc­
cessful model could account for global warming impacts along 
with other impacts without understanding them. For many 
species of fish, the natural mortality rate is an inverse function 
of age: Longer-lived fish will be affected by natural changes 
differently than shorter-lived fish. If the atmosphere-freshwater- 
ocean regime is stable for a particular time, it is possible to 
estimate the age-specific mortality rates for a species of inter­
est. However, at least some parts of the atmosphere-freshwater- 
ocean system are prone to oscillations on a decadal scale, 
which may not be cyclical. These natural changes occur glob­
ally; thus, they will have impacts on the freshwater and marine 
ecosystems that support North American fish populations. 
Under natural conditions, it may be expected that the different 
life histories of these fish will result in different times of 
adjustment to a new set of environmental conditions.
Any effects of climate change on fisheries are expected to be 
most pronounced in sectors that already are characterized by 
full utilization, large overcapacities of harvesting and process­
ing, and sharp conflicts among users and competing uses of 
aquatic ecosystems. Climate change impacts, including changes 
in natural climate variability on seasonal to interannual time
8.3.6.1. 
Freshwater Ecosystem Impacts,
Adaptations, and Vulnerabilities
Commercial and recreational freshwater fisheries are important 
to the economy of many regions, as well as the well-being of 
native populations. In many aquatic ecosystems, freshwater 
fish also are important in maintaining a balance in other aquat­
ic populations lower in the food web (via predatory and other 
effects). In broader terms, aquatic ecosystems are important as 
recreational areas, as sources of water for domestic and indus­
trial use, and as habitat for a rich assemblage of species, 
including some that are threatened or endangered.
Several studies have indicated that projected climate change 
will have important impacts on North American freshwater 
fisheries and aquatic ecosystems. It must be noted, however, 
that most studies to date have used results from earlier climate 
model simulations that gave air temperature increases under a 
2 xC 0 2  climate that were as much as twice as large for the same 
time period as more recent estimates that include aerosol forc­
ing— thus overestimating the effects of temperature increases, 
particularly in the summer.
Changes in survival, reproductive capacity, and growth of 
freshwater fish and the organisms and habitats on which they
North America
293
depend result from changes in water temperature, mixing 
regimes, and water quality.
In North America, freshwater fish have been grouped into three 
broad thermal groups (cold-water, cool-water, and warm-water 
guilds) based on differences in the temperature optima of phys­
iological and behavioral processes. In simulations of deep, 
thermally stratified lakes in the mid- and high latitudes, includ­
ing the Laurentian Great Lakes, winter survival, growth rates, 
and thermal habitat generally increase for fish in all three ther­
mal guilds under the ZxCOj climate (DeStasio et al., 1996; 
IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 10.6.1.2 and 10.6.3.2; Magnuson 
and DeStasio, 1996). However, in smaller mid-latitude lakes, 
particularly those that do not stratify or are more eutrophic, 
warming may reduce habitat for many cool-water and cold- 
water fish because deep-water thermal refuges are not present 
or become unavailable as a consequence of declines in dis­
solved oxygen concentrations (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
10.5.4). For example, Stefan et al. (1996) examined the effect 
of temperature and dissolved oxygen changes in lakes in 
Minnesota; they projected that under a 2 xC 0 2  climate (from a 
GISS GCM that projected a 3.8°C air temperature increase in 
northern Minnesota), cold-water fish species would be elimi­
nated from lakes in southern Minnesota, and cold-water habi­
tat would decline by 40% in lakes in northern Minnesota.
Changes in the productivity and species composition of food 
resources also may accompany climatic warming and, in turn, 
influence fish productivity. Production rates of plankton and 
benthic invertebrates increase logarithmically with tempera­
ture; rates increase generally by a factor of 2-4 with each 10°C 
increase in water temperature, up to 30°C or more for many 
organisms (Regier et a l, 1990; Benke, 1993; IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 10.6.1.1). Although this effect generally should 
increase fish productivity, shifts in species composition of fish 
prey with warming might prevent or reduce productivity gains. 
Biogeographic distributions of aquatic insects are centered 
around species thermal optima, and climate warming may alter 
species composition by shifting these thermal optima north­
ward by about 160 km per 1°C increase in temperature 
(Sweeney e ta l, 1992; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.6.3.1). If 
species range shifts lag changes in thermal regimes because of 
poor dispersal abilities or a lack of north-south migration 
routes (e.g., rivers draining northward or southward) or if 
species adaptation is hindered by limited genetic variability, 
climatic warming might result initially in reductions in the pre­
ferred prey organisms of some fish (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.6.3.3).
Climatic warming may result in substantial changes in the 
thermal regimes and mixing properties of many mid- and 
high-latitude lakes. In the mid-latitudes, some lakes that 
presently are dimictic (mixing in spring and autumn) may no 
longer develop winter ice cover and may become monomictic 
(mixing during fall, winter, and spring), with a longer summer 
stratification period. At high latitudes, some lakes that 
presently are monomictic and mix during summer may strati­
fy in summer and mix twice a year, in autumn and spring
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.5.4). Changes in lake mixing 
properties may have large effects on hypolimnetic dissolved 
oxygen concentrations (affecting available fish habitat) and on 
epilimnetic primary productivity, although these effects are 
likely to depend greatly on the moфhom etric characteristics 
of individual lakes and are difficult to predict (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 10.5.4). For example, longer summer stratifi­
cation and higher water temperature result in more severe 
hypolimnetic oxygen depletion in lakes in Minnesota under a 
2 xC 0
2  climate simulation (Stefan et al., 1993). In other lakes, 
reduction in the duration or lack of winter ice cover might 
reduce the likelihood of winter anoxia (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.6.1.4). At high latitudes, development of summer 
stratification under a warmer climate might increase lake pri­
mary productivity by maintaining algae for longer periods 
within the euphotic zone. Climate changes that result in 
decline in runoff also may have substantial effects on the mix­
ing properties of smaller lakes that are heavily influenced by 
fluxes of chemicals from their catchments. For example, the 
surface mixed layer of boreal lakes at the Experimental Lakes 
Area in northwest Ontario has deepened over the past 20 years 
as a result of a long-term drought that reduced inputs of DOC 
from the catchment and thus increased water clarity (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 10.5.3 and Box 10-2; Schindler et al., 
1996).
Long-term research and monitoring of key physical, chemical, 
and ecological properties (particularly water temperature and 
mixing properties; concentrations of nutrients, carbon, and 
major ions; acid/base status; populations of key organisms; pri­
mary production; and organic-matter decomposition) remain 
key research needs to reduce uncertainties in projections of 
freshwater fisheries’ responses to climate change.
Climate warming may result in general shifts in freshwater 
species’ distributions northward, with widespread!subregional 
species extinction at the lower latitudes and expansion at the 
higher latitudes o f species’ ranges.
Climatic warming may produce a general shift in species dis­
tribution northward. Species extinction and extiфations are 
likely to occur at the lower latitude boundaries of species dis­
tributions, and range expansion likely will occur at the higher 
latitude boundaries of species distributions (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 10.6.3). For example, a 3.8°C increase in mean 
annual air temperature is projected to eliminate more than 50% 
of the habitat for brook trout and result in severe fragmentation 
of its distribution in the southern Appalachian Mountains in the 
southeastern United States (Meisner, 1990). In contrast, a 4°C 
increase in mean air temperature is projected to expand the 
ranges of smallmouth bass and yellow perch northward across 
Canada by about 500 km (Shuter and Post, 1990).
In streams and rivers, particularly at low and mid-latitudes, the 
distributions of many fish species may contract because of lim­
itations on availability of thermal refuges and migratory routes 
during periods of high temperatures and lower streamflow in 
the summer (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.6.3.2). Eaton and
294
North America
Scheller (1996) project that the suitable habitat for cold-, cool-, 
and even many warm-water fish species would be reduced by 
about 50% in streams of the lower 48 states in the United States 
by summer mean air temperature increases of 2-6°C (derived 
from a CCC GCM under a 2 xC 0 2  climate). In the North Platte 
River drainage of Wyoming, Rahel et al. (1996) project losses 
from the present geographic range of cold-water fish species of 
from 7-16%  for a 1°C increase to 64-79%  for a 5°C increase 
in summer air temperatures, with considerable fragmentation 
of remaining populations. In a national study of climate- 
induced temperature effects on fish habitat, complete elimina­
tion of cold-water habitat is projected for sites modeled in 5 to 
10 states and severe reductions in 11 to 15 states, depending on 
the GCM climate projection used (U.S. EPA, 1995). It must be 
noted, however, that most studies of warming effects on stream 
fish populations have used mean temperature increases that 
generally are greater than those produced by current models for 
the same time period; these later models include aerosol forc­
ing and show minimal summer daytime changes and more 
cloud cover in summer for many regions.
Whole ecosystem experiments that alter the thermal, hydrolog­
ical, or mixing regimes in small lakes and streams or in large- 
scale mesocosms (e.g., lake enclosures or artificial streams) are 
needed to determine the responses of organisms, processes, 
and habitats to global change. Additional work also is needed 
in the area of comparative studies of populations or ecological 
processes across latitudinal and hydrological gradients and 
ecosystem types to enable us to better understand climate- 
induced temperature effects in the context of natural seasonal 
and interannual variability.
the cessation of flow in connecting streams— possibly elimi­
nating species such as northern pike from some shallow-water 
lakes because they no longer have connections to deep-water 
lakes for winter habitat (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.6.2.2).
In many areas, increases in flow variability are likely to pro­
duce larger effects on biota than changes in mean flows (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 10.6.2.1), which could result in some 
changes in ecosystem productivity and organism abundance 
(including positive and negative effects). In arid-land streams, 
more intense storms and longer periods of drought may pro­
duce severe streambank erosion, lower biomass and productiv­
ity, and a decline in biological interactions (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Box 10-3). In humid regions, more intense or clustered storms 
could reduce the abundance of many stream organisms via 
scouring of streambeds, although greater frequency of flood- 
plain flooding also might increase the productivity of many 
river and stream organisms. Longer periods of drought in 
humid regions, particularly in summer, could increase the 
probability that streams will cease flowing and become dry; 
reductions in annual runoff also could increase the probability 
that streams will dry. In a regional analysis of U.S. streams, 
Poff (1992) projected that nearly one-half of perennial runoff 
streams in the eastern United States may become intermittent 
with only a 10% decline in annual runoff. Even if streams do 
not become intermittent, longer droughts and lower summer 
baseflows could result in more severe water quality deteriora­
tion (low dissolved oxygen concentrations, high concentrations 
of contaminants), which will reduce available habitat and elim­
inate intolerant species from streams (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.5.4).
In addition, qualitative projections of the consequences of cli­
mate change on the fish resources of North America will 
require good regional atmospheric and oceanic models of the 
response of the ocean to climate change; improved knowledge 
of the life histories of the most vulnerable species for which 
projections are required; and a further understanding of the 
roles that the environment, species interactions, and fishing 
play in determining the variability of growth, reproduction, and 
abundance of fish stocks.
I f climate changes result in lower water levels, reduced 
runoffs, and increased hydrological variability, the productivi­
ty o f some freshwater species may decline.
In areas of North America that experience significant reduc­
tions in runoff, lower water levels in some lakes may eliminate 
or reduce the productivity of fish species dependent on shallow 
near-shore zones or adjacent wetlands as spawning or nursery 
areas (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.6.2.2). Some shallow 
lakes with relatively short water residence times may disappear 
entirely with reduced annual runoff. For example. Marsh and 
Lesack (1996) project with a hydrological model that under a 
2 xC 0 2  climate, many lakes in the Mackenzie delta in the 
Canadian arctic could disappear in several decades as a result 
of decreased precipitation and flooding frequency. In some 
lake districts, connectivity among lakes would be decreased by
8.3.6.2. Oceans
An early review (Wright et al., 1986, summarized by Mann,
1993) projected that for the northern Atlantic, some of the con­
sequences of global warming could include:
• 
A rise in the average sea snrface temperature, causing 
an increase in evaporation and a more vigorous hydro- 
logical cycle of precipitation, runoff, and so forth
• 
The greatest increase in evaporation in mid-latitudes, 
leading to increased precipitation in northern regions, 
increased river runoff, increased stability of the water 
column, and increased strength of buoyancy-driven 
currents such as the Labrador current
• 
An increase in the north-south gradient in salinity 
A decrease in the thickness and extent of ice cover
• 
A reduction of the north-south temperature gradient 
and possibly a reduction in average wind stress over 
the whole of the north Atlantic, which could lead to a 
decrease in the strength of wind-driven currents such 
as the Gulf Stream.
In their summary of the Symposium on Climate Change and 
Northern Fish Populations, Sinclair and Frank (1995) 
described the variability of the northern Pacific in circulation
North America
295
and mixing and linked that variability in part to shifts in atmos­
pheric circulation— specifically, the changes in the location 
and level of the Aleutian low-pressure system. Existing models 
have not been able to shed light on the most probable respons­
es of the northern Pacific to a doubling of atmospheric CO 2 .
Mann (1993) briefly considered various sources of data for the 
wind-driven coastal upwelling system off California. He sug­
gested that available data could be used to support the hypoth­
esis that coastal upwelling increases during global cooling but 
decreases during global warming.
8.3.6.3. 
Impacts, Adaptations, and Vulnerabilities 
o f Ocean Fisheries Resources
Overall, there likely will be relatively small economic and food 
supply consequences at the regional!national level; however, 
impacts are expected to be more pronounced at the subregion­
al level.
Natural climate variability— for example, changes in ocean 
temperatures and circulation patterns associated with the El 
Nino phenomenon and with the northern Pacific gyre— affects 
the distribution and composition of fisheries. Because interan­
nual and decadal-scale natural variability is so great relative to 
global change and the time horizon on capital replacement 
(ships and plants) is so short, impacts on fisheries can be easi­
ly overstated; there likely will be relatively small economic 
and food supply consequences in the United States and Canada 
at the national level. At the state or regional level, impacts 
(positive and negative) will be more pronounced, particularly 
when a center of production shifts sufficiently to make one 
fishing port closer to a resource while a traditional port 
becomes more distant. Over time, fishing vessels and their sup­
port structure will relocate, followed by processors and even­
tually families as well. Community impacts can be significant.
Changes in primary production levels in the ocean as a result 
of climate change may affect fish stock productivity. As a first 
step in assessing the role of changes in primary production on 
fish productivity, global primary production in the ocean has 
been estimated by Longhurst et al. (1995) using satellite mea­
surements of near-surface chlorophyll fields. Annual global 
primary production was estim ated at 45-50 Gt carbon 
(C)/year. This annual global primary production is the sum of 
the annual primary production in 57 biogeochemical provinces 
covering the world ocean. More than 10 such provinces border 
North America. For example, the total primary production is 
estimated at 0.37 Gt C/year in the “California Upwelling 
Coastal” province and 1.08 Gt C/year in the “Northwest 
Atlantic Continental S helf’ province.
Exactly how climate-induced changes in primary production 
would affect the next trophic link, zooplankton, remains a mat­
ter of debate (e.g., Banse, 1995). However, changes in zoo­
plankton biomass are known to affect fish stock productivity. 
Brodeur and Ware (1995) identified a twofold increase in
salmonid biomass in the eastern subarctic Pacific since the 
1950s, coincident with a large-scale doubling of the summer 
zooplankton biomass in the same region. Beamish and 
Bouillon (1995) examined trends in marine fish production off 
the Pacific coast of Canada and the United States. They con­
cluded that the carrying capacity for fish in the northern North 
Pacific Ocean and the Bering Sea fluctuates in response to 
long-term trends in climate.
Projected changes in water temperatures, salinity, and currents 
can affect the growth, survival, reproduction, and spatial dis­
tribution o f marine fish species and o f the prey, competitors, 
and predators that influence the dynamics o f these species.
Environmental conditions have a marked effect on the growth 
of many fish species. For example, mean bottom temperatures 
account for 90% of the observed (10-fold) difference in growth 
rates between different Atlantic cod {Gadus morhua) stocks in 
the north Atlantic (Brander, 1994, 1995). Warmer temperatures 
lead to faster growth rates. Regional studies have shown simi­
lar results (Fleming, 1960; Shackell et a l, 1995). In the north­
west Atlantic, the largest cod typically are found on Georges 
Bank—^where a 4-year-old fish, on average, is five times bigger 
than one off Labrador and Newfoundland. Temperature 
accounts not only for differences in growth rates between cod 
stocks but also year-to-year changes in growth within a stock.
In addition to growth, the environment affects the reproductive 
cycle of fish and shellfish. For example, the age of sexual 
maturity of certain fish species is determined by ambient tem­
perature. Atlantic cod off Labrador and the northern Grand 
Banks mature at age 7 and in the northern Gulf of St. Lawrence 
and the eastern Scotian Shelf at age 6 ; in the warmer waters off 
southwest Nova Scotia and on Georges Bank, they mature at 
3.5 years and 2 years, respectively (Myers et al., 1996).
Spawning times also are influenced by temperature. Generally, 
cold temperatures result in delayed spawning (Hutchinson and 
Myers, 1994a), whereas warm temperatures result in earlier 
spawning. Marak and Livingstone (1970) found that a 1.5-2°C 
temperature change produced a difference in the spawning 
time of haddock on Georges Bank by a month, with earlier 
spawning and a longer duration in warmer years.
Temperature is one of the primary factors, along with food 
availability and suitable spawning grounds, that determine the 
large-scale distribution patterns of fish and shellfish. Because 
most fish species or stocks tend to prefer a specific tempera­
ture range (Coûtant, 1977), long-term changes in temperature 
can lead to expansion or contraction of the distribution range 
of certain species. These shifts generally are most evident near 
their northern or southern boundaries; warming results in a 
distributional shift northward, and cooling draws species 
southward.
Changes in distribution also were observed during a warming 
trend in the 1940s in the Gulf of Maine— which produced a 
northward shift in the abundance and distribution of Atlantic
296
North America
mackerel, American lobster, yellowtail flounder, Atlantic men­
haden, and whiting, as well as the range extension of more 
southern species such as the green crab (Taylor et a l, 1957).
Frank et al. (1990) projected a northward shift of the southern 
extensions of important fisheries such as Atlantic cod, Atlantic 
halibut, American plaice, and redfish out of the Gulf of Maine 
and into Canadian waters. Also projected is the northern exten­
sion of more southern fish species such as Atlantic menhaden, 
butterfish, and redhake further northward into the Gulf of Maine. 
Coûtant (1990) suggests a northward shift of summer stocks of 
striped bass, with losses occurring for Virgina, Delaware, and 
New York and gains projected for M assachusetts, New 
Hampshire, Maine, and New Brunswick.
Understanding recruitment variability has been the number one 
issue in fisheries science in this century. Since the advent of 
intensive fishing, it has become increasingly difficult to sort out 
the relative importance of fishing versus environment as the 
cause of recruitment variability. Still, recruitment levels fre­
quently have been associated with variations in temperature 
during the first years of life of the fish (Drinkwater and Myers, 
1987). American lobster landings increased steadily during the 
1980s and into the 1990s, to all-time historic highs. However, 
the temperature/landing relationships for lobster are not consis­
tent with an expected positive linear relationship— suggesting 
that more than one variable can control the relationship, and a 
different variable may be the dominant one at any given time.
Climate also can affect the fishery through its influence on 
availability (fish available to be caught) and catchability (diffi­
culty to catch), both of which depend not only on the abnn- 
dance of fish but on when and how they are distributed. If cod 
traps are located in waters that are too cold, catches are low. 
Only when the temperature is warm enough do catches 
increase. In the case of lobster catchability, when temperatures 
are low, lobster are known to move slowly, reducing the poten­
tial for encountering lobster traps and hence reducing catcha­
bility (McLeese and Wilder, 1958).
Climate change can be expected to result in distributional shifts 
in species, with the most obvious changes occurring near the 
northern or southern boundaries of species’ ranges. Migration 
patterns will shift, causing changes in arrival times along the 
migration route. Growth rates are expected to vary (with the 
amplitude and direction species-dependent). Recruitment suc­
cess could be affected by changes in time of spawning, fecun­
dity rates, survival rate of larvae, and food availability. Another 
possibility associated with climate change is a change in strat­
ification (as a result of differences in heating, freshwater, and 
vertical mixing rates), which may lead to changes in the ratio 
of pelagic to groundfish abundance (Frank et al., 1990). If 
stratification were to increase, more production would be 
expected to be recycled within the upper layers of the oceans, 
and less would reach the bottom.
Evidence of environmental control on the distribution of 
marine fish is abundant. For example, Welch et al. (1995) have
identified critical temperatures defining the southern bound­
aries of salmonid species. The authors suggest that future tem­
perature changes in the northern Pacific therefore could have a 
direct impact on the production dynamics of Pacific salmon. 
Impacts of global warming in the ocean, however, will be dif­
ficult to separate from natural shifts in ocean carrying capaci­
ty. A  general warming of the ocean will have an impact on 
predators and prey distributions. In the Strait of Georgia, there 
was an abrupt decline in marine survival after the 1976-77 
regime shift, but the mechanisms responsible remain unknown. 
On the west coast, warm periods after the 1989-90 climate 
change resulted in an influx of predators that caused large 
increases in juvenile mortalities. It is impossible to forecast the 
actual changes in the marine ecosystems; thus, the degree to 
which Chinook marine survival may be affected is unknown. 
The abruptness of change in the Strait of Georgia and the west 
coast is of concern because it indicates that signals of change 
need to be detected quickly and managed effectively (Beamish 
et al., 1997).
Because salmonid species (and other anadromous species such 
as striped bass) rely on marine and freshwater aquatic systems 
at different points in their life cycles, projected changes in 
marine and freshwater water temperatures, ocean currents, 
and freshwater flow s are more likely to impact growth, sur­
vival, reproduction, and spatial distribution o f these species 
than o f other fish species.
Because of their anadromous life history, pink salmon are 
affected by changes in freshwater and changes in the ocean— 
and the impacts in each of these habitats are equally important. 
Recent research has shown that trends in pink salmon produc­
tivity shift in response to climate-driven changes in the ocean. 
Because the mortality of young pink salmon is so high 
(95-98% ) shortly after they first enter the ocean, small changes 
in marine survival can result in large changes in adult returns.
Warmer freshwater and oceans and changes in the pattern of 
Fraser River flows probably will reduce the abundance of pink 
salmon, although individual size may increase because of 
improved growth in the warmer water. Warmer temperatures 
will reduce incubation time, and the longer period in fresh water 
will improve growth. In the smaller rivers, where flows are a 
function of winter precipitation, increased precipitation may 
increase water flows— ^resulting in higher egg and alevin mortal­
ity. Dracup et al. (1992) examined the effect of climate change 
in altering the timing of streamflow regimes; they suggest that 
these changes may increase mortality and reduce fish population 
in the Sacramento-San Juaquin chinook salmon fishery.
Marine effects obviously are relevant to hatchery-reared fish. 
Reduced coastal productivity resulting from reduced upwelling 
may reduce the total carrying capacity for pink salmon, and it 
may not be possible to build stocks to historic levels in a poor- 
productivity regime by producing more fry.
In recent years, research has shown that chum salmon produc­
tivity follows trends that shift in relation to climate-related
North America
297
changes in the ocean. Thus, changes in upwelling and the 
intensity of winds may reduce the carrying capacity for chum 
in the ocean to levels below what might occur during natural 
changes.
Increases in temperature in freshwater rearing areas and 
increased winter flows may increase freshwater chum mortali­
ties for stocks in the Fraser River and other southern rivers. 
Chum are a very adaptable species, however, and spawning 
tends to be in the lower portion of rivers and streams; thus, the 
changes in saltwater may be more influential than changes in 
fresh water. It is possible that earlier and larger spring flows in 
rivers may improve survival in the ocean, if the initiation of the 
spring bloom occurs at a more favorable time. In recent years, 
relatively large numbers of age- 0  ocean chum salmon have 
remained in the Strait of Georgia until late in the year, even 
though the surface temperatures have increased over the past 
20 years. This pattern may indicate that the timing of plankton 
production is more favorable as a result of larger flows in April 
(Beamish et ai., 1997).
In the south, warmer river water and reduced flows in late sum­
mer may increase mortalities and reduce spawning success. 
Warmer waters in the winter will accelerate incubation and 
hatching and cause alevins to enter lakes earlier. Henderson et 
ai. (1992) concluded that warming of sockeye rearing lakes 
would lower plankton production and reduce the size of smolts 
going to sea. These smaller smolts also may encounter reduced 
food when they enter the ocean, and the resulting slower 
growth may expose juveniles to predation longer and increase 
mortality in the early marine period. Welch et ai. (1995) pro­
posed that global warming would increase winter temperatures 
sufficiently that sockeye juveniles would migrate out of the 
northern Pacific into the Bering Sea, effectively reducing the 
winter feeding area. It is known that there are large interannu­
al fluctuations in survival (Burgner, 1991) and large, natural, 
decadal shifts in marine survival (Hare and Francis, 1995; 
Adkison et ai., 1996; Beamish et al., 1997). The mechanisms 
involved are not understood, but the shifts in abundance clear­
ly show that changes in the ocean environment have profound 
impacts on the productivity of the stocks.
It is possible that changes affecting the northern stocks may not 
have a major impact on the stocks in the next 50 years. This 
speculation is based on the cumulative effects of freshwater 
and marine events in the early 1990s that have produced his­
toric high returns to some of the northern sockeye stocks in 
Canada and Alaska.
Projected changes in climate can affect the timing of the return 
of anadromous species to fresh water to spawn in some of the 
smaller streams. Changes in the timing of spawning can change 
the behavior (e.g., select for later-spawning fish); however, it is 
not anticipated that large numbers of stocks would be adverse­
ly affected in the next 50 years. Warmer rivers will shorten the 
incubation time, which may result in a longer growing season 
in fresh water. Although fish may feed longer and grow to larg­
er sizes, they also may enter the ocean earlier. This shift may
change the percentage of life history types that survive more 
than overall survival because there already is an extended peri­
od of entry into saltwater for the various rearing types.
Aquaculture potential will be affected by projected changes in 
climate and climate variability and could take advantage o f 
extended favorable conditions in currently marginal areas.
Most of the recent growth in total fisheries production is from 
aquaculture, which has grown rapidly during the past few 
decades and accounts for about 1 0 % of total world fish produc­
tion— mostly of higher-valued products. Aquaculture con­
tributes to the resiliency of the fisheries industry, tending to sta­
bilize supply and prices. Advancements are unevenly distributed 
across regions, farming systems, and communities. Growth in 
the United States is about 5% annually. The marine component 
is growing rapidly, but freshwater aquaculture is still dominant. 
Aquaculture will not rapidly solve the scarcity of natural fish, 
and current industry growth will fulfill the demand only for cer­
tain commodities, regions, and consumer groups.
Genetic engineering holds great promise to increase the pro­
duction and efficiency of fish farming (Fischetti, 1991). 
However, fishers and resource managers are very concerned 
about accidental or intentional release of altered and intro­
duced species that might harm natural stocks and gene pools. 
Around Scandinavia, escapees and nonindigenous reproduc­
tion may have reached or exceeded the recruitment of salmon 
wild stocks (Ackefors et al., 1991). Other concerns associated 
with aquaculture are the discharge of excess nutrients into sur­
rounding waters that can add to eutrophication; the heavy use 
of antibiotics and contamination with pesticides, potentially 
leading to disease outbreaks; and the introduction of pathogen­
ic organisms and antibiotic-resistant pathogens.
Ranching (in which young fish are released to feed and mature 
at sea) and fish farming, like their equivalents on land, have 
self-generated and imposed impediments to success. The activ­
ities can compete for coastal space with other uses, and con­
tinued expansion can jeopardize the quality and quantity of fish 
habitat (e.g., through loss of mangroves and wetlands, compe­
tition for food with wild stocks, or other factors) (NCC, 1989).
Climate variability is important to aquaculture. Decreasing tem­
peratures may cause low minimum temperatures through the 
year—possibly causing mass mortalities, especially along the 
east coast. Lrong-term temperature trends will affect what species 
of fish or shellfish are suitable, as well as the expansion or con­
traction of suitable aquaculture sites. General warming may allow 
aquaculture sites to expand into regions previously unavailable 
because water temperatures were too cold or there was a presence 
of sea ice. Growth rates of fish or shellfish and their food require­
ments are temperature dependent. Aquaculturists also are inter­
ested in projections of wind mixing, which contributes to flush­
ing (i.e., the exchange of water between the aquaculture site and 
surrounding waters). Low flushing can lead to decreased oxygen; 
greater potential for the spread of diseases; and, in the case of fil­
ter feeders such as mussels, reduced food availability.
298
North America
The survival, health, migration, and distribution o f many North 
American marine mammals and sea turtles are expected to be 
impacted by projected changes in the climate through impacts 
on their food supply, sea-ice extent, and breeding habitats.
In North American waters, approximately 125 extant species of 
marine mammals (e.g., whales, dolphins, seals, sea lions, polar 
bears, and marine otters) are known to occur at least some time 
during the year. Although reliable abundance estimates for 
these mammals in North America are limited, there are endan­
gered or threatened species among these mammals (e.g., 28 
species are listed as either endangered or threatened under the 
U.S. Endangered Species Act or depleted under the U.S. 
Marine Mammal Protection Act); many are recovering from 
commercial harvesting and overexploitation.
Many marine mammals (e.g., the great whales) are able to 
locate and follow seasonal centers of food production, which 
frequently change from year to year depending on local 
oceanographic conditions. Similarly, their migrations may 
change to accommodate interannual differences in environ­
mental conditions. However, some marine mammals (e.g., 
seals and sea lions) have life histories that tie them to specific 
geographic features (e.g., pupping beaches or icefields). 
Although there is some flexibility in their need for specific 
habitats, some marine mammals may be more severely affect­
ed than others by changes in the availability of necessary habi­
tats and prey species that result from climate change.
Seasonal sea-ice extent, at least in some areas of the Northern 
Hemisphere, is retreating. This information, coupled with pro­
jections of warming, suggests that current barriers to gene flow 
among marine mammal stocks in the Arctic may change dra­
matically in the next 50 years. Although this shift may not result 
in a reduction in abundance at the species level, it could very 
well change the population structure of many species of Arctic 
whales and seals, which will greatly affect their management.
Coastal wetlands and beaches may be eliminated in some areas 
by rising sea level. As a result, marine mammal calving and 
pupping beaches may disappear from areas where there are no 
alternatives. Affected marine mammals could include, for 
example, all of the temperate and tropical seals and sea lions, 
coastal whales and dolphins, and manatees in estuarine habitats.
Six species of sea turtles (all of which are listed as endangered 
or threatened under the U.S. Endangered Species Act) regular­
ly spend all or part of their lives off North American coasts and 
in U.S. territorial waters of the Caribbean Sea and Pacific 
Ocean. The loss of nesting beaches that would result from the 
combination of coastal development and projected sea-level 
rise is a threat to all marine turtle species.
8.3.7. 
Coastal Systems
Rising sea level is gradually inundating wetlands and lowlands; 
eroding beaches; exacerbating coastal flooding; threatening
coastal structures; raising water tables; and increasing the salin­
ity of rivers, bays, and aquifers (Barth and Titus, 1984). The 
areas most vulnerable to rising seas are found along the Gulf of 
Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean south of Cape Cod. Although 
there also are large low areas around San Francisco Bay and the 
Fraser delta (British Columbia), most of the Pacific coast is less 
vulnerable than the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. Because of a com­
bination of rocky shores, lower rates of sea-level rise, higher 
elevations, and less shorefront development, most of the 
Canadian coast is much less vulnerable to the direct effects of 
rising sea level (Shaw et al., 1994) than the low, sandy and 
muddy shores of the United States.
This section focuses primarily on the impacts of sea-level rise, 
which is the most thoroughly studied effect of global warming 
on coastal zones. Nevertheless, global climate change also is 
expected to alter coastal hydrology, the frequency and severity 
of severe storms, and sea-ice cover. Moreover, the impacts of 
regional climate change on inland areas also will affect coastal 
zones— particularly the estuaries into which most of the conti­
nent drains.
8.3.7.1. 
Physical Effects and Their Implications
The implications of rising sea level are well understood, in part 
because sea level has been rising relative to the land along 
most of the coast of North America (and falling in a few areas) 
for thousands of years. For the most part, the relative rise and 
fall of sea level has been caused by adjustments of the earth’s 
crust to the glacial mass that was removed from the land sur­
faces after the end of the last ice age (Grant, 1975). Change in 
the volume of water in oceans was also of importance. Water 
locked up in ice caps during ice ages lowered the volume of 
water in oceans, thus lowering sea level. The changes dis­
cussed here have occurred over geologic time (Holocene 
Epoch— last 10,000 years). The land is rising (i.e., relative sea 
level is falling) in the northern areas that had been covered by 
the ice sheet; land is subsiding in nearby areas that were not 
covered by the glaciers, such as the Canadian maritime 
provinces and U.S. middle Atlantic states.
A  50-cm rise in sea level would inundate approximately 50% of 
North American coastal wetlands in the next century; many 
beaches would be squeezed between advancing seas and engi­
neering structures, particularly along estuarine shores.
Coastal marshes and swamps generally are found between the 
highest tide of the year and mean sea level. Coastal wetlands 
provide important habitat and nourishment for a large number 
of birds and fish found in coastal areas. Wetlands generally have 
been able to keep pace with the historic rate of sea-level rise 
(Kaye and Barghoorn, 1964). As a result, the area of dry land 
just above wetlands is less than the area of wetlands. If sea level 
rises more rapidly than wetlands can accrete, however, there 
will be a substantial net loss of wetlands (Titus, 1986; Park et 
al., 1989). Because the current rate of sea-level rise is greater 
than the rate that prevailed over the past several thousand years
North America
299
(IPCC 1996, WG I), some areas— such as Blackwater National 
Wildlife Refuge (NWR) along the Chesapeake Bay— are 
already experiencing large losses of coastal wetlands (Keamey 
and Stevenson, 1985). Blackwater NWR is also a victim of her- 
bivory by an introduced rodent, which makes interpretation of 
the role of sea-level rise difficult.
Coastal development is likely to increase the vulnerability of 
wetlands to rising sea level. In many areas, development will 
prevent the wetland creation that otherwise would result from 
the gradual inundation of areas that are barely above today’s 
high-water level (Titus, 1986, 1988). In Louisiana, flood con­
trol levees, navigation infrastructure, and other human activi­
ties have disabled the natural processes by which the 
Mississippi delta otherwise could keep pace with rising relative 
sea level; as a result, Louisiana currently is losing about 90 km^ 
(35 mi2) of wetlands per year (Gagliano et a l, 1981; Penland 
e ta l, 1997).
Louisiana is expected to experience the greatest wetland loss 
from rising sea level, although most of these losses are predict­
ed to occur even with the current rate of relative sea-level rise. 
The mid-Atlantic, south Atlantic, and Gulf coasts also are likely
to lose large areas of wetlands if sea-level rise accelerates. A 50- 
cm rise in sea level would cause a net loss of 17-43% of the 
wetlands, even if no additional bulkheads or dikes are erected to 
prevent new wetland creation. Table 8 - 6  presents estimated 
losses in U.S. wetlands by region. Similar comprehensive 
assessments are unavailable for Canada. Nevertheless, regional 
studies suggest that the most vulnerable area is likely to be the 
salt marsh coast of the Bay of Fundy. Because 85% of these 
wetlands are enclosed by a system of dikes, the risk is not so 
much the direct submergence by higher water levels but rather 
the possibility that unless the dikes are fortified, an increased 
storm surge could overtop and breach the dikes. Many of the 
wetlands around San Francisco are similarly vulnerable.
In estuaries, sandy beaches may be even more vulnerable than 
vegetated wetlands to being squeezed between rising sea level 
and development. A  1-cm rise in sea level generally erodes 
beaches about 1 m (Bruun, 1962). Thus, because estuarine 
beaches usually are less than 5 m wide (Nordstrum, 1992), 
even a 5-cm rise in sea level can eliminate these systems in 
areas where adjacent land is protected with structures. 
Moreover, the environmental regulations that protect wetlands 
generally have not been applied to protect estuarine beaches
Table 8-6: Regional and national wetland losses in the U.S. for the trend and 1-m global sea-level rise scenarios (% loss o f current area).
Region
Current 
Wetland Area (mP)
TYend
1-m Shore Protection Policy
TotaF 
Developed^ 
None^
Northeast
600
7
16
1 0
Mid-Atlantic
746
-5
70
46
38
South Atlantic
3,814
- 2
64
44
40
South/Gulf Coast of Florida
1,869
- 8
44
8 d
7“
Louisiana^
4,835
52
85
85
85
Florida panhandle, Alabama, 
Mississippi, and Texas
1,218
2 2
85
77
75
West®
64
- 1 1 1
56
- 6 8 8
-809
United States
13,145
17
6 6
49
50
Confidence Intervals 
95% Low
9
50
29
26
95% High
—
25
82
69
6 6
‘ The “total” protection scenario implies that all shorelines are protected with structures; hence, as existing wetlands are inundated, no new 
wetlands are formed. “Developed” implies that only areas that are currently developed will be protected; “no protection” assumes that no 
structures will be built to hold back the sea.
® Evaluation of management options currently contemplated for Louisiana (e.g., restoring natural deltaic processes) was outside the scope of 
this study.
' This anomalous result is from small sample size. The impact on nationwide results is small.
Results are not statistically significant; sampling error exceeds estimate of wetlands lost.
Source: Titus et al, 1991.
300
North America
Table 8-7: Loss o f dry land from sea-level rise (95% confidence interval, mP).
Baseline
50
Rise in Sea Level (cm)
1 0 0
2 0 0
If no shores are protected
NR
3,300-7,300
5,100-10,300
9,200-15,400
If developed areas are protected
1,500-4,700
2 ,2 0 0 - 6 , 1 0 0
4,100-9,200
6,400-13,500
NR = not reported. 
Source: Titus et al., 1991.
(Titus, 1997), which are important for recreation, navigation, 
and habitat for several endangered species (Nordstrum, 1992).
A  50-cm rise in sea level could inundate 8,500-19,000 ктЗ o f 
dry land, even if currently developed areas are protected.
The dry land within 1 m above high tide includes forests, farms, 
low parts of some port cities, communities that sank after they 
were built and that now are protected with levees, parts of deltas, 
and the bay sides of barrier islands. The low forests and farms 
generally are in the Mid-Atlantic and Southeast. Major port 
cities with low areas include Boston, New York, Charleston, 
Miami, and New Orleans. New Orleans’ average elevation is 
about 2 m below sea level; parts of Texas City, San Jose, and 
Long Beach, California, are about 1 m below sea level. In the 
United States, 8,500-19,000 km2 (3,300-7,300 mi2) of dry land 
are within 50 cm of high tide— ^5,700-16,000 km2 (2,200-6,100 
mi2) of which currently are undeveloped (Table 8-7) (Titus et ai., 
1991). Approximately 100 km2 of land in the Fraser delta 
(British Columbia) also is within 1 m of sea level.
Many islands are at risk. The low bay sides o f developed bar­
rier islands could be inundated while their relatively high 
ocean sides erode. Undeveloped barrier islands will tend to 
migrate landward through the overwash process.
The most economically important vulnerable areas are recre­
ational resorts on the coastal barriers— generally long and nar­
row islands or spits (peninsulas) with the ocean on one side and 
a bay on the other— of the Atlantic and Gulf coasts. Typically, 
the oceanfront block is 2-5 m above high tide; the bay sides 
often are <0.5 m above high water.
Frosion threatens the high ocean sides of these densely devel­
oped islands; this oceanfront erosion generally is viewed as a 
more immediate problem than inundation of the islands’ low 
bay sides. Shores currently are eroding at a rate of 0.25-0.5 
m/yr in many areas. Studies using the “Bruun (1962) rule” 
have estimated that a 1 -cm rise in sea level will cause beaches 
to erode 0.5-1 m from New Fngland to Maryland, 2 m along 
the Carolinas, 1-10 m along the Florida coast, and 2-4 m along 
the California coast (Bruun, 1962; Kana et ai., 1984; Fverts, 
1985; Kyper and Sorensen, 1985; Wilcoxen, 1986). Because 
many U.S. recreational beaches are less than 30 m wide at high 
tide, even a 30-cm rise would threaten homes in these areas.
Canada’s longest barrier coast is in New Brunswick along the 
Gulf of St. Lawrence; the narrow barrier islands and spits gen­
erally are undeveloped. Rising sea level tends to cause narrow 
islands to migrate landward through the overwash process 
(Leatherman, 1979). Although the barriers themselves are 
undeveloped, there are important recreational areas along the 
mainland coast behind the barriers, as well as environmentally 
sensitive freshwater bogs and woodlands.
Other types of islands also may be vulnerable to sea-level rise. 
In the Chesapeake Bay, several islands populated by a tradi­
tional subculture of fishermen are likely to be entirely sub­
merged (Toll et a l, 1997). The coast of Prince Fdward Island, 
except for some parts along the Northumberland Strait, is high­
ly erodible because of its bedrock cliffs, sandy barriers, coastal 
dunes, salt marshes, and intertidal flats. The heart of the 
island’s tourist industry, along the Gulf of St. Lawrence, is like­
ly to experience increased beach erosion, which would threat­
en shorefront buildings.
Rising sea level would increase flooding and storm damage. 
Regional climate change could offset or amplify these effects, 
depending on whether river flows and storm severity increase 
or decrease.
Changing climate generally is increasing the vulnerability of 
coastal areas to flooding both because higher sea level raises 
the flood level from a storm of a given severity and because 
rainstorms are becoming more severe in many areas. It also is 
possible that hurricanes could become more intense, thus pro­
ducing greater storm surges; IPCC (1996) concluded, however, 
that the science currently is inadequate to state whether or not 
this is likely. Fxisting assessments in coastal areas generally 
focus on the impact of rising sea level.
Because higher sea level provides a higher base for storm 
surges, a 1 -m rise in sea level (for example) would enable a 
15-year storm to flood many areas that today are flooded only 
by a 100-year storm (Kana et al., 1984; Leatherman, 1984). 
Many coastal areas currently are protected with levees and 
seawalls. Because these structures have been designed for cur­
rent sea level, however, higher storm surges might overtop 
seawalls, and erosion could undermine them from below 
(National Research Council, 1987). In areas that are drained 
artificially, such as New Orleans, the increased need for
North America
301
pumping could exceed current pumping capacity (Titus et al., 
1987).
The U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA, 
1991) has examined the nationwide implications of rising sea 
level for the National Flood Insurance Program. The study esti­
mated that rises in sea level of 30 cm and 90 cm would increase 
the size of the 100-year floodplain in the United States from
51,000 km2 (19,500 mi2) in 1990 to 60,000 km2 and 70,000 
km2  (23,000 mi2 and 27,000 mi2), respectively. Assuming that 
current development trends continue, flood damages incurred 
by a representative property subject to sea-level rise are pro­
jected to increase by 36-58%  for a 30-cm rise and 102-200% 
for a 90-cm rise.
Because of its higher elevations, the Canadian coastal zone is 
less vulnerable to flooding than the U.S. coast. Nevertheless, 
flooding appears to be a more serious risk to Canada than the 
loss of land from erosion or inundation. Some communities 
(e.g., Placentia, Newfoundland) already are vulnerable to 
flooding during high astronomical tides and storm surges, 
sometimes exacerbated by high runoff. In Charlottetown, 
Prince Edward Island, some of the highest-value property in 
the downtown core and significant parts of the sewage system 
would experience increased flooding with a 50- to 100-cm rise 
in sea level. According to Clague (1989), a rise of a few tens of 
cm would result in flooding of some waterfront homes and port 
facilities during severe storms in British Columbia, forcing 
additional expenditures on pumping.
Coastal flooding also is exacerbated by increasing rainfall 
intensity. Along tidal rivers and in extremely flat areas, floods 
can be caused by storm surges from the sea or by river surges. 
Washington, D.C., and nearby Alexandria, Virginia, were 
flooded twice by Hurricane Fran in 1996: first by a storm surge 
in the Chesapeake Bay and lower Potomac River, then three 
days later by the river surge associated with intense precipita­
tion over the upper Potomac River’s watershed. Higher sea 
level and more intense precipitation could combine synergisti­
cally to increase flood levels by more than the rise in sea level 
alone in much of coastal Louisiana and Florida, as well as in 
inland port cities along major rivers (such as Portland and 
Philadelphia). The direct effect of higher sea level also could 
be exacerbated throughout the coastal zone if hurricanes or 
northeasters become more severe— a possibility that has been 
suggested but not established (IPCC 1996, WG I).
Rising sea level would increase salinities o f estuaries and 
aquifers, which could impair water supplies, ecosystems, and 
coastal farmland. As with flooding, regional climate change 
could offset or amplify these effects, depending on whether 
river flows increase or decrease.
Rising sea level also enables saltwater to penetrate farther 
inland and upstream in rivers, bays, wetlands, and aquifers; 
saltwater intrusion would harm some aquatic plants and ani­
mals and threaten human uses of water. Increased drought 
severity, where it occurs, would further elevate salinity.
Increased salinity already has been cited as a factor contribut­
ing to reduced oyster harvests in Delaware Bay (Gunter, 1974) 
and the Chesapeake Bay and as a reason that cypress swamps 
in Louisiana are becoming open lakes (Louisiana Wetland 
Protection Panel, 1987).
Higher salinity can impair both surface and groundwater sup­
plies. New York, Philadelphia, and much of California’s 
Central Valley get their water from portions of rivers that are 
slightly upstream from the point at which the water is salty dur­
ing droughts. If saltwater is able to reach farther upstream in 
the future, the existing intakes would draw salty water during 
droughts.
The aquifers that are most vulnerable to rising sea level are 
those that are recharged in areas that currently are fresh but 
could become salty in the future. Residents of Camden and 
farmers in central New Jersey rely on the Potomac-Raritan- 
Magothy aquifer, which is recharged by a portion of the 
Delaware River that is rarely salty even during severe droughts 
today but would be salty more frequently if sea level were to 
rise 50-100 cm or droughts were to become more severe (Hull 
and Titus, 1986). Miami’s Biscayne aquifer is similarly vulner­
able; the South Florida Water Management District already 
spends millions of dollars each year to prevent the aquifer from 
becoming salty (Miller et a l, 1992).
A second class of vulnerable aquifers consists of those in bar­
rier islands and other low areas with water tables close to the 
surface, which could lose their freshwater lens entirely (see 
IPCC 1990, WG II, Figure 6.3; also Chapter 9 in this report).
Finally, rising sea level tends to make some agricultural lands 
too saline for cultivation. In areas where shorefront lands are 
cultivated, the seaward boundary for cultivation often is the 
point where saltwater from ground and surface waters pene­
trates inland far enough to prevent crops from growing. As sea 
level rises, this boundary penetrates inland— often rendering 
farmland too salty for cultivation long before inundation con­
verts the land to coastal marsh (see, e.g.. Toll, 1997).
Coastal areas in the Arctic ami extreme north Atlantic and 
Pacific are less vulnerable, except where sea ice andjor per­
mafrost currently is present at the shoreline.
Sea-level rise and storm surges along the tundra coastline of 
Alaska and Canada are likely to cause erosion, flooding, and 
inundation through mechanisms similar to those for other parts 
of the North American coast. Several additional factors, 
notably sea-ice effects and coastal permafrost degradation, also 
will come into play. Projected changes in sea ice include a 35% 
decrease in winter ice thickness, along with significant retreat 
of the southern limit of sea ice and complete absence of sum­
mer sea ice among the Arctic Islands (Maxwell and Barrie, 
1989). These decreases in the period and extent of sea-ice 
cover will result in larger ocean fetches and greater wave attack 
on the coastal zone (Lewis, 1974), with attendant erosion. 
Subsequent modeling suggested that the wave energy during
302
North America
the open-water season may increase wave heights by 16-40% 
(McGillivray et al., 1993).
Rates of erosion of permafrost also can be expected to increase. 
The Alaska and Yukon coasts already experience significant 
erosion during the annual thaw. According to Lewellen (1970), 
erosion rates in the mid-1960s and early 1970s ranged from a 
few decimeters to as much as 10 m per year. Maximum erosion 
occurred in areas where permafrost contained considerable 
pore, wedge, or massive ice (Lewis, 1974) or where the per­
mafrost shoreline was exposed to the sea (Lewellen, 1970).
8.3.7.2. 
Adapting to Sea-Level Rise
Adaptive responses focus on protection o f shores or allowing 
them to retreat, with subsequent loss o f existing shoreline sys­
tems and structures.
state of Maryland alone has lost the use of 500 km (300 mi) of 
shorelines through the issuance of permits for bulkheads and 
revetments (Tidal Waters Division, 1978-93).
8.3.7.2.2. 
Elevating land surfaces and beaches
The effects of rising sea level can be offset by elevating beach­
es, land surfaces, and structures as sea level rises. A key bene­
fit of this approach is that the character of the shore is not 
altered. Rapidly subsiding communities such as Galveston, 
Texas, have used fill to raise land elevations; some authors 
have suggested that it will be necessary to elevate Miami 
because the soils are too permeable for effective pumping (e.g.. 
Walker et al., 1989). Regulations along San Francisco Bay 
require projects along the shore or on newly reclaimed land to 
be either protected by a dike or elevated enough to accommo­
date accelerated sea-level rise.i
Several U.S. government agencies have started to prepare for 
rising sea level. The U.S. Coastal Zone Management Act 
requires state coastal programs to address rising sea level, and 
a few states have modified coastal land-use policies to address 
rising sea level. The U.S. Army С оф 8  of Engineers is required 
to consider alternative scenarios of future sea-level rise in its 
feasibility studies. These anticipatory measures have been 
implemented in part because assessments have identified mea- 
snres whose costs are less than the benefits of preparation—  
even when future benefits are discounted by an economic rate 
of return.
8.3.7.2.1. Erecting walls to hold back the sea
Most assessments of North American response strategies to 
future sea-level rise have concluded that coastal cities will 
merit protection with bulkheads, dikes, and pumping systems 
(National Research Council, 1987; Titus et al., 1991). 
Bulkheads, seawalls, and rock revetments already are being 
used to halt erosion to protect land that is well above sea level. 
Dikes and pumping systems are used to protect urban areas 
such as New Orleans that are below sea level, and other areas 
that are below flood levels.
Although structural measures can protect property from rising 
water levels, the resulting loss of natural shorelines may have 
adverse environmental, recreational, and aesthetic effects. 
Wetland and shallow-water habitats already are being lost 
because protective structures prevent those systems from 
migrating inland. In other areas, sandy and muddy beaches are 
being eliminated— impairing the ability of some amphibious 
species to move between the water and the land and directly 
removing the habitat of species that inhabit these beaches. The 
elimination of natural beaches may harm recreational and fish­
ing navigation by removing locations from which small craft 
can be launched or beached in an emergency; the loss of beach­
es also impairs the ability of the public to move along the shore 
for fishing, recreation, and other uses. In the past 15 years, the
The practice of elevating land surfaces is most applicable to 
recreational barrier islands, where environmental and aesthetic 
factors (such as natural beaches and waterfront views) can be 
as important as property values and shore-protection costs 
(Gibbs, 1984; Howard et al., 1985; Titus, 1990). Figure 8-9 
illustrates possible responses to sea-level rise for barrier 
islands: building a dike, elevating the land surface, engineering 
a landward retreat, and no protection. A  case study of Long 
Beach Island, New Jersey, concluded that any of the three pro­
tection options would be less costly than the current value of 
the threatened land (Titus, 1990). Although dikes have a lower 
direct cost than elevating land and structures, the latter 
approach is least disruptive to existing land uses and can be 
implemented gradually over time.
8.3.7.2.3. 
Protecting natural shorelines by allowing 
shores to retreat
Several planning measures have been proposed to enable some 
shorelines to remain in roughly their natural state as sea level 
rises, rather than be replaced with structures. For the most part, 
these measures apply to areas that are not yet developed. They 
broadly fall into two categories: setbacks, which are regula­
tions that prevent development of areas likely to be inundated, 
and rolling easements— which allow development today, but 
only with the explicit condition that the property will not be 
protected from rising water levels (Titus, 1997).
Setbacks currently are used to ensure that homes are safe from 
current flood risks. Several U.S. states currently require an 
additional erosion-based setback, in which new houses are set 
back an additional 2 0  to 60 times the annual erosion rate 
(Klarin and Hershman, 1990; Marine Law Institute et al, 
1995). Eventually, however, the shore will erode to any setback
'San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission. 
Resolution 88-15. Adoption of Bay Plan Amendment No. 3-88 
Concerning Sea Level Rise Findings and Policies.
North America
303
line. Moreover, it is economically inefficient, and sometimes 
unconstitutional, to prevent the use of property now solely to 
avoid an adverse impact in the future (Titus, 1991).
Many of these problems are avoided with rolling easements— a 
planning measure in which coastal development is allowed in
return for the property owner agreeing not to build structures or 
otherwise artificially stop the natural inland migration of wet­
lands and beaches. This option requires neither a specific esti­
mate of future sea-level rise nor large public land purchases, 
and it is economically efficient because it does not prevent own­
ers from using their land unless or until the sea rises enough to 
inundate it. The ability of the government to prevent 
property owners from eliminating the shore is 
grounded in the “public trust doctrine,” under 
which the public has always owned tidal waters and 
either owned or had an access right along all inter­
tidal beaches (Slade, 1990). If this approach were 
implemented in the next decade, ensuring the con­
tinued survival of natural wetland and beach shores 
in U.S. areas that are still undeveloped would cost 
approximately $400-1,200 million (Titus, 1997).
Texas common law recognizes rolling easements 
along its Gulf coast beaches. Maine and Rhode 
Island have issued regulations that prohibit struc­
tures that block the inland migration of wetlands. 
South Carolina’s Beachfront Management Act, 
passed in response to the risks of a 1 -ft rise in sea 
level, originally required setbacks along the coast, 
but in the aftermath of a trial court ruling that was 
eventually upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court 
(Lucas V. South Caroiina Coastal Council), the 
statute was modified to require rolling easements 
in some locations2 (South Carolina Beachfront 
Management Act, 1988). Because Canada inherited 
the same common law from England as the United 
States, all of these approaches could be applicable 
to Canada if its coastal zone becomes densely 
developed in the next century.
Figure 8-9: Responses to sea-level rise on developed barrier islands. 
Lightly developed islands may have no practical choice other than the 
“no protection” option, which would result in ocean-side erosion and in 
some cases bayside inundation. Under the “engineered retreat” option, 
a community might tolerate ocean-side erosion but move threatened 
structures to newly created bayside lands, imitating the natural over­
wash process that occurs with narrow undeveloped islands. A more 
common response is likely to be to raise entire islands as well as their 
beaches; although the sand costs are much higher than with an engi­
neered retreat, existing land uses can be preserved. Finally, wide urban­
ized islands may choose to erect seawalls and levees (dikes); the loss 
of beach access and waterfront views, however, make this option less 
feasible for recreational barrier island resorts.
8.3.7.2.4. National assessments o f adaptive 
responses
Several nationwide assessments have been con­
ducted in the United States, mostly focusing on the 
potential loss of wet and dry land and the cost of 
holding back the sea. These studies have recog­
nized that the impact of sea-level rise ultimately 
depends on whether— and how— people hold back 
the sea; they generally estimate impacts assuming 
alternative policies for protecting coastal land. A 
rise of 50 cm would inundate 8,600-19,000 km2 
(3,300-7,300 mi2) of dry land if no shores are pro­
tected and 5,700-16,000 km^ (2,200-6,100 mP) if 
currently developed areas are protected (Table 
8-7). The loss of coastal wetlands would be 
17-43% if no shores are protected and 20-45%  if 
currently developed areas are protected— but 
38-61%  if all shores were protected. These results
2The rolling easements are called “special permits.” SC 
Code 48-39-290 (D)(1).
304
North America
suggest that efforts to mitigate wetland loss from sea-level rise 
could exempt existing development and focus on areas that are 
still undeveloped (Titus et a l, 1991).
Studies generally estimate that the cumulative cost of a 50-cm 
rise in sea level through the year 2 1 0 0  would be $2 0 - 2 0 0  bil­
lion; the cost of a 1 -m rise would be approximately twice that 
amount. Titus et a l (1991) estimated that for a 50-cm rise, bar­
rier islands could be protected by placing sand on eroding 
beaches and the low bay sides, at a cost of $15-81 billion; ele­
vating houses and roads, at a cost of $29-36 billion; and pro­
tecting mainland areas with dikes and bulkheads, at a cost of 
$5-13 billion— for a total cost of $55-123 billion.
Yohe (1990) estimated that if shores were not protected, a 50- 
cm rise would inundate land and structures worth $78-188 bil­
lion; Yohe et a l (1996) estimated that the cost would only be 
$20 billion. Their lower estimate appears to have resulted from 
two differences in their study: First, rather than assuming that 
all developed areas would be protected, Yohe et a l assessed the 
value of land and structures and assumed that only areas that 
could be economically protected would be protected. Second, 
the two studies appear to make different assumptions regarding 
the area of developed barrier islands in the United States. The 
Yohe et a l (1996) analysis was based on a sample of the entire 
coast, which included five densely developed ocean beach 
resorts; Titus et a l (1991) based their estimates on an assess­
ment by Leatherman (1989)— ^who examined every beach com­
munity between New Jersey and the Mexican border, as well as 
in California, along with one site in each of the other states.
8.3.8. 
Human Settlements and Industry
Housing, industry, commerce, and the major components of 
infrastructure that support settlements— energy, water supply, 
transportation, waste disposal, and so forth— have varying 
degrees of vulnerability to climate change. They can be affect­
ed directly through projected changes in climate (temperature, 
precipitation, etc.) and indirectly through projected impacts on 
the environment, natural resources, and agriculture. Indirect 
pathways to impacts include expected changes in the availabil­
ity of natural resources, geographic shifts in climate-sensitive 
resource industries, effects on environmental quality and health 
from changes in ecosystems, and other effects resulting from 
changes in environmental service functions. Furthermore, these 
effects on human settlements in theory could lead to tertiary 
impacts— such as altering land use and redistributing popula­
tion and activities to other regions— resulting in further changes 
in natural resources and other activities. Such effects, however, 
are largely speculative at the current state of knowledge.
Climate directly affects the quality of life; alters patterns of set­
tlement and human activities; subjects humans to risks to their 
health, safety, and property (e.g., due to extreme events); and, 
therefore, has costs and benefits for individuals and for the pri­
vate and public sectors. As such, changes in climate are expect­
ed to have positive and negative impacts.
Climate change will have direct impacts on economic activity 
in the industry, energy, and transportation sectors; impacts on 
markets for goods and services; and impacts on natural 
resources on which economic activity depends. Activities 
directly sensitive to climate include construction, transporta­
tion, offshore oil and gas production, manufacturing depen­
dent on water, tourism and recreation, and industry that is 
located in coastal zones and permafrost regions. Activities 
with markets sensitive to climate include electricity and fossil 
fuel production for space heating and air conditioning, con­
struction activity associated with coastal defenses, and trans­
portation. Activities dependent on climate-sensitive resources 
include agro-industries (food/drink, forestry-related activity, 
and textiles), biomass production, and other renewable energy 
production.
Impacts occurring in the distant future are difficult to predict in 
detail because the context of human settlement patterns and 
technologies cannot be forecast accurately. Concomitantly, 
there are substantial opportunities for adaptation to changed 
climates in conjunction with the development of future hous­
ing and infrastructure facilities, depending in part on our capa­
bility to forecast climate changes. Many types of impacts on 
human facilities have the potential to be partially or complete­
ly reduced or eliminated through adaptation, though this usual­
ly will increase their costs.
8.З.8.1. 
Impacts on Transportation
Projected changes in climate will have both negative and pos­
itive impacts on the operation and maintenance costs o f trans­
portation systems.
Studies in temperate and northern climates generally have indi­
cated that higher temperatures will result in lower maintenance 
costs, especially with fewer freeze-thaw cycles and less snow 
(e.g.. Walker et a l, 1989; Daniels et a l, 1992). Black (1990) 
points out, however, that increased pavement buckling caused 
by longer periods of intense heat is a possibility. Lewis (1988) 
and Hirsch (1988) cite such cases from the great North 
American summer heat wave of 1988.
In moderate climates, water transport would be affected by 
changes in river navigability. Reductions in rainfall, which 
are possible during the summer in mid-latitudes in North 
America, could adversely affect waterborne transportation. 
During the 1988 drought, industries that relied on bulk trans­
portation of raw materials and finished products by barge on 
the Mississippi River found that low water kept more than 
800 barges tied up for several months. In 1993, by contrast, 
floods in the upper M ississippi valley also disrupted the barge 
transportation system, and in 1997 increased siltation associ­
ated with floods prevented ships from reaching the port of 
New Orleans for several days. To the extent that industry is 
moving toward just-in-tim e production systems, it will 
become more vulnerable to interruptions for these and other 
reasons.
North America
305
In colder regions, the most significant direct impact of warm­
ing is likely to be on inland and coastal water transportation. A 
longer season for Arctic shipping is likely for locations like 
Prudhoe Bay, Alaska, which depends on the short ice-free sea­
son to barge in modular loads too large to go by truck. 
Increased wave activity and increased frequency of extreme 
weather events might have a more significant effect on coastal 
transportation operations, but little research has been conduct­
ed on this topic. A  survey of the potential impacts on Canadian 
shipping suggested net benefits to Arctic and ocean shipping as 
a consequence of deeper drafts in ports and longer navigation­
al seasons (IBI Group, 1990).
Winter roads on ice constitute an important part of the trans­
portation network in parts of Canada’s north. For example, 
about 10-15%  of the total annual flow of goods in the 
Mackenzie Valley moves over winter roads, some of which 
cross major rivers. As the name implies, winter roads (or ice 
roads) are functional in the winter only; they are made of snow, 
ice, or a mixture of soil and snow/ice and can be created on the 
frozen surface of lakes and rivers. Lonergan et al. (1993) found 
a substantial reduction in the length of the “ice road” season 
based on climate change projections.
North American skiing seasons as a result of climate change. In 
a study of the implications of an effective COj doubling on 
tourism and recreation in Ontario, Canada, Wall (1988) project­
ed that the downhill ski season in the South Georgian Bay 
region could be eliminated. This outcome assumed a tempera­
ture rise of 3.5-5.7°C and a 9% increase in annual precipitation 
levels. Some of these losses would be offset by an extended 
summer recreational season. Lamothe and Périard (1988) exam­
ined the implications of a 4-5°C temperature rise throughout 
the downhill skiing season in Quebec. They projected a 
50-70% decrease in the number of ski days in southern Quebec; 
ski resorts equipped with snowmaking devices probably would 
experience a 40-50% reduction in the number of ski days. This 
change in winter recreational traffic would have direct implica­
tions for road traffic (down) and requirements for snow- 
removal and road repair (also probably down). On the other 
hand, Masterton et al. (1976) have noted that low temperatures 
are a limiting factor on recreation activity in the northern part of 
the prairie provinces. The summer recreation season in many 
areas may be extended (Masterton et a l, 1976; Staple and Wall,
1994). Warmer temperatures may offset some of the costs of 
sea-level rise for recreational barrier islands.
Further south, there would be a greater number of ice-free days 
for inland waterways such as the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence 
Seaway (IBI Group, 1990). Inland waterways, however, may suf­
fer loss of depth from greater periods of seasonal drought, reduc­
ing their usefulness for commercial shipping even if the ice-free 
season is lengthened (Black, 1990). A  similar study showed that 
reduced ice cover compensated for lower water levels in two of 
three climate change scenarios but that dredging costs generally 
increased in the six Great Lakes ports examined (Keith et ai,
1989). Other climate impacts could arise from changes in snow­
fall or melting of the permafrost (IBI Group, 1990).
Changes in the location and nature o f agricultural activities, 
as well as other climate-dependent industries, could have a 
large impact on the freight transport system.
Existing assessments of transportation impacts have recog­
nized the potential significance of changes in geographical pat­
terns of economic activity on the transportation network. Black 
(1990) notes that even gradual, long-term global warming 
could cause a major disruption of the movement of goods and 
people in North America. The IBI Group (1990) suggests that 
there probably would be a northward spreading of agricultural, 
forestry, and mining activities— resulting in increased popula­
tion and intensified settlement patterns in Canada’s mid-north 
and even in Arctic areas. Marine, road, rail, and air links would 
have to be expanded accordingly.
8.3.8.2. 
Recreation and Tourism
Climate creates opportunities and limitations for outdoor recre­
ation. It is a major influence on the economic viability of some 
recreation enterprises. Several studies have projected shorter
8.3.8.3. 
Extreme Weather Events
Human settlements and infrastructure are especially vulnera­
ble to several types o f extreme weather events, including 
droughts, intense precipitation, extreme temperature episodes, 
high winds, and severe storms. Hence, there could be impacts 
should the frequency or intensity o f these extreme events 
increase or decrease with climate warming.
Weather-related natural disasters (wildfires, hurricanes, severe 
storms, ice, snow, flooding, drought, tornadoes, and other 
extreme weather events) are estimated to have caused damages 
in the United States averaging about $39 billion per year dur­
ing the years 1992-96 (FEMA, 1997). Those losses included 
damages to structures (buildings, bridges, roads, etc.) and loss­
es of income, property, and other indirect consequences.
As indicated in Section 8.2.3 and IPCC (1996, WG I, Section 
6 .5 ), the ability to predict changes in the frequency or intensi­
ty of extreme weather events using global and regional models 
has been limited by their lack of small-scale spatial and tem­
poral resolution and uncertainties about representation of some 
processes.3 Historical changes in frequencies of extreme events
3Most hydrological studies of flooding and water resources now use 
scenarios based on GCM simulations, but there are important uncer­
tainties in this use: “Weaknesses of models in coupling the land sur­
face and atmospheric hydrologie cycles and in GCM simulations of 
regional climate and extremes, particularly with regard to precipita­
tion. Weaknesses in using GCM simulations to define climate- 
change scenarios at the spatial and temporal resolution required by 
hydrological models. The spatial resolution of current GCMs is too 
coarse for their output to be fed directly into hydrological models.” 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 10.2.2).
306
North America
also provide some insights on possible changes, but there is 
debate about which changes are significant and which are 
unambiguously attributable to climate warming. However, 
some indications of directions of change have been inferred 
from observations and model simulations for North America, 
particularly regarding increased variability of precipitation. 
Beyond those inferences, a number of vulnerabilities of 
resources to extreme events have been identified should such 
events increase in frequency or magnitude. Conversely, 
decreases in extreme events could reduce levels of damages 
currently experienced. Additional research is needed to better 
understand the sensitivity and vulnerabilities of North 
American human settlements and infrastructure to extreme 
events, including factors beyond climate that are changing 
those vulnerabilities.
Flooding may be a very important impact because o f the large 
amount o f property and human life potentially at risk in North 
America, as is evident from historical disasters. There have 
been relatively few  studies addressing the change in risk direct­
ly because o f the lack o f credible climate change scenarios at 
the level o f detail necessary to predict flooding.
The evidence for an increasing trend in warm-period rainfall 
intensities in the United States (discussed in Section 8.2.2) sug­
gests the potential for a shift in the periodicity of the flood 
regime in North America. More frequent or more extreme 
flooding could cause considerable disruption of transportation 
and water supply systems.
Increases in heavy rainfall events (e.g., suggested changes in 
frequency of intense subtropical cyclones) (Lambert, 1995) 
and interactions with changes in snowmelt-generated runoff 
could increase the potential for flooding of human settlements 
in many water basins. Changes in snowmelt runoff may add to 
or subtract from rainfall events, depending on basin character­
istics and climate changes for a basin. Extreme rainfall events 
can have widespread impacts on roads, railways, and other 
transportation links. As long as rainfall does not become more 
intense, impacts on urban roads and railways in temperate, 
tropical, and subtropical zones are likely to be modest.
Some areas in North America may experience changed risks of 
wildfire, land slippage, and severe weather events in a changed 
climate regime. Although this increase in risk is predicated on 
changes in the frequency or intensity of extreme weather 
events— about which there is controversy— considering these 
risks in the design of long-lived infrastructure may prove cost- 
effective in some circumstances. Human settlement infrastruc­
ture has increasingly concentrated in areas vulnerable to wild­
fire, such as the chaparral hillsides in California. Settlements in 
forested regions in many areas are vulnerable to seasonal wild­
fires. Areas of potentially increased fire danger include broad 
regions of Canada (Street, 1989; Forestry Canada, 1991) and 
seasonally dry Mediterranean climates like the state of 
California in the United States. It is possible that fuel buildup 
under drought conditions would decrease, decreasing fire 
intensities. Although generally less destructive of life than in
many developing world locations, landslides triggered by peri­
odic heavy rainfall events threaten property and infrastructure 
in steep lands of the western United States and Canada. Relict 
landslides occur in much of northern Europe and North 
America (Johnson and Vaughan, 1989). Although stable under 
present natural conditions, these landslides are reactivated by 
urban construction activities and are triggered by heavy rains 
(Caine, 1980). Lands denuded of vegetation by wildfire or 
urban development also are vulnerable.
Although there has been an apparent downward trend in 
Atlantic hurricanes in recent years (e.g., Landsea et al., 1996), 
not all authors agree (Karl et al., 1995b). What is certain is that 
the amount of property and the number of people in areas 
known to be vulnerable to hurricanes is large and increasing in 
low-lying coastal areas in much of the United States Atlantic 
and Gulf coasts. For example, although data on the amount or 
proportion of national physical assets exposed to climate haz­
ards are not readily available, it is known that in the United 
States about $2 trillion in insured property value lies within 30 
km of coasts exposed to Atlantic hurricanes (IRC, 1995).
Most authors have found increases in seasonal minimum tem­
peratures in North America, but not in seasonal maximums 
(IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 3). These results would suggest 
reduced incidence of cold-related problems without a con­
comitant increase in heat-related problems. However, increas­
es in regional cold outbreaks occurred from the late 1970s to 
the mid-1980s. There has been little evidence of an increase in 
danger from tornadoes in the region (Grazulis, 1993; Ostby, 
1993).
Offshore oil and gas exploration and production would be 
influenced by change in extreme events. In the south, an 
increase in extreme storm events in the Gulf of Mexico may 
mean increasing fixed and floating platform engineering stan­
dards (i.e., more expensive platforms) and more frequent and 
longer storm interruptions. In terms of interruptions, weather- 
related production shutdowns result in losses to production 
companies in the range of 
$ 1  million dollars per day— 
$10,000-50,000 per facility where evacuation is necessary. 
The industry defers millions of dollars annually in royalties 
(approximately $7 million each day for offshore Gulf of 
Mexico facilities) paid for hydrocarbon produced from fields 
owned by the public.
8.3.8.4. 
Energy Supply Systems
The energy sector is diverse, but a few generalizations can be 
made. Many components of conventional energy supply systems 
that involve fossil and nuclear energy— including onshore 
extraction (with exceptions), land transportation of fuels, con­
version, and end-use (except for space conditioning)— are large­
ly independent of climate. However, exploration and well ser­
vicing offshore and in tundra and boreal regions, particularly in 
wet springs in boggy areas, are dependent on the climate regime; 
if climate conditions change (wetter or drier), the duration of the
North America
307
servicing/exploration season could change, with economic 
impacts in those sectors. Water transportation, activities in the 
arctic and mountainous areas, cooling systems for thermal power 
generation, and energy demand for space conditioning also may 
be affected to some degree by changes in climate, positively or 
negatively. 
Many 
renewable 
energy 
sources— such 
as 
hydropower, solar, wind, and biomass— are strongly affected by 
climate in positive or negative ways. Only large-scale 
hydropower and some biomass currently make a large contribu­
tion to the North American energy supply. However, this sector 
may become more dependent on renewable energy in the future, 
and hence more vulnerable to climate change, especially if 
greenhouse gas controls constrain the use of fossil fuels and cur­
rent barriers to nuclear growth continue.
Thermal electric generating plants and nuclear energy plants 
are susceptible to hydrological and water resource constraints 
that affect their cooling water supply. Power plant output may 
be restricted because of reduced water availability or thermal 
pollution of rivers with a reduced flow of water. Events such as 
these have occurred during droughts in several parts of the 
world, including the United States (Energy Economist, 1988). 
Under more extreme temperature conditions, some nuclear 
plants might shut down to comply with safety regulations 
(Miller et al., 1992). Future power plants are less likely to 
depend on once-through cooling and may be designed to deal 
with anticipated shortages of cooling water supplies.
Hydroelectricity, which provides 20% of the region’s electrici­
ty (and is the primary energy source in some areas of North 
America, such as the Pacific Northwest and Quebec), depends 
on the quantity and seasonal distribution of precipitation. 
Greater annual precipitation overall in the North American 
region is projected, with the greatest increases in winter and 
spring. For the north, this likely will mean greater snowfall to 
be added to the spring runoff, which would put greater demand 
on reservoirs to even out electricity supply. For southern 
hydroelectric facilities, climate projections suggest greater sea­
sonal variation— unfortunately not coincidental with anticipat­
ed increased demand for summer air conditioning. Some areas 
(particularly the southwest of the continent) may experience 
lower rainfalls in the summer and fall, which, along with 
increased demand for air-conditioning, would exacerbate peak 
power requirements. However, GCMs are less reliable in sim­
ulating regional precipitation than temperature, and these pre- 
dietions currently are not sufficiently reliable as a basis for 
hydroelectric and water resource planning.
Local energy distribution will not be affected, but long-dis­
tance transmission lines and pipelines may be subject to land 
disturbances, particularly in the western mountains where 
increased precipitation may induce slope instability. In the 
north, the permafrost, which normally provides a solid base for 
construction and transportation, is expected to degrade or thaw 
faster in some areas, producing stress on structures that may 
have been designed for a permafrost regime. Projected changes 
include not only melting but also decreases in the strength 
properties of the permafrost and increases in frost heaving. The
vulnerability of pipelines as a result of projected changes in 
underlying permafrost (Nixon et a i, 1990) are expected to be 
particularly acute in discontinuous permafrost areas and in the 
southern reaches of continuous permafrost. As a result, modi­
fications or repairs to pipelines may be necessary, and some 
concerns have been raised regarding the potential of increased 
risk of environmental contamination.
Small-hydropower— usually located in nondammed streams—  
may provide more power in periods of peak runoff. Solar ener­
gy is highly dependent on cloud cover, which may increase 
with the expected intensification of the hydrological cycle; the 
exception might be the south-central area of North America, 
where increased insolation is expected (and where it would 
coincide with increased electricity demand for space cooling). 
The wind— not yet a significant contributor to North America’s 
energy supply— is a highly variable source. Biofuels, currently 
primarily wood waste and grains, provide about 4% of the 
region’s primary energy supply; changes in the availability of 
these fuels are possible as a result of projected changes to for­
est growth and productivity (see Section 8.3.2) and projected 
changes in the availability (absolutely and regionally) of 
grains, mainly corn for ethanol (see Section 8.3.4.1). However, 
future growth in biofuels is likely to involve dedicated energy 
farms utilizing short-rotation, highly managed crops.
8.3.8.5. 
Energy Demand
Climate warming would result in increased demand for cooling 
and decreased demand for heating energy, with the overall net 
effect varying with geographic region; however, changes in 
energy demand for comfort are expected to result in a net sav­
ing overall for North America.
Space heating and cooling are the most climate-sensitive uses 
of energy; they account for about 14% of energy use in North 
America, based on U.S. estimates extended to include Canada 
(see Table 8 -8 ). The demand for summer cooling is likely to 
increase with projected warming. On the other hand, winter 
heating demand will be reduced. Rosenthal et al. (1995) con­
cluded that a 1.8°C global warming would reduce total U.S. 
energy use associated with space heating and air conditioning 
by 1 exajoule (EJ)— 11% of demand— in the year 2010; costs 
would be reduced by $5.5 billion (1991 dollars). Belzer et al. 
(1996) found that a 4°C warming would decrease total site 
energy use for commercial sector heating and cooling by 
0.5-0.8 EJ (13-17% ) and associated primary energy by 
0.1-0.4 EJ (2-7% ), depending on the degree to which 
advanced building designs penetrate the market. (This analysis 
was based on projected buildings in the year 2030, though the 
assumed 
temperature 
increase 
is 
much 
greater 
than 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projec­
tions for that period.)
The seasonal occurrence of peak demand for electricity is an 
important factor. If peak demand occurs in winter, maximum 
demand is likely to fall, whereas if there is a summer peak.
308
North America
Table 8-8: Use o f energy in buildings in U.S., 1989-90. ^
Energy
Source/Use
Residential 
CommerciaP 
Total
Electricity
-  Air conditioning 
1.5
-  Space heating 
0.9
-  Ventilation 
—
Natural Gas
-  Space heating 
3.4
Fuel Oil 
1.0
LPG 
0.3
District Heat 
—
Total 
7.1
0.9
0.3
0.8
1.3 
0.4
0.6
4.3
11.4
'All values based on Buildings and Energy in the 1980s, Energy 
Information Administration, DOE/EIA-0555(95)/1, June 1995. 
^Commercial values are from 1989.
Note: Total energy resource consumption within the U.S. in 1990 was 
80 quads, so space conditioning accounted for about 14% of total.
maximum demand will rise. The precise effects are strongly 
dependent on the climate zone (Linder and Inglis, 1989). 
Climate change may cause some areas to switch from a winter 
peaking regime to approach a summer peaking regime (Scott et 
al., 1994). Fewer studies have estimated the possible impact of 
climate change on investment requirements in electricity sup­
ply. An exception is the “infrastructure” component (Linder 
and Inglis, 1989) of the U.S. national climate effects study 
(Smith and Tirpak, 1989), which estimated that with a 1.1°C 
warming, peak demand would increase by 29 gigawatts (GW), 
or 4% of the baseline level for that year. Decreases in invest­
ment for heating supply fuels have not been estimated.
Although usually smaller in total magnitude of energy demand, 
the use of electricity and fuels for irrigation pumping and the 
use of fuels for drying of agricultural crops also can be signifi­
cant weather-sensitive demands in some regions (Darmstadter, 
1993; Scott et al., 1993). Pumping would tend to increase in 
regions suffering a decrease in natural soil moisture— for exam­
ple, Goos (1989) found a 20% increase in energy demand for 
irrigation in the province of Alberta— ^whereas drying energy 
would decrease where humidity decreases. Automobile fuel 
efficiency may decrease slightly as a result of greater use of air- 
conditioning. With a 4°C warming, autos would consume an 
additional 47 liters of fuel per 10,000 km driven, for a total cost 
of $1-3 billion per year at current energy prices (Titus, 1992).
The technological capacity to adapt to climate change is like­
ly to be readily available in North America. However, its
application will be realized only if the necessary information 
is available, the institutional and financial capacity to manage 
change exists, and the benefits o f adaptive measures are con­
sidered to be worth their costs. Therefore, to increase the 
potential fo r adaptation and to reduce costs, it is essential that 
information about the nature o f climate change is available 
sufficiently fa r in advance in relation to the planning horizons 
and lifetimes o f investments.
Some adaptation will occur if better information concerning 
the risks posed by climate change is available and the appro­
priate signals are available from the marketplace. Over periods 
of half a century or more, many sectors will change signifi­
cantly, and new products, markets, and technologies will 
emerge. In the transportation industry, for example, nominal 
replacement cycles are 1 0 - 2 0  years for transit vehicles and 
35-70 years for most infrastructure (National Council on 
Public Works Improvement, 1988). Turnover of capital stock 
provides the opportunity to adapt easily if information is avail­
able. Given uncertainties, however, autonomous adaptation 
signaled by the marketplace cannot be relied upon entirely for 
long-lived public transportation and other infrastructure. 
Governments may have to set a suitable policy framework, dis­
seminate information about climate change, and act directly in 
relation to vulnerable infrastructures. For example, effective 
land-use regulation (zoning and building codes) can help 
reduce vulnerabilities by directing population shifts away from 
vulnerable locations such as floodplains, steep hillsides, and 
low-lying coastlines. Research is needed to better understand 
the factors that affect effective adaptive capacity and how those 
factors vary within North America.
Some forms of adaptation, such as those in the areas of fire pre­
vention and water supply-and-demand balancing, will likely be 
advantageous regardless of climate regime. Examples would 
include major adaptive responses in fire-control systems in rural 
areas— such as controlled burns to limit fuel, fire breaks, aerial 
fire retardant delivery, and rural fire departments and “smoke 
jumpers”— and short-term activity controls during high fire- 
danger weather, such as prohibitions on open burning, commer­
cial activities such as logging, and recreation activities such as 
hiking, hunting, or use of off-road vehicles. If the frequency or 
intensity of fire danger warrants, other potential adaptive 
responses involve improved spatial planning of communities 
and some longer-term land-use controls. These strategies would 
provide better isolation of fires and could limit damage to 
human settlements even under current conditions.
In the energy supply sector, anticipation of possible regional 
climate changes will be important in the design of and site 
selection for solar and wind energy systems, as well as energy 
transportation systems. For example, possible thawing of per­
mafrost in Arctic regions may require changes in the design of 
oil pipelines to avoid slumping, breaks, and leaks (Brown, 
1989; Anderson et a i, 1994). Systems with long lifetimes, such 
as large hydroelectric impoundment systems, will have diffi­
culty adjusting in the absence of long-term predictions. Future 
biomass energy farms, however, are likely to be intensively
North America
309
managed and have short crop rotation; therefore, they would be 
better able to adapt to changing conditions through choices of 
crops and management techniques.
For energy demand, building design can assist adaptation. 
Increased building-shell efficiency and changes to building 
design that reduce air-conditioning load show promise (Scott 
et ai., 1994). Though effective, however, adaptive strategies 
are not implemented without costs (Loveland and Brown,
1990). Reducing the size of space-heating capacity in 
response to warmer climate would be a logical adaptive 
response in more temperate and polar countries and may free 
up investment funds for other purposes, even within the ener­
gy sector. Community design to reduce heat islands (through 
judicious use of vegetation and light-colored surfaces) 
(Akbari et al., 1992), reducing motor transportation, and tak­
ing advantage of solar resources also may be viable and would 
have sustainability benefits.
8.3.9. 
Human Health
Climate change is likely to have wide-ranging and mostly 
adverse impacts on human health. These impacts would arise 
by direct pathways (e.g., exposure to thermal stress and 
extreme weather events) and indirect pathways (increases in 
some air pollutants, pollens, and mold spores; malnutrition; 
increases in the potential transmission of vector-bome and 
waterborne diseases; and general public health infrastructural 
damage) (IPCC 1996, WG II Sections 18.2 and 18.3, and 
Figure 18-1). Climate change also could jeopardize access to 
traditional foods garnered from land and water (such as game, 
wild birds, fish, and berries), leading to diet-related problems 
such as obesity, cardiovascular disorders, and diabetes among 
northern populations of indigenous peoples as they make new 
food choices (Government of Canada, 1996).
8.З.9.1. 
Thermal Extremes
Temperate regions such as North America are expected to 
warm disproportionately more than tropical and subtropical 
zones (IPCC 1996, W G I). The frequency of very hot days in 
temperate climates is expected to approximately double for 
an increase of 2-3°C  in the average summer temperature 
(CDC, 1989; Climate Change Impacts Review Group, 1991). 
Heat waves cause excess deaths (Kilbourne, 1992), many of 
which are caused by increased demand on the cardiovascular 
system required for physiological cooling. Heat also aggra­
vates existing medical problems in vulnerable populations—  
particularly the elderly, the young, and the chronically ill 
(CDC, 1995; Canadian Global Change Program, 1995). For 
example, mortality during oppressively hot weather is asso­
ciated predominately with preexisting cardiovascular, cere­
brovascular, and respiratory disorders, as well as accidents 
(Haines, 1993; IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 18.2.1). In addi­
tion to mortality, morbidity such as heat exhaustion, heat 
cramps, heat syncope or fainting, and heat rash also result
from heat waves. People living in hot regions, such as the 
southern United States, cope with excessive heat through 
adaptations in lifestyle, physiological acclimatization, and 
adoption of a particular mental approach (Ellis, 1972; 
Rotton, 1983). In temperate regions, however, periods of 
excessive heat occur less frequently, and populations accord­
ingly are less prepared with responsive adaptive options 
(WHO, 1996).
Data in cities in the United States and Canada show that over­
all death rates increase during heat waves (Kalkstein and 
Smoyer, 1993), particularly when the temperature rises above 
the local population’s temperature threshold. In addition to the 
1980 heat wave that resulted in 1,700 heat-related deaths, heat 
waves in 1983 and 1988 in the United States killed 566 and 
454 people, respectively (CDC, 1995). More recently, in July 
1995, a heat wave caused as many as 765 heat-related deaths 
in the Chicago area alone (Phelps, 1996). Tavares (1996) 
examined the relationship between weather and heat-related 
morbidity for Toronto for the years 1979-89 and found that 
14% of the variability for all morbidity in persons 0-65 years 
of age was related to weather conditions.
Death rates in temperate and subtropical zones appear to be 
higher in winter than in summer (Kilbourne, 1992). 
Comparative analyses of the causes of differences between 
summer versus winter weather-related mortalities are lacking, 
however. The United States averaged 367 deaths per year due 
to cold in the period 1979-94 (Parrish, 1997), whereas the 
annual average number of Canadians dying of excessive cold 
is 110 (Phillips, 1990). It has been suggested that winter mor­
tality rates, which appear to be more related to infectious dis­
eases than to extremely cold temperatures, will be little impact­
ed by climate change. Any global warming-induced increases 
in heat-related mortality, therefore, are unlikely to be of simi­
lar magnitude to decreases in winter mortality (Kalkstein and 
Smoyer, 1993).
Mortality from extreme heat is increased by concomitant con­
ditions of low wind, high humidity, and intense solar radiation 
(Kilbourne, 1992). In Ontario, the number of days annually 
with temperatures above 30°C could increase fivefold (from 10 
to 50 days per year) under doubled CO 2 scenarios (Environment 
Canada et al., 1995).
Several studies (e.g., WHO, 1996) have found that future heat- 
related mortality rates would significantly increase under cli­
mate change. Table 8-9 shows projected changes in heat-related 
deaths for selected cities in North America under two climate 
change scenarios. Acclimatization of populations, however, 
may reduce the predicted heat-related morbidity and mortality. 
Kalkstein et al. (1993) found that people in Montreal and 
Toronto might acclimatize somewhat to global warming condi­
tions. People in Ottawa, on the other hand, showed no signs of 
potential acclimatization. It is important to note that acclimati­
zation to increasing temperatures occurs gradually, particularly 
among the elderly, and may be slower than the rate of ambient 
temperature change.
310
North America
Table 8-9: Total summer heat-related deaths in selected North American cities: current mortality and estimates o f future mortality 
under two different climate change scenarios with global mean temperature increases of~0.53°C or ~1.16°CJ
City
GFDL89 Climate Change Scenario 
Present 
~0.53°C 
~1.16°C
Mortality^ 
no acc 
acc 
no acc 
acc
UKTR Climate Change Scenario
~0.53°C 
~1.16°C
no acc 
acc 
no acc 
acc
United States
Atlanta
78
191
96
293
147
247
124
436
218
Dallas
19
35
28
782
618
1364
1077
1360
1074
Detroit
118
264
131
419
209
923
460
1099
547
Los Angeles
84
205
1 0 2
350
174
571
284
728
363
New York
320
356
190
879
494
1098
683
1754
971
Philadelphia
145
190
142
474
354
586
437
884
659
San Francisco
27
19
40
104
85
57
47
76
62
Canada
Montreal
69
1 2 1
61
245
124
460
233
725
368
Toronto
19
36
0
8 6
1
289
3
563
7
'Figures represent average summer-season heat-related deaths for each city under each climate change scenario. Figures assume no change in 
population size and age distribution in the future.
2Raw mortality data.
Source: Modified from Kalkstein et al. (1997) in WHO (1996), p. 57.
Air conditioning and adequate warning systems also may 
reduce heat-related morbidity and mortality in a warmer North 
America. It has been suggested that air conditioning could 
reduce heat-related deaths by 25% (Phelps, 1996). A  warning 
system such as the Philadelphia Hot W eather-Health 
Watch/Warning System (PWWS) that alerts the public when 
oppressive air masses (e.g., extended periods of extreme high 
temperatures, high humidity, moderate to strong southwesterly 
winds, and high pressure) may occur might further reduce heat- 
related mortality (Kalkstein and Smoyer, 1993). The PWWS is 
a three-tiered system that produces a health watch, health alert, 
or health warning and then accordingly initiates a series of 
interventions, including media announcements, promotion of a 
“buddy system,” home visits, nursing and personal care inter­
vention, increased emergency medical service staffing, and 
provision of air-conditioned facilities (Kalkstein et al., 1995).
8.3.9.2. 
A ir Quality and Ground-Level Ozone
Projected climate changes could lead to exacerbation o f respi­
ratory disorders associated with reduced air quality in urban 
and rural areas and effects on the seasonality o f certain aller­
gic respiratory disorders.
It is well established that exposure to single or combined air 
pollutants has serious public health consequences. For exam­
ple, ozone at ground level has been identified as causing dam­
age to lung tissue, particularly among the elderly and chil­
dren— reducing pulmonary function and sensitizing airways to 
other irritants and allergens (Beckett, 1991; Schwartz, 1994; 
U.S. EPA, 1996). Ground-level ozone affects not only those 
with impaired respiratory function, such as persons with asthma
and chronic obstructive lung disease, but also healthy individu­
als. Even at relatively low exposure levels, healthy individuals 
can experience chest pain, coughing, nausea, and pulmonary 
congestion as a result of exposure to ground-level ozone.
Researchers also recognize that concurrent hot weather and air 
pollution can have synergistic impacts on health (Katsouyanni 
etal., 1993). For example, warmer temperatures can accelerate 
production and increase concentrations of photochemical oxi­
dants in urban and rural areas and thus exacerbate respiratory 
disorders (Shumway et al., 1988; Schwartz and Dockery, 1992; 
Dockery et a l, 1993; Katsouyanni et al., 1993; Pope et al, 
1995; Phelps, 1996).
Few large-scale studies have been performed to assess the 
implications of climate change on air quality or population 
exposures to high concentrations of ground-level ozone. This 
limitation is related to difficulty in devising a defensible sce­
nario of future climate change for a specific location, the pre­
vious focus on acute short-term effects rather than long-term 
effects, and the expense involved in modeling atmospheric 
chemistry. There is a limited number of studies, however, that 
shed some light on possible impacts of climate change on air 
quality and associated health implications.
Emberlin (1994), for example, has suggested that global warm­
ing may affect the seasonality of certain allergic respiratory 
disorders by altering the production of plant aero-allergens. 
Asthma and hay fever can be triggered by aero-allergens that 
cause high seasonal morbidity. The severity of allergies may be 
intensified by projected changes in heat and humidity, thereby 
contributing to breathing difficulties (Environment Canada et 
a l, 1995; Maarouf, 1995).
North America
311
Ozone concentrations at ground level continue to be the most per­
vasive air pollution problem in North America. The U.S. popula­
tion exposed to unhealthy levels of ozone has fluctuated over the 
past 10-20 years— reaching a peak in 1988, when 112 million 
people lived in areas with higher than acceptable concentrations. 
In addition, recent studies (U.S. EPA, 1996) provide evidence of 
a positive correlation between ground-level ozone and respirato­
ry-related hospital admissions in several cities in the United 
States. Such hospital admissions in the province of Ontario 
strongly relate to ambient levels of sulfur dioxide and ozone and 
to temperature (Canadian Public Health Association, 1992).
Research has shown that ground-level ozone formation is 
affected by weather and climate. Many studies have focused on 
the relationship between temperature and ozone concentrations 
(Wolff and Lioy, 1978; Atwater, 1984; Kuntasal and Chang, 
1987; Wackter and Bayly, 1988; Wakim, 1989). For example, 
the large increase in ozone concentrations at ground level in 
1988 in the United States and in parts of southern Canada can 
be attributed, in part, to meteorological conditions; 1988 was 
the third-hottest summer in the past 100 years. In general, the 
aforementioned studies suggest a nonlinear relationship 
between temperature and ozone concentrations at ground level: 
Below temperatures of 22-26°C (70-80°F), there is no rela­
tionship between ozone concentrations and temperature; above 
32“C (90°F), there is a strong positive relationship.
Regression analyses have revealed that high temperatures are a 
necessary condition for high ozone concentrations at ground 
level; other meteorological variables often need to be consid­
ered, however. Weather variables that have been included in 
regression equations include temperature, wind speed, relative 
humidity, and sky cover (Wakim, 1990; Korsog and Wolff, 
1991); however, other variables that could be included are 
wind direction, dew-point temperature, sea-level pressure, and 
precipitation.
Studies of ground-level ozone concentrations in which emis­
sions and other weather factors are held constant (Smith and 
Tirpak, 1989) suggest the following impacts on ground-level 
ozone as a result of a 4°C warming:
• 
In the San Francisco Bay area, maximum ozone con­
centration could increase by about 2 0 % and could 
approximately double the area that would be out of 
compliance with the National Ambient Air Quality 
Standard (NAAQS).
In New York, ground-level ozone concentrations 
could increase by 4%.
In the Midwest and Southeast, changes in ground-level 
ozone levels could range from a decrease of 2.4% to an 
increase of 8 %, and the area in exceedance of the ozone 
standard could exhibit nearly a threefold increase.
New York 
City
Figure 8-10; Average annual weather-related mortality for 1993, 2020, and 2050 climate (Kalkstein and Greene, 1997), based 
on 1980 population and the GFDL89 climate change scenario. Annual estimates were obtained by adding summer and winter 
mortality. The projections do not account for population growth, nor do they fully account for air-conditioning use; however, 
they do assume acclimation to changed climate.
312
North America
In Canada, a projected fivefold rise in the frequency of hot 
days (i.e., those with temperatures >30°C) could lead to a 
greater number of days with levels of ground-level ozone con­
sidered to be a health risk for sensitive individuals in the pop­
ulation (Environment Canada et a l, 1995).
8.3.9.3. 
Extreme Weather Events
In the United States, 145 natural disasters resulted in 14,536 
deaths from 1945 to 1989. Of these events, 136 were weather 
disasters; these extreme weather events caused 95% of all disas­
ter-related deaths. Floods are the most frequent type of disaster.
More frequent extreme weather events are predicted to accom­
pany global warming (see Figure 8-10), in part as a consequence 
of projected increases in convective activity. More intense rain­
fall events accompanying global warming would be expected to 
increase the occurrence of floods, and warmer sea-surface tem­
peratures could strengthen tropical cyclones (IPCC 1996, WG I).
Climate models are unable to predict extreme events because 
they lack spatial and temporal resolution. In addition, there is no 
clear evidence that sustained or worldwide changes in extreme 
events have occurred in the past few decades. Nonetheless, such 
events cause loss of life and endanger health by increasing 
injuries, infectious diseases, stress-related disorders, and 
adverse health effects associated with social and environmental 
dismptions and environmentally enforced migration. Because 
each extreme weather event is unique in scale and location, and 
population vulnerability varies considerably, it is not possible to 
quantify the health impacts that would be associated with poten­
tial changes in extreme weather events.
Recent floods in the United States (e.g., Mississippi River 
flooding in 1993) were caused primarily by unusually high pre­
cipitation combined with soil saturation from earlier precipita­
tion (Kunkel et al., 1994). In the United States, flash floods 
currently are the leading cause of weather-related mortality. In 
addition to causing deaths by drowning, flooding can lead to 
widespread destruction of food supplies and outbreaks of dis­
ease as a result of breakdowns in sanitation services. Flooding 
also may result in the release of dangerous chemicals from 
storage sites and waste disposal sites into floodwaters. 
Increased runoff from agricultural lands during periods of 
heavy precipitation also can threaten water supplies. The 1993 
Mississippi River flooding, for example, caused wide dispersal 
of microorganisms and chemicals from agricultural lands and 
industrial sites (Changnon, 1996).
8.3.9.4. 
Biological Agents: Vector- and Waterborne Diseases
8.3.9.4.1. 
Vector-borne diseases
Changing climate conditions may lead to the northward spread o f 
vector-borne infectious diseases and potentially enhanced trans­
mission dynamics as a result o f warmer ambient temperatures.
Vector-borne diseases (primarily carried by arthropod or small 
mammal “vectors”) and waterborne diarrheal diseases repre­
sent a large proportion of infectious diseases, which are the 
w orld’s leading cause of fatalities. Projected changes in cli­
mate almost certainly would make conditions less suitable for 
the transmission of several vector-borne diseases (e.g., plague 
and some forms of encephalomyelitis) in much of their current 
North American range. Other diseases (e.g.. Saint Louis 
encephalitis and western equine encephalomyelitis) might 
extend their range northward or exhibit more frequent out­
breaks. The crucial factor is the availability of appropriate 
habitats for vectors and (in the case of zoonotic diseases) ver­
tebrate “maintenance” hosts. Although projected changes in 
climate might provide opportunities for diseases to extend their 
range, the North American health infrastructure may prevent a 
large increase in disease cases; providing this protection, how­
ever, could increase the demands on and costs of the current 
public health system.
The transmission of many infectious diseases is affected by cli­
matic factors. Infective agents and their vector organisms are 
sensitive to factors such as temperature, surface water, humid­
ity, wind, soil moisture, and changes in forest distribution 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 18).
M alaria: Climatic factors, which increase the inoculation rate of 
Plasmodium pathogens and the breeding activity of Anopheles 
mosquitoes, are considered the most important factors con­
tributing to epidemic outbreaks of malaria in nonendemic areas. 
A temperature relationship for sporadic autochthonous malaria 
transmission in the temperate United States has been observed 
in New York and New Jersey during the 1990s (Layton et al., 
1995; Zucker, 1996). Common to these two outbreaks was 
exceptionally hot and humid weather, which reduced the devel­
opment time of malaria sporozoites enough to render these 
northern anopheline mosquitoes infectious. Such temperature 
sensitivity of parasite development also has been observed in 
the laboratory (Noden et al., 1995).
Martens et al. (1995) estimated that an increase in global mean 
temperature of several degrees by the year 
2 1 0 0  would 
increase the vectorial capacity of mosquito populations 1 0 0 - 
fold in temperate countries. In these countries, however, con­
tinued and increased application of control measures— such as 
disease surveillance and prompt treatment of cases— probably 
would counteract any increase in vectorial capacity. Similarly, 
Duncan (1996) showed that projected increases in mean daily 
temperatures may allow for the development of malaria in 
Toronto. It was not suggested, however, that climate alone 
would permit the spread of malaria because many other factors 
must be considered.
Malaria once prevailed throughout the American colonies and 
southern Canada (Russell, 1968; Bruce-Chwatt, 1988). By the 
middle of the 19th century, malaria extended as far north as 
50°N latitude. In Canada, malaria disappeared at the end of 
the 19th century (Bruce-Chwatt, 1988; Haworth, 1988). 
Serious malaria control measures were first undertaken in the
North America
313
southern United States in 1912 (Bruce-Chwatt, 1988). By 
1930, malaria had disappeared from the northern and western 
United States and generally caused fewer than 25 deaths per
100,000 people in the South (Meade et a i, 1988). In 1970, the 
World Health Organization Expert Advisory Panel on Malaria 
recommended that the United States be included in the WHO 
official register of areas where malaria had been eradicated. 
The history of malaria in North America reinforces the sug­
gestion that although increased temperatures may lead to con­
ditions suitable for the réintroduction of malaria to North 
America, socioeconomic factors such as public health facili­
ties will play a large role in determining the existence or 
extent of such infections.
Arboviruses: Dengue fever and dengue hemorrhagic fever 
(DHF) periodically have occurred in Texas, following out­
breaks in Mexico, during the past two decades (Gubler and 
Trent, 1994; РАНО, 1994). Because of the sensitivity of 
dengue to climate, especially ambient temperature, it has been 
suggested that this disease may increase in the United States if 
a sustained warming trend occurs. However, due to high living 
standards, this disease is not likely to increase in incidence or 
geographic distribution in the United States, even if there is a 
sustained warming trend. Dengue viruses occur predominantly 
in the tropics, between 30°N and 20°S latitude (Trent et al., 
1983); freezing kills the eggs, larvae, and adults of Aedis 
aegypte, the most important vector (Chandler, 1945; Shope,
1991). It should be noted, however, that the eggs of Ac. 
Alhopictus, also a vector, are not killed by freezing.
Jetten and Focks (1997) analyzed the impact of a 2°C and a 4°C 
temperature rise on the epidemic potential for dengue, includ­
ing the impacts for cities in temperate areas (Figure 8-11). Their 
analysis shows that areas adjacent in latitude or elevation to 
current endemic zones may become more receptive to viral 
introductions and enhanced transmission. Furthermore, their 
study shows that the proportion of the year when transmission 
can occur in North America could significantly increase under 
warming scenarios.
Enceohalitides: O f reported encephalitis cases in North 
America, many are mosquito related, including Saint Louis 
encephalitis, which has occurred as far north as Windsor, 
Ontario (1975); LaCrosse encephalitis; and western, eastern, 
and Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis (Shope, 1980). The 
elderly are at highest risk for Saint Louis encephalitis, and 
children under 16 years are at greatest risk of LaCrosse 
encephalitis.
Although mosquito longevity diminishes as temperatures rise, 
viral transmission rates (similar to dengue) rise shaфly at high­
er temperatures (see Figure 8-11) (Hardy, 1988; Reisen et al.,
1993). From field studies in California (Reeves et al., 1994), 
researchers have suggested that a 3-5°C temperature increase 
could cause a northern shift in western equine and Saint Louis 
encephalitis outbreaks, with the disappearance of western 
equine encephalitis in southern endemic regions. Also to be 
considered in these types of impact assessments is the impact of
projected climate change on mosquito habitat (e.g., freshwater 
hardwood swamps for the eastern equine encephalomyelitis 
vector Culiseta melanura— which may well be eliminated from 
the southeast United States).
Outbreaks of Saint Louis encephalitis are correlated with peri­
ods of several consecutive days in which temperature exceeds 
30^C (Monath and Tsai, 1987). For example, the 1984 
California epidemic followed a period of extremely high tem­
peratures. In addition, eastern equine encephalitis has been 
associated with warm, wet summers along the east coast of the 
United States (Freier, 1993). Computer analysis of monthly cli­
mate data has demonstrated that excessive rainfall in January 
and February, combined with drought in July, most often pre­
cedes outbreaks of eastern equine encephalitis (Bowen and 
Francy, 1980). Such a pattern of warm, wet winters followed 
by hot, dry summers resembles many of the GCM projections 
for climate change over much of the United States.
Tickborne diseases: Ticks transmit Lyme disease— the most 
common vector-borne disease in the United States, with more 
than 10,000 cases reported in 1994— along with Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever (RMSF), and Ehrlichiosis. Involved 
tick and mammal host populations are influenced by land use 
and land cover, soil type, and elevation, as well as the timing, 
duration, and rate of change of temperature and moisture 
regimes (Mount et a l, 1993; Glass et al., 1994). The relation­
ships between vector life-stage parameters and climatic condi­
tions have been verified experimentally in field and laboratory 
studies (Goddard, 1992; Mount et a i, 1993). Ixodes scapu- 
laris— an important hard-backed tick vector in North 
America— ^will not deposit eggs at temperatures below 8 °C, 
and larvae will not emerge from eggs at temperatures below 
12°C; the nymphal molt requires approximately 35 days at 
25°C, and the adult molt requires 45 days at 25°C. Temperature 
also affects the activity of ticks; a minimum threshold for activ­
ity is 4°C. Ticks also are highly dependent on a humid envi­
ronment. Climate change, therefore, could be expected to alter 
the distribution of these diseases in both the United States and 
Canada (Grant, 1991; Canadian Global Change Program, 
1995; Environment Canada et al., 1995; Hancock, 1997). For 
example, any tendency toward drying would suggest a reduc­
tion in the incidence of these diseases.
8.3.9.4.2. 
Waterborne diseases
Freshwater: Diarrheal diseases in North America can be caused 
by a large variety of bacteria (e.g., s a l m o n e l l a , s h i g e ll a , and 
C a m p y lo b a c t e r ) , viruses (e.g., rotavirus), and protozoa (e.g., 
g i a r d i a  la m b l i a , to x o p l a s m a , and C r y p to s p o r id iu m ) . Climatic 
effects on the distribution and quality of surface water, includ­
ing increases in flooding or water shortages, can impede per­
sonal hygiene and impair local sewage systems. For example, 
extreme precipitation contributed to an outbreak of toxoplas­
mosis in British Columbia in 1995 when excessive runoff con­
taminated a reservoir with oocysts from domestic and wild cats 
(British Columbia CDC, writ. comm. 1995).
314
North America
Cryptosporidiosis, which causes severe diarrhea in children and 
can be fatal to immunocompromised individuals, is the most 
prevalent waterborne disease in the United States (Moore et a i,
1995). Natural events (e.g., floods, storms, heavy rainfall, and 
snowmelt) often can wash material of fecal origin, primarily 
from agricultural nonpoint sources, into potable water. The 
Milwaukee cryptosporidiosis outbreak in 1993 resulted in
403,000 reported cases; it coincided with unusually heavy spring 
rains and runoff from melting snow (MacKenzie et a i, 1994).
Factors enhancing waterborne cryptosporidiosis will depend 
on hydrological responses to climate change and the degree of
flooding in water catchment areas. Flushing from heavy rains 
may be more important than actual flooding, especially for pri­
vate wells influenced by surface water. Land-use patterns also 
determine contamination sources (e.g., agricultural activities) 
and therefore must be considered.
In addition, intensification of heavy rainfall events (as suggest­
ed by some scenarios) could lead to more rapid leaching from 
hazardous-waste landfills, as well as contamination from agri­
cultural activities and septic tanks. This leaching or contamina­
tion represents a potential health hazard— particularly at times 
of extensive flooding, which can lead to toxic contamination of
I 
Current
San Diego
Figure 8-11: Weeks of potential dengue transmission under current temperature and 2°C and 4°C warming (adapted from 
Focks et al., 1995; Jetten and Focks, 1997). Presence of dengue virus, mosquito vector, and exposed human populations are 
required for disease transmission.
North America
315
groundwater or surface drinking water. Improvements in water 
treatment facilities and technologies could help ameliorate this 
situation.
Marine: Warm water favors the growth of toxic organisms such 
as red tides, which cause paralytic shellfish poisoning, diarrhe- 
ic shellfish poisoning, and amnesic shellfish poisoning. For 
example, one species of toxic algae previously confined to the 
Gulf of Mexico {Gymnodinium breve) extended northward in 
1987 after a “parcel of warm Gulf Stream water” reached far up 
the east coast, resulting in human neurologic shellfish poison­
ings and substantial fish kills (Tester, 1991). Domoic acid, a 
toxin produced by Nitzchia pungens diatom that causes amnesic 
shellfish poisioning, appeared on Prince Edward Island for the 
first time in 1987. The outbreak coincided with an El Nino year, 
when warm eddies of the Gulf Stream neared the shore and 
heavy rains increased nutrient-rich runoff (Hallegraeff, 1993).
Zooplankton, which feed on algae, can serve as reservoirs for 
Vibrio choierae and other enteric pathogens, particularly gram- 
negative rods. Quiescent forms of V choierae have been found 
to persist within algae; these quiescent forms can revert to a cul- 
turable (and likely infectious) state when nutrients, pH, and 
temperature permit (Huq et ai., 1990). V. choierae occur in the 
Gulf of Mexico and along the east coast of North America. With 
warmer sea surface temperatures, coastal algal blooms therefore 
could facilitate cholera proliferation and transmission.
8.4. 
Integrative Issues
This chapter has discussed the impacts of climate change on 
the North American region largely in the context of sector-by- 
sector assessments of plausible impacts. Several common char­
acteristics among sectors can be identified, however. Also, 
viewed collectively, interactions between sectors and subre­
gions can be assessed, and insights about the integrated nature 
of the effects of climate change can emerge.
8.4.1. 
Limitations o f Climate Scenarios 
for Regional Analyses
Most impact studies have assessed how systems would respond 
to climate change resulting from an arbitrary doubling of 
equivalent CO 2  concentrations. These so-called IxC O j scenar­
ios are limited for regional-scale analyses to the extent that 
they inadequately correspond to the spatial scales of variabili­
ty in North American natural and human systems. They also do 
not permit an examination of the effects of climate variability 
on physical, biological, and socioeconomic systems. Very few 
studies have considered dynamic responses to steadily increas­
ing concentrations of greenhouse gases. Consequently, impor­
tant insights about the ability of systems to respond to chang­
ing climate over time are lost. This lack of information is of 
particular concern because the ability of natural ecological sys­
tems to migrate often may be much slower than the predicted 
rate of climate change. Even fewer studies have examined the
consequences of increases beyond a doubling of equivalent 
atmospheric concentrations.
8.4.2. 
Regional Texture of Impacts
All of the potential impacts of climate change exhibit a region­
al texture. Variations in the regional distribution of impacts 
need to be clearly articulated for policymakers. Failure to do so 
can lead to misleading impressions about the potential changes 
in social welfare as a result of climate change and alternative 
policy responses. A simple look at aggregate impacts on U.S. 
agriculture, for example, might suggest that climate change is 
not likely to harm agriculture enough to significantly affect the 
overall U.S. economy; policymakers might be left with the 
erroneous impression that no policy-relevant problems exist. 
Distributional differences emerge, however, upon examination 
of the regional texture of agricultural impacts.
Different adaptation strategies and options will be necessary to 
deal with these regional and sectoral differences. In areas 
where production significantly increases— such as the northern 
edge of agricultural production in North America— additional 
adaptation may be necessary in the development of infrastruc­
ture to support expanded population and transportation require­
ments associated with growth. The texture of the distribution of 
sectors and their biological, physical, and social components 
across the North American landscape cannot adequately be 
captured at a fine enough scale to be relevant to long-range 
planning at the present time; these are essential elements of 
future assessment needs.
It is also recognized— but poorly understood because of limited 
research— that climate change may have some benefits (e.g., it 
may reduce stress or provide opportunities) for certain areas or 
sectors within North America (e.g., expanded agriculture, 
reduced heating costs) or have a neutral effect on climate-insen­
sitive sectors. If one examines any one particular climate impact, 
it is likely that there will be “winners” and “losers” either across 
subregions or within a subregion (e.g., across demographic 
groups). Nevertheless, the weight of evidence suggests that 
when all potential impacts are considered collectively, every 
subregion will incur some negative impacts of climate change.
8.4.3. 
The Role of Adaptation
Some future climate change is inevitable. Strategies for tech­
nological and behavioral adaptation offer an opportunity to 
reduce the vulnerability of sensitive systems to the effects of 
climate change and variability. Some adaptive strategies can be 
undertaken in anticipation of future climate change; others are 
reactive and can be undertaken as the effects of climate change 
are realized.
Four points must be kept in mind when considering the extent to 
which adaptive strategies should be relied upon. First, adaptation 
is not without cost. Scarce natural and financial resources must be
316
North America
diverted away from other productive activities into adaptive prac­
tices. These costs must be carefully weighed when considering 
the tradeoffs among adapting to the change, reducing the cause of 
the change, and living with the residual impacts. Second, the eco­
nomic and social costs of adaptation will increase the more rapid­
ly climate change occurs. Third, although many opportunities 
exist for technological and behavioral adaptation, uncertainties 
exist about potential barriers and limitations to their implementa­
tion. Fourth, uncertainties exist about the efficacy and possible 
secondary effects of particular adaptive strategies.
8.4.4. 
Water as a Common Resource 
Across Sectors and Subregions
Water is a linchpin that integrates many subregions and sectors. 
Available water supplies will be directly affected by climate 
change, but they also are affected by changes in demand from 
the many sectors that rely upon the water. Water is a scarce 
resource used in the agriculture, forest, and energy sectors. It is 
used in urban areas and in recreational activities. It also is 
essential for the survival of wetlands, nonforest ecosystems, 
wildlife, and other ecological systems.
Assessments of the potential impacts of climate change and vari­
ability on any of these systems and sectors must account for the 
inherent competition for water supplies and the need for water of 
varying qualities in various activities. For example, in an assess­
ment of the potential impacts of climate change on agriculture, 
an assumption that farmers will be able to adapt to changing cli­
matic conditions through a reliance on irrigation is valid only to 
the extent that water is available under future climate scenarios. 
In many cases, the scarcity of available water supplies will 
increase because of the direct effects of climate change on water, 
as well as increased demands for available water supplies.
8.4.5. 
Systemic Nature o f the Problem
In evaluating the implications of climate change impacts on 
North America, one must consider that although there are 
regional differences in response by sector and by subregion, 
the scale of anticipated changes is such that there may be 
adjustments taking place in every sector and subregion simul­
taneously. Any one of the impacts (whether beneficial or detri­
mental) that has been discussed for North America may appear 
well within the capability of existing structures and policies to 
adapt. However, the fact that they are occurring simultaneous­
ly may pose a significant challenge to resource managers and 
policymakers. The systemic nature of impacts and issues rais­
es important questions about society’s ability to manage the 
aggregate/cumulative risks posed by climate change.
This systemic problem also must be placed into the larger con­
text of the multiple stressors that are and will be acting on North 
American resources. Many stressors (environmental, social, and 
economic) influence natural and human systems and pose sig­
nificant challenges for decisionmakers and policymakers. The
challenge of coping with the cumulative risks of climate change 
adds to the complexity. What must be kept in mind is that 
changing climate is not the only— nor necessarily the most 
important— factor that will influence these systems and that it 
cannot be isolated from the combination of other factors deter­
mining their future welfare.
8.4.6. 
Integrated Nature o f the Problem
A complete assessment of the effects of climate change on North 
America must include a consideration of the potential interac­
tions and feedbacks between sectors and subregions. Changes in 
the climate system can affect natural and human systems in a 
chain of consequences (see Figure 8-12). Some of these conse­
quences are the results of direct effects of climate change and 
variability on physical, biological, and socioeconomic systems; 
some result from indirect links between climate-sensitive sys­
tems and related social and economic activities; some result 
from feedbacks between human activities that affect the climate 
system, which in turn can lead to further impacts (e.g., human 
activities affecting the climate system— ^which, in turn, can lead 
to further impacts on human health, the environment, and 
socioeconomic systems).
Most existing studies of potential impacts have focused on the 
more narrow direct pathway between climate change and cli­
mate-sensitive systems and sectors. These effects include direct 
climate impacts on human health (e.g., heat stress), environ­
mental processes (e.g., impacts of runoff and streamflow on the 
hydrological cycle, coastal damages caused by sea-level rise, 
changes in biodiversity), market activities that are linked to the 
environment (e.g., agriculture, commercial timber, waterborne 
transport), and human behavior (e.g., changes in air condition­
ing use as a result of changes in the frequency of very hot days).
Fewer studies have captured the more indirect effects of cli­
mate change, which may take many different forms. Many of
North America
317
the primary determinants of human health (adequate food, 
clean water, secure shelter) are related to outputs from sectors 
such as agriculture, water resources, and fisheries. The poten­
tial spread of infectious diseases is Indirectly related to climate 
change through changes in ecosystems and the hydrological 
cycle. Therefore, it is important to integrate these relevant sys­
tems into a human health assessment.
Other indirect effects include secondary impacts on market 
activities that are dependent upon sectors directly affected by 
climate change. For example, climate change will directly
affect crop yields and hence agricultural production and prices. 
These effects, in turn, will influence the prices of goods and 
services that use agricultural commodities in their production, 
which will feed back to the agricultural sector and agricultural 
prices. Shifts in agricultural production could have a large 
impact on freight transport patterns and may require adjust­
ments in the transportation network— ^with marine, road, rail, 
and air links potentially needing expansion into areas not cur­
rently serviced. One study of the U.S. economy suggests that 
the direct effects of climate change on U.S. agriculture, energy 
use, and coastal protection activities could lead to price
Box 8-3. Mackenzie Basin Impact Study
The Mackenzie Basin Impact Study (MBIS) was a 6 -year climate change impact assessment focusing on northwestern 
Canada (supported by Environment Canada and other sponsors) to assess the potential impacts of climate change scenar­
ios on the Mackenzie Basin region, its lands, its waters, and the communities that depend on them (Cohen, 1997a). The 
MBIS was designed to be a scientist-stakeholder collaborative effort, with 30 research activities on various topics— rang­
ing from permafrost and water levels to forest economics and community response to floods.
The MBIS integration framework included several integration modeling exercises— such as resource accounting, 
multiregional input-output modeling and community surveys of the nonwage economy of an aboriginal community, a 
multiobjective model focusing on scenarios of changing land utilization, and a land assessment framework (ILAF) with 
goal programming and an analytic hierarchy process. MBIS researchers identified six main policy issues related to cli­
mate change as another form of “vertical integration”: interjurisdictional water management, sustainability of native 
lifestyles, economic development opportunities, buildings, transportation and infrastructure, and sustainability of ecosys­
tems (Cohen, 1997a). Integration also was attempted through information exchange (scenarios and data) while study 
components were in progress and a series of workshops that provided opportunities for scientists and stakeholders to 
express their views on how climate change might affect the region and to react to research results (Cohen, 1997a,b).
The main result of the integrated assessment was that most participating stakeholders saw climate impacts scenarios as a 
new and different vision of the future for their region, and that adaptation measures alone might not be enough to protect 
the region from adverse impacts.
Integration research framework for the Mackenzie Basin Impact Study (Cohen, 1997a).
318
North America
Box 8-4. Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Basin Project
The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Basin (GLSLB) Project on “adapting to the impacts of climate change and variability” is 
a binational project initiated in 1992 by Environment Canada to improve our understanding of the complex interactions 
among climate, environment, and society so that regional adaptation strategies could be developed in response to poten­
tial climate change and variability (Mortsch and Mills, 1996). The GLSLB Project identified four climate-sensitive 
theme areas upon which to focus the research: water use and management, land use and management, ecosystem health, 
and human health. Another prime focus of the GLSLB Project is adaptation, which provides the conceptual framework 
for integrating research efforts. GLSLB Project studies contain common components that will facilitate the integration of 
research findings, including study objectives; policy issue foci; a multidisciplinary approach; scenarios tested; impact 
and adaptation assessment methods; the concept of adaptation; and scales of time, space, and human activity (Mortsch 
and Mills, 1996). A number of more pragmatic integration concepts also have been incorporated into the GLSLB Project, 
including the use of “end-to-end studies” assessing biophysical and socioeconomic impacts and developing and evaluat­
ing potential adaptation strategies, economic modeling (LINK model), the use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS), 
and common communication goals (Mortsch and Mills, 1996).
increases for all economic sectors, causing a reallocation of 
spending and the sectoral composition of output.
Other indirect effects include changes in nonmarket activities 
as a result of projected impacts of climate change on ecosys­
tems (e.g., changes in recreational fishing as a result of pro­
jected impacts of climate change on aquatic ecosystems). For 
example, the loss of fishing opportunities could be severe in 
some parts of the region, especially at the southern boundaries 
of fish species’ habitat regions. The loss of fishing opportuni­
ties may result in economic losses for the fishing industry. In 
turn, related industries such as the food, transportation, and 
lodging industries will be affected. All of these examples illus­
trate how each sector that is directly or indirectly affected by 
climate change can adversely affect others.
As this chain of consequences illustrates, the task of assessing 
various impacts and the feedbacks among them is enormously 
complex and requires a number of simplifying assumptions. 
Although there are complex macroeconomic models to assess the 
costs and consequences of various mitigation policies, the state of 
the art in impact work at present limits the insights that can be 
gained from this kind of “top-down” modeling. The dominant 
approach has been “bottom-up”— aggregating direct and indirect 
impacts into a single overall estimate, without much attention to 
feedbacks among various sectors. Nevertheless, the complex, 
integrated nature of the climate change problem suggests the 
need for integrated assessments that incorporate many aspects of 
the region. Sectoral assessments alone would not be sufficient.
Examples of broad, integrated approaches to climate impact 
assessment are two regional studies in North America: the 
Mackenzie Basin Impact Study and the Great Lakes-St. 
Lawrence Basin Project.
These two efforts have tried to account for some of the syner­
gies and interactions among sectors that make each region 
unique. Each represents a learning experience that ultimately 
will lead to improvements in how regional assessments and 
integration are done.
References
A ber, J.D., J.M . M elillo, K.J. Nadelhoffer, J. Pastor, and R.D. Boone, 1991; 
Factors controlling nitrogen cycling and nitrogen saturation in northern 
tem perate forest ecosystem s. Ecological Applications, 1, 303-315.
A ber, J.D ., S.V. Ollinger, C.A. Federer, P.B. Reich, M .L. Goulden, D.W. 
Kicklighter, J.M . M elillo, and R.G. Lathrop, 1995: Predicting the effects 
of clim ate change on w ater yield and forest production in the northeast­
ern United States. Clim ate Research, 5(3), 207-222.
A dam s, D., R. A lig, J.M . Callaway, and B.A. M cCarl, and S.M . W innet, 1996: 
Forest and agricultural sector optimization m odel (FASOM): model 
structure and policy applications. Research Paper PNW -RP-495. U.S. 
D epartm ent o f A griculture, Pacific N orthw est R esearch Station, 
Portland, OR, USA, 60pp.
A dam s, R.M ., R.A. Flem ing, C.-C. Chang, and B.A. M cCarl, 1995a: A 
reassessm ent of the econom ic effects of global clim ate change on U.S. 
agriculture. Clim atic Change, 30(2), 147-167.
A dam s, R.M., B.A. McCarl, K. Segerson, C. Rosenzweig, K.J. Bryant, B.L, 
Dixon, R. Connor, R.E. Evenson, and D. Ojima, 1995b: The economic 
effects o f climate change on U.S. agriculture. Final report. Electric Power 
Research Institute, Climate Change Impacts Program, Palo Alto, CA, 45 pp.
A dkison, M .D., R.M. Peterman, M .R Lapointe, D.M . Gillis, and J. Korman, 
1996: A lternative m odels o f clim atic effects on sockeye salmon 
(Oncorhynchus nerkd), productivity in Bristol Bay, Alaska, and the 
Fraser River, British Colum bia. Fish. Oceanogr. 5(3/4), 137-152.
Agee, J.K., 1990: The historical role of fire in Pacific N orthwest forests. In: 
N atural and prescribed fire in Pacific N orthw est forests [Walstad, J.D., 
S.R. Radosevich, and D.V. Sandberg (eds.)]. Oregon State University 
Press, Corvallis, OR, pp. 25-38.
A k b ari, H., S. Davis, S. Dorsano, J. Huang, and S. W innett, 1992: Cooling our 
communities: a guidebook on tree planting and light-colored surfaces. 
EPA 22P-2001, LB L -31587, U .S. G overnm ent Printing Office, 
W ashington, DC, 217 pp.
A nderson, J.M., 1991: The effects of climate change on decomposition process­
es in grassland and coniferous forests. Ecological Applications, 1, 226-247.
A nderson, J., S. Shiau, and D. Harvey, 1991: Prelim inary investigation of 
trend/patterns in surface w ater characteristics and clim ate variations. In: 
Using hydrom etric data to detect and m onitor clim atic change [Kite, G. 
and K. Harvey (eds.)]. Proceedings o f NHRI W orkshop, National 
Hydrology Research Institute, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, pp. 189-201.
A nderson, W.P., R. DiFransesco, and M, Kilman, 1994: Potential impacts of 
climate change on petroleum  production in the N orthwest Territories. In: 
M ackenzie Basin Im pact Study Interim  Report #2 [Cohen, S.J. (ed.)]. 
Environm ent Canada, Downsview, Ontario, pp. 433-441.
A nisim ov, O.A. and RE. Nelson, 1996: Perm afrost distribution in the Northern 
Hem isphere under scenarios o f clim atic change. Global and Planetary 
Change, 14(1), 59-72.
North America
319
Apps, M .J., W.A. Kurz, R.J. Luxm oore, L.O. Nilsson, R.A. Sedjo, R. Schmidt, 
L.G. Sim pson, and T.S. Vinson, 1993: Boreal forests and tundra. Water, 
Air, and Soil Pollution, 70, 39-53.
Ashfield, D., R. Phinney, H. Belore, and T. Goodison, 1991; Criteria for iden­
tifying stream flow stations applicable to climate change studies. In: 
U s i n g  h y d r o m e t r i c  d a t a  t o  d e t e c t  a n d  m o n i t o r  c l i m a t i c  c h a n g e  [K te, G. 
and K. Harvey (eds.)]. Proceedings of NHRI W orkshop, National 
Hydrology Research Institute, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, pp. 165-180.
Atwater, M.A., 1984: Influence of m eteorology on high ozone concentrations. 
In: A ir Pollution Control Association International Specialty Conference 
on Evaluation o f the Scientific Basis fo r Ozone!Oxidants Standard. 
Proceedings of a conference at Houston, TX, Novem ber 2 7-30,1984. A ir 
Pollution Control A ssociation, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 393 pp.
Auclair, A. N.D., J.T. Lill, and C. Revenga, 1996: The role of climate vari­
ability and global w arm ing in the dieback of Northern Hardwoods. 
Water AtV, and Soil Pollution, 91, 163-186.
Bailey, R.G., 1996: Ecosystem  Geography. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 
204 pp.
Bakun, A., J. Beyer, D. Pauly, J.G. Pope and G.D. 8 Ьаф , 1982: Ocean sci­
ences in relation to living m arine resources: a report. Canadian Journal 
o f Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 39, 1059-1070.
Banse, K., 1995: Zooplankton: pivotal role in the control of ocean production. 
IC E SJ. M ar Sci., 52, 265-277.
Barth, M.C., and J.G. Titus (eds.), 1984: Greenhouse effect and sea level rise: 
A  challenge fo r this generation. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. Inc., New 
York, NY, USA, 325 pp.
Bazzaz, F.A., 1990: The response of natural ecosystem s to the rising global 
CO 2 levels. A nnual Review  o f Ecology and Systematics, 21, 167-196.
Bazzaz, F.A., S.L. Bassow, G.M . Berntson, and S.C. Thomas, 1996: Elevated 
CO 2 and terrestrial vegetation: im plications for and beyond the global 
carbon budget. In: G lobal Change and Terrestrial Ecosystem s [Walker,
B. and W. Steffen (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom, pp. 43-76.
Bazzaz, F.A. and K.D.M . M cConnaughay, 1992; Plant-plant interactions in 
elevated CO 2 environm ents. Australian Journal o f Botany, 40, 547-563.
Beamish, R.J. and D.R. Bouillon, 1995; M arine fish production trends off the 
Pacific coast of Canada and the United States. In: Climate change and 
northern fish  populations [Beamish, R.J. (ed).]. Can. Spec. Pub. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci., 121, 585-591.
Beamish, R.J., M. Henderson, and H.A. Regier, 1997: Impacts of climate 
change on the fishes of British Columbia. In: Responding to Global 
Climate C hange in British Columbia and Yukon [Taylor, E. and B. Taylor, 
(eds.)]. Volume I o f the Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and 
Adaptation, Environm ent Canada and B.C. M inistry of Environment, 
Lands and Parks, Vancouver, British Columbia, pp. 12-1 to 12-16.
Beckett, W.S., 1991: Ozone, air pollution and respiratory health, Y a leJ Biol 
M ed, 64(2), 167-175.
Belnap, J., 1995; Surface disturbances: their role in accelerating desertifica­
tion. Environm ental M onitoring and Assessm ent, 37, 39-57.
Beltaos, S., (ed.), 1995: R iver ice jam s. W ater Resource Publications, 
Highlands Ranch, CO, 372 pp.
Belzer, D.B., M.J. Scott, and R.D. Sands, 1996: Climate change impacts on 
U.S. com m ercial building energy consum ption: An analysis using sample 
survey data. Energy Sources, 18(1), 177-201.
Bengtsson, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1995: Hurricane-type vortices in a 
general circulation model. Tellus, 47A, 1751-1796.
Bengtsson, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1996: Will greenhouse gas-induced 
warm ing over the next 50 years lead to higher frequency and greater 
intensity of hurricanes? Tellus, 48A, 57-73.
Benke, A.C., 1993: Concepts and patterns of invertebrate production in run­
ning waters, Berh. Internat. Verein. Limnol., 25, 15-38,
Bennett, S., R. Brereton, I. M ansergh, S. Berwick, K. Sandiford, and C. 
W ellington, 1991: E n h a n c e d  g r e e n h o u s e  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a n d  i t s  p o t e n t i a l  
e f f e c t  
o n  s e l e c t e d  V i c t o r i a n  f a u n a . A rthur Rylah Institute Technical 
Report No. 132, Departm ent o f Conservation and Environment, Victoria, 
Australia.
Bergeron, Y. and P.R. Dansereau, 1993: Predicting the composition of 
Canadian southern boreal forest in different fire cycles. Journal o f 
Vegetation Science, 4, 827-832.
Bethke, R.W. and T.D. Nudds, 1995: Effects of climate change and land use 
on D uck abundance in C anadian prairie-parklands. E cological 
Applications, 5(3), 588-600.
Binkley, C.S. and G.C. Van Kooten, 1994: Integrating climate change and 
forests: econom ic and écologie assessments. Climatic Change, 281(1-2), 
91-110.
Black, W.R., 1990: Global warm ing impacts on the transportation infrastruc­
ture. TR News, 150, 2-34.
Boer, G.J., N. M cFarlane, and M. Lazare, 1992: Greenhouse gas-induced cli­
mate change simulated with the CCC second-generation general circula­
tion model. Journal o f Climatology, 5, 1045-1077.
Bonan, G.B., F.S. Chapin, and S.L. Thom pson, 1995: Boreal forest and tundra 
ecosystem s as components of the climate system. Climatic Change, 
29(2), 145-168.
Botkin, D.A., R.A. Nisbet, and T.E. Reynales, 1989: Effects of climate change 
on forests of the Great Lake states. In: The potential effects o f global cli­
mate change on the United States: Appendix D  — Forests [Smith, J.B. 
and D.A. Tirpak (eds.)]. U.S. Environm ental Protection Agency, 
W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 2-1 to 2-31.
Bowen, S.G. and B.D. Francy, 1980: Surveillance. In: St. Louis Encephalitis 
[Monath, TP. (ed.)]. American Public Health Association, Washington 
DC, 680 pp.
Boyd, H., 1987: Do June breeding temperatures affect the breeding success of 
Dark-bellied Brent Geese? Bird Study, 34, 155-159.
Brander, K.M ., 1994: Patterns of distribution, spawning, and growth in North 
A tlantic cod: the utility of inter-regional comparisons. IC ES marine sci­
ence symposium, 198, 406-413.
Brander, K.M ., 1995: The effects of temperature on growth of A tlantic cod 
(Gadus morhua L.). IC ES Journal o f M arine Science, 52, 1-10.
Branson, F.A., 1985: Vegetation changes on western rangelands. Range 
M onograph No. 2. Society for Range M anagement, Denver, CO, USA, 
76 pp.
Branson, F.A., G.F. Gifford, K.G. Renard, and R.F. Hadley, 1981: Rangeland 
hydrology. Society for Range M anagement, Denver, CO, USA, 340 pp.
British Colum bia Center for Disease Control, 1995: w ritten communication.
Brklacich, М., P. Curran, and D. Brunt, 1996: The application of agricultural 
land rating and crop models to CO 2 and climatic change issues in north­
ern regions: the M ackenzie Basin case study. Agricultural and Food 
Science in Finland, 5, 351-365.
Brklacich, М., P. Curran, D. Brunt, and D. M cNabb, 1997a: C 0 2 -induced cli­
matic change and agricultural potential in the M ackenzie Basin. In: 
M ackenzie Basin Im pact Study F inal R eport [Cohen, S.J. (ed.)]. 
A tmospheric Environm ent Service, Environment Canada, Downsview, 
Ontario, Canada, pp. 242-246.
Brklacich, М., D. M cNabb, C. Bryant, and J. Dumanski, 1997b: Adaptability 
o f agricultural systems to global climatic change: a Renfrew county, 
Ontario, Canada pilot study. In: Agricultural restructuring and sustain­
ability: a geographic perspective [Ilbery, B., T. Rickard, T., and Q. 
Chiotti (eds.)]. C om m onw ealth A gricultural Bureau International, 
W allingford, UK, pp. 185-200.
Brodeur, R.D. and D. Ware, 1995: Interdecadal variability in distribution and 
catch rates of epipelagic nekton in the Northwest Pacific Ocean. In: 
Climate change and northern fish populations [Beamish, R.J. (ed.)]. 
Can. Spec. Pub. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 121, 329—356.
Brooks, D.J., 1993: U.S. forests in a global context. Gen. Tech. Rep. RM-228. 
USDA Forest Service, Rocky M ountain Research Station, Fort Collins, 
CO, USA, pp. 1-24.
Brown, H.M ., 1989: Planning fo r climate change in the Arctic—the impact on 
energy resource development. Symposium on the A rctic and Global 
Change, Climate Institute, 25-27 O ctober 1988, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada, pp. 96-97.
Brown, R.G.B., 1991; M arine birds and climatic warming in the northwest 
Atlantic. Canadian W ildlife Service Special Publication No. 6 8 , pp. 49-54.
Brown, R., M. Huges, and D. Robinson, 1994: Characterizing the long term 
variability of snow cover extent over the interior of North America. 
Annals o f Glaciology, 21, 45-50.
Bruce-Chwatt, L., 1988: History of M alaria From Prehistory to Eradication. 
In: M alaria: principles and practices o f m alariology [Wernsdofer, W. 
(ed.)]. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, pp. 913-999.
320
North America
Brugm an, M.M ., P. Raistrick, and A. Pietroniro, 1997: Glacier related impacts 
of doubling atm ospheric carbon dioxide concentrations on British 
Colum bia and Yukon. In: Responding to global climate change in British 
Columbia and Yukon [Taylor, E. and B. Taylor (eds.)]. Volume I, Canada 
Country Study: Clim ate Im pacts and Adaptation. British Columbia 
M inistry of Environment, Lands and Parks and Environm ent Canada, 
Vancouver, British Colum bia, pp. 6-1 to 6-9.
B niun, P., 1962: Sea level rise as a cause of shore erosion. 7. o f Waterways and 
H arbors D ivision (ASCE), 8 8 , 116-130.
Bugm ann, H.K.M ., X. Yan, M.T. Sykes, P. M artin, M. Lindner, P.V. Desanker, 
and S.G. Cumming, 1996: A  com parison of forest gap models: model 
structure and behaviour. Climatic Change, 34(2), 289-313.
Burgner, R.L., 1991: Life history of Sockeye salm on {Oncorhynchus nerka). 
In: Pacific Salmon Life H istories [Groot, C. and L. M argolis (eds.)]. 
University of British Colum bia Press, Vancouver, BC, pp. 1-117.
Burn, D., 1994: Hydrologie effects of climate change in west-central Canada. 
Journal o f Hydrology, 160, 53-70.
Burton, P.J. and S.G. Cumming, 1995: Potential effects of clim atic change on 
some w estern Canadian forests, based on pheological enhancem ents to a 
patch m odel of forest succession. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 82, 
4 0 1 ^ 1 4 .
Caine, T.N., 1980: The rainfall intensity duration control of shallow  landslides 
and debris flows. G eografiska A nnaler A , 62A, 23-35.
Callaway, М., J. Smith, and S. Keefe, 1995: The economic effects o f climate 
change fo r U.S. forests. Final Report. U.S. Environm ental Protection 
Agency, A daptation Branch, Climate Change Division, Office of Policy, 
Planning, and Evaluation, W ashington, DC, USA, 103 pp.
Canadian Forest Service, 1996: Selected forestry statistics: Canada, 1995. 
Inf. Rep. E-X-48, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 
184 pp.
Canadian Global Change Program , 1995: Im plications o f global change fo r 
hum an health: Final report o f the health issues panel o f the Canadian 
Global Change Program. The Royal Society o f Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada, 30 pp.
Canadian Public Health Association, 1992: H um an and ecosystem health: 
Canadian perspectives, Canadian action. C anadian Public H ealth 
Association, Ottawa, Ontario, 21 pp.
Carnell, R.E., C.A. Senior, and J.F.B. M itchell, 1996: Sim ulated changes in 
Northern Hem isphere w inter storminess due to increasing CO 2 . Climate 
Dynamics, 12(7), 467-476.
CAST, 1992: Preparing U.S. agriculture fo r global change. Task Force Report 
No. 119, Council for Agricultural Science and Technology, Ames, lA, 
USA, 96 pp.
CD C, 1989: Heat-related deaths —  M issouri, 1979-1989, M orbidity and 
M ortality Weekly Report, 38, 437-439.
CDC, 1995: Heat-related illnesses and deaths —  United States, 1994-1995, 
M orbidity and M ortality Weekly Report, 44(25), 465-468.
Chandler, A.C., 1945: Factors influencing the uneven distribution o i Aedes 
aegypti in Texas cities. Am erican Journal o f Tropical M edicine, 25, 
145-149.
Changnon, S.A., 1993: Changes in clim ate and levels of Lake M ichigan: 
shoreline im pacts at Chicago. Clim atic Change, 23(3), 213-230.
Changnon, S.A., 1996: D efining the flood: a chronology of key events. In: 
The G reat Flood o f 1993: causes, impacts and responses [Changnon,
S.A. (ed.)]. W estview Press, Boulder, CO, USA, pp. 3-28.
Chen, D, S.E. Zebiak, A. Busalacchi, and M .A. Cane, 1995: A n improved pro­
cedure for El Nino forecasting: im plications for predictability. Science, 
269, 1699-1702.
Child, R.D. and G.W. Frasier, 1992: ARS range research. Rangelands, 14, 
17-32.
Clague, J.J., 1989: Sea levels on Canada’s Pacific coast: past and future trends. 
Episodes, 12, 29-33.
Climate Change Impacts Review Group, 1991: The potential effects o f climate 
change in the United Kingdom. First Report, HMSO, London, UK, 124 pp.
Cohen, S.J., 1991: Possible im pacts of clim atic w arm ing scenarios on water 
resources in the Saskatchew an River sub-basin, Canada. Clim atic 
Change, 19(3), 291-317.
Cohen, S.J. (ed.), 1997a: M ackenzie Basin Im pact Study Final Report. 
Environm ent Canada, Downsview, Ontario, Canada, 372 pp.
Cohen, S.J., 1997b: Scientist-Stakeholder collaboration in integrated assess­
m ent of clim ate change: lessons from  a case study o f northwest Canada, 
Environm ental M odelling and A ssessm ent (submitted).
Cohen, S.J., L.E. Welsh, and P.Y.T. Louie, 1989: Possible impacts o f climate 
warm ing scenarios on water resources in the Saskatchewan River sub- 
basin. CCC Report No. 89-9, A tm ospheric Environm ent Service, 
National Hydrology Research Centre, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 87 pp.
Cohen, S.J., E.E. W heaton, and J. M asterton, 1992: Im pacts o f Climatic 
Change Scenarios in the Prairie Provinces: A  Case Study from  Canada. 
SRC Publication No. E-2900-4-D -92, Saskatchew an Research Council, 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, 157 pp.
Colwell, R.R., 1996: Global Climate and Infectious Disease: The Cholera 
Paradigm . Science, 274, 2025-2031.
Cooley, K.R., 1990: Effects of C 0 2 -induced clim atic changes on snowpack 
and streamflow. H ydro! ScL, 35, 511-522.
Coûtant, C.C., 1977: Com pilation of tem perature preference data. Journal of 
the F isheries Research Board o f Canada, 34, 739-745.
Coûtant, C.C., 1990: Tem perature-oxygen habitat for freshw ater and coastal 
striped bass in a changing climate. Transactions o f the American 
Fisheries Society, 119, 240-253.
Croley II, T.E., 1990: Laurentian Great Lakes double-C 0 2  clim ate change 
hydrological im pacts. Clim atic Change, 17(1), 27-47.
Croley II, T.E., 1992: CCC GCM  2 xC 0 2  hydrological impacts on the Great 
Lakes. In: Climate, Climate Change, water level forecasting and frequen­
cy analysis. Supporting Documents, Volume 1. Water supply scenarios. 
Task Group 2, W orking Com m ittee 3, International Joint Commission 
Levels Reference Study, Phase II, W ashington DC, USA, 33 pp.
Cubasch, U., G. M eehl, and Z.C. Zhao, 1994: IP C C  W G I  Initiative on 
Evaluation o f Regional Clim ate Change. Sum m ary Report, 12 pp.
Cubasch, U., J. W aszkewitz, G. Hegerl, and J. Perlwitz, 1995: Regional cli­
m ate changes as sim ulated in tim e-slice experim ents. Clim atic Change, 
31(2-4), 273-304.
Cum m ing, S.G. and P.J. Burton, 1996: Phenology-m ediated effects of climat­
ic change on some sim ulated British Colum bia forests. Climatic Change, 
34(2), 213-222.
Curtis, P.S., 1996: A  m eta-analysis of leaf gas exchange and nitrogen in trees 
grow n under elevated carbon dioxide. Plant, C ell and Environment, 19, 
127-137.
Curtis, P.S., B.G. Drake, P.W. Leadley, W.J. Arp, and D .R W higham , 1989: 
Growth and senescence in plant com m unities exposed to elevated CO2 
concentrations on a estuarine marsh. Oecologia, 78, 20-26.
Curtis, P.S., C.S. Vogel, K.S. Pregitzer, D.R. Zak, and J.A. Teeri, 1995: 
Interacting effects o f soil fertility and atm ospheric CO 2  on leaf area 
growth and carbon gain physiology in Populus X  euramericana (Dode) 
Guinier. N ew  Phytologist, 129, 253-263.
Cushing, D.H., 1982: Climate and fisheries. A cadem ic Press, London, United 
Kingdom, 373 pp.
Cushing, D.H. and R.R. Dickson, 1976: The biological response in the sea to 
clim atic changes. Advances in M arine Biology, 14, 1-122.
Daniels, R.C., V.M. Gom itz, A.J. M ehta, S.C. Lee, and R.M . Cushman, 1992: 
Adapting to sea-level rise in the U.S. southeast: the influence o f built 
infrastructure and biophysical factors on the inundation o f coastal areas. 
ORNL/CDIAC-54, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, O ak Ridge, TN, 
USA, 268 pp.
Darm stadter, J., 1993: Climate change im pacts on the energy sector and pos­
sible adjustm ents in the M INK region. Clim atic Change, 24(1-2), 
117-131.
Darwin, R., 1997. World agriculture and clim ate change: current questions. 
World Resource Review, 9, 17-31.
Darwin, R., M. Tsigas, J. Lewandrowski, and A. Raneses, 1995: World 
Agriculture and Climate Change: Econom ic Adaptations. Economic 
Research Service, USDA, AER-703, W ashington, DC.
Davis, M .B., 1986: Clim atic instability, tim e lags, and com m unity disequilib­
rium. In: Community Ecology [Diamond, J. and T.J. Case (eds.)]. Harper 
and Row, New York, NY, USA, pp. 269-284.
DeStasio, Jr., B.T., D.K. Hill, J.M . Юе1пЬап8, N.P. Nibbelink, and J.J. 
M agnuson, 1996: Potential effects of global clim ate change on small 
north-tem perate lakes: physics, fish, and plankton. Limnology and 
Oceanography, 41, 1136-1149.
North America
321
Di'az, S., J.P. Grime, J. Harris, and E. M cPherson, 1993: Evidence of a feed­
back m echanism  lim iting plant response to elevated carbon dioxide. 
N a t u r e , 364, 616-617.
Dobson, A., A. Jolly, and D. Rubenstein, 1989: The greenhouse effect and bio­
logical diversity. T r e n d s  i n  E c o l o g y  a n d  E v o l u t i o n ,  4, 64-68.
Dockery, D.W., C. Pope, X. Xu, J.D. Spengler, J.H. Ware, M.E. Fay, B.G. 
Ferris, and RE. Speizer, 1993: A n association between air pollution and 
mortality in six U.S. cities. N e w  E n g l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c i n e , 329, 
1753-1759.
DOE/IEA, 1995: B u i l d i n g s  a n d  E n e r g y  i n  t h e  1 9 8 0 s . Energy Information 
Adm inistration, DOE/EIS-0555, 95(1), June.
Dracup, J.A ., and E. K ahya, 1994: T he relationships betw een U.S. 
stream flow  and La N ina events. 
W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  R e s e a r c h , 30, 
2 133-2141.
Dracup, J.A ., S.D. Pelmulder, R. Howitt, J. Horner, W.M. Hanemann, C.F. 
Dumas., R. M cCann, J. Loom is, and S. Ise, 1992: T h e  e c o n o m i c  e f f e c t s  
o f  d r o u g h t  i m p a c t s  o n  C a l i f o r n i a  r e s o u r c e s :  i m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  C a l i f o r n i a  
i n  
a  
w a r m e r  w o r l d .  National Institute for Global Climate Change, 
University of California, Davis, CA, USA, 112 pp.
Drinkwater, K.F. and R.A. M yers, 1987: Testing predictions of m arine fish 
and shellfish landings from  environm ental variables. C a n a d i a n  J o u r n a l  
o f  F i s h e r i e s  a n d  A q u a t i c  S c i e n c e s , 44,1568-1573.
Duncan, K., 1996: A nthropogenic greenhouse gas-induced w arm ing: suit­
ability o f tem peratures for the developm ent o f v i v a x  and f a l c i p a r u m  
m alaria in the Toronto R egion o f O ntario. In: 
G r e a t  L a k e s - S t .  
L a w r e n c e  B a s i n  P r o j e c t  P r o g r e s s  R e p o r t  # 1 :  A d a p t i n g  t o  t h e  I m p a c t s  
o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  V a r i a b i l i t y  [M ortsch, L.D. and B.N. M ills 
(eds.)]. E nvironm ent C anada, B urlington, O ntario, C anada, pp. 
112-118.
Eamus, D., 1991: The interaction of rising CO 2 and tem peratures w ith water 
use efficiency. P l a n t ,  C e l l  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t , 14, 843-852.
Eamus, D., 1996a: Responses of field grown trees to CO 2 enrichment. 
C o m m o n w e a l t h  F o r e s t r y  R e v i e w , 75, 39—47.
Eam us, D., 1996b: Tree responses to CO 2 enrichment: CO 2 and temperature 
interactions, biom ass allocation and stand-scale m odeling. 
T r e e  
P h y s i o l o g y , 16, 43-47.
Eaton, J.G., and R.M . Scheller, 1996: Effects o f clim ate w arm ing on fish ther­
mal habitat in stream s o f the U nited States. 
L i m n o l o g y  
a n d  
O c e a n o g r a p h y , 41, 1109-1115.
Ecological Stratification W orking Group, 1995: A  N a t i o n a l  E c o l o g i c a l  
F r a m e w o r k  f o r  
C a n a d a . M inister of Supply and Services Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, 125 pp.
Eilers, J.M ., D .R Brakke, and D.H. Landers, 1988: Chem ical and physical 
characteristics o f lakes in the U pper M idw est, U nited States. 
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  S c i e n c e  a n d  T e c h n o l o g y , 22, 164-172.
Elliott, K.J. and W.T. Swank, 1994: Im pacts of drought on tree mortality and 
growth in a m ixed hardw ood forest. J o u r n a l  o f  V e g e t a t i o n  S c i e n c e , 5, 
229-236.
Ellis, R.R, 1972: M ortality from  heat illness and heat-aggravated illness in the 
United States. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  R e s e a r c h , 5, 1-58.
Em anuel, W.R., H.H. Shugart, and M.P. Stevenson, 1985: Climate change and 
the broad-scale distribution o f terrestrial ecosystem  complexes. C l i m a t i c  
C h a n g e , 7 ( l ) ,  2 9 ^ 1 .
Emberlin, J., 1994: The effects of patterns in clim ate and pollen abundance on 
allergy. A l l e r g y ,  49, 15-20.
Energy Econom ist, 1988: It is not just farm ers who suffer from drought. 
F i n a n c i a l  T i m e s  B u s i n e s s  I n f o r m a t i o n ,  July 4-7.
Environment Canada, 1986: 
W e t l a n d s  
i n  
C a n a d a :  
a  
v a l u a b l e  r e s o u r c e .  
Lands D irectorate Fact Sheet 86-4. Environm ent Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada, 8  pp.
Environm ent C anada, 1988: 
W e t l a n d s  
o f  C a n a d a . Ecological Land 
Classification Series #24. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 452 pp.
Environment Canada, 1995: T h e  s t a t e  o f  C a n a d a ’s  c l i m a t e :  m o n i t o r i n g  v a r i ­
a b i l i t y  a n d  c h a n g e . State o f Environm ent Rep. No. 95-1. M inister of 
Supply and Services, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 52 pp.
Environment Canada, Smith and Lavender Environmental Consultants, and 
Sustainable Futures, 1995: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s :  
a n  
O n t a r i o  
P e r s p e c t i v e  [M ortsch, L. (ed.)]. Environm ent Canada, Burlington, 
Ontario, Canada, 76 pp.
Evans, S.G. and J.J. Clague, 1997: The impact of climate change on cata­
strophic geomorphic processes in the mountains of British Columbia, 
Yukon and A lberta. In: R e s p o n d i n g  t o  G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  i n  B r i t i s h  
C o l u m b i a  a n d  Y u k o n  [Taylor, E. and B. Taylor (eds.)]. Volume I of the 
Canada Country Study: Climate Impacts and Adaptation, Environment 
Canada and B.C. M inistry of Environment, Lands and Parks, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, pp. 7-1 to 7-16.
Everts, C.H., 1985: Effect of sea level rise and net sand volume change on 
shoreline position at Ocean City, MD. In: P o t e n t i a l  i m p a c t  o f  s e a  l e v e l  
r i s e  o n  t h e  b e a c h  a t  O c e a n  C i t y ,  M a r y l a n d  [Titus, J.G. (ed.)]. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, USA, 176 pp.
Eybergen, J. and F. Imeson, 1989: ОеотофЬо1о§1са! processes and climate 
change. C a t e n a , 16, 307-319.
Fgjer, E.D., M.D. Bowers, and F.A. Bazzaz, 1989: The effects of enriched car­
bon dioxide atmospheres on plant-insect herbivore interactions. S c i e n c e ,  
243, 1198-1200.
FEM A, 1991 : P r o j e c t e d  i m p a c t  o f  r e l a t i v e  s e a  l e v e l  r i s e  o n  t h e  N a t i o n a l  F l o o d  
I n s u r a n c e  
P r o g r a m . 
Report 
to 
Congress. 
Federal 
Insurance 
Administration, Washington, DC, 172 pp.
Fischlin, A., H. Bugmann, and D. Gyalistras, 1995: Sensitivity of a forest 
ecosystem model to climate parametrization schemes. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
P o l l u t i o n ,  87, 267-282.
Flannigan, M.D. and C.E. Van Wagner, 1991: Climate change and wildfire in 
Canada. C a n a d i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  F o r e s t  R e s e a r c h , 21, 66-72.
Flem ing, A.M ., 1960: Age, growth and sexual maturity of cod ( G a d u s  m o r h u a  
L.) in the Newfoundland area, 1947-1950, J o u r n a l  o f  t h e  F i s h e r i e s  
R e s e a r c h  B o a r d  o f  C a n a d a , 17, 775-809.
Flem ing, R.A. and W.J.A. Volney, 1995: Effects of climate change on insect 
defoliator population processes in Canada’s boreal forest: some plausible 
scenarios. W a te r , A i r ,  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  82, 445-454.
Focks, D.A., E. Daniels, D.G. Haile, and J.E. Keesling, 1995: A  simulation 
model of the epidemiology of urban dengue fever: literature analysis, 
model development, preliminary validation, and samples of simulation 
results. A m e r i c a n  J o u r n a l  o f  T r o p i c a l  M e d i c i n e  a n d  H y g i e n e , 5 3 ,489-506.
Forestry C anada, 1991: 
S e l e c t e d  
F o r e s t r y  
S t a t i s t i c s ,  
C a n a d a ,  
I 9 9 I .  
Information Report E-X-46, Forestry Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Fosberg, M.A., 1990: Global change —  a challenge to modeling. In: P r o c e s s  
m o d e l i n g  o f  f o r e s t  g r o w t h  r e s p o n s e s  t o  e n v i r o n m e n t a l  s t r e s s  [Dixon, 
R.K., R.S. M eldahl, G.A. Ruark, and W.G. Warren (eds.)]. Tim ber Press, 
Inc., Portland, OR, USA, pp. 3-8.
Fosberg, M.A., B.J. Stocks, and T.J. Lynham, 1996: Risk analysis in strategic 
planning: fire and climate change in the boreal forest. In: F i r e  i n  e c o s y s ­
t e m s  o f  b o r e a l  E u r a s i a  [Goldammer, J.G. and V.V Furyaev (eds.)]. 
Kluwer Academ ic Publishers N.V., Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 495-504.
Foster, D.R., J.D. Aber, J.M . M elillo, R.D. Bowden, and F.A. Bazzaz, 1997: 
Forest response to disturbance and anthropogenic stress. B i o S c i e n c e , 47, 
437-445.
Frank, K.T., R.L Perry, and K.F. Drinkwater, 1990: Predicted response of 
Northwest Atlantic invertebrate and fish stocks to C 0 2 -induced climate 
change. T r a n s a c t i o n s  o f  t h e  A m e r i c a n  F i s h e r i e s  S o c i e t y , 119, 353-365.
Franklin, J.F., F.J. Swanson, M.E. Harmon, D.A. Perry, T.A. Spies, V.H. Dale, 
A. M cKee, W.K. Ferrell, J.E. M eans, S.V. Gregory, J.D. Lattin, T.D. 
Schowalter, and D. Larsen, 1991: Effects of global climatic change on 
forests in northwestern North America. T h e  N o r t h w e s t  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
J o u r n a l ,  7, 233-254.
Frayer, W.E., T.J. M onahan, D.C. Bowden, and F.A. Graybill, 1983: S t a t u s  
a n d  t r e n d s  o f  w e t l a n d s  a n d  d e e p w a t e r  h a b i t a t  i n  t h e  c o t e r m i n o u s  U n i t e d  
S t a t e s ,  
1 9 5 0 s  t o  
1 9 7 0 s . Department of Forest and Wood Sciences, 
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, USA, 32 pp.
Fredeen, A.L., G.W. Koch, and C.B. Field, 1995: Effects of atmospheric CO 2 
enrichment on ecosystem CO 2 exchange in a nutrient and w ater limited 
grassland. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 215-219.
Frederick, K.D., 1991: 
W a t e r  r e s o u r c e s .  
R e p o r t  T V  o f  I n f l u e n c e s  o f  a n d  
R e s p o n s e s  t o  I n c r e a s i n g  A t m o s p h e r i c  C O 2  a n d  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  
T h e  
M
I N K  P r o j e c t . U.S. Department of Energy, W ashington, DC, USA, 153 pp.
Frederick, K.D., and P.H. Gleick, 1989: W ater resources and climate change. 
In: G r e e n h o u s e  W a r m i n g :  A b a t e m e n t  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  [Rosenberg, N.J., 
W.E. Easterling III, P.R. Crosson, and J. Darm stadter (eds.)]. Resources 
for the Future, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 133-143.
322
North America
Freier, J., 1993: Eastern equine encephalom yeiitis. L a n c e t , 342, 1281-1282.
G agliano. S.M., K.J. M eyer-Arendt, and K.M. W icker, 1981. Land loss in the 
M ississippi R iver deltaic plain. 
T r a n s a c t i o n s  
o f  t h e  
G
u i f  C o a s t  
A s s o c i a t i o n  o f  G e o i o g i c a i  S o c i e t i e s , 31, 295-300.
G ibbs, М., 1984: Econom ic analysis o f sea level rise: M ethods and results. In: 
G r e e n h o u s e  e f f e c t  a n d  s e a  i e v e i  r i s e :  a  c h a l l e n g e  f o r  t h i s  g e n e r a t i o n  
[Barth, M .C. and J.G. Titus (eds.)]. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. Inc., New 
York, NY, USA, pp. 215-251.
G lass, G.E., F.P. Am erasinge, J.M . M organ III, and T.W. Scott, 1994: 
Predicting I x o d e s  
s c a p u l a r i s  abundance on w hite-tailed deer using 
G eographic Inform ation System s. A m e r i c a n  
J o u r n a l  
o f  
T r o p i c a l  
M e d i c i n e  a n d  H y g i e n e , S l(5), 538-544.
G leick, P.H., 1993: W a t e r  i n  C r i s i s . O xford University Press, Oxford, United 
Kingdom, 473 pp.
Goddard, 1., 1992: Ecological studies of adult I x o d e s  s c a p u l a r i s  in Central 
M ississippi; questing activity in relation to time of year, vegetation type 
and meteorological conditions. J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c a l  E n t o m o l o g y , 29(3), 
501-506.
Goos, T O ., 1989: T h e  e f f e c t s  o f  c l i m a t e  a n d  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  t h e  e c o n o m y  o f  
A l b e r t a . A  summary of an Acres International Lim ited report: the envi­
ronm ent/econom y link in A lberta and the im plications under climate 
change. Clim ate Change Digest CCD 89-05, A tm ospheric Environm ent 
Service, Environm ent Canada, Downsview, Ontario, 9 pp.
G orham , E., 1991: Northern peatlands: role in the carbon cycle and probable 
responses to clim atic warming. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 1(2), 182-195.
G orissen, A., J.H. van Ginkel, and J.A. van Veen, 1995: Grass root decom po­
sition is retarded when grass has been grown under elevated CO j. S o i l  
B i o .  B i o c h e m , 27, 117-120.
G overnm ent o f Canada, 1996: T h e  S t a t e  o f  C a n a d a ’s  E n v i r o n m e n t  R e p o r t .  
G overnm ent o f Canada, O ttaw a. A vailable on the Internet at 
http://199.212.18.12/folio.pgi/soereng/query=*/doc
Grant, D.R., 1975: Recent coastal subm ergence of the M aritime Provinces. 
P r o c e e d i n g s ,  N o v a  S c o t i a n  I n s t i t u t e  o f  S c i e n c e , 27, 83-102.
G rant, L., 1991: Hum an health effects o f clim ate change and stratospheric 
ozone depletion. In: G l o b a l  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  h e a l t h  i s s u e s  a n d  p r i o r i t i e s .  
H ealth and W elfare Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, pp. 72-77.
G razulis, T.P., 1993; A 110-Year Perspective of Significant Tornadoes. In: T h e  
T o r n a d o :  i t s  s t r u c t u r e ,  d y n a m i c s ,  p r e d i c t i o n ,  a n d  h a z a r d s  [Church, C., D. 
Burgess, C. Doswell, and R. Davies-Jones (eds.)]. A m erican Geophysical 
Union, W ashington, DC, pp.
G regory, J.M ., and J.F.B. M itchell, 1995: Sim ulation of daily variability of 
surface tem perature and precipitation over Europe in the current and 
2 xC 0 2  clim ates using the UKM O climate model. Q u a r t .  J .  R .  M e t .  S o c . ,  
121, 1451-1476.
G riffin, G.F. and M.H. Friedel, 1985: D iscontinuous change in central 
A ustralia: some im plications of m ajor ecological events for land m an­
agem ent. J o u r n a l  o f  A r i d  E n v i r o n m e n t s , 9, 63-80.
G roism an, P.Y and D.R. Easterling, 1994: Century-scale series of annual pre­
cipitation over the contiguous United States and Southern Canada. In: 
T r e n d s  ’ 9 3 :  a  c o m p e n d i u m  o f  d a t a  o n  g l o b a l  c h a n g e  [Boden, T.A., D.P. 
Kaiser, R.J. Sepanski, and F.W. Stoss (eds.)]. ORNL/CDIAC-65, Carbon 
D ioxide Information A nalysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 
Oak Ridge, TN, USA, pp. 770-784.
G rulke, N.E., J.L. Horn, and S.W. Roberts, 1993: Physiological adjustm ent of 
two full-sib families of ponderosa pine to elevated CO 2 . T r e e  P h y s i o l o g y ,  
12, 3 9 1 ^ 0 1 .
G rulke, N.E., G.H. Riechers, W.C. Oechel, U. Hjelm, and C. Jaeger, 1990; 
Carbon balance in tussock tundra under ambient and elevated atm os­
pheric CO 2 . O e c o l o g i a , 83, 485-494.
G ubler, D.J. and D.W. Trent, 1994: Em ergence of epidem ic dengue/dengue 
hem orrhagic fever as a public health problem  in the Am ericas, I n f e c t i o u s  
A g e n t s  D i s e a s e s , 2(6), 383-393.
G u n ter, G., 1974: A n  e x a m p l e  o f  o y s t e r  p r o d u c t i o n  d e c l i n e  w i t h  a  c h a n g e  i n  
t h e  s a l i n i t y  c h a r a c t e r i s t i c s  o f  a n  e s t u a r y — D e l a w a r e  B a y ,  
I 8 0 0 - I 9 7 3 .  
Proceedings of the National Shellfisheries Association, 65, 3.
H aines, A., 1993: The possible effects of clim ate change on health. In: C r i t i c a l  
C o n d i t i o n :  
H u m a n  
H e a l t h  
a n d  
t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t [Chivian, E., M. 
McCally, H. Hu, and A. Haines (eds.)]. M IT Press, Cam bridge, MA, 
USA, pp. 151-170.
Hall, N .M .J., B.J. Hooskins, P.J. Valdes, and C.A. Senior, 1994: Storm  tracks 
in a high resolution GCM  w ith doubled CO 2 . Q u a r t e r l y  J o u r n a l  o f  th e  
R o y a l  M e t .  S o c i e t y , 120, 1209-1230.
Hallegraeff, G., 1993: A  review of harm ful algal bloom s and their apparent 
increase. P h y c o l o g i c a , 32(2), 79-99.
H ancock, T , 1997: Catastrophic atm ospheric events/W here science stands on 
clim ate variability, atm ospheric change and hum an health. In: C l im a t e  
v a r i a b i l i t y ,  a t m o s p h e r i c  c h a n g e  a n d  h u m a n  h e a l t h  p r o c e e d i n g s  [Holmes, 
R., K. O lgilvie and Q. Chiotti (eds.)] N ovem ber 4 -5 , 1996, Downsview, 
Ontario. Pollution Probe Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, pp. 
7-51.
Hardy, J.L., 1988: Susceptibility and resistance of vector m osquitoes. In: T h e  
A r b o v i r u s e s :  
E p i d e m i o l o g y  
a n d  E c o l o g y  [M onath, T.P. (ed.)]. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, FL, USA.
Hare, S.R. and R.C. Francis, 1995; Clim ate change and salm on production in 
the northeast Pacific Ocean. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  N o r t h e r n  F i s h  
P o p u l a t i o n s  [R.J. Beam ish (ed.)]. C a n .  S p e c .  P u b l .  F i s h .  A q u a t .  S c i . , 121, 
pp. 357-372.
H artm ann, H.C., 1990: Clim ate change im pacts on Laurentian G reat Lakes 
levels. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 17(1), 49-68.
Haworth, J., 1988: The global distribution o f m alaria and the present control 
effort. 
In: 
M
a l a r i a :  
P r i n c i p l e s  
a n d  
P r a c t i c e s  
o f  
M a l a r i o l o g y  
[W ernsdofer, W. (ed.)]. C hurchill Livingstone, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom, pp. 79-99.
H ayam i, Y. and V.W. Ruttan, 1985: A g r i c u l t u r a l  d e v e l o p m e n t :  a n  i n t e r n a t i o n ­
a l  p e r s p e c t i v e . The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltim ore, MD, 
USA, 506 pp.
Heady, H., and R.D. Child, 1994: R a n g e l a n d  e c o l o g y  
a n d  m a n a g e m e n t .  
W estview Press, Boulder, CO, USA, 519 pp.
Heath, L.S., P.E. Kauppi, R Burschel, H.D. Gregor, R. Guderian, G.H. 
Kohlmaier, S. Lorenz, D. Overdieck, F. Scholz, H. Thom asius, and M. 
Weber, 1993: Contribution of tem perate forests to the w orld’s carbon 
budget. W a t e r ,  A i r ,  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  70, 55-69.
Henderson, M .A., D.A. Levy, and D.J. Stockner, 1992: Probable conse­
quences o f clim ate change on freshw ater production o f Adam s River 
sockeye salm on ( O n c o r h y n c h u s  n e r k a ) .  G e o J o u r n a l ,  2 , 51-59.
Higgins, R .W , Y. Yao, E.S. Yarosh, J.E. Janowiak, and K.C. Mo, 1997: 
Influence o f the G reat Plains low-level jet on sum m ertim e precipitation 
and m oisture transport over the Central U nited States. J o u r n a l  
o f  
C l i m a t e , 10, 481-507.
Hirsch, J., 1988: A s streets melt, cars are flum m oxed by hum mocks. T h e  N e w  
Y o r k  T im e s , 137(45799), B l, B5.
Hodges, D.G., F.W. Cubbage and J.L. Regens, 1992: Regional forest migra­
tions and potential econom ic effects. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
T o x i c o l o g y  a n d  
C h e m i s t r y , 11, 1129-1136.
Hogg, W D . and V.R. Swail, 1997: C l i m a t e  e x t r e m e s  i n d i c e s  i n  n o r t h e r n  c l i ­
m a t e s . Proceedings of a w orkshop on indices and indicators for climate 
extrem es, A sheville, NC, June 3-6 , 1997, 14 pp.
H orton, E.B., 1995; Geographical distribution o f changes in m aximum and 
m inim um  tem peratures. Armos. R e s . , 37, 102-117.
H oward, J.D., O.H. Pilkey, and A. Kaufm an, 1985: Strategy for beach preser­
vation proposed. G e o t i m e s , 30, 15-19.
Hull, C.H.J. and J.G. Titus (eds.), 1986: G r e e n h o u s e  e f f e c t ,  s e a  l e v e l  r is e ,  a n d  
s a l i n i t y  
i n  
t h e  
D e l a w a r e  
E s t u a r y .  U.S. Environm ental Protection 
A gency and Delaware R iver Basin Com m ission, W ashington, DC, USA,
8 8  pp.
H unt, H.W., E.T. Elliot, J.K. Detling, J.A. M organ, and D.-X. Chen, 1996: 
Responses of a C 3  and a C 4  perennial grass to elevated CO 2 and tem­
perature under different w ater regimes. G l o b a l  C h a n g e  B i o l o g y , 2, 
35-47.
Huq, A., R.R. Colwell, R. Rahm an, A. A li, M. Chowdhury, S. Parveen, D. 
Sack, and E. Russek-Cohen, 1990: D etection o f Vibrio choierae 01 in the 
aquatic environm ent by fluorescent-m onoclonal antibody and culture 
methods. A p p l i e d  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  M i c r o b i o l o g y ,  56, 2370-2373.
IB l Group, 1990: T h e  i m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  l o n g - t e r m  c l i m a t i c  c h a n g e  o n  t r a n s ­
p o r t a t i o n  i n  C a n a d a . CCD 90-02, A tm ospheric Environm ent Service, 
Environm ent Canada, Downsview, Ontario, Canada, 8  pp.
International M onetary Fund, 1996: I n t e r n a t i o n a l  f i n a n c i a l  s t a t i s t i c s  y e a r ­
b o o k . International M onetary Fund, W ashington, DC, 827 pp.
North America
323
IPCC, 1990: Climate Change: The IP CC  Scientific Assessm ent [Houghton, 
H.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cam bridge University 
Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 365 pp.
Cubasch, U. and R.D. Cess, Chapter 3. Processes and M odelling, 
pp. 69-91.
-  
M itchell, J.F.B., S. M anabe, V. M eleshko, and T. Tokioka, Chapter
5. Equilibrium  Clim ate Change —  and its Implications fo r the 
Future, pp. 131-172.
IPC C , 1996. Clim ate C hange 1995: The Science o f Climate Change. 
Contribution o f Working Group I  to the Second Assessm ent Report o f the 
Intergovernm ental Panel on Climate Change [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
Sum m ary fo r Policym akers and Technical Summary, pp. 1 ^ 9 .
-  
Schimel, D., D. A lves, I. Enting, M. Heimann, F. Joos, D. Raynaud, 
T.M.L. W igley, E. Sanhueza, X. Zhou, P. Jonas, R. Charlson, H. 
Rodhe, S. Sadasivan, K.P. Shine, Y. Fouquart, V. Ramaswamy, S. 
Solom on, J. Srinivasan, D. Albritton, R. Derwent, Y. Isaken, M. 
Lai, and D. W uebbles, Chapter 2. Radiation Forcing o f Climate 
Change, pp. 65-131.
N icholls, N., G.V. Gruza, J. Jouzel, T.R. Karl, L.A. Ogallo, and 
D.E. Parker, Chapter 3. O bserved Climate Variability and Change, 
pp. 133-192.
Gates, W.L., A. H enderson-Sellers, G.J. Boer, C.K. Folland, 
A .Kitoh, B.J. McAvaney, F. Semazzi, N. Smith, A.J. Weaver, and 
Q.-C. Zeng, Chapter 5. Climate M odels — Evaluation, pp. 235-284. 
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. M eehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A .J. Weaver, and T.M.L. Wigley, Chapter
6 . Clim ate M odels — Projections o f Future Climate, pp. 289-357. 
W arrick, R.A., C. Le Provost, M .E Meier, J. Oerlemans, and P.L. 
W oodworth, Chapter 7. Changes in Sea Level, pp. 359-405.
Santer, B.D., T.M .L. Wigley, T.P. Barnett, and E. Anyamba, Chapter 
8 . D etection o f Climate Change and Attribution o f Causes, pp. 
4 0 7 ^ 4 3 .
IPCC , 1996. Clim ate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations, and M itigation o f 
Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution o f Working 
Group II to the Second A ssessm ent Report o f the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Clim ate Change [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom 
and N ew York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
Kirschbaum , M.U.F., Chapter A. Ecophysiological, Ecological, and 
Soil Processes in Terrestrial Ecosystem s: A  Prim er on General 
Concepts and Relationships, pp. 5 1 -1  A.
-  
Allen-Diaz, B., Chapter 2. Rangelands in a Changing Climate: 
Impacts, A daptations and M itigation, pp. 131-158.
Bullock, P. and H. Le Houérou, Chapter 4. L and Degradation and 
Desertification, pp. 170-189.
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. Im pacts o f Climate Change 
on M ountain Regions, pp. 191-213.
Oquist, M.G. and B.H. Svensson, Chapter 6 . N on-Tidal Wetlands, 
pp. 215-239.
Fitzharris, B.B., Chapter 7. The Cryosphere: Changes and their 
Impacts, pp. 240-265.
A m ell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. M ulholland, 
Chapter 10. H ydrology and Freshwater Ecology, pp. 325-364. 
Scott, M .J., Chapter 12. H um an Settlem ents in a Changing 
Climate: Im pacts and Adaptation, pp. 3 9 9 ^ 2 6 .
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. Agriculture in a Changing Climate: Impacts 
and Adaptation, pp. 427-467.
-  
Kaczm arek, Z., Chapter 14. Water Resources M anagement, pp. 
469-486.
-  
M cM ichael, A., Chapter 18. H um an Population H ealth, pp. 
561-584.
IRC, 1995: Coastal exposure and community protection—H urricane A ndrew ’s 
legacy. Insurance Research Council, W heaton, IL, USA, 48 pp.
James, EC . and H.H. Shugart, 1974: The phenology of the nesting season of 
the A m erican robin (Turdus migratorius) in the United States. Condor, 
76, 159-168.
Jetten , Т.Н. and D.A. Focks, 1997: Changes in the distribution of dengue 
transmission under climate w arm ing scenarios. A m  J  Trop M ed H yg (in 
press).
Johns, T.C., R.E. Cam ell, J.F. Crossley, J.M. Gregory, J.F.B. M itchell, C.A. 
Senior, S.F.B. Tett, and R.A. Wood, 1997: The second Hadley Centre 
coupled ocean-atmosphere GCM: M odel description, spinup and valida­
tion. Climate Dynamics (submitted).
Jo h n so n , R.H. and R.B. Vaughan, 1989: The Cows Rocks landslide. 
Geological Journal, 24, 354-370.
Jongen, М., M.B. Jones, T. Hebeisen, H. Blum, and G. Hendrey, 1995: The 
effects of elevated CO 2 concentrations on the root growth of Lolium 
perenne and Trifolium repens grown in a FACE system. Global Change 
Biology, 1, 261-371.
Joyce, L.A,, J.R. Mills, L.S. Heath, A.D. M cGuire, R.W. Haynes, and R.A. 
Birdsey, 1995: Forest sector impacts from changes in forest productivity 
under climate change. Journal o f Biogeography, 22(4-5), 703-713.
K ahya, E. and J.A. Dracup, 1993: U.S. stream flow patterns in relation to the 
El 
N ino/Southern 
O scillation. 
Water R esources Research, 
29, 
2491-2503.
K alkstein, L.S. and J.S. Greene, 1997: An evaluation of climate/mortality rela­
tionships in large U.S. cities and the possible impacts of a climate 
change. Environmental H ealth Perspectives, 105(1), 84-93.
K alkstein, U.S., J.S. Greene, M .C. Nichols and C.D. Barthel, 1993: A new spa­
tial climatological procedure. In: Proceedings o f the eighth conference on 
applied clim atology, January 17-22, 1993, A naheim , C alifornia, 
American M eteorological Society, Boston, MA, pp. 169-174.
K alkstein, U.S., P.F. Jamason, J.S. Greene, J. Libby, and L. Robinson, 1995: 
The Philadelphia hot weather-health watch/wam ing system: develop­
m ent and application, sum m er 1995. Bulletin o f the Am erican 
M eteorological Society, 77(7), 1519-1528.
K alkstein, L.S. and K.E. Smoyer, 1993: The impact of climate change on 
hum an health: som e international im plications. E xperiencia, 49, 
469-479.
K alkstein, L.S., et al., 1997: The impacts of w eather and pollution on human 
mortality. EPA 230-94-019. US EPA Office of Policy, Planning and 
Evaluation, W ashington, DC, USA (in press).
K ana, T.W., J. Michel, M.O. Hayes, and J.R. Jensen, 1984: The physical 
impact of sea level rise in the area of Charleston, South Carolina. In: 
Greenhouse effect and sea level rise: A  challenge fo r this generation 
[Barth, M.C. and J.G. Titus (eds.)]. Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. Inc., New 
York, NY, USA, pp. 105-144.
K arl, T.R., P.D. Jones, R.W. Knight, G. Kukla, N. Plummer, V. Razuvayev, 
K.P. Gallo, J. Lindseay, R.J. Charlson, and T.C. Peterson, 1993: A  new 
perspective on recent global warming: Asym m etric trends of daily m ax­
im um  
and 
m inim um  
tem perature. 
B ulletin 
o f the Am erican 
M eteorological Society, 74, 1007-1023.
K arl, T.R., R.W. Knight, D.R. Easterling, and R.G. Quayle, 1995a: Trends in 
U.S. climate during the 20th century. Consequences, 1, 3-12.
K arl, T.R., R.W. Knight, and N. Plummer, 1995b: Trends in high-frequency 
climate variability in the twentieth century. Nature, 377, 217-220.
K arl, T.R., R.W. Knight, D.R. Easterling, and R.G. Quayle, 1996: Indices of 
clim ate change for the U nited States. B ulletin o f the Am erican 
M eteorological Society, 77, 279-303.
K atsouyanni, K., A. Pantazopoulou, and G. Touloumi, 1993: Evidence for 
interaction between air pollution and high temperature in the causation of 
excess mortality. Archives o f Environmental H ealth, 48, 235-242.
K atz, R.W. and B.G. Brown, 1992: Extreme events in a changing climate: 
variability is more important than averages. Climatic Change, 21(3), 
289-302.
K aye, A., and E.S. Barghoorn, 1964: Lake quaternary sea level change and 
coastal rise at Boston, MA. Geology Society o f Am erica Bulletin, 75, 
63-80.
K earney, M.S. and J.C. Stevenson, 1985: Sea level rise and marsh vertical 
accretion rates in Chesapeake Bay. In: Coastal zone ’85 [M agoon, O.T.,
H. Converse, D. Miner, D. Clark, and L.T. Tobin, (eds.)]. American 
Society of Chemical Engineers, New York, NY, pp. 1451-1461.
K eim , B.D., G.E. Faiers, R.A. Muller, J.M. Grymes III, and R.V. Rohli, 1995: 
Long-term trends of precipitation and runoff in Louisiana, USA. 
International Journal o f Climatology, 15, 531-541.
324
North America
Keith. V.F., J.C. De Avila, and R.M. W illis, 1989: Effect of clim ate change on 
shipping within Lake Superior and Lake Erie. In: P otential Effects o f 
G lobal C lim ate C hange on the U nited States: A p p en d ix H  —  
Infrastructure [Smith, J.B. and D.A. Т1фак (eds.)]. U.S. Environm ental 
Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA.
Kellison, R.C. and R.J. Weir, 1987: Breeding strategies in forest tree popula­
tions to buffer against elevated atm ospheric carbon dioxide levels. In: 
The Greenhouse effect, climate change and U.S. forests [Shands, W.E. 
and J.S. Floffman (eds.)].
K em p, P.R., D.G. W aldecker, C.E. Owensby, J.F. Reynolds, and R.A. Virginia, 
1994: Effects of elevated CO 2 and nitrogen fertilization pretreatm ents on 
decom position of tallgrass prairie leaf litter. P lant Soil, 165, 115-127.
Kilbourne, E.M ., 1992: Epidem iological Statistics. W HO R eg Publ. Ear. 
Series, 42, 5-25.
K ing, G.A. and R.R Neilson, 1992: The transient response of vegetation to cli­
mate change: a potential source of CO 2 to the atmosphere. Water, A ir and 
Soil Pollution, 64, 365-383.
Kirschbaum , M .U .R, D.A. King, H.N. Comins, R.E. M cM urtrie, B.E. 
M edlyn, S. Pongracic, D. Murty, H. Keith, R.J. Raison, P.K. Khanna, and 
D.W. Sheriff, 1994: M odelling forest response to increasing CO 2 con­
centration 
under 
nutrient-lim ited 
conditions. 
Plant, 
C ell 
and 
Environment, 17, 1081-1099.
ЮИс1, T.G.R, R Giorgi, and G.A. M eehl, 1998: Intercomparison o f regional 
biases and doubled CO 2 sensitivity of coupled atmosphere-ocean general 
circulation model experiments. Climate Dynamics. 26 manuscript pages.
K itzm iller, J.H., 1993: G enetic considerations in propagating diverse tree 
species. \n\ Proceedings, Western Forest N ursery Association, September 
12-14, 1992, Fallen L e a f Lake, CA [Landis, T.D. (ed.)]. General 
Technical Report RM -221, U.S. Departm ent of A griculture, Porest 
Service, Rocky M ountain Porest and Range Experim ent Station, Port 
Collins, CO, USA, 151 pp.
Ю апп, P. and M. Hershm an, 1990: Response o f the coastal zone m anagem ent 
program s to sea level rise in the United States, Coastal M anagement, 
18(2), 143-166.
Knoop, W.T. and B.H. Walker, 1985: Interactions of woody and herbaceous 
vegetation in a southern Africa savanna. Journal o f Ecology, 73,235-253.
K om arek, E.V., 1974: Effects o f fire on tem perate forests and related ecosys­
tems: Southeastern United States. In: Fire and Ecosystem s [Kozlowski, 
T.T. and C.E. A hlgren (eds.)]. A cadem ic Press, N ew York, NY, USA, pp. 
251-277.
K o rn er, C., 1995: Towards a better experim ental basis for upscaling plant 
responses to elevated CO 2 and clim ate warming. Plant, C ell and 
Environment, 18, 1101-1110.
K orsog, P.E. and G.T. Wolff, 1991: A n exam ination o f tropospheric ozone 
trends in the northeastern U.S. (1973-1983) using a robust statistical 
m tütoâ. Atm ospheric Environment, 25B, 47-51.
K ram er, K., A. Friend, and I. Leinonen, 1996: M odelling com parison to eval­
uate the im portance of phenology and spring frost dam age for the effects 
o f climate change on growth of m ixed tem perate-zone deciduous forests. 
Climate Research, 7, 31-41.
K unkel, K.E., S.A. Changnon, and J.R. Angel, 1994: Clim atic aspects of the 
1993 U pper M ississippi River basin flood. Bulletin o f the A m erican 
M eteorological Society, 75(5), 811-822.
K untasal, G. and T.Y  Chang, 1987: Trends and relationship of O 3 , N 0 ^ , and 
HC in the south coast air basin of California. Journal o f the A  ir Pollution 
Control Association, 37, 1158-1163.
K yper, T., and R. Sorensen, 1985: Potential impacts o f selected sea level rise 
scenarios on the beach and coastal w orks at Sea Bright, New Jersey. In: 
Coastal zone ’85 [M agoon, O.T., H. Converse, D. Miner, D. Clark, and 
L.T. Tobin (eds.)]. A m erican Society of Chem ical Engineers, New York, 
NY, pp. 2645-2655.
Lam bert, S.J., 1995: The effect of enhanced greenhouse w arm ing on w inter 
cyclone frequencies and strengths. T ourna/ o f Climate, 8 , 1447-1452.
Lam othe and Périard, 1988: Im plications o f climate change fo r downhill ski­
ing in Quebec. CCD 88-03, Environm ent Canada, Downsview, Ontario, 
Canada, 12 pp.
Landhauser, S.M. and R.W. Wein, 1993: Postfire vegetation recovery and tree 
establishm ent at the Arctic treeline: clim ate-change-vegetation-response 
hypotheses. Journal o f Ecology, 81, 665-672.
Landsea, C.W., N. Nicholls, W.M. Gray, and L.A. Avila, 1996: Quiet early 
1990s continues trend o f few er intense atlantic hurricanes. Journal of 
Climate, 5, 4 3 5 ^ 5 3 .
Lane, L.J., M .H. Nichols, and H.B. Osborn, 1994: Tim e series analysis of 
global change data. Environm ental Pollution, 83, 63-68.
Layton, М ., M .E. Parise, C.C. Cam pbell, R. A dvani, J.D. Sexton, E.M . Bosler 
and J.R. Zucker, 1995: M osquito transm itted m alaria in New York, 1993, 
Lancet, 346(8977), 729-731.
Leatherm an, S.P., 1979: M igration o f Assateague Island, M aryland, by inlet 
and overw ash processes. Geology, 7, 104—107.
Leatherm an, S.P., 1984: Coastal geom oф hic responses to sea level rise: 
G alveston Bay, Texas. In: Greenhouse effect and sea level rise: a chal­
lenge fo r this generation [Barth, M .C. and J.G. Titus, (eds.)]. Van 
N ostrand Reinhold Co. Inc., New York, NY, pp. 151-178.
Leatherm an, S.P., 1989: National assessm ent o f beach nourishm ent require­
m ents associated w ith accelerated sea level rise. In: The potential effects 
o f global climate change on the U nited States: A ppendix В  — Sea level 
rise [Smith, J.B. and D.A. Т1фак (eds.)]. U.S. Environm ental Protection 
Agency, W ashington, DC, USA.
Lee, D.H., R. M oulton, and B.A. Hibner, 1996: Clim ate change impacts on 
western Lake Erie, D etroit River, and Lake St. C lair water levels. Great 
Lakes Environm ental R esearch Laboratory, A nn A rbor, M I and 
Environm ent Canada, Burlington, Ontario, Canada, 44 pp.
Leitch, J.A., 1981: The wetlands and drainage controversy-revisited. Agricu/tura/ 
Economist 26. University of M innesota, St. Paul, MN, USA, 5 pp.
Leitch, J.A. and L.E. Danielson, 1979: Social, econom ic and institutional 
incentives to drain or preserve pra irie w etlands. D epartm ent of 
Agriculture and A pplied Econom ics, U niversity of M innesota, St. Paul, 
M N, USA, 78 pp.
Lenihan, J.M . and R.P. Neilson, 1993: A  rule-based vegetation formation 
m odel for Canada. Journal o f Biogeography, 20, 615-628.
Lenihan, J.M . and R.P. Neilson, 1995: Canadian vegetation sensitivity to pro­
jected clim atic change at three organizational levels. Clim atic Change, 
30(1), 27-56.
Lettenm aier, D .R, E.F. Wood, and J.R. W allis, 1994: Hydro-clim atological 
trends in the continental U nited States, 1948-1988. Journal o f Climate, 
7, 586-607.
Lewellen, R., 1970: Permafrost erosion along the Beaufort sea coast. University 
o f Denver, Geography and Geology Department, D enver CO, USA, 25 pp.
Lewis, C.P., 1974: Sedim ents and sedim entary processes, Yukon-Beaufort sea 
coast. G eological Survey of Canada Paper 75-1, Part B. Geological 
Survey of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, pp. 165-170.
Lewis, N., 1988: Two m ore heat records fall as sum m er of 1988 boils on. The 
Washington Post, 111(257), A l, AlO, A ll, A ugust 18.
Linder, K.P. and M .R. Inglis, 1989: The potential effects of clim ate change on 
regional and national dem ands for electricity. In: The potential impacts of 
global clim ate change on the United States. In: Potential Effects of 
G lobal C lim ate C hange on the U nited States: A p pendix H  — 
Infrastructure [Smith, J.B. and D.A. Т1фак (eds.)]. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA.
Lins, H .R, and P.J. M ichaels, 1994: Increasing U.S. stream flow  linked to 
greenhouse forcing. E O S Transactions, 75, 281-283.
Loehle, C., 1988: Forest decline: endogenous dynam ics, tree defenses, and the 
elim ination o f spurious correlation. Vegetatio, 77, 65-78.
Loehle, C. and D. LeBlanc, 1996: M odel-based assessm ents of clim ate change 
effects on forests: a critical review. Ecological M odelling, 90, 1-31.
Lonergan, S., R. DiFrancesco, and M. Woo, 1993: Climate change and trans­
portation in Northern Canada: an integrated im pact assessm ent. Climatic 
Change, 24(4), 331-351.
Ixm ghurst, A., S. Sathyendranath, T. Platt, and C. Caverhill, 1995: A n esti­
m ate o f global prim ary production in the ocean from  satellite radiometer 
data.X  Plank. Res. 17, 1245-1271.
Louisiana W etland Protection Panel, 1987: Saving Louisiana’s wetlands: 
The need fo r a long-term p lan o f action. U.S. Environm ental Protection 
Agency and Louisiana G eological Survey, W ashington DC, 102 pp.
Loveland, J.E. and G.Z. Brown, 1990: Im pacts o f clim ate change on the ener­
gy perform ance o f buildings in the U nited States. OTA/UW /UO, 
Contract J3-4825.0, Office of Technology Assessm ent, United States 
Congress, W ashington, DC, USA, 58 pp.
North America
325
Lovett, G.M ., 1994: A tm ospheric deposition of nutrients and pollutants in 
North Am erica: an ecological perspective. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 4, 
629-650.
Lucas V. S outh C aro lin a C oastal C o u n c il, 
U .S . 
, 112 S.Ct. 2886
(1992).
M aarouf, A., 1995: Human Health. In: T h e  c a s e  f o r  c o n t r i b u t i o n s  t o  t h e  
G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  O b s e r v i n g  S y s t e m  ( G C O S )  [Canadian Climate Program 
Board (ed)]. Canadian Climate Program Board, Ottawa, Ontario pp. 
105-108.
M acK enzie, W.R., N.J. Hoxie, M.E. Proctor, and M.S. Gradus, 1994: A  mas­
sive outbreak in M ilwaukee of cryptosporidum  infection transmitted 
through public w ater supply. N e w  E n g l a n d  J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c i n e , 331(3), 
161-167.
M agnuson, J.J., and B.T. DeStasio, 1996: Therm al niche of fishes and global 
warm ing. In: G l o b a l  w a r m i n g  —  i m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  f r e s h w a t e r  a n d  m a r i n e  
f i s h  [Wood, C.M . and D.G. M cDonald (eds.)]. Society for Experimental 
Biology Sem inar Series 61, Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom , pp. 377-408.
M alcolm , J.R. and A. M arkham , 1996: Ecosystem  resilience, biodiversity, and 
climate change: setting limits. P a r k s , 6 , 38-49.
M altby, E., 1986: W a t e r l o g g e d  w e a l t h . Earthscan Publications International 
Institute, W ashington, DC, USA, 200 pp.
M anabe, S. and R.T, W etherald, 1987: Large-scale changes in soil wetness 
induced by an increase in carbon dioxide. J .  A t m o s .  S e t , 44, 1211-1235.
M ann, K.H., 1993: Physical oceanography, food chains and fish stocks, a 
review. I C E S J .  M a r .  S c i . , 50, 105-119.
M anning, W.J. and A.V. Tiedem ann, 1995: Climate change: potential effects 
of increased atm ospheric carbon dioxide (CO 2), ozone (O 3), and ultravi- 
olet-B (UV-B) radiation on plant diseases. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  P o l l u t i o n , 8 8 , 
219-245.
M arak, R.R. and R. Livingstone Jr., 1970: Spawning date of Georges Bank 
haddock. I C N A F  R e s e a r c h  B u l l e t i n ,  7, 56-58.
M arkham , A., 1996: Potential impacts of climate change on ecosystems: a 
review of im plications for policym akers and conservation biologists. 
C l i m a t e  R e s e a r c h , 6 , 179-191.
M arkham , A. and J. M alcolm , 1996: Biodiversity and wildlife conservation: 
adaptation to clim ate change. In: A d a p t a t i o n  t o  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  a s s e s s ­
m e n t  a n d  i s s u e s  [Smith, J., N. Bhatti, G. M enzhulin, R. Benioff, M. 
Campos, B, Jallow, and F. Rijsberm an (eds.)]. Springer-Verlag, New 
York, NY, USA, pp. 384-401.
M arland, G., and T.A. Boden, 1997: Global, Regional, and National CO 2  
Em issions. In: T r e n d s :  a  c o m p e n d i u m  o f  d a t a  o n  g l o b a l  c h a n g e . Carbon 
Dioxide Inform ation Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 
Oak Ridge, TN , USA.
M arsh, P., and L.F.W. Lesack, 1996: The hydrologie regime of perched lakes 
in the M ackenzie D elta: potential responses to clim ate change. 
L i m n o l o g y  a n d  O c e a n o g r a p h y , 41, 849-856.
M artens, W., T. Jetten, J. Rotmans, et al., 1995: Climate change and vector- 
borne diseases: a global m odelling perspective. G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
C h a n g e , 5(3), 195-209.
M artin, C., 1992: Clim atic perturbation as a general m echanism of forest 
dieback. In: F o r e s t  D e c l i n e  C o n c e p t s  [Manion, P.D. and D. Lachance 
(eds.)]. A PS Press, St. Paul, M N, USA, pp. 38-58.
M artin, PH ., 1996: Climate change, w ater stress, and fast forest response: a 
sensitivity study. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 34(2), 223-230.
M asterton, J.M ., R.B. Crowe, and W.M. Baker, 1976: T h e  t o u r i s m  a n d  o u t ­
d o o r  
r e c r e a t i o n  
c l i m a t e  
o f  
t h e  
P r a i r i e  
P r o v i n c e s . 
R EC-1-75, 
M eteorological A pplications Branch, Environm ent Canada, Toronto, 
Ontario, 221 pp.
M atson, P.A., W.J. Parton, A.G. Power and M.J. Swift, 1997: Agricultural 
intensification and ecosystem  properties. S c i e n c e ,  1 1 1 , 504-509.
M atthew s, R.B., M.J. Kropff, and D. Bachelet, 1994a: Climate change and 
rice production in A sia. E n t w i c k l u n g  u n d  L a n d l i c h e r r a u m , 1, 16-19.
Matthews, R.B., M.J. Kropff, D. Bachelet, and H.H. van Laar, 1994b: T h e  
i m p a c t  o f  g l o b a l  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  r i c e  p r o d u c t i o n  i n  A s i a :  a  s i m u l a t i o n  
s t u d y . Report No. ERL-COR-821, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Environmental Research Laboratory, Corvallis, OR, USA, 289 pp.
Mattson, W.J. and R.A. Haack, 1987: The role of drought in outbreaks of 
plant-eating insects. B i o S c i e n c e , 37(2), 110-118.
M axw ell, J.B. and L.A. Barrie, 1989: Atm ospheric and climatic change in the 
Arctic and Antarctic. A m b i o , 18(1), 42-49.
M ayeux, H.S., H.B. Johnson, and H.W. Polley, 1991: Global change and veg­
etation dynamics. In: N o x i o u s  R a n g e  W e e d s  [James, L .E, J.O. Evans, 
M.H. Ralphs, and R.D. Childs (eds.)]. W estview Press, Boulder, CO, 
USA, pp. 62-74.
M cC abe, Jr., G.J. and D.M. Wolock, 1992: Effects of climatic change and cli­
matic variability on the Thom thwaite moisture index in the Delaware 
River basin. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 20(2), 143-153.
M cF arlane, N.A., G.J. Boer, J.-P. Blanche!, and M. Lazare, 1992: The 
Canadian Climate Centre second-generation general circulation model 
and its equilibrium  climate. 7. C l i m . , 5, 1013-1044.
M cG illivray, D.G., T.A. Agnew, G.A. McKay, G.R. Pilkington, and M .C. Hill, 
1993: I m p a c t s  o f  c l i m a t i c  c h a n g e  o n  t h e  B e a u f o r t  s e a - ic e  r e g i m e :  i m p l i ­
c a t i o n s  f o r  t h e  a r c t i c  p e t r o l e u m  i n d u s t r y . CCD 93-01, Environment 
Canada, Downsview, Ontario, 17 pp.
M cG uire, A.D., J.M. M elillo, and L.A. Joyce, 1995: The role of nitrogen in the 
response of forest net primary production to elevated atm ospheric carbon 
dioxide. A n n u a l  R e v i e w  o f  E c o l o g y  a n d  S y s t e m a t i c s , 26, 473-503.
M cL aughlin, S.B. and D.J. Downing, 1995: Interactive effects of ambient 
ozone and climate measured on growth of mature forest trees. N a t u r e ,  
3 1  A , 252-254.
M cLeese, D.W. and D.G. Wilder, 1958. The activity and catchability of the 
lobster ( H o m a r u s  a m e r i c a n u s )  in relation to temperature. J o u r n a l  o f  t h e  
F i s h e r i e s  R e s e a r c h  B o a r d  o f  C a n a d a , 15, 1345-1354.
M cN aughton, S.J., R.W. Ruess, and S.W. Seagle, 1988: Large mammals and 
process dynamics in A frican ecosystem s. B i o S c i e n c e s , 38, 794-800.
M cNeely, J.A., 1990: Climate change and biological diversity: policy implica­
tions. In: L a n d s c a p e  e c o l o g i c a l  i m p a c t s  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  [Boer, M.M. and 
R.S. de Groot (eds.)]. lOS Press, Amsterdam, Netherlands, pp. 406-428.
M cN ulty, S.G., J.M . Vose, and W. Swank, 1996: Potential climate change 
effects on loblolly pine forest productivity and drainage across the south­
ern United States. A m b i o , 25, 449-453.
M eade, М., J. Florin, and W. Gesler, 1988: M e d i c a l  G e o g r a p h y . The Guildford 
Press, New York, NY, 340 pp.
M earns, L.O., F. Giorgi, L. M cDaniel, and C. Shields, 1995: A nalysis of daily 
variability of precipitation in a nested regional climate model: com pari­
son with observations and doubled CO 2 results. G l o b a l  a n d  P l a n e t a r y  
C h a n g e , 10, 55-78.
M earns, L.O., C. Rosenzweig, and R. Goldberg, 1996: The effects of changes 
in daily and interannual climatic variability on CERES-wheat: A  sensi­
tivity study. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 32(1), 257-292.
M eisner, J.D., 1990: Effect of clim atic warm ing on the southern margins of 
the native range of brook trout, S a l v e l i n u s  f o n t i n a l i s .  C a n a d i a n  J o u r n a l  
o f  F i s h e r i e s  a n d  A q u a t i c  S c i e n c e s , 47, 1067-1070.
M ekis, E., and W. Hogg, 1997: Rehabilitation and analysis of Canadian daily 
precipitation time series. In: 1 0 t h  c o n f e r e n c e  o n  A p p l i e d  C l i m a t o l o g y ,  
2 0 - 2 4  O c t o b e r  1 9 9 7 , Reno, Nevada, USA (in press).
M iller, B.A., et al., 1992: I m p a c t  o f  i n c r e m e n t a l  c h a n g e s  i n  m e t e o r o l o g y  o n  
t h e r m a l  c o m p l i a n c e  a n d  p o w e r  s y s t e m  o p e r a t i o n s . Report W R28-1-680- 
109. Tennessee Valley Authority Engineering Laboratory, Norris, TN, 
USA, 32 pp.
M ills, P., 1994: The agricultural potential of northwestern Canada and Alaska 
and the impact of climatic change. A r c t i c ,  47, 115-213.
M itchell, J.F.B., T.C. Johns, J.M . Gregory, and S. Tett, 1995: Climate response 
to increasing levels of greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols. N a t u r e ,  
376, 501-504.
M itchell, J.F.B. and D. A. Warrilow, 1987: Sum m er dryness in northern mid 
latitudes due to increased COo. N a t u r e , 330, 238-240.
M itsch, W.J. and J.G. Gosselink, 1986: W e t l a n d s . Van Nostrand Reinhold Co. 
Inc., New York, NY, USA, 539 pp.
M onath, T.P. and T.E Tsai, 1987: St. Louis encephalitis: lessons from the last 
decade. A m e r i c a n  J o u r n a l  
o f  T r o p i c a l  M e d i c i n e  
a n d  H y g i e n e , 37, 
40S-59S.
M oore, M.V., M.L. Pace, J.R. Mather, PS. Murdoch, R.W. Howarth, C.L. Folt,
C.Y. Chen, H .E Hemond, P.A. Flebbe, and C.T. Driscoll, 1997: Potential 
effects of clim ate change on freshw ater ecosystem s o f the New 
England/M id-Atlantic Region. H y d r o !  P r o c e s s e s , (in press). Hydrologie 
Processes, 11, 925-947.
326
North America
M oore, R., s. Tzipori, J.K. Griffiths, and K. Johnson, 1995: Temporal changes 
in perm eability and structure of piglet ileum after site-specific infection 
by Cryptosporidium parvium . G a s t r o e n t e r o l o g y , 108(4), 1030-1039.
M organ, J.A., H.W. Hunt, C.A. M onz, and D.R. Lecain, 1994: Consequences 
of growth at two carbon dioxide concentrations and two tem peratures for 
leaf gas exchange in Pascopyrum  sm ithii (C 3 ) and Bouteloua gracilis 
(C 4 ). P l a n t  C e l l  E n v i r o n m e n t , 17, 1023-1033.
M orin, G. and M. Slivitzky, 1992: Im pacts de changem ents clim atiques sur le 
régime hydrologique: le cas de la rivière M oisie. R e v u e  d e s  S c i e n c e s  d e  
l ’E a u , 5, 179-195.
M ortsch, L. and F. Quinn, 1996: Climate change scenarios for G reat Lakes 
Basin ecosystem  studies. L i m n o l o g y  a n d  O c e a n o g r a p h y , 41(5), 903-911.
M ortsch, L.D. and B.N. M ills (eds.), 1996: G reat Lakes-St. Lawrence Basin 
Project progress report #1: adapting to the im pacts o f climate change and 
variability. Environm ent Canada, Burlington, Ontario, 140 pp. + appen­
dix. 160 pp.
M ount, G.A., D.G. Haile, D.R. Barnard, and E. Daniels, 1993: New Version 
of LSTSIM  for com puter sim ulation o f  A m b l y o m m a  a m e r i c a n u m  (Acari: 
Ixodes) population dynam ics. J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c a l  E n t o m o l o g y , 30(5), 
843-857.
M yers, R.A., J.A. H utchings and N.J. Barrowm an, 1996: H ypotheses for the 
decline of cod in the North Atlantic. M a r i n e  E c o l o g y  P r o g r e s s  S e r i e s ,  
138, 293-308.
M yneni, R.B., C.D. Keeling, C.J. Tucker, G. Asrar, and R.R. Nemani, 1997: 
Increased plant growth in the northern high latitudes from  1981 to 1991. 
N a t u r e , 386, 698-702.
N ash, L.L. and P.H. Gleick, 1993: T h e  C o l o r a d o  R i v e r  b a s i n  a n d  c l i m a t e  
c h a n g e :  t h e  s e n s i t i v i t y  o f  s t r e a m f l o w  a n d  w a t e r  s u p p l y  t o  v a r i a t i o n s  i n  
t e m p e r a t u r e  a n d  p r e c i p i t a t i o n .  EPA-230-R-93-009, U.S. Environm ental 
Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 92 pp.
N ational Council on Public W orks Im provem ent, 1988. F r a g i l e  f o u n d a t i o n s  —  
F i n a l  r e p o r t  t o  t h e  P r e s i d e n t  a n d  C o n g r e s s . Washington, DC, USA, 226 pp.
N ational R esearch C ouncil, 1987: R e s p o n d i n g  t o  
c h a n g e s  
i n  
s e a  
l e v e l .  
National Academ y Press, W ashington, DC, USA, 148 pp.
Neilson, R.P., 1993a: Vegetation redistribution: a possible biosphere source of 
CO 2 during climate change. W a te r , A
i r  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  70, 659-673.
Neilson, R.P., 1993b: Transient ecotone response to clim atic change: some 
conceptual and m odelling approaches. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s ,  3, 
385-395.
Neilson, R.P., 1995; A  model for predicting continental-scale vegetation distri­
bution and w ater balance. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 5, 362-385.
Neilson, R.P., G.A. King, and G. К оеф ег, 1992: Toward a rule-based biom e 
model. L a n d s c a p e  E c o l o g y ,  1 , 27-43.
Neilson, R.R and D. M arks, 1994: A  global perspective of regional vegetation 
and hydrologie sensitivities from  clim atic change. J o u r n a l  o f  V e g e t a t i o n  
S c i e n c e , 5, 715-730.
N ewton, P.C.D., H. Clark, C.C. Bell, E.M. Glasgow, K.R. Tate, D.J. Ross, G.W. 
Yeates, and S. Saggar, 1995: Plant growth and soil processes in temperate 
grassland communties at elevated CO 2 . J .  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 235-240.
Ng, H., and J. M arsalek, 1992: Sensitivity of stream flow sim ulation to changes 
in clim atic inputs. N o r d i c  H y d r o l o g y , 23(4), 257-272.
N ixon, J.F., K.A. Sortland, and D.A. James, 1990: Geotechnical aspects of 
northern gas pipeline design. In: 5 t h  C a n a d i a n  P e r m a f r o s t  C o n f e r e n c e . ,  
Collection N ordicana No. 54, Laval University, M ontreal, Quebec, 
Canada, pp. 299-307.
N oden, B.H., M.D. Kent, and J.C. Beier, 1995; The impact of variations in 
tem perature on early Plasm odium  falciparum  developm ent in A n o p h e l e s  
s t e p h e n s i.  P a r a s i t o l o g y , 111, 539-545.
N orby, R.J., 1996: Forest canopy productivity index. N a t u r e , 381, 564.
N o rd stru m , K.F., 1992. E s t u a r i n e  B e a c h e s :  a n  i n t r o d u c t i o n  t o  t h e  p h y s i c a l  
a n d  h u m a n  f a c t o r s  a f f e c t i n g  u s e  a n d  m a n a g e m e n t  o f  b e a c h e s  i n  e s t u a r ­
ie s ,  l a g o o n s ,  b a y s  a n d  f i o r d s .  Elsevier Science Publishers, Essex, UK, 
225 pp.
N R C  C om m ittee on R angeland C lassification, 1994: R a n g e l a n d  h e a l t h :  n e w  
m e t h o d s  
t o  
c l a s s i f y ,  
i n v e n t o r y  
a n d  
m o n i t o r  
r a n g e l a n d s . N ational 
Academ y Press, W ashington, DC, USA.
O echel, W .C., S.J. Hastings, G. Vourlitis, and M. Jenkins, 1993: Recent change 
of arctic tundra ecosystem s from net carbon dioxide sink to a source. 
N a t u r e , 361, 520-523.
O IE S, 1991: A r i d  E c o s y s t e m s  I n t e r a c t i o n s . Report O IES - 6  UCAR, UCAR 
Office for Interdisciplinary Research, Boulder, CO, USA.
O ja, T. and P.A. А ф , 1996: N utrient cycling and biom ass growth at a North 
A m erican hardwood site in relation to clim ate change: ForSVA assess­
ments. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 34(2), 239-251.
O ’Neill, E.G. and R.J. Norby, 1996: Litter quality and decom position rates of 
foliar litter produced under CO 2 enrichm ent. In: C a r b o n  d i o x i d e  a n d  t e r -  
r e s t i a l  e c o s y s t e m s  [Koch, G.W. and H.A. M ooner (eds.)]. Academic 
Press, San Diego, CA, USA, pp. 87-103.
O ppenheim er, М ., 1989: Clim ate change and environm ental pollution: phys­
ical and biological interactions. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 15(1-2), 255-270.
O ram , P.A. 1989: C l i m a t e  a n d  f o o d  s e c u r i t y . International Rice Research 
Institute, M anila, Philippines. 602 pp.
O stby, F.P., 1993: The changing nature of tornado climatology. In: P r e p r i n t s ,  
1 7 t h  C o n f e r e n c e  o n  S e v e r e  L o c a l  S t o r m s ,  O c t o b e r  4 - 8 ,  1 9 9 3 ,  S t .  L o u i s ,  
M i s s o u r i ,  A m erican M eteorological Society, Boston, M A, pp. 1-5.
OTA, 1984: W e t l a n d s :  t h e i r  u s e  a n d  r e g u l a t i o n . U.S. Congress OTA-O-206, 
W ashington, DC, USA, 208 pp.
OTA, 1993: P r e p a r i n g  f o r  a n  u n c e r t a i n  c l i m a t e  -  
V o l u m e  /. OTA-0-567. 
Governm ent Printing Office, W ashington, DC, USA, 372 pp.
O verpeck, J.T., D. Rind, and R. Goldberg, 1990: Clim ate-induced changes in 
forest disturbance and vegetation. N a t u r e , 343, 51-53.
O w ensby, C.E., L.M . A uen, and P.L Coyne, 1994: Biom ass production in a 
nitrogen-fertilized, tallgrass prairie ecosystem  exposed to am bient and 
elevated levels of CO 2 . P l a n t  S o i l , 165, 105-113.
O w ensby, C.E., R.C. Cochran, and L.M . Auen, 1996: Effects of elevated car­
bon dioxide on forage quality for rum inants. In; C a r b o n  d i o x i d e ,  p o p u ­
l a t i o n s ,  a n d  c o m m u n i t i e s  [Korner, C. and F.A. Bazzaz (eds.)]. Academic 
Press, San Diego, CA, pp. 363-371.
O w ensby, C.E., P.I. Coyne, J.M . Ham, L.A. Auen, and A.K. Knapp, 1993: 
Biom ass production in a tall grass prairie ecosystem  exposed to elevated 
CO 2 . E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s ,  3, 644-653.
Pacala, S.W., C.D. Canham , J. Saponara, J.A. Silander, R.K. Kobe, and E. 
Ribbens, 1996: Forest m odels defined by field measurem ents: estima­
tion, error analysis and dynamics. E c o l o g i c a l  M o n o g r a p h s , 6 6 , 1 ^ 3 .
РА Н О , 1994: D e n g u e  a n d  d e n g u e  h e m o r r h a g i c  f e v e r  i n  t h e  A m e r i c a s :  g u i d e ­
l i n e s  f o r  p r e v e n t i o n  a n d  c o n t r o l . Pan A m erican Health Organization, 
W ashington, DC, 98 pp.
P a rk , R.A., M.S. Treehan, P.W. M ausel, and R.C. Howe, 1989: The effects of 
sea level rise on U.S. coastal wetlands. In: T h e  p o t e n t i a l  e f f e c t s  o f  g l o b ­
a l  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s :  A p p e n d i x  В  —  S e a  l e v e l  r is e  
[Smith, J.B. and D.A. Т1фак (eds.)]. U.S. Environm ental Protection 
Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 255 pp.
P a rk e r, A.J., 1986: Environm ental and historical factors affecting red and 
white fir regeneration in ecotonal forests. F o r e s t  S c i e n c e , 32, 339-347.
P a rrish , G., 1997: Im pact of W eather on Health. In: W o r k s h o p  o n  t h e  S o c i a l  
a n d  E c o n o m i c  I m p a c t s  o f  W e a t h e r  [Pielke, Jr., R.A. (ed.)]. April 2-4, 
1997, Boulder, CO, USA, pp. 87-91.
P arsons, D.J., 1991: Planning for clim ate change in national parks and other 
natural areas. T h e  N o r t h w e s t  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  J o u r n a l ,  1 , 255-269.
P arto n , W.J., J. M .O. Scurlock, D.S. Ojima, T.G. Gilmanov, R.J. Scholes, D.S. 
Schimel, T. Kirchner, J.C. M enant, T. Seastedt, E. Gracia Moya, A. 
Kamnalrut, and J.L. Kinyam ario, 1993: Observations and modeling of 
biom ass and soils organic m atter dynam ics for grassland biom e world­
wide. G l o b a l  B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s ,  1 , 785-809.
P asto r, J. and W.M. Post, 1988; Response of northern forests to C 0 2 -induced 
clim ate change. N a t u r e , 334, 55-58.
PC SD , 1996: S u s t a i n a b l e  A m e r i c a :  a  n e w  c o n s e n s u s  f o r  p r o s p e r i t y ,  o p p o r t u ­
n i t y ,  a n d  a  h e a l t h y  e n v i r o n m e n t  f o r  t h e  f u t u r e . U.S. G overnm ent Printing 
Office, W ashington, DC, USA, 186 pp.
Peixoto, J.R and A.H. Oort, 1992: P h y s i c s  o f  c l i m a t e . Am erican Institute of 
Physics, New York, NY, USA, 520 pp.
P erez-G arcia, J., L.A. Joyce, C.S. Binkley, and A.D. M cGuire, 1997: 
Econom ic impacts of clim atic change on the global forest sector: an inte­
grated 
ecological/econom ic 
assessm ent. 
C r i t i c a l  
R e v i e w s  
o f  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  S c i e n c e  a n d  T e c h n o l o g y  (in press).
P erru ch o u d , D.O. and A. Fischlin, 1995: The response o f the carbon cycle in 
undisturbed forest ecosystem s to clim ate change: a review of plant-soil 
models. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22(4-5), 759-774.
North America
327
Perry, D.A. and J. M aghem be, 1989: Ecosystem  concepts and current trends 
in forest m anagem ent: tim e for reappraisal. 
F o r e s t  E c o l o g y  
a n d  
M a n a g e m e n t ,  2 6 , 123-140.
Peters, R.L. and J.D.S. Darling, 1985: The greenhouse effect and nature 
reserves. B i o S c i e n c e , 35, 707-717.
Phelps, P., 1996: C o n f e r e n c e  o n  h u m a n  h e a l t h  a n d  g l o b a l  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  
s u m m a r y  o f  t h e  p r o c e e d i n g s . Septem ber 11-12, 1995, Washington, DC, 
National A cadem y Press, W ashington, DC, USA, 64 pp.
P hillips, D., 1990: 
T h e  
C l i m a t e s  
o f  C a n a d a . E nvironm ent Canada, 
Downsview, Ontario, Canada, 176 pp.
Phillips, D.L., J. Lee, and R.F. Dodson, 1996: Sensitivity of the U.S. corn belt 
to clim ate change and elevated CO j: I. Corn and soybean yields. 
A g r i c u l t u r a l  S y s t e m s ,  5 2 , 481-502.
Poff, J.L., 1992: Regional hydrologie response to climate change: an ecologi­
cal perspective. In: G l o b a l  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a n d  f r e s h w a t e r  e c o s y s t e m s  
[Firth, P. and S.G. Fisher (eds.)]. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 88-115.
Poiani, K.A. and W.C. Johnson, 1991: Global w arm ing and prairie wetlands: 
potential consequences for waterfowl habitat. B i o s c i e n c e , 41, 611-618.
Poiani, K.A. and W.C. Johnson, 1993: Potential effects of climate change on a 
sem i-perm anent prairie wetland. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 24 (37), 213-232.
Polley, H.W., 1997: Im plications of rising atmospheric carbon dioxide con­
centrations for rangelands. J o u r n a l  o f  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , (in press).
Polley, H.W., H.B. Johnson, and H.S. M ayeux, 1994: Increasing CO 2 : com ­
parative responses of the C 4  grass S c h i z a c h y r i u m  and grassland invader. 
P r o s o p i s .  E c o l o g y ,  7 5 , 976-988.
Polley, H.W., H.B. Johnson, H.S. M ayeux, C.R. Tischler, and D.A. Brown, 
1996: Carobon dioxide enrichm ent im proves growth, w ater relations and 
survival o f droughted honey m esquite ( P r o s o p i s  g l a n d u l o s a )  seedlings. 
T r e e  P h y s i o l o g y , 16, 817-823.
Polley, H.W ., H.S. M ayeux, H.B. Johnson, and C.R. Tischler, 1997: 
Viewpoint: atm ospheric CO 2 , soil water, and shrub/grass ratios on range­
lands. J o u r n a l  o f  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , 50, 278-284.
Pope, C., D. Bates, and M. Raizenne, 1995: Health effects of particulate air 
pollution: tim e for reassessm ent? E n v i r o n m e n t a l  H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s ,  
103, 472-480.
Post, W.M. and J. Pastor, 1996: LINKAGES —  An individual-based forest 
ecosystem  model. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 34(2), 253-261.
Post, W.M., J. Pastor, A.W. King, and W.R. Em anuel, 1992: Aspects of the 
interaction betw een vegetation and soil under global change. W a te r , A i r ,  
a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  64, 345-363.
Powell, D.S., J.L. Faulkner, D.R. Darr, Z. Zhu, and D.W. M acCleery, 1993: 
F o r e s t  r e s o u r c e s  o f  t h e  
U n i t e d  S t a t e s ,  
1 9 9 2 . USD A  Forest Service, 
General Technical Report, RM -234, Fort Collins, CO, USA, 132 pp.
Price, C. and D. Rind, 1994: Possible im plications of global climate change on 
global lightning distributions and frequencies. J o u r n a l  o f  G e o p h y s i c a l  
R e s e a r c h , 99, 10823.
Price, D.T. and M.J. Apps, 1996: Boreal forest responses to climate-change 
scenarios along an ecoclim atic transect in Central Canada. C l i m a t i c  
C h a n g e , 34(2), 179-190.
Prowse, T.D., 1997: Climate change effects on permafrost, freshwater ice and 
glaciers. In: E c o s y s t e m  E f f e c t s  o f  A t m o s p h e r i c  C h a n g e . Proceedings of a 
colloquium, March 5-6, 1996, Pointe Claire, Quebec. National Water 
Research Institute, Environment Canada, Burlington, Ontario, pp. 105-136.
Rahel, F.J., C.J. Keleher, and J.L. Anderson, 1996: Potential habitat loss and 
population fragm entation for cold w ater fish in the North Platte River 
drainage of the Rocky M ountains: response to climatic warming. 
L i m n o l o g y  a n d  O c e a n o g r a p h y , 41, 1116-1123.
Rauzi, F. and C.L. Fly, 1968: W a t e r  I n t a k e  o n  M i d c o n t i n e n t a l  R a n g e l a n d s  a s  
I n f l u e n c e d  b y  S o i l  a n d  P l a n t  C o v e r . Technical Bulletin No. 1390. USDA- 
ARS, W ashington, DC, USA, 58 pp.
Reeves, W.C., J.L. Hardy, W.K. Reisen, and M.M. Milby, 1994: The potential 
effect of global w arm ing on mosquito-borne arboviruses. J o u r n a l  o f  
M e d i c a l  E n t o m o l o g y , 31(3), 323-332.
Regens, J.L., F.W. Cubbage and D.G. Hodges, 1989: Greenhouse gases, cli­
mate change and U.S. forest markets. E n v i r o n m e n t , 31(4), 45-51.
Regier, H.A., J.A. Holm es, and D. Panly, 1990: Influence of temperature 
changes on aquatic ecosystem s: an interpretation of empirical data. 
T r a n s a c t i o n s  o f  t h e  A m e r i c a n  F i s h e r i e s  S o c i e t y , 119, 374-389.
Reisen, W.K., R .P Meyer, S.B. Presser, and J.L. Hardy, 1993: Effects of tem ­
perature on the transmission of Western Equine encephalomyelitis and 
St. Louis encephalitis viruses by C u l e x  t a r s a l i s  (Diptera: Culicidae). 
J o u r n a l  o f  M e d i c a l  E n t o m o lo g y , 30, 151-160.
R hodes, S.L. and K.B. Wiley, 1993: Great Lakes toxic sedim ents and climate 
change: 
im plications 
for 
environm ental 
rem ediation. 
G l o b a l
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  C h a n g e , 3(3), 292-305.
R osenberg, N.J., 1992: Adaptation of agriculture to climate change. C l i m a t i c  
C h a n g e , 21(4), 3 8 5 ^ 0 5 .
Rosenberg, N.J., 1993: T o w a r d s  a n  i n t e g r a t e d  a s s e s s m e n t  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  T h e  
M
I N K  S t u d y . Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA, USA, 173 pp.
R osenthal, D.H., H.K. Gruenspecht, and E. M oran, 1995: Effects of global 
warm ing on energy use for space heating and cooling in the United 
States. E n e r g y  J o u r n a l , 16(2), 77-96.
Rosenzweig, C., J. Phillips, R. Goldberg, J. Carroll, and T. Hodges, 1996: 
Potential impacts o f climate change on citrus and potato production in the 
U.S. A g r i c u l t u r a l  S y s t e m s , 52, 4 5 5 ^ 7 9 .
R otton, J., 1983: Angry, sad, happy? Blame the weather. U . S .  N e w s  a n d  W o r l d  
R e p o r t , 95, 52-53.
R ow ntree, P., 1993: 
W o r k s h o p  o n  s o c i o - e c o n o m i c  a n d  p o l i c y  a s p e c t s  o f  
c h a n g e  o f  i n c i d e n c e  a n d  i n t e n s i t y  o f  e x t r e m e  w e a t h e r  e v e n t s . Institute for 
Environm ental Studies, W 93/15, Free University, A m sterdam , The 
Netherlands, June 24-25, 1993.
Russell, P., 1968: The United States and malaria: debits and credits. B u l l e t i n  o f  
t h e  N e w  Y o r k  A c a d e m y  o f  M e d i c i n e , 44, 623-653.
Sala, O.E., R.A. Golluscio, W.K. Lauenroth, and A. Soriano, 1989: Resource 
partitioning between shrubs and grasses in the Patagonian steppe. 
O e c e o l o g i a , 81, 501-505.
Sala, O.E., W J. Parton, L.A. Joyce, and W .K  Lauenroth, 1988: Primary produc­
tion of the central grasslands region of the United States. E c o l o g y , 69,40-45.
Sam pson, R.N., M. Apps, S. Brown, C.V. Cole, J. Downing, L.S. Heath, D.S. 
Ojima, T.M. Smith, A. M. Solomon, and J. W isniewski, 1993: Workshop 
summary statement: terrestrial biospheric carbon fluxes —  quantification 
of sinks and sources of CO 2 . W a te r , A i r ,  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n , 70, 3-15.
Savage, М ., P.M. Brown, and J. Feddema, 1996: The role of climate in a pine 
forest regeneration pulse in the southwestern United States. E c o s c i e n c e ,  
3, 310-318.
Schappi, B. and C. Komer, 1996: Growth responses of an alpine grassland to 
elevated CO 2 . O e c o l o g i a , 105, 43-52.
Schim m elpfenning, D.E., 1996: Uncertainty in econom ic models of climate- 
change impacts. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 33(2), 213-234.
Schim m elpfenning, D.E., J. Lewandrowski, J.M. Reilly, M. Tsigas, and I. 
Parry, 1996: A g r i c u l t u r a l  A d a p t a t i o n  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  I s s u e s  o f  L o n g  
R u n  
S u s t a i n a b i l i t y .  N atural Resource and Environm ent D ivision, 
Economic Research Service, USDA, AER-740, W ashington, DC, 57 pp.
Schindler, D., 1997: W idespread effects of climatic w arm ing on freshwater 
ecosystem s in North America. H y d r o l o g i e  P r o c e s s e s , 11, 1043-1067.
Schindler, D.W., S.E. Bayley, B.R. Parker, K.G. Beaty, D.R. Cruikshank, E.J. 
Fee, E.U. Schindler, and M.P. Stainton, 1996: The effects of climatic 
w arm ing on the properties o f boreal lakes and stream s at the 
Experim ental Lakes A rea, northw estern O ntario. 
L i m n o l o g y  
a n d  
O c e a n o g r a p h y , 41, 1004-1017.
Schindler, D.W., P.J. Curtis, P. Parker, and M.P. Stainton, 1996: Consequences 
of climatic warm ing and lake acidification for UVb penetration in North 
American boreal lakes. N a t u r e , 379, 705-708.
Schlesinger, M.E. and Z.C. Zhao, 1988: S e a s o n a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e s  I n d u c e d  
b y  D o u b l e d  C O 2  a s  S i m u l a t e d  b y  t h e  O S U  A t m o s p h e r i c  G C M / M i x e d -  
L a y e r  O c e a n  M o d e l . Oregon State University Climate Research Institute 
Report, Corvallis, OR, USA.
Schlesinger, M.E. and Z.C. Zhao, 1989: Seasonal clim atic change introduced 
by double CO 2 as simulated by the OSU atmospheric GCM /mixed-layer 
ocean model. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e ,  2 , 429-495.
Schneider, S.H., 1996: 
E n c y c l o p e d i a  
o f  c l i m a t e  
a n d  
w e a t h e r . Oxford 
University Press, New York, NY, USA, 929 pp.
Schw artz, J., 1994: Air pollution and daily mortality: a review and m eta­
analysis. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  R e s e a r c h , 64, 36-52.
Schw artz, J. and D. Dockery, 1992: Increased mortality in Philadelphia asso­
ciated with daily air pollution concentrations. A m e r i c a n  
R e v i e w  
o f  
R e s p i r a t o r y  D i s e a s e s , 142, pp. 600-604.
328
North America
Scifres, C.J., 1980: B r u s h  M a n a g e m e n t . Texas A & M  University Press, College 
Station, TX, USA, 360 pp.
Scott, M .J., D.L. Hadley, and L.E. W rench, 1994: Effects of clim ate change on 
com m ercial building energy demand. E n e r g y  S o u r c e s , 16(3), 339-354.
Scott, M .J., R.D. Sands, L.W. Vail, J.C. Chatters, D.A. Neitzel, and S.A. 
Shankle, 1993: T h e  e f f e c t s  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  P a c i f i c  N o r t h w e s t  w a t e r -  
r e l a t e d  r e s o u r c e s :  s u m m a r y  o f  p r e l i m i n a r y  f i n d i n g s . PNL-8987, Pacific 
Northwest Laboratory, Richland, WA, USA, 46 pp.
Seastedt, T.R., J.M . Briggs, and D.J. Gibson, 1991: Controls of nitrogen lim i­
tation in tallgrass prairie. O e c o l o g i a , 87, 72-79.
Sedjo, R.A., 1991: Climate, forests, and fire: a N orth A m erican perspective. 
E n v i r o n m e n t  I n t e r n a t i o n a l , 17, 163-168.
S h ab b ar, A., B. Bonsai, and M. Khandekar, 1997: Canadian precipitation pat­
terns associated w ith the Southern Oscillation, J o u r n a l  
o f  C l i m a t e ,  
10(11).
Sbackell, N.L., K.T. Frank, W.T. Stobo and D. Brickm an, 1995: C o d  ( G a d u s  
m o r h u a j  g r o w t h  b e t w e e n  1 9 5 6  a n d  1 9 6 6  c o m p a r e d  t o  g r o w t h  b e t w e e n  
1 9 7 8  t o  1 9 8 5 ,  o n  t h e  S c o t i a n  S h e l f  a n d  a d j a c e n t  a r e a s . ICES Paper CM 
1995/P:1, 18 pp.
S harp, G.D., 1987: Clim ate and fisheries: cause and effect or m anaging the 
long and short of it all. S o u t h  A f r i c a n  J o u r n a l  o f  M a r i n e  S c i e n c e , 5, 
811-838.
Shaw , J., R.B. Taylor, D.L. Forbes, M .H. Rux and S. Solom on, 1994: 
S e n s i t i v i t y  o f  t h e  C a n a d i a n  c o a s t  t o  s e a - l e v e l  r i s e . Geological Survey of 
Canada Open File Report 2825. Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa. 114
pp.
S h eppard, J.G., J.G. Pope and R.D. Consens, 1984: Variations in fish stocks 
and hypotheses concerning their links w ith climate. R a p p o r t s  e t  p r o c è s -  
v e r b a u x  d e s  r é u n i o n s .  C o n s e i l  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  p o u r  l ’E x p l o r a t i o n  d e  l a  
M e r , 185, 255-267.
Shope, R.E., 1980: A rbovirus-related encephalitis. Y a le  J o u r n a l  o f  B i o l o g y  a n d  
M e d i c i n e , 53, 93-99.
Shope, R.E., 1991: G lobal clim ate change and infectious diseases. 
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  H e a l t h  P e r s p e c t iv e s , 96, 171-174.
S h rin er, D.S., 1980: Vegetation surfaces: a platform  for pollutant/parasite 
interactions. In: P o l l u t e d  R a i n  [Toribara, T.Y., M.W. Miller, and P.E. 
M orrow (eds.)]. Plenum  Publishers, New York, NY, pp. 259-272.
S h u g art, H.H. and T.M. Smith, 1996: A  review of forest patch models and 
their application to global change research. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 34(2), 
131-153.
Shum w ay, R., A. Azari, and Y. Pawitan, 1988: M odelling m ortality fluctua­
tions in Los A ngeles as functions of pollution and w eather effects. 
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  R e s e a r c h , 45, 224-241.
S h u ter, B.J. and J.R. Post, 1990: Climate, population viability and the zoo­
geography of tem perate fishes. T r a n s a c t i o n s  o f  t h e  A m e r i c a n  F i s h e r i e s  
S o c i e t y , 119, 316-336.
S huttlew orth, W.J., 1996: The challenges of developing a changing world. 
E O S  T r a n s a c t i o n s , 77(36), 347.
Sim berloff, D., J.A. Farr, J. Cox, and D.W. M ehlm an, 1992: M ovem ent corri­
dors: conservation bargains or poor investm ents? C o n s e r v a t i o n  B i o l o g y ,  
6 , 493-504.
Sinclair, M. and K. Frank, 1995: Symposium summary. In: C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  
a n d  n o r t h e r n  f i s h  p o p u l a t i o n s  [Beamish, R.J. (ed.)]. C a n .  S p e c .  P u b .  
F i s k A q u a t .  S c i . , 121, 735-739.
Singh, B., 1987: T h e  i m p a c t s  o f  C O 2 - i n d u c e d  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  h y d r o - e l e c ­
t r i c  
g e n e r a t i o n  
p o t e n t i a l  
i n  
t h e  
J a m e s  
B a y  
t e r r i t o r y  
o f  Q u e b e c .  
Proceedings of the influence of clim ate change and clim atic variability 
on the hydrologie regim e and w ater resources [Soloman, S.I., M. Beran, 
and W. Hogg (eds.)]. lA H S Publication no. 168, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, pp. 403-418.
Sissenwine, M.R, 1984: W hy 
do fish populations vary? In: E x p l o i t a t i o n  o f  
M a r i n e  C o m m u n it ie s , [May, R.M. (ed.)]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany.
Slade, D.C. (ed.)., 1990: P u t t i n g  t h e  p u b l i c  t r u s t  d o c t r i n e  t o  w o r k . Coastal 
Sates Organization, W ashington, DC, 361 pp.
Slivitzky, М., 1993: W a t e r  m a n a g e m e n t :  w a t e r  s u p p l y  a n d  d e m a n d  t h e  S t . 
L a w r e n c e  R i v e r . Proceedings of the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Basin 
Project w orkshop on adapting to the impacts of clim ate change and vari­
ability [Mortsch, L., G. Koshida, and D. Tavares (eds.)]. Environm ent 
Canada, Downsview, Ontario, pp. 32-34.
Sm it, B., D. M cNabb, and J. Sm ithers, 1996: Agricultural adaptation to cli­
m atic variation. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 33(1), 7-29.
Sm ith, J., and E. M cBean, 1993: The impact of clim ate change on surface 
w ater resources. In: T h e  i m p a c t  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  w a t e r  i n  t h e  G r a n d  
R i v e r  B a s i n ,  O n t a r i o  [Sanderson, M. (ed.)]. Departm ent of Geography, 
University of W aterloo, Publications Series No. 40, W aterloo, Ontario, 
pp. 25-52.
Sm ith, J.B. and D.A. Tirpak (eds.), 1989: T h e  p o t e n t i a l  e f f e c t s  o f  g l o b a l  c l i ­
m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s . EPA-230-05-89, Office o f Policy, 
Planning and Evaluation, U.S. E nvironm ental Protection Agency, 
W ashington, DC, 411 pp. + app., 689 pp.
Sm ith, T.M. and H.H. Shugart, 1993: The transient response of terrestrial car­
bon storage to a perturbed climate. N a t u r e , 361, 523-526.
Sohngen, B. and R. M endelsohn, 1997: A  dynam ic m odel of carbon storage in 
the U nited States during clim ate change. 
C r i t i c a l  
R e v i e w s  
o f  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  S c i e n c e  a n d  T e c h n o l o g y  (in press).
Solom on, A .M ., 1986 Transient response o f forests to C 0 2 -induced climate 
change: sim ulation m odeling experim ents in eastern N orth America. 
O e c o l o g i a , 6 8 , 567-579.
Soulis, E.D., S.I. Solom on, M. Lee, and N. Kouwen, 1994: Changes to the dis­
tribution of m onthly and annual runoff in the M ackenzie Basin using a 
m odified square grid approach. In: M a c k e n z i e  B a s i n  I m p a c t  S t u d y  i n t e r ­
i m  
r e p o r t #2 [Cohen, S.J. (ed.)]. Environm ent Canada, Downsview, 
Ontario, pp. 197-209.
S outh C arolina, S tate of, 1988: S o u t h  C a r o l i n a  B e a c h f r o n t  M a n a g e m e n t  A c t .  
SC Code §4839-250 et seq. (1988) and SC Code §4839-290(D)(l) 
(1990).
S paeth , K.E., T.L. Thurow, W.H. B lackburn, and F.B. Pierson, 1996: 
Ecological dynam ics and m anagem ent effects on rangeland hydrologie 
processes. In: G r a z i n g l a n d  H y d r o l o g y  I s s u e s :  P e r s p e c t i v e s  f o r  t h e  l i s t  
C e n t u r y . Society for Range M anagem ent, Denver, CO, USA, pp. 25-51.
Stage, A.R. and D.E. Ferguson, 1982: Regeneration m odeling as a component 
o f forest succession sim ulation. In: F o r e s t  s u c c e s s i o n  a n d  s t a n d  d e v e l o p ­
m e n t  r e s e a r c h  i n  t h e  n o r t h w e s t [M eans, J.E. (ed.)]. Forest Research 
Laboratory, Corvallis, OR, USA, pp. 24-30.
S taple, T. and G. Wall, 1994: Im plications of clim ate change for water-based 
recreation activities in Nahanni National Park Reserve. In: M a c k e n z i e  
B a s i n  I m p a c t  S t u d y  I n t e r i m  R e p o r t #2 [Cohen, S.J. (ed.)]. Environment 
Canada, Downsview, Ontario, pp. 4 5 3 ^ 5 5 .
S tarfield, A.M . and F.S. Chapin III, 1996: M odel of transient changes in arc­
tic and boreal vegetation in response to clim ate and land use change. 
E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 6 , 842-864.
Stefan, H.G., M. Hondzo, and X. Fang, 1993: Lake w ater quality modeling for 
projected future clim ate scenarios. J .  E n v i r o n .  Q u a l i t y , 22, 4 1 7 ^ 3 1 .
Stefan, H.G., M. Hondzo, X. Fang, J.G. Eaton, and J. M cCorm ick, 1996: 
Sim ulated long-term  tem perature and dissolved oxygen characteristics of 
lakes in the north-central United States and associated fish habitat limits. 
L i m n o l o g y  a n d  O c e a n o g r a p h y , 41(5), 1124-1135.
Stephenson, N.L., 1990: Climate control of vegetation distribution: the role of 
the w ater balance. A m e r i c a n  N a t u r a l i s t ,  135, 649-670.
Stocks, B.J., 1993: Global w arm ing and forest fires in Canada. T h e  F o r e s t r y  
C h r o n i c l e , 69(3), 290-293.
Stocks, B., B.S. Lee, and D.L. M artell, 1996: Som e potential carbon budget 
im plications o f fire m anagem ent in the boreal forest. In: F o r e s t  e c o s y s ­
t e m s ,  f o r e s t  m a n a g e m e n t  a n d  t h e  g l o b a l  c a r b o n  c y c l e  [Apps, M .J. and
D.T. 
P rice 
(eds.)]. 
NATO A SI 
Series, 
S ubseries 
1, 
Global 
Environm ental Change, Vol. 40, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 
89-96.
S treet, R.B., 1989: C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a n d  f o r e s t  f i r e s  i n  O n t a r i o . Proceedings, 
10th Conference on Fire and Forest M eteorology, Forestry Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, pp. 177-182.
Suffling, R., 1995: Can disturbance determ ine vegetation distribution during 
clim ate w arm ing? A  boreal test. 
J o u r n a l  
o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 
2387-2394.
Sweeney, B.W., J.K. Jackson, J.D. Newbold, and D.H. Funk, 1992: Climate 
change and the life histories and biogeography of aquatic insects in east­
ern N orth A m erica. In: 
G l o b a l  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  
E c o s y s t e m s  [Firth, P.A. and S.G. Fisher (eds.)]. Springer-Verlag, New 
York, NY, USA, pp. 143-176.
North America
329
Tavares, D., 1996: W eather and heat-related morbidity relationships in 
Toronto (1979-89). In: G r e a t  L a k e s - S t .  L a w r e n c e  B a s i n  P r o j e c t  p r o g r e s s  
r e p o r t  # 1 :  a d a p t i n g  t o  t h e  i m p a c t s  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a n d  v a r i a b i l i t y  
[M ortsch, L.D. and B.N. M ills (eds.)]. Environm ent Canada, Burlington, 
Ontario, pp. 110-112.
Taylor, C.C., H.B. Bigelow and H.W. Graham, 1957: Climate trends and the 
distribution of m arine anim als in New England. F i s h e r i e s  B u l l e t i n , 57, 
293-345.
Taylor, G.E., D.W. Johnson, and C.P. A ndersen, 1994: A ir pollution and forest 
ecosystem s: a regional to global perspective. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s ,  4 ,  
662-689.
Teskey, R.O., 1997: Com bined effects of elevated CO 2 and air temperature on 
carbon assim ilation of P i n u s  t a e d a  trees. P l a n t ,  C e l l  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t ,  
20, 373-380.
Tester, R, 1991: Red Tide: effects on health and econom ics. H e a l t h  a n d  
E n v i r o n  D i g e s t , 5, 4-5.
T hurow , T.L., W .H. B lackburn, and C.A. Taylor, Jr., 1986: H ydrologie 
characteristics o f vegetation types as affected by livestock grazing sys­
tem s, Edw ards Plateau, Texas. J o u r n a l  o f  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , 39, 
505-509.
Tidal W aters D ivision, M aryland D epartm ent o f Natural Resources, 1978-93. 
A nnual report. D epartm ent of N atural Resources, Annapolis, MD, USA.
Titus, J.G., 1986; G reenhouse effect, sea level rise, and coastal zone m anage­
ment. C o a s t a l  M a n a g e m e n t , 14(3), 147-171.
Titus, J.G., 1988: G r e e n h o u s e  e f f e c t ,  s e a  l e v e l  r is e ,  a n d  c o a s t a l  w e t l a n d s . U.S. 
Environm ental Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 152 pp.
Titus, J.G., 1990: G reenhouse effect, sea level rise, and barrier islands. C o a s t a l  
M a n a g e m e n t , 18(1), 65-90.
Titus, J.G ., 1991: G reenhouse effect and coastal wetland policy: How 
Am ericans could abandon an area the size o f M assachusetts at minimum 
cost. E n v i r o n m e n t a l  M a n a g e m e n t , 15, 39-58.
Titus, J.G., 1992: The costs o f clim ate change to the United States. In: G l o b a l  
c l i m a t e  
c h a n g e :  
i m p l i c a t i o n s ,  
c h a l l e n g e s  
a n d  
m i t i g a t i o n  
m e a s u r e s  
[M ajumdar, S.K., L.S. Kalkstein, B. Yarnal, E.W. Miller, and L.M. 
Rosenfeld (eds.)]. Pennsylvania Academ y o f Science, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA, pp. 385-409.
Titus, J.G., 1997: Rising seas, coastal erosion, and the takings clause: how to 
save w etlands and beaches without hurting property owners. M a r y l a n d  
L a w  R e v i e w  (in press).
Titus, J.G., C.Y. Kuo, M.J. Gibbs, T.B. LaRoche, M.K. Webb, and J.O. 
W addell, 1987: G reenhouse effect, sea level rise, and coastal drainage 
systems. J. o f  W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  P l a n n i n g  a n d  M a n a g e m e n t , 113, 2.
Titus, J.G., R.A. Park, S. Leatherm an, R. Weggel, M.S. Greene, M. Treehan, 
S. Brown, C. Gaunt, and G. Yohe, 1991; Greenhouse effect and sea level 
rise; The cost o f holding back the sea. 
C o a s t a l  M a n a g e m e n t , 19, 
171-204.
Titus, J.G. and V. Narayanan, 1996: The risk of sea level rise; A  delphic Monte 
Carlo analysis in w hich twenty researchers specify subjective probabili­
ty distributions for m odel coefficients w ithin their respective areas of 
expertise. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 33(2), 151-212.
Toll, J. et al., 1997: Chesapeake Bay at the crossroads: final report of a con­
ference held at Chestertown, M aryland, O ctober 18-19, 1996. Climate 
Institute, W ashington, DC, USA, 15 pp.
Townsend, A.R., B.H. Braswell, E.A. Holland, and J.E. Penner, 1996: Spatial 
and tem poral patterns in terrestrial carbon storage due to deposition of 
fossil fuel nitrogen. E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 6, 806-814.
TVent, D.W., J.A. Grant, L. Rosen, and TP. M onath, 1983: Genetic variations 
am ong dengue 2 viruses of different geographic origin. V i r o l o g y , 128, 
271-284.
UNEP, 1997: G l o b a l  e n v i r o n m e n t  o u t l o o k . Oxford University Press, New 
York, NY, USA, 264 pp.
U rban, D.L. and H.H. Shugart, 1989: Forest response to climatic change: a 
simulation study for southeastern forests. In: T h e  p o t e n t i a l  e f f e c t s  o f  
g l o b a l  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  o n  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s :  A p p e n d i x  D  —  F o r e s t s  
[Smith, J.B. and D.A. Tirpak (eds.)]. U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 176 pp.
U.S. D ep artm en t o f C om m erce, 1996: A n n u a l  s u r v e y  o f  m a n u f a c t u r e r s ,  
1 9 9 4 . Econom ics and Statistics Adm inistration, Bureau of the Census, 
Washington, DC, USA.
U.S. EPA, 1995: E c o l o g i c a l  i m p a c t s  f r o m  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e :  a n  e c o n o m i c  a n a l y ­
s i s  o f  f r e s h w a t e r  r e c r e a t i o n a l  f i s h i n g .  U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, W ashington, DC, USA.
U.S. EPA, 1996; N a t i o n a l  a i r  q u a l i t y  a n d  e m i s s i o n s  t r e n d s  r e p o r t ,  1 9 9 5 . U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA.
U.S. EPA  and E nvironm ent C anada, 1995: T h e  G r e a t  L a k e s :  a n  e n v i r o n ­
m e n t a l  a t l a s  a n d  r e s o u r c e  b o o k  Government of Canada, Toronto. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Great Lakes National Program Office, 
Chicago, IE, USA, 3rd ed., 46 pp.
Vallentyne, J.F., 1971: R a n g e  
d e v e l o p m e n t  
a n d  
i m p r o v e m e n t s . Brigham 
Young University Press, Provo, UT, USA, 516 pp.
Van D er Vinne, G., T.D. Prowse, and G. Andres, 1991: Econom ic aspects of 
river ice jam s in Canada. In: N o r t h e r n  h y d r o l o g y :  s e l e c t e d  p e r s p e c t i v e s  
[Prowse, T.D. and C.S.L. Ommanney (eds.)]. NHRI Symposium, 
National Hydrology Research Institute, Environment Canada, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, pp. 333-352.
Van K ooten, G.C. and L.M . Arthur, 1989: Assessing econom ic benefits of cli­
mate change on Canada’s boreal forest. C a n a d i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  F o r e s t  
R e s e a r c h , 1, 4 6 3 ^ 7 0 .
V E M A P M em bers, 1995: Vegetation/ecosystem m odeling and analysis pro­
ject: comparing biogeography and biogeochemistry models in a conti- 
nental-scale study of terrestrial ecosystem responses to climate change 
and CO 2 doubling. G l o b a l  B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s , 9, 407-437.
V itousek, P.M., 1994: Beyond global warming; ecology and global change. 
E c o l o g y , 75, 1861-1876.
Vose, J., B.D. Clinton, and W.T. Swank, 1993: F i r e ,  d r o u g h t ,  a n d  f o r e s t  m a n ­
a g e m e n t  
i n f l u e n c e s  
o n  p i n e j h a r d w o o d  
e c o s y s t e m s  
i n  
t h e  
s o u t h e r n  
A p p a l a c h i a n s . Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Fire 
and Forest Meteorology, Society of American Foresters, 26-28 October, 
1993, Jekyll Island, GA, USA, pp. 232-238.
W ackter, D.J. and P.V. Bayly, 1988: The effectiveness of emission controls on 
reducing ozone levels in Connecticut from 1976 through 1987. In: T h e  
s c i e n t i f i c  a n d  t e c h n i c a l  i s s u e s  f a c i n g  p o s t - 1 9 8 7  o z o n e  c o n t r o l  s t r a t e g i e s  
[G.T. Wolff, J.L. Hanisch, and K. Schere (eds.)[. A ir and Waste 
M anagement Association, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, pp. 398-415.
W akim , P.G., 1989: Temperature-adjusted ozone trends for Houston, New 
York and W ashington, 1981-1987. In: P a p e r  8 9 - 3 5 . 1 ,  P r e s e n t e d  a t  t h e  
8 2 n d  A n n u a l  M e e t i n g  a n d  E x h i b i t i o n  o f  t h e  A i r  a n d  W a s t e  M a n a g e m e n t  
A s s o c i a t i o n , Anaheim , CA, USA, June 25-30, 1989.
W akim , P.G., 1990: 1981 to 1988 ozone trends adjusted to meteorological 
conditions for 13 metropolitan areas. In: P a p e r  9 0 - 9 7 . 9 ,  P r e s e n t e d  a t  t h e  
8 3 r d  A n n u a l  M e e t i n g  a n d  E x h i b i t i o n  o f  t h e  A
i r  a n d  W a s t e  M a n a g e m e n t  
A s s o c i a t i o n , Pittsburgh, PA, USA, June 24-29, 1990.
W alker, J.C., T.R. Miller, G.T. Kingsley, and W.A. Hyman, 1989: Impact of 
global climate change on urban infrastructure. In; T h e  P o t e n t i a l  E f f e c t s  
o f  G l o b a l  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
o n  
t h e  
U n i t e d  
S t a t e s :  A p p e n d i x  
H  —  
I n f r a s t r u c t u r e  [Smith, J.B. and D.A. Tirpak (eds.)]. U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 176 pp.
W all, G., 1988: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  f o r  t o u r i s m  a n d  r e c r e a t i o n  i n  
O n t a r i o . CCD 88-05, Environment Canada, Downsview, Ontario, 16 pp.
W aring, R.H. and W.H. Schlesinger, 1985: F o r e s t  e c o s y s t e m s :  c o n c e p t s  a n d  
m a n a g e m e n t . Academ ic Press, New York, NY, USA, 345 pp.
W elch, D.W., A.I. Chigirinsky, and Y. Ishida, 1995: Upper thermal limits on 
the oceanic distribution of Pacific salmon ( O n c o r h y n c h u s )  in the spring. 
C a n .  J .  F i s h .  A q u a t .  S e t ,  52, 489-503.
W eller, M.W., 1981: F r e s h w a t e r  M a r s h e s . University of M innesota Press, 
M inneapolis, MN, 146 pp.
W eltz, M .A., and M.K. Wood, 1986: Short duration grazing in Central New 
Mexico: effect on sedim ent production. J .  S o i l  a n d  W a t e r  C o n s e r v . , 41, 
262-266.
W estoby, М., В. Walker, and I. Noy-M eir, 1989: Opportunistic management 
for rangelands not at equilbrium. J o u r n a l  o f  R a n g e  M a n a g e m e n t , 42, 
266-274.
W H O  (W orld H ealth O rganization), 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  H u m a n  
H e a l t h  [McMichael, A.J., A. Haines, R. Slooff, and S. Kovats (eds.)]. 
World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 297 pp.
W ilcoxen, P.J., 1986: Coastal erosion and sea level rise: Implications for ocean 
beach and San Francisco’s Westside Transport Project. C o a s t a l  Z o n e  
M a n a g e m e n t  J o u r n a l ,  14, 3.
330
North America
W illiam s, D.W. and A.M . Liebhold, 1995: H erbivorous insects and global 
change: potential changes in the spatial distribution of forest defoliator 
outbreaks. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y , 22, 665-671.
W illiam s, M .A.J., and R.C. Balling, Jr., 1996: I n t e r a c t i o n s  o f  d e s e r t i f i c a t i o n  
a n d  
c l i m a t e . W orld M eteorological O rganization, U nited N ations 
Environm ent Programme, Wiley, New York, NY, USA, 270 pp.
W inner, W.E., 1994: M echanistic analysis of plant responses to air pollution. 
E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 4, 651-661.
W olff, K. and P. T. Lioy, 1978: An em pirical m odel for forecasting maxim um  
daily ozone levels in the northeastern U.S. J o u r n a l  o f  t h e  A
i r  P o l l u t i o n  
C o n t r o l  A s s o c i a t i o n . 28, 1034-1038.
W oodw ard, F.I., 1987: C l i m a t e  a n d  p l a n t  d i s t r i b u t i o n . Cam bridge University 
Press, London, United Kingdom, 174 pp.
W otton, B.M. and M .D. Flannigan, 1993: Length o f fire season in a changing 
climate. T h e  F o r e s t r y  C h r o n i c l e , 69, 187-192.
W R I, 1996: W o r l d  R e s o u r c e s  1 9 9 6 - 1 9 9 7 . Oxford University Press, N ew York, 
NY, USA, 365 pp.
W right, D.G., R.M. Hendry, J.W. Loder, and F.W. Dobson, 1986: Oceanic 
changes associated w ith global increases in atm ospheric carbon dioxide: 
a prelim inary report for the A tlantic coast of Canada. C a n .  T e c h . R e p .  
F i s h .  A q u a t .  S c i . , 1426, vii + 78 pp.
W ullschleger, S.D., W.M. Post, and A.W. King, 1995: O n the potential for a 
CO 2  fertilization effect in forest trees: an assessm ent of 58 controlled- 
exposure studies and estim ates o f the biotic growth factor. In: B i o t i c  
f e e d b a c k s  
i n  
t h e  g l o b a l  
c l i m a t e  
s y s t e m  [W oodwell, G.M , and F.T. 
M ackenzie (eds.)]. Oxford U niversity Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 
85-107.
Yan, N.A., W. Keller, N.M . Scully, D.R.S. Lean and P.J. Dillon, 1996: 
Increased UV-B penetration in a lake owing to drought-induced acidifi­
cation. N a t u r e , 381, 141-143.
Y arnal, B., D.L. Johnson, B.J. Frakes, G.L Bowles, and P. Pascale, 1997: The 
Flood of ’96 and its socioeconom ic im pacts in the Susquehanna River 
Basin. J o u r n a l  o f  t h e  A m e r i c a n  W a t e r  R e s o u r c e  A s s o c i a t i o n , (in press).
Yohe, G., 1990: The cost o f not holding back the sea. C o a s t a l  M a n a g e m e n t ,  
18, 4 0 3 ^ 3 2 .
Yohe, G., J. Neum ann, P. M arshall, and H. A m eden, 1996: The econom ic cost 
of greenhouse-induced sea-level rise for developed property in the 
United States. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 32(4), 387-410.
Z ucker, J.R., 1996: Changing patterns o f autochtonous m alaria transmission 
in the U nited States: a review of recent outbreaks. E m e r g i n g  I n f e c t i o u s  
D i s e a s e s , 2(1), 37-43.
9
Small Island States
LEONARD A. NURSE (BARBADOS), ROGER F. McLEAN (AUSTRALIA), 
AND AVELINO G. SUAREZ (CUBA)
Contributors:
M. Ali (Maldives), J. Hay (New Zealand), G. Maul (USA),
G. Sem (Papua New Guinea)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary
333
9.3.2.
Terrestrial Ecosystems
343
9.З.2.1. Forests
343
9.1.
Introduction: General Characteristics
9.3.3.
Biodiversity and Small Islands
343
of Small Islands
336
9.3.4.
Hydrology and Water Resources
344
9.3.5.
Agriculture and Fisheries
344
9.2.
Regional Climate
339
9.З.5.1. Agriculture
344
9.2.1. Some Common Influences
339
9.3.5.2. Fisheries
345
9.2.2. Observed Trends
339
9.3.6.
Coastal Systems
346
9.2.2.1. Temperature and Precipitation
339
9.З.6.1. Sea-Level Rise and
9.2.2.2. Tropical Cyclones
339
Coastal Changes
346
9.2.3. Model Projections
340
9.3.7.
Human Settlement
346
9.2.З.1. Temperature, Precipitation, and
9.3.7.1. Infrastructure and Settlement
346
Evaporation
340
9.3.7.2. Tourism
347
9.2.3.2. Extreme Events and Interannual
9.3.8.
Human Health
348
Variability
341
9.3.9.
Cultural Integrity
350
9.2.3.3. Sea-Level Rise: Projections and
Implications
341
9.4. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential
Vulnerabilities and Impacts
350
93.
Sensitivity, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
342
9.3.1. Marine Ecosystems
342
References
351
9.З.1.1. Coral Reefs
342
9.3.1.2. Mangrove Communities
342
9.3.1.3. Seagrasses
343
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction
All of the small island states considered in this report are 
located within the tropics, with the exception of M alta and 
Cyprus in the M editerranean. About one-third of the states 
comprise a single main island; the others are made up of 
several or many islands. Although some states are experi­
encing relative declines in sea level, others— primarily low- 
lying island states and atolls— are especially vulnerable to 
climate change and associated sea-level rise because, in 
many cases (e.g., The Baham as, K iribati, M aldives, 
Marshall Islands), much of the land area is only 3-4 m 
above the present mean sea level. Islands at higher eleva­
tions also are vulnerable— particularly in coastal zones, 
where settlem ents, econom ic infrastructure, and vital ser­
vices tend to be concentrated.
Regional Characteristics
The ocean exerts a strong influence on small islands. Island 
climate is moderated by the maritime influence— which, 
given the islands’ mainly tropical location, results in uni­
formly high temperatures (20°C and above) throughout the 
year. However, other climate variables often exhibit distinct 
seasonal patterns— particularly rainfall distribution, which 
results in wet and dry seasons. Some small island states are 
subject to tropical cyclones (i.e., hurricanes or typhoons); 
those that are outside the main storm tracks also are affected 
by high seas and swells associated with such events. In the 
Pacific, large interannual rainfall variations resulting from 
the El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon are an 
important climate characteristic; ENSO effects also are felt 
on islands in the Caribbean Sea and Indian Ocean.
Economic activities in small island states frequently are domi­
nated by agriculture (e.g., sugar and bananas for export; sub­
sistence farming for local consumption) and by tourism, both 
of which are sensitive to external forces and are strongly influ­
enced by climatic factors. Fisheries, although largely artisanal, 
also support an important economic activity. Although total 
population numbers are low, settlements commonly are con­
centrated in the capital city or on the capital island, where pop­
ulation densities often are very high. Human demands on 
coastal and marine resources are continuing to increase; the 
potential impacts of climate change, added to these pressures, 
almost certainly will result in the degradation or loss of some 
natural ecosystems that are important to the economies of 
small island states.
Caribbean islands experienced an increase in mean annual 
temperature of more than 0.5°C during the period 1900-1995. 
During the same period, mean annual total rainfall decreased 
by about 250 mm, though throughout the rainfall record has 
been characterized by large variability. In the Pacific islands, 
the Increase in average annual temperature has been less than 
0.5°C since 1900. Rainfall records for the Pacific (1900-1995) 
reveal no clear trend; they show decadal fluctuations of ± 2 0 0  
mm for mean annual rainfall and ±50-100 mm for seasonal 
rainfall.
Observed Climate Trends
Climate Model Projections
Because simulations using ocean-atmosphere general circula­
tion models (GCMs) are not presently conducted at fine hori­
zontal resolution, the ability to generate climate change sce­
narios for the small island states is somewhat limited. 
However, because of the strong influence of the surrounding 
oceans on the climate of these islands and because the oceans 
are projected to warm in the future [1-2°C for the Caribbean 
Sea and the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans, with a dou­
bling of carbon dioxide (CO 2 )], small Islands also are expect­
ed to experience moderate warming in the future. Mean rain­
fall intensity also is projected to increase by about 20-30%  
over the tropical oceans (the main locations of the small island 
states) with doubled CO 2 . On the other hand, simulations con­
ducted with combined greenhouse gas (GHG) and aerosol 
forcings project a decrease in mean summer precipitation over 
the Mediterranean Sea region (the location of Malta and 
Cyprus).
At this stage, there is much uncertainty in climate model 
projections with respect to possible changes in the distribu­
tion, frequency, and intensity of tropical cyclones and 
ENSO events. The most significant climate-related projec­
tion for small islands is sea-level rise. Current estimates of 
future global sea-level rise of 5 mm/yr (with a range of 2-9 
mm/yr) represent a rate that is 2 to 4 times higher than what 
has been experienced globally over the past 
1 0 0  years. 
Considerable local and regional variations in the rate, mag­
nitude, and direction of sea-level change can be expected as 
a result of thermal expansion, tectonic movements, and 
changes in ocean circulation. However, although the level 
of vulnerability will vary from island to island, it is expect­
ed that practically all small island states will be adversely 
affected by sea-level rise.
Sensitivity, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
Tourism
Marine Ecosystems
The impact of a climate change-related increase in air tem­
perature on small island states has not been investigated in 
any detail. A  rise in temperature (of the magnitude projected) 
is not anticipated to have widespread adverse consequences, 
though some critical ecosystems (e.g., coral reefs) are highly 
sensitive to temperature changes. Although reefs have the 
potential to keep up or catch up with the projected rate of sea- 
level rise, in many parts of the tropics (e.g., the Caribbean 
Sea, the Pacific Ocean) some species of corals live near their 
limits of tolerance to temperature (about 25-29°C). Thus, 
even relatively small projected increases in sea-surface tem­
perature could have an adverse impact on the viability of 
some of these organisms. An increase in the incidence of 
bleaching— associated with the elevation of water tem pera­
tures above seasonal maxima— similarly would pose a threat 
to coral reef ecosystems.
The natural capacity of mangroves to adapt and migrate land­
ward in response to projected sea-level rise is expected to be 
reduced by associated land loss, land-use practices, and the 
presence of infrastructure in the coastal zone. Survival of man­
groves appears likely where the rate of sedimentation approxi­
mates the local rise in sea level, but landward migration com­
monly is inhibited by topography and infrastructure, which 
will constrict the mangrove belt.
Some ecosystems already are seriously affected by anthro­
pogenic stresses— ^which, in some islands, may pose as great a 
threat as climate change itself. Where this situation exists, the 
natural capacity of ecosystems to adapt to the effects of climate 
change will be substantially reduced.
Coastal Systems
Many islands are likely to experience increased coastal ero­
sion and land loss as a consequence of sea-level rise. Beaches 
are expected to be affected by a reduced supply of sediment 
from adjacent reefs; on high islands, however, increased sedi­
ment yields from stream catchments may compensate for this 
effect, at least in the short term. In addition, increased sea 
flooding and inundation (as have been projected for the 
Marshall Islands and Kiribati) are expected in most low-lying 
islands and atolls.
Human Settlements and Infrastructure
In many small island states, the largest settlements, much crit­
ical infrastructure, and major economic activities and services 
are located close to present sea level and therefore will be at 
risk from sea-level rise. Vulnerability assessment studies have 
shown that the costs of shoreline and other infrastructure pro­
tection could be burdensome for some islands.
Tourism is the dominant economic sector in many small island 
states in the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific and Indian Oceans. 
This sector is the single largest contributor to gross national 
product (GNP) in many countries. In 1995, for example, 
tourism accounted for 69%, 53%, and 50% of GNP in Antigua, 
the Bahamas, and the Maldives, respectively. The tourism sec­
tor also earns considerable foreign exchange for a number of 
small island states, many of which depend heavily on import­
ed food, fuel, and a range of other goods and services. For 
example, in 1995, the tourist industry in the Maldives earned 
US$181 million in foreign exchange— amounting to more than 
70% of the country’s total foreign exchange earnings for that 
year. In the Bahamas, the industry earned US$1.3 billion in for­
eign exchange in 1995, which was equivalent to more than 
50% of government revenues for the year. Climate change and 
sea-level rise would affect tourism directly and indirectly. The 
loss of beaches to erosion and inundation, increasing stress on 
coastal ecosystems, damage to infrastructure, and an overall 
loss of amenities would jeopardize the viability of the tourist 
industry in many small islands.
Integration and Adaptation
Proper evaluation of the overall risk of island states to project­
ed climate change effects requires adoption of a fully integrated 
approach to vulnerability assessments. The sensitivity of small 
islands to climate change cannot be attributed to any single fac­
tor (e.g., size or elevation); the cumulative and synergistic result 
of these and related biophysical attributes, combined with their 
economic and sociocultural character, ultimately determines the 
vulnerability of these islands. Moreover, some islands are prone 
to periodic non-climate-related hazards (e.g., earthquakes, vol­
canic eruptions, tsunamis); the degree of vulnerability of such 
islands to climate change therefore should not be evaluated in 
isolation from these threats. In addition, vulnerability assess­
ments for small island states should take into consideration the 
value of nonmarketed goods and services (e.g., subsistence 
assets, community structure, traditional skills and knowledge), 
which also may be at risk. In some island societies, these assets 
are just as important as marketed goods and services.
Numerous adaptation measures for responding to climate 
change and sea-level rise theoretically are available to small 
island states; given their small size and limited human and 
financial resources, however, the costs of adaptation often are 
prohibitive. Shore protection, for instance, is very expensive— 
and in the past, the design of structures has not always been 
appropriate for the coastal environments of tropical small 
islands. The use of more flexible, easily replaceable, tradition­
al shore protection measures could be explored, particularly in 
island states of the Pacific and Indian Oceans. Moreover, in 
planning for adaptation, efforts should be made to maximize 
the use of traditional knowledge and skills because island peo­
ples have had to cope with a variety of environmental stresses 
in the past.
On low-lying islands and atolls where sea-level rise is project­
ed to be a threat, retreat away from the coast rarely is an option, 
given the limited physical size of many islands. As a result, 
migration and resettlement outside national boundaries may 
have to be considered in extreme cases.
Uncertainties in climate change projections are likely to be a 
disincentive for implementing various adaptive measures, 
especially because some options may be costly or require 
changes in societal norms and behavior. For example, efforts to
enhance the health and resilience of natural ecosystems—  
including coral reefs, mangroves, and beaches— by reducing 
activities that increase their vulnerability would be a vital 
adaptation strategy, but there would be monetary and social 
costs associated with their implementation. However, policies 
that seek to incorporate sound principles of integrated coastal 
management would be beneficial to the small island states in 
the long term— even in the absence of projected climate 
change and sea-level rise.
336
Small Island States
9.1. 
Introduction: General Characteristics 
of Small Islands
The majority of the world’s small island states are concentrat­
ed in four tropical regions: the tropical Pacific Ocean, Indian 
Ocean, and Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean off the coast 
of west Africa. A  few small islands are found outside these 
areas— for example, Malta and Cyprus, which are located in 
the Mediterranean Sea. This chapter principally addresses 
independent small island states; it does not focus on islands 
that are more appropriately considered to be part of another 
region (e.g., Singapore in Tropical Asia, Bahrain in the Middle 
East); the many islands that constitute part of a larger country 
(e.g., the thousands of small islands of Indonesia); or those that 
are administered by a metropolitan country, such as the United 
Kingdom, the United States, France, or The Netherlands. 
Nevertheless, many of the climate change projections and 
impacts detailed in this chapter apply equally to these other 
types of islands.
The small island states on which the discussion in this chapter 
focuses are depicted in Figure 9-1. Box 9-1 provides a listing 
of the islands for which socioeconomic data were compiled in 
Annex D.
Although these islands are by no means homogeneous politi­
cally, socially, or culturally— or in terms of physical size or 
stage of economic development— many tend to share a number 
of common characteristics. Island states generally have small 
land areas and high population densities, and large exclusive 
economic zones (EEZs) (for mid-Pacific states, these zones are
1 , 0 0 0  times larger than the land area); they are located predom­
inantly in tropical and subtropical regions of the Caribbean Sea
Box 9-1. Small Island States 
[United Nations Member States and Members of the 
Aliiance of Small Island States (AOSIS)]
Antigua and Barbuda
Malta
The Bahamas
Marshall Islands
Barbados
Mauritius
Cape Verde
Nauru
Comoros
Palau
Cook Islands
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Cuba
Saint Lucia
Cyprus
Saint Vincent and the
Dominica
Grenadines
Dominican Republic
Samoa
Federated States of
Sao Tome and Principe
Micronesia
Seychelles
Fiji
Solomon Islands
Grenada
Tonga
Haiti
Trinidad and Tobago
Jamaica
Tuvalu
Kiribati
Vanuatu
Maldives
and the Indian and Pacific Oceans (Table 9-1). The climates of 
most islands generally are moderated by the maritime influence, 
with lower maximum and higher minimum temperatures than 
continental land masses at the same latitude. Most islands also 
have distinct seasonal patterns of rainfall and temperature. 
Although many islands are located outside the normal tropical 
storm tracks, some states in the Pacific and Indian Oceans and 
the Caribbean Sea periodically are subject to the devastating 
inflences of tropical cyclones (i.e., hurricanes and typhoons).
Small island states may comprise a single island (e.g., 
Barbados, Malta, and Nauru); a few islands, such as Tuvalu (9 
islands), Vanuatu (12), and Cape Verde (15); or numerous 
islands— for instance, the Seychelles (115), Tonga (180), and 
the Maldives (1,200). Physiographically and geologically, 
island states may comprise low oceanic islands, including 
atolls and reef islands; high volcanic or limestone islands; or 
continental islands (Nunn, 1994). In the first group of islands, 
species diversity and endemism often are low. In the second 
group, species diversity may be high or low, but endemism 
usually is high. Continental islands— particularly those located 
on the broad shelves of neighboring land masses— tend to have 
high species diversity and low endemism, which are functions 
of their continental proximity.
The ecology of small islands generally is characterized by a 
limited range of terrestrial and coastal ecosystems, surrounded 
by a vast expanse of ocean. Vegetation usually consists of 
groups of easily dispersed species, which have a tendency to be 
restricted in their distribution. Forests (including strands and 
mangroves), coral reefs, and sea grass communities provide a 
range of food and other resources. Biodiversity is highly vari­
able and depends on a combination of physical and other fac­
tors (e.g., location, area, geology). For example, because of the 
coralline nature of most low-lying atolls, soils usually are poor­
ly developed, exhibit immature profiles, are highly alkaline 
and usually deficient in nutrients, and have low water-retention 
capacity.
To the extent that island species are restricted in range and dis­
tribution, they are potentially more endangered and prone to 
extinction than the flora and fauna of continental land masses. 
Communities of terrestrial fauna on small islands are poorly 
developed and include few indigenous land mammals. Avian 
fauna are dominated mainly by migratory sea birds, with a rel­
atively small number of indigenous species (Table D-7), repre­
senting a limited number of families.
The economies of small island states are sensitive to external 
market forces over which they have little control. The 
economies generally are dominated by agriculture, fisheries, 
tourism, and international transport activities (air and sea). On 
some islands, remittances from expatriate nationals are an 
important component of family income. In the case of Tuvalu, 
remittances mainly from workers in the phosphate mines in 
Nauru, seamen, and contract workers in New Zealand exceed 
by far export earnings (SPREP, 1996). Primary production also 
is an important source of export earnings for many islands;
Small Island States
337
H A ITI]
 _____  
, 
■ / DOMINICÀÎT
C A R I B B E A N
S E A
■S ANTIGUA
ST KITTS NEVIS'-,-;s ; 0 a b b UDA 
DOMINICA 0
ÎS
Figure 9-1: Main regions of the world in which small island states are located.
338
Small Island States
important products include sugar (Barbados, Cuba, Dominican 
Republic, Fiji, Mauritius), bananas (Dominica, St. Lucia, 
Tonga), copra (Cook Islands, Palau, Seychelles, Vanuatu), 
forestry (Solomon Islands), and mining (Cuba, Cyprus, 
Jamaica, Nauru). Subsistence agriculture also is an important 
economic activity, providing some level of food security and
saving valuable foreign exchange that otherwise would be 
spent on food and other imports. Tourism also is an important 
foreign exchange earner in many small island states.
Infrastructure and services often are not well developed and fre­
quently are concentrated in areas of high population density; on
Table 9-1: Land area and population data (1995) fo r selected small island states.
Country
Land Area 
(km2)
Population
(000s)
Pop. Density 
(persons/km^)
Coastline 
Length (km)
EEZ 
(000s km^)
Atlantic Ocean 
Cape Verde
Sao Tome and Principe
4,033
960
392
133
97
139
965
209
734
X
Caribbean Sea
Antigua and Barbuda
Bahamas
Barbados
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Haiti
Jamaica
St. Kitts and Nevis 
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
Trinidad and Tobago
280
13,935
431
110,861
750
48,442
312
27,750
10,991
269
616
389
5,128
66
276
262
11,041
71
7,823
92
7,180
2,447
41
150
112
1,306
236
20
607
100
95
161
295
259
223
152
244
288
255
153
3,542
97
6,073
148
940
121
370
1,022
135
158
84
3,760
110
759
167
X
15
X
27
X
297
11
16 
32
X
Indian Ocean
Comoros
Maldives
Mauritius
Seychelles
2,171
300
1,850
280
653
254
1,117
73
292
854
547
261
340
644
177
491
X
X
1,000
15,000
Mediterranean Sea
Cyprus
Malta
9,251
316
742
366
80
1,159
Pacific Ocean 
Cook Islands
Federated States of Micronesia 
Fiji
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
Palau
Samoa
Solomon Islands 
Tonga 
Tuvalu 
Vanuatu
236
720
18,272
728
181
21
497
2,842
28,446
697
26
14,763
X
X
784
79
X
11
X
171
378
98
10
169
X
X
43
109
X
523
X
61
13 
141 
385
14
120
6,112
1,129
1,143
370
30
X
403
5,313
419
24
2,528
X
2,978
1,290
3,550
2,131
320
X
120
1,340
700
900
680
X = n o  d ata av ailab le.
Sources: Wilkinson and Buddemeier, 1994; FAO, 1995; UN Population Division, 1995.
Small Island States
339
some islands, however, infrastructure for services and tourism 
is well developed. In most island states, the greatest concentra­
tion of people tends to occur in the capital city or on the capital 
island— where, in some cases, more than 50% of the country’s 
total population lives. Nevertheless, in many cases (e.g.. Pacific 
island communities), there are strong traditional and cultural 
ties to the home island, village, or rural area; there also may be 
strong religious links, which may have an important influence 
on perceptions of and attitudes toward climate change and sea- 
level rise (McLean and d’Aubert, 1993).
Some low-lying small island states— such as the atoll nations of 
the Pacific and Indian Oceans— are among the most vulnerable 
to climate change, seasonal-to-interannual climate variability, 
and sea-level rise. Much of their critical infrastmcture and many 
socioeconomic activities tend to be located along the coastline, 
in many cases at or close to present sea level (Nurse, 1992; 
Pernetta, 1992; Hay and Kaluwin, 1993). Coastal erosion, saline 
intrusion, sea flooding, and land-based pollution already are seri­
ous problems that many of these countries face. Supplies of 
high-quality potable water often are inadequate, and water sup­
ply systems tend to lack adequate storage capacity. Moreover, 
valuable coastal ecological systems currently are stressed by 
human activities in the coastal zone and inland, reducing their 
capacity to adapt to the effects of climate change and sea-level 
rise. Pressures on these resources continue to increase in most 
small islands, partly as a consequence of high population growth 
rates, increasing urbanization, tourism development, and greater 
demand for material goods and services.
In addition, these island states are sensitive to changes in pre­
cipitation in terms of absolute amounts as well as spatial and 
temporal distribution. Similarly, island systems would be 
extremely vulnerable to any changes in the frequency or inten­
sity of extreme events (e.g., droughts, floods, hurricanes, and 
storm surges). Indeed, vulnerability to these and other natural 
hazards— including some that may not be influenced by climate 
change (e.g., tsunamis, volcanoes)— contributes to the cumula­
tive vulnerability of many small island states (Maul, 1996).
9.2. 
Regional Clim ate
9.2.1. 
Some Common Influences
Although there is much climatic variation between localities, 
some factors and characteristics are common to most small 
islands— mainly as a result of their insular natures and tropical 
locations. For instance, it is generally true that:
• 
The ocean exerts a strong influence on the climate of 
islands.
• 
Temperatures usually are high, with mean annual val­
ues of 20°C and above.
• 
Diurnal and seasonal variations in temperature are 
low, with values around 5°C and below.
Many small island states are influenced by tropical 
storms and cyclones (i.e., hurricanes and typhoons).
In the tropical Pacific, most islands are strongly influ­
enced by the ENSO phenomenon and associated high 
interannual variations in rainfall and sea level (Hay et ai, 
1993a). The ENSO phenomenon also has an influence on 
the weather and climate of islands in the Caribbean Sea 
(Centella et al., 1996), as well as in the Indian Ocean.
9.2.2. 
Observed Trends
9.2.2.1. 
Temperature and Precipitation
Global and regional temperature and precipitation trends are 
presented in Annex A of this report. Figure 9-2a shows that, for 
the Caribbean islands, average annual temperatures have 
increased by more than 0.5°C over the period 1900-1995; the 
seasonal data are consistent with this overall trend. In the spe­
cific case of Cuba, for which a study of observed temperature 
trends has been undertaken, Centella et al. (1996) found that 
mean air temperature has risen by 0.6°C during the past 45 
years. Rainfall data for the same period show much greater sea­
sonal, interannual, and decadal-scale variability, although a 
declining trend in average annual rainfall— on the order of 250 
mm— is evident (see Figure 9-2b). Average annual temperature 
also has increased since 1900 in the Pacific islands; the magni­
tude of the increase in this area, however, is less than 0.5 °C, and 
seasonal trends are not coherent, nor do they track the annual 
average. Similarly, the rainfall data show considerable decadal- 
scale fluctuations— on the order of 2 0 0  mm for annual average 
rainfall and 50-100 mm for seasonal rainfall (Figure 9-2d,e).
Further details of climate trends for the southwest Pacific region 
have been reported by Hay et al. (1993a,b) and Salinger et al. 
(1995); several subregions with coherent trends and variability 
were identified. These studies indicate that the region as a 
whole has warmed at a rate of about 0.2°C per decade and that 
the 1981-1990 decade was the warmest on record. Within the 
region, there has been a steady increase in temperature to the 
south of the South Pacific Convergence Zone (SPCZ)— an area 
that includes Fiji and Tonga— since the 1880s. A rapid increase 
has occurred north of the SPCZ since the 1970s, after an earli­
er cooling trend from the 1940s; this region includes Tuvalu, 
Kiribati, Western Samoa, and the northern Cook Islands.
Rainfall in the southwest Pacific has been more variable, both 
temporally and spatially, over the past 1 0 0  years, and long-term 
trends are difficult to ascertain. In Kiribati, Tuvalu, and the north­
ern Cook Islands, wetter-than-average conditions have prevailed 
since 1975; conditions have been drier in Fiji, Tonga, and Western 
Samoa. Rainfall patterns in the region clearly are associated with 
the ENSO phenomenon (Salinger et a i, 1995), although the pre­
cise nature of the relationship is not clearly understood.
9.2.2.2. 
Tropical Cyclones
The annual number of tropical cyclones for the greater 
Caribbean over the last 100 years and for the southwest Pacific
340
Small Island States
Carihlx'iin Islands 
a. Annual Temperaliirc
raeific Islands 
d Annual Teiripcralure
u
1 .5 -)
1.0 - 
Ü .5 - 
(1.0
-0 5-  
- 1.0 -
-1,5
Щ
-I 
a 
г 
1------1“ ......1
b. Annual I’rccipilalion
e. Annual I’recipitalion
s. Tropical C’ycUmcs
(_
с
Z
KM
6 a
4a
a_
Г. lVopii:al Cydones
о
оz
14-1
1 2 -
10-
8 -
6 -
4 -
KJUl) 
к и п  
|‘)2u 
Ю.ЯО 
1U4II 
KJ.si) 
K)70 
IV.SI)
I40!i 
1ЧК1 
1 4 2 0  
К Л О  
| ‘)40 
I'iSI) 
1 4 / 0  
I4SI) 
luai)
Figure 9-2: Time series of climate observations in the Caribbean islands (a-c) and Pacific islands (d-f). Observed annual 
temperature anomalies (a,d) and observed annual precipitation anomalies (b,e) both relative to 1961-90 means. Longer term 
variation of annual anomalies are emphasized by the smooth curve using a nine-point binomial filter. Number of Atlantic 
hurricanes including those in the Caribbean region (c), and annual numbers of tropical cyclones in the southwest Pacific region 
(f). Note that while there was an increase in the number of tropical cyclones detected since the advent of weather satellites in 
1969, there is no clear evidence that tropical cyclones have been changing in number or intensity over the years.
Sources: Annex A  (a,b,d,e); Environment Division, Ministry of Health and Environment, Barbados (c); Climate Research and 
Information Services, National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, Wellington, New Zealand (f).
cyclone belt for the past 50 years is given in Figure 9-2c,f. In 
both regions, high interannual and subdecadal variations are 
evident with no long-term overall trend.
9.2.3. 
M odel Projections
9.2.3.1. 
Temperature, Precipitation, and Evaporation
Analysis of climate model results (including results from a 
number of global coupled atmosphere-ocean models) suggests 
that global mean surface air temperatures can be expected to 
rise in the future. Unfortunately, current computing requirements
for atmosphere-ocean GCMs (AOGCMs) virtually prohibit the 
modeling community from conducting simulations at fine hor­
izontal resolution; because many of the small island states fall 
within a grid box of the models, they are not appropriately 
resolved. This constraint severely limits any ability to generate 
future projections of climate change for small islands. 
Nonetheless, because the climate of these islands is influenced 
by the surrounding oceans, and the oceans are expected to 
warm in the future (albeit at a slower rate than land masses), 
the small island states also are likely to experience moderate 
warming. Pittock et al. (1995) have made some progress 
toward developing climate change scenarios for the southwest 
Pacific.
Small Island States
341
An annual mean rise in tropical sea-surface temperature of about 
1.0°C is projected by AOGCMs (with a doubling of CO 2), with 
no appreciable differences between the two seasons. This pro­
jection is in agreement with the analysis of Wigley and Santer 
(1993)— ^who were confident that, although the magnitude of the 
warming in the Caribbean is uncertain, the sign of the projection 
is correct. The models also suggest some differential mean 
warming of the eastern and western Pacific Ocean. Small reduc­
tions also are projected in mean diurnal temperature ranges.
One possible consequence of generally warmer temperatures 
would be an increase in evaporation in the tropics. As in other 
regions, however, the rates of increase in evaporation in the lat­
itudes of small island states would not be uniform because evap­
oration is influenced by factors other than temperature (e.g., 
pressure). Thus, changes in evaporation rates would be expected 
to vary spatially and temporally, across and within regions.
Mean rainfall intensity is projected to increase by approxi­
mately 20-30%  over the tropical oceans (the main locations of 
the small island states) at the time of doubling of CO 2 . 
However, simulation experiments with combined GHG and 
aerosol forcings suggest that mean precipitation might 
decrease during summer over the Mediterranean Sea region, 
leading to a higher probability of dry soils in islands located in 
this region (i.e., Cyprus and Malta). Relatively greater increas­
es in mean rainfall are projected for the central equatorial 
Pacific Ocean region (see IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 6.2).
Inter-model agreement (for equilibrium experiments, as well as 
for coupled model experiments) on rainfall change is variable. 
Agreement is poor for the western tropical Atlantic 
Ocean/Caribbean Sea and Mediterranean Sea regions; it is 
moderate for the Indian Ocean and fairly good over the Pacific 
Ocean region (see Maul, 1993; Whetton et a i, 1996).
92.3.2. 
Extreme Events and Interannual Variability
Various studies have attempted to assess possible climate 
change-related changes in extreme events, but few assessments 
have focused specifically on small island states. Several mod­
els, for instance, project an increase in precipitation intensity, 
runoff, and possible flooding for latitudes within which many 
of the islands are located. In a few cases, the possibility of 
change in the occurrence of droughts also has been projected. 
Given the constraints of scaling and resolution in the models 
with respect to small islands (see Section 9.2.3.1.) and the cur­
rent status of inter-model agreement, however, such projec­
tions must be considered inconclusive at this stage.
A major ongoing concern for many small island states is 
whether global warming will lead to changes in the character 
and pattern of tropical cyclones (i.e., hurricanes and typhoons). 
Unfortunately, model projections suggest no clear trend, so it is 
not possible to state whether the frequency, intensity, or distrib­
ution of tropical storms and cyclones will change (IPCC 1996, 
WG I, Sections 3.5.2.3, 3.5.3.1, 3.5.3.2). Within the past few
decades, an increase in the number of tropical cyclones also has 
been reported in the southwest Pacific, with the greatest 
increase in stronger cyclones (see Figure 9-2f). It should be 
noted, however, that some doubts exist about the homogeneity 
of the data base, due in part to recent improvements in observa­
tion capabilities (Thompson et a l, 1992; Radford et a l, 1996).
Gray (1993) reports that, based on historical data for the 
Caribbean Sea, increases in sea-surface temperature of 1.5°C 
have been associated with an increase in hurricane frequency. 
Although there is some uncertainty in the data base, projected 
increases of this magnitude represent approximately 40% more 
hurricane activity than normal. More recently, Holland (1997) 
projects that the intensity of tropical cyclones could increase 
by 10-20% under 2 xC 0 2  conditions. In contrast, observed data 
suggest that, in the vicinity of longitudes 105-160°E (in the 
region of Australia), the total number of tropical cyclones 
between 1969-70 and 1995-96 has decreased, although there 
were slight increases in the number of strong systems and the 
duration of the cyclones (Nicholls et a l, 1997).
9.2.3.3. 
Sea-Level Rise: Projections and Implications
As a result of global warming, the penetration of heat into the 
ocean leads to the thermal expansion of the water; this effect, cou­
pled with the melting of glaciers and ice sheets, results in a rise in 
sea level. Sea-level rise wih not be uniform globally but will vary 
with factors such as currents, winds, and tides— as well as with 
different rates of warming, the efficiency of ocean circulation, and 
regional and local atmospheric (e.g., tectonic and pressure) effects.
For the IS92a emission scenario, it is estimated that sea level 
would rise, on average, about 5 mm/yr, within a range of 
uncertainty of 2-9 mm/yr (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section
7.5.2.4). On regional and local scales, sea level is expected to 
vary significantly from this global projection, as a result of 
factors such as vertical land movements (Aubrey and Emery, 
1993; Hendry, 1993; Maul, 1996) and dynamic effects due to 
ocean circulation, wind and pressure patterns, and ocean- 
water density.
Although these projections are lower than the IPCC (1990) 
estimates, it should be emphasized that the current best esti­
mates for sea-level rise represent a rate approximately two to 
four times higher than the rate experienced in the past 1 0 0  
years (i.e., 1.0-2.5 mm/yr). Model runs also show that sea level 
would continue to rise beyond the year 2 1 0 0  (because of lags 
in the climate response), even with assumed stabilization of 
global GHG emissions (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.3.1.1). 
Recent estimates by Pittock et al. (1995) indicate a sea-level 
rise of 28-32 cm for the southwest Pacific region at the time of 
CO 2 doubling— the figure representing only the contribution 
from thermal expansion. These projections are of considerable 
concern to small islands (Pernetta, 1992; Hay and Kaluwin, 
1993; Maul, 1993): Many islands and atolls in the Pacific and 
Indian Oceans rarely exceed Ъ-4 m above mean sea level in 
elevation and therefore could be vulnerable to changes of this
342
Small Island States
magnitude. The extent of this threat, however, would depend 
on several factors, including the rate of sand production.
9.3. 
Sensitivity, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
The ecological systems of small islands— and the functions 
they perform— are sensitive to the rate and the magnitude of 
changes in climate. These systems provide food, medicine, and 
energy; process and store carbon and other nutrients; assimilate 
wastes; purify water and regulate runoff; and provide opportu­
nities for recreation and tourism (see IPCC 1996, W C II, 
Section 9.2).
Although CCMs provide little insight at present into the extent 
of climate change impacts on island ecosystems, it is widely 
postulated that some effects could be quite dislocating for the 
inhabitants of many small islands (Pernetta, 1988; Roy and 
Connell, 1991; Holthus et al., 1992; Maul, 1993, 1996; 
Nicholls, 1995). Various socioeconomic sectors, including 
tourism, infrastructure, agriculture, water resources, and 
human health— all of which are sensitive to fluctuations in 
rainfall, temperature, and sea level— also could be negatively 
affected.
9.3.1. 
M arine Ecosystems
9.3.1.1. 
Coral Reefs
Coral reefs represent one of the most important resources of 
tropical islands. They perform valuable functions, including 
supplying sand to beaches and playing a critical role in the for­
mation and maintenance of reef islands; they are habitats for a 
variety of marine communities; and they serve as spawning 
and nursery grounds for numerous species of reef fish. Reefs 
also function as protective barriers for beaches and coasts by 
reducing incident wave energy through the processes of wave 
reflection, dissipation, and shoaling; they also are significant 
contributors to the economic resource base of many small 
island states.
Civen current projected rates of increase, sea-level rise per se 
is not expected to have widespread adverse effects on coral 
reefs. Indeed, some researchers argue that a rising sea level 
actually may be beneficial because the new conditions would 
be favorable for inducing vertical growth; in contrast, reef 
growth has been largely horizontal in the recent past, as a con­
sequence of lower sea levels (Wilkinson and Buddemeier,
1994). Edwards (1995) further suggests that even slowly 
accreting reef flats should be able to cope with projected sea- 
level rise, in the absence of other negative forces (e.g., elevat­
ed seawater temperature and anthropogenic stresses).
The climate change effect of greatest potential significance to 
coral reefs is likely to be an increase in seawater temperature. 
Corals have narrow temperature tolerances (approximately 
25-29°C) and salinity tolerances (about 32-36 ppm) (Bellairs
Research Institute, 1990). In some islands, some species of 
corals currently live at or near their threshold of temperature 
tolerance (Coreau, 1992). Corals respond to the combined 
effects of irradiance and water temperature elevation by paling 
in color, or bleaching. However, corals generally do not bleach 
simply as a result of rapid fluctuation in water temperature but 
rather as a result of departures in temperature above their sea­
sonal maximums. If the temperature elevation is substantial 
over an extended period (e.g., 3 ^ ° C  for > 6  months), signifi­
cant coral mortality is likely (Brown and Suharsono, 1990). On 
the other hand, if the temperature increase is relatively small 
(e.g., 1-2°C) for a short period, bleached corals may recover, 
though with reduced growth and impaired reproductive capa­
bilities (Coreau, 1992; Brown and Ogden, 1993). A  compre­
hensive review of the causes and consequences of coral bleach­
ing has recently been completed (Brown, 1997).
Notwithstanding their adaptive capacity, corals— like other 
biotic communities— ^will continue to be subjected to increas­
ing human stresses (e.g., nutrient loading and other types of 
chemical pollution, sedimentation from land-based activities, 
damage from anchoring of boats). These pressures inevitably 
will limit the innate capacities of these organisms to adapt to 
the effects of climate change.
ENSO events already have been associated with extensive 
coral bleaching in the Caribbean and the Pacific in the early 
1990s. Although it is not yet clear how climate change will 
influence the incidence of ENSO events in the future, events 
that cause high temperature excursions will lead to coral 
bleaching and, possibly, to mortality (Coreau, 1992; Wilkinson 
and Buddemeier, 1994; see also Glynn, 1993).
9.3.1.2. 
Mangrove Communities
The capacity of mangrove forests to cope with sea-level rise is 
higher where the rate of sedimentation approximates or 
exceeds the rate of local sea-level rise. Indeed, Hendry and 
Digerfeldt (1989) have shown that mangrove communities in 
western Jamaica were able to keep pace with mid-Holocene 
sea-level rise (ca. 3.8 mm/yr). However, the adaptive capacity 
of mangroves and other coastal wetlands to sea-level rise (usu­
ally by landward migration) is now severely limited in many 
localities by increasing human activities. It has been suggested, 
for instance, that a 1-m rise in sea level in Cuba will drastical­
ly affect the viability of 333,000 ha of these wetland commu­
nities (approximately 93% of Cuba’s mangroves) (Perez et al.,
1996). Additionally, adaptive capacity will vary among 
species; some species of mangroves appear to be more robust 
and resilient than others to the effects of climate change and 
sea-level rise (Ellison and Stoddart, 1991; Aksornkaoe and 
Paphavasit, 1993).
Some ecologists believe that mangrove communities are more 
likely to survive the effects of sea-level rise in macrotidal, sed­
iment-rich environments— such as northern Australia, where 
strong tidal currents redistribute sediment (Semeniuk, 1994;
Small Island States
343
Woodroffe, 1995)— than in microtidal, sediment-starved envi­
ronments like those in many small islands (e.g., in the 
Caribbean) (Parkinson et al., 1994). Most small islands fall 
within the latter classification; therefore, they are expected to 
suffer reductions in the geographical distribution of man­
groves. 
Furthermore, where the rate of shoreline recession 
increases, mangrove stands are expected to become com­
pressed and suffer reductions in species diversity in the face of 
rising sea levels.
On the other hand, Snedaker (1993) argues that mangroves in 
the Caribbean are more likely to be affected by changes in pre­
cipitation than by higher temperatures and rising sea levels 
because they require large amounts of fresh water to reach full 
growth potential. He hypothesizes that a decrease in rainfall in 
the Caribbean would reduce mangroves’ productive potential 
and increase their exposure to full-strength seawater. Thus, 
peat substrates would subside as a result of anaerobic decom­
position by sulfate-reducing microorganisms, leading to the 
elimination of mangroves in affected areas (Snedaker, 1993).
9.3.1.3. 
Seagrasses
It has been postulated that seagrass meadows— ^which exist in 
shallow, intertidal coastal environments— are the ecosystems 
most likely to be negatively affected by climate change 
effects, particularly sustained elevation of sea-surface temper­
ature or increases in freshwater runoff from land (Edwards,
1995). There is a growing consensus, however, that the main 
threats to seagrasses in the future are likely to come not from 
the effects of climate change but from anthropogenic distur­
bances— such as dredging, overfishing, water pollution, and 
land reclamation.
9.3.2. 
Terrestrial Ecosystems
9.З.2.1. 
Forests
Although significant land clearance has been a feature of many 
small island states over decades of settlement, extensive areas 
of some islands still are covered by forests and other wood­
lands. For instance, forest and woodland cover in the Solomon 
Islands, Vanuatu, Dominica, and Fiji is more than 60% of the 
total land area (see Table 9-2 and Annex D, Table D-7).
Although the tropical forests on small islands are not as criti­
cal to the global carbon budget as the tropical rainforests of the 
South American and African continents, their influence on 
local and regional climates is no less important (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Box 1-5). Forests also are of great socioeconomic 
importance as sources of timber, fuel, and many nonwood 
products. Furthermore, forests provide a broad range of other 
economic and social goods, even though their true value may 
be difficult to quantify. For example, they provide a basis for 
ecotourism, habitats for wildlife, and reservoirs for conserva­
tion of biological diversity; they also reduce soil erosion.
Moreover, forests are of spiritual importance to many indige­
nous peoples (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.1), many of whom 
inhabit small islands.
It is possible that tropical forests will be affected more by 
anthropogenic forces than by climate change per se, as long as 
deforestation continues at its current rate (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Box 1-5). Tropical forests are likely to be affected more by 
changes in soil water availability (caused by the combined 
effects of changes in temperature and rainfall) than by changes 
in temperature alone. Forests are particularly vulnerable to 
extremes of water availability (drought or flooding) and will 
decline rapidly if conditions move toward one of these 
extremes. Increasing temperature and extreme events also may 
increase the incidence of pests and pathogens, as well as the 
frequency and intensity of fires.
On the other hand, increasing amounts of CO 2  may enable some 
forest species to use water and nutrients more efficiently (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 1.3.7). CO 2  fertilization may have the 
greatest effect in the tropics, where it may lead to a gain in net 
carbon storage in undisturbed forests, especially in the absence 
of nutrient limitations (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.4.3).
9.3.3. 
Biodiversity and Sm all Islands
The biodiversity of islands also could be adversely affected by 
climate change. A wide range of changes might be expected, 
including alterations in population size, species distribution, 
species composition, and the geographical extent of habitats 
and ecosystems, as well as an increase in the rate of species 
extinction. One of every three known threatened plants are 
island endemics; among birds, approximately 23% of island 
species are threatened, compared with only 1 1 % of the global 
bird population (McNeely et a l, 1993). Although this situation
Table 9-2: Forest and woodland cover for selected small 
island states, 1993.
Country
Forest/Woodland Cover (%)
Bahamas
32
Comoros
18
Cuba
24
Cyprus
13
Dominica
67
Dominican Republic
1 2
Fiji
65
Jamaica
17
Mauritius
2 2
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
36
Solomon Islands
8 8
Trinidad and Tobago
46
Vanuatu
75
Source: UNFAO, 1995 (FAOSTAT-PC, FAO, Rome).
344
Small Island States
is believed to be linked closely to increasing population pres­
sures and habitat alteration, additional stressors— such as pro­
jected climate change effects— could further adversely affect 
island biodiversity.
Small islands are variable in their marine, coastal, and terres­
trial biodiversity. Some are very rich; for example, coral reefs 
have the highest biodiversity of any marine ecosystem, with 
some 91,000 described species of reef taxa. Table D-7 of 
Annex D shows that endemism among terrestrial flora is high 
in Fiji (58%), Mauritius (46%), Dominican Republic (36%), 
Haiti (35%), and Jamaica (34%). In the case of Cuba, 42.6% of 
the known flora and fauna is endemic (Vales et al., 1996). In 
contrast, other island ecosystems such as low-reef islands tend 
to have both low biodiversity and low endemism.
The impacts of climate change, in association with human- 
induced stresses, probably would result in a loss of biodiversi­
ty. Bleaching of coral reefs as a result of changes in sea-surface 
temperature may deplete one of the world’s most species-rich 
ecosystems (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.4.5). In addition, the 
capacity of species and ecosystems, such as mangroves, to shift 
their ranges and locations in response to climate change will be 
hindered by land-use practices that have fragmented existing 
habitats. The establishment of nature reserves (terrestrial as 
well as marine) therefore is worth consideration as a viable 
option for arresting the decline in terrestrial, marine, and 
coastal biodiversity.
9.3.4. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
It is highly probable that the effects of climate change will 
lead to adjustments in the global hydrological cycle, which 
could affect the distribution and availability of regional 
water resources. Climate variability on seasonal to interan­
nual time scales can cause changes in precipitation— which 
can affect the magnitude, rate, and tim ing of runoff and the 
frequency and intensity of floods and droughts. Temperature 
variations can result in changes in évapotranspiration, soil 
moisture, and infiltration rates (IPCC 1996, W G II, Sections
10.1, 10.3, 10.4).
There is growing evidence that hydrological variability might be 
associated with the occurrence of mega-scale climate anomalies, 
such as those associated with the ENSO phenomenon (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 10.2.1). In the tropics and low-latitude 
regions of the Southern Hemisphere, the ENSO phenomenon is 
a major factor in year-to-year climate variability, with a marked 
effect on rainfall patterns (Pittock, 1984; Philander, 1990; 
Whetton et al., 1996). Similarly, floods experienced in the Gulf 
states, Cuba, and other parts of the Americas in the early 1980s 
and hurricanes in Tahiti and Hawaii during the same period have 
been linked to a major ENSO event in 1982-83 (Shea, 1994). 
Possible climate changes associated with ENSO events could 
have serious consequences for water supplies and agriculture in 
many nations. As with sea-level rise, atoll communities depen­
dent on rainfall for fresh water could be at risk from precipita­
tion variability associated with anomalies such as the ENSO 
phenomenon (Meehl, 1994).
Coral islands and atolls are particularly sensitive to changes in 
groundwater recharge because almost all of their water supply 
comes from groundwater sources. In The Bahamas, for 
instance, freshwater lenses are the only exploitable groundwa­
ter resources; these lenses are affected periodically by salinity 
intrusions caused by overpumping and excess évapotranspira­
tion (Cant, 1996). Sea-level rise may precipitate the intrusion 
of saltwater into the freshwater lens, reducing the quality and 
quantity of potable water, if the recharge rate or the width of 
the island is reduced. In contrast, if recharge and island-width 
remain constant or expand with rising sea level, the freshwater 
lens may increase in size (Buddemeier and Oberdorfer, 1990).
Various options have been suggested for minimizing the effects 
of climate change on water resources (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 12.5.5), and many of these strategies are worthy of 
consideration by small island states. Options that these coun­
tries may wish to evaluate include the harvesting of rainwater, 
more efficient and extensive use of surface water, artificial 
recharge of aquifers with rainwater or treated wastewater, and 
more efficient management of existing supplies and associated 
infrastructure (e.g., use of various water-saving devices, reduc­
tion of leaks, replacement of worn pipes, and recycling).
In many small island states (such as the islands of the eastern 
Caribbean), the annual rainfall regime often is characterized 
by pronounced wet and dry seasons. In some countries (e.g., 
Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Grenada), as much as 65% 
of the annual rainfall may occur during the wet season (June 
to December); this rainfall is associated largely with the 
northerly migration of the Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone 
(ITCZ) and the passage of major weather systems such as 
easterly waves, tropical depressions, storms, and hurricanes 
(Nurse, 1985; Gray, 1993). Therefore, to the extent that the 
availability of water resources in these islands is dependent 
on heavy rainfall events, changes in the occurrence of these 
phenomena inevitably will impact water supplies. In the 
south Pacific, the SPCZ plays a similar role (Salinger et al.,
1995).
9.3.5. 
Agriculture and Fisheries
9.3.5.1. Agriculture
The climate-sensitive agricultural sector is important to the sub­
sistence economies of many island states (SPREP, 1994a, 1994b,
1996). On many islands, agricultural production systems already 
are stressed as a consequnce of high population densities and 
growth rates. Few studies have been conducted specifically on 
the effects of climate change on agriculture in small islands 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.4). However, those investiga­
tions that have been undertaken suggest that although CO 2  fer­
tilization might have a beneficial effect— mainly on C3  crops— 
the net effect of climate change is unlikely to be beneficial 
(Singh et a l, 1990; Singh, 1994; SPREP, 1996).
Small Island States
345
Examination of the agricultural impacts of climate variability 
associated with seasonal to interannual climate phenomena 
offers valuable insight into the potential effects of climate 
change on agriculture. Climate change and climate variability 
effects that alter the rainfall regime, increase evaporation, or 
reduce soil moisture would affect agricultural production—  
possibly with adverse consequences for food security and 
nutrition in many countries. Crop yields in small island states 
in the Pacific are projected to decrease as a consequence of 
reduced solar radiation (resulting from increased cloudiness), 
higher temperatures (causing shorter growth duration and 
increased sterility in some cultivars), and changes in water 
availability (because of changes in the frequency of droughts 
and floods, as well as changes in their spatial and temporal dis­
tribution) (Singh et al., 1990). Seawater intrusion also would 
degrade the fertility of coastal soils and consequently con­
tribute to a reduction in yields (IPCC 1996, WGII, Sections
13.6.4 and 13.7). Some of these adverse consequences of cli­
mate change may be partially offset, however, by the beneficial 
effects of increased atmospheric CO 2  (SPREP, 1996).
Singh (1994) projects that, for small islands in the Pacific, an 
extension of the dry season by 45 days would lead to a decrease 
in maize yields of 30-50% . Similarly, yields from sugarcane 
and taro would be reduced by 10-35% and 35-75%, respec­
tively. On the other hand, Singh et al. (1990) found that signif­
icantly increased rainfall (>50%) during the wet season on the 
windward side of the larger islands would cause taro yields to 
increase by 5-15% , but would reduce rice yields by approxi­
mately 10-20%  and maize yields by 30-100%.
In Tuvalu, contraction of the freshwater lens on the atolls (as a 
result of increasing water demand and sea-level rise) is expect­
ed to reduce crop yields severely. At locations such as Funafuti 
atoll, where there already is heavy demand on the water supply, 
the effects of sea-level rise will exacerbate water scarcity. The 
crop expected to be most seriously affected is pulaka (giant 
taro). Reduced yields from pulaka pits are “likely to have sig­
nificant cultural ramifications, given the central role of this crop 
in Tuvaluan society” (SPREP, 1996, Section 6.4.1). The culti­
vation of taro, another important subsistence crop in the Pacific 
islands, would be similarly threatened (see Box 9-2).
Recent research has attempted to assess changes in world 
prices for selected crops, based on GCM projections. Reilly et 
al. (1994) estimate that, under the GFDL scenario, world prices 
for most crop commodities would fall relative to baseline 
prices; the exceptions are rice and sugar, which would rise by 
approximately 30% and 15%, respectively. Should such a pro­
jected increase in the price of world sugar occur, positive eco­
nomic benefits (in the form of increased foreign exchange 
earnings) would accrue to the economies of sugar-exporting 
small island states. The estimated price increases are somewhat 
less for scenarios that include adaptation. In the GISS scenario, 
prices for soybeans, groundnuts, cotton, and tobacco fell by 
about 10-15% with adaptation. Prices for other crop com­
modities considered in the analysis rose by as much as 2 0 % 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.8.2).
Box 9-2. Taro Cultivation and Sea-Level Rise
The pit cultivation of taro is particularly susceptible to 
changes in freshwater quality. Taro is grown in depres­
sions and pits that have been excavated down to the 
freshwater lens and partly filled with composting 
organic matter. Leaves of many species— including 
Guettarda speciosa, Tournefortia argentea, Artocarpus 
altilis, Triumfetta procumbens, and Hibiscus tiliaceus—  
are used to form the organic soil. In Kiribati, taro (C. 
Chamissonis) is planted in 20-m x 10-m pits, 2-3 m 
deep, with the taro corm placed in “organic baskets” of 
Pandanus and Cocos nucifera and anchored in holes 60 
cm below the water level. In Puluwat Atoll, in contrast, 
the taro is planted in organic-matter bundles 0.5 m 
above the water level. Taro swamps also are sites of 
high évapotranspiration; increased loss of freshwater 
will increase the risk of saltwater intrusion.
A rise in sea level will have a serious impact on atoll 
agroforestry and the pit cultivation of taro. Erosional 
changes in the shoreline will disrupt populations, and 
the combined effects of freshwater lens loss and 
increased storm surges will stress freshwater plants and 
increase vulnerability to drought (Wilkinson and 
Buddemeier, 1994).
Although these scenarios do not address small island states 
specifically, some of the results would be relevant to any analy­
sis of climate change impacts on agriculture in these nations. 
To the extent that island states depend heavily on food imports 
and export some agricultural products, such projected price 
changes would have a considerable impact on the ability of 
these countries to earn much-needed foreign exchange.
9.3.5.2. 
Fisheries
Fishing, although largely artisinal or small-scale commercial, 
is an important activity on most small islands (Blommestein et 
a l, 1996; Mahon, 1996). Although marine fisheries only 
account for approximately 1 % of the global economy, many 
coastal and island states are far more dependent on the sector 
than this statistic would suggest (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
16.1.1). For example, the annual yield of lobsters from the 
shelves and banks of the Caribbean islands (excluding the U.S. 
Virgin Islands) has a retail value in restaurants of approxi­
mately US$40 million (Vicente, 1996). Similarly, marine fish 
account for 16% of global animal protein consumption, but the 
contribution to protein intake is much greater in developing 
countries, where animal protein tends to be relatively expen­
sive (Lauretti, 1992; Weber, 1993, 1994; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 16.2.4).
The modest temperature increases projected for these regions 
are not anticipated to have a widespread adverse effect on
346
Small Island States
small island fisheries. However, a temperature rise could have 
a negative effect on productivity in areas— such as shallow 
lagoons— ^where hypersalinity may occur, especially if juve­
niles are sensitive to salinity or temperature (Aim et al., 1993). 
On the other hand, warming-induced changes in current pat­
terns might increase upwellings at sea, bringing more nutrients 
to the surface and providing more food for the fish (Aparicio, 
1993; Bakun, 1993; Chakalall, 1993; Maul, 1993).
There is some evidence that clam and sea-turtle fisheries could 
be sensitive to sea temperature changes. Clams, like corals, 
are known to suffer from bleaching with the expulsion of sym­
biotic algae, as a result of excesses in temperature or radiation 
(Gomez and Belda, 1988; Lucas et al., 1988). Bleaching 
would cause “loss of productivity or devastation in stocks of 
growout clams on the reef-flats” (Wilkinson and Buddemeier,
1994). One possible option to minimize this possibility in 
locations where commercial clam mariculture is practiced 
(e.g., the Solomon Islands, Palau, Samoa) in deeper water, 
where light and temperature fluctuations would be reduced. 
This measure, however, will result in lower growth rates and 
reduced returns to the grower (Lucas et al., 1988; Wilkinson 
and Buddemeier, 1994). In the case of sea turtles, most species 
nest during the summer, when temperatures are close to the 
organisms’ upper thermal limit. It is uncertain whether turtles 
will be able to adapt to warmer temperatures by nesting in the 
cooler months (Limpus, 1993). If such adaptation is not pos­
sible, increased temperatures are likely to result in a higher 
ratio of females to males because the sex ratio of sea turtles is 
directly 
determ ined 
by 
tem perature 
(W ilkinson 
and 
Buddemeier, 1994).
Generally, fisheries in the small island states are not expected 
to be adversely affected by sea-level rise per se. A  higher sea 
level would be a critical factor for fisheries only if the rate of 
rise were far more rapid than current projections suggest. In 
such circumstances, the natural succession of coastal ecosys­
tems on which some species depend (e.g., mangroves, sea­
grasses, corals) would be disrupted (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 16.2.2.1). In tropical islands, these ecosystems func­
tion as nurseries and forage sites for a variety of commercially 
important species. Fish production obviously would suffer if 
these habitats were endangered or lost (Costa et a i, 1994).
9.3.6. 
Coastal Systems
9.З.6.1. 
Sea-Level Rise and Coastal Changes
Major coastal impacts will result from accelerated sea-level 
rise; these effects will include coastal erosion, saline intrusion, 
and sea flooding, among other impacts. Impact studies have 
confirmed that low-lying deltaic and barrier coasts, low reef 
islands, and coral atolls are especially vulnerable to the poten­
tial impacts of sea-level rise (Maul, 1993). Some small islands 
could suffer land loss and experience increased beach erosion, 
inundation, and flooding from a sea-level rise of between 50 
cm and 1 m. Leatherman (1994) suggests that sea-level rise
could convert many islands in the Maldives to sandbars and 
significantly reduce available dry land on larger, more heavily 
populated islands. In Majuro Atoll (Marshall Islands), compu­
tation of land loss from a 1 -m rise in sea level, based on the 
Bruun rule, suggests that approximately 60 ha of dry land 
(8 .6 % of the total land area) would be lost to erosion. It also is 
estimated that more than 115 ha of Majuro Atoll would be 
inundated if a 1 -m sea-level rise were superimposed on present- 
day flooding from wave runup and overtopping (Holthus et al,
1992). In the case of Kiribati, Woodroffe and McLean (1992) 
have suggested that 12.5% of the total land area would be vul­
nerable with a 1 -m rise in sea level.
Notwithstanding these projections, the response of islands to 
the impacts of climate change will vary within regions and 
even within countries. Islands are not passive systems; they 
will respond dynamically in variable and complex ways to sea- 
level and climate changes (Aalbersberg and Hay, 1993; 
McLean and d ’Aubert, 1993; McLean and Woodroffe, 1993). 
For example, the extent to which relative sea-level rise will 
affect coastal recession rates will depend on many factors, 
including (though not limited to) the rate of sediment supply 
relative to submergence; the width of existing fringing reefs; 
the rate of reef growth; whether islands are anchored to emer­
gent rock platforms; whether islands are composed primarily 
of sand or coral rubble; the presence or absence of natural 
shore-protection structures, such as beachrock or conglomerate 
outcrops; the presence or absence of biotic protection, such as 
mangroves or other strand vegetation; the health of coral reefs; 
and, especially, the tectonic history of the island.
9.3.7. 
Human Settlement
9.3.7.1. 
Infrastructure and Settlement
Generally, the largest concentrations of settlements on small 
islands occur no further than 1
- 2  km from the coast, and some­
times much less. In most of the eastern Caribbean states, for 
instance, more than 50% of the population resides within 2 km 
of the coast; the corresponding figure in Barbados is estimated 
to be in the region of 60% (Nurse, 1992). Similarly, large 
coastal populations are the norm in the Pacific and Indian 
Ocean islands— especially the atoll states, where settlement 
areas may even be sited on the beach itself or on the sand ter­
race (e.g., Tuvalu, Kiribati, Maldives). Clearly, such settle­
ments are at risk from projected sea-level rise— ^which, in all 
likelihood, would be accompanied by inundation, increased 
flooding, coastal erosion, and consequently land loss.
On many small islands, critical infrastructure tends to be locat­
ed in or near coastal areas; this infrastructure will be highly 
vulnerable to the effects of projected sea-level rise, especially 
during extreme events. Similarly, significant infrastructural 
damage could result from any increase in the frequency or 
intensity of extreme events such as floods, tropical storms, and 
storm surges (Pernetta, 1992; Aim et a l, 1993). Moreover, 
because island populations tend to congregate in the few urban
Small Island States
347
centers where most of the infrastructure and services are locat­
ed, damage to important infrastructure (e.g., coastal roads, 
bridges, seawalls) would be disruptive to several types of eco­
nomic, social, and cultural activities. In Malta, for example, 
vital desalinization facilities on the coast would be at risk in 
such circumstances (Sestini, 1992). Social and economic dislo­
cation would be especially severe among communities with 
high population densities— such as Eauripik, Federated States 
of Micronesia (950 persons/km^); Majuro, Marshall Islands 
(2,188 persons/km2); and Male, Republic of Maldives (5,000
persons/km 2 ).
The costs of protecting the shoreline and other infrastructure 
will vary, depending on the kind of protection needed, the 
length of area to be protected, design specifications to be 
adopted, and the availability of construction materials. There is 
concern, however, that the overall costs of infrastructure pro­
tection will be beyond the financial means of many island 
nations. Vulnerability studies conducted for selected small 
islands suggest that the costs of coastal protection (“hard” 
options) would be a significant proportion of GNP (see IPCC 
1996, WG II, Table 9-3). In Malta and Cyprus, it is estimated 
that approximately US$550 million and US$190 million, 
respectively, would be needed to provide adequate shore pro­
tection works against a 20-30 cm rise in relative sea level 
(Sestini, 1992). Although these estimated costs might not be 
excessive in the context of large economies, they represent 
considerable financial resources that these small island states 
would have to reallocate.
Box 9-4. Sea-Level Rise 
and Settlement in the Caribbean
The relocation of vulnerable coastal settlements is a 
difficult option for many Caribbean island states to 
consider. However, large populations and supporting 
infrastructure presently are located close to mean sea 
level; when the combined effects of increased flooding, 
salinization, coastal land loss, and infrastructural dam­
age are contemplated, some resettlement of coastal 
populations seems inevitable. This resettlement would 
be socially dislocating for the people themselves and 
require an injection of funds that few countries in the 
region can easily afford.
The implications of resettlement will be even more 
serious for the smallest, low-lying states, for whom 
relocation within their own national boundaries may be 
physically impossible (see Nurse, 1992).
infrastructure in nonthreatened locations, where this proves 
feasible. Other options could include adoption of building 
codes and other design and construction standards, construc­
tion of mandatory building setbacks in coastal areas, and 
diversification of economic activities to the maximum extent 
possible. In the worst-case scenario, resettlement of entire 
communities also may have to be considered (see Box 9-4).
The cost of insurance is another important factor that must be 
taken into consideration in any assessment of climate change 
impacts on infrastructure. Property insurance costs are 
extremely sensitive to the effects of catastrophic events such as 
hurricanes, floods, and earthquakes. High-risk locations there­
fore could face high insurance premiums— and even, in 
extreme cases, withdrawal of coverage (Box 9-3).
Like other countries, small islands might wish to consider 
implementing appropriate strategies to reduce the potential 
dislocation that may result from climate change-related infra­
structural damage. As part of an overall response strategy, 
these countries may consider the gradual replacement of
Successful implementation of these and other adaptation mea­
sures will depend largely on the extent to which island states 
are able to overcome associated constraints. Some possible 
constraining factors for many small islands include technology 
and human resources capability; financial limitations; cultural 
and social acceptability of adaptation measures; and the avail­
ability of adequate political, legal, and institutional support. On 
the positive side, many island societies possess a reserve of 
important traditional knowledge and skills— by virtue of hav­
ing had to adapt, over generations, to a range of other stresses 
(Holthus, 1996; SPREP, 1996). This knowledge base is a vital 
resource that these countries may wish to exploit in designing 
and implementing appropriate adaptation strategies.
Box 9-3. Hurricanes and Insurance in the Caribbean
The Caribbean region suffered considerable damage 
from severe hurricanes (e.g., David, Hugo, Gilbert, 
Gabrielle, Luis, Marilyn) in the 1980s and 1990s. As a 
direct result, many insurance and reinsurance compa­
nies withdrew from the market. Those that remained 
imposed onerous conditions for coverage— including 
very high deductibles; separate, increased rates for 
windstorms; and insertion of an “average” clause to 
eliminate the possibility of underinsurance (see Murray, 
1993; Saunders, 1993).
9.3.7.2. 
Tourism
Tourism is one of the most important sectors of the economies 
of many small island states in the Caribbean Sea and the 
Pacific and Indian Oceans; the industry is equally important to 
the Mediterranean island of Malta. In some Caribbean coun­
tries, the annual number of long-staying visitors (i.e., exclud­
ing cruise ship arrivals) far exceeds the size of the resident 
population; in some cases, the ratio of tourists to residents is 
greater than 2:1 (e.g., approximately 3:1 in Antigua and almost 
6:1 in the Bahamas; see Caribbean Tourism Organization, 
1996). Tourism also is the largest single contributor to GNP in 
many islands. In 1995, for instance, this sector accounted for
348
Small Island States
69% and 53% of GNP in the Caribbean islands of Antigua and 
the Bahamas, respectively, and more than 10% in most other 
islands in the region. Tourism also earns valuable foreign 
exchange for these islands; the sector earned US$180 million 
in 1995 in the Maldives— more than 70% of the country’s total 
foreign exchange earnings for that year. Moreover, tourism 
generates significant employment in many islands, such as the 
Bahamas— where three-quarters of the labor force is 
employed, directly or indirectly, in providing services to the 
industry (Box 9-5).
Tourism is so vital to many small island societies that when 
there is contraction in the industry (and, hence, reduced earn­
ings), the rate of national economic growth often declines. In 
such circumstances, provision of many essential services 
would be jeopardized, and other vital sectors (e.g., health, edu­
cation, and welfare)— ^whose budgetary allocations may be 
influenced by tourism earnings— also may be affected.
Climate affects tourism in many ways, directly and indirectly. 
Loss of beaches to erosion; inundation; degradation of ecosys­
tems and related impacts (e.g., loss of coral reefs to bleaching, 
saline intrusion); and damage to critical infrastructure are only 
a few consequences that could undermine the tourism resource 
base of vulnerable small island states (Aim et al., 1993). 
Although some of these impacts also can be triggered by non­
climate-related factors, there is a growing consensus that cli­
mate change is likely to precipitate such changes, and that they 
would be disruptive (Holthus et a i, 1992; Pernetta, 1992; 
Sestini, 1992; IPCC, 1996, WG II, Box 9-3; SPREP, 1996). 
There is evidence that any such dislocation in the tourism sec­
tor would have severe repercussions for the economic, politi­
cal, and sociocultural life of many small islands.
9.3.8. 
Human Health
Climate change-related disturbances of physical systems (e.g., 
weather patterns, sea level, water supplies) and ecosystems 
(e.g., agro-ecosystems, disease-vector habitats) could pose 
risks to the health of human populations. Some health impacts 
would occur via direct pathways (e.g., death from heat waves 
and other extreme weather events, such as hurricanes); others
would occur via indirect pathways (e.g., changes in the geo­
graphical range of vector-borne diseases). Researchers gener­
ally agree that most of the impacts of climate change on human 
health are likely to be adverse. The vulnerability of populations 
to such threats will depend on many factors, including present 
health status, quality of available health care services and asso­
ciated infrastructure, and availability of financial and technical 
resources (McMichael, 1993).
Should global warming increase the frequency and/or severity 
of extreme weather events such as droughts, floods, landslides, 
and tropical cyclones, it is likely that more deaths, injuries, 
infectious disease cases, and psychological disorders could 
result (McMichael and Martens, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 18.2.2). Elevated global mean temperatures also could 
lead to a greater frequency of heat waves— and consequently a 
higher incidence of related illness (predominantly cardiorespi­
ratory) and mortality. Inevitably, the most vulnerable countries 
will be those with reduced capacity to respond to or mitigate 
these threats. Because of their present social and economic cir­
cumstances, many small islands fall into this category.
The transmission of many infectious diseases is affected by cli­
matic factors. Vector-borne diseases such as malaria, dengue, 
and yellow fever are sensitive to factors such as temperature, 
rainfall, and humidity. Climate change could increase the geo­
graphical range of disease agents; changes in the life-cycle 
dynamic of vectors and infective agents, in aggregate, could 
result in more efficient transmission of many vector-borne dis­
eases (McMichael et al., 1996). Mathematical models project 
that an additional 50-80 million cases of malaria would result 
from a mean temperature increase of 3.0^C (Martens et al,
1995). Although most of this projected increase is expected to 
be in temperate-zone countries, some increase in the tropics— 
the latitudinal zone in which the majority of small islands and 
other developing countries are located— cannot be ruled out 
(see Table 9-3). Moreover, even a marginal increase in the 
incidence of disease would place great stress on the public 
health systems of many small islands, where these facilities 
often are not well developed.
Results fom a recent study of dengue fever in island states of the 
South Pacific have shown a strong link between the incidence
Bahamas
Box 9-5. Importance of Tourism in the Economies of the Bahamas and the Maldives 
Maldives
Accounts for 40% of gross domestic product (GDP) 
Earns approximately US$1.3 billion in foreign exchange 
Estimated to account for more than 50% of all govern­
ment revenues
Employs approximately 50% of labor force directly, 
another 25% in related services.
Accounts for 18% of GDP
Earns approximately US$181 million in foreign
exchange
Accounts for 32.5% of all government revenues 
More than 25% of labor force employed directly in 
tourism.
Sources; Ministry of Tourism, Commonwealth of the Bahamas; Ministry of Tourism, Republic of the Maldives (1995 data).
Small Island States
Table 9-3: Estimated impacts o f climate change on tropical vector-borne diseases.
349
Disease
Population 
at Risk 
(millions)
Prevalence or 
Incidence of 
Infection
Present
Distribution
Possible Change of 
Distribution due 
to Climate Changei
Malaria
2,400
300-500 million
Tropics/Subtropics
+++
Schistosomiasis
600
2 0 0  million
Tropics/Subtropics
++
Lymphatic filiariasis
1,094
117 million
Tropics/Subtropics
+
African trypanosomiasis
55
250,000-300,000 
new cases/yr
Tropical Africa
+
Dracunculiasis
1 0 0
1 0 0 ,0 0 0 /yr
Tropics (Africa/Asia)
?
Visceral leishmaniasis
350
1 2  million (prevalence) + 
500,000 new cases/yr
Asia/S. Europe/ 
Africa/South America
+
Onchocerciasis
123
17.5 million
Africa/Latin America
++
American trypanosomiasis
1 0 0
18 million
Central and South America
+
Dengue
2,500
50 million/yr
Tropics/Subtropics
++
Yellow fever
450
<5,000 cases/yr
Africa/Latin America/ 
East and Southeast Asia
++
1 += likely; ++ = very likely; +++ = highly likely; ? = unknown.
Source: WHO, 1996.
of outbreaks of the disease and the ENSO phenomenon (Hales 
et al., 1996). Although climate models do not, at present, give 
reliable projections of ENSO events with global warming, 
ENSO phenomena are known to be associated with interannual 
warming and rainfall anomalies (Hay et a l, 1993a; Salinger et 
al, 1995; Centella et a l, 1996). It therefore appears highly 
probable that changes in ENSO patterns would affect the inci­
dence of dengue fever.
An increase in the incidence of waterborne and food-borne 
infectious diseases, particularly in tropical regions, could 
result from a rise in temperature, microorganism proliferation, 
and a higher incidence of flooding and water shortages. Algal 
blooms— which occur in warm tropical waters and are associ­
ated with biotoxin contamination of fish and shellfish— also 
could become more frequent, resulting in the proliferation and 
increased transmission of cholera. Recent research has shown 
a clear relationship between increased incidence of cholera 
outbreaks and sea warming, owing to the ability of zooplank- 
ton to function as a reservoir for a dormant state of the 
pathogen (Colwell, 1996). In general, biotoxins such as 
ciguatera are known to be temperature sensitive; therefore, 
they could become more abundant with ocean warming, 
resulting in a higher incidence of seafood contamination and 
biotoxin poisoning. Microbiological contamination already is 
a problem in the coastal areas of many small islands, where
sewage and solid-waste disposal systems currently are inade­
quate. These combined circumstances would place additional 
stress on already overextended health sectors of most small 
islands and may even threaten the nutritional status of some of 
these countries.
Among the strategies that could be adopted to ameliorate 
some of the negative effects of climate change on the health 
sector are the mounting of an effective public education pro­
gram aimed at improving personal behavior and hygiene; 
upgrading, extension, and maintenance of existing health­
care facilities and services; implementation and mainte­
nance of appropriate, cost-efficient sewage and solid-waste 
management systems; adoption of appropriate disaster pre­
paredness and management plans; and wider application of 
available protective technologies, such as water purification 
and sewage treatment (M cM ichael et a l, 1996). In addition. 
Health Early Warning Systems (HEW S)— which incorpo­
rate seasonal and interannual climate forecast inform ation—  
could be used to detect ecological conditions conducive to 
outbreaks of climate-sensitive diseases such as cholera, 
malaria, and dengue. Lessening the vulnerability of small 
islands to such health threats through these types of 
improved planning measures and implementation of timely 
strategies would reduce human suffering and economic 
losses.
350
Small Island States
In many small island states, a number of factors, including iso­
lation and close traditional ties to the land and sea, have con­
tributed to the development of a unique set of cultural traits on 
different islands or groups of islands. In Tuvalu, for instance—  
as in other small Pacific atoll states— attachment to land and sea 
is a critical component of local cosmology (SPREP, 1996). Any 
force that poses a threat to this attachment would be culturally 
and socially disruptive in these traditional societies.
Ethnic, linguistic, social, and religious differences among and 
between the peoples of Polynesia, Melanesia, and Micronesia 
in the South Pacific illustrate the cultural diversity of the island 
states. The unique cultures that have developed over millenia 
on the resource-rich and diverse high-volcanic and limestone 
islands in the region, such as Vanuatu, Fiji, and Samoa, are 
unlikely to be seriously threatened by climate change. On the 
other hand, resource-poor, low-reef islands and atolls, which 
have developed equally distinctive traditional identities over 
centuries— such as the Tuvaluan, Kiribati, Marshallese, and 
Maldivian cultures— are more at risk. The fragility of these low 
islands and their sensitivity to sea-level change and storms sug­
gest that the future existence of such islands and their cultural 
diversity could be seriously threatened (Roy and Connell,
1991).
9.3.9. 
Cultural Integrity
9.4. 
Integrated Analysis of
Potential Vulnerabilities and Impacts
Because of their strong dependence on economic sectors that 
are highly sensitive to climate change effects (e.g., coastal 
tourism and agriculture), small island states clearly are a vul­
nerable group of countries (IPCC 1996, WG III, Sections 
6.5.10, 6.5.11). Briguglio (1993) developed a mean “vulnera­
bility index” for different categories of nations, based on three 
selected variables: export dependence, insularity and remote­
ness, and proneness to natural disasters. Although there may 
be some limitations associated with this index (e.g., the 
restricted criteria), it supports the widely held view that small 
island states will be more vulnerable than any other group of 
countries to projected climate change impacts. On a scale 
from 0  (lowest vulnerability) to 1  (highest vulnerability), a 
score of 0.590 (the highest index) was derived for the small 
island group. A lower index, 0.539, was calculated for other 
developing countries; the index for all developing countries as 
a group was 0.417. Indeed, based on Briguglio’s index, 9 of 
the 10 most vulnerable countries are small islands. Thus, 
though the index has its limitations, it draws attention to the 
high vulnerability of small island states in relation to all other 
regional groups.
Pernetta (1988) ranks Pacific islands in terms of their vulnera­
bility to sea-level rise, taking other factors— such as eleva­
tion— into consideration. Based on his classification, states 
such as the Marshall Islands, Tuvalu, and Kiribati would suffer 
“profound” impacts, including disappearance in the worst-case
scenario; “severe impacts,” resulting in major population dis­
placement, would be experienced by the Federated States of 
Micronesia, Nauru, and Tonga; “moderate to severe impacts” 
would be felt by Fiji and the Solomon Islands; and “local 
severe to catastrophic” effects would be experienced by 
Vanuatu and Western Samoa.
It must be em phasized, however, that the sensitivity of 
sm all islands to the projected effects of clim ate change can­
not be attributed to any single factor (e.g., size, elevation, 
rem oteness, or any other) or to a select group of factors. 
Rather, the level of vulnerability of these islands is deter­
mined by the cum ulative and synergistic result of these and 
related biophysical attributes (including the degree of nat­
ural adaptive capacity), com bined with the islands’ eco­
nom ic and sociocultural characters (including current and 
future levels of anthropogenic stress) (see, e.g., SPREP,
1996). M oreover, because many small islands already are 
prone to other hazards (e.g., tropical cyclones and storm 
surges) that invariably have adverse effects, clim ate change 
im pacts on longer tim e scales could render these countries 
extrem ely vulnerable.
The Caribbean countries are a case in point. Some face an 
annual threat from hurricanes (cyclones); others, such as St. 
Vincent and Montserrat, are prone to disruptive volcanic activ­
ity; and still others are affected by periodic earthquakes and 
tsunamis (Maul, 1996). Most have extensive, vulnerable, low- 
lying coastal plains; some (e.g., Barbados, Antigua, St. Kitts, 
Bahamas) are heavily dependent on groundwater supplies; and 
for many, tourism is the most vital economic sector. A higher 
incidence of flooding and inundation, beach and coastal land 
loss, reef damage, salinization of the freshwater lens, and dis­
ruption of tourism and infrastructure would create economic 
and social crises in a number of these islands. Thus, many 
Caribbean countries must be classified as vulnerable to the 
effects of climate change and sea-level rise— not simply 
because of their size or elevation alone but because of strong 
linkages between these and other physical characteristics, nat­
ural resources, and socioeconomic structures.
Moreover, for small islands with limited resources, it is 
absolutely essential for integrated assessment models to 
include the value of nonmarketed goods and services that also 
will be at risk. Commodities such as cultural and subsistence 
assets (e.g., community structures), recreational values, tradi­
tional skills and knowledge, and natural values (e.g., the 
capacity of mangroves to filter nitrate and phosphate and thus 
reduce nutrient loading to the marine zone) are just as impor­
tant to some small islands as marketed goods and services. 
Such nonmarketed goods and services often are not incorpo­
rated into integrated assessment models. From the perspective 
of small island states, the integration of these assets is an 
important and necessary challenge facing the modeling com­
munity. Some recent attempts to develop an appropriate 
methodology for vulnerability assessment, incorporating these 
factors, have been made by Yamada et al. (1995) for south­
west Pacific islands.
Small Island States
351
Box 9-6. A Small Island Response to Climate Change
Climate change will impose diverse and significant impacts on small island states. Impediments to responses to climate 
change in small islands include:
Lack of definitive projections of temperature, rainfall, and sea level 
Ambiguous statements on ENSO and tropical storms, hurricanes, and typhoons 
• 
Many vulnerability assessments undertaken using methodologies “poorly harmonized with local conditions” 
Limited adaptive capacity of small island states.
Possible Regional Responses to Facilitate Adaptation to Climate Change for Small Island States
Policy Responses 
Priority Action Strategies
A policy of regional cooperation and coordination
• 
A policy of “owning” the issue of climate change and 
variability
• 
A policy of maximizing the benefits of climate change 
A policy to base plans and actions on factual under­
standing of climate change
• 
A policy of mainstreaming climate change responses 
in national planning through adaptation of sustainable 
management practices
A policy of enhancing capacities to respond to the 
consequences of anticipated change in climate
• 
A  policy of enhancing regional water, soil, habitat, and 
food security
Source: Modified from Hay, 1997.
A strategy for capacity building, awareness-raising, 
and technical capacity enhancement 
A strategy for development and application of appro­
priate methodologies and information sources 
A  strategy to identify, assess, and implement invest­
ment instruments relevant to adaptation 
A strategy to support optional management responses 
to climate change at the national level 
A strategy for regional support for integrated coastal 
zone management
A  strategy to undertake regionally relevant research on 
impacts and adaptations to climate change
Clearly, it would be inappropriate to assess the sensitivity of 
small islands to climate change impacts in isolation from other 
factors that 
contribute to their overall vulnerability. 
Constraining factors such as size, elevation, limited resources 
(natural, financial, and technological), proneness to natural 
hazards, dependence on external markets, and generally high 
population growth rates enhance the vulnerability of these 
island states (Aim et a l, 1993). Only when the effects of such 
factors are evaluated in combination with the threat of climate 
change impacts can a meaningful vulnerability index for small 
island states be developed and appropriate adaptation options 
pursued (see Box 9-6).
References
A albcrsberg, B. and J. Hay, 1993: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  S e a  
L e v e l  R i s e  f o r  T u v a l u . SPREP Reports and Studies Series No. 54, South 
Pacific Regional Environm ent Program m e, Apia, W estern Samoa, 80 pp.
A ksornkaoe, S. and N. Paphavasit, 1993: Effect of sea-level rise on the m an­
grove com m unity in Thailand. 
M a l a y s i a n  
J o u r n a l  
o f  
T r o p i c a l  
G e o g r a p h y , 24, 29-34.
Aim, A., E. Blom m estein, and J.M . Broadus, 1993: Climatic changes and 
socio-econom ic impacts. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  t h e  I n t r a - A m e r i c a s  S e a  
[Maul, G.A. (ed.)]. Edward Arnold, London, United Kingdom, pp. 
333-349.
A paricio, R., 1993: M eteorological and oceanographic conditions along the 
southern coastal boundary of the Caribbean Sea. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  
t h e  I n t r a - A m e r i c a s  S e a  [M aul, G.A. (ed.)]. Edward Arnold, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 100-114.
A u b rey , D.G. and K.O. Em ery, 1993: Recent global sea levels and land 
levels. In: C l i m a t e  a n d  S e a  L e v e l  C h a n g e :  O b s e r v a t i o n s ,  P r o j e c t i o n s  
a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s  [W arrick, R.A., E.M . Barrow, and T.M .L. W igley 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, U nited Kingdom , 
pp. 45-56.
B akun, A., 1993: Global greenhouse effects, multi-decadal wind trends, and 
potential impacts on coastal pelagic fish populations. I C E S  M a r i n e  
S c i e n c e  S y m p o s i u m , 195, 316-325.
B ellairs R esearch Institute, 1990: A  S u r v e y  o f  M a r i n e  H a b i t a t s  A r o u n d  
A n g u i l l a ,  
w i t h  B a s e l i n e  C o m m u n i t y  D e s c r i p t o r s  f o r  C o r a l  R e e f s  a n d  
S e a g r a s s  B e d s . Report prepared for the Department of Agriculture and 
Fisheries, Government of Anguilla. Funded by British Developm ent 
Division in the Caribbean, Bridgetown, Barbados, 177 pp.
Blom m estein, E., B. Boland, T. Harker, S. Lestrade, and J. Towle, 1996: 
Sustainable development and small island states of the Caribbean. In: 
S m a l l  I s l a n d s :  M a r i n e  S c i e n c e  a n d  S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t [Maul, 
G.A. (ed.)]. American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 
3 8 5 ^ 1 9 .
Briguglio, L. 1993: T h e  E c o n o m i c  V u l n e r a b i l i t i e s  o f  S m a l l  I s l a n d  D e v e l o p i n g  
S t a t e s . Report to U.N. Conference on Trade and Developm ent (UNC­
TAD), Geneva, Switzerland,
Brow n, B.E., 1997: Coral bleaching: Causes and Consequences. C o r a l  R e e f s ,  
16, pp. 129-138.
Brow n, B.E. and J.C. Ogden, 1993: Coral bleaching. 5cie/!t(^c4m encan, 268, 
64-70.
Brow n, B.E., and Suharsono, 1990: Damage and recovery of coral reefs affect­
ed by El Nino-related seawater warm ing in the Thousand Islands, 
Indonesia. C o r a l  R e e f s , 8 , 163-170.
B uddem eier, R.W. and J.A. Oberdorfer, 1990: Climate change and ground­
w ater reserves. In: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  E x p e c t e d  C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e s  i n  t h e  
S o u t h  P a c f i c  R e g i o n :  A n  O v e r v i e w  [Pernetta, J.C. and P.J. Hughes (eds.)]. 
UNEP Regional Seas Reports and Studies No. 128, United Nations 
Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 56-67.
352
Small Island States
Cant, R.V., 1996: W ater supply and sewerage in a small island environment: 
the Baham ian experience. In: 
S m a l l  
I s l a n d s :  
M a r i n e  
S c i e n c e  
a n d  
S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t [M aul, G.A. (ed.)]. A m erican Geophysical 
Union, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 3 8 5 ^ 1 9 .
Caribbean Tourism O rganization, 1996: Caribbean Tourism Statistical 
Report, 1995, Bridgetown, Barbados, 249 pp.
Centella, A., L.R. Naranjo, and L.P. Paz, 1996: 
V a r i a t i o n s  
a n d  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e s  o n  C u b a . Technical Report, National Climate Center, Institute 
of M eteorology, Havana, Cuba, 58 pp. (in Spanish)
Chakalall, B., 1993: Policy issues for sustainable fisheries development in the 
Caribbean. In: R e p o r t  a n d  P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  M e e t i n g  o n  F i s h  E x p l o i t a t i o n  
W i t h i n  t h e  E x c l u s i v e  E c o n o m i c  Z o n e s  o f  t h e  E n g l i s h  S p e a k i n g  C a r i b b e a n  
C o u n t r i e s  [Chakalall, B. (ed.)]. FAO Fisheries Report No. 483, Food and 
Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy, pp. 1 ^ 3 .
Colwell, R.R., 1996: Global clim ate and infectious disease: the cholera para­
digm. S c i e n c e , 274, 2025-2031.
Costa, M .J., J.L. Costa, PR . Almeida, and C.A. A ssis, 1994: Do eel grass beds 
and salt m arsh borders act as preferential nurseries and spawning grounds 
for fish? An exam ple of the M ira estuary in Portugal. E c o l o g i c a l  
E n g i n e e r i n g ,  3 , 187-195.
E dw ards, A.J., 1995: Im pact of clim ate change on coral reefs, m angroves and 
tropical seagrass ecosystem s. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  I m p a c t  o n  C o a s t a l  
H a b i t a t i o n  [Eisma, D. (ed.)]. Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, FL, USA, 
pp. 209-234.
E llison, J.C. and D.R. Stoddart, 1991: M angrove ecosystem  collapse during 
predicted sea-level rise: H olocene analogues and im plications. J o u r n a l  o f  
C o a s t a l  R e s e a r c h , 7, 151-165.
Glynn, P.W., 1993: Coral reef bleaching: ecological perspectives. C o r a l  R e e f s , 
12, 1-17.
G omez, E.D., and C.A. Belda, 1988: Growth of giant clam s in Bolinao, 
Philippines. In: G i a n t  C l a m s  i n  A s i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c  [Copland, J.W. and 
J.S. Lucas (eds.)]. Australian Centre for International Agricultural 
Research M onograph No. 9, Canberra, pp. 178-182.
G oreau, T.J., 1992: Bleaching and reef com m unity change in Jamaica: 
1951-1991. A m erican Zoo/ogy, 32, 683-695.
Gray, C.R., 1993: Regional m eteorology and hurricanes. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  
i n  t h e  I n t r a - A m e r i c a s  S e a  [Maul, G.A. (ed.)]. Edward Arnold, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 87-99.
H ales, S., P. W einstein, and A. W oodward, 1996: Dengue fever epidem ics in 
the South Pacific: driven by El Nino Southern Oscillation. L a n c e t , 348, 
1664-1665.
Hay, J.E. 1997: A  Pacific Response to Climate Change. T i e m p o , 23, pp. 1-10.
Hay, J.E. and C. Kaluwin (eds.), 1993: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  S e a  L e v e l  R i s e  i n  
t h e  S o u t h  P a c i f i c  R e g i o n . Proceedings of the Second SPREP meeting, 
N om ea, 6 -1 0  A pril 1992, South Pacific R egional E nvironm ent 
Program m e, A pia, W estern Samoa, 238 pp.
H ay, J.E., C. Kaluwin, and N. Koop, 1993b: Im plications of climate change 
and sea level rise for small island nations of the South Pacific: a region­
al synthesis. W e a t h e r  a n d  C l i m a t e , 16, 1-20.
Hay, J., J. Salinger, B. Fitzharris, and R. Basher, 1993a: Clim atological “see­
saws” in the Southwest Pacific. W e a t h e r  a n d  C l i m a t e , 13, 9-21.
H endry, M.D., 1993: Sea-level m ovem ents and shoreline changes in the wider 
Caribbean region. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  t h e  I n t r a - A m e r i c a s  S e a  [Maul, 
G.A. (ed.)]. Edward Arnold, London, United Kingdom, pp. 152-161.
H endry, M .D. and G. Digerfeldt, 1989: Palaeogeography and palaeoenviron- 
m ents of a tropical coastal wetland and adjacent shelf during Holocene 
subm ergence, 
Jam aica. 
P a l a e o g e o g r a p h y ,  
P a l a e o c l i m a t o l o g y .  
P a l a e o e c o l o g y , 73, 1-10.
H olland, G.J., 1997: The maxim um  potential instability of tropical cyclones. 
J o u r n a l  o f  A t m o s p h e r i c  S c i e n c e  (in press).
H olthus, P R , 1996: Coastal and m arine environm ents o f the Pacific Islands: 
ecosystem  classification, ecological assessm ent and traditional know l­
edge for coastal m anagement. In: S m a l l  I s l a n d s :  M a r i n e  S c i e n c e  a n d  
S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t [Maul, G.A. (ed.)]. A m erican Geophysical 
Union, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 341-365.
Holthus, P., M. Crawford, C. Makroro, and S. Sullivan, 1992: V u l n e r a b i l i t r y  
A s s e s s m e n t  f o r  A c c e l e r a t e d  S e a  L e v e l  R i s e  C a s e  S t u d y :  M a j u r o  A t o l l ,  
R e p u b l ic  o f  t h e  M a r s h a l l  I s l a n d s . SPREP Reports and Studies Series No. 60, 
South Pacific Regional Environment Program, Apia, Western Samoa, 107 pp.
IPCC, 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
1 9 9 5 :  
T h e  
S c i e n c e  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  G r o u p  I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  th e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro 
Rilho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, U nited Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
-  
Nicholls, N., G.V. Gruza, J. Jouzel, T.R. Karl, L.A. Ogallo, and 
D.E. Parker, Chapter 3. O b s e r v e d  C l i m a t e  V a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  C h a n g e ,  
pp. 133-192.
Kattenberg, N., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. M eehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A .J. Weaver, and T.M .L. Wigley, Chapter 
6 . C l i m a t e  M o d e l s :  P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  F u t u r e  C l i m a t e , pp. 285-357.
-  
W arrick, R.A., C. Le Provost, M .R M eier, J. Oerlem ans, and PL. 
W oodworth, Chapter 7. C h a n g e s  i n  S e a  L e v e l , pp. 359-405.
IPCC, 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  S c i e n t i f i c - T e c h n i c a l  A n a l y s e s .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k in g  
G r o u p  I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
-  
Kirschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  o n  F o r e s t s , pp. 95-129.
-  
Bijlsm a, L., Chapter 9. C o a s t a l  Z o n e s  a n d  S m a l l  I s l a n d s , pp. 
289-324.
-  
A m ell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. Mulholland, 
C hapter 10. H y d r o l o g y  a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  E c o l o g y , pp. 325-363. 
Scott, M .J., C hapter 12. 
H u m a n  
S e t t l e m e n t s  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 3 9 9 ^ 2 6 .
-  
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. A g r i c u l t u r e  i n  a  
C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e , pp. 
427-469.
Everett, J.T., Chapter 16. F i s h e r i e s , pp. 511-537.
M cM ichael, A.J., Chapter 18. H u m a n  
P o p u l a t i o n  
H e a l t h , pp. 
561-584.
IPC C , 1996. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  E c o n o m i c  a n d  S o c i a l  D i m e n s i o n s  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W
o r k i n g  G r o u p  I I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  
A s s e s s m e n t  
R e p o r t  
o f  t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  
o n  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [B ruce, J .P , H. Lee, and E.F. H aites (eds.)]. Cam bridge 
U niversity Press, C am bridge, U nited K ingdom  and N ew  York, NY, 
USA , 448 pp.
Pearce, D.W., W.R. Cline, A.N. A chanta, S. Fankhauser, R.K. 
Pachauri, R.S.J. Toi, and P. Vellinga, Chapter 6 . T h e  S o c i a l  C o s t s  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  G r e e n h o u s e  D a m a g e  a n d  t h e  B e n e f i t s  o f  C o n t r o l ,  
pp. 179-224.
Lauretti, E. (comp.), 1992: Fish and Fishery Products. W orld Apparent 
Consum ption Statistics Based on Food Balance Sheets (1961-1990). 
FAO Fisheries Circular 821 (Rev. 2), Food and A griculture Organization, 
Rome, Italy, 477 pp.
L eatherm an, S .P , 1994: R ising sea levels and sm all island states.
E c o D e c i s i o n , 11, 53-54.
Lim pus, C., 1993: A  m arine resource case study: clim ate change and sea level 
rise probable im pacts on m arine turtles. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  S e a  
L e v e l  R i s e  i n  t h e  S o u t h  P a c i f i c  R e g i o n  [Hay, J.E. and C. Kaluwin (eds.)]. 
Proceedings of the Second SPREP M eeting, Noum ea, N ew  Caledonia, 6 - 
10 A pril 1992, South Pacific Regional Environm ent Program m e, Apia, 
W estern Samoa, p. 157.
Lucas, J.S., R.D. Braley, C.M. Crawford, and W.J. Nash, 1988: Selecting opti­
mum conditions for ocean-nursery culture of Tridacna gigas. In: G i a n t  
C l a m s  i n  A s i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c  [Copland, J.W. and J.S. Lucas (eds.)]. 
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Monograph 
No. 9, Canberra, pp. 129-132.
M ahon, R., 1996: Fisheries o f small island states and their oceanographic 
research and inform ation needs. In: S m a l l  I s l a n d s :  M a r i n e  S c i e n c e  a n d  
S u s t a i n a b l e  D e v e l o p m e n t [Maul, G.A. (ed.)]. A m erican Geophysical 
Union, W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 298-322.
M artens, W.J.M., Т.Н. Jetten, J. Rotm ans, and L.W. Neissen, 1995: Climate 
change and vector-borne diseases: a global m odelling perspective. 
G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  C h a n g e , 5(3), 195-209.
M aul, G.A. (ed.), 1993: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  t h e  I n t r a - A m e r i c a s  S e a . Edward 
Arnold, London, United Kingdom, 389 pp.
Small Island States
353
M aul, G.A. (ed.), 1996: Small Islands: M arine Science and Sustainable 
Development. American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, USA, 467 pp.
M cLean, R. and A.M . d ’Aubert, 1993: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  S e a  
L e v e l  R i s e  f o r  T o k e l a u . SPREP Reports and Studies Series No. 61, South 
Pacific Regional Environm ent Program, Apia, Western Samoa, 53 pp.
M cLean, R.F. and C.D. W oodroffe, 1993: Vulnerability assessment of coral 
atolls: the case of A ustralia’s Cocos (Keeling) Islands. In: V u l n e r a b i l i t y  
A s s e s s m e n t  t o  S e a  L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  M a n a g e m e n t [McLean, 
R. and N. M imura (eds.)]. Proceedings of the IPCC /W CC ’93 Eastern 
Hem isphere W orkshop, 3 -6  A ugust 1993, Tsukuba, Japan, Departm ent of 
Environment, Sport and Territories, Canberra, Australia, pp. 99-108.
M cM ichael, A.J., 1993: Global environm ental change and human population 
health: a conceptual and scientific challenge for epidem iology. 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  E p i d e m i o l o g y ,  2 2 , 1-8.
M cM ichael, A.J., A. Haines, R. Slooff, and S. Kovats (eds.), 1996: Climate 
Change and Hum an Health: A n Assessm ent Prepared by a Task Group on 
B ehalf o f the W orld Health Organization, the World M eteorological 
O rganization and the U nited N ations Environm ent Program m e 
(W HO/EHG/96.7). W HO, Geneva, Switzerland, 297 pp.
M cM ichael, A.J. and W.J.M. M artens, 1995: The health impacts of global cli­
mate change: grapling w ith scenarios, predictive models, and multiple 
uncertainties. E c o s y s t e m  H e a l t h , 1(1), 23-33.
M cNeely, J.A., M. Gadgil, C. Leveque, C. Padoch, and K. Redford, 1993: 
Human influences on biodiversity. In: G l o b a l  B i o d i v e r s i t y  A s s e s s m e n t  
[Heyword, V.H. and R.T. W atson (eds.)]. United Nations Environmental 
Program m e, Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom, 
pp. 711-821.
Meehl, G.A., 1994: Possible changes o f ENSO effects due to increased CO 2  
in global coupled-ocean-atm osphere climate models. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p l i c a t i o n s  
a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  
S t r a t e g i e s  f o r  
t h e  I n d o - P a c i f i c  I s l a n d  
N a t i o n s :  W o r k s h o p  P r o c e e d i n g s  [Rappa, P., A. Tomlinson, and S. Ziegler 
(eds.)]. Proceedings o f the W orkshop at Honolulu, Hawaii, September 
26-30, 1994, U.S. Country Studies Program, p. 35.
M urray, C., 1993: Catastrophe reinsurance crisis in the Caribbean. In: 
C a t a s t r o p h e  R e i n s u r a n c e  N e w s l e t t e r , 6 , 1993. DYP Group Ltd., London, 
United Kingdom , pp. 14-18.
Nicholls, N., C. Landsea, and J. Gill, 1997: Recent trends in Australian region 
tropical cyclone activity. Subm itted to M e t e o r o l o g y  a n d  A t m o s p h e r i c  
P h y s i c s , special edition on tropical cyclones. (In press).
Nicholls, R.J., 1995: Synthesis o f vulnerability analysis studies, b :  P r e p a r i n g  t o  
M e e t  t h e  C o a s t a l  C h a l l e n g e s  o f  t h e  l i s
t  C e n t u r y ,  v o l .  1 . Proceedings of the 
World Coast Conference, November 1-5, 1993, Noordwijk, Netherlands, 
CZM -Centre Publication No. 4, M inistry of Transport, Public Works and 
Water M anagement, The Hague, Netherlands, pp. 181-216.
Nunn, P.D., 1994: O c e a n i c  I s l a n d s . Blackwell Publishers, Oxford, United 
K ingdom, 413 pp.
Nurse, L.A., 1985: A  review of selected aspects of the geography of the 
Caribbean and Their im plications for environm ental impact assessment. 
In: P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  C a r i b b e a n  S e m i n a r  o n  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  I m p a c t  
A s s e s s m e n t [Geoghegan, T. (ed.)]. M ay 27-June 7, 1985, Centre for 
Resource M anagem ent and Environm ental Studies, University of the 
West Indies; Caribbean Conservation Association; Institute for Resource 
and Environm ental Studies-Dalhousie University; and the Canadian 
International D evelopm ent Agency, Bridgetown, Barbados, pp. 10-18.
Nurse, L.A., 1992: Predicted sea-level rise in the W ider Caribbean: likely con­
sequences and response options. In: S e m i - E n c l o s e d  S e a s  [Fabbri, P. and 
G. Fierro (eds.)]. Elsevier A pplied Science, Essex, United Kingdom, pp. 
52-78.
Parkinson, R.W., R.D. de Laune, and J.R. W hite, 1994: Holocene sea-level 
rise and the fate of m angrove forests within the W ider Caribbean region. 
J o u r n a l  o f  C o a s t a l  R e s e a r c h , 10, 1077-1086.
Perez, A.L., C. Rodriguez, and I. Salas, 1996: E v a l u a t i o n  o f  R i s k s  o f  C o a s t a l  
F l o o d i n g ,  C u b a . Institute o f Physical Planning, Institute of M eteorology, 
Havana, Cuba, 20 pp. (in Spanish)
Pernetta, J.C., 1988: Projected clim ate change and sea-level rise: a relative 
impact rating for the countries of the Pacific basin. In: P o t e n t i a l  I m p a c t s  
o f  G r e e n h o u s e  G a s  G e n e r a t e d  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  P r o j e c t e d  S e a  L e v e l  
R i s e  o n  P a c i f i c  I s l a n d  S t a t e s  o f  t h e  S P R E P  R e g i o n  [Pernetta, J.C. (ed.)]. 
ASPEI Task Team, Split, Yugoslavia, pp. 1-10.
P ern etta, J.C., 1992: Impacts of climate change and sea-level rise on small 
island states: national and international responses. G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  
C h a n g e ,  2 , 19-31.
P hilander, S.G., 1990: E l  N i n o ,  
L a  N i n a  
a n d  t h e  S o u t h e r n  
O s c i l l a t i o n .  
Academ ic Press, San Diego, CA, USA, 289 pp.
Pittock, A.B., 1984: On the reality, stability and usefulness of Southern 
Hemisphere teleconnections. A u s t r a l i a n  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  M a g a z i n e , 32, 
75-82.
Pittock, A.B., M.R. Dix, K.J. Hennessy, J.J. Katzfey, K.L. M clnnes, S.P. 
O ’Farrel, I.N. Smith, R. Suppiah, K.J. Walsh, P.H. W hetton and S.G. 
W ilson, 1995: Progress towards climate change scenarios for the south­
west Pacific. W e a t h e r  a n d  C l i m a t e , 15(2), 2 1 ^ 6 .
R adford, D., R. Blong, A.M. d ’Aubert, I. Kuhnel, and P. Nunn, 1996; 
O c c u r r e n c e  
o f  T r o p i c a l  
C y c l o n e s  
i n  
t h e  
s o u t h w e s t  
P a c i f i c  
R e g i o n  
1 9 2 0 - 1 9 9 4 . Greenpeace International, Amsterdam , Netherlands, 35 pp.
Reilly, J., N. Hohmann, and S. Kane, 1994: Climate change and agricultural 
trade: who benefits and who loses? G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t a l  C h a n g e , 4(1), 
24-36.
Roy, P. and J. Connell, 1991: Climate change and the future of atoll states. 
J o u r n a l  o f  C o a s t a l  R e s e a r c h , 7, 1057-1075.
Salinger, M .J., R. Basher, B. Fitzharris, J. Hay, P.D. Jones, I.P. M acveigh, and 
I. Schmideley-Lelu, 1995: Climate trends in the south-west Pacific. 
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y , 15, 285-302.
S au n d ers, A., 1993: Underw riting Guidelines. Paper presented at the 
Thirteenth Caribbean Insurance Conference, Association of British 
Insurers, London, United Kingdom, 7 pp. (unpublished)
Sem eniuk, V., 1994: Predicting the effect of sea-level rise on mangroves in 
Northwestern Australia. J o u r n a l  o f  C o a s t a l  R e s e a r c h , 10, 1050-1076.
Sestini, G., 1992: Sea-level rise in the Mediterranean region: likely consequences 
and response options. In: S e m i - E n c l o s e d  S e a s  [Fabbri, P. and G. Fierro 
(eds.)]. Elsevier Applied Science, Essex, United Kingdom, pp. 79-109.
Shea, E., 1994: Climate change reality: current trends and implications. In: 
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  I m p l i c a t i o n s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  S t r a t e g i e s  f o r  t h e  I n d o -  
P a c i f i c  I s l a n d  N a t i o n s .  W o r k s h o p  P r o c e e d i n g s  [Rappa, P., A. Tomlinson, 
and S. Ziegler (eds.)]. Proceedings of the W orkshop at Honlulu, Hawaii, 
September 26-30, 1994, U.S. Country Studies Program, pp. 26-28.
Singh, U., 1994: P o t e n t i a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  I m p a c t s  
o n  
t h e  A g r i c u l t u r a l  
S y s t e m s  o f  t h e  S m a l l  I s l a n d  N a t i o n s  o f  t h e  P a c i f i c . Draft paper, IFDC- 
IRRI, Los Banos, Philippines, 28 pp.
Singh, U., D.C. Godwin, and R.J. M orrison, 1990: M odelling the impact o f cli­
mate change on agricultural production in the South Pacific. In: G l o b a l  
W a r m i n g - R e l a t e d  E f f e c t s  o f  A g r i c u l t u r e  a n d  H u m a n  H e a l t h  a n d  C o m f o r t  
i n  t h e  S o u t h  P a c i f i c  [Hughes, P.J. and J. M cGregor (eds.)]. South Pacific 
Regional Environmental Program and United Nations Environment 
Programme, University o f Papua New Guinea, Port Moresby, Papua New 
Guinea, pp. 24-40.
Snedaker, S.C., 1993: Impact on mangroves. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  t h e  I n t r a -  
A m e r i c a s  S e a  [Maul, G.A. (ed.)]. Edward Arnold, London, United 
Kingdom, pp. 282-305.
SP R E P, 1994a: 
I n t e g r a t e d  
C o a s t a l  Z o n e  
M a n a g e m e n t  
P r o g r a m m e  f o r  
W e s t e r n  S a m o a  a n d  F
i j i  I s l a n d s  —
A s s e s s m e n t  o f  C o a s t a l  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  
a n d  R e s i l i e n c e  t o  S e a - L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e ,  
C a s e  S t u d y :  
S a v a i ’ i  I s l a n d ,  W e s t e r n  S a m o a ,  P h a s e  I I :  D e v e l o p m e n t  o f  M e t h o d o l o g y .  
South Pacific Regional Environment Programme; Environment Agency, 
Government of Japan; and the Overseas Environmental Cooperation 
Center, Japan, Apia, Western Samoa, 23 pp.
SP R E P, 1994b: 
I n t e g r a t e d  
C o a s t a l  
Z o n e  
M a n a g e m e n t  
P r o g r a m m e  f o r  
W e s t e r n  S a m o a  a n d  F
i j i  I s l a n d s  —
A s s e s s m e n t  o f  C o a s t a l  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  
a n d  R e s i l i e n c e  t o  S e a - L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e ,  
C a s e  S t u d y :  
Y a s a w a  I s l a n d s ,  
F i j i ,  P h a s e  I I :  D e v e l o p m e n t  o f  M e t h o d o l o g y . South 
Pacific R egional Environm ent Program m e; E nvironm ent Agency, 
Government of Japan; and the Overseas Environmental Cooperation 
Center, Japan, Apia, Western Samoa, 118 pp.
SPR E P, 1996: I n t e g r a t e d  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  M a n a g e m e n t  P r o g r a m m e  f o r  F
i j i  a n d  
T u v a l u  —
C o a s t a l  v u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  r e s i l i e n c e  i n  T u v a l u  —
A s s e s s m e n t  o f  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  
a n d  A d a p t a t i o n ,  
P h a s e  
T V . South Pacific 
Regional Environment Programme; Environm ent Agency, Government 
of Japan; and the Overseas Environmental Cooperation Center, Japan, 
Apia, Western Samoa, 130 pp.
354
Small Island States
Thom pson. C., S. Ready, and X. Zheng, 1992: T r o p i c a l  C y c l o n e s  i n  t h e  
S o u t h w e s t  
P a c i f i c :  
N o v e m b e r  
1 9 7 9  
t o  
M a y  
1 9 8 9 . N ew  Zealand 
M eteorological Service, W ellington, New Zealand, 35 pp.
Vales, M .A., A. Alvarez, L. M ontes, A. Avila, and H. Ferras (eds.), 1996: 
Country Study for the Biological Diversity of the Republic o f Cuba (in 
Spanish). UNEP-CITM A, Flavanna, Cuba, 433 pp.
Vicente, V.R, 1996: Littoral ecological stability and econom ic developm ent in 
small island states. In: S m a l l  I s l a n d s :  M a r i n e  S c i e n c e  a n d  S u s t a i n a b l e  
D e v e l o p m e n t [M aul, G .A . (ed.)]. A m erican G eophysical U nion, 
W ashington, DC, USA, pp. 266-283.
W eber, A.P., 1993: A b a n d o n e d  S e a s :  R e v e r s i n g  t h e  D e c l i n e  o f  t h e  O c e a n s .  
W orld Watch Paper 116, W orld W atch Institute, W ashington, DC, USA,
6 6  pp.
W eber, A.P., 1994: N e t  L o s s :  F i s h ,  J o b s  a n d  t h e  M a r i n e  E n v i r o n m e n t . World 
W atch Paper 120, World W atch Institute, W ashington, DC, USA, 76 pp. 
W hetton, PH ., M.H. England, S.P. O ’Farrell, I.G. W alterson, and A.B. Pittock, 
1996: Global Com parison of the regional rainfall results of enhanced 
greenhouse coupled and m ixed layer ocean experim ents: Im plications for 
climate scenario developm ent. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 33, pp. 497-519. 
W H O , 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  H u m a n  
H e a l t h  [M cM ichael, A.J., A. 
Haines, R. Slooff, and S. Kovats (eds.)]. W HO, Geneva, Switzerland, 
279 pp.
W igley, T.M .L. and B.D. Santer, 1993: Future clim ate of the Gulf/Caribbean 
Basin from the global circulation m odels. In: C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e  i n  th e  
I n t r a - A m e r i c a s  S e a  [M aul, G.A. (ed.)]. Edward A rnold, London, United 
Kingdom , pp. 31-54.
W ilkinson, C.R. and R.W. Buddem eier, 1994: G l o b a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  
C o r a l  R e e f s :  I m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  P e o p l e  a n d  R e e f s . Report of the UNEP- 
lO C-A SPEI-IU CN  Global Task Team on the Im plications o f Climate 
Change on Coral Reefs. International Union for Conservation of Nature 
and Natural Resources (lU CN ), Gland, Switzerland, 124 pp.
W oodroffe, C.D., 1995: Response of tide-dom inated m angrove shorelines in 
Northern A ustralia to anticipated sea-level rise. E a r t h  S u r f a c e  P r o c e s s e s  
a n d  L a n d f o r m s , 20, 65-86.
W oodroffe, C .D ., and R.F. M cL ean, 1992: K iribati V ulnerability to 
A ccelerated Sea-Level Rise: A  Prelim inary Study. Departm ent of the 
Arts, Sport, Environm ent and Territories, Canberra, Australia, 82 pp.
Y am ada, K., P.D. Nunn, N. M imura, S. M achida and M. Yamamoto, 1995: 
M ethodology for the A ssessm ent of Vulnerability o f South Pacific Island 
Countries to Sea-Level Rise and Clim ate Change. J o u r n a l  o f  G l o b a l  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  E n g i n e e r i n g , 1, pp. 101-125.
10
Temperate Asia
MASATOSHI YOSHINO (JAPAN) AND SU JILAN (CHINA) 
Lead Authors:
Byong-Lyol Lee (Korea), H. Harasawa (Japan), K I. Kobak (Russia), Lin Erda 
(China), Liu Chunzen (China), N. Mimura (Japan)
Contributors:
Ding Yihui (China), M. Lai (India)
CONTENTS
10.1. Regional Characteristics 
360
10.1.1. Geography and Demography 
360
10.1.2. Regional Climate Information 
361
10.1.2.1. Past and Present Climate 
Characteristics 
361
10.1.2.2. Future Climate Projections 
362
10.2. Sensitivity, Adaptability, and Vulnerability 
364
10.2.1. Ecological Systems (including Cryosphere) 364
10.2.1.1. Forests, Grasslands, and Tundra 
364
10.2.1.2. Deserts and Desertification 
365
10.2.1.3. Lakes, Streams, and Wetlands 
366
10.2.1.4. Mountain Regions 
366
10.2.1.5. Cryosphere 
366
10.2.2. Hydrology and Water Resources 
368
10.2.2.1. Hydrological Systems 
368
10.2.2.2. Water Supply 
368
10.2.2.3. Water Resources in China 
369
10.2.3. Food and Fiber Production 
369
10.2.3.1. Agriculture 
369
10.2.3.2. Fisheries 
371
10.2.3.3. Production Forestry 
372
Executive Summary 
357
10.2.4. Coastal Systems 
372
10.2.4.1. Sea-Level Rise 
372
10.2.4.2. Coastal Flooding and Inundation 
373
10.2.4.3. Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management 
373
10.2.5. Human Settlements and Industry 
373
10.2.5.1. Human Settlements 
373
10.2.5.2. Industry 
374
10.2.6. Human Health 
374
10.2.6.1. Heat Stress 
374
10.2.6.2. Infectious Diseases 
374
10.2.6.3. Pollution Hazards 
375
10.3. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential
Vulnerabilities and Impacts 
375
10.3.1. North China 
375
10.3.1.1. Water Resources 
375
10.3.1.2. Agriculture 
376
10.3.1.3. Forests 
376
10.3.1.4. Coastal Zones 
376
10.3.2. Forests in Temperate Asia 
376
References 
378
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Introduction
Temperate Asia is composed of three regions: monsoon Asia, 
excluding its tropical subregion; the inner arid/semi-arid 
regions; and Siberia. The region includes countries in Asia 
between 18°N and the Arctic Circle, including the Japanese 
islands, the Korean peninsula, Mongolia, most parts of China, 
and Siberia in Russia. The east-west distance of the area is 
about 8,000 km, and its north-south extent is about 5,000 km. 
The largest plateau in the world— the Qing-Zang plateau 
(Tibetan plateau), with an average elevation of more than 4,000 
m— is located in southwest China. Inner Siberia, with a mean 
monthly temperature in January of about -50°C, is the coldest 
part of the northern hemisphere in winter; this area is called the 
“cold pole.” On the other hand, extremely dry, hot climate pre­
vails in the Taklamakan Desert in China.
Human activities through the ages have brought profound 
changes to the landscape of this area. Except for boreal forests 
in Siberia, other natural forests in the region have long been 
destroyed. Broad plains have been cultivated and irrigated for 
thousands of years, and natural grasslands have been used for 
animal husbandry. In recent years, many countries in this 
region have shown marked economic development. Their gross 
national products (GNPs) and populations are increasing at an 
extremely rapid rate. The region’s population is expected to 
grow from 1.42 billion in 1995 to 1.72 billion by 2025; the 
environment in this region already is under great stress. The 
impacts of expected climate change may exacerbate existing 
environmental problems.
conditions prevail over most of the monsoon-affected area 
during (globally) colder periods.
Tropical cyclones (typhoons) frequent the coastal regions. 
They are important not only because they cause disasters along 
the coasts but also because they are beneficial carriers of water 
resources to inland areas. The frequency, path, and intensity of 
typhoons vary greatly from year to year, with clear differences 
between El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and non-ENSO 
years.
Over the past century, the average annual temperature in 
Temperate Asia has increased by more than 1°C. This increase 
has been most evident since the 1970s; seasonally, the warming 
is evident mainly in winter. Subregionally, over the past 100 
years, there has been a 2-4°C temperature increase in eastern and 
northeastern Temperate Asia and a 1-2°C temperature decrease 
in some parts of southeasten China, except for the coastal area. 
These trends also are reflected in corresponding seasonal temper­
ature distributions, except that summer temperatures in central 
Siberia actually are decreasing. In terms of precipitation, large 
decadal variability seems to have masked a smaller positive trend 
in annual precipitation. Over the past 100 years, there has been a 
20-50% increase in east Siberia; a 10-20% increase across the 
Korean peninsula, northeast China, the Huaihe River Basin, and 
the Yellow River Basin; and a 10-20% decrease in Japan and the 
southern half of east China, including Taiwan. The increasing 
trend in annual precipitation in northeast China is evident mainly 
in spring and summer rainfall; in south China, annual winter pre­
cipitation shows a slight positive trend, in contrast to a negative 
trend in total annual precipitation.
Climate Characteristics
Climate differs widely within Temperate Asia. It has a tropical 
monsoon climate in the far south; a humid, cool, temperate cli­
mate in the north; and a desert climate or steppe climate in the 
west and northwest. In the rest of the area— ^where most of the 
population of the region is concentrated— a humid, temperate 
climate prevails.
The east Asian monsoon has great influence on temporal and 
spatial variations in the hydrological cycle over parts of the 
region. For example, the summer monsoon accounts for 70% of 
the total annual runoff in China; for northern China, this precip­
itation often concentrates in a few storms during the flood sea­
son. At time scales longer than 100 years, the summer monsoons 
generally are stronger during (globally) warmer periods, leading 
to wetter conditions in northern China. On the other hand, drier
Future Climate Projection
Numerical experiments with coupled atmosphere-ocean gener­
al circulation models (AOGCMs) that include transient 
increases in greenhouse gases [i.e., increases in equivalent car­
bon dioxide (COj) at a rate of 1% per year] project a warming 
of between 2°C and 3°C over the annual mean of the region at 
the time of COj doubling. Warming was more pronounced in 
the arid/semi-arid and Siberian regions than in the coastal mon­
soon region. Recent simulations, wherein GCMs also include 
the offsetting effects of sulfate aerosols, project a temperature 
rise of about 0.8°C over the eastern part of the region, about 
1°C over most parts of eastern China, and close to 2°C in the 
Siberian region on an annual mean basis by the middle of the 
next century. It should be noted that the projections that 
account for sulfate aerosols also are highly uncertain.
In equilibrium and transient-response numerical experiments 
with GCMs, precipitation is projected to marginally increase 
(<0.5 mm/day) at the time of COj doubling during the winter 
(DJF) throughout the region. In the summer (JJA), the spatial 
pattern of projected changes in precipitation is not uniform 
over the region. Model projections suggest that precipitation 
will increase slightly (0.5-1.0 mm/day) in the northern part of 
the region (Siberia), and by more than 1 mm/day over the 
Korean peninsula, the Japanese islands, and the southwestern 
part of China. In contrast, precipitation may decline in the 
northern, western, and southern parts of China. The projected 
decline in rainfall over most of China is substantial in numeri­
cal experiments that include the effects of sulfate aerosols.
Summary Poiuts
For boreal forests, which are concentrated mainly in the 
Russian Federation, models suggest large shifts in distrib­
ution (e.g., area reductions of up to 50%) and productivi­
ty. In the boreal region, grasslands and shrublands may 
expand significantly, whereas the tundra zone may 
decrease by up to 50%, according to model predictions. 
Climatic warming would increase the release of methane 
from deep peat deposits— particularly from tundra soils, 
since they would become wetter. The release of CO 2  is 
expected to increase, though not by more than 25% of its 
present level.
• 
It is likely that by 2050, up to a quarter of the existing 
mountain glacier mass would disappear. For areas with 
very large glaciers, the extra runoff may persist for a cen­
tury or more. By 2050, the volume of runoff from glaciers 
in central Asia is projected to increase threefold. 
Eventually, however, glacial runoff will taper off or even 
cease. Projected future glacier runoff is about 6 8  km^/yr in 
2100, compared with the present value of 98 kmVyr. 
Permafrost in northeast China is expected to disappear if 
the temperature were to increase by 2°C or more. Over the 
Qing-Zang plateau, estimates of the impact of climate 
change on permafrost range from its complete disappear­
ance as a result of a temperature increase of 2°C to a 
raising of its elevation limit to 4,600 m as a result of a 
warming of 3°C.
Hydrologically, model results suggest that the areas most 
vulnerable to climate change would be in the northern part 
of China. Projected changes in runoff are due mainly to 
changes in precipitation in spring, summer, and autumn 
because of the strong influence of the monsoon climate. 
The most critical uncertainty is the lack of credible projec­
tions of the effect of climate change on either the Asian 
monsoon or the ENSO phenomenon, both of which strong­
ly influence river runoff. In moderately and extremely dry 
years, the projected potential water deficiency caused by 
climate change— although less than that caused by popula­
tion growth and economic development— may exacerbate 
seriously the existing water shortage.
Different GCMs’ estimated impacts on agricultural yields 
vary widely in range. Possible large negative impacts on 
rice production as a consequence of climate change would 
be of concern in the face of expected population Increases. 
In China, across different scenarios and different sites, yield 
changes for several crops by 2050 are projected to be -78% 
to +15% for rice, -21% to +55% for wheat, and -19% to 
+5% for maize. An increase in productivity may occur if the 
positive effects of CO 2  on crop growth are considered, but 
the magnitude of the fertilization effect remains uncertain.
Climate change is projected to have favorable impacts on 
agriculture in the northern areas of Siberia and to cause a 
general northward shift of crop zones. Grain production in 
southwestern Siberia is projected to fall by about 20% as 
a result of a more arid climate.
Projections for 2010 indicate that the need for industrial 
roundwood could increase by 38% (southern Temperate 
Asia) to 96% (eastern Temperate Asia). These require­
ments may result in serious shortages of boreal industrial 
roundwood, placing further stress on boreal forests.
Along most of the continental coast, relative sea level (i.e., 
sea level in relation to land) is an important factor for 
coastal environments. Deltaic coasts in China face severe 
problems from relative sea-level rise as a result of tectoni- 
cally and anthropogenically induced land subsidence. In 
the next 50 years, the expected worldwide sea-level rise 
due to climate change will not be a major factor in relative 
sea-level rise for the Old Huanghe and Changjiang deltas in 
China, although it may be for the Zhujiang delta. Sea-level 
rise due to global warming will, however, exacerbate prob­
lems in all three deltas, along with saltwater intrusion prob­
lems in deltaic regions and coastal plains. China, however, 
has a long history in defenses against sea encroachment.
Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya are all located in the coastal 
zone; together, they account for more than 50% of Japan’s 
Industrial production. In these metropolitan areas, already 
about 860 km 2  of coastal land— an area supporting 2  mil­
lion people and with physical assets worth $450 billion— 
are below mean high-water level. With a 1-m rise in mean 
sea level, the area below mean high-water level would 
expand by a factor of 2.7, embracing 4.1 million people 
and assets worth more than $900 billion. The same sea- 
level rise would expand the flood-prone area from 6,270 
km2 to 8,900 km^. The cost of adjusting existing protec­
tion measures has been estimated at about $80 billion.
One of the potential threats that sea-level rise poses is exac­
erbated beach erosion. Sandy beaches occupy 20-25% of the 
total length of the Japanese coast. About 120 km^ of these 
beaches have been eroded over the past 70 years. An addi­
tional 118 km 2  of beaches— 51% of the remaining sandy 
beaches in Japan today— ^would disappear with a 30-cm sea- 
level rise. This percentage would increase to 82% and 90% 
if the sea level rose by 65 cm or 100 cm, respectively.
An increase in the frequency or severity of heat waves 
would cause an increase in (predominantly cardiorespira­
tory) mortality and illness. Studies of urban populations in 
Temperate Asia indicate that the number of heat-related 
deaths would increase several-fold in response to modeled 
climate change scenarios for 2050.
North China— including Beijing, Tianjin, the four 
provinces (Hebei, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi), part of 
Anhui province, and part of inner Mongolia— is an eco­
nomic center of the country. It also is a topographic and 
climatological entity. Because this region already is at risk 
from normal climate variability, it also is likely to be quite 
vulnerable to long-term secular shifts.
1) 
Water resources: Water resources in north China are 
vulnerable to climate change because of already low 
levels of available per capita water supplies, water 
projects that already are highly developed, large 
changes in river runoff related mainly to variability in 
flood season, and rapid economic development. Water 
resources also are sensitive to climate change because 
of the critical dependence of floods on the Asian mon­
soon and the ENSO phenomenon.
2) Agriculture: This region appears to be especially sen­
sitive to climate change because of potential increas­
es in the soil moisture deficit. Warming and increased 
évapotranspiration, along with possible declines in 
precipitation, would make it difficult to maintain the 
current crop pattern in areas along the Great Wall and 
would limit the present practice of cultivating two 
crops in succession in the Huang-Hai Plains. 
Although climate warming may cause northward 
shifts of subtropical crop areas, frequent waterlogging 
in the south and spring droughts in the north would 
inhibit the growth of subtropical crops.
3) 
Forests: Demands for agriculture as a result of popu­
lation increases and changes in the characteristics of 
arable lands due to climate change will likely result in 
large reductions of forest area.
4) 
Coastal zones: Climate change will exacerbate the 
already serious problem of relative sea-level rise 
because of tectonic subsidence and heavy groundwa­
ter withdrawal. Defense against sea encroachment 
would be the only viable response because of the high 
concentration of population and economic activities. 
Contamination of groundwater by seawater intrusion 
would further worsen the water resource shortage 
problem.
Research needs: (i) Projection of regional climatic scenar­
ios with high spatial and temporal resolution; (ii) 
improved hydrological models with appropriate land-sur­
face parameters under nonstationary climatic conditions; 
(iii) multiple-stress impact studies on water resources in 
international river basins; (iv) implementation strategies 
for integrated coastal zone management, taking climate 
change into consideration; (v) studies of the interactive 
effects of stresses on human health from hot weather and 
high levels of air pollution; and (vi) integrated impact 
studies that consider different sectors and their response to 
adaptation strategies.
Conclusion: The major impacts of global warming on 
Temperate Asia will likely take the form of large shifts of 
the boreal forests, the disappearance of significant por­
tions of mountain glaciers, and shortages in the water sup­
ply. The most critical uncertainty in these estimates stems 
from the lack of credible projections of the hydrological 
cycle under global warming scenarios. The effects of cli­
mate change on the Asian monsoon and the ENSO phe­
nomenon are among the major uncertainties in the model­
ing of the hydrological cycle. Projections of agricultural 
crop yields are uncertain not only because of the uncer­
tainty in the hydrological cycle but also because of the 
potential positive effects of CO 2  and production practices. 
In the coastal zones, sea-level rise endangers sandy beach­
es but remains an anthropogenically induced problem in 
deltaic areas. Integrated impact studies that consider mul­
tiple stress factors are needed.
360
Temperate Asia
10.1. 
Regional Characteristics
10.1.1. Geography and Demography
This report covers countries in Temperate Asia between 18°N 
and the Arctic Circle, including the Japanese islands, the 
Korean peninsula, Mongolia, most parts of China, and Siberia 
in Russia (see Figure 10-1). Geographically, the region is locat­
ed on the northeastern part of the Eurasian continent— the 
world’s largest continent— and borders the Pacific, the world’s 
largest ocean. The east-west distance of the area is about 8,000 
km, and its north-south extent is about 5,000 km. The world’s 
largest plateau— the Qing-Zang plateau (Tibetan plateau), with 
an average elevation of more than 4,000 m— is located in 
southwest China. Mt. Qomolangma (formerly Mt. Everest), the 
highest peak in the world (8,848 m), lies near the southern bor­
der of the plateau. The lowest point of the region (-154 m) is 
found in the Turfen Depression, northeast of the Taklamakan 
Desert.
Temperate Asia is composed of three regions: so-called mon­
soon Asia, excluding its tropical subregion; the inner 
arid/semi-arid regions; and Siberia (West Siberia, East Siberia, 
and Far East), which is covered largely by boreal forests and 
tundra. Tropical cyclones (typhoons) frequent the coastal
regions. Inner Siberia, with a mean monthly temperature In 
January of about -50°C, is the coldest part of the northern 
hemisphere in winter; this area is called the “cold pole.” On the 
other hand, extremely dry, hot climate prevails in the 
Taklamakan Desert.
Human activities through the ages have brought profound 
changes to the landscape of the region: Except for the boreal 
forests in Siberia, for example, natural forests in the region 
have long been destroyed. Only in mountain areas do sec­
ondary forests remain (Numata, 1974). Broad plains have been 
cultivated and irrigated for thousands of years, and natural 
grasslands have been used for animal husbandry.
The present population and projected population in 2025 for 
each country or region in Temperate Asia, except Siberia and 
Taiwan, are listed in Table 10-1, based on statistics from 
United Nations Population Division (1993) and FAO (1995). 
The region’s population is expected to grow from 1.42 billion 
in 1995 to 1.72 billion by 2025. Table 10-1 also shows the cur­
rent land use in each country or region.
In recent years, many countries in this region have shown 
marked economic development. Their GNPs and populations 
are increasing at an extremely fast rate. Thus, the environment
Figure 10-1: The Temperate Asia region [compiled by the World Bank Environment Department Geographic Information 
System (GIS) Unit; see Annex E for a color rendition].
Temperate Asia
361
Box 10-1. Temperate Asia (Country/Region)
China
Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea 
Japan 
Mongolia
Republic of Korea 
Siberia (West Siberia, East 
Siberia, and Far East) 
Taiwan, China
in this region already is under great stress. The impacts of 
expected climate change may exacerbate existing environmen­
tal problems.
10.1.2. Regional Climate Inform ation
The Tibetan plateau, rising to the 600-hPa level of the tropos­
phere, strongly influences the atmospheric general circulation 
over the region, both thermally and dynamically. Development 
of polar frontal zones and cyclones in Temperate Asia is close­
ly connected to activities associated with the westerly jet 
stream and the east Asian monsoon, both of which are signifi­
cantly affected by the plateau (Kim et al., 1973; Fukui, 1977; 
Yeh and Gao, 1979).
Climate differs widely within Temperate Asia. The region has 
a tropical monsoon climate in the far south, a humid, cool, tem­
perate climate in the north, and a desert climate or steppe cli­
mate in the west and the northwest. In the rest of the area—  
where most of the population of the region is concentrated— a 
humid, temperate climate prevails. Mean monthly and annual 
temperatures and mean annual precipitation at selected sites 
are shown in Table 10-2.
China has kept proxy data, old documents, diaries, and other 
data throughout its long history. Likewise, Korea and Japan 
have kept relatively homogeneous proxy data for several hun­
dred years. Such data are useful for analyzing climatic changes 
and their impacts on human activities.
10.1.2.1. Past and Present Climate Characteristics
Permafrost distribution in this region has changed substantial­
ly during warming periods of the Quaternary Period. The 
southern limit of lowland permafrost moved northward at a 
rate of 60 km/°C. In the alpine areas of Tibet, the boundary of 
lower-elevation permafrost changed by 160 m/°C; on the 
northern slope of the Himalayas, this sensitivity is about 80 
m/°C (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.2.3).
The length of many mountain glaciers in Pamirs, Tian Shan, 
and Altay has decreased by up to 4 km during the past two cen­
turies. Fluctuations of 224 glaciers in central Asia from the 
1950s to the 1980s can be summarized as retreating (73%), 
advancing (15%), and stable (12%). The mean equilibrium-line 
altitude— at which snow accumulation is equal to snow abla­
tion for a glacier— is estimated as being 50-80 m lower today 
than during the Little Ice Age in the 18th century and the first 
half of the 19th century (IPCC 1996, WG II, Box 5-1 and 
Section 7.2.2).
Over the past century, the average annual temperature in 
Temperate Asia has increased by more than 1°C (Figure 10-2). 
This increase has been most evident since the 1970s. It is a 
reflection primarily of the warming of the winter season since 
that time, although temperatures in all the other seasons also 
show a slight increase (see Annex A). Decadal time scale vari­
ability is evident from long-term variations of annual and sea­
sonal temperatures. In terms of precipitation, large decadal 
variability seems to have masked a smaller positive trend (see 
Figure 10-2 and Annex A).
Subregionally, over the past 100 years, there has been a 2-4°C 
temperature increase in eastern and northeastern Temperate 
Asia and a 1-2°C temperature decrease in the eastern half of 
south China, except for the coastal area. These trends also are 
reflected in corresponding seasonal temperature distributions, 
except that the summer temperature in central Siberia exhibits 
a negative trend. Over the same period, there has been a 
20-50% increase in annual precipitation in east Siberia; a
Table 10-1: Population (1995 and 2025) and land use (1993) in Temperate Asia.
Comtry or Region!
Land Area 
(Mha)
1993
Population
(0 0 0 s)
1995
Population
(0 0 0 s)
2025
Urban
Population
(0 0 0 s)
1995
Arable and 
Cropland 
(Mha)
1993
Pastureland
(Mha)
1993
Forestand
Woodland
(Mha)
1993
China
932,641
1,221,462
14,96,722
369,736
95,975
400,000
130,496
Hong Kong
99
5,865
6,306
5,574
7
1
2 2
Japan
37,652
125,095
124,249
97,120
4,463
661
25,100
Korea, Dem People’s Rep
12,041
23,917
33,522
14,650
2 , 0 0 0
50
7,370
Korea, Rep
9,873
44,995
52,946
36,572
2,055
90
6,460
Mongoha
156,650
2,410
4,421
1,468
1,401
125,000
13,750
Source: UN Population Division, FAO FAOSTAT.
Uata not avaflable for Siberia and Taiwan.
362
Temperate Asia
Table 10-2: Temperature and precipitation at selected sites in Temperate Asia.
Latitude 
Longitude 
Height 
Temperature (°C)
(N) 
(L) 
(m) 
January 
July
Annual
Annual
Precipitation
(mm)
Verkhoyansk
Oymyakon
Novosibirsk
bChabarovsk
Hotan
Beijing
Shanghai
Haikou
Seoul
Sapporo
Tokyo
Lhasa
67°33’
63°16’
44°12’
48°31’
37°08’
39°48’
31°10’
20° 02 ’
37°03’
43°03’
35°41’
29°42’
133°23’
143°09’
37°48’
135°07’
79°56’
116°28’
12 Г 2 6 ’
110°21’
126°58’
14 Г 2 0 ’
139°46’
91°08’
137
740
37
86
1,375
51
5
14
86
17
5
3,658
-48.9
-50.1
2.5
-22.7
-5.7
-4.7
4.2
17.1
-4.9
-4.9
4.7
-2.3
15.3
14.5
23.6 
21.0 
25.5 
26.0
27.8
28.4
24.5 
20.2 
25.2
14.9
-15.6
-16.5
12.7 
1.2
12.1
11.6
16.1
23.8 
11.2
8.0
15.3
7.5
155
193
638
569
35
683
1,135
1,690
1,259
1,158
1,460
454
10-20%  increase across the Korean peninsula, northeast 
China, the Huaihe River Basin, and the Yellow River Basin; 
and a 10-20% decrease in Japan and the southern half of east 
China, including Taiwan. The increasing trend of annual pre­
cipitation in northeast China is manifested mainly in spring and 
summer rainfalls, whereas in south China the winter precipita­
tion shows a certain degree of positive trend, in contrast to the 
trend in annual precipitation (see Annex A).
The temperature trend in east China (east of 105°E) differs 
from the global warming tendency. The peak warming period 
occurred in the 1940s. Since then, there has been a general 
cooling trend in this area (particularly in the southwestern 
area)— in contrast to the linear warming trend in Mongolia 
and the northern part of China. Similarly, the mean tempera­
ture in south China has decreased by about 0.8°C from the 
1950s to the 1980s (Ding and Dai, 1994; Yatagai and Yasunari,
1994).
Rainfall over Mongolia concentrates mainly in the summer. 
Annual precipitation in this country is 100-400 mm over the 
steppe and less than 150 mm in the southern Cobi. In the Cobi 
area, summer rainfall decreased over the period 1970-1990; in 
particular, the number of days with relatively heavy rainfall 
(greater than 3 mm/day) dropped significantly (Mijiddorj et al.,
1992).
The east Asian monsoon greatly influences temporal and spa­
tial variations in the hydrological cycle over many parts of 
the region. For example, the summer monsoon accounts for 
70% of the total annual runoff in China; for northern China, 
it often concentrates in a few storms during the flood season. 
The characteristics of the hydrological cycle are significantly 
different north and south of the Huaihe River. South of the 
river, the ratio of evaporation to precipitation is 0.51, w here­
as to the north it is 0.75. The evaporation-to-precipitation 
ratio is higher than 0.8 for the Yellow River and the Hailuan 
River (DH-MWR, 1987).
At a time scale longer than 100 years, summer monsoons gen­
erally are stronger during (globally) warmer periods, leading to 
wetter conditions in northern China. On the other hand, drier 
conditions prevail over most of the monsoon-affected area dur­
ing (globally) colder periods. At the 10-100 year time scale, 
however, such a global-regional relationship is not obvious 
(Yan and Marienicole, 1995).
Tropical cyclones (typhoons) are important not only because 
they cause disasters along the coasts south of 40°N but also 
because they are beneficial carriers of water resources to inland 
areas. The frequency, path, and intensity of typhoons vary 
greatly from year to year, with clear differences between 
ENSO and non-ENSO years (Nishimori and Yoshino, 1990). It 
is difficult to extrapolate impacts on ENSO behavior under 
global warming, however.
Because of the rising population, rapid industrialization, and 
increasing level of air pollution, heat-island effects are clearly 
evident in recent urban climate records of this region. The dif­
ference between average city temperatures during two peri­
ods— 1961-90 and 1931-60— correlates closely with the 
urban population. For cities in Japan with a population of 6-7 
million, the temperature difference is about 0.8°C; for Beijing, 
it is only about 0.4°C (Japan Meteorological Agency, 1996). 
Cities located in the northern part of South Korea show signif­
icantly higher warming trends than those in the southern part, 
especially in the anomalies of monthly mean minimum tem­
perature. Thus, even if the global warming rate is lowered in 
the future, warming trends of the urban climate due to heat- 
island effects should be considered.
10.1.2.2. Future Climate Projections
Global climate models project that the mean annual surface 
temperature will rise by about 1.0-3.5°C by the year 2100. On 
regional scales, confidence in future climate projections
Temperate Asia
363
remains low. There is more confidence in temperature projec­
tions than in precipitation changes. The degree to which 
regional climate variability will change also remains uncertain. 
Projections of future changes in temperature and rainfall for 
the Temperate Asia region, based on available scenarios from 
various GCM experiments, are described below.
10.1.2.2.1. Temperature
GCM equilibrium response experiments suggested an annual 
mean warming of 2-5°C over the region as a result of a doubling
of CO 2  (experiment acronyms A3, FI, G l, and H2 in Table 1-1 
of the Introduction). Warming was projected to be more pro­
nounced during winter than in summer. Subsequent numerical 
experiments with coupled AOGCMs, which included transient 
increases in greenhouse gases (i.e., increases in equivalent CO 2  
at a rate of 1 % per year), projected a slightly lower degree of 
warming over the region of between 2°C and 3°C at the time of 
CO 2 doubling on an annual mean basis (experiment acronyms 
X2, X5, and X7 in Table 1-2 of the Introduction). Warming was 
more pronounced in arid/semi-arid and Siberian regions than in 
the coastal monsoon region. Recent simulation experiments 
(experiment acronyms X 6  and X 8  in Table 1-2 of the
Year
Year
Figure 10-2: Trends in average precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) in the Temperate Asia region, 1901 96 (see Annex A).
364
Temperate Asia
Introduction), wherein GCMs also include the offsetting effects 
of sulfate aerosols, project a temperature rise of about 0.8°C over 
the eastern part of the region, about 1°C over most parts of east­
ern China, and close to 2°C in the Siberian region on an annual 
mean basis by the middle of the next century. During winter, the 
projected changes are marginally higher for all of the regions; 
during summer, however, the projected warming is considerably 
less, and most parts of China show a cooling. It should be noted 
that the projections that account for sulfate aerosols also are 
highly uncertain because our current understanding of the indi­
rect effects of sulfate aerosols is poor (IPCC 1996, WG I, 
Section 6.2.2).
10.1.2.2.2. Precipitation
In equilibrium and transient-response numerical experiments 
with GCMs, precipitation is projected to increase marginally 
(<0.5 mm/day) at the time of doubling of CO 2  during the win­
ter (DJF) throughout the region. In summer (JJA), the spatial 
pattern of projected changes in precipitation is not uniform 
over the region. Model projections suggest that precipitation 
will increase slightly (0.5-1.0 mm/day) in the northern part of 
the region (Siberia) and by more than 1 mm/day over the 
Korean peninsula, the Japanese islands, and the southwestern 
part of China. In contrast, precipitation changes show a decline 
in the northern, western, and southern parts of China (IPCC 
WG I, Section 6.2.2). The projected decline in rainfall over 
most of China is substantial in numerical experiments that 
include the effects of sulfate aerosols.
10.1.2.2.3. Possible changes in sea ice over the Sea o f Okhotsk
Tokioka et al. (1995) studied possible changes in sea ice over 
the Sea of Okhotsk based on future climate projections using a 
coupled GCM (MRI-X3). Sea ice in the Sea of Okhtosk is most 
vulnerable to climate, and it influences climate, ecosystems, 
fisheries, and transportation around the area. Because this area 
is the southernmost ocean in the Northern Hemisphere where 
sea ice forms, a sea ice-albedo feedback may occur early and 
effectively. These results suggest an early disappearance of sea 
ice and thus a large sea-surface temperature (SST) rise over the 
Sea of Okhotsk. Therefore, it is plausible that this area will suf­
fer large impacts of climate change in coming decades.
10.2. 
Sensitivity, Adaptability, and Vulnerability
10.2.1. Ecological Systems (including Cryosphere)
10.2.1.1. Forests, Grasslands, and Tundra
Although the area of potential distribution of temperate forests 
in Temperate Asia is, to a large extent, cleared and used for 
intensive agriculture, global warming can be considered suffi­
cient to trigger structural changes in remaining temperate 
forests. The nature and magnitude of these changes depend on
associated changes in water availability, as well as in water-use 
efficiency. Shifts in temperature and precipitation in temperate 
rangelands may result in altered growing seasons and bound­
ary shifts among grasslands, forests, and shrublands (IPCC 
1996, WGII, Sections 1.5 and 2.6).
According to simulation results of potential vegetation change 
by Neilson (see Annex C), temperate mixed forest areas, tem­
perate evergreen forest, and grassland areas would expand in 
Temperate Asia under 2хС 0г equilibrium scenario conditions. 
However, there would be practically no change in the leaf area 
index (LAI) in almost all parts of the region (see Figures C-2 
and C-4 of Annex C). Uncertainty remains about the time lag 
between climate change and migration of forest species at high 
latitudes.
For boreal forests, which are mainly concentrated in the 
Russian Federation, climate models (UKM 0-H3, GFDL-A2) 
suggest large shifts in distribution (area reductions of up to 
50%) and productivity (Dixon et al., 1996). All components of 
boreal forest ecosystems would be affected, including water 
resources, soil systems, and wildlife, and the combined effect 
could be even stronger as a result of interacting factors.
Grasslands and shrublands in boreal regions may expand sig­
nificantly, whereas the tundra zone may decrease by up to 
50%, according to model projections. Climatic warming also 
would increase the release of methane from deep peat deposits, 
particularly from tundra soils, because they would become 
wetter. It is expected that the release of CO 2  would increase, 
though not by more than 25% of its present level (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 7.4.2).
The most widely distributed coniferous forests in Siberia are 
the larch forests: West of the Yenissei River, Larix russica pre­
dominates; to the east, Larix gmelini prevails. The latter grows 
in the north of eastern Siberia, where the annual temperature 
range reaches about 100°C (-64°C to +38°C), as shown by 
mean long-term meteorological data from 1937 to the present 
from Yakutsk weather station. Larix gmelini has a specialized 
root system: Its apex central root dies off at the permafrost bor­
der, and a root system develops in the upper soil layers. The 
larch is vulnerable to damage by fires and insects, which may 
occur more frequently under global warming. Increased steppe 
area also may be expected in the southern part of eastern 
Siberia (Kobak et al., 1996).
The biomass densities of larch (Larix sibirica), scotch pine 
(Pinus silvestris), Siberian pine (Pinus sibirica), and birch 
(Betula platyphylla) are projected to decrease by 27.7, 4.3,
28.5, and 2.6 t/ha, respectively, under a 2хС0г equilibrium 
scenario (Ulziisaikhan, 1996). Such decreases seem to be 
caused by warming air temperature and reduced rainfall during 
the summer season. Gobi and steppe areas in Mongolia would 
therefore expand.
The numbers of all known and endemic species of mammals, 
birds, and flowering plants in Temperate Asia are shown in
Temperate Asia
365
Table 10-3. Existing factors causing the loss of biodiversity 
include natural factors, such as storms and floods; population 
pressure; soil erosion and desertification; deforestation and 
timber cutting; and overcollection of wild plant resources 
(Davis et ai., 1995; Heywood, 1995). Although global warm­
ing will play an important role in future changes in biodiversi­
ty, human influences also may have the potential to affect the 
climate system (Mooney et al., 1995). Such influences have 
taken the form of rapid, large, and frequent changes in land and 
resource use; increased frequency of biotic invasions; reduc­
tions in species numbers; creation of novel stresses; and the 
potential for change in the climate system.
Climate change may affect the biodiversity in boreal forests of 
Temperate Asia through a myriad of processes and effects: 
local mortality of boreal species and replacement by northern 
hardwoods or prairies, depending on locale and soil type; 
migration of boreal species northward and coastward, also 
depending on locale and soil type; increased probability of fire; 
increased or decreased soil nutrient availability, depending on 
permafrost, soil water-holding capability, and locale; increased 
emissions of greenhouse gases— particularly methane— from 
wetlands; and increased probability of outbreaks of pests, par­
ticularly insects, to drought-stressed trees (Pastor et ai., 1996).
Changes in local vegetation zones as a result of global warm­
ing could be important in marginal areas of the region. For 
example, in the Kamtchatka Peninsula, five ecological zones 
may be classified (Kojima, 1992): the Larix Kamtchatka zone, 
the Picea ajanensis zone, the Betuia ermanii zone, the Pinus 
pumiia zone, and the alpine tundra zone. These zones coincide 
with the division by continentality (or oceanity) defined by 
types of seasonal change, annual range, and other characteris­
tics of air temperature. The first three zones are boreal forest, 
under three different climate types: subhumid continental, 
humid continental, and superhumid maritime, respectively. 
The fourth zone is subalpine, corresponding to a humid mar­
itime climate zone. Under global warming, the most vulnera­
ble region would be the Larix Kamtchatka zone because of the 
increasing aridity of soils or increasing frequency of forest 
fires. Major alterations in vegetation could be expected, espe­
cially in the mountains of the northern boreal subzone and the 
subarctic forest-tundra ecotone in northeast Siberia. In the
middle and southern boreal subzones, vegetation changes may 
be more limited because of more-resistant species interaction 
in the forest communities of the continental area and the iso­
lated islands of the Kuril, Shantar, and Kommander groups 
(Grishin, 1995).
Plant phenology is an important indicator of vegetation 
change. It also is quite useful and necessary for farmers of 
intensively cultivated small-hold rice fields in this region 
because their cultivation calendar depends on the year-to-year 
change of seasons, which is reflected in local plant phenology. 
For example, the flowering of cherry blossoms in spring begins 
about 3-4 days earlier per 1°C increase in the mean tempera­
ture in March (Yoshino and Ono, 1996). Leaf-color-change 
dates of Ginko biioba and Acer paimatum in autumn are 
delayed for 2-7 days per 1°C increase in monthly mean tem­
perature (Kai et ai., 1996).
10.2.1.2. Deserts and Desertification
Cold deserts and semi-deserts are widespread in west-central 
Temperate Asia. With projected shifts to warmer and drier con­
ditions in Mongolia, the Gobi would change to warm temper­
ate desert scrub, and the area of cool temperate desert scrub 
would expand to the Khangai mountains, supplanting forest 
areas (Ulziisaikhan, 1996). At the same time, low- and midland 
parts of central Asia are likely to change gradually into a more 
arid interior desert as the disappearance of mountain glaciers 
reduces the volume of summer runoff. Projection of potential 
changes in the total extent of cool semi-deserts varies among 
models: Whereas BIOME 1.1 suggests an almost 50% reduc­
tion in its extent, IMAGE 2.0 projects no change. However, 
desertification arises from adverse climatic conditions and 
from human abuse of the land; the latter can accelerate the 
desertification process (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 2.6).
Evapotranspiration rates over the grasslands in inner Mongolia 
of China are two to three times higher in midsummer than in 
spring or autumn, and the heat budget of the grassland under 
such a desertification process is close to that of a sand dune 
(Harazono et ai., 1993). In northwestern China, the number of 
days each year when windstorms (greater than 17.2 m/sec)
Tabie 10-3: Number o f species (all known and endemic) o f mammals, birds, and plants in Temperate Asia, 1990s.
Country or Regioni
Mammals
Known (All) 
Endemic
Birds
Known (All)
Endemic
Flowering Plants
Known (All) 
Endemic
China
394
77
1,244
67
30,000
18,000
Japan
132
38
583
2 1
4,700
2 , 0 0 0
Korea, Dem People’s Rep
---
0
390
0
2,898
107
Kore, Rep
49
0
372
0
2,898
224
Mongolia
134
0
290
0
2,272
229
Source: World Conservation Monitoring Center.
'Data not available for Siberia and Taiwan.
366
Temperate Asia
occur averages 20-40 days in arid regions and 10-25 days in 
semi-arid regions— but reaches more than 1 0 0  days in areas 
most affected (Xia, 1993; Zhao, 1996). These numbers are 
expected to increase under global warming because dryer and 
stronger-wind conditions are expected, resulting in accelerated 
soil degradation.
10.2.1.3. Lakes, Streams, and Wetlands
Significant shortening of the duration of ice cover in lakes is 
expected. Enhanced evaporation, as well as ground thaw, 
would cause some arctic lakes to disappear. Lakes in northern 
latitudes may change from a vertically homogeneous state to a 
stratified state (vice versa for those in southerly areas). These 
changes in mixing regimes are likely to have very important 
effects on biota (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.4).
Lake water levels are very sensitive to climate. In many 
regions, lake levels are likely to decline or fluctuate more 
widely because of changes in precipitation or increases in 
évapotranspiration. In lakes experiencing declines or rapid 
changes in water level, vegetation and habitat characteristics of 
highly productive inshore littoral areas may change signifi­
cantly— ^with profound but highly lake-specific effects on food 
webs and productivity. Water-level declines in lakes with 
extensive bordering wetlands are likely to reduce lake produc­
tivity and populations of fish and invertebrates dependent on 
these wetlands for spawning and nursery grounds (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Sections 10.5.2 and 10.6.2).
Climate change would result in a wide range of changes in the 
hydrological regimes of streams, with associated impacts on 
their ecosystems. For snowmelt streams, for example, a shift 
toward more rainfall and less snowfall in winter would result 
in a shift of the seasonality of stream discharge regimes toward 
higher winter flows and lower spring and summer flows. These 
changes may alter the timing of biogeochemical fluxes that 
could produce very important, but highly uncertain, effects on 
the biota in streams, lakes, and estuaries (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 10.3.5).
Model results based on six different climate change scenarios 
(precipitation increasing or decreasing by 1 0 % and tempera­
ture increasing 1°C, 2°C, and 3°C) suggest that the areal extent 
of herbaceous wetlands in eastern China would decline as a 
result of reductions in total rainfall and increases in évapotran­
spiration (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 6.3.3).
Local extinctions and extirpations of cold-water and cool- 
water species of fish and invertebrates may be expected as a 
consequence of warming in the temperate zone. This effect will 
be most pronounced in shallow lakes, streams, and rivers in 
which appropriate thermal réfugia (well-oxygenated deep 
waters, groundwater vents, access to higher elevations) are not 
available. Although biodiversity theoretically should increase 
with warming— ^particularly at mid- and high latitudes— ini­
tially there may be a loss in total diversity in cool temperate
and boreal regions, if northward migration of warm-water 
species cannot keep pace with the rate of loss of cool-water and 
cold-water species due to limitations on dispersal (physiologi­
cal limitations, lack of north-south corridors) and genetic adap­
tation (IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 10.6.1 and 10.6.3).
Productivity and biodiversity in streams and rivers will likely 
be reduced in humid parts of Temperate Asia, which are 
expected to experience reductions in total rainfall and/or 
increases in évapotranspiration that produce longer, more 
severe droughts during the warm season. Declines in biodiver­
sity would result from severe water quality deterioration (e.g., 
low dissolved oxygen levels, high concentrations of toxic sub­
stances, high temperatures) during extended low-flow periods 
in the summer, as well as from drying of previously perennial 
streams. These effects will be exacerbated in systems that are 
strongly affected by human activities (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Sections 10.3.7, 10.4.2, 10.6.2, and 10.6.4).
10.2.1.4. Mountain Regions
Subalpine conifers may expand into alpine regions under the 
influence of global warming— though this expansion would 
not disturb the upper vegetation zone, which already is occu­
pied by well-developed creeping pine (Pinus pumila) scrub 
(Omasa et al., 1996). Similarly, the distribution area of beech 
(Fagus crenata) on the Sea of Japan (East Sea) side of Honshu 
could shift upwards on the mountain slopes, but its extent will 
be affected by snow-cover status, which provides different 
vegetation dynamics.
The impacts of global warming on mountain regions in 
Temperate Asia are summarized in Table 10-4.
10.2.1.5. Cryosphere
If projections of climate change for the year 2050 (UKM0-X5) 
are realized, a number of impacts on the cryosphere are likely. 
Projected warming of the climate would reduce the area and 
volume of the cryosphere. This reduction would have signifi­
cant impacts on related ecosystems, people, and their liveli­
hoods. There could be pronounced reductions in seasonal 
snow, permafrost, glaciers, and periglacial belts, with a corre­
sponding shift in landscape processes. Pronounced alterations 
in glacier-melt runoff also are likely as the climate changes 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4).
Snow cover in the temperate regions ranges from a few meters 
to a few centimeters, but the snow often is close to its melting 
point; consequently, continental and alpine snow covers are very 
sensitive to climate. As warming occurs for many Asian moun­
tains, there is a tendency for rainfall to occur at the expense of 
snowfall, although the extent of this shift depends on location. 
Less snow will accumulate at low elevations, although there may 
be more snow above the freezing level as a result of increased 
precipitation (IPCC 1996, WG II, Sections 7.3.1 and 7.4.1).
Temperate Asia
Table 10-4: Possible impacts o f global warming on mountain regions in Temperate Asia.
367
Field
Impacts
References
Physical
System
Hydrology
a) Increase in air temperature and decrease in precipitation in summer
b) Increase in rate of rainfah/snow and decrease in depth and duration of snow 
accumulation
c) Upward shift of maximum precipitation zone on mountain slopes
Nakatsugawa, 
1995; IPCC 1996, 
WG П, Chapter 10
Cryosphere
a) Direct effect of elevated temperature
b) Increasing density of snow accumulation and longer snow-free duration
EPCC1996,WGn, 
Chapter 7
Abnormal
Weather
a) Significant increase in frequency of strong winds and torrential rams
b) Warm and dry spring and summer, causing inaeased fire risk
Nakashizuka and 
lida, 1995; IPCC 
1996, WGft, 
Chapters 1 and 12
Topographical
Process
a) Increase in precipitation maximum over mountain slopes, causing increased 
landshde, mud flow, soil erosion, groundwater pressure, etc.
b) Thawing of permafrost, causing increased grade and frequency of landslide
IPCC 1996, WGft, 
Chapters 5 and 7
Biological
World/
Vegetation
a) Change of main species of mountain plants and animals, causmg inaeased stress on 
mountain ecosystems
b) Easier upward shift of main species of mountain plants, due to short shift distance 
and less stress of adaptation to light condition within shift elevation
c) Effects of changing snow accumulation on plants and animals
Mooney et al, 
1995; IPCC 1996, 
WGII, Chapter5
Socio-
Economic
System
Mountain
Agriculture
a) Decrease in existing crops
b) Change of cultivation calendar along mountain slopes
IPCC 1996, WGft, 
Chapters 5 and 13
Hydrological
Power
a) Change of available water power due to seasonal change of hydrology
b) Increased demand for electric power in summer and decreased demand in winter
IPCC 1996, WGft, 
Chapter 10
Forestry
a) Change of economically predominant species
b) Inaeased damage by wildfire, pests, virus, disease, etc.
Kojima, 1992; 
Grishin, 1995; 
Mooney era/., 
1995; Nakashizuka 
and lida, 1995; 
IPCC 1996, WGft, 
Chapters 1 and 12
Tourism
a) Change of elements dominating mountain landscape
b) Deaeased length of skiing season
IPCC 1996, W Gn, 
Chapter 11
Transportation
a) Increased accessibility due to amount and period of snow accumulation in winter
b) Possibility of accidents and damages by freezing for traffic and transmission systems
IPCC 1996, WGft, 
Chapter 11
Glaciers are more sensitive to changes in temperature than to 
any other climatic element. For Asian glaciers, where precipi­
tation occurs mainly during the summer monsoon season, 
temperature rise has a double effect. The first effect is an 
increase in the absorption of solar radiation caused by a low­
ering of the surface albedo, as snowfall is converted to rain­
fall. The second effect is an increase in energy exchange 
between the atmosphere and the glacier surface (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 7.3.1). Both effects lead to an increase in 
glacial melting.
Empirical and energy-balance models indicate that a large frac­
tion (about one-third to one-half) of the world’s existing moun­
tain glacier mass could disappear with anticipated warming 
over the next 100 years. By 2050, up to a quarter of mountain 
glacier mass may have melted. However, the largest alpine 
glaciers— such as those found in the Pamirs, the Tien Shan, and 
the Himalayas— are expected to continue to exist into the 22nd 
century. Other studies are based on calculations of ablation and 
equilibrium-line altitude, according to given climatic scenar­
ios. Ablation would intensify in central Asia with climate
368
Temperate Asia
warming because conditions there could become even more 
continental (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.2).
The broad sensitivity of permafrost to past climate change is 
well documented in Siberia and China. There would be a pole­
ward shift of permafrost zones, although deep-seated, ice-rich 
permafrost will be resistant to changes. Permafrost in northeast 
China is expected to disappear if temperature increases by 2°C 
or more. Over the Qing-Zang plateau, estimates of climate 
change impacts on permafrost range from complete disappear­
ance for a temperature increase of 2°C to the raising of its ele­
vation limit to 4,600 m for a warming of 3°C (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Sections 7.3.3 and 7.4.3).
10.2.2. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
10.2.2.1. Hydrological Systems
Global warming affects stream hydrology in many ways. In 
mid- and high-latitude regions— ^where warmer temperatures 
and a shift toward more rainfall and less snowfall in winter are 
projected— the seasonality of discharge regimes of snowmelt 
streams would shift toward higher winter flows and lower 
spring and summer flows. In semi-arid regions, streams and 
rivers may experience large increases in hydrological variabil­
ity, with more frequent and larger floods with high sediment 
loads and longer droughts. In humid regions, streams and 
rivers are likely to experience reductions in total rainfall and/or 
increases in évapotranspiration that produce longer, more 
severe droughts during the warm season (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Sections 10.3.5,10.3.7, and 10.4.2).
In mountain regions, glaciers will provide extra runoff as the ice 
disappears. In general, the extra runoff would persist for a few 
decades; in areas with very large glaciers, it may last for a centu­
ry or more. By 2050, the volume of ranoff from glaciers in cen­
tral Asia is projected to increase threefold. Tentative estimates 
have been made for central Asia based on mass balances from a 
small number of Tien Shan glaciers for the period 1959-1992. 
Extrapolation to the whole area of central Asia suggests that its 
glacier mass may have decreased by 804 km^ over that time, rep­
resenting a 15% increase in glacial ranoff. Eventually, however, 
glacial ranoff will taper off or even cease. Projected glacier ranoff 
in 2 1 0 0  is about 6 8  km^/yr, compared with the present value of 
98 km3/yr (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 7.4.2).
a warmer winter would tend to promote thermal breakup, this 
effect might be counteracted to some degree by the earlier tim­
ing of the event, reducing breakup severity (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 7.4.4).
Widespread loss of permafrost over extensive continental and 
mountain areas would trigger erosion or subsidence of ice-rich 
landscapes and change hydrological processes. Revegetation 
of terrain following deglaciation is slow in high-mountain 
areas. This lag leaves morainic deposits unprotected against 
erosion for extended periods (decades to centuries), which can 
result in increased sediment loads in alpine rivers and acceler­
ated sedimentation in lakes and artificial reservoirs at high alti­
tudes. On slopes steeper than about 25-30 degrees, stability 
problems such as debris flows will develop in freshly exposed 
or thawing nonconsolidated sediments (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 7.4.3 and Box 7-2).
10.2.2.2. Water Supply
Overall, most 2хС0г equilibrium scenario simulations show a 
decrease in water supplies throughout Temperate Asia, except 
in a few river basins. Warmer winters may affect water bal­
ances because water demands are higher in spring and summer. 
Glacial melt may lead to nonsustainable supplies of surface 
water (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 14).
To balance water supply with water demand, more efficient 
water management is likely to be the approach taken by Japan. 
In other parts of Temperate Asia, water resource development 
will remain important. There, the central adaptation issue is 
how climate change might affect the design of new water 
resource infrastructure.
Because many river basins are international, climate change 
would exacerbate current international conflicts over water use 
and potentially cause new conflicts (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 14.2.3). Clearly, multiple-stress impact studies on 
water resources in international river basins are needed.
Table 10-5: Impact o f climate change on annual runoff of 
seven river basins in China, in % change o f annual runoff 
(Liu, 1997).
General Circulation Model
Many rivers within temperate regions would tend to become
1 1  NLi
UKMO-H3
OSU-Bl
GISS-Gl
ice-free or develop only intermittent or partial ice coverage. Ice
growth and thickness would be reduced. In colder regions, the
Dongjiang
0.4
-3.1
8 . 1
-4.9
present ice season could be shortened by up to a month by 2050.
Hangjiang
-7.7
-2 . 6
4.4
-0.7
Warmer winters would cause more midwinter breakups as rapid
Huaihe
-14.7
-6.3
7.8
-3.9
snowmelt, initiated particularly by rain-on-snow events.
Huanghe
-7.2
-4.6
-2 . 6
4.0
became more common. Warmer spring air temperatures may
Haihe
-16.0
7.2
1 . 0
-7.3
affect breakup severity, but the results would be highly site-
Llaohe
-14.0
17.4
-2.3
5.9
specific because breakup is the result of a complex balance
Songhuajiang
3.4
1 2 . 1
-7.5
3.8
between downstream resistance (ice strength and thickness) and
upstream forces (flood wave). Although thinner ice produced by 
^L. Gates, pers. comm.
Table 10-5 shows the impacts of climate change on the annual 
runoff of seven river basins in China, located in different cli­
mate zones from south to north. For all four GCMs, projected 
changes in runoff are the result mainly of changes in precipita­
tion in spring, summer, and autumn because of the strong influ­
ence of the monsoon climate (Liu, 1997).
The model results from the four GCMs suggest that the most 
sensitive and vulnerable areas to climate change would be in 
the northern part of China:
Within climatic regions, runoff is likely to be more sen­
sitive to climate change in the plains than in mountain 
areas.
• 
In the Huaihe River basin and the area to its north, 
reduced runoff would occur mainly in the spring, sum­
mer, and autumn (most significantly in the summer as a 
result of high temperatures and less rainfall), which 
may unfavorably affect reservoir storage.
For the Songhuajiang River, Liaohe River, Haihe River, 
upper reach of the Yellow River, Huaihe River, and 
Dongjiang River, increases in runoff would occur 
mainly in the spring, summer, and autumn, necessitat­
ing greater flood control.
• 
In moderately and extremely dry years, the projected 
potential water deficiency caused by climate change in 
the Huaihe River basin and the area to its north—  
although less than that caused by population growth 
and economic development— may seriously exacer­
bate existing water shortages and thus badly affect 
socioeconomic development in these areas.
• 
Single isolated reservoir systems are less adaptable 
than integrated multiple reservoir systems to reduced 
water resources.
Adaptation strategies for water-resource management in China 
could include:
• 
Strengthening water-resource management infrastructure
• 
Increasing investment in water-saving technology and 
enhancing public consciousness of water saving 
Strengthening the management of existing water projects 
Strengthening protection of water sources and develop­
ing new water sources
Implementing step-by-step interbasin water-transfer 
projects
Promoting water conservation and establishing water 
statutes
Formulating contingent response measures for extraor­
dinary conditions.
The most critical area of uncertainty is the lack of credible pro­
jections of the regional climate in Temperate Asia. In particu­
lar, the effect of climate change on the Asian monsoon or the 
ENSO phenomenon is unknown. Presently, there are two dia­
metrically opposite projections: one showing a strengthening
Temperate Asia
10.2.2.3. Water Resources in China
369
and the other a weakening of the Asian monsoon, which would 
result in completely opposite impacts on hydrology and water 
resources. Other uncertainties are introduced in the downscal­
ing of precipitation from the GCM grid scale to the scale of 
hydrological models for river basins, through the stochastic or 
interpolation method. There also is considerable uncertainty in 
the translation of climate change into hydrological effects 
through hydrological models: The parameters in hydrological 
models, which are calibrated by historical data, are not trans­
ferable either geographically or in terms of a changing envi­
ronment. In addition, the impact of climate change on évapo­
transpiration and groundwater—^both of which are important 
for long-term projections of water resources— so far cannot be 
estimated appropriately.
Research and monitoring needs include projection of regional 
climate scenarios with high spatial and temporal resolution, 
improved hydrological models with appropriate land surface 
parameters under nonstationary climatic conditions. Integrated 
impact studies that consider different sectors and their respons­
es to adaptation strategies, and enhanced hydrological moni­
toring networks.
10.2.3. 
Food and Fiber Production
10.2.3.1. Agriculture
Table 10-6 shows major rice, wheat, maize, and soybean pro­
duction in the countries of Temperate Asia (except Siberia) for 
1990, 1993, and 1996. The increasing production of wheat, 
maize, and soybeans in China reflects better management prac­
tices, particularly in the northeast provinces. Rice production 
in the whole region seems to have leveled off. The drop in rice 
production in 1993 reflects the anomalously cool and dry sum­
mer of that year (Yoshino, 1997; see also Annex A).
Agricultural yields estimated using different GCMs are shown 
in Table 10-7; the impacts clearly vary widely. Nevertheless, 
possible large negative impacts on rice production as a result of 
climate change would be of concern in the face of expected 
population increases. In China, across different scenarios and 
different sites, yield changes for several crops by 2050 are pro­
jected to be -78% to +15% for rice, -21% to +55% for wheat, 
and -19% to +5% for maize. An increase in productivity may 
occur if the positive effects of CO 2  on crop growth are consid­
ered, but the magnitude of the fertilization effect remains 
uncertain.
Six areas are most likely to be negatively affected by climate 
change: the area around the Great Wall lying southeast of the 
transition belt between crop agriculture and animal husbandry; 
the Huang-Hai Plains, where dryland crops like wheat, cotton, 
corn, and fruit trees are grown; the area north of Huaihe River—  
including east Shandong— that lies along the south edge of the 
temperate crop zone; the central and southern areas of Yunnan 
plateau; the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River; and 
the Loess plateau. Except for the Yunnan plateau, these areas
Table 10-6: Major production o f rice, wheat, and maize (million tons) in Temperate Asia for 1990, 1993, and 1996.
5 70 
Temperate Asia
China
Japan
Korea,
Dem People’s Rep
Korea, Rep
Mongolia
Rice
1990
1993
1996
191.59
179.79
190.10
13.12
9.79
13.00
3.08
2.30
2.80
7.72
6.51
6.28
Wheat
1990
1993
1996
98.23
106.39
109.01
0.95
0.64
0.55
0.12
0.12
0.10
0.60
0.45
0.26
Maize
1990
1993
1996
Soybean
1990
1993
1996
97.21
103.11
117.35
11.08
15.32
13.31
0.22
0.10
0.12
2.38
1.96
2.00
0.46
0.38
0.40
0.12
0.08
0.07
0.23
0.17
0.16
Source: FAO, 1997.
would be at heightened risk of drought and would suffer poten­
tial increases in soil erosion. The Yunnan plateau, with general­
ly abundant rainfall, would be subject to alternating drought and 
waterlogging, as well as to cold spells, and hence would also 
suffer yield losses (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.3).
Studies for Japan indicate that the positive effects of CO 2  on 
rice yields generally would more than offset negative climatic 
effects in the central and northern areas. However, in southwest 
Japan, particularly in Kyushu, the effects on rice yields, on bal­
ance, would be negative (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.3).
GISS-Gl and GFDL-A3 GCMs under 2 xC 0 2  equilibrium sce­
narios suggest that the production of spring wheat in Mongolia 
could be reduced significantly because of higher évapotranspi­
ration. Adaptive measures— such as changing planting dates, 
using different varieties of spring wheat, or applying the ideal 
amount of nitrogen fertilizer at the optimum time— are poten­
tial responses that could modify these effects (Bayasgalan et 
al., 1996). Climate change is projected to have favorable 
impacts on agriculture in the northern areas of Siberia and to 
cause a general northward shift of crop zones. Grain produc­
tion in the steppes of southwestern Siberia is projected to fall 
by about 20% as the result of a more arid climate. These pro­
jections could change substantially if market reforms succeed 
in improving the efficiency and productivity of agriculture 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.5).
For mountain regions in China, climatic warming would, in 
general, increase agricultural productivity— partly as a result
of reduced periods of low temperature and partly because of 
the expansion of arable lands. Studies using simple empirical 
indices show that a warming of 1°C in mean temperature in the 
mountain regions of southwest China would cause a 170-m 
shift in the upper boundary for growing grain. There is uncer­
tainty, however, related to the expansion of crop areas because 
soil is a very important limiting factor for grain production. In 
addition, the specific crop varieties that are used in mountain 
agriculture may need to be altered to keep up with global 
warming. In Japan, for example, although current varieties of 
rice respond positively only to small temperature increments, 
late-maturing varieties are likely to adapt well under much 
warmer conditions. For such crop varieties, under a tempera­
ture rise of 3°C, most of the land below 500 m on Hokkaido 
and up to 600 m on Tohoku could become viable for agricul­
ture (Yoshino et a l, 1987).
Estimated net economic welfare impacts of climate change for 
three GCMs under 2хСОз equilibrium scenarios are shown in 
Table 10-8. According to the GFDL-A2 and UKM0-H3 
GCM s, all countries/regions would experience negative 
impacts except the mainland of China. On the other hand, the 
GISS-Gl GCM estimated positive impacts for all countries 
except the Republic of Korea if no adaptation options were 
pursued. In China, climate change would occur against a 
steadily increasing demand for food, which is expected to con­
tinue through at least 2050. The increased annual cost of gov­
ernment investment only (excluding farm ers’ additional costs) 
in agriculture in response to climate change through 2050 was 
estimated at US$3.48 billion (17% of the cost of government
Temperate Asia
Table 10-7: Agricultural yield impact o f selected climate change studies.
371
Country/Region
Rice
China
China
China
China2
China
China
Japan
Japan
Japan
Japan
Korea, Rep 
Korea, Rep 
Taiwan
Wheat
China
China
Japan
Mongolia
Russia^
Yield Impact (%)
-6
-11 to -7 
-78' to - 6  
-37 to +15 
-18 to -4 
- 2 1  to 0  
+ 1 0  
- 1 1  to + 1 2  
-45 to +30 
-28 to + 1 0  
-37 to +16 
-40 
+ 2  to +28
-21 to +55 
-41 to + 8  
-67 to -19 
-19 to +41
Direct COj Effect
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Author(s)
Reference'*
Tao 
Zhang 
Jin et al.
Jin et al. 
Matthews et al. 
Lin
Sugihara
Seino
Horie
Matthews et al.
Yun
Oh
Matthews et al.
Tao
Lin
Seino
Lin
Menzhulin and Koval
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
3
4 
1
Maize
China
China
Japan
Pasture
Mongolia
-4 to +1 
-19 to +5 
-31 to +51
-40 to +25
Yes
No
Yes
No
Tao
Lin
Seino
Bolortsetseg et al.
'This large negative percentage is a result of the modeled result at a single site in southwest China.
2por irrigated rice, 
including European Russia.
“Sources: (1) IPCC 1996, WG II, Table 13-6; (2) Lin, 1996; (3) Yun, 1990; (4) Oh, 1995; (5) IPCC 1996, WG II, Table 13-8; and 
(6) Bolortsetseg and Tuvaansuren, 1996.
investment in agriculture in 1990) (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 
13.6.3).
10.2.3.2. Fisheries
Even without major changes in atmospheric and oceanic circula­
tion, local shifts in centers of production and mixes of species in 
marine and fresh waters are expected as ecosystems are displaced 
geographically and changed internally. The relocation of popula­
tions will depend on the presence of properties in changing envi­
ronments to shelter all stages of the life cycle of a species. Under 
climatic warming, positive effects for saltwater fisheries— such 
as longer growing seasons, lower natural winter mortality, and 
faster growth rates in higher latitudes— may be offset by nega­
tive factors such as the alteration of established reproductive pat­
terns, migration routes, and ecosystem relationships. Changes in
abundance are likely to be more pronounced near major ecosys­
tem boundaries. The rate of climate change may prove to be a 
major determinant of the abundance and distribution of new pop­
ulations. Rapid change from physical forcing usually will favor 
production of smaller, low-priced, opportunistic species that dis­
charge large numbers of eggs over long periods. Regionally, 
gains or losses in freshwater fisheries will depend on changes in 
the amount and timing of precipitation, on temperatures, and on 
species tolerances. For example, increased rainfall during a short­
er period in winter could lead to reduced summer levels of river 
flows, lakes, and wetlands— and thus to reductions in freshwater 
fisheries. Marine stocks that reproduce in freshwater (e.g., 
salmon) or require reduced estuarine salinity will be similarly 
affected (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 6  Executive Summary).
Aquaculture is particularly important to Temperate Asia. In 
1994, the world’s aquaculture production was about 18.6 million
372
Temperate Asia
Table 10-8: Estimated net economic welfare impacts o f climate change projected by three GCMs under 2xC02 equilibrium 
scenarios (millions o f 1989 $US; negative numbers in parentheses).
G ISS-G l
GFDL-A2
UKMO-H3
Country or Region
No Adaptation
Adaptation
No Adaptation
Adaptation
No Adaptation
Adaptation
Mainland China
1,039
2,535
80
2,199
(275)
3,183
Other East Asia
48
157
(147)
(34)
(717)
(411)
Japan
1,290
2,170
(2,016)
(501)
(7,839)
(4,686)
South Korea
(176)
174
(658)
(166)
(2,185)
(1Д69)
Former Soviet Union
1,367
1,859
(1,502)
(293)
(10,403)
(5,020)
Taiwan
69
271
(271)
(7)
(1,340)
(671)
Source: Reilly et al., 1993.
Note: Economic model simulations are based on yield shocks as estimated by Rosenzweig and Parry (1994). Economic impacts are measured 
as combined consumer and producer surplus and government budget changes.
tons (excluding seaweed), of which Temperate Asia accounted 
for 64.7% and China alone accounted for 57.2% (FAO, 1996a). 
With seaweeds included, the world’s production in 1994 was
25.4 million tons, and the shares of Temperate Asia and China 
were 70.3% and 60.4%, respectively. During the period from 
1984 to 1994, aquaculture in Temperate Asia demonstrated a 
yearly growth rate of 10% in volume and 11% in value (FAO, 
1996b). Climate change impacts generally will be positive 
through faster growth, lower winter mortality rates, reduced ice 
cover, and reduced energy costs as a result of expanded regions 
of warmer water. Cultivation of warm-water species also may 
expand. Warming will require greater attention to possible oxy­
gen depletion, fish diseases, and introduction of unwanted 
species (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 16.2.3).
10.2.3.3. Production Forestry
Projections for 2010 indicate that the need for industrial round- 
wood could increase 38% (southern Temperate Asia) to 96% 
(eastern Temperate Asia). These requirements may result in seri­
ous shortages of boreal industrial roundwood, placing further 
stress on boreal forests (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 15.4.3).
10.2.4. 
Coastal Systems
10.2.4.1. Sea-Level Rise
Current best estimates for sea-level rise— 1.0-2.5 mm/yr—  
represent a rate two to five times higher than that experienced 
in the past 100 years. Even with assumed stabilization of glob­
al greenhouse gas emissions, sea level is projected to contin­
ue to rise beyond the year 2 1 0 0  because of lags in climate 
response. Regional differences will exist as a result of wind 
and atmospheric pressure patterns, regional ocean density dif­
ferences, and oceanic circulation. For Temperate Asia, sea- 
level rise is projected to be slightly below the global mean 
value around the Okhotsk Sea and along the coasts south of 
about 30°N and slightly above the mean elsewhere (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 9.3.1).
Along most of the continental coast, relative sea level (i.e., sea 
level in relation to land) is an important factor for coastal envi­
ronments. Deltaic coasts in China are facing severe problems 
of relative sea-level rise as a consequence of tectonically and 
anthropogenically induced land subsidence. Sea-level rise 
related to global warming will exacerbate these problems. In 
addition, saltwater intrusion problems will become more seri­
ous with sea-level rise in deltaic regions and coastal plains 
(IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 9.4.2).
Box 10-2. Sea-Level Rise 
at M ajor Deltas of China (ESD-CAS, 1994)
The Old Huanghe (Yellow River) delta, the Changjiang 
(Yangtze River) delta, and the Zhujiang (Pearl River) 
delta are major areas of economic activity in China. The 
metropolises of Tianjin, Shanghai, and Guangzhou 
(Canton) are located within these three deltas, respec­
tively. The three deltas are located in regions with tec­
tonic subsidence rates of about 2-3 mm/yr, 1-2 mm/yr, 
and 1
- 2  mm/yr, respectively (although hilly lands in the 
Zhujiang delta have a tectonic uplifting rate of 1 
mm/yr). The Old Huanghe delta and the Changjiang 
delta have experienced severe land subsidence problems 
in the past as a result of groundwater extraction. Recent 
efforts to mitigate this problem have been successful in 
reducing the subsidence rate. It is estimated that these 
rates can be controlled within the range of 6
- 1
0  mm/yr 
for the Old Huanghe delta and 3-5 mm/yr for the 
Changjiang delta. In the Zhujiang delta, natural progra­
dation of the coast and active land reclamation activities 
have resulted in a 0.5-1 mm/yr sea-level rise in the dis­
tributaries in the estuarine area— the same order of mag­
nitude as the projected value due to climate change. This 
rate is expected to continue for some time. In the next 
50 years, therefore, the expected eustatic sea-level rise 
due to climate change will not be a major factor in rela­
tive sea-level rise for the Old Huanghe and Changjiang 
deltas, although it may be for the Zhujiang delta.
Tokyo, Osaka, and Nagoya are located in the coastal zone, and 
together they account for more than 50% of Japan’s industrial 
production. In these metropolitan areas, about 860 km2 of 
coastal land— an area supporting 2  million people and with 
physical assets worth $450 billion (1985 dollars)— already are 
below mean high-water level. With a 1-m rise in mean sea 
level, this area would expand by a factor of 2.7 to embrace 4.1 
million people and assets worth $908 billion. The same sea- 
level rise would expand the flood-prone area from 6,270 km 2  
to 8,900 km2. The cost of adjusting existing protection mea­
sures has been estimated at about $80 billion (IPCC 1996, WG 
III, Section 6.5.2).
One of the potential threats that sea-level rise poses to the 
coastal environment is exacerbated beach erosion. Sandy 
beaches occupy 20-25%  of the total length of the Japanese 
coast. About 120 km2 of these beaches have been eroded over 
the past 70 years. According to Braun’s Rule, an additional 118 
km2 of beaches— 57% of the remaining sandy beaches in Japan 
today— ^would disappear with a 30-cm sea-level rise. This per­
centage would increase to 82% or 90% if the sea level rose by 
65 cm or 100 cm, respectively (Mimura, 1995).
Temperate Asia experiences tropical cyclones every year; these 
storms inundate and exacerbate flood situations in coastal 
areas, eroding and restructuring coastal formations. There is no 
conclusive evidence that the frequency or intensity of tropical 
cyclones would change as a result of climate change or that a 
systematic shift in their tracks would occur (IPCC 1996, WG 
II, Section 9.3.2). However, with the projected sea-level rise, 
even if the frequency and severity of storms remain unchanged 
in the future, storm surge could still present an increased haz­
ard. It should be pointed out that China and other countries of 
the region have a long history of experience in the defense 
against sea encroachment, through the construction of dikes, 
seawalls, and other structures (ESD-CAS, 1994).
Temperate Asia
10.2.4.2. Coastal Flooding and Inundation
10.2.4.3. Integrated Coastal Zone Management
Coastal oceans provide rich living and nonliving resources; 
serve as media for transportation and recreation; and receive, 
dilute, and transform massive quantities of wastes from human 
activities on land. Coastal oceans already are under stress as a 
result of a combination of factors (e.g., increased population 
pressure, habitat destruction, increased land-based pollutant 
loads, and increased nutrient inputs from rivers). The effects of 
climate change therefore will constitute additional— largely 
adverse— series of impacts on an already overstressed 
resource, with potential for synergistic relationships among 
stresses (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 8.2.2).
The most effective adaptation strategy would embrace the 
tenets of integrated coastal zone management (ICZM). ICZM 
IS an iterative, evolutionary, and continuous process. It 
involves comprehensive assessment, setting of objectives, and
373
planning and management of coastal systems and resources; it 
takes into account traditional, cultural, and historical perspec­
tives, as well as conflicting interests and uses (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Box 9.5). At present, implementation of ICZM in 
Temperate Asia is in its exploratory phase; further studies are 
needed.
10.2.5. 
H um an Settlements and Industry
10.2.5.1. Human Settlements
If future climates resemble those projected by GCMs, wetter 
coasts, drier midcontinent areas, and sea-level rise may cause 
the gravest effects of climate change through sudden human 
migration, as millions of people are displaced by shoreline ero­
sion, river and coastal flooding, or severe drought. For exam­
ple, agricultural settlements in China are projected to be sensi­
tive to drought conditions (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 12.4.2).
Climate change may affect the intensity or the probability of 
the occurrence of extreme weather events. The impact of 
extreme events on human settlements can be affected by the 
grade of the extreme event, the level of economic and tech­
nological development, and the extent of countermeasures 
taken. In Japan, for example, although the number of deaths 
is large for the more severe typhoons, such deaths have been 
declining since World War II (see Figure 10-3). This decline 
is thought to have occurred because of increasingly effective 
mitigation measures taken during the past 40 years. These 
measures include conservation of mountain slopes, rivers, 
and coasts; harmonization of institutions and laws related to 
disaster mitigation; preparation of systems for disaster pre­
vention, including better design; meteorological observation 
and information systems; promotion of people’s conscious­
ness with regard to preventing disasters; and development of 
communication systems for disaster occurrences. On the 
other hand, economic damages from typhoons have been ris­
ing in Japan during the same period because of the increasing 
values of properties along the coasts (IPCC 1996, WG II, 
Section 12.4.2).
In mountain lands and continental permafrost areas, cryos- 
pheric change could reduce slope stability and increase the 
incidence of natural hazards for people, buildings and other 
structures, pipelines, and communication links (IPCC 1996, 
WG II, Section 7.5).
During summer days, from the early morning to the time of 
maximum temperature, the temperature inside a big oasis in the 
arid regions of northwest China usually is 2-3°C lower than 
that outside the area; this gradient is called the “oasis effect” 
(Du and Maki, 1994; Yoshino and Liu, 1997). In the future, as 
the population increases in oases, so will the cultivated area 
and water consumption. This pattern could lower the moisture 
content in the oasis and hence weaken the oasis effect. Climate 
change thus could compound the hardship for human settle­
ments in the oases.
374
Temperate Asia
Figure 10-3: Change in numbers of deaths per typhoon in 
Japan during the past 70 years. Typhoon grade: I— ^weak; 
II— normal; III— strong; IV— stronger; V— ^violent; VI—  
super-violent (after IPCC 1996, WG II, Figure 12-2).
Ironically, some arid regions of northwest China also have 
been suffering from heavy rainfall and flood damages. In 
Xinjiang, during the period 1949-1990, about one-third of the 
total natural hazards and two-thirds of the total losses incurred 
by natural hazards were caused by floods (Yoshino and Liu,
1997). Under global warming, this tendency could be intensi­
fied because intense rainfall is likely to occur more frequently.
10.2.5.2. Industry
Power-related industries could be affected both negatively and 
positively by climate change. As a result of climate change, 
demand for electricity for cooling purposes will rise in the 
summer. In Japan, this demand could rise by 5% by 2050, with 
a 1 0 % increase in peak demand.
The rate of methane production in biogas generators increases at 
high temperatures and may be interrupted by low temperatures
in the winter, when heating of the digesters is required. 
Therefore, in north China, for example, global warming may 
lengthen the periods of high yields and extend the areas in which 
biogas can be produced without heating the digester. Reduction 
of water resources, however, could jeopardize hydroelectric 
energy supplies, and existing petroleum production and distrib­
ution systems in the tundra zone could be disrupted because of 
thawing of permafrost (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 11).
With climate warming, a longer shipping season— with signif­
icant cost savings in ice-breaking operations— is likely for 
rivers in northern Temperate Asia. The Arctic coast would have 
major periods during which coastal waters were open and nav­
igable. On the other hand, thawing induced by climate warm­
ing could result in serious disruptions and increased mainte­
nance costs for railways and highways through the permafrost 
zone from ground subsidence, side-slope slumpings, land­
slides, icings, and ice-mound growth. China, for example, has 
more than 3,000 km of railways and more than 13,000 km of 
highways in the permafrost zone that would be affected (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Sections 7.5.1 and 11.5).
10.2.6. 
H um an H ealth
10.2.6.1. Heat Stress
An increase in the frequency or severity of heat waves would 
cause an increase in (predominantly cardiorespiratory) illness 
and mortality. Although this increase in heat-related deaths 
would be partially offset by a reduction in cold-related deaths, 
there are insufficient data to quantify this trade-off. In addition, 
this balance would vary by location and according to adaptive 
responses (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 18 Executive Summary).
Based on data collected for persons in Shanghai aged over 65 
years for the period 1980-1989, the threshold temperature for 
heat-related mortality in summer is 34°C. Days with high after­
noon temperatures, low wind speeds, and high humidity were 
associated with the greatest mortality increase. The transient 
models (GFDL-X2, U KM 0-X6) estimate that, for the year 
2050, heat-related deaths in Shanghai would increase to 3.6-7.1 
times the present figure. Since the warming would be a gradual 
process, however, this increase could drop to 2.5-2.6 times the 
present figure if acclimatization of the population is taken into 
consideration. Climate change also may lead to more frequent 
occasions with both very hot weather and very high levels of air 
pollution. The interactive effects of both stresses on human 
health are not yet well understood (McMichael et al., 1996).
10.2.6.2. Infectious Diseases
Net climate change-related increases in the geographic distrib­
ution (elevation and latitude) of vector organisms of infectious 
diseases (e.g., malarial mosquitoes, schistosome-spreading 
snails) and changes in the life-cycle dynamics of vector and 
infective parasites would, in aggregate, increase the potential
Temperate Asia
375
transmission of many vector-borne diseases in Temperate Asia. 
10.3.1.1. Water Resources 
Increases in potential transmission areas for malaria, for exam­
ple, are projected to occur in temperate regions. However, 
actual climate-related increases in malaria incidence would 
occur primarily in tropical, subtropical, and less well protected 
temperate-zone populations that currently are at the margins of 
endemically infected areas. Some localized decreases also may 
occur (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 18 Executive Summary).
Water resources in north China are sensitive and vulnerable to 
climate change because;
Increases in non-vector-borne infectious diseases— such as 
cholera, salmonellosis, and other food- and water-related 
infections— also could occur as a result of climatic impacts on 
water distribution, temperature, and microorganism prolifera­
tion (IPCC 1996, WG II, Chapter 18 Executive Summary). 
Recent evidence suggests that the “El Tor” biotype cholera 
may be classified as a water-based disease. It has spread as far 
northward as the Korean peninsula. Its mechanism of trans­
mission is still subject to debate, however (McMichael et al., 
1996).
Disease surveillance could be strengthened and integrated with 
other environmental monitoring activities to develop early 
warning systems; early, environmentally sound public health 
interventions; and anticipatory social policies to reduce the risk 
of outbreaks and the subsequent spread of epidemics (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 12.5.6).
10.2.6.3. Pollution Hazards
Experiments by Hatakeyama et al. (1991) showed that the 
higher temperatures are, the faster ground-level ozone forms 
and the longer high concentrations of ozone last. Therefore, 
global warming would accelerate the photochemical reaction 
rates among chemical pollutants in the atmosphere, increasing 
oxidants in many urban areas. High levels of photochemical 
oxidants are associated with eye irritation, severe respiratory 
irritation, increased frequency of asthmatic attacks of suscep­
tible persons, and decreased pulmonary functions (Ando,
1993).
10.3. 
Integrated Analysis of Potential 
Vnlnerabilities and Impacts
10.3.1. North China
North China— including Beijing, Tianjin, the four provinces 
(Hebei, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi), parts of Anhui province, 
and parts of inner Mongolia— is an economic center of China. 
It also is a topographical and climatological entity. Its popula­
tion is 371 million, and its area is 76.5 million ha, including 
28.9 million ha of cultivated land. Because this region already 
is at risk from normal climate variability, it also is likely to be 
quite vulnerable to long-term secular shifts. The concept of 
regions at risk is used here to focus on four different managed 
ecosystems: water resources, agriculture, forests, and coastal 
zones.
• 
Water resource availability in this area amounts to 
merely 500 m^ per capita— half the critical value of 
the United Nations (UN) standard (1,000 m^ per capi­
ta) for maintaining socioeconomic and environmental 
development.
• 
There already is a high level of water project devel­
opment in this region. For example, in the Haihe 
basin, the ratio of water supply to total runoff has 
reached 0.87, but the ratio of water demand to total 
runoff already is 1.32. Because of the shortage of sur­
face runoff for meeting water demand, depletion of 
groundwater resources is very serious.
• 
Depending on the different scenarios used for GCMs, 
changes in runoff could range between -16% and 
-h7%; these shifts would occur mainly during the 
flood season. Such changes could unfavorably affect 
reservoir capability for storage and flood control. 
Although water shortages resulting from climate 
change are likely to be less important than those 
caused by population growth, economic development, 
and urbanization (for example, in the Hailuang River 
basin, water shortages resulting from climate change 
are projected to be about 6 .9-9.5 billion m^, whereas 
shortages from other factors are projected to be 
25.2-47.8 billion m^), the potential water deficiency 
due to climate change in moderately and extremely 
dry years may seriously exacerbate the current water 
shortage— and thus badly affect socioeconomic 
development in this region.
Trends of runoff for north China under four GCM scenarios 
are shown in Table 10-9. (At its lower reach, the Huanghe is
Table 10-9: Runoff trends under four GCM scenarios.
GCM
Runoff Trends
LLNLi
All decrease
UKM 0-H3
Huanghe and area to its south decrease 
Others increase
OSU-Bl
Huaihe and area to its south increase 
Others decrease slightly
GISS-Gl
Huanghe, Liaohe, and Songhuajiang increase 
Others decrease
iL. Gates, pers. comm.
Note: Under the GCM scenarios, subregions of northern China have 
different ranges of runoff change: Jing-Jin-Tang (-16 to +3%); 
Huaihe River Basin (-15 to +8%); middle reaches of Yellow River 
Basin (-12 to -5%).
376
Temperate Asia
elevated above its neighboring lands.) Both surface water and 
groundwater in north China seem to be quite sensitive to cli­
matic variability, especially on the Huang-Hai plain, accord­
ing to the model results. Under these scenarios, climate 
change will result in an additional shortfall of 0.15-1.4 billion 
m3 of water in the Jing-Jin-Tang subregion, which would 
cause economic losses of US$50-800 million (constant 1990 
values) in a normal year and US$230-2,270 million in a very 
dry year.
10.3.1.2. Agriculture
Three subregions in north China appear to be especially sensi­
tive to climate change because of potential increases in the soil 
moisture deficit:
Areas along the Great Wall— This area lies southeast 
of the transition belt between agriculture and animal 
husbandry. Warming and increased évapotranspira­
tion, along with possible declines in precipitation, 
would make it difficult to maintain current crop pat­
terns. The northern rangeland would gradually intrude 
into this area, creating a transition zone dominated by 
livestock. The northwestern part of this area would 
become an arid grassland.
• 
The Huang-H ai plains— Climatic w arm ing may 
increase the moisture deficit (i.e., the difference 
between precipitation and évapotranspiration) by 
more than 70 mm and result in more frequent and 
severe spring droughts with hot, dry winds, damaging 
wheat production and limiting the present practice of 
double-cropping in succession. Dryland crops will 
suffer from drought.
The area north o f the Huaihe River, including eastern 
Shandong— This area lies along the southern edge of 
the temperate crop zone. Climate warming may cause 
the northward shift of subtropical crop areas. 
However, projected frequent waterlogging in the 
south and spring droughts in the north would inhibit 
the growth of subtropical crops.
The state and farmers can take steps to adapt agricultural pro­
duction to the unfavorable impacts of possible climate change. 
Such strategies include allowing the sown acreage of grain to 
stabilize at a level of 0.8-0.9 ha per capita to attain the pro­
duction target; strengthening irrigation capacity as one of the 
most beneficial means of maintaining agricultural production 
in the face of unfavorable climate change; and transforming 
medium- or low-yield farmland into high-yield farmland. To 
maintain the productivity of cultivated land, it is necessary to 
popularize a more optimal fertilizer mix and adopt the tech­
nique of subsoil application according to actual changes in soil 
conditions. It also is necessary to use and extend technology 
for agricultural adaptability— such as using superior species of 
crops, improving standardized cultural techniques under cli­
matic variation, using dryland farming techniques, and devel­
oping feed crops instead of grain crops.
Forests in northern China have been seriously depleted over the 
past few centuries. Despite recent reforestation efforts, the 
forested area in the region is only 1 1 .8 % of the total land cover, 
which is lower than the mean value for China. Under the influ­
ence of projected climate change, the distribution pattern of 
many important tree species would be affected. For example, the 
present forests of Pinus tabulaeformis, a key temperate species 
widely distributed in northern China, will be reduced an addi­
tional 9.4% under a 2хС0г equilibrium climate (Guo, 1995).
10.3.1.3. Forests
10.3.1.4. Coastal Zones
For the southern coast of Shangdong, estimated sea-level rise by 
the years 2030, 2050, and 2100 would be 1.1, 5.7, and 40.2 cm, 
respectively and, for the coast of Liaoning-Tianjin, 13.1, 22.5, 
and 69.0 cm, respectively (Du et al., 1996). Construction of 
dikes and seawalls is likely to be the most common adaptation 
strategy in these areas; this practice has been used there through­
out history to combat sea encroachment (ESD-CAS, 1994).
Integrated vulnerability to climate change for northern China, 
including the vulnerability of forests, is summarized in Table
10- 10.
10.3.2. 
Forests in Temperate Asia
Forests, which are characterized by their composition of tree 
species, are among the important ecosystems of the environ­
ment. They are greatly affected by climate, soil, fire, industry, 
tourism, and pipeline/railway/road construction. Consequently, 
the expected impact of global warming on forests would vary 
from region to region.
In Temperate Asia, temperature seems to be the primary envi­
ronmental parameter affecting the distribution of forests 
because sufficient precipitation exists for almost all forest types. 
Exceptions are in regions with heavy snow accumulation, 
windy mountain crests and slopes, or windy coastal zones.
In particular, the amount of snow accumulation seems to be an 
important parameter for forest growth. Accumulated snow pro­
tects trees from severe cold, but its weight can damage the 
branches and trunks. In Japan, large differences in snow accu­
mulation between the Japan Sea side and the Pacific side are 
strongly reflected in the corresponding forest types.
The amount of snowfall may decrease as a result of global 
warming, resulting in spring and summer drought. Uncertainty 
remains, however, because changes in snowfall amounts 
depend on changes in the frequency of snow and freezing pre­
cipitation in the winter in the mountain regions; the wind speed 
and the difference between the air temperature and the sea- 
surface temperature over the Japan Sea in winter, which deter­
mine the amount of snow precipitation over mountain regions
Temperate Asia
377
on the Japan Sea side; the ratio of snowfall to rainfall in win­
ter; the dates of onset and termination of snowfall and the max­
imum depth of snow accumulation during winter; and the den­
sity of accumulated snow.
Almost all forest trees would grow better under a warmer cli­
mate, but increases in diseases, insect damages, and other 
meteorological hazards (e.g., severe storm damage) also may 
result in a shortened life for forest trees (Tsunekawa et al., 
1996a). When the original species in a forest decline, other 
species from neighboring forest zones more suitable for 
warmer conditions would grow. If there were an afforested 
region or broad cultivated area between natural forests, such 
changes would not occur. The impact of warming would occur 
noticeably on a time scale of decades to centuries, in areas 
where the distribution of plant communities is continuous.
Forests of the Hokuriku region on the Japan Sea side of central 
Japan are likely to respond to climatic change (Kojima, 1996). 
Of the four vegetation belts, the Pinus pumiia zone— ^the highest 
belt in elevation— ^would be most seriously affected. It may 
remain only in small areas at higher elevations or even become 
fragmented by the upward advance of plant species adapted to a 
warmer climate. Uncertainties from the viewpoint of vegetation 
are the rate of geographical expansion of plant species, the time 
lag between climate change and soil change, and phenological 
(seasonal) and environmental adaptation of plant species.
Catastrophic scenarios include water deficit as a result of 
decreasing precipitation and/or increasing évapotranspiration 
due to warming; elevated minimum temperatures, resulting in 
the absence of low-temperature stimulation needed for germina­
tion, flowering, and fruition; and discord in the seasonal rhythm 
of air temperature and daytime length, which controls the phe­
nology of plant growth for plants propagated to the north.
According to a study on potential vegetation distribution shifts 
in China (Tsunekawa et al., 1996b), the northward shift rate of 
the deciduous genus Queras is projected to be 7 km/year—  
14—24 times faster than the migration rate recorded over the 
past 13,000 years in Europe. Difficulty in adaptation would be 
expected for such a rapid shift.
Forest and grassland fire is expected to occur more frequently 
and in broader areas in northern parts of Temperate Asia as a 
result of global warming and deforestation activities. In May 
1987, one of the largest forest fires of the past 30 years 
occurred in China and Russia. In the Daxinganlin mountain 
range of northeast China, it was reported that the total area 
burned was 1,010 x 10^ ha, at 729 sites. The most serious wild­
fire in the forests and grasslands in Mongolia occurred in 
March 1996. The burned-out area was estimated to be about
8,000 X 103 ha. Although the occurrence of forest fires varies 
greatly each year, such serious cases should be taken into con­
sideration in global warming impact studies.
Table 10-10: Integrated vulnerability to climate change in northern China.
Sector
Scenarios
Method
Most
Vulnerable R ^ on
Sununary 
of Results
Cross-Sector Impact
Water
Resources (W)
LLNLi
и к м о - ю
OSU-Bl
GISS-Gl
Climatic, hydrological, 
and socioeconomic 
indices
Hai-Luan River Basin, 
followed by the Huaihe 
River Basin
Runoff change of 
-16 to +17%
Deaeased supply to (A) 
and reduction with (F)
Agriculture (A)
GroL-A3
UKM0-H3
MPI-KT
CERES and other crop 
models; moisture deficit 
and socioeconomic 
indices
Hebei, Shanxi, 
inner MongoHa, and 
along the Great Wall
Yield change of 
wheat ( - 6  to +42%), 
maize (-9 to +5%), 
rice (-21 to -7%), 
cotton (+21 to +53%)
Increased risk for (F) and 
inaeased demand for 
(W)
Forests (F)
LLNLi
UKM0-H3
OSU-Bl
GISS-Gl
ОГОи-АЗ
MPI-Kl
Aridity and fiielwood 
supply indices
AU areas
Productivity increase 
of + 1  to 1 0 %; area 
change of -57 to +12% 
(varying with spedes)
Increased risk from (A) 
and effect on (W)
Coast Zone (CZ)
Sea-level rise 
of 30-65 cm
IPCC 7-step method
Jing-Jin-Tang and 
YeUow River Delta
Likely and viable 
strategy of dikes 
andseawaUs
luCTcased risk to (A) and 
(W)
'L. Gates, pers. comm. 
Source: Lin era/., 1994.
378
Temperate Asia
References
A ndo, М., 1993: Health. In: T h e  P o t e n t i a l  E f f e c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  i n  J a p a n  
[Nishioka, S. and H. H arasawa (eds)]. Center for Global Environm ental 
Research, Environm ental Agency o f Japan, pp. 87-93.
B ayasgalan, S.H., B. Bolortsetseg, D. Dagvadorj, and L. Natsagdorj, 1996: 
The im pact of clim ate change on spring w heat yield in M ongolia and its 
adaptability. In: A d a p t i n g  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e ,  
A s s e s s m e n t  
a n d  I s s u e s  
[Smith, J.B., N. Bhatti, G.V. M enzhulin, R. Benioff, M. Cam pos, B. 
Jallow, F. Rijsberman, M.I. Budyko, and R.K. Dixon (eds.)]. Springer- 
Verlag, New York, NY, 164-173.
B olortsetseg, B. and G. Tuvaansuren, 1996: The potential im pacts of climate 
change on pasture and cattle production in M ongolia. In: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e ,  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  i n  A s i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c  [Lin, E., 
W.C. Bolhofer, S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. M ukherjee, J.B. Smith and J. 
W isniewski (eds.)]. W a te r , A
i r  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  91(1-2), 95-105.
Davis, S.D., V.H. Haywood, and A.C. Hamilton, 1995: C e n t r e s  o f  P l a n t  
D i v e r s i t y .  A  G u i d e  a n d  S t r a t e g y  f o r  T h e i r  C o n s e r v a t i o n ,  
V o l. 2 :  A s i a ,  
A u s t r a l i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c . W orld W ide Fund (W W F) for N ature and 
International U nion for the C onservation o f N ature and N atural 
Resources, Gland, Switzerland and Cam bridge, U.K., 578 pp.
D H -M W R , 1987: W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  A s s e s s m e n t  f o r  C h i n a . D epartm ent of 
Hydrology, M inistry of W ater Resources, China W ater and Pow er Press, 
Beijing, 325 pp. (in Chinese and English)
Ding, Y. and X. Dai, 1994: Temperature in China during the last 100 years. 
M o n t h l y  M e t e o r o l o g y , 20, 19-26.
D ixon, R.K., O.N. Krankina, and K.I. Kobak, 1996: Global climate change 
adaptation: exam ples from  Russian boreal forests. I n :  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e ,  A s s e s s m e n t  a n d  I s s u e s  [Smith, J.B., N. Bhatti, G.V. M enzhulin, 
R. Benioff, M. Cam pos, B. Jallow, F. Rijsberman, M.I. Budyko, and R.K. 
Dixon (eds.)]. Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, pp. 359-373.
Du, M. and T. M aki, 1994: Clim ate differences betw een an oasis and its peral 
area in Тифап, Xianjiang, China. J I R C A S  J o u r n a l , 1, 47-55.
D u, М ., M. Yoshino, Y. Fujita, S. Arizono, T. M aki, and J. Lei, 1996: Climate 
change and agricultural activities in the Taklamakan Desert, China, in 
recent years. J o u r ,  o f  A r i d  L a n d  S t u d ie s , 5, 173-183.
ESD -CAS, 1994: I m p a c t  o f  S e a - L e v e l  R i s e  o n  t h e  D e l t a i c  R e g i o n s  o f  C h i n a  
a n d  
i t s  M
i t i g a t i o n  [Earth Science Division, Chinese A cadem y of 
Sciences (eds.)]. Science Press, Beijing, China, 353 pp. (in Chinese)
FAO, 1995: F A O S T A T - P C . Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy, 
(on diskette).
FAO, 1996a: F A O  F i s h e r i e s  C i r c u l a r  N o .  8 1 5 ,  R e v .  8 . Food and Agriculture 
Organization, Rome, Italy, 189 pp.
FAO, 1996b: East Asia. In: T h e  S t a t e  o f  W
o r l d  F i s h e r i e s  a n d  A q u a c u l t u r e ,  
Sofia, Bulgaria.
FAO, 1997: F A O S T A T 1 9 9 7 . Food and A griculture Organization, Rome, Italy.
F ukui, E., 1977: T h e  C l i m a t e  o f  J a p a n . Kodansua Ltd., Tokyo, Japan and 
Elsevier Science Publishers, A m sterdam , N etherlands, 317 pp.
G rishin, S.Y , 1995: The boreal forests of north-eastern Eurasia. V e g e t a t i o ,  
121, 11- 21.
G uo, Q., 1995: A  study on the im pacts of clim ate change on distribution of 
P i n u s  T a b u l a e t o r m i s  in China. F o r e s t  S c i e n c e s , 31(5), 3 9 3 ^ 0 3 .
H arazono, Y , S.-G. Li, J.-Y. Shen, and Z.-Y. He, 1993: Seasonal m icrom ete- 
orological changes over a grassland in Inner M ongolia. J o u r .  A g r i c u l .  
M e t . , 48(5), 711-714.
H atak ey am a, S., H. Akimoto, and N. W ashida, 1991: Effects of tem perature 
on the form ation of photochem ical ozone in a propene N^jj-air-irradia- 
tion system. E n v i r o n .  S c i .  T e c h n o l . , 25, 1884-1890.
H eyw ood, V.H., 1995: 
G l o b a l  B i o d i v e r s i t y  A s s e s s m e n t . United Nations 
Environm ental Programme, Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, 
United Kingdom, 1140 pp.
IP C C , 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
1 9 9 5 :  
T h e  
S c i e n c e  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  G r o u p  I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Houghton, J.T., L.G. M eira 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N.Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United BCingdom, 572 pp.
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. M eehl, J.F.B. M itchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver, and T.M .L. Wigley, Chapter 
6 . C l i m a t e  M o d e l s  -  P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  F u t u r e  C l i m a t e , pp. 289-284.
IP C C , 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  S c i e n t i f i c - T e c h n i c a l  A n a l y s e s .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k in g  
G r o u p  I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H, 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom 
and New York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
-  
Kirschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, C hapter 1. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  o n  F o r e s t s , pp. 95-129.
-  
Allen-D iaz, B., Chapter 2. R a n g e l a n d  i n  a  
C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  
I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s ,  a n d  M i t i g a t i o n ,  pp. 131-158.
-  
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. I m p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
o n  M o u n t a i n  R e g i o n s , pp. 191-213.
-  
Oquist, M.G. and B.H. Svensson, Chapter 6. N o n - T i d a l  W e tla n d s , 
pp. 215-239.
-  
Fitzharris, B.B., C hapter 7. T h e  C r y o s p h e r e :  C h a n g e s  a n d  T h e i r  
I m p a c t s , pp. 241-265.
-  
Ittekkot, V , C hapter 8 . O c e a n s , pp. 267-288.
-  
Bijlsm a, L., Chapter 9. C o a s t a l  Z o n e s  
a n d  S m a l l  I s l a n d s , 
pp.
289-324.
-  
Arnell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J.J. M agnuson, and P. Mulholland, 
Chapter 10. H y d r o l o g y  a n d  F r e s h w a t e r  E c o l o g y , pp. 325-363.
-  
M oreno, R.A. and J. Skea, Chapter 11. I n d u s t r y ,  
E n e r g y ,  
a n d
T r a n s p o r t a t i o n :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 365-398.
-  
Scott, M .J., C hapter 12. H u m a n  
S e t t l e m e n t s  
i n  
a  
C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 3994^26.
-  
Reilly, J., Chapter 13. A g r i c u l t u r e  i n  a  C h a n g i n g  C l i m a t e :  I m p a c t s  
a n d  A d a p t a t i o n , pp. 426-467.
-  
Kaczm arek, Z., Chapter 14. W a t e r  R e s o u r c e s  M a n a g e m e n t , pp. 
4 6 9 4 8 6 .
-  
Solom on, A .M ., Chapter 15. W o o d  P r o d u c t i o n  u n d e r  C h a n g i n g  
C l i m a t e  a n d  L a n d  U s e , pp. 487-510.
-  
Everett, J.T., Chapter 16. F i s h e r i e s , pp. 511-537.
-  
M cM ichael, A.J., Chapter 18. H u m a n  
P o p u l a t i o n  
H e a l t h , pp. 
561-584.
IP C C , 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  E c o n o m i c  a n d  S o c i a l  D i m e n s i o n s  o f  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W
o r k i n g  G r o u p  I I I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  
A s s e s s m e n t  
R e p o r t  
o f  t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  
o n  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [B ruce, J.R , H. Lee, and E.F. H aites (eds.)]. Cambridge 
U niversity Press, C am bridge, U nited K ingdom , and N ew  York, NY, 
U SA , 448 pp.
-  
Pearce, D.W., W.R. Cline, A.N. Achanta, S. Fankhouser, R.K. 
Pachauri, R.S.L. Toi, and P. Vellinga, Chapter 6 . T h e  S o c i a l  C o s t s  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e :  
G r e e n h o u s e  D a m a g e  
a n d  t h e  B e n e f i t s  o f  
C o n t r o l , pp. 179-224.
Japan M eteorological A gency, 1996: A b n o r m a l  
W e a t h e r  
R e p o r t ,  
’ 9 4 . 
A b n o r m a l  W e a t h e r  a n d  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  o f  t h e  
W o r l d  i n  t h e  R e c e n t  
Y e a r s ,  V I . Printing Office of M inistry of Finance, Tokyo, 423 pp. (in 
Japanese)
Kai, K., M. Kainuma, and N. M urakoshi, 1996: Effects o f global warming on 
the phenological observation in Japan. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  P l a n t s  in  
E a s t  A s i a  [Omasa, K., K. Kai, H. Toda, Z. U chijim a, and M. Yoshino 
(eds.)]. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 85-92.
Kim , Kwang-sik, Bong-nai Kwon, Sang-won Kim, Sung-sam  Kim, Jung-knk 
Kim, Chin-nyun Kim, Chae-shif Rho, Chan-ho Park, Kwang-ho Lee, 
D oo-H yeong Lee, Suk-woo Lee, Young-taek Lee, Chan Lee, Chang-hi 
Joung and D ong-w ok Han, 1973: T h e  c l i m a t e  o f  K o r e a . Iljisa Publishing 
House, Seoul, Korea, 446 pp. (in Korean)
K obak, K.L, LY E. Turchinovich, N. Yu. Kondrasheva, E.D. Schulze, W. 
Schulze, H. Koch, and N.N. Vygodskanya, 1996: Vulnerability and adap­
tation o f the larch forest in eastern Siberia to clim ate change. W a te r , A i r ,  
a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n , 92, 119-127.
K ojim a, S., 1992: F o r e s t  T y p e s  a n d  a  T e n t a t i v e  E c o l o g i c a l  Z o n a t i o n  o f  
K a m
t c h a t k a  
P e n i n s u l a .  
P ro ceed in g s 
o f the A rc tic  
Science 
W orkshop, D ecem ber 17, 1992, A rctic E nv iro n m en t Research 
C enter, N ational Institute o f P olar R esearch, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 
9 2 -9 6 .
Kojim a, S., 1996: Global clim atic w arm ing and possible responses of vegeta­
tion of H okuriku region. J a p a n .  J o u r ,  o f  P h y t o g e o g r a p h y  a n d  T a x o n o m y ,  
44, 9-18.
Temperate Asia
379
Lin, E., 1996: A gricultural vulnerability and adaptation to global warm ing in 
China. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e ,  V u l n e r a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  i n  A s i a  a n d  t h e  
P a c i f i c  [Lin, E., W.C. Bolhofer, S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. Mukherjee, J.B. 
Smith, and J. W isniewski (eds.)]. W a te r , A
i r  a n d  S o i l  P o l l u t i o n , 91(1-2), 
63-73.
Lin, E., L. Chunzen, X. Deying, and D. Bilan, 1994: M a n a g e m e n t  
o f  
V u l n e r a b l e  N a t u r a l  R e s o u r c e s ,  i n  N a t i o n a l  R e s p o n s e  S t r a t e g y  f o r  G l o b a l  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  P e o p l e ’s  R e p u b l i c  o f  C h i n a . Asia Developm ent Bank 
Report TA 1690-PRC, M anila, Philippines, pp. 323-370.
Liu, C., 1997: The potential im pact o f climate change on hydrology and water 
resources in China. A d v a n c e s  i n  W a t e r  S c i e n c e , 8(2), 21-32.
M cM ichael, A.J., A. Haines, R. Slooff, and S. Kovates (eds.), 1996: C l i m a t e  
a n d  H u m a n  H e a l t h .  W orld Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 
297 pp.
M U 'ddorj, R., C.H. Yadamsren, and J. Baigalmaa, 1992: S u m m e r  R a i n f a l l  
F l u c t u a t i o n s  i n  G o b i  R e g i o n  D u r i n g  L a s t  Y e a r s . Proceedings of the 
Sym posium  on Global Change and Gobi Desert, December 19, 1991, 
H ydrom eteorological R esearch Institute, Centre o f Projects on 
Developm ent of Gobi, State Com m ittee for Nature and Environmental 
Protection of M ongolia, Ulaanbaatar, M ongolia, pp. 64-68 (in Russian 
w ith English abstract).
M im ura, N., 1995: Responses of Coastal Landform to Sea-level Rise in Costal 
Zone in Japan. J o u r .  J a p a n  S o c i e t y  o f  C o a s t a l  Z o n e  S t u d ie s ,  5 , 1-11 (in 
Japanese).
M ooney, H.A., J. Labchenco, R. Dirzo, and O.E. Sala, 1995: Biodiversity and 
ecosystem  functioning: B asic principles. In: 
G l o b a l  B i o d i v e r s i t y  
A s s e s s m e n t [H eyw ood, V.H., (ed.)]. C am bridge U niversity Press, 
Cam bridge, United Kingdom, pp. 279-325.
N akashizuka, T., and S. lida, 1995: Composition, dynamics and disturbance 
regime of tem perate deciduous forests in M onsoon Asia. V e g e t a t i o , 121, 
23-30.
N akatsugaw a, М ., 1995: A  study on effects of climate change on hydrologie 
processes in cold and snowy regions. 
C i v i l  
E n g i n e e r i n g  R e s e a r c h  
I n s t i t u t e , 106, 5-22. (in Japanese)
Nishim ori, M. and M. Yoshino, 1990: ENSO and its relation to generation, 
developm ent and tracks of typhoons. G e o g r a p h i c a l  R e v i e w  o f  J a p a n ,  
63A(8), 530-540.
N um ata, М ., 1974: T h e  F l o r a  a n d  V e g e t a t i o n  o f  J a p a n . Kodansha Ltd., Tokyo, 
Japan and Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam , The Netherlands, 
294 pp.
Oh, S., 1995: Study on impact o f doubling atm ospheric CO 2 climate change 
on lowland rice in Korea. J o u r .  K o r e a n  M e t e o r .  S o c . , 31(3), 267-312.
Om asa, K., K. Kai, H. Toda, Z. Uchijima, and M. Yoshino, 1996: C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  P l a n t s  i n  E a s t  A s i a . Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, 215 pp.
Pastor, J., D.J. M ladenoff, Y. Haila, J. Bryant, and S. Payette, 1996: 
Biodiversity and ecosystem  processes in boreal regions. In: F u n c t i o n a l  
R o l e s  o f  B i o d i v e r s i t y :  A  G l o b a l  P e r s p e c t i v e  [Mooney, H.A,. (ed.)]. John 
W iley and Sons, Ltd., Chichester, United Kingdom, 492 pp.
Reilly, R., N. Hohm ann, and S. Kane, 1993: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  A g r i c u l t u r e :  
G l o b a l  a n d  R e g i o n a l  E f f e c t s  U s i n g  a n  E c o n o m i c  M o d e l  o f  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
T r a d e . M IT-CEEPR 93-012W P, A ugust 1993, M assachusetts Institute of 
Technology Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, 
Cam bridge, M A, USA, 78 pp.
Rosenzweig, C. and M. Parry, 1994: Potential impacts of climate change on 
world food supply. N a t u r e , 367, 133-138.
Tokioka, T , A. Noda, A. Kitoh, Y. Nikaidou, S. Nakagawa, T. Motoi, S. 
Yukimoto, and K. Takata, 1995: A transient CO 2  experiment with the 
MRI CGCM —  quick report. J .  M e t e o r .  S o c .  J a p a n , 73, 817-826.
Tsunekaw a, A., H. Ikeguhi, and K. Omasa, 1996a: Prediction of Japanese 
potential vegetation distribution in response to clim atic change. In: 
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  P l a n t s  i n  E a s t  A s i a  [Omasa, K., K. Kai, H. Toda, Z. 
Uchijima, and H. Yoshino (eds.)], Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 
57-65.
Tsunekaw a, A., X. Zhang, G. Zhou, and K. Omasa, 1996b: Climatic change 
and its impacts on the vegetation distribution in China. In: C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  P l a n t s  i n  E a s t  A s i a  [Omasa K, K. Kai, H. Toda, Z. Uchijima, 
and H. Yoshino (ed.)], Springer-Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 67-84.
U lziisaikhan, V , 1996: I m p a c t  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  o n  F o r e s t  
E c o s y s t e m  i n  M o n g o l i a . Paper presented at the Regional W orkshop on 
Climate Change Vulnerability and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific, 
January 15-19, 1996, M anila, Philippines, pp. 1-10.
U nited N ations Popniation Division, 1993: A n n u a l  P o p u l a t i o n s  ( 1 9 9 4  r e v i ­
s i o n ) . United Nations, New York, NY, USA (on diskettes).
Xia, X., 1993: D e s e r t i f i c a t i o n  
a n d  C o n t r o l  o f  B l o w n  
S a n d  D i s a s t e r s  
i n  
X i a n j i a n g . Science Press, Beijing, China, 298 pp.
Yan, Z., and P. M arienicole, 1995: On the relationship between global thermal 
variations and wet/dry alterations in the Asia and African monsoon areas. 
A c t a  G e o g r a p h i c a  S i n ic a , 50(5), 4 7 1 ^ 7 9 .
Y atagai, A. and T. Yasunari, 1994: Trends and decadal-scale fluctuations of 
surface air temperature and precipitation over China and M ongolia dur­
ing the recent 40 year period (1951-1990). J o u r .  M e t e o r .  
S o c i e t y  o f  
J a p a n , 72(6), 937-957.
Yeh, D.Z. and Y.X. Gao, 1979: M e t e o r o l o g y  o f  Q i n g h a i - X i z h a n g  
( T ib e t )  
P l a t e a u . Science Press, Beijing, China, 228 pp. (in Chinese with English 
abstract)
Yoshino, М., 1997: 
C l i m a t e  
a n d  F o o d  S e c u r i t y . Paper presented at the 
APN/SASCOM /IHDP/GCTE workshop on the Human Dimensions 
Programme, January 20-23, 1997, New Delhi, India, 15 pp.
Yoshino, М., T. Horie, H. Seino, H. Tsujii, T. Uchijima, and Z. Uchijima, 1987: 
The effect of climatic variations on agriculture in Japan. In: T h e  I m p a c t  
o f  C l i m a t i c  
V a r i a t i o n s  o n  A g r i c u l t u r e ,  
v o l .  
1 :  A s s e s s m e n t s  
i n  
C o o l  
T e m p e r a t u r e  a n d  C o l d  R e g i o n s  [Parry, M.L.,T.R. Carter, and N.T. Konijn 
(eds.)]. Reidl, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 723-868.
Yoshino, M. and Y. Liu, 1997: Climate of the Тифап Basin: past and present. 
J o u r ,  o f  A r i d  L a n d  S t u d ie s , 6(2), 193—202.
Yoshino, M. and H.S.P. Ono, 1996: Variations in the plant phenology affected 
by global warming. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  a n d  P l a n t s  i n  E a s t  A s i a  [Omasa, 
K., K. Kai, H. Toda, Z. Uchijima, and H. Yoshino (eds.)]. Springer- 
Verlag, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 93-107.
Yun, J., 1990: A nalysis o f the climatic impact on Korean rice production under 
the carbon dioxide scenario. J .  K o r e a n  M e t e o r .  S o c . , 26(4), 263-274.
Zhao, Z., 1996: Climate change and sustainable development in China’s semi 
arid regions. In: 
C l i m a t e  
V a r i a b i l i t y ,  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
a n d  
S o c i a l  
V u l n e r a b i l i t y  i n  t h e  S e m i - A r i d  T r o p i c s . Cambridge University Press, 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K., pp. 92-108.
■;.' -;::i; : ; ■ m i.A ^^:'^- - 7 A f'+.t
'.y+îvc f.tïîv ГпгЧ; Cijs^
 
9 a  '"
ЙХ
E,i& Î L j / ' ’’- 1 %
т^щ.Щй-т-5№ё-4
' Ш
^ Щ
У?Э
f m i
^■‘.4-*; f ■ 
^й-i
11
Tropical Asia
ROGER F. McLEAN (AUSTIL\LIA), S.K. SINHA (INDIA), 
M.Q. MIRZA (BANGLADESH), AND MURARI LAL (INDIA) 
Contributors:
A. Achanta (India), S. Adhikary (Nepal), R.V Cruz (Philippines), Lim Joo Tick 
(Malaysia), A.N. Purohit (India), A. Soegiarto (Indonesia), S. Soesanto (Indonesia), 
C. Tingsabadh (Thailand)
CONTENTS
Executive Summary 
11.1. Regional Characterization 
and Baseline Conditions
11.1.1. Introduction
11.1.2. Physiography and Biogeography
11.1.3. Settlement, Population, and Economy
11.2, Regional Climate
11.2.1. Present Climate Characteristics
11.2.2. Recent Climate Trends and Variability
11.2.2.1. Temperature and Precipitation
11.2.2.2. Tropical Cyclones
11.2.2.3. Trends in Climate-Related 
Phenomena: Floods and Droughts
11.2.2.4. Trends in Sea Level
11.2.3. Projections of Future Climates:
Regional Scenarios
11.2.3.1. Background Information
11.2.3.2. Temperature and Rainfall
11.2.3.3. Tropical Cyclones
11.2.4. A Recent Scenario for the 
Indian Subcontinent
383
11.3.3. Hydrology and Water Resources
394
11.3.3.1. Introduction
394
11.3.3.2. Hydrological Systems
395
385
11.3.3.3. Runoff and River Discharge
395
385
11.3.4. Food and Fiber: Agriculture,
385
Forestry, and Fisheries
396
386
11.3.4.1. Agriculture
396
11.3.4.2. Forests and Forestry
398
386
11.3.4.3. Fisheries
399
386
11.3.5. Mountain and Upland Regions
399
388
11.3.6. Coastal Zones
400
388
11.3.7. Human Health
401
388
11.3.7.1. Malaria
401
11.3.7.2. Dengue and Schistosomiasis
402
388
11.3.7.3. Other Diseases
402
389
11.4. Integrated Assessment of Potential
389
Vulnerabilities and Impacts
403
389
389
References
404
390
391
113. Vulnerabilities and Potential Impacts
11.3.1. General Comments
11.3.2. Ecosystems and Biodiversity
11.3.2.1. Terrestrial Ecosystems
11.3.2.2. Coastal Ecosystems
391
391
392
393 
393
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The 16 countries of Tropical Asia range in size from about
61,000 ha (Singapore) to 300 million ha (India). The region is 
physiographically diverse and ecologically rich in natural and 
crop-related biodiversity. The present total population of the 
region is about 1 . 6  billion, and the population is projected to 
increase to 2.4 billion by 2025; although this population is 
principally rural, in 1995, the region included 6  of the 25 
largest cities in the world. Exploitation of natural resources 
associated with rapid urbanization, industrialization, and eco­
nomic development has led to increasing pollution, land degra­
dation, and other environmental problems. Climate change repre­
sents a further stress. Over the long period of human occupation 
in the region, human use systems have developed some 
resilience to a range of environmental stresses. However, it is 
uncertain whether such resilience can continue in the face of 
rapid socioeconomic development, increasing population, and 
projected changes in climate.
Climate Characteristics and Trends
Climate in Tropical Asia is characterized by seasonal weather 
patterns associated with the two monsoons and the occurrence 
of tropical cyclones in the two core areas of cyclogenesis (the 
northern Indian Ocean and the northwestern Pacific Ocean). 
Over the past 100 years, mean surface temperatures across the 
region have increased in the range of 0.3-0.8°C. No long-term 
trend in mean rainfall has been discernible over that period, 
although many countries have shown a decreasing trend in the 
past three decades. Similarly, no identifiable change in the 
number, frequency, or intensity of tropical cyclones has been 
observed in the region over the past 1 0 0  years; however, sub­
stantial decadal-scale variations have occurred.
Ecological Systems
Substantial elevational shifts of ecosystems in the mountains 
and uplands of Tropical Asia are projected. At high elevations, 
weedy species can be expected to displace tree species, 
although the rates of vegetation change could be slow and 
constrained by increased erosion in the Greater Himalayas. 
Changes in the distribution and health of rainforest and drier 
monsoon forest will be complex. In Thailand, for instance, the 
area of tropical forest could increase from 45% to 80% of total 
forest cover; in Sri Lanka, a significant increase in dry forest 
and a decrease in wet forest could occur. Projected increases 
in évapotranspiration and rainfall variability are likely to have 
a negative impact on the viability of freshwater wetlands.
resulting in shrinkage and dessication. Sea-level rise and 
increases in sea-surface temperature are the most probable 
major climate change-related stresses on coastal ecosystems. 
Coral reefs may be able to keep up with the rate of sea-level 
rise but may suffer bleaching from higher temperatures. 
Landward migration of mangroves and tidal wetlands is 
expected to be constrained by human infrastructure and 
human activities.
Hydrology and Water Resources
The Himalayas play a critical role in the provision of water to 
continental monsoon Asia. Increased temperature and 
increased seasonal variability in precipitation are expected to 
result in accelerated recession of glaciers and increasing dan­
ger from glacial lake outburst floods. A reduction in flow of 
snow-fed rivers, accompanied by increases in peak flows and 
sediment yields, would have major impacts on hydropower 
generation, urban water supply, and agriculture. Availability of 
water from snow-fed rivers may increase in the short term but 
decrease in the long term. Runoff from rain-fed rivers may 
change in the future, although a reduction in snowmelt water 
would result in a decrease in dry-season flow of these rivers. 
Larger populations and increasing demands in the agricultural, 
industrial, and hydropower sectors will put additional stress on 
water resources. Pressure will be most acute on drier river 
basins and those subject to low seasonal flows. Hydrological 
changes in island and coastal drainage basins are expected to 
be small, apart from those associated with sea-level rise.
Agriculture
The sensitivity of major cereal and tree crops to changes in 
temperature, moisture, and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) concentration 
of the magnitudes projected for the region has been demon­
strated in many studies. For instance, projected impacts on rice, 
wheat, and sorghum yields suggest that any increases in pro­
duction associated with CO 2 fertilization will be more than 
offset by reductions in yield resulting from temperature and/or 
moisture changes. Although climate change impacts could 
result in significant changes in crop yields, production, storage, 
and distribution, the net effect of the changes regionwide is 
uncertain because of varietal differences and local differences 
in growing season, crop management, and so forth; noninclu­
sion of possible diseases, pests, and microorganisms in crop 
model simulations; and the vulnerability of agricultural areas 
to episodic environmental hazards, including floods, droughts.
and cyclones. Low-income rural populations that depend on 
traditional agricultural systems or on marginal lands are partic­
ularly vulnerable.
Coastal Zones
Sea-level rise is the most obvious climate-related impact in 
coastal areas. Densely settled and intensively used low-lying 
coastal plains, islands, and deltas are especially vulnerable to 
coastal erosion and land loss, inundation and sea flooding, 
upstream movement of the saline/freshwater front, and seawa­
ter intrusion into freshwater lenses. Especially at risk are the 
large deltaic regions of Bangladesh, Myanmar, Viet Nam, and 
Thailand, and the low-lying areas of Indonesia, the Philippines, 
and Malaysia. Socioeconomic impacts could be felt in major 
cities, ports, and tourist resorts; artisinal and commercial fish­
eries; coastal agriculture; and infrastructure development. 
International studies have projected the displacement of sever­
al million people from the region’s coastal zone in the event of 
a 1-m rise in sea level. The costs of response measures to 
reduce the impact of sea-level rise in the region could be 
immense.
Human Health
The incidence and extent of some vector-borne diseases are 
expected to increase with global warming. Malaria, schistoso­
miasis, and dengue— ^which are significant causes of mortality 
and morbidity in Tropical Asia— are very sensitive to climate 
and are likely to spread into new regions on the margins of
presently endemic areas as a consequence of climate change. 
Newly affected populations initially would experience higher 
case fatality rates. In presently vulnerable regions, increases in 
epidemic potential of 12-27% for malaria and 31-41%  for 
dengue are anticipated, along with an 11-17% decrease for 
schistosomiasis. Waterborne and water-related infectious dis­
eases, which already account for the majority of epidemie 
emergencies in the region, also are expected to increase when 
higher temperatures and higher humidity are superimposed on 
existing conditions and projected increases in population, 
urbanization rates, water quality declines, and other factors.
Adaptation and Integration
Strategies for adapting to different climatic conditions will he 
quite diverse. For example, responses to impacts on agriculture 
will vary from region to region, depending on the local agro- 
climatic setting as well as the magnitude of climate change. 
New temperature- and pest-resistant crop varieties may be 
introduced, and new technologies may be developed to reduce 
crop yield losses. Countries in Tropical Asia could improve 
irrigation efficiency from current levels, to reduce total water 
requirements. Integrated approaches to river basin manage­
ment, which already are used in a number of countries in the 
region, could be adapted regionwide. Such approaches could 
increase the effectiveness of adapting to the often-complex 
potential impacts of climate change that generally transcend 
political boundaries and encompass upstream and downstream 
areas. Similarly integrated approaches to coastal zone manage­
ment can include current and longer-term issues, including cli­
mate change and sea-level rise.
11.1. 
Regional Characterization and Baseline Conditions
11.1.1. Introduction
This chapter is concerned with Tropical Asia, which extends 
over 80 degrees of longitude (from 70°E to 150°E) and 40 
degrees of latitude (from 30°N to 10°S). The 16 countries that 
make up the region (see Box 11-1) range in area from about
61,000 ha (Singapore) to 300 million ha (India). Three states in 
the region (Nepal, Bhutan, and Laos) are landlocked. The 
region is physically diverse and ecologically rich in natural and 
crop-related biodiversity. The present total population is about
1.6 billion, and the population is projected to increase to 2.4 bil­
lion by 2025 (see Table 11-1); although the majority of this pop­
ulation is rural, in 1995, the region included 6  of the 25 largest 
cities in the world. Exploitation of natural resources associated 
with rapid urbanization, industrialization, and economic devel­
opment has led to increasing pollution, declining water quality, 
land degradation, and other environmental problems.
Climate change represents an additional stress. Projected cli­
mate changes in the region include strengthening of monsoon 
circulation, increases in surface temperature, and increases in 
the magnitude and frequency of extreme rainfall events. 
Climate-related effects also will include sea-level rise. These 
changes could result in major impacts on the region’s ecosys­
tems and biodiversity; hydrology and water resources; agricul­
ture, forestry, and fisheries; mountains and coastal lands; and 
human settlements and human health.
This chapter is based primarily on the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) Second Assessment Report (SAR) 
(IPCC, 1996), along with results from recent regional studies, 
such as the Regional Workshop on Climate Change 
Vulnerability and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific held in 
Manila in January, 1996; national studies, such as the 
Malaysian National Conference on Climate Change held at the 
University of Agriculture in August, 1996; and other indepen­
dent studies.
Tropical Asia
11.1.2. Physiography and Biogeography
Tropical A sia includes the major land masses of south and 
southeast Asia, as well as the long peninsulas that reach into
Box 11-1. Countries in Tropical Asia
Bangladesh
Myanmar
Bhutan
Nepal
Brunei Darussalam
Papua New Guinea
Cambodia
Philippines
India
Singapore
Indonesia
Sri Lanka
Laos
Thailand
Malaysia
Viet Nam
385
the eastern Indian and western Pacific Oceans and the arch­
ipelagoes comprising the thousands of islands of Indonesia, 
M alaysia, India, and the Philippines (Figure 11-1). 
Physiographically, Tropical Asia is extremely complex and 
diverse. It contains the highest mountains on Earth, the 
deepest seas, and the largest number of islands— the latter 
making up what has been called the “maritime continent.” 
The high mountains and the complex land-sea configuration 
have a strong influence on the weather and climate of the 
region.
Geologically, Tropical Asia straddles the boundary between 
the Indo-Australian and Pacific tectonic plates. The collision 
and subduction zones between these plates are characterized 
primarily by earthquakes, land movements, active volcan- 
ism, and volcanic eruptions, which are major environmental 
hazards. Earthquakes and land movements also are responsi­
ble for local differences in relative sea level. The massive 
eruptions of Krakatoa in Indonesia more than a century ago 
and of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991 caused cli­
matic cooling extending far beyond the region (Parker et al.,
1996).
Tropical Asia includes some large drainage basins, the sources 
of which extend into arid Asia to the north and west of the 
region. These basins include the Ganges, Brahmaputra, 
Meghna, Irrawaddy, and Salween Rivers, which drain into the 
Bay of Bengal and Andaman Sea; and the Nan, Mekong, and 
Red Rivers, which drain into the South China Sea. Varying 
impacts of climate change can be expected on the headwaters, 
broad valleys, and deltaic mouths of these catchments.
Biogeographically, the region includes the tropical Indo- 
Pacific borderlands, which have some of the greatest natural 
species diversity and productivity on Earth; coral reefs in the 
marine environment and tropical rainforests on land are prime 
examples. Ecological richness also is demonstrated by the 
region’s crop and livestock diversity and by its large numbers 
of cultivars and varieties. The diversity of managed plants and 
animals is a result, in part, of climate and soil; it also reflects 
the length of human settlement in Tropical Asia, as well as its 
cultural and ethnic diversity. In addition, a number of animals, 
insects, and microbes have developed in parallel with the veg­
etation in this region.
Agriculture in Tropical Asia evolved on the basis of unique 
crop-related diversity, and only a few crops from other 
regions have become acceptable. Throughout the region, 
agriculture is critically important; it accounts for more than 
30% of the gross domestic product (GDP) in at least seven 
countries. Climate-sensitive crops— such as rice, other grains 
and cereals, vegetables, and spices— are particularly important 
in the region. There is little doubt that agricultural systems in 
Tropical Asia have adapted to a range of environmental 
stresses over the region’s long history of human settlement 
and land-use change. Whether such resilience can continue in 
the face of climate change and economic and population 
changes is uncertain, although it is expected that the processes
386
Tropical Asia
of ongoing adaptation to changing environmental circum- 
11.2. 
Regional Clim ate 
stances will continue.
11.1.3. Settlement, Population, and Economy
Population estimates for the year 2025 for each country in 
Tropical Asia are given in Table 11-1, based on figures from 
WRI (1996); with the exception of Brunei, Singapore, Malaysia, 
and the Philippines, the populations of these countries are pre­
dominantly rural. By 2025, the region’s total population is 
expected to grow from the present 1.6 billion to about 2.4 billion, 
with the largest increases expected in urban areas. In 1995, 6  of 
the world’s 25 largest cities were located in Tropical Asia: 
Bombay (#5), Calcutta (#9), Jakarta (#11), Delhi (#17), Manila 
(#21), and Dhaka (#23); in terms of average annual growth rates 
during 1990-95, Dhaka was first (5.74%), Jakarta third (4.35%), 
and Bombay fifth (4.22%) among the 25 cities (see Table 11-2). 
In these and other cities of the region, rapid urban growth has 
been accompanied by a proliferation of slums and squatter set­
tlements without access to basic infrastructure, clean water, and 
sanitation, with associated health risks (UNEP, 1997).
Rapid economic development and industrialization have char­
acterized the economies of the region in recent years. In some 
countries (particularly in southeast Asia), there has been con­
siderable expansion in the use of natural resources— including 
the exploitation of forests and fisheries, which has resulted in 
increasing environmental degradation.
11.2.1. Present Climate Characteristics
The climate of Tropical Asia is dominated by the two mon­
soons: The summer southwest monsoon influences the climate 
of the region from May to September, and the winter northeast 
monsoon controls the climate from November to February. The 
monsoons bring most of the region’s precipitation and are the 
most critical climatic factor in the provision of drinking water 
and water for rain-fed and irrigated agriculture.
As a result of the seasonal shifts in weather, a large part of Tropical 
Asia is exposed to annual floods and droughts. The average annu­
al flood covers vast areas throughout the region; in India and 
Bangladesh alone, floods cover 7.7 million ha and 3.1 million ha, 
respectively (GOI, 1992; Mirza and Ericksen, 1996). At least four 
types of floods are common: riverine flood, flash flood, glacial lake 
outburst flood, and breached landslide-dam flood (bishayri); the 
latter two are limited to mountainous regions of Nepal, Bhutan, 
Papua New Guinea, and Indonesia. Flash floods are common in the 
foothihs, mountain borderlands, and steep coastal catchments; 
riverine floods occur along the courses of the major rivers, broad 
river valleys, and alluvial plains throughout the region.
Tropical cyclones also are an important feature of the weather 
and climate in parts of Tropical Asia. Two core areas of cyclo- 
genesis exist in the region: one in the northwestern Pacific 
Ocean, which particularly affects the Philippines and Viet
TmpicalAsia
Table 11-1: Tropical Asia population: 1995 and 2025.
387
Country
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
India
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Nepal
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Viet Nam
Total
Land Area 
(ООО ha)
Population 
in 1995 
(millions)
Estimated 
Population in 2025 
(millions)
13,017
4,700
527
17,652
297,319
181,157
23,080
32,855
65,755
13,680
45,286
29,817
61
6,463
51,089
32,549
815,007
120.433
1.638
0.285
10.251
935.744
197.588
4.882
20.140
46.527
21.918
4.302
67.581
2.848
18.354
58.791
74.545
1,585.827
196.128
3.136
0.389
19.686
1,392.086
275.598
9.688
31.577
75.564
40.693
7.532
104.522
3.355
25.031
73.584
118.151
2,376.720
Urban 
Population 
in 1995 (%)
Estimated 
Urban Population 
in 2025 (%)
18
6
58
21
27
35
22
54
26
14
16
54
100
22
20
21
40
19
44
45 
61 
45
73 
47 
34 
32
74 
100
43
39
39
Source: WRI, 1996—Data Tables A.l and 9.1.
Nam, and the other in the northern Indian Ocean, which par­
ticularly affects Bangladesh. Other extreme events include 
high-temperature winds, such as those that blow from the 
northwest into the Ganges valley during January.
In the megacities and large urban areas, high temperatures and 
heat waves also occur. These phenomena are exacerbated by 
the urban heat-island effect and air pollution.
Geographically much more extensive is the El Nino-Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, which has an especially 
important influence on the weather and interannual variability 
of climate and sea level, especially in the western Pacific 
Ocean, South China Sea, Celebes Sea, and northern Indian 
Ocean. Indeed, the original historical record of El Nino events 
compiled by Quinn et al. (1978) considered the relationships
among Indonesian droughts, the Southern Oscillation, and El 
Nino. For more recent analyses of historical ENSO telecon­
nections in the Eastern Hemipshere— based on teak tree-ring 
data from Java and a drought and famine chronology from 
India— see Whetton and Rutherford (1994,1996).
The strength of such connections has been demonstrated in 
several other studies. Suppiah (1997) has found a strong corre­
lation between the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) and sea­
sonal rainfall in the dry zone of Sri Lanka; Clarke and Liu 
(1994) relate recent variations in south Asian sea-level records 
to zonal ENSO wind stress in the equatorial Pacific. The influ­
ence of Indian Ocean sea-surface temperature on the large- 
scale Asian summer monsoon and hydrological cycle and the 
relationship between Eurasian snow cover and the Asian sum­
mer monsoon also have been substantiated (Sankar-Rao et a i.
Table 11-2: Cities in Tropical Asia included in world’s 25 largest cities, 1995.
Source: WRI, 1996— Data Table 1.1.
City
Population
(millions)
Rank in World 
Cities
Average Annnal 
Growth Rate (1990-95)
Rank in World 
Cities
Bombay
15.1
5
4.22
5
Calcutta
11.7
9
1.67
16
Jakarta
11.5
1 1
4.35
3
Delhi
9.9
17
3.80
6
Manila
9.3
2 1
3.05
8
Dhaka
7.8
23
5.74
1
388
Tropical Asia
1996; Zhu and Houghton, 1996). Kripalani et al. (1996) stud­
ied rainfall variability over Bangladesh and Nepal and identi­
fied its connections with features over India.
a. A n n u a l T cm p er a lu rc
1 .0 -
0.5-
yilHIUjljüjliyü
Fü  0.0-),
-0 .5 / ' ’ 
' "
- 1 .0 -
■ I..S
-1---------1--------- 1---------r
b- A n n u a l P r ecip ita tio n
-1----------1----------1----------г
с. T r o p ic a l C y c lo n e s  B a y  o f  B e n g a l
>,
u
"o
о
d . T r o p ic a l C y c lo n e .s V ie t N a m  
14n
I2 J 
10 
8  
6 - 
4- 
2
1<)(Ю 
1910 
1920 
1‘ЛО 
1440 
1950 
I960 
1970 
1980 
199tl
Figure 11-2: Time series of climate observations in Tropical 
Asia— a) observed annual temperature anomalies and b) 
observed precipitation anomalies, both relative to the 
1961-90 means [longer term variations of the annual anom­
alies are emphasized by the smooth curve using a nine-point 
binomial filter (see Annex A)]; c) annual number of tropical 
cyclones over the Bay of Bengal, Arabian Sea, and land 
(Gadgill, 1996); and d) annual number of tropical cyclones 
that cross the coast of Viet Nam from the South China Sea 
(data supplied by Marine Hydrometeorological Center, 
Hydrometeorological Service, Hanoi, S.R. Viet Nam).
11.2.2.1. Temperature and Precipitation
Over the past 100 years, mean surface temperatures have 
increased by 0.3-0.8°C across the region; the general increase 
is clearly evident in Figure ll-2 a. Although there is no definite 
trend discernible in the long-term mean for precipitation for the 
region (Figure 11-2b) or in individual countries during this 
time period, many countries have shown a decreasing trend in 
rainfall in the past three decades. The southwest monsoon in 
India has shown definite changes in the period 1961-1990, in 
comparison with either 1901-1930 or 1931-1960, though no 
consistent longer-term trend is detectable. In Viet Nam, mean 
annual temperature has increased over the period 1895-1980, 
with net warming estimated at 0.27°C over the past two 
decades. Variations in rainfall also have been observed, with 
geographical variation. Since the 1960s, annual rainfall has 
been increasing in the north of Viet Nam and decreasing in the 
south (Granich et a i, 1993).
11.2.2. Recent Climate Trends and Variability
11.2.2.2. Tropical Cyclones
The frequencies of tropical cyclones in the core regions of cyclo­
genesis in Tropical Asia are quite different. Data for a 27-year 
period (1958-84) indicate that the average number of cyclones 
per year in the northern Indian Ocean is 5.5, whereas the north­
western Pacific experiences an average of 26.1 cyclones per 
year— representing 7% and 33%, respectively, of the total num­
ber of global cyclones (Climate Impact Group, 1992).
No identifiable changes in the number, frequency, or intensity 
of tropical cyclones or depressions have been observed in the 
northern Indian Ocean cyclone region (Bay of Bengal and 
Arabian Sea) over the past 100 years, although Gadgill (1995) 
has shown decadal-scale variations— ^with a rising trend during 
1950-75 and a declining trend since that time (see Figure 11- 
2c). Similarly, there is evidence of substantial multidecadal 
variability in the northwestern Pacific, as shown by data from 
Viet Nam (see Figure ll-2 d ), though no clear evidence of long­
term trends (Henderson-Sellars and Zhang, 1997). In 
Bangladesh, during the period 1948-1988, a total of 418 
depressions and storms were formed, of which 79 were severe 
cyclonic storms (wind speed 69-117 km/hr). A  time-series pre­
pared by GOB (1989) indicates that, over the 40-year period, 
the highest number of depressions and storms formed in the 
1960s, whereas the 1980s showed a decreasing trend. These 
findings are in broad agreement with regional trends.
11.2.2.3. Trends in Climate-Related Phenomena:
Floods and Droughts
For the period 1871-1984, Parthasarathy et al. (1987) identi­
fied a range of 2-30 flood years (i.e., years when precipitation 
is at least 26% higher than normal) in the various meteorolog­
ical subdivisions in India. In the same period, the range of
0201020101530102020201020200000281000002050101
TmpicalAsia
389
severe flood years (i.e., precipitation more than 51% higher 
than normal) was between 1 and 14. Mirza et al. (1997) ana­
lyzed peak flood discharges recorded at various stations on the 
Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna rivers in Nepal, India, and 
Bangladesh and found no conclusive increasing or decreasing 
trends. Similarly, no trends were detected in time-series data of 
flooded areas in various river basins of India and Bangladesh.
Droughts also can reach devastating proportions in Tropical 
Asia, although the incidence is variable in time and place. In 
India, Parthasarathy et al. (1987) identified a range of 1-12 
severe drought years (i.e., precipitation 51% less than normal) 
for the various meteorological subdivisions of the subcontinent 
during the period 1871-1984. Chronically drought-affected 
areas cover the western parts of Rajasthan and the Kutch region 
of Gujrat (SAARC, 1992). In Bangladesh, about 2.7 million ha 
are vulnerable to annual drought; there is about a 1 0 % proba­
bility that 41-50%  of the country is experiencing drought in a 
given year (GOB, 1989). Drought or near-drought conditions 
also can occur in parts of Nepal (Sharma, 1979) and in Papua 
New Guinea and Indonesia, especially during El Nino events.
fall (i.e., land emergence) of 1.33 mm/yr to a rise (i.e., land 
submergence) of 2.27 mm/yr.
In many parts of Tropical Asia, historical sea-level records 
appear to show not only a eustatic component but also local 
anthropogenic or meteorological effects. In Bangkok, for 
example, extraction of water from groundwater aquifers has 
resulted in accelerated land subsidence (i.e., a relative rise in 
sea level) of around 20 mm/yr since 1960, compared with an 
earlier trend of about 3 mm/yr (see IPCC 1996, WG II, Section
9.3.1); in contrast, high recent rates of sea-level rise in Manila 
have been blamed on coastal reclamation (Spencer and 
Woodworth, 1993). Analysis of time-series data for 1955-1990 
indicates an average sea-level rise of 1.9 mm/yr at Hondau in 
North Viet Nam. This finding is in broad agreement with the 
observed rise in global mean sea level (Granich et al., 1993). 
Meteorological effects generated by zonal interannual winds 
blowing along the Equator in the Pacific Ocean have been 
detected in the interannual sea-level signal that occurs along 
more than 8,000 km of Indian Ocean shoreline, extending from 
southern Java to Bombay (Clarke and Liu, 1994).
11.2.2.4. 
Trends in Sea Level
11.2.3. 
Projections of Future Climates: Regional Scenarios
The IPCC Second Assessment Report (IPCC 1996, WG I, 
Section 7.2) indicates that:
• 
Global mean sea level has risen 10-25 cm over the 
last 1 0 0  years.
• 
There has been no detectable acceleration of sea-level 
rise during this century.
Warrick et al. (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 7.4) suggest that the 
observed sea-level rise has been caused largely by increases in 
global temperatures and related factors, including thermal 
expansion of the ocean and melting of glaciers and ice caps. 
Changes in surface water and groundwater storage, along with 
tectonic movements and subsidence, also may have affected 
local sea levels.
Major difficulties in determining regional sea-level trends for 
Tropical Asia relate to the limited amount of historical tide- 
gauge data and the region’s high decadal and interannual vari­
ability. For instance, only one station in the region (Bombay) is 
included in the list of stations with records exceeding 75 years 
used by Douglas (1992) to determine global acceleration in sea 
level; this study showed a -0 . 0 2  mm/yr acceleration for the 
109-year record (1878-1987). With reference to Bangladesh, 
Warrick et al. (1996) indicate that existing tide-gauge data do 
not yet allow an unambiguous estimate of regional and local 
trends in relative sea-level change and their causes.
Studies of historical rates of relative sea-level rise in the 
South Asia Seas region, reported by Gable and Aubrey 
(1990), indicate an average annual relative sea-level rise of 
0.67 mm/yr. In addition, during the past half-century or so, 
relative sea-level changes in the region have ranged from a
11.2.3.1. Background Information
The first detailed climate scenario for south and southeast Asia 
was developed by the Climate Impact Group (1992), as part of 
the Asian Development Bank’s 1994 regional study on global 
environmental issues (including climate change); the methodol­
ogy is outlined by Whetton (1994). Analyses were carried out 
using data obtained in experiments with four general circulation 
models (GCMs): the Canadian Climate Centre model (CCCJl), 
the United Kingdom Meteorological Office model (UKMOH), 
the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics model (GFDLA), and the 
Australian CSIR09 model. All of the experiments used an 
atmospheric model coupled to a simplified ocean model and 
were run to equilibrium conditions for present levels of green­
house gases (GHGs) and for doubled CO 2 levels.
Comparisons of the control simulation of the GCMs with pre­
sent-day climatology included results for the region’s surface 
temperature, mean sea-level pressure, and precipitation. The 
broad-scale observed patterns are well simulated, including the 
summer and winter monsoons. Results described by Suppiah 
(1994), based on the aforementioned models, indicated 
strengthening of the monsoon circulation and an increase in 
wet-season rainfall under enhanced greenhouse conditions—  
that is, an increase in summer rainfall in the southwest mon­
soon region and an increase in winter rainfall in the northeast 
monsoon region.
11.2.3.2. Temperature and Rainfall
Temperature and rainfall scenarios are based on simulated 
changes averaged over two broad seasons: the southwest
390
Tropical Asia
Table 11-3: Temperature change scenarios fo r 2010 and 
2070 (°C).
Region
Year
2010 
2070
Indonesia, Philippines, 
and coastal south and
southeast Asia 
0.1-0.5 
0.4—3.0
Inland south and 
southeast Asia (not 
south Asia in
June-July-August) 
0.3-0.7 
1.1-4.5
Inland south Asia in
June-July-August 
0.1-0.3 
0.4-2.0
Source: Whetton, 1994.
Other simulations of changes in rainfall indicated a tendency 
for an increase in wet-season rainfall in both monsoon regions, 
with changes ranging from -5% to +18% (Climate Impact 
Group, 1992). More consistent and much larger rainfall 
increases are projected for the south Asia subregion wet sea­
son, with values ranging from +17% to +59%. Changes in dry- 
season rainfall are less consistent and are estimated only as 
broad-scale regional rainfall changes; local-scale changes 
could be much greater.
Systematic increases in average rainfall intensity are a com­
mon feature in simulated daily rainfall experiments, along 
with associated increases in the projected frequency of heavy 
rainfall events. W hetton et al. (1994) conclude that there is 
reason for higher confidence in increasing rainfall intensity in 
south and southeast Asia under enhanced greenhouse condi­
tions than in increases or decreases in total rainfall in particu­
lar regions.
monsoon and the northeast monsoon. Temperature scenarios 
for Tropical Asia reported by W hetton (1994) and the Climate 
Im pact Group (1992) suggest that tem perature would 
increase throughout most of the region, although the amount 
of warming is projected to be less than the global average. 
Moreover, results presented in Table 11-3 indicate that there 
may be differences within the region, depending on proxim i­
ty to the sea. Thus, warming is projected to be least in the 
islands and coastal areas throughout Indonesia, the 
Philippines, and coastal south Asia and Indo-China and great­
est in inland continental areas of south Asia and Indo- 
China— except from June to August in south Asia, where 
reduced warming could occur.
In terms of rainfall, the models considered by Whetton (1994) 
suggested an April-to-September maximum over south Asia and 
the Indo-China peninsula and a minimum over Indonesia and 
areas near Australia. Projections of regionally averaged changes 
in rainfall for the years 2010 and 2070 are given in Table 11-4.
11.2.3.3. 
Tropical Cyclones
Current 
atm osphere-ocean 
general 
circulation 
model 
(AOGCM) simulations have limited ability to suggest likely 
changes in tropical cyclone activity; until high-resolution 
GCM simulations are available, it is not possible to say 
whether the frequency, area of occurrence, time of occurrence, 
mean intensity, or maximum intensity of tropical cyclones will 
change in Tropical Asia. However, more recent studies with 
models of higher resolution appear to be able to simulate trop­
ical cyclone climatology (Bengtsson et al., 1995). Bengtsson et 
al. (1995) found a decrease in the number of tropical cyclones 
under enhanced greenhouse scenarios, especially in the 
Southern Hemisphere, although their geographical distribution 
remained unchanged.
A  study by Holland (1997) indicated that tropical cyclones are 
unlikely to be more intense than the worst storms experienced 
under present-day climate conditions— although some poten­
tial exists for changes in cyclone intensity in tropical oceanic
Table 11-4: Rainfall scenarios for 2010 and 2070 (% change).
Region
2 0 1 0
Wet Season
2 0 1 0
Dry Season
2070
Wet Season
2070
Dry Season
Southwest Monsoon Region
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Philippines (western part), 
and Viet Nam (except east coast)
0
0
Oto 1 0
- 1 0  t o + 1 0
Northeast M onsoon Region
Indonesia, Philippines (east part), Viet Nam (east coast), 
Sri Lanka, and Malaysia
Oto -5
0
-5 to +15
0  to + 1 0
South Asia Subregion (15-30°N; 65-95°E)
0  to + 1 0
-5 to +5
+5 to +50
-5 to +20
Source: Whetton, 1994.
Tropical Asia
391
regions, where sea-surface temperature (SST) is betwen 26°C 
and 29°C. According to Henderson-Sellars and Zhang (1997), 
recent studies indicate that the maximum potential intensities 
of cyclones will remain the same or undergo a modest increase 
of up to 1 0 - 2 0 %; they add that these predicted changes are 
small compared with observed natural variations and fall with­
in the uncertainty range in current studies. Lai et al. (1995a), in 
their ECHAM3-T106 experiment, found no significant change 
in the number and intensity of monsoon depressions in the 
Indian Ocean in a warmer climate. Similarly, likely changes in 
the ENSO phenomenon under enhanced greenhouse conditions 
and their possible impact on the interannual variability of the 
summer monsoon are not known.
The spatial patterns of increases in surface temperature during 
winter (DJF) and summer (JJA), simulated by the more recent 
coupled AOGCMs, tend to confirm, to a large extent, the pro­
jections of the Climate Impact Group (1992) for the monsoon 
Asian region. Area-averaged increases in temperature for dou­
bled CO 2  conditions are, however, lower by 15-20% in the 
transient experiments (using AOGCMs and based on a 1% 
increase in CO 2 ) than in equilibrium experiments (using atmos­
pheric GCMs and based on an instantaneous doubling of CO 2  
and a mixed-layer ocean). The area-averaged increase in sum­
mer monsoon rainfall and its spatial distribution are highly 
variable among GCMs, although all models produce an 
increase in monsoon rainfall.
11.2.4. A Recent Scenario for the Indian Subcontinent
The response of the monsoon climate to transient increases in 
GHGs and sulfate aerosols in the Earth’s atmosphere has 
recently been examined by Lai et al. (1995b), using data gen­
erated by the MPI-ECHAM3 atmospheric model, coupled to a 
large-scale geostrophic ocean model (ECHAM3 + LSG). The 
authors identified the potential role of sulfate aerosols in 
obscuring GHG-induced warming over the Indian subcontinent 
during the past century and found that year-to-year variability 
in simulated monsoon rainfall for the past century is in fair 
agreement with observed climatology.
Lai et al. (1995b) then presented a scenario of climate change 
for the Indian subcontinent for the middle of the next centu­
ry, taking into account projected emissions of GHGs and sul­
fate aerosols. They suggested an increase in annual mean 
maximum and minimum surface air temperatures of 0.7°C 
and 1.0°C over the land regions in the decade of the 2040s 
with respect to the 1980s. This warming would be less pro­
nounced during the monsoon season than in the winter 
months. A significant decrease in the winter diurnal tempera­
ture range, with no appreciable change during the monsoon 
season, also is projected (Lai et al., 1996). Moreover, pro­
jected warming of the land region of the Indian subcontinent 
is likely to be relatively lower in magnitude than that of the 
adjoining ocean, resulting in a decline in the land-sea thermal 
contrast— the primary factor responsible for the onset of sum­
mer monsoon circulation.
As a consequence— and contrary to simulations that consider 
only CO 2  forcing— Lai et al. (1995b) found a decline in mean 
summer monsoon rainfall of about 0.5 mm/day over the region, 
which is marginally above the range of interannual variability 
for the present-day atmosphere. This decline in summer mon­
soon rainfall resulting from combined GHG and aerosol forc­
ing in the southeast Asian region also has been suggested in the 
UKMO GCM experiments (see Figure B-2).
Despite the great strides that have been made in objective mod­
eling of climate and climate change through AOGCMs, there 
still are uncertainties associated with model projections, espe­
cially for climate change on regional scales. The problem is 
even more complicated when researchers attempt to project 
time-dependent regional climatic responses to future increases 
in radiative forcing from anthropogenic GHGs and aerosols. 
Because the anthropogenically induced sulfate aerosol burden 
has large spatial and temporal variations in the atmosphere, its 
regional-scale impacts could be in striking contrast to the 
impacts of GHGs— the concentrations of which are likely, in 
most cases, to change uniformly throughout the globe. Spatially 
localized radiative forcing resulting from anthropogenic 
aerosols is confined largely to the Northern Hemisphere and 
tends to yield a steepening of normalized meridional tempera­
ture gradient in that hemisphere. The effects of aerosols also 
yield distinct precipitation responses in the tropical region in 
general and over the Asian monsoon region in particular. The 
implications of enhanced aerosol loading on tropospheric 
clouds, which could strongly modulate the monsoon climate, 
still are not clear. Because anthropogenic sulfate aerosol load­
ings are projected to be substantial over the southeast Asian 
region, their impact on the Asian summer monsoon needs to be 
more carefully examined. Their precise magnitude, as well as 
the roles of other localized potential forcings (e.g., aerosols 
from biomass burning, increases in tropospheric ozone), also 
must be known before confident predictions of regional 
changes in the monsoon climate and its variability can be made.
11.3. 
Vulnerabilities and Potential Impacts
11.3.1. General Comments
This section discusses impacts that could plausibly result from 
projected climate changes. In many studies relevant to Tropical 
Asia, however, specific scenarios are not identified; in several 
cases, assumptions also have been made about the magnitude 
and timing of potential climate changes. Four other points are 
of special relevance. First, climate change represents an impor­
tant additional external stress on the numerous ecological and 
socioeconomic systems in Tropical Asia that already are 
adversely affected by air, water, or land pollution, as well as 
increasing resource demands, environmental degradation, and 
nonsustainable management practices. Second, most of 
Tropical Asia’s ecological and socioeconomic systems are sen­
sitive to the magnitude and the rate of climate change. They 
also have developed a resilience through their long history of 
adaptation to environmental and cultural changes; identifying
392
Tropical Asia
resilient features is a particular challenge. Third, Tropical 
Asia’s physical environment is extremely diverse, and tradi­
tional systems of land use are very closely adapted to these 
conditions. Such diversity has important implications for 
assessing the impacts of future climate change, which would 
vary greatly from area to area, depending not only on the cli­
mate change scenario but also on specific local conditions and 
changes in factors such as population and technology. Finally, 
the potential impacts of climate change in Tropical Asia rarely 
have been quantified. Thus, the results of impact studies usual­
ly are qualitative and often have been directed toward identify­
ing the sensitivities of specific systems or sectors. In this 
regard, considerable progress has been made in recent years in 
assessing the sensitivity and vulnerability of some ecosystems.
activities, resources, and environments in the region. This 
progress is illustrated by the following discussion. Figure 11-3 
summarizes the potential impacts of some of the components 
of climate change in Tropical Asia.
11.3.2. Ecosystems and Biodiversity
Tropical Asia is rich in natural and managed (crop-related) bio­
diversity. The richness in terrestrial and coastal ecosystems can 
be gauged from the following facts:
• 
The rainforests of southeast Asia contain about 10% 
of the world’s floral diversity.
C lim ate Change
Greenhouse Gas Emission
Temperature (+)
Precipitation (+/-)
+ C 0,
Rice (+/-), 
Wheat (+/-), 
Mung Bean (+/-), 
Soybean (+/-)
Animal Health 
Productivity (+/-)
Forest (+/-)
Fisheries (-)
Cloudiness
Humidity (+)
Human Health
Heat Stress (-I-)
Malaria (+)
Dengue (+)
Water-Related 
Diseases (+)
Agriculture
Water Resources
Sea-Level Rise
Demand (+)
Supply (+/-)
Hydropower (+/-)
Reservoir 
Sedimentation (-)
Inland Water 
Quality (-)
Coastal 
Inundation (+)
Population 
Displacement (+)
Coastal Water 
Quality (-)
Degradation in 
Agricultural Land (+)
Loss of Coastal 
Mangroves (+)
Figure 11-3: Possible climate change-related impacts in Tropical Asia (+ = projected increase, - = projected decrease).
Tropical Asia
393
• 
The Indo-Pacific borderlands are the center of global 
shallow-water diversity, containing the greatest num­
ber of coral, mangrove, sea grass, and coastal fish 
genera in the world.
In both cases, however, habitat loss and degradation have 
reached acute levels (UNEP, 1997).
Potential climate change-related impacts are highlighted in the 
following examples, along with other types of human-related 
impacts.
increased erosion and overland flows in the highly dissected 
and steep terrain of the Greater Himalayas. Weedy species with 
a wide ecological tolerance will have an advantage over others. 
High-elevation tree species— such as Abies, Acer, and Betula—  
prevail in cold climates because of their adaptations to chilling 
winters. Temperature increases would result in competition 
between such species and new arrivals. The sensitivity of 
plants to climatic factors and, in particular, water stress in the 
summit region of Mt. Kinabalu, Borneo— the highest mountain 
in southeast Asia— recently has been demonstrated (Kitayama,
1996).
11.3.2.1. 
Terrestrial Ecosystems
11.3.2.1.1. Tropical forests
Forests are extremely sensitive to climate change, as well as to 
other stresses. Section 1.4 of the Working Group II contribu­
tion to the SAR (IPCC, 1996) concludes that tropical forests 
are likely to be more affected by changes in land use than by 
climate change, as long as deforestation continues at its current 
high rate; that any degradation of these forests, whether it is 
caused by climate or land-use changes, will lead to an irre­
versible loss in biodiversity; and that tropical forests are likely 
to be more affected by changes in soil water availability 
(caused by the combined effects of changes in temperature and 
rainfall) than by changes in temperature per se.
Details on the potential impacts of climate change on the 
forests of Tropical Asia are provided in Section 11.3.4.2.
11.3.2.1.2. Freshwater wetlands
Freshwater wetlands or peatlands are accumulations of decom­
posed organic matter that have an ability to store water, reduce 
floodwater peaks, and provide water during dry periods. More 
than 10% (43 million ha) of global peatlands are located in the 
humid tropical zone of Asia; by far the largest area of peatlands 
is in Indonesia, especially the Kalimantan region, followed by 
Malaysia and Papua New Guinea (Rieley et a i, 1995). Tropical 
peatlands require high rainfall input and are sensitive to 
drought and changes in land use; impacts on drainage, for 
example, compromise the sustained utilization of the peatland 
resource. Projected increases in évapotranspiration and 
increased rainfall variability are likely to have negative 
impacts on the viability of peatlands, resulting in dessication 
and shrinkage.
11.3.2.1.4. Crop biodiversity
In addition to the biodiversity of the region’s natural terrestrial 
ecosystems. Tropical Asia has a unique crop-related biodiver­
sity. In particular, the Indochina-Indonesian and Hindustani 
regions have been identified as centers of diversity of a great 
many crops and other economically important plants that orig­
inate in these regions. Tropical Asia abounds in diverse cereal, 
tree, spice, and fruit species, which are endowed with unique 
genetic properties. Thousands of accessions of rice, cucurbits, 
legumes, mangoes, citrus, and other species and varieties have 
been collected and conserved. Maintenance of this diversity to 
allow further evolution to occur in response to climate change 
may be important for future generations, particularly when the 
effects of increasing human populations also are taken into 
account. Moreover, because of their interdependence and 
shared evolutionary history, the plants, animals, and microbes 
in the region strongly influence each other. For example, a 
change in insect population and diversity could influence the 
evolution of plant biodiversity, and vice-versa. These sub­
jects— ^which are the basis of ecological sustenance, crop and 
animal improvement, and ultimately economic growth—  
remain unexplored.
11.3.2.2. 
Coastal Ecosystems
The Indo-Pacific borderlands contain the greatest shallow- 
water and intertidal biodiversity on Earth. Coral reefs have the 
highest biodiversity of any marine ecosystem; coral reef mac­
robiota represent about 4-5%  of the described global biota. 
Coral reef diversity and the majority of the region’s coral gen­
era are centered around the archipelagoes of the Philippines 
and Indonesia. Similar rich concentrations of species in the 
region occur in mangroves and tropical sea grasses 
(Woodroffe, 1990; Mukai, 1993).
11.3.2.1.3. M ontane ecosystems
Changes in high-elevation ecosystems can be expected as a 
consequence of global warming. For instance, the present dis­
tribution of species is projected to shift to higher elevations, 
although the rates of vegetation change are expected to be 
slow, and colonization success would be constrained by
11.3.2.2.1. Coral reefs
The effects of climate change on coral reefs have been reviewed 
by Wilkinson and Buddemeier (1994). Brown et al. (1994) have 
shown that coral reefs are particularly sensitive to prolonged 
increases in seawater temperature and increased irradiance. 
Oxidation stress during exposure to elevated temperatures also
394
TmpicalAsia
has been shown to cause coral bleaching (Lesser, 1997). In 
Tropical Asia, projected increases in surface air temperature 
could lead to increases in seawater temperature, posing a major 
threat to the health of coral reefs. In Indonesia, where severe 
bleaching took place as a result of seawater warming during an 
ENSO event in 1983, coral reefs have failed to show continued 
recovery beyond the initial recovery noted in 1988 (Brown and 
Suharsono, 1990).
11.3.2.2.2. Mangroves
Mangroves constitute a significant part of tropical coastal bio­
diversity. They are found throughout Tropical Asia, where they 
occupy more than 75,000 km^, or 40% of the world’s total area 
of mangroves. Indonesia alone, with 42,530 km^, accounts for 
23% of the world total; India (with 6,700 km2), Malaysia (with 
6,424 km2), and Bangladesh (with 5,767 km^) each have over 
3% of the world total (Spalding, 1997). Over the past few 
decades, mangrove forests in Tropical Asia have declined con­
siderably as a consequence of human activities. The 
Philippines and Thailand have experienced reductions of 60% 
and 55%, respectively, over 25 years. Between 1980 and 1990, 
the area of mangroves declined by more than 37% in Viet Nam 
and more than 12% in Malaysia. These figures suggest a loss 
of nearly 7,500 km^ of mangrove forests in these four countries 
alone— representing more than 4% of the current global total.
Mangroves may be affected by climate change-related increas­
es in temperature and sea-level rise. Although the temperature 
effect on growth and species diversity is not known, sea-level 
rise may pose a serious threat to these ecosystems. In 
Bangladesh, for instance, there is a threat to species in the three 
distinct ecological zones that make up the Sundarbans— the
largest continuous mangrove area in the world. If the saline 
water front moves further inland, Heritiera fom es (the domi­
nant species in the landward freshwater zone) could be threat­
ened. Species in the other two ecological zones (Excoecaria 
agallocha in the moderately saltwater zone and Ceriops decan- 
dra in the saltwater zone) also could suffer. These changes 
could result in economic impacts: Direct employment support­
ed by the Sundarbans is estimated to be in the range of 
500,000-600,000 people for at least half of the year (ESCAP, 
1987), and a large number of these people— who are directly 
employed in the industries that use raw materials from the 
Sundarbans (e.g., woodcutting; collection of thatching materi­
als, honey, beeswax, and shells; fishing)— may lose their 
sources of income. Sea-level rise also may threaten a wide 
range of mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles, and crustaceans 
living in the Sundarbans. A  large part of the coastal area that 
now is protected by the Sunderbans will be vulnerable to 
cyclonic storms and surges. In Thailand, the potential impact of 
sea-level rise on the mangrove community is a serious issue 
(Aksorakaoe and Paphavasit, 1993).
11.3.3. 
Hydrology and Water Resources
11.3.3.1. Introduction
The impact of climate change on the water resources of 
Tropical Asia may be significant. Whetton et al. (1994) suggest 
that increased evaporation (resulting from higher tempera­
tures), combined with regional changes in precipitation char­
acteristics (e.g., total amount, variability, and frequency of 
extremes), has the potential to affect mean runoff, frequency, 
and intensity of floods and droughts; soil moisture; and water 
supplies for irrigation and hydroelectric generation. Anglo et
Table 11-5: Water resources and use in Tropical Asia.
C ountry
A nnual 
Internal 
Renew able (km^)
A nnual
W ithdraw al
(km3)
% of
W ater
Resources
Sectoral W ithdraw al (%)
Domestic 
Industry 
Agriculture
Bangladesh
2,357.0
22.50
1
3
1
96
Bhutan
95.5
0 . 0 2
0
36
1 0
54
Cambodia
496.1
0.52
0
5
1
94
India
2,085.0
380.00
18
3
4
93
Indonesia
2,530.0
16.59
1
13
1 1
76
Laos
270.0
0.99
0
8
1 0
82
Malaysia
456.0
9.42
2
23
30
47
Myanmar
1,082.0
3.96
0
7
3
90
Nepal
170.0
2 . 6 8
2
4
1
96
Philippines
323.0
29.50
9
18
2 1
61
Singapore
0 . 6
0.19
32
45
51
4
Sri Lanka
43.2
6.30
15
2
2
96
Thailand
179.0
31.90
18
4
6
90
Viet Nam
376.0
28.90
8
13
9
78
Source: WRI, 1996— Data Table 13.1.
Tropical Asia
395
al. (1996) confirm that water resources in the region are very 
sensitive not only to changes in temperature and precipitation 
but also to changes in tropical cyclones. For example, runoff in 
Nepal is affected by snow cover, the southwest monsoon, and 
cyclones— all of which may be affected by climate change.
Water resources in the region also are vulnerable to increasing 
demand resulting from population growth, urbanization, indus­
trialization, and agriculture (Schreir and Shah, 1996). At pre­
sent, agriculture is the predominant water use throughout the 
region (see Table 11-5).
11.3.3.2. Hydrological Systems
The effects of climate change on hydrology in Tropical Asia 
would have many facets. In the Himalayas, the storage of pre­
cipitation in the form of snow and ice (in glaciers) over a long 
period provides a large water reservoir that regulates annual 
water distribution. The majority of rivers originating in the 
Himalayas have their upper catchments in snow-covered areas 
and flow through steep mountains. This factor and the perenni­
al nature of the rivers provide excellent conditions for the 
development of hydropower resources, despite the temporal 
variability in the sources of runoff for Himalayan rivers. 
Studies of one large catchment in the western Himalayas (the 
Chenab, a tributary of the Indus) show that the average 
snowmelt and glacier-melt contribution to the annual flow is 
49.1%; a significant proportion of runoff is derived from snow 
in the dry season, when water demand is highest (Singh et a l,
1997). Climate change-related increases in temperature also 
could increase the rate of snowmelt and reduce the amount of 
snowfall, if the winter is shortened.
If climate change does alter the rainfall pattern in the 
Himalayas, the impacts could be felt in the downstream coun­
tries— that is, India and Bangladesh. By and large, dry-season 
flow in the major Himalayan rivers in a given year results from 
the monsoon rainfall of the previous year. Catchments in Nepal 
supply about 70% of the dry-season flow of the Ganges River, 
and tributaries of the Brahmaputra River originating in Bhutan 
supply about 15% of the total annual flow of that river. If cli­
mate change disrupts these resources and alters mountain 
hydrological regimes, the effects will be felt not only in the 
montane core of Tropical Asia but also downstream, in coun­
tries that depend on this water resource.
Any change in the length of the monsoon also would be sig­
nificant. For instance, if the southwest monsoon arrives later or 
withdraws earlier, soil moisture deficits in some areas may get 
worse. On the other hand, prolonged monsoons may contribute 
to more frequent flooding and increase the depth of inundation 
in many parts of the large river basins. If precipitation increas­
es, dry-season river flow may increase because of increased 
recharge in the monsoon season. For instance, flooding is 
experienced on the east coast of Malaysia and in the coastal 
areas of Sarawak and Sabah almost every year during the rainy 
northeast monsoon season; these floods become severe and
catastrophic with heavy rainstorms around the same time of the 
year (Sooryanarayana, 1995). Increases in rainfall during the 
northeast monsoon, as well as increases in the magnitude of 
extreme rainfall events— both of which have been projected 
with climate change— are expected to increase the frequency 
and intensity of flooding in the region.
Divya and Mehrotra (1995) examined regional effects of cli­
mate change on various components of the hydrological 
cycle— such as surface runoff, soil moisture, and évapotranspi­
ration— by applying a conceptual model on a monthly time 
scale. The experiment was conducted using hypothetical sce­
narios in three drainage basins located in different agroclimat­
ic zones of central India. The authors found that basin charac­
teristics— such as soil type, moisture-holding capacity, and 
runoff coefficients— significantly influence basin runoff. More 
recently, Mirza (1997) modeled nine subbasins of the Ganges 
River using the GISS transient scenario (a global coupled 
ocean-atmosphere climate model with 4x5-degree resolution). 
The GCM experiment is based on 74 years, during which CO 2  
increases by 1% (compounded) per year. Mirza (1997) found 
that changes in mean annual runoff in the range of 27-116% 
occurred in the subbasins at doubled CO 2  and that runoff was 
more sensitive to climate change in the drier subbasins than in 
the wetter subbasins.
11.3.3.3. Runoff and River Discharge
Water resources in Tropical Asia could be significantly affected 
by climate change. Results from early greenhouse warming sim­
ulations in MPI-ECHAM3 model experiments reported in Lai
(1994) suggest that mean annual surface runoff throughout the 
region could increase by about 15% by the end of the century, 
with the greatest increases in northeast India and Indonesia. 
However, a more recent study (Lai et a l, 1995b) that takes into 
account the combined effects of GHGs and aerosols suggests a 
future decline in surface runoff throughout the region.
In many parts of the region, the ratio of monsoon-to-dry-season 
runoff is very high (e.g., nearly 6;1 for the Ganges River). 
Because water requirements for agriculture and other water-use 
sectors are significantly higher during the dry season than during 
the monsoon, water supply in the dry season often cannot meet 
demand. Any change in the availability of water resources as a 
consequence of climate change may have a substantial effect on 
agriculture, navigation, fisheries, industrial and domestic water 
supply, reservoir storage and operation, and salinity control 
(Divya and Mehrotra, 1995; Mirza and Dixit, 1997).
Mirza (1997) applied empirical models using standardized pre­
cipitation scenarios from the CSIR09, UKMO, GFDL, and 
T .T .NL GCMs to estimate changes in mean annual discharge of 
the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers in Bangladesh. For the 
CSIR09-E1 (Whetton et a i, 1993), GFDL-A2 (Whetherald 
and Manabe, 1986), and LLNL GCM experiments, the global 
warming value is equivalent to the climate sensitivity of the 
climate model (i.e., the equilibrium global mean temperature
396
Tropical Asia
change for a doubling of C 0
2 -equivalent concentration). For 
the UKM 0-X5 GCM experiment (Murphy and Mitchell,
1995), the changes are defined as the difference between the 
mean climate state of one decade in the perturbed integration 
minus the climate state of the equivalent decade in the control 
Integration. In the study, a 2-6°C  temperature increase was 
considered; under a 4°C global mean temperature change sce­
nario, mean annual discharge of the Ganges River could 
increase by 27% (CSIR09), 42% (UKMO), 15% (GFDL), or 
2% (LLNL). Under the same temperature scenario, mean annu­
al discharge of the Brahamaputra River may change by -0.1%, 
+13%, +9%, and +2% for the four GCMs, respectively. For 
higher temperature increases, the changes vary linearly.
The sediment load transported by these rivers is a nonlinear 
function of discharge. The implications of these increases in 
discharge on the sediment load of the Ganges and 
Brahamaputra— ^which already carry an extraordinarily heavy 
sediment load and have a high, though irregular, rate of down­
stream deposition— could be severe (Subram anian and 
Ramanathan, 1996).
Riebsame et al. (1995) conducted a study on the potential 
effect of climate change on water resources of the Mekong 
River basin. Equilibrium precipitation scenarios for doubled 
CO 2  from the GISS (Hansen et al., 1983), GFDL (Mitchell et 
a l, 1990), and UKMO (Wilson and Mitchell, 1987) GCMs, as 
well as a transient scenario (for the year 2030) from the GISS 
GCM (Hansen et a l, 1988), were used in the assessment. 
Riebsame et a l (1995) found slight or no changes in annual 
river flows, but they did detect changes in seasonality. Reduced 
hydropower production and low-flow augmentation from a 
planned cascade of 13 dams also were projected.
11.3.4. Food and Fiber: Agriculture,
Forestry, and Fisheries
11.3.4.1. Agriculture
11.3.4.1.1. Regional importance o f agriculture
Agriculture dominates land use and the economies of most 
countries in Tropical Asia. Arable land and permanent pasture 
occupy 15-35%  of the land area in most countries; they occu­
py approximately 60% and 80% in India and Bangladesh, 
respectively (see Table 11-6). Agriculture is a key economic 
sector, employing more than half of the labor force and 
accounting for 10-63%  of the GDP in 1993 in most countries 
of the region. Substantial foreign exchange earnings also are 
derived from exports of agricultural products.
Agriculture in Tropical Asia has evolved on the basis of 
regionally available crop biodiversity; only a few crops from 
other regions— such as wheat, potatoes, and tomatoes— have 
competed with endemic crops and become widely cultivated. 
Much of the land is intensively cropped, and there is a short­
age of agricultural land in some countries (see Annex D). 
Most areas have the potential to produce a variety of crops 
through year-round cultivation; in several areas, more than 
one crop is grown annually on the same field. Many crop com­
binations are common, either individually or as intercrops. 
Because farmers in the region utilize a variety of cropping sys­
tems, studies df one specific crop in one area cannot be extrap­
olated to represent tropical agriculture in Asia or its impact on 
the agricultural economy in general. Some indication of the 
range of potential impacts is highlighted in the examples 
below.
Table 11-6: Land use in Tropical Asia, 1991-93.
Country
Land Area 
(ООО ha)
Cropland 
(ООО ha)
Permanent 
Pasture (ООО ha)
Forest and 
Woodland (ООО ha)
Other Land 
(ООО ha)
Bangladesh
13,017
9,700
800
1,896
818
Bhutan
4,700
133
272
3,100
1,194
Brunei
527
7
6
450
64
Cambodia
17,652
2,367
1,967
11,667
1,652
India
297,319
169,547
11,533
68,330
47,909
Indonesia
181,157
30,993
11,776
111,258
27,130
Laos
23,080
807
800
703
20,770
Malaysia
32,855
4,880
27
20,347
7,601
Myanmar
65,755
10,061
359
32,397
22,938
Nepal
13,680
2,354
2 , 0 0 0
5,750
3,576
Papua New Guinea
45,286
412
13,577
7,377
2,014
Philippines
29,817
9,177
1,277
13,600
5,764
Singapore
61
1
3
57
Sri Lanka
6,463
1,903
439
2,126
1,995
Thailand
51,089
20,775
797
13,557
15,960
Viet Nam
32,549
6,607
328
9,639
15,975
Source: WRI, 1996— Data Table 9.1.
Table 11-7: Agricultural production in selected countries o f Tropical Asia (average annual production, 1992-95).
TmpicalAsia
397
Country
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Cambodia
India
Indonesia
Laos
Malaysia
Myanmar
Nepal
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Viet Nam
Total
Rice 
(ООО MT)
Wheat 
(ООО MT)
Maize 
(ООО MT)
26,120
43
2,161
117,920
48,205
1,454
2,108
17,472
3,228
10,025
2,570
20,217
22,989
274,512
1,144
5
58,760
132
840
60,881
3
40
55
9,722
7,387
66
39
243
1,269
4,534
30
3,732
806
27,926
Pulses 
(ООО MT)
525
2
14
13,683
374
42
965
184
37
40
374
71
16,311
Soybean 
(ООО MT)
36
4,003
1,686
5
35
12
4
512
111
6,404
Meat 
(ООО MT)
349
8
128
4,116
1,759
84
220
169
27
1,500
83
1,330
1,240
11,013
Milk 
(ООО MT)
792
32 
19
60,374
413
11
42
536
902
33 
279 
209
71
63,713
Source: FAO Production Yearbook, 1996.
Rice is the most important cereal crop in Tropical Asia. The 
importance of rice relative to other crops, as well as to meat 
and milk, is indicated by recent production figures (see Table
11-7). In Bangladesh, Cambodia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, 
Sri Lanka, and Viet Nam, rice constitutes 94-98%  of total cere­
al production. Cereal production in Thailand and Indonesia 
consists of 80% and 84% rice, respectively, with the remainder 
predominantly maize. Rice production in India, Nepal, and the 
Philippines accounts for 50%, 52%, and 6 6 % of the cereal pro­
duced; most of the remainder in India and Nepal is wheat, and 
maize is another important cereal in the Philippines. With 
regard to calorie intake in the monsoon region, 29-80% of the 
supply is contributed by rice; calorie intake from rice is high­
est in Bangladesh and lowest in Malaysia (Hossain and 
Fischer, 1995).
11.3.4.1.2. Vulnerability o f agriculture
Anglo et al. (1996) note that changes in average climate con­
ditions and climate variability will have a significant effect on 
agriculture in many parts of the region. Particularly vulnerable 
are low-income populations that depend on isolated agricul­
tural systems. These communities include many areas that 
concentrate on the production of tropical crops, such as tea 
and coconuts, as well as regions with limited access to agri­
cultural markets. Changes in climate variability would affect 
the reliability of agriculture and livestock production in the 
region. Increasing population also could place stress on agri­
cultural production. During the past three decades, food pro­
duction— largely rice and wheat— increased at a higher rate 
than did population growth, but these crops currently show 
signs of stagnating productivity; there also appears to be a 
decrease in the production of coarse grains in the region 
(Sinha, 1997).
Moreover, agricultural areas in Tropical Asia are vulnerable to 
many environmental hazards— including frequent floods, 
droughts, cyclones, and storm surges— that can damage life and 
property and severely reduce agricultural production. For exam­
ple, on average during 1962-1988, Bangladesh annually lost 
about half of a million tons of rice— nearly 30% of the country’s 
average annual food grain imports (BBS, 1989; Paul and Rashid,
1993)— as a result of floods. In India, the crop area affected by 
floods is nearly one-third of the average flood-prone area (GOI, 
1992). More insidious changes in the groundwater level, as well 
as groundwater pollution, appear to be taking place in some 
high-productivity agricultural areas of the country (Sinha, 1997).
Two additional factors increase the vulnerability of the agri­
cultural sector in the region. First, even though 35% of the 
region’s land is irrigated (Annex D), a significant portion of 
agriculture is rain-fed. About 46 million ha, or 88.5%, of glob­
al rain-fed lowland rice is cultivated in south and southeast 
Asia (IRRI, 1993). In eastern India, approximately 80% of the 
20 million ha of rice is grown in rain-fed lowlands (Zeigler and 
Puckridge, 1995). Yields for rice under rain-fed conditions in 
Asian tropical regions are low, compared with those of irrigat­
ed rice yields. A number of factors explain this pattern, includ­
ing floods, droughts, temporary inundation from rainfalls, and 
tidal flows and coastal salinity (Hossain and Fischer, 1995).
Second, the region supports a large human population per 
hectare of cropland: 5.4 people per hectare in south Asia and
5.7 in southeast Asia. Although the rate of growth of rice yields 
is modest in many countries of the monsoon region, it has been 
estimated that per-hectare rice yields will need to be doubled 
by 2025 to meet demand. Even if yields in rain-fed lowlands 
can be doubled through the development of high-yielding vari­
eties that are resistant to floods, droughts, and problem soils, 
the required rice yield from irrigated areas by 2025 will be
398
Tropical Asia
about 8  tons/ha (compared with current yields of 4.9 tons/ha) 
(Hossain and Fischer, 1995).
11.3.4.1.3. Climate change and crop yields
The main climate variables that are important for crops, as for 
other plants, are air temperature and humidity, cloudiness, solar 
radiation, water, and atmospheric CO 2  concentration; the first 
and last of these figure explicitly in climate change projections.
Selected crop studies for south and southeast Asia are summa­
rized in Section 13.6.2 of the Working Group II contribution to 
the SAR (IPCC, 1996). Yield impacts for rice for a number of 
countries and from four different studies are given in Table 11-8.
Estimated impacts of climate change on rice yields, as indicat­
ed in Table 11-8, are highly variable and depend on the 
rice/yield model, the choice of scenario, the region, the grow­
ing season, and other factors. Rice models, for instance, 
assume a constraint-free environment for water, fertilizers, 
pests, and other factors. Although there is an acknowledged 
need for further improvement in such models, these estimates 
clearly demonstrate that a single estimate of change in rice 
yield for the whole region would mean very little. Several local 
studies illustrate the fact that intraregional variability will be 
important in the future, as it is now.
In Bangladesh, the impact of climate change on high-yield rice 
varieties was studied by Karim et al. (1996), using the CERES- 
Rice model and several scenarios and sensitivity analyses. 
They found that:
Increased CO 2  levels increased rice yields.
• 
Considerable spatial and temporal variations occurred.
• 
High temperatures reduced rice yields in all seasons 
and in most locations.
• 
The detrimental effect of temperature rise more than 
offset the positive effect of increased CO 2  levels.
Similarly, experiments in India reported by Sinha (1994) found 
that higher temperatures and reduced radiation associated with 
increased cloudiness caused spikelet sterility and reduced 
yields to such an extent that any increase in dry-matter pro­
duction as a result of CO 2 fertilization proved to be no advan­
tage in grain productivity. Similar studies conducted recently in 
Indonesia and the Philippines confirmed these results. Amien 
et al. (1996) found that rice yields in east Java could decline by 
1% annually as a result of increases in temperature. In a study 
of northwest India, Lai et al. (1996) also found that reductions 
in yield resulting from a rise in surface air temperature offset 
the effects of elevated CO 2 levels; the projected net effect is a 
considerable reduction in rice yield.
Simulations of the impact of climate change on wheat yields 
for several locations in India using a dynamic crop growth 
model, WTGROWS, indicated that productivity depended on 
the magnitude of temperature change. In north India, a 1°C rise
in mean temperature had no significant effect on potential 
yields, although an increase of 2°C reduced potential grain 
yields in most places (Aggarwal and Sinha, 1993). In a subse­
quent study, Rao and Sinha (1994) used the CERES-Wheat 
simulation model and scenarios from three equilibrium GCMs 
(GISS, GFDL, and UKMO) and the transient GISS model to 
assess the physiological effects of increased CO 2  levels. In all 
simulations, wheat yields were smaller than those in the current 
climate, even with the beneficial effects of CO 2  on crop yield; 
yield reductions were associated with a shortening of the 
wheat-growing season resulting from projected temperature 
increases. Karim et al. (1996) also have shown that wheat 
yields are vulnerable to climate change in Bangladesh. Studies 
of the productivity of sorghum showed adverse effects in rain- 
fed areas of India (Rao et a i, 1995). Results were similar for 
corn yields in the Philippines (Buan et al., 1996).
The likely impact of climate change on the tea industry of Sri 
Lanka was studied by Wijeratne (1996). He found that tea yield 
is sensitive to temperature, drought, and heavy rainfall. An 
increase in the frequency of droughts and extreme rainfall 
events could result in a decline in tea yield, which would be 
greatest in the low-country regions (<600 m). Other important 
crops of the region include rubber, oil palm, coconut, sugar­
cane, coffee, and spices, but almost no information is available 
on the impact of climate change on these crops.
11.3.4.2. Forests and Forestry
In Tropical Asia, two major types of closed-canopy forest have 
been distinguished (Collins et al., 1991): rainforest and monsoon
Table 11-8: Yield impact o f selected climate change studies 
for rice in Tropical Asia.
G eographic Scope
Yield Im pact (%)
Reference
Bangladesh
- 6  to 1 - 8
1
Bangladesh
-ilO
2
Bangladesh
-9 to -1-14
4
Thailand
-17 to - 1 6
1
Thailand sites
-5 to -t- 8
3
Thailand
-12 to +9
4
Philippines
- 2 1  to -H 2
1
Philippines
decrease
2
Philippines
-14 to -114
4
Indonesia
-3
2
Indonesia
approx. -4
3
Indonesia
- 1 6  to -123
4
Malaysia
- 2 2  to - 1 2
3
Malaysia
- 1 2  to +27
4
Myanmar
-14 to - 1 2 2
4
Sources: IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 13.6.2; (1) Rosenzweig and 
Iglesias, 1994; (2) Qureshi and Hobbie, 1994; (3) Parry et al., 1992; 
(4) Matthews et al., 1994.
Tropical Asia
399
forest. Rainforests grow in ever-wet conditions where rainfall is 
heavy and spread throughout the year. These forests are ever­
green or semi-evergreen and include lowland, montane, and 
swamp forests. Monsoon forests grow where rainfall is high but 
unevenly spread throughout the year. Most monsoon forest trees 
are deciduous; they shed their leaves in the dry season. These 
two types of forest cover about 2 million km^ in the region, 
although many forests are degraded by logging, farming, and 
fire. In Malaysia, Myanmar, and Sumatra, forests are being mod­
ified by timber extraction. In Laos, Kalimantan, and Papua New 
Guinea, shifting cultivation is encroaching into the forests; in 
Bangladesh, India, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Viet 
Nam, only scattered relicts of relatively undamaged forests 
remain (Collins et al., 1991).
Studies of the potential regional impacts of climate change on 
the forests and forestry of Tropical Asia are limited, although a 
number of local studies have been carried out. Results of 
research from Thailand suggest that climate change would have 
a profound effect on the future distribution, productivity, and 
health of Thailand’s forests. Using climate change scenarios 
generated by the UKMO and GISS GCMs, Boonpragob and 
Santisirisomboon (1996) estimated that the area of subtropical 
forests could decline from the current 50% to either 20% or 12% 
of Thailand’s total forest cover (depending on the model used), 
whereas the area of tropical forests could increase from 45% to 
80% of total forest cover. Somaratne and Dhanapala (1996) used 
the same model for Sri Lanka and estimated a decrease in tropi­
cal rainforest of 2-11% and an increase in tropical dry forest of 
7-8%. A northward shift of tropical wet forests into areas cur­
rently occupied by tropical dry forests also is projected.
Teak is an important wood product throughout the region; in 
Java, it has been shown to be sensitive to variations in climate 
(Whetton and Rutherford, 1994). Using climate scenarios gen­
erated by ECHAM3, Achanta and Kanetkar (1996) have linked 
the precipitation effectiveness index (PEI) to net primary pro­
ductivity of teak plantations in Kerala State, India. They esti­
mate that a projected depletion of soil moisture would likely 
cause teak productivity to decline from 5.40 mVha to 5.07 
m3/ha. The productivity of moist deciduous forests also could 
decline, from 1.8 mVha to 1.5 m^/ha.
In recent decades, deforestation has increased in Tropical Asia. 
The impacts have been investigated in a series of GCM simula­
tions of the effects of deforestation on the local and regional cli­
mate (Zhang, 1994). In general, Zhang found that deforestation 
can modify land-surface characteristics, such as surface albedo 
and surface roughness, and thus redistribute the local surface 
energy budget. At the same time, modification of land-surface 
processes by deforestation may produce some disturbances of 
monsoon circulation over the southeast Asian region. 
Deforestation, along with the potential impacts of climate 
change, also may have a negative impact on sustainable-nutri- 
tion security in south Asia (Sinha and Swaminathan, 1991).
In semi-arid regions of Tropical Asia, tropical forests general­
ly are sensitive to changes in temperature and rainfall, as well
as changes in their seasonality. Fire— which also is influenced 
by these changes— significantly affects the structure, composi­
tion, and age diversity of forests in the region. Fire frequency 
is affected by intentional (e.g., slash and burn agriculture) and 
nonintentional changes in human land use, as well as by varia­
tions in climate (e.g., longer or shorter dry seasons).
11.3.4.3. Fisheries
Few studies have been done on the possible impact of climate 
change on fisheries in Tropical Asia, despite the fact that com­
mercial and subsistence marine and freshwater fisheries and 
aquaculture are important for the food security and the 
economies of many countries in the region. In the Philippines, 
for instance, fisheries account for about 4% of gross national 
product (GNP). The fisheries sector employs nearly a million 
people— about 26% of whom are engaged in aquaculture oper­
ations, 6% in commercial fishing, and 68% in marine and 
freshwater municipal fishing (i.e., artisinal, small-scale, or tra­
ditional fisheries) (Lim et a i, 1995). Overexploitation of 
inshore and inland fisheries in most countries of south and 
southeast Asia threatens fishery resources as well as the liveli­
hoods of the fishermen.
Section 16.2 of the Working Group II contribution to the SAR 
(IPCC, 1996) identified climate change impacts on several 
types of fisheries and considered health and infrastructural 
issues. For marine fisheries, slight changes in environmental 
variables— such as temperature, salinity, wind speed and direc­
tion, ocean currents, strength of upwelling, and predators— can 
shaфly alter the abundance of fish populations (Glantz and 
Feingold, 1992). Rises in sea level also may cause saline water 
fronts to penetrate further inland, which could increase the 
habitat of brackish-water fisheries. Coastal inundation also 
could damage the aquaculture industry.
The effect on inland fisheries may be felt strongly because large 
sections of the region’s population consume freshwater fish. 
Fisheries at higher elevations may be particularly affected by 
lower oxygen availability resulting from increases in tempera­
ture. In the plains, the timing and amount of precipitation may 
affect the migration of fish species from the river to the flood- 
plains for spawning, dispersal, and growth. If the magnitude and 
extent of floods increase, more flood-control projects would fur­
ther deplete floodplain fisheries. Current annual losses of open- 
water fish in Bangladesh from flood-control and drainage pro­
jects are estimated to be 65 kg/ha (Mirza and Ericksen, 1996).
11.3.5. 
M ountain and Upland Regions
Scenarios of climate change in the mountainous regions of the 
world are highly uncertain; they are poorly resolved even in the 
highest-resolution GCMs (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 5.2). A 
few impact studies have been carried out in the mountain 
regions of Tropical Asia, where topography and elevation also 
have an important influence on the regional climate.
400
TmpicalAsia
In Nepal, Bhutan, and northern India, for instance, mountains 
provide food, fuel, and fresh water— ^which are needed for 
human survival and are fundamental resources for tourism and 
economic development. Tourism contributes about 24% of 
Nepal’s foreign-exchange earnings (HMGN, 1992). Seasonal 
variations in the water resources of Nepal’s Himalaya region 
are very high: The maximum-to-minimum discharge ratios for 
the Kamali, Sapt Gandaki, and Sapt Kosi rivers are 120:1, 
180:1, and 105:1, respectively. This variation is due mainly to 
heavy and concentrated rainfall during a short time period; 
steep topography, which encourages higher surface runoff; and 
the high rate of deforestation in the watersheds (Uprety, 1988).
At high elevations in the Himalayas, an increase in temperature 
could result in faster recession of glaciers and an increase in 
the number and extent of glacial lakes— many of which, 
according to Watanabe et al. (1994), have formed in the past 
several decades. The rapid growth of such lakes could exacer­
bate the danger from glacial lake outburst floods (GLOFs), 
with potentially disastrous effects. GLOFs result from the fail­
ure of moraine dams when excessive hydrostatic pressure is 
exerted on dam walls as a result of increased melting and 
increased water depth in lakes. In a warmer world, GLOFs 
could be expected to increase in number and severity through­
out the Himalayas of India, Nepal, and Bhutan. Recent exam­
ples, which may be suggestive of increasingly frequent occur­
rences in the future, include the catastrophic outburst of two 
glacial lakes in the Lunana area, northern Bhutan, in October 
1994 (which resulted in the deaths of 21 persons and damage 
to villages, washed away bridges, and filled water with debris 
and large logs) and the 1985 outburst flood in KLumbu Himal, 
Nepal (Watanabe and Rothacher, 1996).
35 times higher than the design value. Increased severity and 
frequency of monsoonal storms and flooding in the Himalayas, 
which are expected outcomes of climate change, may signifi­
cantly alter the area’s erosion, river discharge, and sediment 
dynamics. Eventually, this may affect existing hydropower 
reservoirs, as well as those planned for construction in the 
Himalayas. Part of the generated sediment may be deposited on 
agricultural lands or in irrigation canals and streams, which 
will contribute to a deterioration in crop production and in the 
quality of agricultural lands.
11.3.6. 
Coastal Zones
The impacts of climate change on coastal areas in Tropical 
Asia could be severe and in some areas catastrophic. Nicholls 
et al. (1995) estimate that (assuming no adaptation and no 
change in existing population) a 1-m rise in sea level could dis­
place nearly 15 million, 7 million, and at least 2 million people 
from their homes in Bangladesh, India, and Indonesia, respec­
tively; millions more could be threatened in Viet Nam, 
Myanmar, Thailand, and the Philippines. (Potential impacts on 
special tropical coastal ecosystems, including coral reefs and 
mangroves, are discussed in Section 11.3.2.)
Sea-level rise and heavy rainfall events are projected with 
some confidence to increase with climate change; these 
increases, superimposed on existing coastal problems, would 
have major impacts, regardless of whether there is any change 
in the frequency or intensity of tropical storms.
Projected impacts include:
Devastating floods occur in the central Himalaya of Nepal dur­
ing the monsoon months of June through September. Monsoon 
floods differ from GLOFs and floods caused by breaching of 
landslide dams: They are of longer duration and less sudden in 
onset. The incessant rainfall of August 1987 submerged parts 
of central and eastern Terai in waters of as much as 1 m 
(BNJST, 1989). Damage from floods takes several forms, 
including the destruction of footbridges that often provide the 
only link between remote mountain villages; demolition of irri­
gation diversions; mass-wasting by undercutting of steep, 
stream-adjacent slopes; and damage to floodplain agricultural 
land by erosion and sedimentation (Marston et al., 1996).
The effects of climate change on soil erosion and sedimenta­
tion in mountain regions of Tropical Asia may be indirect but 
could be significant. An erosion rate in the range of 1-43 
tons/ha— ^with an average of 18 tons/ha— ^was calculated in 
three small experimental plots in central Nepal. Over the 3- 
year period of the experiment, 40-96%  of the annual losses 
occurred during two storms (Carver and Nakarmi, 1995). 
Uprety (1988) found a statistically significant correlation 
between monsoon precipitation in the Karnali and Spata Kosi 
watersheds in Nepal and sediment load. In a single storm in 
1993, Sthapti (1995) reported a sediment load into the reservoir 
of the Kulekhani hydropower project in Nepal that was about
• 
Land loss and population displacement 
Increased flooding of low-lying coastal areas
• 
Agricultural impacts (e.g., loss of yield and employ­
ment) resulting from inundation, salinization, and 
land loss
Impacts on coastal aquaculture
Impacts on coastal tourism, particularly the erosion of
sandy beaches.
Nicholls et al. (1995) consider the first of these impacts to be 
the most serious coastal issue in the region. They estimate that 
a 1-m rise in sea level could lead to land loss in Bangladesh, 
India, Indonesia, and Malaysia of nearly 30,000; 6,000; 34,000; 
and 7,000 km2, respectively. In Viet Nam, 5,000 km^ of land 
could be inundated in the Red River delta, and 15,000-20,000 
km^ of land may be threatened in the Mekong delta.
Several studies have been undertaken on the vulnerability of 
Bangladesh to climate change, particularly to sea-level rise. A 
comprehensive summary appears in Warrick and Ahmad 
(1996). Recent geological studies suggest that the magnitude 
of tectonic subsidence in the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta of 
Bangladesh is greater than has been taken into account in some 
earlier projections; this subsidence is expected to result in 
higher estimates of relative sea-level rise. Around the city of
Tropical Asia
401
Dhaka, average subsidence is about 0.62 mm/yr; elsewhere, it 
can exceed 20 mm/yr (Alam, 1996).
The Ganges-Brahmaputra delta is one of the world’s most 
densely populated areas, and the combined effects of subsi­
dence and sea-level rise could cause serious drainage and sed­
imentation problems, in addition to coastal erosion and land 
loss. With higher sea level, more areas would be affected by 
cyclonic surges; inland freshwater lakes, ponds, and aquifers 
could be affected by saline and brackish-water intrusion. The 
present limit of tidal influence is expected to move further 
upstream, and increases in soil salinity, as well as surface- 
water and groundwater salinity, may cause serious water sup­
ply problems for drinking and irrigation over large areas 
(Alam, 1996). Reduced dry-season freshwater supply from 
upstream sources may further exacerbate salinity conditions in 
the coastal area of Bangladesh. These impacts clearly would 
have immense socioeconomic costs.
The other large deltaic areas in Tropical Asia— such as the 
Irrawaddy in Myanmar and the Mekong and Red in Viet 
Nam— as well as smaller deltaic regions and low-lying coastal 
plains in India, Thailand, Cambodia, Malaysia, Indonesia, and 
the Philippines will be affected in similar ways. Specific exam­
ples of vulnerability assessments and impact analyses for sev­
eral south and southeast Asian countries are given in McLean 
and Mimura (1993), Chou (1994), Nicholls and Leatherman
(1995), Erda et al. (1996), and Milliman and Haq (1996).
The magnitude of physical and socioeconomic impacts of sea- 
level rise alone on a small segment of the Malaysian coast in 
West Johor, which is occupied by 150,000 people, has been 
detailed by Teh and Voon (1992). In this example, a projected 
coastal embankment failure resulting from sea-level rise would 
result in a substantial reduction in the area under agriculture and 
extensive damage to houses, schools, and other social amenities. 
In addition, millions of dollars of revenue loss from the destruc­
tion of the three main crops (coconuts, oil palm, and rubber) ulti­
mately could involve a population shift inland. This example is 
duplicated many times in the region, with the implication that 
greenhouse-induced sea-level rise may require a reassessment of 
existing and future coastal developments— as has been done in 
Malaysia (Midun and Lee, 1995).
level poses a threat for the investment, operation, and safety 
levels of the flood-control system, which could have an esti­
mated annual pumping cost of up to US$20 million (Sabhasri 
and Suwarnarat, 1996).
11.3.7. 
H um an Health
Vector-borne diseases are significant causes of mortality and 
morbidity in Tropical Asia. Climate change may cause a 
change in the distribution of malaria, dengue, bilharzia, leish­
maniasis, and schistosomiasis. The region also is particularly 
vulnerable to extreme weather events such as tropical 
cyclones, storms, and floods. The vulnerability of the popula­
tion to these events is significantly increased by high popula­
tion densities and poor sanitation; thus, waterborne and food- 
borne infectious diseases also are major problems. For exam­
ple, waterborne and waterrelated diseases account for about 
70% of the epidemic emergencies in India. The additional 
impacts of climate change, superimposed on existing condi­
tions, could seriously exacerbate health problems.
11.3.7.1. Malaria
Malaria is the most serious and widespread tropical disease in 
the world today. In most areas of the Asia-Pacific region where 
malaria now occurs, its distribution was considerably reduced 
or eliminated during the 1960s and 1970s. In recent years, 
however, the situation has been worsening in frontier regions 
of economic development (Porter, 1994). The emergence and 
rapid spread of drug-resistant malaria have become major 
health concerns to all malaria-affected countries in the region 
(WHO, 1996a).
Climate has a direct influence on malaria mosquitoes because 
each species has a range of climate conditions suitable for its 
development (see Figure 11-4). Climate also has an indirect 
effect on malaria through its influence on suitable vegetation 
and vector breeding sites. Precipitation is important because 
mosquitoes require water to lay their eggs, as well as for the 
subsequent development of larvae.
In the previous example, the area was 
essentially rural and agricultural. The 
potential impact of sea-Ievel rise on 
recreational and tourist sectors— for 
example, on the east coast of peninsu­
lar Malaysia (Wong, 1992) and at 
Phuket, Thailand (Wong, 1995)— and 
on infrastructure, harbors, and air­
ports also would be severe. Indeed, 
Nicholls (1995) shows that present 
and future megacities of the region—  
including Jakarta, Bangkok, and 
Manila— are especially vulnerable. 
For Bangkok, the steady rise in sea
minimum
optimum
temperature
for
temperature
mosquito
for
development
mosquitoes
8 9 10 . 
.
. 
. 14 15 16 17 18 19 . 
.
minimum temperature 
for parasite development 
P. vivax<P. falciparum
. 
. 25 16 21 .
.
. .
 40
maximum
temperature
for
parasites
and
mosquitoes
Figure 11-4: Critical temperatures in malaria epidemiology (°C) (adapted from 
WHO, 1996b).
402
Tropical Asia
Several estimates of the potential distribution of malaria have 
been produced, using climate change scenarios from a num­
ber of GCMs. These projections indicate that, in the future, 
malaria is most likely to extend its range into the fringes of 
established endemic areas (M artens et al., 1995). In southeast 
Asia, this would include new areas of Indonesia— notably 
Sumatra and Irian Jaya— and Papua New Guinea (Porter,
1994). Martin and Lefebvre (1995) report that the intensity 
and extent of m alaria’s potential transmission would change 
significantly under scenarios generated by the five GCMs 
they used. In all cases, an increase in seasonal malaria at the 
expense of perennial malaria results; such an increase is most 
likely to lead to epidemics among unprepared or nonimmune 
populations. Similarly, Martens et al. (1995) conclude that 
newly affected populations would initially experience high 
case-fatality rates because of their lack of naturally acquired 
immunity.
Increased incidence of malaria associated with climate change 
may significantly strain the economies of many countries of 
the region. Picard and Mills (1992) estimated losses of five 
working days for infected persons, during the period from 
infection to recovery, in two districts in Nepal. Mills (1994) 
found that the economic consequences of malaria could be 
high in the areas without malaria-control programs. The high 
cost of alternative drugs has put enormous pressure on the 
scarce economic resources of the countries in Asia (WHO, 
1996a). ISPAN (1992) estimated that a complete course of 
treatment in rural Bangladesh may cost one m onth’s wage for 
an agricultural worker (about US$40), or roughly one-fifth of 
overall per capita income. Hammer (1993) discusses the eco­
nomics of malaria treatment and cites examples from Nepal, 
Thailand, and Indonesia— where the economic return of malar­
ia treatment was found to be substantial.
11.3.7.2. Dengue and Schistosomiasis
Dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) are widespread 
in many countries of Tropical Asia. Although the transmission 
of DHF is said to have resulted from rapid urbanization, the 
disease vector Aedes aegypti exists in remote areas (WHO, 
1996a). In Tropical Asia, children are particularly affected by 
dengue/DHF; these diseases cause many hospitalizations and 
deaths. According to WHO (1996a), dengue/DHF will contin­
ue to persist in Indonesia, Myanmar, and Thailand, where they 
are prevalent in endemic form. In recent years, sporadic cases 
and outbreaks also have been reported in Bangladesh, India, 
and Sri Lanka.
Studies suggest that climate change would likely affect the dis­
tribution, life cycle, and population dynamics of dengue 
(WHO, 1996b). According to Koopman et al. (1991), an 
increase of 3 ^ ° C  in average temperature may double the 
reproduction rate of the dengue virus. Results from a simple 
mathematical model developed in Indonesia suggest that, 
under the best-estimate climate change scenario, incidences of 
dengue may increase threefold in Indonesia (ADB, 1994b).
Schistosomiasis is a water-based infectious disease caused by 
five species of the trematode Schistosoma. The spread of this 
disease is largely attributed to the expansion of irrigation in 
tropical regions. According to Martens et al. (1995), climate 
change-related temperature increases would influence snail 
reproduction and growth, schistome mortality, infectivity and 
development in the snail, and human-water contact. Climate 
change impacts on the spread of schistosomiasis also may be 
indirect (WHO, 1996b); for example, expansion of irrigation to 
new areas may introduce schistosomiasis where endemic foci 
already exist.
A recent assessment of the sensitivity of malaria, dengue, and 
schistosomiasis (the world’s most prevalent vector-bome dis­
eases) to global warming suggests an increase in the extent of 
geographical areas susceptible to transmission of malarial plas­
modium parasites, dengue flavivirus, and schistosoma worms. 
Martens et al. (1997) show that the transmission potential of 
the three associated vector-borne diseases is highly sensitive to 
climate changes on the periphery of the currently endemic 
areas and at higher elevations within such areas, including 
Tropical Asia. With reference to present endemic areas, their 
findings show that the potential increase in epidemic transmis­
sion of malaria and dengue may be estimated at 12-27%  and 
3 1 ^ 7 % , respectively; in contrast, schistosomiasis transmis­
sion potential may be expected to exhibit a 11-17% decrease.
11.3.7.3. Other Diseases
In recent years, incidence of visceral leishmaniasis has 
increased in some countries of Tropical Asia. During 
1987-1990, visceral leishmaniasis reached epidemic form in 
the Indian state of Bihar and spread rapidly to surrounding 
areas. WHO (1996a) estimated that about 110 million people 
were at risk from visceral leishmaniasis. Major endemic foci are 
reported in border areas between India (states of Bihar and West 
Bengal), Bangladesh, and Nepal. In Bangladesh, visceral leish­
maniasis already has reached epidemic form; the most vulnera­
ble populations are poor and rural cattlekeepers. Reported cases 
appear to cluster close to flood-control embankments; there 
appears to be a significant risk that visceral leishmaniasis preva­
lence in some localities will increase as a result of flood-control 
and drainage projects (ISPAN, 1992). In a warmer climate, the 
incidence of visceral leishmaniasis also may increase (IPCC 
1996, WG II, Section 18.3; WHO, 1996b).
Other waterborne and food-borne infectious diseases pose a 
great threat to public health in the tropical monsoon region. In 
1995, in eight countries of the region (Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
India, Indonesia, Myanmar, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand), 
the total death toll from diarrhea was estimated to be 1.03 mil­
lion; 71% and 12% of the deaths occurred in India and 
Bangladesh, respectively. Children under age 5 accounted for 
about 25% of these deaths (WHO, 1996a).
According to Colwell (1996), the major rivers of the Indian 
subcontinent that discharge into the Bay of Bengal carry huge
Tropical Asia
403
amounts of agricultural and industrial waste, providing nutri­
ents sufficient to convert coastal waters to eutrophic condi­
tions. Brackish water extends some distance upriver for all 
rivers. Salinities between 5 ppm and 30 ppm, which were 
detected in inland coastal areas of Bangladesh, as well as in 
seawater (Huq et al., 1984), are favorable for the growth of V. 
cholerae.
In the Bay of Bengal, evidence has been found— by synthesiz­
ing satellite remote-sensing, in-situ hydrographic and meteoro­
logical data sets, and cholera cases in Bangladesh— that 
cholera cases occur with a rise in ocean temperature (Colwell,
1996). Two peak periods for cholera outbreaks have been iden­
tified: from early April to mid-May and from early September 
to the end of November. During these periods, high sea-surface 
temperature, salinity, and concentrations of nutrients probably 
favor the growth of V. cholerae. Outbreaks during the monsoon 
have been substantially smaller. Colwell (1996) also indicated 
a possible link between outbreaks of cholera in Peru and neigh­
boring countries and a warming ENSO event. Although the 
ENSO phenomenon has a substantial effect on the Indian sum­
mer monsoon, its linkage with cholera has not been investigat­
ed. Future increases in sea-surface temperature, as well as 
increased concentrations of pollutants in river flows under cli­
mate change scenarios, may create a more favorable environ­
ment for the growth of V. cholerae throughout the year in the 
coastal area of Bangladesh.
Essential steps in recognizing and mitigating the emergence of 
malaria, dengue, and bilharzia, as well as many other infectious 
diseases, include enhanced surveillance and response (Martens 
et al., 1997). Dowlatabadi (1997) argues that because public 
health measures, case management, and land use play more 
significant roles in determining the prevalence of malaria than 
does climate, the most appropriate policy is to introduce or 
improve simple public health measures in the region; this 
approach would ensure that, even with climate change, devel­
oping countries would be far less susceptible to marginal 
increases in the potential prevalence of diseases such as malar­
ia, schistosomiasis, dengue, and cholera.
11.4. 
Integrated Assessment of Potential 
Vulnerabilities and Impacts
Individual countries, regions, resources, sectors, and systems 
will be affected by climate change not in isolation but in inter­
action with one another. The direct effects of climate change to 
which this chapter alludes, such as changes in rice crop yields 
and inundation of coastal areas, will have further indirect effects.
Integration of impacts and adaptations to climate change can 
take many forms. Several different approaches can be consid­
ered for Tropical Asia, including the following:
1) Country-Specific Studies— These studies have attempt­
ed to summarize salient aspects of vulnerability, 
impacts, and adaptations, generally in a qualitative
manner. Some simple examples for India, Indonesia, 
Malaysia, and Thailand are given in Section 6.5 of the 
Working Group III contribution to the SAR (IPCC,
1996) and in ADB (1994a, 1994b). In these and other 
national studies, the conclusions usually are strongly 
thematic or sector-based.
2) 
Geographical Integration— Linkages between differ­
ent functional regions are difficult to investigate 
although, at a conceptual level, they are readily 
acknowledged. For example, drainage basins can pro­
vide functional links between climate change impacts 
in headwaters and the downstream areas they affect; at 
the same time, however, downstream areas also may be 
responding to locally specific climate change impacts. 
Some simple examples have been described in this 
chapter (e.g.. Section 11.3.3.3). Functional adapta­
tions— such as through total river catchment analyses 
or integrated coastal management— are extraordinarily 
difficult to implement because of jurisdictional sensi­
tivities, even though conceptual and methodological 
hurdles may be relatively easy to overcome.
3) 
Sectoral and Trade Integration— There have been a 
number of attempts to integrate the various components 
of food supply (agriculture) in Tropical Asia, generally 
with simplified production change models in response 
to changes in environmental conditions (e.g,. tempera­
ture or precipitation and their derivatives, such as 
length of growing season and time of fruiting), some 
with yield adaptations and some without. These results 
are then integrated into an international trade-condi- 
tions model, and estimates of net economic welfare 
impacts are calculated. Reilly et al. (1993) have done 
this for Tropical Asia using three GCMs and 2 xC 0 2  
equilibrium scenarios.
4) 
Comprehensive Monetary Estimates—^Another way of 
integrating the range of potential impacts of climate 
change is to derive a comprehensive monetary estimate, 
which adds аП of a country’s impacts, expressed in their 
dollar value. Expressing damage to marketed goods and 
services (e.g., land lost to sea-level rise, energy savings in 
winter) in monetary terms is more or less straightforward 
because the price is known. Expressing damage to non­
marketed goods and services (e.g., wetland loss, mortality 
changes) in monetary terms can be done either through 
examining market transactions where such goods or ser­
vices are implicitly traded (e.g., tourism, where landscape 
beauty is valued) or through interviewing people to deter­
mine their preferences (i.e., their willingness to pay to 
secure a benefit or their willingness to accept compensa­
tion for a loss). Such valuation techniques reflect econom­
ic circumstances and value systems in the Organisation for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The 
estimates for non-OECD countries in Chapter 6  of the 
Working Group III contribution to the SAR (IPCC, 1996) 
are based on extrapolation from studies in the OECD. 
With these caveats in mind. Chapter 6  of the WG III con­
tribution to the SAR (IPCC, 1996) reports best estimates 
for the annual impact resulting from a doubling of
404
Tropical Asia
atmospheric concentrations of CO 2  of about 2 .1 - 8 .6 % of 
GDP in South and Southeast Asia. These figures compare 
with an estimated world impact of 1.4—1.9% of GDP. 
Many assumptions underlie these best guesses, however, 
and large uncertainties remain.
References
A D B, 
1994a: C lim ate C hange in A sia: E xecutive Sum m ary. A sian 
Developm ent Bank, M anila, Philippines, 122 pp.
ADB, 1994b: Climate Change in Asia: Indonesia Country Report. Asian 
Developm ent Bank, M anila, Philippines, 122 pp.
A chanta, A.N. and R. Kanetkar, 1996: Im pact o f clim ate change on forest p ro­
ductivity: a case study o f Kerala, India. Paper presented at the A sian and 
Pacific W orkshop on Climate Change Vulnerability and A daptation 
A ssessm ent, January 15-19, 1996, M anila, Philippines.
Aggarwal, P.K. and S.K. Sinha, 1993: Effect of probable increase in carbon 
dioxide and tem perature on w heat yields in India. Journal o f Agricultural 
Meteorology, 48(5), 811-814.
Aksorakaoe, S. and N. Paphavasit, 1993: Effect of sea level rise on the mangrove 
community in Thailand. Malaysian Journal o f Tropical Geography, 2 4 ,29-34.
A lam , М ., 1996: Subsidence of the Ganges-Brahm aputra delta o f Bangladesh 
and associated drainage, sedim entation and salinity problem s. In: Sea- 
L evel R ise and C oastal Subsidence: Causes, C onsequences, and 
Strategies [M illiman, J.D. and B.U. Haq (eds.)] M uw er Academ ic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 169-192 pp.
Am ien, I., P. Rejekiningrum , A. Pram udia, and E. Susanti, 1996: Effects of 
interannual clim ate variability and clim ate change on rice yield in Java, 
Indonesia, In: Climate Change Variability and Adaptation in A sia and the 
Pacific [Erda, L., W. Bolhofer. S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. M ukherjee, J.B. 
Sm ith, and J. W isniew ski (eds.)]. K luw er A cadem ic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 29-39.
Anglo, E.G., W.C. Bolhofer, L. Erda, S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. M ukheijee, J. 
Smith, and J. W isniewski, 1996: Regional W orkshop on Clim ate Change 
Vulnerability and A daptation in A sia and the Pacific: W orkshop 
Summary. January 15-19, 1996, M anila, Philippines, K luwer A cadem ic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 16 pp.
BBS (Bangladesh Bureau o f Statistics), 1989: Statistical Year Book o f 
Bangladesh. M inistry of Planning, Dhaka, 729 pp.
Bengsston, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1995: H urricane-type vortices in a 
general circulation model. Tellus, 47A, 175-196.
BNJST (Bangladesh-Nepal Joint Study Team ), 1989: Report on Flood 
M itigation M easures and M ultipurpose Use o f W ater Resources. 
G overnm ent of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh and His M ajesty’s 
G overnm ent of N epal, 89 pp.
Boonpragob, K. and J. Santisirisomboon, 1996: Modeling potential impacts o f cli­
mate changes of forest area in Thailand under climate change. In: Climate 
Change Variability and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific [Erda, L., W. 
Bolhofer. S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. Mukheijee, J.B. Smith, and J. Wisniewski] 
M uwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 107-117 pp.
Brow n, B., R.P. Dunne, T.P. Scoffin, and M .D.A. le Tissier, 1994: Solar dam ­
age in intertidal corals. M arine Ecological Progress Series, 105, 219-230.
Brown, B. and Suharsono, 1990: Dam age and recovery of coral reefs affected 
by El Nino related to seawater w arm ing in the Thousand Islands, 
Indonesia. Coral Reefs, 8 , 163-170.
Buan, R.D., A.R. M aglinao, P.P. Evangelista, and B.G. Pajuelas, 1996: 
Vulnerability of rice and com to climate change in the Philippines. In: Climate 
Change Variability and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific [Erda, L., W. 
Bolhofer. S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. Mukheijee, J.B. Smith, and J. Wisniewski 
(eds.)]. M uwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp.41-51.
Carver, M. and G. Nakarmi, 1995: The effect of surface conditions on soil 
erosion and stream  suspended sedim ents. In: Challenges in Resource 
D ynam ics in N epal: Processes, Trends and D ynam ics in M iddle 
M ountain Watersheds [Schreir, H., P.B. Shah, and S. Brown (eds.)]. 
Proceedings of a w orkshop by the International Centre for Integrated 
M ountain D evelopm ent (ICIM O D ) and International D evelopm ent 
Research Centre (IDRC), Kathmandu, Nepal, 155-162 pp.
Chou, L.M . (ed.), 1994: Im plications o f Expected Clim ate Changes in the East 
A sian Seas Region: an Overview. RCU /EA S Technical Report Series No. 
2, United N ations Environm ental Program m e, Bangkok, Thailand.
Clarke, A.J. and X. Liu, 1994: Interannual sea level in the northern and east­
ern Indian Ocean. Journal o f Physical Oceanography, 24, 1224-1235.
C lim ate Im pact Group, 1992: Clim ate Change Scenarios fo r South and 
Southeast Asia. C om m onw ealth Scientific and Industrial Research 
Organisation (CSIRO), Division of A tm ospheric Research, Aspendale, 
M ordialloc, Australia, 4 i pp.
Collins, N.M ., J.A. Sayer, and T.C. W hitm ore (eds.), 1991: Conservation Atlas 
o f Tropical Forests, A sia and the Pacific. BP, lU CN , and WCMC, 
M acm illan Press, London, United Kingdom.
Colwell, R.R., 1996: G lobal clim ate and infectious disease: the cholera para­
digm. Science, 274, 2025-2031.
Divya, and R. M ehrotra, 1995: Clim ate change and hydrology w ith emphasis 
on the Indian subcontinent. H ydrological Sciences Journal, 40, 231-241.
Douglas, B., 1992: Global sea level acceleration. Journal o f Geophysical 
Research, 97(12), 699-712, 706.
Dowlatabadi, H., 1997: A ssessing the health im pacts of clim ate change: an 
editorial essay. Clim ate Change, 35, 137-144.
Erda, L., W. Bolhofer. S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. M ukheijee, J.B. Smith, and J. 
W isniewski (eds.), 1996: C lim ate Change Variability and Adaptation in 
A sia and the Pacific. M uw er A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands, pp. 249.
ESCAP, 1987: C oastal Environm ental M anagem ent Plan fo r Bangladesh — 
Volume One: Sum m ary. Econom ic and Social Com m ission for Asia and 
the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand, 32 pp.
Gable, RJ. and D.G. Aubrey, 1990: Potential coastal impacts of contemporary 
changing climate on South Asian Seas states. Environmental Management, 
14(1), 33-46.
Gadgill, S., 1995: Clim ate change and agriculture —  an Indian perspective. 
Current Science, 69(8), 649-659.
Glantz, M .H. and L.E. Feingold, 1992: Clim ate variability, climate change, 
and fisheries: a summary. In: Clim ate Variability, Clim ate Change, and 
Fisheries [Glantz, M .H. and L.E. Feingold (eds.)]. Cam bridge University 
Press, London, U nited Kingdom , 417-438 pp.
GO B (G overnm ent o f B angladesh), 1989: Study on the Causes and 
C onsequences o f N atural D isasters and Protection and Preservation of 
the Environment. Bangladesh Country Report, GOB, Dhaka, pp. 1-13.
GO I (G overnm ent o f India), 1992: Eighth F ive Year Plan (1992-1997). 
Planning Com m ission, N ew  Delhi, India, 480 pp.
G ranich, S., M. Kelly, and N.H. Ninh, 1993: G lobal Warming and Vietnam. 
C entre for E nvironm ent R esearch E ducation/U niversity of East 
A nglia/International Institute for Environm ent and Development, 
London, U nited Kingdom.
H am m er, J.S., 1993: The econom ics of m alaria. The World B ank Research 
Observer, 8(1), 1-22.
Hansen, J., I. Fung, A. L ad s, D. Rind, S. Lebedeff, R. Ruedy, and G. Russell, 
1988: G lobal clim ate changes as forecast by the G oddard Institute of 
Space Studies three-dim ensional m odel. Jo u rn a l o f Geophysical 
Research, 93, 9341-9364.
H ansen, J., G. Russell, D. Rind, P. Stone, A. Lacis, S. Lebedeff, R. Ruedy, and 
L. Travis, 1983: Efficient three-dim ensional global m odels for climate 
studies: m odels I and II. M onthly W eather Review, 3, 609-662.
H enderson-Sellers, A., and H. Zhang, 1997: Tropical Cyclones and Global 
Climate Change. Report to the WMO/CASATMRP Committee on Climate 
Change A ssessm ent (Project TC-2), W orld M eteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 44 pp. + 5 figures, http://www.bom.gov.au/bmrc/
HM GN (His M ajesty’s Government o f Nepal), 1992: National Report on United 
Nations Conference on Environment and Development. Kathmandu, 63 pp.
Holland, G.J., 1997: The m axim um  potential intensity of tropical cyclones. 
Journal o f Atm ospheric Science (submitted).
Hossain, M. and K.S. Fischer, 1995: Rice research for food security and sus­
tainable agricultural developm ent in A sia: achievem ents and future chal­
lenges. Geojournal, 35(3), 286-298.
Huq, A., P.A. West, E.B. Small, M .J. Huq, and R.R. Colwell, 1984: Influence 
o f w ater tem perature, salinity, and pH  on survival and growth of toxi­
genic Vibriocholerae serovar 0 1  associated w ith live copepods in labo­
ratory microcosm. A pplied Environm ental M icrobiology, 48(2): 420-424
Tropical Asia
405
IPC C , 1996: Clim ate Change 1995: The Science o f Climate Change. 
Contribution o f Working G roup I  to the Second Assessm ent Report o f the 
Intergovernm ental P anel on Climate Change [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 572 pp.
W arrick, R.A., C. Le Provost, M.F. M eier, J. Oerlemans, and P.L. 
W oodworth, Chapter 7. Changes in Sea Level, pp. 359-405.
IPCC, 1996. Clim ate Change 1995: Impacts, Adaptations, and M itigation o f 
Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses. Contribution o f Working 
Group 11 to the Second A ssessm ent Report o f the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Clim ate Change [Watson, R.T., M.C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
Moss (eds.)[. Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom 
and N ew York, NY, USA, 880 pp.
Kirschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. Climate Change 
Im pacts on Forests, pp. 95-130.
-  
Beniston, M. and D.G. Fox, Chapter 5. Im pacts o f Climate Change 
on M ountain Regions, pp. 191-213.
Bijlsm a, L, Chapter 9. Coastal Zones and Sm all Islands, pp. 
289-324.
Reilly, J., C hapter 13. Agriculture in a Changing Climate: Impacts 
and Adaptation, pp. 427-467.
Everett, J., Chapter 16. Fisheries, pp. 511-537.
M cM ichael, A., Chapter 18. H um an Population H ealth, pp. 
561-584.
IPCC, 1996. Clim ate Change 1995: Econom ic and Social D imensions o f 
Climate Change. Contribution o f Working Group III to the Second 
Assessm ent R eport o f the Intergovernm ental Panel on Climate Change 
[Bruce, J.P., H. Lee, and E.F. Haites (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
Cam bridge, U nited K ingdom  and New York, NY, USA, 448 pp.
Pearce, D.W., W.R. Cline, A.N. Achanta, S. Fankhauser, R.K. 
Pachauri, R.S.J. Toi, and P. Vellinga, Chapter 6 . The Social Costs o f 
Clim ate Change: Greenhouse D am age and Benefits o f Control, pp. 
179-224.
IRRI anternational R ice R esearch Institute), 1993: IRRI: 1993-1995: IR R I 
Rice Alm anac. IRRI, M anila, Philippines, 142 pp.
ISPAN (Irrigation Support Project for A sia and the Near-East), 1992: 
Im pacts o f F lood Control and D rainage on Vector-Borne Disease 
Incidence in Bangladesh., Dhaka, Bangladesh, ISPAN, VA, USA, 34 pp.
K arim , Z., S.G., Hussain, and M. Ahm ed, 1996: A sssessing impacts o f climate 
variations on foodgrain production in Bangladesh. In; Climate Change 
Variability and A daptation in A sia and the Pacific [Erda, L., W. Bolhofer. 
S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. M ukheijee, J.B. Smith, and J. W isniewski 
(eds.)]. K luw er A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 53-62.
K itayam a, K., 1996: Clim ate of the summit region of M ount Kinabalu 
(Borneo) in 1992, an El Nino year. M ountain Research and Development, 
16(1), 65-75.
K oopm an, J.S., D.R. Prevots, M.A.V. M arin, H.G. Dantes, M .I.Z Aqino, I.M. 
Longimi, and J.S. Amor, 1991: Determ inants and predictors of dengue 
infection in M exico. A m erican Jo u rn a l o f Epidem iology, 
133, 
1168-1178.
K ripalani, R.H., S. Inamdar, and N.A. Sontakke, 1996; Rainfall variability 
over Bangladesh and Nepal: comparison and connections with features 
over India. InternationalJournal o f Climatology, 16, 689-704.
Lai, М., 1994; W ater resources of the South A sian region in a warm er atmos­
phere. A dvances in Atm ospheric Sciences, 11(2), 239-246.
Lai, М., L. Bengtsson, U. Cubasch, M. Esch, and U. Schlese, 1995a: Synoptic 
scale disturbances o f Indian sum m er m onsoon as simulated in a high res­
olution clim ate model. Clim ate Research, 5, 243-258.
Lai, М., U. Cubasch, R. Voss, and J. W aszkewitz, 1995b: Effect of transient 
increase in greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols on m onsoon climate. 
Current Science, 69(9), 752-763.
Lai, М., K.K. Singh, L.S. Rathor, G. Srinivasan, and S.A. Saseendran, 1996; 
Vulnerability o f Rice and Wheat Yields in Northwest India to Future Changes 
in Climate. Centre for Atmospheric Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology, 
Tech Report No. A/TR/1-96 (August 1996), New Delhi, India, 29 pp.
Lai, М., G. Srinivasan, and U. Cubasch, 1996: Implications of increasing 
greenhouse gases and aerosols on the dium al temperature cycle of the 
Indian subcontinent. Current Science, 21(10), 746-752.
Lim, C.P., Y. M atsuda, and Y. Shigemi, 1995: Problems and constraints in 
Philippine municipal fisheries: the case of San M iguel Bay, Camarines 
Sur. Environmental M anagement, 19(6), 837-852.
Lesser, M.P., 1997; Oxidative stress causes coral bleaching during exposure to 
elevated temperatures. Coral Reefs, 16(3), 187-192.
M arston, R., J. Kleinman, and M. Miller, 1996: Geomorphic and forest cover 
controls on monsoon flooding, central Nepal Himalaya. M ountain 
Research and Development, 16, 257-264.
Martens, W.J.M., Т.Н. Jetten, and D.A. Focks, 1997: Sensitivity of malaria, schis­
tosomiasis and dengue to global warming. Climate Change, 3 5 ,145-156.
M artens, W.J.M., L.W. Niessen, J. Rotmans, Т.Н. Jetten, and A.J. M cM ichael, 
1995: Potential impact of global climate change on m alaria risk. 
Environmental H ealth Perspectives, 103(5), 458-464.
M artin, P. and M. Lefebvre, 1995: M alaria and climate: sensitivity of malaria 
potential transmission to climate. Ambio, 24 (4), 200-207.
M atthews, R.B., M.J. Kropff, D. Bachelet, and H.H. van Laar, 1994: The 
Im pact o f Global Climate Change on Rice Production in Asia: a 
Simulation. Report No. ERL-COR-821, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, Environmental Research Laboratory, Corvallis, OR, USA.
McLean, R.F., and N. Mimura (eds.), 1993: Vulnerability Assessment to Sea Level 
Rise and Coastal Zone Management. Proceedings of the IPCC Eastern 
Hemisphere Workshop, August 3-6, 1993, Tsukuba, Japan, Department of 
Environment, Sport and Territories, Canberra, Australia, 429 pp.
Midun, Z. and S.C. Lee, 1995: Implications of a greenhouse-induced sea-level 
rise: a national assessment for Malaysia. Journal o f Coastal Research, 
Sl(14), 96-115.
M illiman, J.D. and B.U. Haq, 1996: Sea-level Rise and Coastal Subsidence: 
Causes, Consequences and Strategies. Ю uw er A cadem ic Press, 
Dordrecht, Netherlands, 369 pp.
Mills, A., 1994: The economic consequences of malaria for households: a 
case-study in Nepal. H ealth Policy, 29, 209-227.
M irza, M.Q., 1997: The ranoff sensitivity of the Ganges river basin to climate 
change and its implications. Journal o f Environmental Hydrology, 5, 
1-13.
M irza, M.Q, and A. Dixit, 1997: Climate change and water management in the 
GBM  basins. Water Nepal, 5(1), 71-100.
M irza, M.Q. and N.J. Ericksen, 1996: Impact o f w ater control projects on fish­
eries resources in Bangladesh. Environmental M anagement, 20(4), 
523-539.
M irza, M.Q., N.J. Ericksen, R.A. Warrick, and G.J. Kenny, 1997: Are floods 
getting worse in the Ganges, Brahmaputra and M eghna basins? Natural 
Hazards (in press).
M itchell, J.F.B., S. Manabe, T. Tokioka, and V. M eleshko, 1990: Equilibrium 
climate change. In: Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessm ent 
[Houghton, J.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, pp. 131-172.
M ukai, H., 1993: Biogeography of tropical seagrasses in the western Pacific. 
Australian Journal o f M arine and Freshwater Research, 44, 1-17.
Murphy, J.M. and J.F.B. Mitchell, 1995: Transient response of the Hadley Centre 
coupled ocean-atmosphere model to increasing carbon dioxide. Part II. 
Spatial and temporal structure of response. Journal o f Climate, 8 , 57-80.
Nicholls, R.J. 1995: Coastal megacities and climate change. Geojournal, 37, 
369-379.
Nicholls, R.J. and S.P. Leatherman (eds.), 1995: Potential impacts of acceler­
ated sea-level rise on developing countries. Journal o f Coastal Research, 
14, pp. 324.
Nicholls, R.J., N. Mimura, and J.C. Topping, 1995: Climate change in south 
and south-east Asia: some implications for coastal areas. Journal o f 
Global Environmental Engineering, 1, 137-154.
Parker, D.E., H. W ilson, P.D. Jones, J.R, Christy, and C.K. Folland, 1996: The 
impact of M ount Pinatubo on world-wide temperatures. International 
Journal o f Climatology, 16, 487-497.
Parry, M.L., M. Baltran de Rozari, A.L. Chong, and S. Panich (eds,), 1992: 
The Potential Socio-Economic Effects o f Climate Change in South-East 
Asia. United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 126.
P arth asarath y , B., N.A. Sontake, A.A. M onot, and D.R. Kothawale, 1987: 
Drought-flood in the summer monsoon season over dilïerent m eteoro­
logical subdivisions of India for the period 1871-1984. Journal o f 
Climatology, 7, 57-70.
406
TmpicalAsia
Paul, В. and H. Rashid, 1993: Flood dam age to rice crop in Bangladesh. T h e  
G e o g r a p h i c a l  R e v i e w , 83(2), 151-159.
P icard , J. and A. M ills, 1992: The effect o f m alaria on w ork time: analysis of 
data from  two N epalese districts. J o u r n a l  o f  T r o p i c a l  M e d i c i n e  a n d  
H y g i e n e , 95, 382-389.
P o rter, J., 1994: The im pact of climate change on m alaria distribution in the 
Asia-Pacific region. In: C l i m a t e  I m p a c t  A s s e s s m e n t  M e t h o d s  f o r  A s i a  a n d  
t h e  P a c i f i c  [Jakeman, A.J. and A.B. Pittock (eds.)]. Proceedings o f a 
regional symposium , 10-12 M arch 1993, organised by A N U TECH  Pty. 
Ltd. on behalf of the A ustralian International Developm ent Assistance 
Bureau (AIDAB), Canberra, Australia, 149-152 pp.
Q uinn, W.H., D.O. Zopf, K.S. Short, and R.T. Kuo Yang, 1978: H istorical 
trends and statistics of the Southern O scillation, El Nino, and Indonesian 
droughts. F i s h e r i e s  B u l l e t i n , 76, 663-678.
Q ureshi, A. and D. Hobbie, 1994: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
i n  A s i a :  
T h e m a t i c  
O v e r v i e w . A sian D evelopm ent Bank, M anila, Philippines, 351 pp.
R ao, D.G., J.C. Katyal, S.K. Sinha, and K. Srinivas, 1995: Im pacts of climate 
change on sorghum  productivity in India: sim ulation study. In: C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  a n d  A g r i c u l t u r e :  A n a l y s i s  o f  P o t e n t i a l  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A s p e c t s ,  
American Society of Agronomy, Special Publication 59, M adison, W I, 
USA, 325-337 pp.
R ao, D.G. and S.K. Sinha, 1994: Im pact of clim ate change on sim ulated w heat 
production in India, EPA Conference, New Delhi, India, pp. 1-8.
Reilly, J., N. Hohm ann, and S. Kane, 1993: C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a n d  a g r i c u l t u r e :  
T h e  r o l e  o f  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  T r a d e .  A m e r i c a n  E c o n o m i c  A s s o c i a t i o n  P a p e r s  
a n d  P r o c e e d i n g s  8 3 , pp. 306-312.
R iebsam e, W.E., K.M . Strzepek, L.L. W escoat, Jr., R. Perritt, G.L. Gaile, J. 
Jacobs, R. Lieichenko, C. M agadza, H. Phien, B.J. Urbiztondo, P. 
Restrepo, W.R. Rose, M. Saleh, L.H. Ti, C. Tucci, and D. Yates, 1995: 
Com plex river basins. In: Ax C l i m a t e  C h a n g e s :  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  I m p a c t s  
a n d  I m p l i c a t i o n s  [Strzepek, K.M. and J.L. Smith (eds.)] Cam bridge 
University Press, M elbourne, Australia, pp. 57-91.
Rieley, J.O., S. Page, and G. Shefferm ann, 1995: Tropical peat swam p forests 
of southern Asia: ecology and environm ental im portance. M a l a y s i a n  
J o u r n a l  o f  T r o p i c a l  G e o g r a p h y , 26(2), 130-141.
R osenzw eig, C. and A. Iglesias, 1994: I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  f o r  
I n t e r n a t i o n a l  A g r i c u l t u r e :  
C r o p  M o d e l i n g  S t u d y . EPA 230-B-94-003, 
U.S. Environm ental Protection Agency, W ashington, DC, USA, 312 pp.
SA A R C  (S outh A sian A ssociation fo r R egional C ooperation), 1992: 
R e g i o n a l  S t u d y  o n  t h e  C a u s e s  a n d  C o n s e q u e n c e s  o f  N a t u r a l  D i s a s t e r s  
a n d  
t h e  
P r o t e c t i o n  
a n d  P r e s e r v a t i o n  
o f  t h e  E n v i r o n m e n t . SAARC 
Secretariat, Kathm andu, Nepal, 147-149 pp.
S abhasri, S. and K. Suw am arat, 1996: Im pact o f sea level rise on flood con­
trol in Bangkok and vicinity. In: S e a - L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  C o a s t a l  S u b s i d e n c e :  
C a u s e s ,  
C o n s e q u e n c e s  a n d  S t r a t e g i e s  [M illiman, J.D. and B.U. Haq 
(eds.)]. K u w er A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, N etherlands, 343-355
pp.
S ankar-R ao, М ., K.M . Lau, and S. Yang, 1996: On the relationship betw een 
Eurasian snow cover and the Asian sum m er monsoon. I n t e r n a t i o n a l  
J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y , 16, 605-616.
S cbreir, H. and P.B. Shah, 1996: W ater dynam ics and population pressure in 
the N epal Himalayas. G e o j o u r n a l , 40(1-2), 45-51.
S h arm a, C.K., 1979: Partial drought conditions in Nepal. H y d r o l o g i c a l  
S c i e n c e s  B u l l e t i n , 24(3), 327-333.
Singh, P., S.K. Jain, and N. Kumar, 1997: Estim ation of snow and glacier-m elt 
contribution to the Chenab River, W estern Him alaya. M o u n t a i n  R e s e a r c h  
a n d  D e v e l o p m e n t , 17(1), 49-56.
Sinha, S.K., 1994: Response of tropical agrosystem s to clim ate change. 
P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  I n t e r n a t i o n a l  C r o p  S c i e n c e  C o n g r e s s , 1, 281-289.
Sinha, S .K  1997: Global change scenario: current and future w ith reference to 
land cover change and sustainable agriculture —  south and south-east 
Asian context. C u r r e n t  S c i e n c e , 72(11), 846-854.
Sinha, S.K., and M .S. Swam inathan, 1991: Deforestation, clim ate change and 
sustainable nutrition security. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 19, 201-209.
Som aratne, S. and A.H. Dhanapala, 1996: Potential im pact of global clim ate 
change on forest in Sri Lanka. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
V a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  
A d a p t a t i o n  i n  A s i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c  [Erda, L., W. Bolhofer. S. Huq, S. 
Lenhart, S.K. M ukherjee, J.B. Smith, and J. W isniewski (eds.)] Ю uwer 
A cadem ic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 129-135 pp.
S o o ry an aray an a, V., 1995: Floods in M alaysia: patterns and implications. 
M a l a y s i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  T r o p i c a l  G e o g r a p h y , 26(1), 3 5 ^ 6 .
Spalding, М ., 1997: The global distribution and status of m angrove ecosys­
tems. I n t e r c o a s t  N e t w o r k , 1, 20-21.
Spencer, N.E. and P.L. W oodworth, 1993: D a t a  H o l d i n g s  o f  t h e  P e r m a n e n t  
S e r v i c e  f o r  M e a n  S e a  L e v e l  ( N o v e m b e r  1 9 9 3 ) . Perm anent Service for 
M ean Seal Level (PSM SL), Bidston Observatory, Birkenhead, United 
Kingdom , 81 pp.
S thapti, K.M ., 1995: Sedim entation o f Lakes and Reservoirs w ith Special 
Reference to the K ulekhani Reservoir. In: 
C h a l l e n g e s  
i n  R e s o u r c e  
D y n a m i c s  
i n  
N e p a l :  
P r o c e s s e s ,  
T r e n d s  
a n d  D y n a m i c s  
i n  
M i d d l e  
M o u n t a i n  
W a t e r s h e d s  [Schreir, H., P.B. Shah, and S. Brown (eds.)]. 
Proceedings of a w orkshop. International Centre for Integrated Mountain 
D evelopm ent (ICIM O D ) and International D evelopm ent Research 
Centre (IDRC), Kathm andu, Nepal, pp. 5-12.
S u b ram an ian , V. and A.L. Ram anathan, 1996: N ature of sedim ent load in the 
Ganges-Brahm aputra River system s in India. In: S e a - L e v e l  R i s e  a n d  
C o a s t a l  S u b s i d e n c e . [M illiman, J.D. and B.U. Haq (eds.)], Kuwer 
A cadem ic Publishers, Dordecht, N etherlands, pp. 151-168.
S uppiah, R., 1994: The Asian m onsoons: simulations from  four GCMs and like­
ly changes under enhanced greenhouse conditions. In: C l i m a t e  I m p a c t  
A s s e s s m e n t  M e t h o d s  f o r  A s i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c  [Jakeman, A.J. and B. Pittock 
(eds.)]. Proceedings of a regional symposium , organised by ANUTECH 
Pty. Ltd. on behalf of the Australian International Developm ent Assistance 
Bureau 10-12 M arch 1993, Canberra, Australia, pp. 73-78.
S uppiah, R., 1997: Extrem es o f the southern oscillation phenom enon and the 
rainfall of Sri Lanka. I n t e r n a t i o n a l  J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t o l o g y , 17, 87-101.
Teh, T.S. and P.K. Voon, 1992: Im pacts o f sea level rise in West Johore, 
M alaysia. M a l a y s i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  T r o p i c a l  G e o g r a p h y , 23(2), 93-102.
U N EP, 1997: G l o b a l  E n v i r o n m e n t  O u t l o o k . U nited N ations Environment 
Program m e and Oxford U niversity Press, N airobi, Kenya and Oxford, 
United Kingdom , 270 pp.
U prety, B.K., 1988: I m p a c t  o f  R i v e r b a n k  E r o s i o n ,  F l o o d  H a z a r d  a n d  R i v e r  
S h i f t i n g  i n  N e p a l . Paper presented at the International Sym posium  on the 
Im pact o f Riverbank Erosion, Flood H azard and the Problems of 
Population D isplacem ent. A pril 11-13,1988, Dhaka, Bangladesh, 27 pp.
W arrick , R.A. and Q.K. A hm ad (eds.), 1996: T h e  I m p l i c a t i o n s  o f  C l i m a t e  a n d  
S e a - L e v e l  
C h a n g e  f o r  
B a n g l a d e s h . M uw er A cadem ic Publishers, 
Dordrecht, N etherlands, 415 pp.
W atan ab e, T., J.D. Ives, and J.E. Ham m ond, 1994: Rapid growth of a glacial 
lake in K hum bu Himal, Nepal H im alaya: prospects for a catastrophic 
flood. M o u n t a i n  R e s e a r c h  a n d  D e v e l o p m e n t , 14, 329-340.
W atan ab e, T. and D, Rothacher, 1996: The 1994 Lugge Tsho glacial lake out­
burst flood, Bhutan Him alaya. M o u n t a i n  R e s e a r c h  a n d  D e v e l o p m e n t , 16, 
77-81.
W h eth erald , R.T. and S. M anabe, 1986: A n investigation o f cloud cover 
change in response to therm al forcing. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 8 , 5-23.
W hetton, P., 1994: Constructing climate scenarios: the practice. In: C lim a t e  
I m p a c t  A s s e s s m e n t  M e t h o d s  f o r  A s i a  a n d  t h e  P a c i f i c  [Jakeman, A J. and
A.B. Pittock (eds.)]. Proceedings of a regional symposium, organised by 
ANUTECH Pty. Ltd. on bebalf of the Australian International Development 
Assistance Bureau 10-12 M arch 1993, Canberra, Australia, pp. 21-27.
W hetton, P.H., A.M . Fowler, M .R. H aylock, and A .B. Pittock, 1993: 
Im plications of clim ate change due to the enhanced greenhouse effect on 
floods and droughts in A ustralia. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e ,  2 5 , 289-318.
W hetton, P., A.B. Pittock, and R. Suppiah, 1994: Im plications of climate 
change for w ater resources in south and southeast Asia. In: C lim a t e  
C h a n g e  i n  A s i a :  T h e m a t i c  O v e r v i e w . A sian D evelopm ent Bank, Manila, 
Philippines, pp. 57-103.
W hetton, P.H. and I. Rutherford, 1994: Historical ENSO teleconnections in 
the Eastern H em isphere. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e , 28, 221-253.
W hetton, P.H. and I. Rutherford, 1996: Historical teleconnections in the 
Eastern Hem isphere: com parison w ith latest El Nino series of Quinn. 
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e , 32, 103-109.
W ijeratn e, M .A., 1996: Vulnerability of Sri Lanka tea production to global 
clim ate change. In: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  V a r i a b i l i t y  a n d  A d a p t a t i o n  i n  A s ia  
a n d  
t h e  P a c i f i c  [Erda, L., W. Bolhofer. S. Huq, S. Lenhart, S.K. 
M ukherjee, J.B. Smith, and J. W isniewski (eds.)]. Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Dordrecht, N etherlands, 249 pp.
Tropical Asia
407
W ilkinson, C.R. and R.W. Buddem eier, 1994: Global Climate Change and 
C oral Reefs: Im plications fo r People and Reefs. Report of the UNEP- 
lO C-A SPEI-IU CN  Global Task Team on the Implications of Climate 
Change on Coral Reefs, International Union for the Conservation of 
Nature and N atural Resources (lUCN), Gland, Switzerland, 124 pp. 
W ilson, C.A. and J.E B . M itchell, 1987: A  doubled CO 2 climate sensitivity 
experim ent w ith a global clim ate m odel including a simple ocean. 
Journal o f G eophysical Research, 92, 13315-13343.
Wong, P.P., 1992: G eom orphology and tourism  on the east coast of peninsular 
M alaysia. In: The Coastal Zone o f Peninsular M alaysia [Tija, H.D. and
S.M .S. A bdullah (eds.)]. Penerbit U niversiti, K ebangsaan, Bangi, 
M alaysia, pp. 72-79.
Wong, P.P., 1995: Tourism -environm ent interaction in the western bays of 
Phuket Islands. M alaysian Journal o f Tropical Geography, 26(1), 67-75. 
W oodroffe, C.D., 1990: The im pact of sea-level rise on m angrove shorelines.
Progress in Physical Geography, 14, 483-520.
WHO (W orld H ealth O rganization), 1996a: Regional H ealth Report 1996.
W HO Regional Office for South-East Region, New Delhi, India, 80 pp. 
WHO (W orld H ealth Organization), 1996b: Climate Change and Human 
H ealth [M cM ichael, A.J., A . Haines, R. Slooff, and S. Kovats (eds.)]. 
W HO, Geneva, Switzerland, 279 pp.
W RI (World Resources Institute), 1996: World Resources: A  Guide to the 
Global Environment, 1996-97. World Resources Institute/United Nations 
Environment Programme/United Nations Development Programme/The 
World Bank. Oxford University Press, New York, 342 pp.
Zeigler, R.S., and D.W. Puckridge, 1995: Improving sustainable productivity 
in rice-based rainfed lowland systems of south and southeast Asia. 
Geojournal, 35(3), 307-324.
Zhang, H., 1994: Impacts of tropical deforestation in S.E. Asia. In: Climate 
Im pact Assessm ent M ethods fo r Asia and theP acific [Jakeman, A.J. and 
B. Pittock (eds.)]. Proceedings of a regional symposium, organised by 
AN U TECH  Pty. Ltd. on behalf of the A ustralian International 
Development Assistance Bureau 10-12 M arch 1993, Canberra, Australia, 
pp. 137-140.
Zhu, Y , and D.D. Houghton, 1996: The impact of Indian Ocean SST on the 
large-scale A sian sum m er m onsoon and the hydrological cycle. 
International Journal o f Climatology, 16, 617-632.
?ГЛ^. SW
ùiîlQ. (Я>
i.^m -
T h e  R e g i o n a l  Im p a c t s  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e : A n n e x e s
Prepared by IPCC Working Group II
M i
A
Regional Trends and Variations of 
Temperature and Precipitation
THOMAS R. KARL (USA)
i p f
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
413
IPCC (1996) provided time-series plots and global maps 
depicting trends of precipitation and temperature. This Annex 
extends and updates these records for a broader number of con­
tiguous regions.
Two data sets are used to represent near-surface air temperature 
change. Over land this includes a near-surface air temperature 
data set developed by Jones (1994), and over the oceans a sea- 
surface temperature data set developed by Folland and Parker 
(1995). Both of these data sets provide the basis for calculating 
global temperature change as reported in the IPCC Second 
Assessment Report (1996). Parker et al. (1994) describe the 
methodology used to aggregate land and ocean temperatures 
for grid cells that span both regions.
Precipitation changes are also calculated from two data sets. 
Land-surface precipitation data are derived and updated from 
Hulme (1991) and from Eischeid et al. (1995); the latter is 
referred to as the GHCN (version 1) data set in IPCC (1996). 
Both data sets were available with a resolution of 5°x5°. Since 
two data sets were used, a procedure was needed to integrate 
the data. A simple equal weighting scheme was used when both 
data sets had data available. For some grid cells, data were 
available from only one data set, and this provided additional 
coverage relative to the use of a single data set.
In Figures A-1 and A-2, the magnitude of the trends of precip­
itation and temperature for each 5°x5° grid cell is given by the 
area of circle centered in each cell; brown and blue circles 
reflect decreasing trends, and green and red circles increasing 
trends. Trends are given in %/century for precipitation and 
°C/century for temperature. Precipitation trends are expressed 
in percent relative to the 1961-90 average precipitation.
Time-series plots of the annual anomalies of precipitation and 
temperature (relative to 2 0 th century averages) are depicted for
each of the various regions delineated in Figure A-3. For those 
regions where a 5°x5° grid cell spanned two or more regions, 
the anomalies for that grid cell were used more than once—  
once for each region that intersected the grid cell. The time 
series depicted in Figures A-4 through A-13 show the anom­
alies from the 1961-90 means. Longer term variation of these 
annual anomalies are emphasized by a smooth curve using a 
nine-point binomial filter.
Time-series plots of precipitation are not provided for 
Antarctica, due to very poor spatial coverage and large data 
uncertainties. The trends of temperature for the small island 
states include both land and ocean sea-surface temperature 
trends for grid cells that include both land and ocean.
References
Eischeid, J.K., C.B. Baker, T.R. Karl, and H.R Diaz, 1995: The quality control 
of long-term climatological data using objective data analysis. Journal o f 
A pplied M eteorology, 34, 2787-2795.
Folland, C.K. and D.E. Parker, 1995: Correction of instrumental biases in his­
torical sea-surface temperature data. Quarterly Journal o f the Royal 
M eteorological Society, 121, 319-367.
H ulm e, М., 1991: An intercomparison of model and observed global precipi­
tation climatologies. Geophysical Research Letters, 18, 1715-1718.
IP C C , 1996: Climate Change 1995: The Science o f Climate Change. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Second Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Houghton, J.J., L.G. Meiro 
Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg and K.M askell (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York, 572 pp.
Jones, P.D., 1994: Hemispheric surface air temperamre variations: A  reanaly­
sis and an update to 1993. Journal o f Climate, 3, 1794-1802.
P ark er, D.E., P.D. Jones, C.K. Folland, and A. Bevan, 1994: Interdecadai 
changes of surface temperature since the late 19th century. Journal o f 
Geophysical Research, 99, 14373-14399.
Figure A-1: Precipitation— ^Annual 1901-1995.
414
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
Figure A-2: Temperature— ^Annual 1901-1996.
Figure A-3: GIS mask used to define the 10 regions covered in this Special Report.
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
415
Year
Year
Figure A-4: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Africa region.
416
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
Y ear
Y ear
Y ear
Figure A-5: Observed annual precipitation [top (Arctic)] and temperature [middle (Arctic) and bottom 
(Antarctica)] changes for the Arctic/Antarctica region.
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
417
Year
Year
Figure A-6: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Australasia region.
418
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
Year
Year
Figure A-7: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Europe region.
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
419
Year
Year
Figure A-8: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Latin America region.
420
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
Year
Year
Figure A-9: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Middle East/Arid Asia region.
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
421
Year
Year
Figure A-10: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the North America region.
422
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
Year
Year
Figure A -11: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Caribbean island component of the
Small Island States region.
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
423
Year
Year
Figure A -11 (continued): Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Pacific island
component of the Small Island States region.
424
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
Year
Year
Figure A-12: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Temperate Asia region.
Regional Trends and Variations o f Temperature and Precipitation
425
Year
Year
Figure A -13: Observed annual precipitation (top) and temperature (bottom) changes for the Tropical Asia region.
4 Ç
TTUi
îbff
ÿjS
Ш
.ш т ш
?'ф5 » ^ '.- . . . г , . : ’ sââSSÜSzB. m s ttim r
•' -'4fE?Ç  
■ •- 
' - ’'Л - Т . »  •■ -'Э
„□v r.
' 
'^’Я<®'-’'-—'"‘Sp
i &
r
îfe>4:
^  
\Æxms 
Й
■ ЧШ
в
Simulation of Regional 
Climate Change with Global 
Coupled Climate Models and 
Regional Modeling Techniques
Ibis Annex is based solely on Chapter 6  of the Working Group I contribution to the IPCC Second Assessment Report (1996).
F. GlORGl (USA), G.A. MEEHL (USA), A. KATTENBERG 
(THE NETHERLANDS), H. GRASSL (SWITZERLAND), J.F.B. MITCHELL 
(UK), RJ. STOUFFER (USA), T. TObQOKA (JAPAN), AJ. WEAVER 
(CANADA), AND T.M.L. WIGLEY (USA)
CONTENTS
B.2. 
Simulations with Greenhouse Gas and Aerosol Forcing 
430
B.3. 
Seasonal Changes in Temperature, Precipitation, and Soil Moisture 
432
B.3.1. Temperature 
432
B.3.2. Precipitation 
4 3 3
B.3.3. Soil Moisture 
4 3 3
B.4. 
Simulations using Statistical Downscaling and Regional Climate Modeling Systems 
4 3 4
B.4.1. Statistical Downscaling 
4 3 4
B.4.2. Regional Modeling 
4 3 4
B.5. 
Conclusions 
4 3 5
References 
436
B .l. 
Regional Simulations by GCMs 
429
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate Models and Regional Modeling Techniques
429
In IPCC (1990) and IPCC (1992), very low confidence was 
placed on the climate change scenarios produced by general 
circulation model (GCM) equilibrium experiments on the sub­
continental, or regional, scale (order of lO^-lO'^ km^). This was 
mainly attributed to coarse model resolution, limitations in 
model physics representations, errors in model simulation of 
present-day regional climate features, and wide inter-model 
range of simulated regional change scenarios. Since then, tran­
sient runs with Atmosphere-Ocean GCMs (AOGCMs) have 
become available that allow a similar regional analysis. In 
addition, different regionalization techniques have been devel­
oped and tested in recent years to improve the simulation of 
regional climate change. This section examines regional 
change scenarios produced by new coupled GCM runs. 
Following the 1990 and 1992 reports, emphasis is placed on 
the simulation of seasonally averaged surface air temperature 
and precipitation, although the importance of higher order sta­
tistics and other surface climate variables for impact assess­
ment is recognized (Kittel et a l, 1995; Mearns et a l, 1995a,b).
(CNA; 35-50°N, 85-105°W), South East Asia (SEA; 5-30°N, 
70-105°E), Sahel (Africa) (SAH; 10-20°N, 20°W-40°E), 
Southern Europe (SEU; 35-50°N, 10 W- 45°E), and Australia 
(AUS; 12-45°S, 110-155°E). Output from different coupled 
model runs with dynamical oceans for these regions was ana­
lyzed by Cubash et a l (1994a), Whetton et a l (1996), and 
Kittel et al. (1997), while analysis over the Australian region 
from equilibrium simulations with mixed-layer ocean models 
was performed by Whetton et al. (1994). Results over two 
additional regions were analyzed by Raisanen (1995) for 
Northern Europe (NEU; land areas north of 50°N and west of 
60°E) and Li et a l (1994) for East Asia (EAS; 15-60°N, 70- 
140°E). To summarize the findings of these works, Figure B-1 
shows differences between region-average values at the time of 
CO 2  doubling and for the control run, and differences between 
control run averages and observations (hereafter referred to as 
bias), for winter and summer surface air temperature and pre­
cipitation. Note that these models contain increases of CO 2  
only. Experiments including increased COj and the effects of 
sulfate aerosols will be discussed later.
B.l. 
Regional Sim ulations by GCM s 
The biases are presented as a reference for the inteфretation of
the scenarios, because it can be generally expected that the bet- 
In IPCC (1990), five regions were identified for analysis of 
ter the match between control run and observed climate (i.e., 
regional climate change simulation: Central North America 
the lower the biases), the higher the confidence in simulated
(a) 
W inter, Tem perature
и
a
Region
(b) 
W inter, Temperature
(e)
Winter, Precipitation
(0
W inter, Precipitation
Region
Region
Region
(c) 
Summ er, Tem perature
(d) 
Summer, Temperature
(g) 
Summer, Precipitation
(h)
Summer, Precipitation
Figure B-1: Difference between averages at time of CO 2 doubling and control run averages (C 0 2 -Control) and difference 
between control run averages and observed averages (Control-Observed) as simulated by nine AOGCM runs over seven regions. 
Units are °C for temperature and percentage of control run, or observed, averages for precipitation. In (f) and (h), values in excess 
of 200% have been reported at the top end of the vertical scale. In (e), values in excess of 60% have been reported at the top end 
of the vertical scale. Winter averages are for December-January-February (DJF) for Northern Hemisphere regions, and June-July- 
August (JJA) for Australia; summer averages are for JJA for the Northern Hemisphere, and DJF for Australia. See Kittel et al. 
(1997) for further details.
430
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate M odels and Regional M odeling Techniques
change scenarios. The model runs are labeled d, g, m, x, p, q, r, 
s, and t as shown in the legend of the figure. Letter designations 
here refer to model descriptions in Table B-1. Note also in 
Table B-1 that the models employ different spatial resolutions 
and flux adjustments.
Scenarios produced by these transient experiments varied 
widely among models and from region to region, both for tem­
perature and precipitation. Except for a few outliers, individual 
values of projected surface warming varied mostly in the range 
of ~1 to ~5°C [Figure B-1 (a,c)]— ^with the NCAR(r) and 
MPI(^) runs showing the least temperature sensitivity because, 
with a 1% linear increase in СОг/уеаг (Table B-1), CO 2  has 
increased only by a factor of 1.7 by the end of the 70-year sim­
ulation, compared to a doubling for the other model runs. For 
most regions, the inter-model range of simulated temperature 
increase was rather pronounced, about 3-5°C. With the excep­
tion of one or two outliers, the smallest inter-model range of 
simulated warming at the time of CO 2  doubling was over 
Australia in summer and the Sahel in winter, where the scenar­
ios differed among models by no more than 1.3°C. It should be 
noted, however, that for a region such as Australia continental- 
scale agreement may come from canceling differences at the 
sub-continental scale.
The surface air temperature biases had positive and negative 
values both in winter and summer [Figure B-1 (b,d)]. However, 
biases were mostly negative in winter and positive in summer, 
an indication that the models tended to overestimate the sea­
sonal temperature cycles. Most biases were in the range of -7 
to 10°C, but values as large as ~15°C were found. The small­
est biases were found over Australia and, with the exception of 
one or two models. South East Asia and Southern Europe. Over 
most regions, the inter-model range of temperature biases was 
of the order of 10°C (i.e., it was greater than the inter-model 
range of regional temperature increase). The surface tempera­
ture biases as well as the simulated regional warming scenar­
ios were in the same range as those reported in IPCC (1990) for 
a number of equilibrium runs.
Regional precipitation biases spanned a wide range, with val­
ues as extreme as —90% or greater than 200% [Figure B-1 
(f,h)]. The biases were generally larger in winter than in sum­
mer, and, overall, regions with the smallest biases were 
Southern Europe, Northern Europe, and Central North 
America. Regions receiving low winter precipitation (e.g., 
Sahel, South East Asia) tended to have large positive or nega­
tive biases, because small errors in control run values appear as 
large biases when reported in percentage terms.
Simulated precipitation sensitivity to doubled CO 2  was mostly 
in the range of -20 to 20% of the control value [Figure B-1 
(e,g)]. The most salient features of simulated regional precipi­
tation changes are summarized as follows:
• 
All models agreed in summer precipitation increases 
over East Asia and, except for one model. South East 
Asia— reflecting an enhancement of summer monsoonal
flow (contrast this result to the experiments that include 
the effects of sulfate aerosols; see discussion below in 
relation to Figure B-2).
• 
All models agreed in winter precipitation increases 
over Northern Europe, East Asia, and, except for one 
model. Southern Europe. In the other cases, agreement 
was not found among models even on the sign of the 
simulated change.
• 
Regions with the smallest inter-model range of simu­
lated precipitation change were 
Central North 
America, East Asia, and Northern Europe in summer 
and Southern Europe, Northern Europe, and East Asia 
in winter.
• 
Overall, the precipitation biases were greater than the 
simulated changes. A  rigorous statistical analysis of the 
model results in Figure B-1 has not been carried out; 
however, it can be expected that, due to relatively high 
temporal and spatial variability in precipitation, tem­
perature changes are more likely to be statistically sig­
nificant than precipitation changes.
In summary, several instances occurred in which regional sce­
narios produced by all models agreed, at least in sign. In fact, 
regardless of whether flux correction was used, the range of 
model sensitivity was less than the range of biases (note that 
the scales in Figure B-1 are different for the sensitivities and 
the biases). However, the range of simulated scenarios of the 
model regional biases were still large, so that confidence in 
regional scenarios simulated by AOGCMs remains low. It 
should be pointed out that, while model agreement increases 
our confidence in the veracity of model responses, it does not 
necessarily guarantee their correctness because of possible sys­
tematic errors or deficiencies shared by all models. On the 
other hand, in spite of these errors, models are useful tools to 
study climate sensitivity (see IPCC 1996, W G I, Chapter 5). 
Even though models cannot exactly reproduce many details of 
today’s climate, key processes that we know to exist in the real 
climate system are represented in these models (see IPCC 
1996, WG 1, Chapter 4). For example, the simulation of the 
seasonal cycle of winds, temperature, pressure, and humidity 
in both the horizontal and vertical provides us with a first-order 
qualification of the fidelity of the models’ ability to capture 
these basic features of the Earth’s climate. As another example, 
AOGCMs exhibit the ability to simulate essential responses of 
the climate system to various forcings (e.g., those involving El 
Nino sea surface temperature anomalies and aerosols from vol­
canic activity). This increases our confidence in the use of 
AOGCM sensitivity experiments to evaluate potential changes 
in important climate processes.
B.2. 
Simulations with Greenhouse Gas 
and Aerosol Forcing
Two simulations {x,w) were forced with the historical increase 
in equivalent CO 2 , then a 1 %/yr increase in equivalent СОз- 
The patterns of change are qualitatively similar to those in the 
experiments above. In Sections 6.2.1.2 and 8.4.2.3 of the
Table B-1: Summary of transient coupled AOGCM experiments used in this assessment. The scenario gives the rate of increase of CO2 
used; most experiments use l%lyr, which gives a doubling ofC02 after 70 years (IS92a gives a doubling of equivalent CO2 after 95 years). 
The ratio of the transient response at the time of doubled CO2 to the equilibrium (long-term) response to doubling COj is given if known.
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate Models and Regional Modeling Techniques 
431
Center
Expt
Reference
Flux
Adjusted?
Scenario
Warming 
at Doublingt
Equilibrium
Warming
Ratio (%)t
ВШ С
a
Power et al. (1993), Colman et al. (1995)
N0
1%/yr
1.35
2.1
63
ccc
b
G. Boer (pets, comm.)
Yes
1%/yr
-
35
COLA
с
E. Schneider (pets, comm.)
No
1%/yr
2.0
-
CSIRO
d
Gordon and O’Farrell (1997)
Yes
1%/yr
2.0
43
Al
OroL
e
Stouffer (pets, comm.)
Yes
0.25%/yr
2.6
Ъ.1
f
Stouffer (pets, comm.)
Yes
050%/yr
2.4
3.7
g
Manabe ei a/. (1991,1992)
Yes
1% ^
2.2
Ъ.1
59
h
Stouffer (pers. comm.)
Yes
2%/yr
1.8
3.7
i
Stouffer (pers. comm.)
Yes
4%/yr
1.5
Ъ.1
j
Stouffer (pers. comm.)
Yes
1%/yr
-
-
GISS
к
Russell et al. (1995), Miller and Russell (1995)
No
1%/yr
1.4
-
lAP
h
Keming et al. (1994)
Yes
1%/yr
25
-
MPI
nil
Cubasch et а/. (1992,1994b),
Yes
IPCC90A
1.3
2.6
50
Hassehnaim et al. (1993), Santer et al. (1994)
n
Cubasch et al. (1992), Hasselmann et al. (1993),
Yes
UPCC90D
na
2.6
Santer era/. (1994)
0
Yes
IPCC90A
1.5
-
x3
Hasselmann et al. (1995)
Yes
IPCC90A
na
2.6
V
Hasselmann et al. (1995)
Yes
Aerosols
na
2.6
MRI
P
Tokioka et al. (1995)
Yes
1%/yr
1.6
-
NCAR
9
Washington and Meehl (1989)
No
1%/yr*
2.3
4.0
58
rs
Washington and Meehl (1993,1996),
No
1%/yr
3.8
4.6
83
Meehl and Washington (1996)
UKMO
s
МифЬу (1995a,b), Murphy and Mitchell (1995)
Yes
1%/yr
1.7
2.7
64
Johns et al. (1997), Keen (1995)
Yes
1%/yr
1.7
2.5
’б8
Johns et al. (1997), Tett et al. (1991),
Yes
1%/yr
na
25
MitcheU et al. (1995b), Mitchell and Johns (1997)
28
Johns et al. (1997), Tett et al. (1997),
Yes
Aerosols
na
25
MitcheU et al. (1995b), MitcheU and Johns (1997)
na = not available
tNumbers in italics indicate simulations with other than a 1 %/yr increase in CO2 .
*l%/yr of current CO2 concentrations.
Tolar deep ocean quantities constrained.
Three additional 50-year runs, each from different initial conditions.
^C02 from IPCC scenario 90A after greenhouse gas forcing from 1880 to 1990.
“•As (1) with a representation of aerosol forcing, with increases after 1990 based on IS92a.
Equilibrium model excluded sea ice dynamics. Coupled model has warmer than observed tropical sea surface temperatures and a vigorous 
ice albedo feedback (Washington and Meehl, 1996) contributing to the high sensitivity.
^Average of three experiments from different initial conditions.
’CO2 increased by 1%/yr from 1990. Observed greenhouse gas forcing used from 1860 to 1990.
®As (7) with a representation of aerosol forcing, with increases of aerosol and greenhouse gases after 1990 based on IS92a.
432
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate Models and Regional M odeling Techniques
Working Group I contribution to IPCC (1996), we saw that the 
inclusion of the direct sulfate aerosol forcing can improve the 
simulation of the patterns of temperature change over the last 
few decades. Here we consider the effect of combined green­
house gas and direct sulfate aerosol forcing derived from IS92a 
on simulated patterns of temperature change to 2050 and 
beyond (yfr). Figure B-2 shows area averages of summer and 
winter surface temperature, precipitation, and soil moisture 
from two models— one set with CO 2  increase only, the other 
with CO 2  increase and the direct effects of sulfate aerosols. The 
areas considered include five from Figure B-1 (i.e.. Central 
North America, South East Asia, Sahel, Southern Europe, and 
Australia).
Increasing CO 2 alone leads to positive radiative forcing every­
where, with the largest radiative heating in regions of clear 
skies and high temperatures (experiment w shown in Figure
Winter, Temperature
(c)
CNA 
SEA 
SAH 
SEU 
AUS 
Region
Winter, Precipitation
t
I 0.0
Summer, Precipitation
(e)
Figure B-2: Simulated regional changes from 1880-1889 to 
2040-2049 (experiments x, y) or from pre-industrial to 
2030-2050 (experiments w, z). Experiments x  and w include 
greenhouse gas forcing only, whereas y and z also include 
direct sulfate aerosol effects (see Table B-1): (a) Temperature 
(December to February); (b) Temperature (June to August); 
(c) Precipitation (December to February); (d) Precipitation 
(June to August); (e) Soil Moisture (December to February); 
and (f) Soil Moisture (June to August).
6.7a of IPCC 1996, WG I). The surface temperature warms 
everywhere except in the northern North Atlantic (Figure 6.7b 
of IPCC 1996, WG 1). In transient simulations to 2050, the 
inclusion of aerosols based on IS92a (y,z) reduces the global 
mean radiative forcing, and leads to negative radiative forcing 
over southern Asia. This leads to a muted warming or even 
small regions of cooling (y) in mid-latitudes. In (z), China con­
tinues to warm, albeit at a very reduced rate, even though the 
local net radiative forcing becomes increasingly negative 
(Figure 6.7c in IPCC 1996, WG I). The rate of warming over 
North America and western Europe, where the aerosol forcing 
weakens, remains below that in the simulation with greenhouse 
gases only (w). The cooling due to aerosols is amplified by sea 
ice feedbacks in the Arctic (Figure 6.7f in IPCC 1996, WG I).
In assessing these results, one should bear in mind the possible 
exaggeration of the sulfate aerosol concentrations under this 
scenario, the uncertainties in representing the radiative effeets 
of sulfate aerosols, and neglect of other factors including the 
indirect effect of sulfates. Nevertheless, these experiments sug­
gest that the direct effect of sulfate aerosols could have strong 
influence on future temperature changes, particularly in north­
ern mid-latitudes.
B,3. 
Seasonal Changes in Temperature, Precipitation, 
and Soil Moisture
IPCC (1990) reported some broad scale changes that were evi­
dent in most of the equilibrium 2 хСОг experiments that were 
then available. The detailed regional changes differed from 
model to model. In the transient experiments reported in IPCC 
(1992), it was found that the large-scale patterns of response at 
the time of doubling CO 2  were similar to the corresponding 
equilibrium experiments (IPCC, 1990), except that there was a 
smaller warming in the vicinity of the northern North Atlantic 
and the Southern Ocean in transient experiments. Here we 
summarize the main features in the seasonal (December to 
February and June to August) patterns of change in tempera­
ture, precipitation, and soil moisture in those experiments with 
a 1%/yr increase in CO 2  for which data were available. The 
changes are assessed at the time data of CO 2  doubling (after 70 
years). In experiments w-z, we also contrast the continental- 
scale response under the IS92a scenario with and without 
aerosol forcing at around 2040.
B.3.1. 
Temperature
With increases in CO 2 , all models produce a maximum annu­
al mean warming in high northern latitudes (Figures 6 . 6  and 
6.7b of IPCC 1996, WG I). The warming is largest in late 
autumn and winter, largely due to sea ice forming later in the 
warmer climate. In summer, the warming is small; if the sea 
ice is removed with increased CO 2 , then the thermal inertia of 
the mixed-layer prevents substantial warming during the short 
summer season, otherwise melting sea ice is present in both 
control and anomaly simulations, and there is no change in
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate Models and Regional Modeling Techniques
433
surface temperature (see Ingram et a l, 1989). The details of 
these changes are sensitive to parameterization of sea ice and, 
in particular, the specification of sea ice albedo (e.g., Meehl 
and Washington, 1995). In one simulation (k), there is a 
marked cooling over the northeastern Atlantic throughout the 
year, which leads to a cooling over part of northwest Europe 
in winter. There is little seasonal variation of the warming in 
low latitudes or over the southern circumpolar ocean.
When aerosol effects are included (y,z cf. x,w respectively), 
the maximum winter warming in high northern latitudes is 
less extensive. In mid-latitudes, there are some regions of 
cooling (e.g., over China), and the mean warming in the trop­
ics is greater than in mid-latitudes. In northern summer, there 
are again regions of cooling in mid-latitudes and the greatest 
warming now occurs over Antarctica. Again, including the 
direct forcing by sulfate aerosols has a strong effect on simu­
lated regional temperature changes, though the reader should 
bear in mind the limitations of these experiments as noted 
earlier.
B.3.2. 
Precipitation
On increasing CO 2 , all models produce an increase in global 
mean precipitation. Precipitation increases in high latitudes in 
winter (except in к around the Norwegian Sea where there is 
cooling and a reduction in precipitation), and in most cases the 
increases extend well into mid-latitudes (e.g., Figure 6.11a in 
IPCC 1996, WG I). The warming of the atmosphere leads to 
higher atmospheric water vapor content and enhanced pole­
ward water vapor transport into the northern high latitudes—  
hence enhanced water vapor convergence and precipitation 
(e.g., Manabe and Wetherald, 1975). In the tropics, the pat­
terns of change vary from model to model, with shifts or 
changes in intensity of the main rainfall maxima. However, 
many produce more rainfall over India and/or southeast Asia 
as seen in Figure B-1. This is consistent with an Increase in 
atmospheric water vapor concentration leading to enhanced 
low level moisture convergence associated with the strong 
mass convergence into the monsoon surface pressure low. All 
models considered apart from p  and q produce a general 
reduction in precipitation over southern Europe. In general, 
changes in the dry subtropics are small.
With the inclusion of aerosol forcing (yfr), there is only a small 
increase in global mean precipitation. The patterns of change in 
precipitation in northern winter are broadly similar to that in a 
parallel simulation with greenhouse gases only (x,w respec­
tively), but less intense. In northern summer, there is a net 
reduction in precipitation over the Asian monsoon region 
(Figure B-2), because the aerosol cooling reduces the land-sea 
contrast and the strength of the monsoon flow. This is in con­
trast to the models run with CO 2  increase only that showed 
increases of monsoon precipitation (Figure B-1). Precipitation 
increases on average over southern Europe (it decreases when 
aerosol effects are omitted) and over North America, where 
changes were small with increases in greenhouse gases only.
There is now mounting evidence to suggest that a warmer cli­
mate will be one in which the hydrological cycle will in gener­
al be more intense (IPCC, 1992), leading to more heavy rain 
events (ibid, pp. 119). It should be noted, however, that as the 
GCM grid sizes are much larger than convective elements in the 
atmosphere, daily precipitation is poorly reproduced by GCMs.
B.3.3. 
Soil Moisture
Soil moisture may be a more relevant quantity for assessing 
the impacts of changes in the hydrological cycle on vegetation 
than precipitation since it incorporates the integrated effects of 
changes in precipitation, evaporation, and runoff throughout 
the year. However, simulated changes in soil moisture should 
be viewed with caution because of the simplicity of the land- 
surface parameterization schemes in current models (e.g., 
experiments a,e-i,m,n,p,q, and r use an unmodified “bucket” 
formulation; see Section 5.3.2 of IPCC 1996, WG I).
Most models produce a general increase in soil moisture in 
the mean in high northern latitudes in winter, though in some 
(a,k) there are also substantial areas of reduction. The 
increases are due mainly to the increased precipitation dis­
cussed above, and the increased reaction of precipitation 
falling as rain in the warmer climate. At the low winter tem­
peratures, the absolute change in potential evaporation is 
small, as expected from the Clausius-Clapyeron relation, so 
evaporation increases little even though temperature increas­
es are a maximum in winter. Hence, the increase in soil mois­
ture in high altitudes in winter is consistent with physical rea­
soning and the broad scale changes are unlikely to be model- 
dependent. However, it should be noted that in general the 
models considered here do not represent the effects of freez­
ing on groundwater.
Most models produce a drier surface in summer in northern 
mid-latitudes. This occurs consistently over southern Europe 
(except q, which produces an excessively dry surface in winter 
in its control climate) and North America (except d,k, and q). 
The main factor in the drying is enhanced evaporation in sum­
mer (see Wetherald and Manabe, 1995): The absolute rate of 
increase in potential evaporation increases exponentially with 
temperature if other factors (wind, stability, and relative 
humidity) are unchanged.
As noted in the IPCC (1990), the following factors appear to 
contribute to summer drying:
The soil in the control simulation is close to saturation 
in late winter or spring; this ensures that much of the 
extra precipitation in winter is not stored in the soil but 
lost as runoff.
• 
There is a substantial seasonal variation in soil moisture 
in the simulation of present climate; some of the sim­
pler models may exaggerate the seasonal cycle of soil 
moisture (see Chapter 5 of IPCC 1996, WG I) leading 
to an exaggerated response in the warmer climate.
434
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate M odels and Regional M odeling Techniques
In higher latitudes, earlier snowmelt leading to enhanced 
solar absoфtion and evaporation may contribute. 
Changes in soil moisture may be amplified by cloud 
feedbacks in regions where evaporation is being limit­
ed by low soil moisture values (e.g., Wetherald and 
Manabe, 1995).
• 
The drying is more pronounced in regions where pre­
cipitation is reduced in summer.
Given the varying response of different land-surface schemes 
to the same prescribed forcing (IPCC 1996, WG I, Chapter 5), 
the consistency from model to model of reductions over south­
ern Europe in summer might be regarded as suфrising. All 
models submitted (except p,q) produced a reduction in summer 
precipitation over southern Europe: Here changes in circula­
tion and precipitation may be more important in determining 
soil moisture changes than the details of the land-surface 
scheme. Reductions over North America are less consistent, 
and there is a still wider model-to-model variation in the 
response over northern Europe and northern Asia.
With aerosol forcing included (yfr), the patterns of soil moisture 
change in northern winter are similar but weaker than with green­
house gas forcing only (x,w). However, soil moisture increases 
over North America and southern Europe in summer when 
aerosol effects are included (yfr), presumably because of the 
reduced warming and its effect on evaporation, and because of 
increases in precipitation. The changes in the hydrological cycle 
are likely to be sensitive to the distribution of aerosol forcing and 
the coupled model used. However, it is clear that aerosol effects 
have a strong influence on simulated regional climate change.
B.4. 
Simulations using Statistical Downscaling and 
Regional Climate Modeling Systems
Although computing power has substantially increased during 
the last few years, the horizontal resolution of present coupled 
GCMs is still too coarse to capture the effects of local and 
regional forcings in areas of complex surface physiography 
and to provide information suitable for many impact assess­
ment studies. Since IPCC (1992), significant progress has 
been achieved in the development and testing of statistical 
downscaling and regional modeling techniques for the gener­
ation of high-resolution regional climate information from 
coarse-resolution GCM simulations.
B.4.1. 
Statistical Downscaling
Statistical downscaling is a two-step process basically consist­
ing of i) development of statistical relationships between local 
climate variables (e.g., surface air temperature and precipita­
tion) and large-scale predictors, and ii) application of such rela­
tionships to the output of GCM experiments to simulate local 
climate characteristics. A  range of statistical downscaling mod­
els have been developed (IPCC 1996, WG I), mostly for U.S., 
European, and Japanese locations where better data for model
calibration are available. The main progress achieved in the last 
few years has been the extension of many downscaling models 
from monthly and seasonal to daily time scales, which allows 
the production of data more suitable for a broader set of impact 
assessment models (e.g., agriculture or hydrologie models).
When optimally calibrated, statistical downscaling models 
have been quite successful in reproducing different statistics of 
local surface climatology (IPCC 1996, WG 1). Limited appli­
cations of statistical downscaling models to the generation of 
climate change scenarios has occurred showing that in com­
plex physiographic settings local temperature and precipitation 
change scenarios generated using downscaling methods were 
significantly different from, and had a finer spatial scale struc­
ture than, those directly inteфolated from the driving GCMs 
(IPCC 1996, WG 1).
B.4.2. 
Regional Modeling
The (one-way) nested modeling technique has been increasing­
ly applied to climate change studies in the last few years. This 
technique consists of using output from GCM simulations to 
provide initial and driving lateral meteorological boundary con­
ditions for high-resolution Regional Climate Model (RegCM) 
simulations, with no feedback from the RegCM to the driving 
GCM. Hence, a regional increase in resolution can be attained 
through the use of nested RegCMs to account for sub-GCM 
grid-scale forcings. The most relevant advance in nested region­
al climate modeling activities was the production of continuous 
RegCM multi-year climate simulations. Previous regional cli­
mate change scenarios were mostly produced using samples of 
month-long simulations (IPCC 1996, WG I). The primary 
improvement represented by continuous long-term simulations 
consists of equilibration of model climate with surface hydrol­
ogy and simulation of the full seasonal cycle for use in impact 
models. In addition, the capability of producing long-term runs 
facilitates the coupling of RegCMs to other regional process 
models, such as lake models, dynamical sea ice models, and 
possibly regional ocean (or coastal) and ecosystem models.
Continuous month- or season-long to multi-year experiments 
for present-day conditions with RegCMs driven either by 
analyses of observations or by GCMs were generated for 
regions in North America, Asia, Europe, Australia, and Africa. 
Equilibrium regional climate change scenarios due to doubled 
CO 2  concentration were produced for the continental U.S., 
Tasmania, Eastern Asia, and Europe. None of these experi­
ments included the effects of atmospheric aerosols.
In the experiments mentioned above, the model horizontal grid 
point spacing varied in the range of 15 to 125 km and the 
length of runs from 1 month to 10 years. The main results of 
the validation and present-day climate experiments with 
RegCMs can be summarized in the following points:
• 
When driven by analyses of observations, RegCMs 
simulated realistic structure and evolution of synoptic
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate Models and Regional Modeling Techniques
435
events. Averaged over regions on the order of 
кщ 2  in size, temperature biases were mostly in the 
range of a few tenths of °C to a few °C, and precipita­
tion biases were mostly in the range of 10-40% of 
observed values. The biases generally increased as the 
size of the region decreased.
• 
The RegCM performance was critically affected by the 
quality of the driving large-scale fields, and tended to 
deteriorate when the models were driven by GCM out­
put, mostly because of the poorer quality of the driving 
large-scale data compared to the analysis data (e.g., 
position and intensity of storm tracks).
Compared to the driving GCMs, RegCMs generally 
produced more realistic regional detail of surface cli­
mate as forced by topography, large lake systems, or 
narrow land masses. However, the validation experi­
ments also showed that RegCMs can both improve and 
degrade aspects of regional climate compared to the dri­
ving GCM runs, especially when regionally averaged.
• 
Overall, the models performed better at mid-latitudes 
than in tropical regions.
The RegCM performance improved as the resolution of 
the driving GCM increased, mostly because the GCM 
simulation of large-scale circulation patterns improved 
with increasing resolution.
• 
Seasonal as well as diurnal temperature ranges were 
simulated reasonably well.
• 
An important problem in the validation of RegCMs has 
been the lack of adequately dense observational data, 
since RegCMs can capture fine structure of climate pat­
terns. This problem is especially relevant in mountain­
ous areas, where only a relatively small number of 
high-elevation stations are often available.
When applied to the production of climate change scenarios, 
nested model experiments showed the following (IPCC 1996, 
WG I):
• 
For temperature, the differences between RegCM- and 
GCM-simulated region-averaged change scenarios were 
in the range of 0.1 to 1.4°C. For precipitation, the differ­
ences between RegCM and GCM scenarios were more 
pronounced than for temperature, in some instances by 
one order of magnitude or even in sign. These differ­
ences between RegCM- and GCM-produced regional 
scenarios are due to the combined contributions of the 
different resolution of surface forcing (e.g., topography, 
lakes, coastlines) and atmospheric circulations, and in 
some instances the different behavior of model parame- 
terizations designed for the fine- and coarse-resolution 
models. In summer, differences between RegCM and 
GCM results were generally more marked than in winter 
due to the greater importance of local processes.
• 
While the simulated temperature changes obtained with 
nested models were generally larger than the corre­
sponding biases, the precipitation changes were gener­
ally of the same order of, or smaller than, the precipita­
tion biases.
Finally, of relevance for the simulation of regional climate 
change is the development of a variable-resolution global 
model technique, whereby the model resolution gradually 
increases over the region of interest.
B.5. 
Conclusions
Analysis of surface air temperature and precipitation results 
from regional climate change experiments carried out with 
AOGCMs indicates that the biases in present-day simulations 
of regional climate change and the inter-model variability in the 
simulated regional changes are still too large to yield a high 
level of confidence in simulated change scenarios. The limited 
number of experiments available with statistical downscaling 
techniques and nested regional models has shown that complex 
topographical features, large lake systems, and narrow land 
masses not resolved at the resolution of current GCMs signifi­
cantly affect the simulated regional and local change scenarios, 
both for precipitation and (to a lesser extent) temperature (IPCC 
1996, WG I). This adds a further degree of uncertainty in the 
use of GCM-produced scenarios for impact assessments. In 
addition, most climate change experiments have not accounted 
for human-induced landscape changes and only recently has the 
effect of aerosols been investigated. Both these factors can fur­
ther affect projections of regional climate change.
Compared to the global-scale changes due to doubled CO 2  con­
centration, the changes at Ю'^-Юб km^ scale derived from tran­
sient AOGCM runs are greater. Considering all models, at the 
lO't-lOe km 2  scale, temperature changes due to CO 2  doubling 
varied between 0.6 and 7°C and precipitation changes varied 
between -35 and 50% of control run values, with a marked 
inter-regional variability. Thus, the inherent predictability of 
climate diminishes with reduction in geographical scale. The 
greatest model agreement in the simulated precipitation change 
scenarios was found over the South East Asia (about -1 to 
30%), Northern Europe (about -9 to 16%), Central North 
America (about -7 to 5%), and East Asia (about 0.1 to 16%) 
regions in summer, and Southern Europe (about -2 to 29%), 
Northern Europe (about 5 to 25%), and East Asia (about 0.5 to 
18%) in winter. For temperature, the greatest model agreement 
in simulated warming occurred over Australia in summer 
(about 1.65 to 2.5°C, when excluding one outlier) and the 
Sahel in winter (about 1.8 to 3.15°C, when excluding one out­
lier). Regardless of whether flux correction was used, the range 
of model sensitivities was less than the range of biases, which 
suggests that models produce regional sensitivities that are 
more similar to each other than their biases.
The latest regional model experiments indicate that high- 
resolution information, on the order of a few 1 0 s of km or less, 
may be necessary to achieve high accuracy in regional and 
local change scenarios in areas of complex physiography. In 
the last few years, substantial progress has been achieved in the 
development of tools for enhancing GCM information. 
Statistical methods were extended from the monthly/seasonal 
to the daily time scale, and nested model experiments were
436
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate M odels and Regional M odeling Techniques
extended to the multi-year time scale. Also, variable- and high- 
resolution global models can be used to study possible feed­
backs of mesoscale forcings on general circulation.
Regional modeling techniques, however, rely critically on the 
GCM performance in simulating large-scale circulation patterns 
at the regional scale, because they are a primary input to both 
empirical and physically based regional models. Although the 
regional performance of coarse-resolution GCMs is still some­
what poor, there are indications that features such as position­
ing of storm track and jet stream core are better simulated as the 
model resolution increases. The latest nested GCM/RegCM and 
variable-resolution model experiments, which employed rela­
tively high-resolution GCMs and were run for long simulation 
times (up to 1 0  years) show an improved level of accuracy. 
Therefore, as a new generation of higher resolution GCM sim­
ulations become available, it is expected that the quality of sim­
ulations with regional and local downscaling models will also 
rapidly improve. In addition, the movement towards coupling 
regional atmospheric models with appropriately scaled ecolog­
ical, hydrological, and mesoscale ocean models will not only 
improve the simulation of climatic sensitivity, but also provide 
assessments of the joint response of the land surface, atmos­
phere, and/or coastal systems to altered forcings.
References
C olm an, R.A., S.B. Power, B.J. M acAvaney and R.R. D ahni, 1995: A n o n - 
flux-corrected transient CO 2 experim ent using the B M RC coupled 
atm osphere/ocean GCM . 
G e o p h y s i c a l  R e s e a r c h  L e t t e r s ,  
2 2 , 3047- 
3050.
C ubasch, U., K. Hasselm ann, H. Hock, E. M aier Reimer, U. M ikolajewicz, 
B.D. Santer, and R. Sausen, 1992: Tim e-dependent greenhouse w arm ing 
com putations w ith a coupled ocean-atm osphere m odel. 
C l i m a t e  
D y n a m i c s , 8 , 55-69.
C ubasch, U., G. M eehl, and Z.C. Zhao, 1994a: I P C C  W G  I  I n i t i a t i v e  o n  
E v a l u a t i o n  o f  R e g i o n a l  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e . Sum m ary Report, 12 pp.
C ubasch, U., B.D. Santer, A. Hellach, G. Hegerl, H. Hock, E. M aier-Reimer, 
U. M ikolajewicz and A. Stossl, 1994b: M onte Carlo climate change fore­
casts w ith a global coupled ocean-atm osphere model. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s ,  
10, 1-20.
G ordon, H.B. and S.P. O ’Farrell, 1997: Transient climate change in the 
CSIRO coupled m odel w ith dynam ical sea-ice. M o n t h l y  W e a t h e r  R e v i e w ,  
125, 875-907.
H asselm ann, K, R. Sausen, E. M aier-Reim er and R. Voss, 1993: On the cold 
start problem  in transient sim ulations w ith coupled ocean-atm osphere 
models. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s ,  9 , 53-61.
H asselm ann K., L. Bengtsson, U. Cubasch, G.C. Hegerl, H. Rodhe, E. 
Roeckner, H. von Storch, R. Voss, and J. W aszkewitz, 1995: D etection of 
anthropogenic clim ate change using a fingerprint m ethod. In: 
P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  “ M o d e m  D y n a m i c a l  M e t e o r o l o g y , ” S y m p o s i u m  i n  h o n o r  
o f  A
b e l  W i i n - N i e l s e n ,  1 9 9 5  [P. Ditlevsen (ed.)]. ECM W F Press.
In g ram , W.J., C.A. W ilson, and J.F.B. M itchell, 1989: M odeling climate 
change: An assessm ent of sea-ice and surface albedo feedbacks. J o u r n a l  
o f  G e o p h y s i c a l  R e s e a r c h , 94, 8609-8622.
IP C C , 1990: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  T h e  I P C C  S c i e n t i f i c  A s s e s s m e n t [Houghton, 
J.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, 
Cam bridge and New York, 365 pp.
IP C C , 1992. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 2 :  T h e  S u p p l e m e n t a r y  R e p o r t  t o  t h e
I P C C  S c i e n t i f i c  A s s e s s m e n t . Report o f the IPCC Scientific A ssessm ent 
W orking Group [Houghton, J.T., B.T. Callander, and S.K. Varney 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge and N ew  York, 200
pp.
IP C C , 1996: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  T h e  S c i e n c e  o f  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e .
Contribution of W orking Group I to the Second A ssessm ent Report of 
the Intergovernm ental Panel on Clim ate Change [Houghton, J.J., L.G. 
M eiro Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg and K.M askell 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, Cam bridge and New York, 572 pp.
Jo h n s, T.C., R.E. Carnell, J.F. Crossley, J.M . Gregory, J.F.B. M itchell, C.A. 
Senior, S.F.B. Tett, and R.A. Wood, 1997: The second Hadley Centre 
coupled ocean-atm osphere GCM : M odel description, spinup and valida­
tion. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s , 13, 103-134.
K een, A .B., 1995: Investigating the effects of initial conditions on the response 
of the Hadley Centre coupled model. H a d l e y  C e n t r e  I n t e r n a l  N o t e  n o .  7 1 .
K erning, C., J. Xiangze, L. W uyin, Y. Yongquiang, G. Yufu, and Z. Xuehong, 
1994: Lecture in International Sym posium  on Global Change in Asia and 
the Pacific Region (GCAP). 8-10 A ug, 1994, Beijing.
K ittel, T.G.F., N.A. Rosenbloom , Т.Н. Painter, D.E. Schimel, and VEMAP 
m odeling participants, 1995: The V EM A P integrated database for mod­
eling U nited States ecosystem /vegetation sensitivity to climate change. 
J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y ,  2 2 , 857-862.
K ittel, T.G.F., F. Giorgi and G.A. M eehl, 1997: Intercom parison of regional 
biases and doubled CO 2 sensitivity o f coupled atm osphere-ocean gener­
al circulation m odel clim ate experim ents. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s  (in press).
Li, X., Z. Zongci, W. Shaowu, and D. Yohui, 1994: Evaluation of regional cli­
m ate change simulation: A  case study. P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  I P C C  S p e c i a l  
W o r k s h o p  o n  A r t i c l e  2  o f  t h e  U n i t e d  N a t i o n s  F r a m e w o r k  C o n v e n t i o n  o n  
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e . Fortaleza, Brazil, 17-21 O ctober 1994.
M anabe, S. and R.T. W etherald, 1975: The effects of doubling the CO 2 con­
centration on the clim ate of a general circulation model. J o u r n a l  o f  
A t m o s p h e r i c  S c i e n c e s , 32, 3-15.
M anabe, S., R.J. Stouffer, M .J. Spelman, and K. Bryan, 1991: Transient 
responses of a coupled-ocean atm osphere m odel to gradual changes of 
atm ospheric C 0 2 - Part I: A nnual m ean response. J o u r n a l  o f  C l im a t e , 4, 
785-818.
M anabe, S., M.J. Spelm an, and R.J. Stouffer, 1992: Transient responses of a 
coupled ocean-atm osphere m odel to gradual changes of atmospheric 
CO 2 . Part II: Seasonal response. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 5, 105-126.
M earns, L.O., F. Giorgi, L. M cDaniel, and C. Shields, 1995a: Analysis of 
daily variability of precipitation in a nested regional climate model: 
Com parison w ith observations and doubled CO 2 results. G l o b a l  a n d  
P l a n e t a r y  C h a n g e , 10, 55-78.
M earns, L.O., F. Giorgi, L. M cDaniel, and C. Shields, 1995b: Analysis of vari­
ability and diurnal range o f daily tem perature in a nested regional climate 
model: Com parison w ith observations and doubled CO 2 results. C l im a t e  
D y n a m i c s , 11, 193-209.
M eehl, G.A. and W.M. W ashington, 1995: Cloud albedo feedback and the 
super greenhouse effect in a global coupled GCM . C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s ,  
11, 399-411.
M eehl, G.A. and W.M. W ashington, 1996: El N ino-like clim ate change in a 
model w ith increased atm ospheric CO 2 concentrations. N a t u r e , 382, 56- 
60.
M iller, J.R. and G.L. Russell,1995: Clim ate change and the A rctic hydrologie 
cycle as calculated by a global coupled atm osphere-ocean model. A n n u a l  
G l a c i o l o g y , 21, 91-95.
M itchell, J.F.B. and T.J. Johns, 1997: On m odification o f global warming by 
sulfate aerosols. Тонгаа/ o f  C l i m a t e , 10, 245-267.
M itchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram, and C.A. Senior, 1995b: On surface 
tem perature, greenhouse gases and aerosols: m odels and observations. 
J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 10, 2364-2386.
M u rp h y , J.M ., 1995a: Transient response of the Hadley Centre coupled model 
to increasing carbon dioxide. Part I -  Control clim ate and flux adjust­
ment. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 8 , 36-56.
M u rp h y , J.M ., 1995b: Transient response of the Hadley Centre coupled model 
to increasing carbon dioxide. Part III -  Analysis of global-m ean response 
using simple models. J o u rn al o f  C l i m a t e , 8 , 496-514.
M u rp h y , J.M . and J.F.B. M itchell, 1995: Transient response of the Hadley 
Centre coupled m odel to increasing carbon dioxide. Part II -  Temporal 
and spatial evolution of patterns. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e , 8 , 57-80.
Pow er, S., R. Colman, B. McAvaney, R. Dahni, A. M oore, and N. Smith, 1993: 
The BM RC coupled atm osphere/ocean/sea ice model. 
T h e  
B M R C  
R e s e a r c h  R e p o r t  N o  3 7 .
Simulation o f Regional Climate Change with Global Climate Models and Regional Modeling Techniques
437
R aisanen, J., 1995: A  com parison of the results of seven GCM experiments in 
Northern Europe. G e o p h y s i c a , 30(1-2), 3-30.
Russell, G.E., J.R. Miller, and D. Rind, 1995: A coupled atmosphere-ocean 
model for transient clim ate change studies. A t m o s p h e r e - O c e a n , 33, 4.
Santer, B.D., W. Bruggem ann, U. Cubasch, K. Hasselmann, E. Maier-Reimer, 
and U. M ikolajewicz, 1994; Signal-to-noise analysis of time-dependent 
greenhouse w arm ing experim ents. Part 1; Pattern analysis. C l i m a t e  
D y n a m i c s , 9, 267-285.
Tett, S.F.B., T.C. Johns, and J.F.B. M itchell, 1997; Global and regional vari­
ability in a coupled A OGCM . C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s , 13, 303-323.
Tokioka, T., A. Noda, A. Kitoh, Y. Nikaidou, S. Nakagawa, T. Motoi, S. 
Yukimoto, and K. Takata, 1995: A  transient CO 2 experiment with the 
M RI C G C M .  J o u r n a l  o f  t h e  M e t e o r o l o g i c a l  S o c i e t y  o f  J a p a n , 74(4), 817- 
826.
W ashington, W.M. and G.A. M eehl, 1989: Climate sensitivity due to 
increased CO 2 : Experim ents with a coupled atmosphere and ocean gen­
eral circulation model. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s , 4,1-38.
W ashington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1993; Greenhouse sensitivity experi­
ments with penetrative cumulus convection and tropical cirrus albedo 
effects. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s , 8 , 211-223.
W ashington, W.M. and G.A. Meehl, 1996; High-latitude climate change in a 
global coupled ocean-atmosphere-sea ice model with increased atmos­
pheric C O j .  J o u r n a l  o f  G e o p h y s i c a l  R e s e a r c h , 101, 12795-12801.
W etherald, R.T. and S. Manabe, 1995: The mechanisms of summer dryness 
induced by greenhouse warming. Jo u rn a/ o f  C l i m a t e , 8 , 3096-3108.
W hetton, P.H., P.J. Rayner, A.B. Pittock, and M.R. Haylock, 1994: An assess­
ment of possible climate change in the Australian region based on an 
intercomparison of general circulation modeling results. J o u r n a l  o f  
C l i m a t e , 7, 441-463.
W hetton, R, M. England, S. O ’Farrell, I. Waterson, and B. Pittock, 1996: 
Global comparison of the regional rainfall results of enhanced green­
house coupled and mixed layer ocean experiments: Implications for cli­
mate change scenario development. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 33, 497-519.
с
Simulated Changes in Vegetation 
Distribution under Global Warming
RONALD P. NEILSON (USA)
Lead Authors:
I.e. Prentice (UK), B. Smith (Australia) 
Contributors:
T. Kittel (USA), D. Viner (UK)
CONTENTS
C.2. 
VEMAP Model Intercomparison 
441
C.3. 
Biogeography Model Description 
441
C.4. 
Vegetation Classifîcation 
442
C.5. 
Future Climate Scenarios 
444
C.6 . 
Interpretation of Biogeographic Model Simulations 
445
C.6.1. Control Climate 
446
C.6.2. Future Vegetation Distribution 
447
C.6.3. Change in Vegetation Density (LAI) 
449
C.6.4. Equilibrium vs. “Transient” Scenarios and the Importance of Elevated COj 
450
C.6.5. Sulfate Aerosols 
451
C.6 .6 . Change in Annual Runoff 
451
C.7. 
Conclusions 
453
References 
455
C .l. 
Introduction 
441
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
441
C.l. 
Introduction
Global vegetation models (GVM) have in the past decade 
evolved from largely statistical-correlational to more process- 
based, rendering greater confidence in their abilities to address 
questions of global change. There are generally two classes of 
GVMs, biogeography models and biogeochemistry models. The 
biogeography models place emphasis on determination of what 
can live where, but either do not calculate or only partially cal­
culate the cycling of carbon and nutrients within ecosystems. 
The biogeochemistry models simulate the carbon and nutrient 
cycles within ecosystems, but lack the ability to determine what 
kind of vegetation could live at a given location. BI0M E3 has 
significantly blurred this model distinction (Haxeltine and 
Prentice, 1996). There are over 20 biogeochemistry models and 
about 5 biogeography models. Two of the biogeography models, 
MAPSS (Neilson, 1995) and BI0M E3 were used to provide 
estimates of changes in vegetation distribution, density and 
hydrology for this IPCC special report. These are equilibrium 
models, which simulate the potential ‘climax’ vegetation that 
could live at any well-drained, upland site in the world under an 
‘average’ seasonal climate. Equilibrium models provide useful 
‘snapshots’ of what a terrestrial biosphere in equilibrium with its 
climate might look like, but can provide only inferential infor­
mation about how the biosphere will make transitions from one 
condition to another. This is in contrast to other models, which 
simulate the timeseries of vegetation change at a point (Shugart 
and Smith, 1996), but which do not produce maps of vegetation 
distribution and function. Fully dynamic versions of the spatial- 
ly-explicit GVMs are being developed and incorporate both bio­
geography and biogeochemistry processes, but the dynamic 
global vegetation models (DGVM) are not yet ready for assess­
ment purposes (Neilson and Running, 1996). Several model 
intercomparison projects are underway and can serve to provide 
some context for the two models used here. One such intercom­
parison is the VEMAP process.
C.2. 
VEMAP Model Intercomparison
The Vegetation/Ecosystem Modeling and Analysis Project 
(VEMAP) compared three biogeography models, MAPSS 
(Neilson, 1995), B10ME2 (Haxeltine et a i, 1996), and DOLY 
(Woodward and Smith, 1994; Woodward et al., 1995) and three 
biogeochemistry models ТЕМ (Raich et я/., 1991; McGuire et 
ai, 1992; Melillo et a l, 1993), CENTURY (Parton et a l, 1987; 
Parton et a l, 1988; Parton et a l, 1993), and BIOME-BGC (Hunt 
and Running, 1992; Running and Hunt, 1993). The two classes 
of global models were intercompared and loosely coupled for an 
assessment of both model capabilities and the potential impacts 
of global warming on U.S. ecosystems (VEMAP Members, 
1995). The VEMAP process determined that all the models have 
roughly equal skill in simulating the current environment, but 
exhibit some divergences under alternative climates, in some 
cases producing vegetation responses of opposite sign.
Given the timeframe of this IPCC special report, only MAPSS 
and BI0M E3 were able to provide global simulations. MAPSS
and B10ME2 (a precursor to B10ME3) were found to produce 
generally similar results under the future climate scenarios of 
the VEMAP process. However, MAPSS is consistently more 
sensitive to water stress, producing a more xeric outcome 
under future climates and it also has a more sensitive response 
to elevated COj. That is, when incorporating a direct, physio­
logical CO 2 effect, MAPSS produces a larger benefit to vege­
tation from increased water-use-efficiency (VEMAP Members, 
1995).
C.3. 
Biogeography Model Description
MAPSS (Mapped Atmosphere-Plant-Soil System; Neilson, 
1995) and BI0M E3 (Haxeltine and Prentice, 1996) are among 
a new generation of process-based, equilibrium biogeographic 
models (IPCC 1996, WG II, Section 1.3.4; VEMAP Members, 
1995). The models simulate the distribution of potential global 
vegetation based on local vegetation and hydrologie processes 
and the physiological properties of plants. Both models simu­
late the mixture of vegetation lifeforms, such as trees, shrubs, 
and grasses, that can coexist at a site while in competition with 
each other for light and water. A set of physiologically-ground­
ed ‘rules’ determines whether the woody vegetation will be 
broadleaved or needleleaved, or evergreen or deciduous, as 
well as other properties. The models also simulate the maxi­
mum carrying capacity, or vegetation density, in the form of 
leaf area that can be supported at the site, under the constraints 
of energy and water. Energy constraints, largely applicable to 
cold ecosystems, are prescribed in MAPSS, but are simulated 
by an explicit carbon flux model in BI0M E3. The two models 
simulate a similar set of water balance processes, incoфorating 
soil texture effects.
Thus, MAPSS and BI0M E3 simulate the distribution of vege­
tation, such as forests, savannas, shrubland, grasslands and 
deserts over all non-wetland sites of the Earth, based on the rel­
ative densities or productivity of overstory and understory, veg­
etation leaf characteristics and thermal tolerances. The models 
simulate the distribution of generalized vegetation lifeforms 
(e.g. tree, shrub, grass; evergreen-deciduous; broadleaf-needle- 
leaf), rather than species and assemble these into a vegetation 
type classification. There are currently 45 different vegetation 
types simulated by MAPSS and 18 by BI0ME3. The vegetation 
types are hierarchical, representing biomes (e.g., boreal forest, 
temperate savanna, grassland, etc.) at the top and more detailed 
community-level descriptions at the lower end (e.g., subtropi­
cal, хеготофЬ1с woodland). Only the top of the hierarchy is 
utilized in this analysis. Since both models simulate a full site 
water balance, they are also calibrated and tested hydrologie 
models, thereby, allowing estimates of impacts on water 
resources fully integrated with the simulated impacts on vege­
tation (Neilson and Marks, 1994; VEMAP Members, 1995). As 
equilibrium models, MAPSS and B10ME3 simulate vegetation 
distribution and hydrology under an average seasonal cycle of 
climate. They simulate an equilibrium land-surface biosphere 
under current or future climate, but not the transitional vegeta­
tion changes from one climate to another. Thus, the models
442
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
show the long term potential consequences of climate change, 
but one can only infer immediate ( 1 - 1 0  year) effects.
MAPSS and BI0M E3 contain algorithms that allow the incor­
poration of a direct physiological CO 2  effect. Elevated CO 2  
concentrations can, among other effects, enhance productivity 
and increase the water-use-efficiency (WUE, carbon fixed per 
unit water transpired) of the vegetation thereby reducing the 
sensitivity of the vegetation to drought stress (IPCC 1996, WC 
II, Section A.2.3; Bazzaz et a l, 1996; Eamus, 1991). BI0M E3 
allows a direct CO 2 effect on both productivity and water-use- 
efficiency. MAPSS accomplishes the same effect by reducing 
stomatal conductance, which then results in increased leaf area, 
thus indirectly incorporating a productivity effect. Individual 
species exhibit variations in their expressions of direct CO 2  
effects. For example, the productivity and WUE effects are not 
necessarily tightly coupled (Eamus, 1996a). However, since 
the models simulate functional types, rather than species, both 
models have generalized the direct CO 2  effects to all vegeta­
tion, with the exception in BI0M E3 of differentiating C 3 and 
C 4  physiological types. In BI0M E3 C4  plants do not experi­
ence the elevated growth of C3 plants, but do experience 
increased water-use-efficiency. The realized importance of the 
direct CO 2  processes in complex, mature ecosystems remains a 
matter of debate (Bazzaz et al., 1996).
A review of 58 studies indicated an average 32% increase in 
plant dry mass under a doubling of CO 2  concentration 
(Wullschleger, Post, and King, 1995). Norby (1996) document­
ed an average 29% increase in annual growth per unit leaf area 
in seven broadleaf tree species under 2  x CO 2  over a wide range 
of conditions. Increased WUE, examined in another review, 
averaged about 30-40% as indexed by reductions in leaf con­
ductance to water vapor (Eamus, 1991). If such responses were 
maintained in forests over many decades, they would imply a 
substantial potential for increased storage of atmospheric car­
bon, as well as conferring some increased tolerance to drought 
due to increased WUE. However, some species or ecosystems 
exhibit acclimation to elevated CO 2  by downregulating photo­
synthesis (Bazzaz, 1990; Grulke et al., 1993; Grulke et a l, 
1990); while others do not exhibit acclimation (Bazzaz, 1990; 
Teskey, 1997). Most of the early CO 2  research was done on 
juvenile trees in pots and growth chambers. New research is 
beginning to emerge which focuses on larger trees or intact 
forested ecosystems. Recent reviews of this newer literature 
(Eamus, 1996a; Curtis, 1996) indicate that acclimation may not 
be as prevalent when roots are unconstrained and also that leaf 
conductance may not be reduced and that both responses are 
dependent on the experimental conditions, the length of expo­
sure and the degree of nutrient or water stress. These results 
imply that forests could produce more leaf area under elevated 
CO 2 , but may not gain a benefit from increased WUE. In fact, 
with increased leaf area, transpiration should increase on a per 
tree basis and the stand would use more water. Elevated tem­
peratures would increase transpiration even further, perhaps 
drying the soils and inducing a drought effect on the ecosystem 
(ibid). Prominent among the environmental influences that are 
thought to moderate long-term responses to elevated CO 2  is
nitrogen supply (Kirschbaum et a l, 1994; McGuire et a i, 1995; 
Eamus, 1996b). Unless CO 2  stimulates an increase in N miner­
alization (Curtis et a l, 1995), productivity gains in high COj 
are likely to be constrained by the system’s N budget (Korner,
1995). Nitrogen limitations may constrain carbon gains to struc­
tural tissue, rather than leaves (Curtis et a l, 1995). Thus, in 
areas receiving large amounts of N deposition, a direct CO2  
response could result in large increases in leaf area, increasing 
transpiration and possibly increasing sensitivity to drought via 
rapid soil water depletion. Early growth increases may disap­
pear as the system approaches carrying capacity as limited by 
water or nutrients (Komer, 1995). Shifts in species composition 
will likely result from different sensitivities to elevated CO2 
(Bazzaz et a l, 1996; Korner, 1995). Both MAPSS and 
BI0M E3 have been operated with and without the direct CO2 
effects in this study in order to gauge the importance and sensi­
tivity of the processes within the modeling framework. The 
direct effects of elevated CO 2  are imparted only in the ecologi­
cal model processes and not in the GCMs. There are no feed­
backs between the ecological and atmospheric models
The MAPSS model also contains a fire model that shifts some 
vegetation to a ‘fire climax’ state, such as in many grasslands 
or savannas. BI0M E3 embeds these processes in the calibra­
tion. Neither model considers current or past land-use prac­
tices. Thus, some areas that the models indicate as grassland, 
for example, might actually be shrublands, due to either graz­
ing or fire suppression. Although the two models do not simu­
late actual land-use, the ‘potential’ land-cover simulated by the 
models should provide an accurate estimate of the land-surface 
potential. That is, forests cannot be grown in deserts or shrub­
lands without irrigation; and, agricultural productivity should 
be higher in a potential forest landscape than in a potential 
shrubland landscape (given similar soils). Changes in LAI can 
be interpreted as a change in the overall carrying capacity or 
standing crop of the site, regardless of whether it is in potential 
natural vegetation or under cultivation. Additions from irriga­
tion or nitrogen could alter this conclusion, but it should hold 
for non-irrigated, upland systems. Thus, simulated changes in 
potential natural vegetation should be valuable indicators of 
general shifts in agricultural potential.
C.4. 
Vegetation Classification
The vegetation classification from each model has been aggre­
gated to ten broad classes for MAPSS and nine for BI0ME3. 
The models are most accurate in differentiating the broad phys­
iognomic divisions of Forest, Savanna, semi-arid lands 
(Shrublands and Grasslands) and Arid Lands. These differ­
ences are largely based on the relationship between leaf area 
and site water balance and the simulated changes in leaf area 
and site water balance should be generally reliable (especially 
with respect to the sign of the change). The aggregated vegeta­
tion classes used for this analysis are as follows.
1) Tundra is defined as the treeless vegetation which 
extends beyond treeline at high latitudes and altitudes.
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
443
regardless of whether it is dominated by dwarf shrubs 
or herbaceous plants.
2) Taiga/Tundra is the broad ‘ecotonal’ region of open 
6)
woodland, which occurs at higher latitudes or eleva­
tions beyond the ‘closed’ Boreal forest. This type is
not explicitly simulated by ВЮМЕЗ, but rather is 
7)
included in Boreal Conifer Forest.
3) Boreal Conifer Forest is the Taiga proper, i.e., rela­
tively dense forest composed mainly of needle-leaved 
trees and occurring in cold-winter climates.
4) Temperate Evergreen Forest encompasses the wet tem­
perate and subtropical conifer forests of the Northwest 
in North America, as well as subtropical evergreen 
broadleaf forests (e.g., in China) and the Nothofagus
and Eucalyptus forests of the Southern Hemisphere. 
8)
5) Temperate M ixed Forest includes pure temperate 
broadleaf forests, such as oak-hickory, or beech- 
maple. It also includes mixtures of broadleaf and tem­
perate evergreen types, such as the cool-mixed 
pine/fir and hardwood forests of the northeastern
United States or the warm-mixed pine/hardwood 
forests of the southeastern U.S.
Tropical Broadleaf Forest includes both tropical ever­
green forest and dense tropical drought-deciduous 
forests.
Savanna/Woodlands encompass all ‘open’ tree vege­
tation from high to low latitudes and elevations. The 
tropical dry savannas and drought deciduous forests 
are contained within this class. So too are the temper­
ate pine savannas and ‘pygmy’ forests and the aspen 
woodlands adjacent to the boreal forest. Fire can play 
an important role in maintaining the open nature of 
these woodlands; while, grazing can increase the den­
sity of woody vegetation at the expense of grass. 
Shrub/Woodlands 
are 
distinguished 
from 
the 
Savanna/Woodlands by their lower biomass and short­
er stature. This is a drier vegetation type than the 
Savanna/Woodlands and encompasses most semi-arid 
vegetation types from Chaparral to mesquite wood­
lands to cold, semi-desert sage shrublands. The actual
Table C-1: Potential future biome area (percentage o f current) simulated by the MAPSS and BI0M E3 biogeography models 
under three older (IPCC 1990, WG I), equilibrium 2 x  COj GCM scenarios and under three newer (IPCC 1996, WG I), tran­
sient simulations from which 2 x CO2 scenarios were extracted. The reported ranges include both ecological models under 
several GCM  scenarios. The baseline areas estimates are outputs from each model. Since BI0M E3 does not differentiate 
TaigalTundra from Boreal Forest, two different aggregations are presented. The TaigalTundra summaries are MAPSS data 
only; while the “Boreal + TaigalTundra” and “Total Forest + TaigalTundra” summaries are from both models. The ranges of 
percent change for Boreal Conifer are from both models (except FAR scenarios, which are MAPSS output). The TaigalTundra 
under the M APSS simulations decreases in area in all scenarios; while. Boreal conifer increases in area. Were these two vege­
tation zones aggregated in MAPSS, they would exhibit either increases or decreases, as in the BIOME3 simulations. The 
decreases in Boreal Conifer, shown in the table, are BI0M E3 simulations.
Biome ТУре
Baseline Area (Mha) 
MAPSS 
BI0M E3
With CO2
FAR Scenarios
; Effect
SAR Scenarios
Without CO2  Effect
SAR Scenarios
Tundra
792
950
33-59%
43-60%
43-60%
Taiga/Tundra
999
35-62%
56-64%
56-64%
Boreal Conifer Forest
1,024
1,992
109-133%
64-116%
68-111%
Boreal + TaigalTundra
2,023
1,992
72-95%
64-90%
68-87%
Temperate Evergreen Forest
1,142
816
104-121%
104-137%
84-109%
Temperate Mixed Forest
744
1,192
125-161%
139-199%
104-162%
Total Temperate Forest
1,886
2,008
116-125%
137-158%
107-131%
Tropical Broadleaf Forest
1,406
1,582
71-151%
120-138%
70-108%
SavannaAVoodland
2,698
2,942
90-130%
78-89%
100-115%
Shrub-Steppe
994
1,954
61-70%
70-136%
81-123%
Grassland
2,082
554
109-126%
45-123%
120-136%
Total Shrub!Grassland
3,076
2,508
96-108%
105-127%
111-126%
Arid Lands
1,470
1,351
71-72%
59-78%
83-120%
Total Vegetation
13,351
13,333
100-101%
100-101%
100-101%
Note: FAR = First Assessment Report (IPCC 1990, WG I); SAR = Second Assessment Report (IPCC 1996, WG I).
444
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
vegetation associated with this type is very susceptible 
to variation depending on soils, topography, fire, graz­
ing and land-use history. Distinctions between shrub- 
steppe and grassland are sometimes difficult to quanti­
fy, given that each usually contains elements of both 
grass and woody vegetation. The relative abundance 
of the two functional types is considered in determin­
ing the classification, but there are no generally 
accepted rules to indicate how much woody vegetation 
is sufficient to label a region a shrubland, or converse­
ly how much grass is required to label it a grassland.
9) 
Grasslands include both C 3 and C4  grassland types in 
both temperate and tropical regions. Much of the 
grassland type is a ‘fire climax’ type that would be 
populated by shrubs either with the absence of fire, or 
with extensive grazing.
10) Arid Lands encompass all regions drier than grass­
lands, from hyper-arid to semi-arid, ranging from the 
“waterless” deserts such as the Namib to the ‘semi- 
deserts’ of central Asia and Patagonia. The regions 
could be more or less ‘grassy’ or ‘shrubby’ depending 
on disturbance and land-use history.
C.S. 
Future Climate Scenarios
Estimation of the potential impacts of global warming should 
utilize several future climate scenarios, since the magnitude, 
timing and spatial details of global warming vary among cli­
mate models. Most published impacts studies were based on 
atmospheric General Circulation Model (GCM) doubled CO 2  
radiative forcing equilibrium experiments with simple mixed- 
layer oceans. Doubled CO 2  radiative forcing (2 x CO 2 ) 
includes only about 50% actual CO 2  forcing with the balance 
arising from other greenhouse gases. More recent, transient 
experiments with coupled atmosphere-ocean GCMs have sug­
gested a global average increase in temperature of about 1 .0 - 
3.5‘’C by the time of CO 2 doubling, estimated as 60-70 years
from now (described in the IPCC Second Assessment Report, 
SAR; IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 
6 ; Annex B). The most 
recent GCMs include sulfate aerosols in some experiments, 
which can cool the climate. The analysis presented here will 
rely both on the older 2 x CO 2 equilibrium GCM scenarios 
(described in the IPCC First Assessment Report, FAR; IPCC 
1990, WG I, Section 3; Annex B), since most published analy­
ses have relied on them, and on three new simulations, two 
from the Hadley Center (HADCM2GHG and HADCM2SUL; 
Johns et a l, submitted; Mitchell et a l, 1995; IPCC 1996, WG 
I, Sections 5, 6 ), and one from the Max Planck Institute for 
Meteorology (MPI-T106; Bengtsson, et al. 1995; Bengtsson, 
et al., 1996; IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 6 ), which have been 
made using coupled atmosphere-ocean GCMs and considering 
sulfate aerosol forcing.
To allow direct comparison with the previously completed 
VEMAP simulations over the conterminous U.S. (VEMAP 
Members, 1995), the same three equilibrium GCM scenarios 
were utilized for the global simulations: UICMO (Mitchell and 
Warrilow, 1987); GFDL-R30 (IPCC 1990, WG I, Section 3; 
IPCC 1990, WG I, Section 5); and OSU (Schlesinger and 
Zhao, 1989). The coarse grid from each model was interpolat­
ed to a 0.5° X 0.5°, lat.-long. grid. Scenarios were constructed 
by applying ratios ( ( 2  x C 0 2 )/(l x CO 2 )) of all climate vari­
ables (except temperature) back to a baseline longterm average 
monthly climate dataset (Leemans and Cramer, 1991). Ratios 
were used to avoid negative numbers (e.g., negative precipita­
tion), but were not allowed to exceed 5, to prevent unrealistic 
changes in regions with normally low rainfall. Temperature 
scenarios were calculated as a difference ( ( 2  x CO 2 ) - ( 1  x 
CO 2 )) and applied to the baseline dataset.
The newer GCM scenarios are extracted from transient GCM 
simulations wherein trace gases were allowed to increase grad­
ually over a long period of years, allowing the climate to adjust 
while incorporating inherent lags in the ocean-atmosphere sys­
tems. In order to run the equilibrium vegetation models under
Table C-2: Percentage area o f current biomes which could undergo a loss o f leaf area (i.e., biomass decrease) due to global 
warming under various older (FAR) and newer (SAR) GCM scenarios, and with or without a direct CO2 effect (see Table C-1 
for details), as simulated by the M APSS and B10ME3 biogeography models (ranges include both models). The losses in leaf 
area generally indicate a less favorable water balance (drought).
Biome ТУре
With CO 2
FAR Scenarios
Effect
SAR Scenarios
Without CO 2  Effect
SAR Scenarios
Tundra
1-3%
0 - 1 %
0 -2 %
Taiga/Tundra
1-5%
1 %
2 %
Boreal Conifer Forests
39-67%
0 -2 0 %
3-69%
Temperate Evergreen Forests
24-57%
1-18%
28-51%
Temperate Mixed Forests
54-86%
1-29%
15-75%
Tropical Broadleaf Forests
5-63%
1-42%
26-33%
Savanna/Woodlands
1 0 -2 1 %
7-17%
38-75%
Shrub-Steppe
26-45%
1-24%
20-59%
Grasslands
33-37%
5-46%
43-75%
Arid Lands
8 - 1 2 %
0-13%
0-29%
Table C-3: Percentage area o f current biomes which could undergo a gain o f leaf area (i.e., biomass increase) due to global 
warming under various older (FAR) and newer (SAR) GCM scenarios, and with or without a direct CO2 effect (see Table C-1 
for details), as simulated by the M APSS and BI0M E3 biogeography models (ranges include both models). The gains in leaf 
area generally indicate a more favorable water balance.
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming 
445
Biome T>pe
With CO 2 Effect
FAR Scenarios 
SAR Scenarios
Without CO2  Effect
SAR Scenarios
Tundra
20-74%
20-58%
49-82%
Taiga/Tundra
91-98%
92-95%
91-94%
Boreal Conifer Forests
13-21%
36-93%
3-58%
Temperate Evergreen Forests
20-41%
46-67%
7-18%
Temperate Mixed Forests
4-26%
50-91%
9-21%
Tropical Broadleaf Forests
7-40%
16-87%
0-7%
Savanna/Woodlands
74-88%
46-84%
4-31%
Shrub-Steppe
46-64%
64-80%
16-42%
Grasslands
56-60%
45-78%
3-28%
Arid Lands
51-57%
53-80%
23-66%
the newer transient GCMs, a control climate is extracted as an 
average of either 30 years (Hadley Center) or 10 years (Max 
Planck Institute) of model output associated with present cli­
mate (e.g. 1961-1990). Likewise, a 30 or 10 year average is 
extracted from the time period approximating 2 x CO 2  forcing 
(e.g. 2070- 2099). These average climates are then used to 
drive the vegetation models. Note that because the vegetation 
models are equilibrium models, the results must be interpreted 
as indicating the potential vegetation, i.e., the climatically suit­
able vegetation. Time lags and transient responses of the vege­
tation to climate change are not considered here.
C.6. 
luterpretatiou of Biogeographic Model Simulations
Each of the ten IPCC regions was supplied with a set of MAPSS 
and BI0M E3 output. Included were figures of vegetation dis­
tribution under current and future climate, vegetation density 
change (indexed by leaf area change), and runoff change. Also
included were summary tables of the areas of the different bio­
mes within each region under current and future climate, a 
change matrix indicating the area shifts from current biome type 
to other types, the areas within each biome expected to undergo 
an increase or decrease in vegetation density (change in LAI) 
and the areas within each biome expected to undergo an 
increase or decrease in annual runoff. These results were sup­
plied for each vegetation model and for each GCM scenario. 
MAPSS and BI0M E3 were both run under the Hadley Center 
scenarios; BI0M E3 alone was run under the Max Planck 
Institute scenario; and, MAPSS alone was run under the older 
OSU, GFDL-R30 and UKMO scenarios. The Hadley and MPI 
simulations were run both with and without a direct CO 2  effect 
(applied in the ecological models); while, the OSU, GFDL-R30 
and UKMO scenarios were only ran with the direct CO 2  effects 
incoфorated, in keeping with the VEMAP analyses.
Since the regional maps are of a much smaller extent and 
include quantitative information, the detailed interpretation
Table C-4: Percentage area o f current biomes which could undergo a loss o f annual runoff due to global warming under vari­
ous older (FAR) and newer (SAR) GCM scenarios, and with or without a direct CO2 effect (see Table C-1 for details), as simu­
lated by the M APSS and ВЮ МЕЗ biogeography models (ranges include both models).
With CO 2  Effect
Without CO 2  Effect
Biome Type
FAR Scenarios
SAR Scenarios
SAR Scenarios
Tundra
19-32%
16-45%
28-46%
Taiga/Tundra
79-90%
71-79%
76-82%
Boreal Conifer Forests
1-25%
3-53%
33-81%
Temperate Evergreen Forests
12-21%
25-37%
33-67%
Temperate Mixed Forests
59-77%
51-66%
62-68%
Tropical Broadleaf Forests
11-40%
15-54%
23-68%
SavannaAVoodlands
14-19%
37-60%
31-46%
Shrub-Steppe
43-61%
23-44%
18-42%
Grassland
34-38%
41-60%
33-56%
Arid Lands
24-26%
1-20%
2-20%
446
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
Table C-5: Percentage area o f current biomes which could undergo a gain o f annual runoff due to global warming under vari­
ous older (FAR) and newer (SAR) GCM scenarios, and with or without a direct CO2 effect (see Table C-1 fo r details), as simu­
lated by the M APSS and BIOME3 biogeography models (ranges include both models).
Biome ТУре
With CO 2  Effect
FAR Scenarios 
SAR Scenarios
W ithout CO 2  Effect
SAR Scenarios
Tundra
67-80%
36-82%
32-70%
Taiga/Tundra
10-20%
20-28%
18-23%
Boreal Conifer Forests
74-98%
41-95%
14-63%
Temperate Evergreen Forests
78-87%
58-73%
29-66%
Temperate Mixed Forests
23-41%
33-47%
11-37%
Tropical Broadleaf Forests
60-89%
46-85%
32-76%
Savanna/Woodlands
80-84%
31-60%
51-59%
Shrub-Steppe
23-44%
15-45%
23-48%
Grasslands
38-41%
19-32%
17-40%
Arid Lands
7-24%
4-15%
3-15%
will be left to the regions and the following discussion will 
only address general features of the simulations, particularly 
the differences between the older and newer GCMs and the 
MAPSS and B I0M E3 intercomparisons. Although each 
region received the full set of figures, only a subset will be 
presented here. The MAPSS and BI0M E3 results are suffi­
ciently similar that the ranges presented in Tables C-1 to C-5 
encompass the output from both models to indicate the full
range of uncertainties within the scope of these experiments 
and models.
C.6.1. 
Control Climate
MAPSS and BI0M E3 produce similar vegetation maps under 
current climate, but there are some differences. Some of the
M A PSS
T undra
T aiga / T undra 
B oreal C onifer Forest 
T em perate E vergreen Forest 
; T em perate M ixed Forest 
J T ropical B roadleaf Forest
Savanna / W oodland 
Shrub / W oodland
B I0 M E 3
G rassland 
A rid Land
Figure C-1: The distribution of major biome types as simulated under current climate by the (a) MAPSS and (b) BI0ME3 
biogeography models.
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
447
M APSS G FD L + C 0 2
; T undra 
T aiga /  T undra 
B oreal C onifer Forest 
?1 T em perate E vergreen Forest
ëj
I T em perate M ixed Forest 
T ropical B roadleaf Forest 
S avanna / w o o a ian a  
j Shrub / W oodland " 
G rassland 
! A rid Land
M APSS G FD L
Figure C-2: The potential distribution of major biomes as simulated under the GFDL-R30 2 x CO 2  GCM experiment 
(Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, slab ocean, no sulfate aerosols), by MAPSS, both (a) with and (b) without a direct, 
physiological COj effect.
discrepancies between MAPSS and BI0M E3 under current cli­
mate (Figure C-1) are due to questions of classification, espe­
cially in the drier types. For example, the Sahel region in 
Africa is labeled as ‘shrub-steppe’ in the original BI0M E3 
classification, but as various grassland types in MAPSS. The 
MAPSS grassland types do allow some shrubs, but the shrub 
density is usually reduced by the fire model, which assumes 
that there has been no reduction in fuel due to grazing. Were 
such land-use constraints included, the two models would be in 
better agreement on the classification. This classification dif­
ference between the models occurs over many of the drier parts 
of the world.
The models each appear to be better calibrated to their ‘home’ 
continents than either is to other continents. For example, 
MAPSS 
over-estim ates the 
distribution of Temperate 
Evergreen Forests (conifers) in western Europe; while, 
BI0ME3 overestimates the distribution of Temperate Mixed 
Forests (broadleaf) in western North America (Table C-1); yet, 
the two models are generally in agreement on the amount and 
loeation of temperate forests.
One area of significant departure from observed vegetation is 
the Pampas of southern South America. Both models simulate 
forests where grasslands are generally predominant. Various
hypotheses for this discrepancy include unique soils, fire dis­
turbance, rainfall seasonality and interannual variability of 
rainfall (VEMAP Members, 1995; Neilson, 1995; Neilson and 
Marks, 1994) and represent a focus for future research. Other 
local to regional errors in the MAPSS and BI0M E3 classifica­
tions will be apparent to the knowledgeable reader. Reasons for 
these errors are many, but include 1) possible errors in the 
interpolated climate, 2) grazing, harvest, fire and other distur­
bances, and 3) missing or weak representation of some 
processes in the models. Globally, both models are reasonably 
accurate and are generally considered to be more accurate 
under altered climates than previous, empirical approaches 
(VEMAP Members, 1995). Empirical approaches cannot 
simultaneously simulate changes in vegetation distribution and 
changes in vegetation density and hydrology. Nor can they 
examine the sensitivity of the system to altered CO 2  concen­
trations. However, as the focus shifts to ever smaller regions or 
locales, the model uncertainty and the likelihood of error 
increases.
C.6.2. 
Future Vegetation Distribution
Both MAPSS and BI0M E3 produce large shifts of cold-limit­
ed vegetation boundaries into higher latitudes and elevations.
448
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
BI0ME3 MPI + C02
Tundra 
V
Taiga / Tundra 
Boreal Conifer Forest 
Temperate Evergreen Forest 
Temperate Mixed Forest 
Tropical Broadleaf Forest 
Savanna / Woodland 
Shrub / Woodland 
Grassland 
Arid Land
BI0ME3 MPI
Figure C-3: The potential distribution of major biomes as simulated under the MPI-T106 GCM experiment (Max Planck 
Institute, 2 X CO 2  greenhouse gas radiative forcing, extracted from transient simulation, no sulfate aerosols), by BI0M E3, both 
(a) with and (b) without a direct, physiological CO 2  effect.
However, the water-controlled boundaries may exhibit any 
direction of change, depending on the interaction of several 
variables including among others, the relative changes in tem­
perature and precipitation, and whether or not the direct effects 
of CO 2  have been incorporated.
The older GCM scenarios tend to be hotter than the newer ones 
and produce a more dramatic change in vegetation distribution. 
The MAPSS results under GFDL-R30 serve to illustrate one of 
the older simulations. MAPSS and BI0M E2 (Haxeltine et a l,
1996) were similar over the U.S. under this scenario (VEMAP 
Members, 1995), if both incorporated the direct CO 2  effects. 
MAPSS was far more xeric in response than ВЮ МЕ2 without 
the direct CO 2  effects (ibid).
The Tundra decreases by as much as 1/3 to 2/3 of its present 
size, as does the Taiga/Tundra, under all scenarios and with 
both ecological models (Table C-1, Figures C-2 to C-5). The 
boreal forest expands in size under all scenarios ranging from 
108% to 133% of its present size (MAPSS only). Since 
BI0M E3 includes the Taiga/Tundra, which contracts under all 
warming scenarios (MAPSS simulations), with the Boreal 
Conifer Forest, which expands under all scenarios (MAPSS
simulations), the net change simulated by BI0M E3 usually 
indicates a loss of Boreal Forest. However, the aggregation of 
the two types in BI0M E3 hides the observation that the two 
vegetation types (as defined above) tend to change in opposite 
sign with respect to area, i.e., Taiga/Tundra decreasing, Boreal 
Conifer increasing. The two models are quite consistent in the 
simulated response of the combined biomes (Table C-1). 
Temperate forests (inclusive of both types) increase in area 
(107% to 158%). Tropical forests could either expand or con­
tract, largely dependent on the inclusion of the direct CO2  
effect, but also dependent on the severity of the scenario. 
Savanna/woodlands expand or contract, depending on whether 
or not they are encroached upon by neighboring forests or 
semi-arid lands, again reflecting whether or not direct CO2  
effects are considered and on the scenario. BI0M E3 shows a 
competitive displacement of tropical savannas by neighboring 
forests, due to the superior competitive ability in the model of 
the C3 trees over the C4  grasses under elevated CO 2 . The total 
area of grasslands and shrublands in these simulations remains 
largely unchanged or expands by as much as 27%, depending 
on the CO 2  effect and the scenario. If the direct effects of CO2  
are included, arid lands tend to contract in all scenarios, shift­
ing to less arid types (Table C-1, Figures C-2 to C-5). Without
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
449
the direct CO 2 , arid lands either expand or contract in area, 
depending on the climate scenario and the ecological model.
C.6.3. 
Change in Vegetation Density (LAI)
Although temperature-controlled vegetation boundaries shift 
predictably in all cases, water-controlled boundaries could shift 
any direction, reflecting either more or less beneficial water 
status. Likewise, vegetation change does not simply consist of 
shifts in the boundaries between homogeneous blocks of vege­
tation. Indeed, changes in vegetation density (via leaf area 
index, LAI) may often be more informative, since changes in 
LAI in water-limited areas generally indicate a change in the 
site water status and carrying capacity (Tables C-2, C-3; 
Figures C-6 to C-9). The change in LAI could also be taken as 
an indication of what could happen in the near term, since 
changes in LAI can occur in a matter of a few years while 
adjustments of vegetation structure and composition take much 
longer.
MAPSS and BIOME3 produce generally similar maps of 
change in LAI when forced by the same scenario, except that 
MAPSS produces a consistently stronger drought effect (com­
pare Figures C-6 and C-7 and Figures C-8 and C-9). For exam­
ple, within the U.S., when not including a direct CO 2  effect 
(Figure C-9), both models indicate increases in LAI in the 
Southwest and either an increase or no change in LAI over 
most of the eastern U.S. Both models simulate a decline or no 
change (BI0M E3) over much of the western U.S. (excluding 
the SW). Both models produce increases in LAI over parts of 
the Sahara/Sahel, either with or without the direct CO 2  effect 
under all scenarios, both old and new. Likewise, both models 
under all scenarios indicate some increases in LAI over much 
of the arid interior of Australia. In general, there appear to be 
increases in LAI in already low LAI regions, either arid or 
cold. The increases in cold regions are due to expansion of 
forests into non-forested areas. The increases in arid areas are 
due to increased rainfall, a consequence of a generally more 
vigorous hydrologie cycle. There are many other consistencies 
between the two biogeography models with respect to the rel­
ative regional or subregional simulated LAI changes. A more 
complete discussion of simulated LAI patterns from the 
VEMAP models over the conterminous U.S. is in preparation.
If the direct effects of CO 2  are minimal and the future scenar­
ios are relatively warm, decreases in LAI could occur over very 
large forested areas, ranging up to nearly 2/3 or more of the 
areas of boreal, temperate and tropical forests (Table C-2). By 
contrast, if the direct effects of CO 2 are strong and scenarios
M APSS H adleyS + C 0 2
T undra
T aiga / T undra 
B oreal C onifer Forest 
: T em perate E vergreen Forest 
T em perate M ixed Forest
j T ropical B roadleaf Forest 
■ S avanna / W oodland 
Shrub / W oodland 
G rassland 
; A rid Land
B I0M E 3 H adleyS + C 0 2
Figure C-4: The potential distribution of major biomes as simulated under the HADCM2SUL GCM experiment (Hadley 
Center, 2 x CO 2  greenhouse gas radiative forcing, extracted from transient simulation, plus sulfate aerosols), by (a) MAPSS 
and (b) BI0M E3. Both models have incoфorated a direct, physiological CO 2 effect.
450
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
MAPSS HadleyS
■q*.
Tundra
Taiga / Tundra 
Boreal Conifer Forest 
Temperate Evergreen Forest 
Temperate Mixed Forest 
Tropical Broadleaf Forest 
Savanna / Woodland 
Shrub / Woodland . 
Grassland 
Arid Land
BI0ME3 HadleyS
Figure C-5: The potential distribution of major biomes as simulated under the HADCM2SUL GCM experiment (Hadley 
Center, 2 x CO 2  greenhouse gas radiative forcing, extracted from transient simulation, plus sulfate aerosols), by (a) MAPSS 
and (b) ВЮМЕЗ. A direct, physiological CO 2  effect is not incorporated in either model.
are not too warm, then all forest vegetation zones could expe­
rience increased biomass over as much as 2/3 or more of their 
areas (Table C-3). More likely, the responses will be interme­
diate with large regional contrasts, decreases in vegetation den­
sity in some areas, increases in others. Even though these are 
equilibrium simulations, a simulated decline in LAI generally 
implies a less favorable water balance and a loss of vegetation 
density. These losses imply a process of loss over some time 
period. We can only draw inferences about how rapidly such 
losses would occur, based on the simulated amount of loss. The 
regions that could experience declining LAI (Figures C-6 to C- 
9), would exhibit spatial gradients in response from mild 
decline grading into potentially catastrophic dieback. All 
reaches along the decline gradients would experience drought 
stress, which could trigger other responses, such as pest infes­
tations and fire. Following disturbance by drought, infestation 
or pests, new vegetation, either of the same or of a different 
type would grow, but to a lower density.
Including both equilibrium  and 
‘transient’ scenarios, 
MAPSSwas run under four different scenarios (not counting 
the sulfate scenario, HADSUL). These range in global tem­
perature increase (delta T) at the time of 2 x CO 2  from 1.7
(HADGHG) to 5.2°C (UKMO) (Annex B). In general, the 
areas of forest decline within individual biomes (incorporating 
a direct CO 2  effect) increase linearly with increasing delta T in 
the temperate and boreal forests; while, the areas of increased 
forest density decrease with increasing delta T. Tropical 
forests exhibit a similar pattern across the three FAR scenar­
ios, but under the cooler HADGHG scenario show a large 
decline as simulated by MAPSS. By contrast, BI0M E3, under 
the HADGHG scenario, shows almost no change in tropical 
forest density. Interestingly, adjacent tropical savannas 
increase in density in both ecological models under the 
HADGHG scenario.
C.6.4. 
Equilibrium vs. “Transient” Scenarios and the 
Importance of Elevated CO2
The newer climate scenarios (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 6), 
extracted from transient GCM simulations, are as a group quite 
different from the older, equilibrium scenarios (IPCC 1990, WG 
I, Section 3), in terms of the simulated ecological responses that 
these scenarios produce. All of the older scenarios produce large 
regions showing LAI declines (especially in temperate to high
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
451
latitudes), as well as gains, even when the direct effects of CO 2  
are included (MAPSS simulations. Figure C-6, OSU and 
UKMO scenarios not shown). By contrast, under the newer sce­
narios, if a direct CO 2  effect is assumed, then there are very few 
regions with declines in LAI, as simulated by both MAPSS and 
ВЮМЕЗ (Figures C-7, C-8); rather, most of the world is simu­
lated with an increased LAI. Actual increases in LAI could be 
limited by nitrogen availability in some areas, although elevat­
ed soil temperatures could increase decomposition, releasing 
more nitrogen (McGuire et al., 1995; VEMAP Members, 1995). 
The first-order differences between the older and newer scenar­
ios are likely due to the smaller global temperature increases in 
the newer climate scenarios, which came from GCMs that had 
not attained their full equilibrium temperature changes.
C.6.5. 
Sulfate Aerosols
The incorporation of sulfate aerosols produced a cooling 
effect 
in 
the 
HADCM 2SUL 
run 
compared 
to 
the 
HADCM2GHG run, which lacked the sulfate forcing (GHG 
runs are not shown). The vegetation response to the sulfate 
forcing is observable in the model output from both MAPSS
and BI0M E3, but is relatively small compared to the differ­
ences between the newer and older climate scenarios. The 
newer scenarios produce widespread enhanced vegetation 
growth, even without the sulfate effect, if direct CO 2  effects 
are included and widespread decline if the CO 2  effects are 
excluded. The presence of the sulfate-induced cooling pro­
duces a much smaller amplitude effect on the vegetation than 
does the presence or absence of the direct effects of elevated 
CO 2 on water-use-efficiency.
C.6.6. 
Change in Annual Runoff
Changes in annual runoff (Figure C-10) were mapped for all 
scenarios from both MAPSS and BI0M E3. The changes in 
runoff are more stable among the different climate scenarios 
than are the simulated changes in LAI. The relative stability of 
simulated runoff change may reflect that runoff is a passive 
drainage process; whereas, évapotranspiration is a biological 
process and a function of the product of LAI and stomatal con­
ductance. If stomatal conductance is reduced, e.g., via a direct 
CO 2  effect, LAI will compensate by increasing and runoff will 
show little change (Neilson and Marks, 1994). Some of the
MAPSS GFDL + C02 - Change in LAI
I
I
Increase 
> 200%
100 - 200%  
50 - 100% 
25 - 50%
10 - 25%
1 - 10%
No Change 
1 - 10%
10 - 25%
25 - 50%
50 - 75%
75 - 100% 
100% 
Decrease
MAPSS GFDL - Change in LAI
Figure C-6: The potential change in vegetation leaf area index (LAI), which can be considered as an index of vegetation den­
sity or biomass, as simulated under the GFDL-R30 2 x CO 2 GCM experiment (Geophyskal Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, slab 
ocean, no sulfate aerosols), by MAPSS, both (a) with and (b) without a direct, physiological CO 2 effect.
452
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
ВЮМЕЗ MPI + C02 - Change in LAI
Increase 
> 200%
100 -  200%  
50 - 100% 
25 - 50%
10 - 25%
1 -  10%
No Change 
1 - 10%
10 - 25%
25 - 50%
50 - 75%
75 - 100% 
100% 
Decrease
BI0ME3MPI - Change in LAI
Figure C-7: The potential change in vegetation leaf area index (LAI), which can be considered as an index of vegetation den­
sity or biomass, as simulated under the MPI-T106 GCM experiment (Max Planck Institute, 2 x CO 2  greenhouse gas radiative 
forcing, extracted from transient simulation, no sulfate aerosols), by BI0M E3, both (a) with and (b) without a direct, physio­
logical CO 2  effect.
obvious differences between MAPSS and BI0M E3 can be 
attributed to structural differences in the models. BI0M E3 cal­
culates water balance daily, even though all inputs are month­
ly; whereas, MAPSS calculates water balance monthly. This 
difference alone could be causing the more extreme respon­
siveness of MAPSS, which shows both larger runoff increases 
and larger losses in different regions. On the other hand, 
MAPSS uses a 3-layer soil with roots only in the top two lay­
ers; while B10ME3 uses a 2-layer soil with roots in both lay­
ers. The third layer in MAPSS provides a consistent base flow 
and might explain why MAPSS produces runoff in some drier 
regions, such as the western U.S., while BI0M E3 does not. 
The hydrology models in both MAPSS and B10ME3, although 
process-based, are considered prototypes for eventual replace­
ment by more elaborate models (see for example, the PILPS 
model intercomparison study; Love and Henderson-Sellers, 
1994).
In general, MAPSS and BI0M E3 produce similar regional pat­
terns in the estimated changes in runoff. Although the magni­
tude of the changes are different, there are broad similarities in 
the sign of the change (but, clearly not in all regions). The
largest area of regional difference between the two models is in 
interior Eurasia (Figure C-10).
Runoff generally increases in the Tundra, due to higher tem­
peratures, more precipitation and more melting (Tables C-4, 
C-5). It decreases in the Taiga/Tundra due to encroachment of 
high-density boreal forest into low density vegetation (hence, 
higher transpiration). Runoff results are varied in the temper­
ate forests, but Temperate Mixed forests tend to present a 
higher likelihood of reduced runoff over large areas (range 
51% to 88% of the area under all scenarios) than of increased 
runoff (range 11% to 47% of the area under all scenarios. 
Tables C-4, C-5). Even the most benign scenarios indicate a 
minimum of 51% of the area of the world’s temperate ever­
green forests could experience a runoff decline; whereas, a 
maximum of 47% of the area would experience increased 
runoff. Temperate Evergreen Forests exhibit a greater likeli­
hood of increased runoff over large areas (range 29% to 87% 
of the area under all scenarios) than decreased runoff (range 
11% to 68%), but the overlap in these increase and decrease 
ranges indicates the degree of uncertainty in the simulations. 
However, much of the increased runoff in the Temperate
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
453
Evergreen forested areas is due to increased winter runoff, 
which is not necessarily available for use by ecosystems, irri­
gation or domestic purposes. Runoff from tropical forest areas 
could either increase or decrease over large areas, depending 
largely on the importance of the direct CO 2  effects. Runoff 
from drier vegetation types is regionally variable and exhibits 
both increases and decreases, depending on the direct CO 2  
effects and regional rainfall patterns.
C.7. 
Conclusions
MAPSS and ВЮ МЕЗ produce qualitatively similar results 
under alternative future climate scenarios, with or without 
including a direct, physiological CO 2  effect. However, 
MAPSS produces consistently stronger drought effects with 
increasing temperature than does ВЮМЕЗ. When under com­
mon scenarios, the two models produce similar subregional 
sensitivities. That is, if two adjacent subregions show opposite 
sign responses under a future climate in MAPSS, they will 
tend to exhibit the same relationship in ВЮМЕЗ, but the over­
all sensitivity will be lower in ВЮМЕЗ. The newer scenarios, 
constructed from transient GCM experiments, are consistently
less xeric, as measured by simulated changes in leaf area 
index (LAI), than the older, equilibrium GCM scenarios. 
Under the newer scenarios, both ecological models indicate an 
overall increase in LAI (although nutrient constraints could 
limit or delay the increase), when a direct physiological CO 2  
effect is included. However, if the direct CO 2  effects are not 
included, both models indicate a general reduction in global 
vegetation density.
The changes in vegetation leaf area (LAI) simulated by both 
MAPSS and ВЮМЕЗ are analogous to the changes in soil 
water content reported by earlier GCM experiments (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 6). Those earlier experiments maintained 
a fixed vegetated land surface. That is, the vegetation type and 
density were not allowed to respond to changes in either cli­
mate or elevated CO 2 concentration. Therefore, as evaporative 
demand went up in those simulations, soil water content 
decreased, or was totally depleted. MAPSS and ВЮМЕЗ, 
however, absorb those processes directly in the vegetation 
response. Both models simulate water-limited LAI by maxi­
mizing the LAI that can be supported and just barely transpire 
available soil water. Thus, in the equilibrium solution to LAI, 
soil water is fully utilized and can’t change much under altered
MAPSS HadleyS + C02 - Change in LAI
Increase 
> 200%
100 -  200%  
50 - 100% 
25 - 50%
10 - 25%
1 - 10%
No Change 
1 - 10%
10 - 25%
Decrease
BIOME3 HadleyS + C02 - Change in LAI
Figure C-8: The potential change in vegetation leaf area index (LAI), which can be considered as an index of vegetation den­
sity or biomass, as simulated under the HADCM2SUL GCM experiment (Hadley Center, 2 x CO 2  greenhouse gas radiafive 
forcing, extracted from transient simulation, plus sulfate aerosols), by (a) MAPSS and (b) ВЮМЕЗ. Both models have incor­
porated a direct, physiological CO 2  effect. This figure is a companion to Figure C-4.
454
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
MAPSS HadleyS - Change in LAI
Increase 
> 200%
100 -  200%  
50 -100% 
25 - 50%
10 - 25%
1 - 10%
No Change 
1 - 10%
10 - 25%
25 - 50% 
50 - 75%
75 - 100% 
100% 
Decrease
BI0ME3 HadleyS - Change in LAI
•4s.
Figure C-9: The potential change in vegetation leaf area index (LAI), which can be considered as an index of vegetation den­
sity or biomass, as simulated under the HADCM2SUL GCM experiment (Hadley Center, 2 x COj greenhouse gas radiative 
forcing, extracted from transient simulation, plus sulfate aerosols), by (a) MAPSS and (b) ВЮМЕЗ. A  direct, physiological 
CO 2  effect is not incorporated in either model. This figure is a companion to Figure C-5.
climates. Changes in the site water balance are, therefore, indi­
cated by changes in LAI.
The newer climate scenarios used in this analysis are relative­
ly cool in comparison to other possible new scenarios (IPCC 
1996, WG I, Section 6). Therefore, the analyses presented here 
must be considered as a relatively conservative subset of the 
possible future ecological responses.
Although many of the simulations from both MAPSS and 
BI0M E3 indicate potentially large expansions of tropical and in 
some cases temperate forests, actual expansions would be limit­
ed by urban and agricultural land-use constraints, unsuitable 
soils in some areas and slow dispersal rates, among other factors. 
Even so, if a forest is anticipated to expand into a region for­
merly indicated as shrubland, any agriculture in the region might 
expect an increase in potential productivity, and vice versa. Such 
changes between forest and shrubland are usually underlain by a 
change in LAI, which reflects the site water balance. An increase 
or decrease in LAI indicates a change in the water or energy bal­
ance and the potential biomass density or carrying capacity that 
could be supported on the site, regardless of whether the biomass 
is ‘natural’ or agricultural (dryland agriculture only).
The results presented here are for steady-state, or equilibrium 
conditions and do not directly indicate how the systems would 
behave in their transient responses toward a new equilibrium. 
For example, in areas where LAI is indicated to decline, it may 
be that equilibrium runoff is indicated to increase. However, one 
hypothesis is that during the processes of LAI decline, increased 
evaporative demand could cause reductions in runoff, before the 
vegetation becomes sufficiently drought-stressed for the LAI to 
be reduced. After further time, if the vegetation is sufficiently 
drought stressed, a rapid dieback could occur and might be facil­
itated by pests and fire. Were vegetation to undergo such a large 
dieback, then transpiration demand would be temporarily 
reduced and runoff could increase substantially. Thus, before a 
new equilibrium is attained with new vegetation growth, streams 
could go through a dry to wet oscillation. These possible hydro­
logie responses to vegetation change are, however, of a different 
timeframe (years) than possible short term floods and droughts 
that could occur simply due to increased variation of extreme 
weather events (IPCC 1996, WG I, Section 6).
At least two contrasting, transient trajectories of vegetation 
change are possible. If a large, direct CO 2  benefit were to 
occur, vegetation could increase in growth and biomass under
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
455
relatively cool, early warming conditions, only to experience 
drought-stress and decline or dieback under the hotter, later 
stages of warming. Alternatively, if direct COj benefits are 
more muted, vegetation could become drought-stressed and 
experience decline or dieback within the next few decades 
even under mild warming. Expansion of forests into cooler 
zones would likely lag behind decline and dieback in warmer 
zones, producing a transient reduction in forest area, possible 
increases in pests and fire, and possibly large releases of CO 2  
to the atmosphere (King and Neilson, 1992; Smith and 
Shugart, 1993).
References
Bazzaz, F.A. 1990: The Response of N atural Ecosystem s to the Rising Global 
CO 2 Levels. A n n u a l  R e v i e w  o f  E c o l o g y  a n d  S y s t e m a t i c s , 21, 167-196.
Bazzaz, F.A., S.L. Bassow, G.M . Berntson, and S.C. Thom as, 1996: Elevated 
CO 2 and terrestrial vegetation: im plications for and beyond the global 
carbon budget. In: G l o b a l  C h a n g e  a n d  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s  [Walker,
B. 
and W. Steffen (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 
43-76.
Bengtsson, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1995: Hurricane-type vortices in a 
general circulation model. T e l l u s , 47A, 1751-1796.
Bengtsson, L., M. Botzet, and M. Esch, 1996: Will greenhouse gas-induced 
warming over the next 50 years lead to higher frequency and greater 
intensity of hurricanes? T e llu s , 48A, 57-73.
C urtis, P.S. 1996: A  meta-analysis of leaf gas exchange and nitrogen in trees 
grown under elevated carbon dioxide. P l a n t ,  C e l l  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t , 19, 
127-137.
C urtis, P.S., C.S. Vogel, K.S. Pregitzer, D.R. Zak, and J.A. Teeri, 1995: 
Interacting effects of soil fertility and atmospheric CO 2 on leaf area 
growth and carbon gain physiology in P o p u l u s  X  e u r a m e r i c a n a  (Dode) 
Guinier. N e w  P h y t o l o g i s t , 129, 253-263.
Eam us, D., 1991: The interaction of rising CO 2 and temperatures with water 
use efficiency. P l a n t ,  C e l l  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t , 14, 843-852.
Eam us, D., 1996a: Responses of field grown trees to CO 2 enrichment. 
C o m m o n w e a l t h  F o r e s t r y  R e v i e w , 75, 39-47.
E am us, D. 1996b: Tree responses to CO 2 enrichment: CO 2 and temperature 
interactions, biom ass allocation and stand-scale m odeling. 
T r e e  
P h y s i o l o g y , 16, 43-47.
G rulke, N.E., J.L. Horn, and S.W. Roberts, 1993: Physiological adjustment of 
two full-sib families of ponderosa pine to elevated CO 2 . T r e e  P h y s i o l o g y ,  
12, 391-401.
G rulke, N.E., G.H. Riechers, W.C. Oechel, U. Hjelm, and C. Jaeger. 1990: 
Carbon balance in tussock tundra under ambient and elevated atmos­
pheric CO 2 . O e c o l o g i a , 83, 485-494.
H axeltine, A. and I.C. Prentice, 1996: BI0M E3: An equilibrium terrestrial 
biosphere model based on ecophysiological constraints, resource avail­
ability and com petition am ong plant functional types. 
G l o b a l  
B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s , 10(4), 693-710.
MAPSS HadleyS -l C02 - Change in Runoff
Increase 
> 200%
100 -  200%  
50 - 100% 
25 - 50%
10 - 25%
1 - 10%
No Change 
1 - 10%
10 - 25%
Decrease
BI0ME3 HadleyS + C02 - Change in Runoff
Figure C-10: The potential change in annual runoff, as simulated under the HADCM2SUL GCM experiment (Hadley Center, 2 
X CO2 greenhouse gas radiative forcing, extracted from transient simulation, plus sulfate aerosols), by (a) MAPSS and (b) 
BI0ME3. Both models have incorporated a direct, physiological CO 2  effect. This figure is a companion to Figures C-4 and C-8.
456
Simulated Changes in Vegetation Distribution under Global Warming
H axeltine, A., I.C. Prentice, and I.D. Creswell, 1996: A  coupled carbon and 
water flux model to predict vegetation structure. J o u r n a l  o f  V e g e t a t i o n  
S c i e n c e , 7(5), 651-666.
H unt, E.R. and S.W. Running, 1992: Sim ulated dry m atter yields for aspen and 
spruce stands in the North A m erican boreal forest. C a n a d i a n  J o u r n a l  o f  
R e m o t e  S e n s i n g , 18, 126-133.
IP C C , 1990: C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  T h e  I P C C  S c i e n t i f i c  A s s e s s m e n t [Houghton, 
J.T., G.J. Jenkins, and J.J. Ephraum s (eds.)]. Cam bridge U niversity Press, 
Cam bridge and New York, 365 pp.
-  
Cubasch, U. and R.D. Cess, Chapter 3. P r o c e s s e s  a n d  M o d e l l i n g ,  
pp. 69-91.
-  
M itchell, J.F.B., S. M anabe, V. M eleshko, and T. Tokioka, Chapter
5. E q u i l i b r i u m  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  a n d  i t s  I m p l i c a t i o n s  f o r  t h e  
F u t u r e , pp. 131-172.
IP C C , 1996: 
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  
1 9 9 5 :  
T h e  
S c i e n c e  
o f  C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e .  
C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  G r o u p  I  t o  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  
I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  P a n e l  
o n  
C l i m a t e  
C h a n g e  [Houghton, J.T., L.G. 
M eira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. M askell 
(eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge and N ew  York, 572 pp.
-  
Gates, W.L., A. Henderson-Sellers, G.J. Boer, C.K. Folland, 
A.Kitoh, B.J. McAvaney, F. Semazzi, N. Smith, A.J. Weaver, and 
Q.-C. Zeng, C hapters. C l i m a t e  M
o d e l s — E v a l u a t i o n , pp. 235-284.
-  
Kattenberg, A., F. Giorgi, H. Grassl, G.A. M eehl, J.F.B. M itchell, 
R.J. Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A. J. Weaver, and T.M .L. Wigley, Chapter
6. C l i m a t e  M o d e l s  — P r o j e c t i o n s  o f  F u t u r e  C l i m a t e , pp. 289-357. 
ff C C , 1996. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  1 9 9 5 :  I m p a c t s ,  A d a p t a t i o n s  a n d  M
i t i g a t i o n  o f
C l i m a t e  C h a n g e :  S c i e n t i f i c - T e c h n i c a l  A n a l y s e s .  C o n t r i b u t i o n  o f  W o r k i n g  
G r o u p  I I  o f  t h e  S e c o n d  A s s e s s m e n t  R e p o r t  o f  t h e  I n t e r g o v e r n m e n t a l  
P a n e l  o n  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  [Watson, R.T., M .C. Zinyowera, and R.H. 
M oss (eds.)]. Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge and N ew York,
880 pp.
-  
Kirschbaum , M.U.F., Chapter A. E c o p h y s i o l o g i c a l ,  E c o l o g i c a l ,  a n d  
S o i l  P r o c e s s e s  i n  T e r r e s t r i a l  E c o s y s t e m s :  A  P r i m e r  o n , G e n e r a l  
C o n c e p t s  a n d  R e l a t i o n s h i p s , pp. 5 1 - 1  A .
-  
Kirschbaum , M.U.F. and A. Fischlin, Chapter 1. C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  
I m p a c t s  o n  F o r e s t s , pp. 95-129.
Jo h n s, T.C., R.E. Cam ell, J.F. Crossley, J.M . Gregory, J.F.B. M itchell, C.A. 
Senior, S.F.B. Tett, and R.A. Wood, 1997: The second Hadley Centre 
coupled ocean-atm osphere GCM: M odel description, spinup and valida­
tion. C l i m a t e  D y n a m i c s  (submitted).
K irsch b au m , M.U.F., D.A. King, H.N. Comins, R.E. M cM urtrie, B.E. 
M edlyn, S. Pongracic, D. Murty, H. Keith, R.J. Raison, P.K. Khanna, and 
D.W. Sheriff. 1994: M odelling forest response to increasing CO 2  con­
centration 
under 
nutrient-lim ited 
conditions. 
P l a n t ,  
C e l l  
a n d  
E n v i r o n m e n t , 17, 1081-1099.
K ing, G.A. and R.P. Neilson, 1992: The transient response of vegetation to cli­
mate change: A  potential source of CO 2 to the atmosphere. W a te r , A i r ,  
S o i l  P o l l u t i o n ,  64, 365-383.
K o m er, C. 1995. Towards a better experim ental basis for upscaling plant 
responses to elevated CO 2  and clim ate warming. P l a n t ,  
C e l l  
a n d  
E n v i r o n m e n t , 18, 1101-1110.
Leem ans, R. and W.P. Cramer, 1991: T h e  I I A S A  d a t a b a s e  f o r  m e a n  m o n t h l y  
v a l u e s  o f  t e m p e r a t u r e ,  p r e c i p i t a t i o n ,  a n d  c l o u d i n e s s  o n  t h e  g l o b a l  t e r r e s ­
t r i a l  g r i d . International Institute for A pplied System s A nalysis RR-91-18,
pp. 1-62.
Love, P.K. and A. Henderson-Sellers, 1994: Land-surface clim atologies of 
AM IP-PILPS m odels and identification of regions for future investiga­
tion (PILPS Phase 3a). IGPO Publication Series 13, pp. 1-48.
M cG uire, A.D., J.M . M elillo, and L.A. Joyce, 1995: The role of nitrogen in 
the response of forest net prim ary production to elevated atmospheric 
carbon dioxide. A n n u a l  R e v i e w  o f  E c o l o g y  a n d  S y s t e m a t i c s , 26, 473-503. 
M cG uire, A .D., J.M . M elillo, L.A. Joyce, D.W. Kicklighter, A.L. Grace, B. 
M oore, and C.J. Vorosmarty, 1992: Interactions betw een carbon and 
nitrogen dynamics in estim ating net prim ary productivity for potential 
vegetation in N orth America. G l o b a l  B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s , 6,101-124. 
M elillo, J.M ., A.D. M cGuire, D.W. Kicklighter, B. M oore, C.J. Vorosmarty, 
and A.L. Schloss, 1993: Global climate change and terrestrial net prim a­
ry production. N a t u r e , 363, 234-240.
M itchell, J.F.B., T.C. Johns, J.M . Gregory, and S. Tett, 1995: Climate response 
to increasing levels of greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols. N a t u r e  
376, 501-504.
M itchell, J.F.B. and D. A. Warrilow, 1987: Sum m er dryness in northern mid 
latitudes due to increased CO 2 . N a t u r e , 330, 238-240.
Neilson, R.P., 1995: A  m odel for predicting continental-scale vegetation distri­
bution and w ater balance. E c o b g i c a l A p p l i c a t i o n s ,  5, 362-385.
Neilson, R.P. and D. M arks, 1994: A  global perspective of regional vegetation 
and hydrologie sensitivities from  clim atic change. J o u r n a l  o f  V e g e t a t io n  
S c i e n c e , 5, 715-730.
N eilson, R.P. and S.W. Running, 1996: Global dynam ic vegetation modelling: 
coupling biogeochem istry and biogeography models. In: G l o b a l  C h a n g e  
a n d  
T e r r e s t r i a l  
E c o s y s t e m s  [W alker, B. and W. Steffen (eds.)]. 
Cam bridge University Press, Cam bridge, pp. 451-465.
Norby, R.J. 1996: Forest canopy productivity index. N a t u r e , 381, 564.
Parton, W.J., D.S. Schim el, C.V. Cole, and D. Ojima, 1987: Analysis of fac­
tors controlling soil organic levels of grasslands in the G reat Plains. S o i l  
S c i e n c e  S o c i e t y  o f  A m e r i c a , 51, 1173-1179.
Parton, W.J., J.M .O. Scurlock, D.S. Ojima, T.G. Gilmanov, R.J. Scholes, D.S. 
Schim el, T. K irchner, J.-C. M enant, T. Seastedt, E.G. Moya, A. 
K am nalrut, and J.I. Kinyam ario, 1993: O bservations and modeling of 
biom ass and soü organic m atter dynam ics for the grassland biome world­
wide. G l o b a l  B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s , 7, 785-809.
Parton, W.J., J.W.B. Stewart, and C.V. Cole, 1988: Dynam ics of C, N, P and 
S in grassland soils: a m odel. B i o g e o c h e m i s t r y , 5, 109-131.
Prentice, I.C., W. Cramer, S.P. Harrison, R. Leem ans, R.A. M onserud, and 
A.M . Solom on, 1992: A  global biom e m odel based on plant physiology 
and dom inance, soil properties and climate. J o u r n a l  o f  B i o g e o g r a p h y ,
19, 117-134.
Raich, J.W., E.B. Rastetter, J.M . M elillo, D.W. Kicklighter, P.A. Steadier, B.J. 
Peterson, A.L. Grace, B. M oore, and C.J. Vorosmarty, 1991: Potential net 
prim ary productivity in South Am erica: Application of a global model. 
E c o l o g i c a l  A p p l i c a t i o n s , 1, 399-429.
Running, S.W. and E.R. Hunt, 1993: Generalization of a forest ecosystem 
process model for other biom es, BIO M E-BG C, and an application for 
global-scale models. In: S c a l i n g  P h y s i o l o g i c a l  P r o c e s s e s :  L e a f  t o  G lo b e  
[Ehleringer, J.R. and C.B. Field (eds.)]. A cadem ic Press, Inc., San Diego, 
CA, p. 141-158.
Schlesinger, M.E. and Z.C. Zhao, 1989: Seasonal clim atic change introduced 
by double CO 2  as sim ulated by the OSU atm ospheric GCM/mixed-layer 
ocean model. J o u r n a l  o f  C l i m a t e ,  2 , 429-495.
Shugart, H.H. and T.M. Smith, 1996: A  review of forest patch models and 
their application to global change research. C l i m a t i c  C h a n g e , 34(2), 131- 
153.
Sm ith, T.M. and H.H. Shugart, 1993: The transient response of terrestrial car­
bon storage to a perturbed climate. N a t u r e , 361, 523-526.
Teskey, R.O. 1997: Com bined effects of elevated CO 2 and air temperature on 
carbon assim ilation of Pinus taeda trees. P l a n t ,  C e l l  a n d  E n v i r o n m e n t ,
20, 373-380.
VEM A P M em bers, 1995: Vegetation/ecosystem m odeling and analysis pro­
ject: Com paring biogeography and biogeochem istry models in a conti­
nental-scale study of terrestrial ecosystem  responses to climate change 
and CO 2  doubling. G l o b a l  B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c l e s , 9, 407-437.
W oodward, F.I. and T.M. Smith, 1994: Predictions and measurements of the 
m axim um  photosynthetic rate at the global scale. In: E c o p h y s i o l o g y  o f  
P h o t o s y n t h e s i s  [Schulze, E.-D. and M .M . Caldwell (eds.)]. Ecological 
Studies, vol. 100. Springer-Verlag, N ew York, pp. 491-509.
W oodward, F.I., T.M. Smith and W.R. Em anuel, 1995: A  global land primary 
productivity and phytogeography model. G l o b a l  B i o g e o c h e m i c a l  C y c le s , 
9, 471-490.
W ullschleger, S.D., W.M. Post, and A.W. King. 1995: On the Potential for a 
CO 2 F ertilization Effect in Forest Trees: A n A ssessm ent of 58 
Controlled-Exposure Studies and Estim ates of the Biotic Growth Factor. 
In: Biotic Feedbacks in the Global Climate System [W oodwell, G.M. and 
FT. M ackenzie (eds.)]. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 85-107.
D
Socioeconomic Baseline Data
Sources (see page 479)
Total Population
Current Population Density
Projected Population Density
Total Urban Population
Urban Population in Coastal Cities
GDP per Capita in Constant PPP
GDP from Agriculture
GDP from Industry
GDP from Services
GDP Annual Growth Rate
Total Land Area
Arable and Permanent Cropland 
Permanent Pasture 
Forest and Woodland 
Other Land
Water Resources per Capita
Domestic Annual Water Withdrawals
Industry Annual Water Withdrawals
Agriculture Annual Water Withdrawals
Irrigated Land
Agricultural Labor Force
Total Labor Force
Cattle Stocks
Sheep Stocks
Goat Stocks
Pig Stocks
Equines (Horses, Mules, Asses)
Buffalo Stocks 
Camel Stocks
Total Commercial Energy Consumption 
Traditional Fuel Consumption 
Commercial Hydroelectric Production 
Known and Endemic Mammal Species 
Known and Endemic Bird Species 
Known and Endemic Plant Species
UN Population Division, Annual Populations (1994 Revision), Median Estimate [HD16101]
UN Population Division, Annual Populations (1994 Revision), Median Estimate [HD16104]
UN Population Division, Annual Populations (1994 Revision), Median Estimate [HD16104]
United Nations, Urban and Rural Areas 1950-2025 (1995 Revision) [HD16405]
UN Statistical Office, UN Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, and Offshore Magazine [HD16419] 
Penn World Tables [EI5124]
World Bank World Tables 1994 Update [EI15105]
World Bank World Tables 1994 Update [EI15106]
World Bank World Tables 1994 Update [EI15107]
World Bank World Tables 1994 Update [EI15122]
FAO 1995 [LC17101]
FAO 1995 [LC17102]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [LC17104]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [LC17105]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [LC17106]
Compiled by World Resources Institute [WA22102]
Compiled by World Resources Institute [WA22109]
Compiled by World Resources Institute [WA22109]
Compiled by World Resources Institute [WA22109]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18203 
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18509]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18508]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18301]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18302]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18303]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18304]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18305]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18306]
FAO FAOSTAT 95 [FA18307]
UN Energy Statistics Yearbook 1993 [EM21201]
UN FAO [EM21209]
UN Energy Statistics Yearbook 1993 [EM21106]
World Conservation Monitoring Centre [BI20401]
World Conservation Monitoring Centre [BI20402]
World Conservation Monitoring Centre [BI20501]
458
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-I: Africa region.
Coimtiy
Population and Human Development
Current 
Projected 
Urban
Pop. 
Pop. 
Total 
Pop. in 
Total 
Density 
Density 
Urban 
Coastal
Pop. 
(persons/ 
(persons/ 
Pop. 
Cities
(1000s) 
km2) 
km2) 
(1000s) 
(1000s)
1995 
1995 
2025 
1995 
1980
Eœnomic Conditions
GDP per 
GDP 
GDP
Capita in 
from 
GDP 
GDP 
Annual
Constant 
Agri- 
from 
from 
Growth
PPP 
culture 
Industry 
Services 
Rate
C85IN$) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%)
1992 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993
Algeria 
27939 
12 
19 
15591 
3493
Angola 
11072 
9 
21 
3569 
1132
Benin 
5409 
48 
109 
1691 
585
Botswana 
1487 
3 
5 
418 
X
Burkina Faso 
10319 
38 
79 
2809 
X
Burundi 
6393 
230 
485 
480 
X
Сатегхюп 
13233 
28 
61 
5938 
854
Central African Republic 
3315 
5 
10 
1301 
X
Chad 
6361 
5 
10 
1362 
X
Congo 
2590 
8 
17 
1523 
217
Cote d'Ivoire 
14253 
44 
114 
6211 
1495
Dem. Republic of Congo 43901 
19 
45 
12766 
102
Djibouti 
577 
25 
45 
478 
211
Egypt 
62931 
63 
97 
28170 
4246
Equatorial Guinea 
400 
14 
28 
169 
181
Eritrea 
3531 
30 
60 
607 
X
Ethiopia 
55053 
50 
115 
7371 
760
Gabon 
1320 
5 
10 
660 
155
Gambia 
1118 
99 
186 
286 
109
Ghana 
17453 
73 
159 
6333 
1336
Guinea 
6700 
27 
61 
1981 
696
Guinea-Bissau 
1073 
30 
55 
238 
174
Kenya 
28261 
49 
109 
7817 
489
Lesotho 
2050 
68 
137 
473 
X
Lrberia 
3039 
27 
65 
1366 
465
Libya 
5407 
3 
7 
4649 
1496
Madagascar 
14763 
25 
59 
4003 
570
Malawi 
11129 
94 
189 
1505 
X
MaU 
10795 
9 
20 
2909 
X
Mauritania 
2274 
2 
4 
1224 
238
Morocco 
27028 
61 
91 
13071 
5543
Mozambique 
16004 
20 
44 
5481 
1109
Namrbia 
1540 
2 
4 
576 
76
Niger 
9151 
7 
18 
1558 
X
Nigeria 
111721 
121 
258 
43884 
4383
Reunion 
653 
260 
359 
442 
279
Rwanda 
7952 
302 
600 
483 
X
Senegal 
8312 
42 
86 
3512 
1378
Sierra Leone 
4509 
63 
121 
1632 
453
SomaUa 
9250 
15 
33 
2382 
1186
South Africa 
41465 
34 
58 
21073 
4272
Sudan 
28098 
11 
23 
6915 
356
SwazUand 
855 
49 
95 
267 
X
Tanzania 
29685 
31 
67 
7230 
1750
Togo 
4138 
73 
165 
1276 
324
Tunisia 
8896 
54 
81 
5093 
2476
Uganda 
21297 
90 
204 
2670 
X
Zambia 
9456 
13 
25 
4071 
X
Zimbabwe 
11261 
29 
50 
3619 
X
2719
X
X
X
514
569
1029
514
408
2240
1104
X
X
1869
X
X
X
3622
X
956
740
634
914
952
X
X
608
496
X
837
2173
711
2774
X
978
X
762
X
734
X
3068
X
X
X
530
3075
547
X
X
13.47
X
35.78 
5.67
X
51.88 
28.61
49.88 
43.61 
11.43 
37.42
X
2.85
17.87
47.20
13.15 
60.45
8.24
27.53
47.55
23.92
44.79
28.92 
10.08
X
X
33.95
39.20 
42.39
27.65 
14.30
33.15 
9.84
38.52
33.52 
X
40.54 
19.51
X
X
4.56
X
11.76
55.98
48.56
17.89
52.66 
33.69 
15.18
43.30 
X
12.86
47.28
X
21.11
24.85
14.14
21.57
35.18 
24.06
X
21.20
22.38 
25.84 
20.67
10.30 
44.93
14.63 
16.08
31.13
18.98 
17.56
47.19 
X 
X
13.78
18.12
15.36 
30.16
32.36 
12.01 
26.90 
17.89
42.63 
X
21.47
19.13 
X 
X
39.45 
X
38.70
14.45
17.98
31.34
12.35 
36.33
36.39
43.23
X
51.36 
47.04
X
27.01
46.54
35.99
34.82 
53.39
38.52 
X
75.95
59.74
26.96 
66.18
29.25
46.83
57.84
36.37 
44.94 
36.22
53.52
42.74 
X 
X
52.26 
42.68 
42.25 
42.19 
53.34 
54.83
63.27 
43.58 
23.86
X
38.00
61.36
X
X
55.99 
X
49.54 
29.57 
33.47 
50.77
34.99 
29.98 
48.43
-2.20
X
3.30
3.00 
0.40 
- 1.20
4.90 
-2.50 
-2.90 
- 2.10 
- 1.10
X
X
0.50
7.30 
X
7.70
2.50
1.50
4.80
4.50
2.90
1.00 
6.20
X
X
1.90
8.80
7.70
5.00 
0.20
19.10
0.30
1.40
2.90 
X
3.20
-2.00
0.70
X
1.10
X
2.00 
X
-12.70
2.70
6.40
2.00
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-1: Africa region (continued).
459
Country
Total 
Land 
Area 
(1000 ha) 
1993
Land Cover/Use
Arable and 
Forest 
Permanent Permanent 
and 
Cropland 
Pasture 
Woodland 
(1000 ha) 
(1000 ha) 
(1000 ha) 
1993 
1993 
1993
Other 
Land 
(1000 ha) 
1993
Water 
Resources 
per Capita 
(m3) 
1995
Water
Domestic 
Industry 
Armual 
Annual 
Withdraws Withdraws
(%) 
(%) 
1995 
1995
Agriculture
Annual
Wthdraws
(%)
1995
Algeria
238174
7850
30700
4000
195624
528
25
15
60
Angola
124670
3500
29000
51900
40270
16618
14
10
76
Benin
11062
1880
442
3400
5340
4770
23
10
67
Botswana
56673
420
25600
26500
4153
9886
32
20
48
Burkina Faso
27360
3565
6000
13800
3995
2713
19
0
81
Burundi
2568
1360
915
85
208
563
36
0
64
Cameroon
46540
7040
2000
35900
1600
20252
46
19
35
Central Afiican Rep
62298
2020
3000
46700
10578
42534
21
5
74
Chad
125920
3256
45000
32400
45264
6760
16
2
82
Congo
34150
170
10000
21100
2880
321236
62
27
11
Cote dlvoire
31800
3710
13000
7080
8010
5451
22
11
67
Dem. Republic of Congo 226705
7900
15000
173800
30005
23211
61
16
23
Djibouti
2318
X
X
6
X
X
X
X
X
Egypt
99545
2800
4950
31
91764
923
6
9
85
Equatorial Guinea
2805
230
104
1300
1171
75000
81
13
6
Eritrea
10100
1280
4800
2000
2020
2492
X
X
X
Ethiopia
110100
13930
44750
25000
26420
1998
11
3
86
Gabon
25767
460
4700
19900
707
124242
72
22
6
Gambia
1000
180
90
280
450
7156
7
2
91
Ghana
22754
4320
5000
7900
5534
3048
35
13
52
Guinea
24572
730
5500
14460
3882
33731
10
3
87
Guinea-Bissau
2812
340
1080
1070
322
25163
60
4
36
Kenya
56914
4520
21300
16800
14294
1069
20
4
76
Lesotho
3035
320
2000
X
715
2551
22
22
56
Liberia
9675
375
5700
1700
1900
76341
27
13
60
Libya
175954
2170
13300
840
159644
111
11
2
87
Madagascar
58154
3105
24000
23200
7849
22827
1
0
99
Malawi
9408
1700
1840
3700
2168
1678
10
3
86
Mah
122019
2503
30000
6900
82616
6207
2
1
97
Mauritania
102522
208
39250
4410
58654
5013
6
2
92
Morocco
44630
9920
20900
8970
4840
1110
5
3
92
Mozambique
78409
3180
44000
14000
17229
12997
9
2
89
Namibia
82329
662
38000
18000
25667
29545
29
3
68
Niger
126670
3605
8915
2500
111650
3552
16
2
82
Nigeria
91077
32385
40000
11300
7392
2506
31
15
54
Reunion
250
48
12
88
102
X
X
X
X
Rwanda
2467
1170
450
550
297
792
5
2
94
Senegal
19253
2350
3100
10450
3353
4740
5
3
92
Sierra Leone
7162
540
2200
2040
938b
35485
7
4
89
Somalia
62734
1020
43000
16000
2714
1459
3
0
97
South Africa
122104
13179
81378
8200
19347
1206
17
11
72
Sudan
237600
12975
110000
44240
70385
5481
4
1
94
Swaziland
1720
191
1070
120
339
5275
2
2
96
Tanzania
88359
3500
35000
33500
16359
2998
9
2
89
Togo
5439
2430
200
900
1909
2900
62
13
25
Tunisia
15536
4952
3103
676
6805
443
9
3
89
Uganda
19965
6770
1800
5500
5895
3099
32
8
60
Zambia
74339
5273
30000
28700
10366
12267
16
7
77
Zimbabwe
38685
2876
4856
8800
22153
1776
14
7
79
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measuie; X = not available; total water withdrawals may exceed 100% due to groundwater drawdowns or river inflows.
460
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-1: Africa region (continued).
Country
Irrigated 
Land 
(1000 ha) 
1993
Agricultural
Labor
Force
(1000s)
1993
Total
Labor
Force
(1000s)
1993
Cattle
Stocks
(1000s)
1994
Agriculture/Food
Sheep 
Goat 
Stocks 
Stocks 
(1000s) 
(1000s) 
1994 
1994
Kg
Stocks
(1000s)
1994
Equines
(horses/
mules/asses)
(1000s)
1994
Buffalo
Stocks
(1000s)
1994
Camel
Stocks
(1000s)
1994
Algeria
555
1468
6441
1370
17850
2820
6
508
X
125
Angola
75
2687
3918
3280
255
1570
820
6
X
X
Benin
10
1360
2321
1??3
940
1198
555
7
X
X
Botswana
2
287
473
2800
344
2475
17
193
X
X
Burkina Faso
20
4199
5020
4261
5686
7400
551
468
X
12
Burundi
14
2752
3032
380
350
850
80
0
X
X
Cameroon
21
2754
4717
4867
3770
3767
1380
51
X
X
Central African Rep
X
877
1475
2800
152
1340
480
0
X
X
Chad
14
1458
2041
4621
2152
3178
17
467
X
593
Congo
1
533
908
68
111
305
56
0
X
X
Cote dlvoire
68
2616
4964
1232
1251
976
404
0
X
X
Dem. Republic of Congo
10
9312
14510
1696
1012
4317
1185
0
X
X
Djibouti
X
X
X
190
470
507
X
8
X
62
Egypt
3246
6119
15674
3070
3382
3210
27
1661
3200
133
Equatorial Guinea
X
79
152
5
36
8
5
0
X
X
Eritrea
28
X
X
1550
1510
1400
X
0
X
69
Ethiopia
0
16250
22320
29450
5000
16700
20
630
X
1000
Gabon
4
355
546
38
170
83
165
0
X
X
Gambia
15
332
414
414
121
150
11
46
X
X
Ghana
6
2865
5961
1680
3288
3337
595
15
X
X
Guinea
93
1903
2650
1658
435
460
33
3
X
X
Guinea-Bissau
17
361
467
494
263
276
312
7
X
X
Kenya
66
8252
10908
11000
5500
7438
107
2
X
815
Lesotho
3
682
884
663
1691
1010
78
292
X
X
Liberia
2
702
1025
36
210
220
120
0
X
X
Libya
470
162
1252
50
3500
600
X
70
X
120
Madagascar
1087
4169
5556
10288
740
1300
1558
0
X
X
Malawi
28
3084
4267
980
196
890
245
2
X
X
Mah
1
2524
3187
5542
5173
7380
63
712
X
260
Mauritania
49
445
705
1011
4800
3100
X
173
X
1000
Morocco
1258
2868
8441
2431
15594
4431
10
1555
X
36
Mozambique
118
6225
7716
1250
119
389
174
20
X
X
Namibia
6
154
472
2036
2620
1639
18
137
X
X
Niger
66
3645
4241
1986
3700
5900
39
532
X
370
Nigeria
957
28219
44279
16717
14455
25497
6926
1237
X
18
Reunion
6
25
248
25
2
32
86
0
X
X
Rwanda
4
3348
3690
610
400
1100
130
0
X
X
Senegal
71
2613
3362
2800
4600
3200
329
879
X
16
Sierra Leone
29
910
1518
362
302
168
51
0
X
X
Somalia
180
2539
3714
5000
13000
12000
9
46
X
6000
South Africa
1270
1886
14716
12584
29134
6402
1511
454
X
X
Sudan
1946
5066
8943
21751
22870
16449
X
699
X
2856
Swaziland
67
217
340
620
27
434
32
13
X
X
Tanzania
150
10688
13495
13376
3955
9682
335
178
X
X
Togo
7
1054
1538
250
1250
2048
934
6
X
X
Tunisia
385
625
2917
660
7100
1420
6
367
X
231
Uganda
9
6611
8361
5100
1980
3350
880
17
X
X
Zambia
46
1972
2918
3300
69
620
295
2
X
X
Zimbabwe
193
2818
4228
4500
550
2530
280
129
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available.
Table D-1: Africa region (continued).
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
461
Country
Total
Commercial
Energy
Consumption
(PJ)
1993
Energy
Traditional
Fuel
Consumption
(TJ)
1991
Commercial
Hydroelectric
Production
(PJ)
1993
Known
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Biodiversity
Known 
Endemic 
Bird 
Bird 
Species 
Species
m  
(#)
1990s 
1990s
Known
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Algeria
1183
19076
1.27
92
2
375
1
3100
250
Angola
26
56054
4.95
276
7
909
13
5000
1260
Benin
7
48223
0 . 0 0
188
0
423
0
2 0 0 0
X
Botswana
X
13197
0 . 0 0
164
0
550
0
X
17
Burkina Faso
8
84547
0 . 0 0
147
0
453
0
1 1 0 0
X
Burundi
.3
43522
0.41
107
0
596
0
2500
X
Cameroon
36
114320
9.53
297
13
874
8
8000
156
Central African Rep
3
33751
0.28
209
2
662
0
3600
1 0 0
Chad
1
35462
0 . 0 0
134
1
532
0
1600
X
Congo
24
21852
1.54
2 0 0
2
569
0
4350
1 2 0 0
Cote d'Ivoire
109
102843
3.95
230
1
694
0
3517
62
Dem. Republic of Congo 
73
365076
2 1 . 6 8
415
28
1096
2 2
1 1 0 0 0
1 1 0 0
Djibouti
18
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Egypt
1226
45365
30.67
98
7
439
0
2066
70
Equatorial Guinea
2
4367
0 . 0 1
184
3
322
3
3000
6 6
Eritrea
X
0
0 . 0 0
1 1 2
0
537
0
X
X
Ethiopia
45
414055
4.09
255
31
813
28
6500
1 0 0 0
Gabon
32
26415
2.56
190
2
629
0
6500
X
Gambia
3
8939
0 . 0 0
108
0
504
0
966
X
Ghana
67
151523
2 2 . 0 1
2 2 2
1
725
1
3600
43
Guinea
15
35275
0 . 6 8
190
1
552
0
3000
8 8
Guinea-Bissau
3
4124
0 . 0 0
108
0
319
0
1 0 0 0
1 2
Kenya
90
344388
10.77
359
2 1
1068
6
6000
265
Lesotho
X
6486
0 . 0 0
33
0
281
0
1576
2
Liberia
5
48492
0.63
193
0
581
1
2 2 0 0
103
Libya
457
5234
0 . 0 0
76
5
323
0
1800
134
Madagascar
15
75959
1.25
105
77
253
103
9000
6500
Malawi
1 1
132511
2.80
195
0
645
0
3600
49
Mali
7
53504
0.76
137
0
622
0
1741
1 1
Mauritania
39
79
0.09
61
1
541
0
1 1 0 0
X
Morocco
297
13725
1.59
105
4
416
0
3600
625
Mozambique
14
147370
0.18
179
1
678
0
5500
219
Namibia
X
0
0 . 0 0
154
3
609
1
3128
X
Niger
15
46886
0 . 0 0
131
0
482
0
1170
X
Nigeria
705
1009506
11.52
274
6
862
2
4614
205
Reunion
23
5167
1.79
X
X
X
X
X
X
Rwanda
7
52771
0.83
151
0
6 6 6
0
2288
26
Senegal
38
49439
0 . 0 0
155
0
610
0
2062
26
Sierra Leone
6
29662
0 . 0 0
147
0
622
0
2090
74
SomaUa
X
71411
0 . 0 0
171
1 1
649
1 0
3000
500
South Africa
3578
131424
2.97
247
27
790
7
23000
X
Sudan
48
220068
3.38
267
1 1
937
0
3132
50
Swaziland
X
18487
0 . 0 0
47
0
485
0
2636
4
Tanzarria
30
329752
2.25
322
14
1005
19
1 0 0 0 0
1 1 2 2
Togo
9
10352
0 . 0 2
196
1
558
0
2 0 0 0
X
Tunisia
218
30791
0.23
78
1
356
0
2150
X
Uganda
16
136987
2.81
338
6
992
3
5000
X
Zambia
51
129891
27.88
229
3
736
1
4600
2 1 1
Zimbabwe
208
69940
6.09
270
1
648
0
4200
95
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; all plant speaes includes flowering plants only.
462
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-2: Australasia region
Country
Population and Human Development
Current 
Projected 
Urban
Pop. 
Pop. 
Total 
Pop. in 
Total 
Density 
Density 
Urban 
Coastal
Pop. 
(persors/ 
(persore/ 
Pop. 
Cities
(1 0 0 0 s) 
km2) 
km2) 
( 1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s)
1995 
1995 
2025 
1995 
1980
Economic Conditions
GDP per 
GDP 
GDP
Capita in 
from 
GDP 
GDP 
Annual
Constant 
Agri- 
from 
from 
Growth
PPP 
culture 
Industry 
Services 
Rate
(‘85IN$) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%)
1992 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993
Australia 
New Zealand
18088
3575
2
13
3 
15318
16 
3077
10568
2279
14458
11363
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Country
Land Cover/Use
Total 
Arable and 
Forest
Land 
Permanent Permanent 
and 
Other
Area 
Cropland 
Pasture 
Woodland 
Land
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993
Water
Water 
Domestic 
Industry 
Agriculture 
Resources 
Armual 
Annual 
Annual
per Capita Withdraws Withdraws Withdraws 
(m3) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%)
1995 
1995 
1995 
1995
Australia 
New Zealand
764444
26799
46486
3800
413800
13500
145000
7380
159158
2119
18963
91469
65
46
2
10
33
44
Agricultural 
Total
Agriculture/Food
Equines
Country
Irrigated 
Land 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Labor 
Labor 
Force 
Force 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1993 
1993
Cattle
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Sheep
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Goat
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Pig 
(horses/ 
Stocks mules/asses) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1994 
1994
Buffalo
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Camel
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Australia
2107
387 
8584
24732
132609
241
2740
274
X
X
New Zealand
285
132 
1546
8550
50135
484
430
80
X
X
Energy
Biodiversity
Total
Commercial
Traditional 
Commercial
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Energy
Fuel 
Hydroelectric
Mammal
Mammal
Bird
Bird
Plant
Plant
Consumption
Consumption 
Production
Species
Species
Species
Species
Species
Species
(PJ)
(TJ)
(PJ)
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
Country
1993
1991
1993
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
Australia
3917
109059 
136.87
252
198
751
353
15000
14074
New Zealand
565
489
76.58
1 0
4
287
76
2160
1942
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; aU plant species includes flowering plants only.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
463
Table D-3: Europe region.
Population and Human Development
Economic Conditions
Current
Projected
Urban
GDP per
GDP
GDP
Pop.
Pop.
Total
Pop. in
Capita in
from
GDP
GDP
Annual
Total
Density
Density
Urban
Coastal
Constant
Agri­
from
from
Growth
Pop.
(persons/
(persons/
Pop.
Cities
PPP
culture
Industry
Services
Rate
(lOOOs)
km2)
km2)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(‘85IN$)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1995
1995
2025
1995
1980
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993
Albania
3441
1 2 0
162
1285
622
X
X
X
X
X
Andorra
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Armenia
3599
1 2 1
159
2473
X
X
48.00
29.84
22.16
-14.80
Austria
7968
95
99
4424
X
12955
X
X
X
X
Azerbaijan
7558
87
117
4216
X
X
X
X
X
-13.00
Belarus
10141
49
48
7215
X
X
16.86
53.73
29.41
-950
Belgium
10113
331
341
9809
1968
13484
X
X
X
X
Belgium/Luxembouig
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Bosnia and Herzegovina
3459
6 8
8 8
1695
X
X
X
X
X
X
Bulgaria
8769
79
70
6201
857
5208
12.98
38.16
48.86
4.70
Croatia
4495
80
75
2896
X
X
11.50
30.02
58.48
X
Czech Repubhc
10296
131
135
6736
X
X
6.17
39.95
53.87
X
Denmark
5181
1 2 0
118
4414
3980
14091
X
X
X
X
Estonia
1530
34
32
1118
X
X
8.08
29.17
62.75
X
Finland
5107
15
16
3225
1539
1 2 0 0 0
X
X
X
X
France
57981
105
1 1 1
42203
9380
13918
X
X
X
X
Geoigia
5457
78
8 8
3190
X
X
58.03
21.79
Ж 18
40.00
Germany
81591
229
214
70616
X
14709
X
X
X
X
Greece
10451
79
75
6817
5252
X
X
X
X
-0 . 1 0
Hungary
10115
109
1 0 1
6541
X
4645
5.60
28.40
65.99
-3.30
Iceland
269
3
3
246
186
12618
X
X
X
X
Ireland
3553
51
55
2043
1766
9637
X
X
X
X
Italy
57187
190
174
38101
21232
12721
X
X
X
X
Latvia
2557
40
36
1863
X
X
14.90
31.61
53.49
-950
Liechtenstein
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Lithuania
3700
57
59
2667
X
X
20.54
41.47
38.00
-16.20
Luxembourg
406
157
170
361
X
16798
X
X
X
X
Macedonia
2163
84
1 0 0
1294
X
X
X
X
X
X
Moldova
4432
132
152
2293
X
X
34.59
47.69
17.72
-14.00
Monaco
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Netherlands
15503
380
398
13801
7764
13281
X
X
X
X
Norway
4337
13
15
2667
2324
15518
X
X
X
X
Poland
38388
119
129
24853
1842
3826
6.33
38.59
55.08
4.00
Portugal
9823
106
105
3496
2352
X
X
X
X
-0.50
Romania
22835
96
92
12650
573
X
20.51
39.88
39.61
1 . 2 0
Russian Federation
147000
9
8
111736
18372
X
X
X
X
-1 2 . 0 0
San Marino
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Slovak Repubhc
5353
109
123
3146
X
X
6.69
43.90
49.41
4.40
Slovenia
1946
96
90
1236
X
X
5.64
36.04
58.32
X
Spain
39621
78
74
30292
13903
9802
X
X
X
X
Sweden
8780
2 0
2 2
7296
4018
13986
X
X
X
X
Switzerland
7202
174
189
4379
X
15887
X
X
X
X
Ukraine
51380
85
81
36099
X
X
34.72
47.15
18.13
-18.50
United Kingdom
58258
239
252
52119
26765
12724
X
X
X
X-\r
Yugoslavia
10849
106
1 1 2
6134
1236
X
X
X
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; shaded cells contain data originally attributed to former country identity (e.g., former 
Yugoslavia) or data for more than one country (e.g., Belgium/Luxembouig).
464
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-3: Еиюре region (continued).
Country
Total 
Land 
Area 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Land Cover/Use
Arable and 
Forest 
Permanent Permanent 
and 
Cropland 
Pasture 
Woodland 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993 
1993 
1993
Other 
Land 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Water 
Resources 
per Capita 
(m3) 
1995
Water
Domestic 
Industry 
Armual 
Annual 
Withdraws Withdraws
(%) 
(%) 
1995 
1995
Agriculture
Annual
Withdraws
(%)
1995
Albania
2740
702
424
1048
566
6190
6
18
76
Andorra
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Armenia
2840
X
X
X
X
3687
13
15
72
Austria
8273
1498
1954
3240
1581
11333
33
58
9
Azerbaijan
8610
2 0 0 0
2 2 0 0
950
X
4364
4
2 2
74
Belarus
20760
6248
3106
7000
X
7277
32
49
19
Belgium
3282
X
X
X
X
1236
1 1
85
4
Belgium/Luxembouig
3282
794
6 8 8
700
1 1 0 0
X
X
X
X
Bosnia and Herzegovina
5100
940
1 0 0 0
2 0 0 0
1160
X
X
X
X
Bulgaria
11055
4310
1811
3877
1057
23378
3
76
2 2
Croatia
5592
1313
1093
2 1 0 0
1086
13660
X
X
X
Czech Republic
7728
3293
873
2629
933
5653
41
57
2
Denmark
4243
2542
197
445
1059
2509
30
27
43
Estonia
4227
1143
313
2 0 2 2
749
11490
5
92
3
Finland
30461
2580
106
23186
4589
22126
1 2
85
3
France
55010
19439
10764
14931
9876
3415
16
69
15
Georgia
6970
1 0 0 0
2 0 0 0
2700
X
11942
2 1
37
42
Germany
34927
12116
5251
10700
17560
2096
1 1
70
2 0
Greece
12890
3494
5250
2620
1526
5612
8
29
63
Hungary
9234
4973
1157
1764
1340
11864
9
55
36
Iceland
10025
6
2274
1 2 0
7625
624535
31
63
6
Ireland
6889
923
4690
320
956
14073
16
74
1 0
Italy
29406
11860
4300
6770
6476
2920
14
27
59
Latvia
6205
1711
803
2839
852
13297
42
44
14
Liechtenstein
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Lithuania
4551
3008
460
2 0 0 0
X
6541
7
90
3
Luxembourg
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Macedonia
2543
663
634
1 0 0 0
246
X
X
X
X
Moldova
3297
2193
421
421
262
3093
7
70
23
Monaco
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Netherlands
3392
934
1051
350
1057
5805
5
61
34
Norway
30683
890
123
8330
21340
90385
2 0
72
8
Poland
30442
14668
4047
8785
2942
1464
13
76
1 1
Portugal
9195
3160
840
3300
1895
7085
15
37
48
Romania
23034
9941
4852
6682
1559
9109
8
33
59
Russian Federation
1699580
133900
76200
778500
X
30599
17
60
23
San Marino
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Slovak Republic
4808
1613
835
1991
369
5753
X
X
X
Slovenia
2 0 1 2
301
558
1 0 2 0
133
X
X
X
X
Spain
49944
19656
10300
16137
3851
2809
1 2
26
62
Sweden
41162
2780
576
28000
9806
20501
36
55
9
Switzerland
3955
467
1114
1252
1 1 2 2
6943
23
73
4
Ukraine
57935
34417
7473
10331
5714
4496
16
54
30
United Kingdom
24160
6127
11048
2438
4547
1219
2 0
77
3
Yugoslavia
X
X
X
2700
X
X
X
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; shaded œUs œntain data originally attributed to former country identity (e.g., former 
Yugoslavia) or data for more than one country (e.g., Belgjum/Luxembouig); total water withdrawals may exceed 1Ю% due to groundwater drawdowns or river 
inflows.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-3: Eumpe region {continued).
465
Coimtiy
Irrigated 
Land 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Agricultural
Labor
Force
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993
Total
Labor
Force
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993
Cattle
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Agriculture/Food
Sheep 
Goat 
Stocks 
Stocks 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1994 
1994
Pig
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Equines
(horses/
mules/asses)
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Buffalo
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Camel
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Albania
341
756
1631
630
1900
1280
8 6
196
2
X
Andorra
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Armenia
X
X
X
X
720
16
80
1 2
X
X
Austria
4
190
3777
2430
324
40
3800
65
X
X
Azerbaijan
1 0 0 0
X
X
1621
4339
2 0 0
115
35
1 0
30
Belarus
1 0 0
X
X
5851
289
30
4175
223
2 0
X
Belgium
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Belgium/Luxembourg
1
6 8
4314
3289
160
9
6948
2 1
X
X
Bosnia and Herzegovina
2
X
X
390
600
X
223
50
1
X
Bulgaria
1237
485
4397
750
3763
676
2071
433
17
X
Croatia
3
X
X
519
444
108
1347
32
X
X
Czech Republic
24
709
8468
2113
196
45
4071
18
X
X
Denmark
435
119
2887
2082
82
X
10864
17
X
X
Estonia
X
X
X
463
83
0
424
5
X
X
Finland
64
185
2562
1230
79
6
1300
49
X
X
France
1485
1182
26026
2 0 1 1 2
10452
1055
13383
370
X
X
Georgia
400
X
X
1050
1300
85
650
2 0
2 0
X
Germany
475
1662
40268
15891
2360
8 8
26044
530
X
X
Greece
1314
904
4008
608
9604
5557
1143
2 0 0
1
X
Hungary
206
518
5186
1 0 0 2
1280
36
5002
76
X
X
Iceland
X
9
141
77
500
X
2 2
82
X
X
Ireland
X
166
1347
6308
5991
9
1487
6 8
X
X
Italy
2710
1429
23748
7683
10370
1346
8200
388
92
X
Latvia
X
X
X
995
133
5
737
28
X
X
Liechtenstein
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Lithuania
X
X
X
1650
48
9
1 2 0 0
78
X
X
Luxembourg
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
0
X
X
Macedonia
83
X
X
276
2444
X
181
62
1
X
Moldova
311
X
X
916
1373
72
1165
57
X
X
Monaco
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Netherlands
560
204
6314
4629
2198
13
13991
6 6
X
X
Norway
97
99
2190
1003
2316
89
745
2 2
X
X
Poland
1 0 0
3710
19674
7696
870
X
19466
721
X
X
Portugal
630
644
4540
1322
5991
836
1487
275
X
X
Romania
3102
2118
11848
3597
11499
776
9262
785
0
X
Russian Federation
4000
16389
144909
48900
41078
2622
28600
2520
140
1 0
San Marino
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Slovak Republic
80
X
X
916
397
1 2
2179
0
X
X
Slovenia
2
X
X
504
2 1
8
620
0
X
X
Spain
3453
1380
14821
5000
23838
2739
18188
412
X
X
Sweden
115
153
4442
1830
483
X
2168
8 6
X
X
Switzerland
25
1 2 2
3458
1700
425
52
1680
57
X
X
Ukraine
2605
X
X
21607
6118
745
15298
731
X
X
United Kingdom
108
523
28567
11735
29300
X
7910
184
X
X
Yugoslavia
0
2104
10955
1809
2752
X
4000
82
19
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; shaded cells contain data originally attributed to former country identity (e.g., former 
Yugoslavia) or data for more than one country (e.g., Belgium/Luxembourg).
466
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-3: Еиюре œgion (continued).
Country
Total
Commercial
Energy
Consumption
(PJ)
1993
Energy
Traditional
Fuel
Consrrmption
(TJ)
1991
Commercial
Hydroelectric
Production
(PJ)
1993
Kiiown
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Biodiveraty
Known 
Endemic 
Bird 
Bird 
Species 
Species
(#) 
(#) 
1990s 
1990s
Known
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Albania
43
15199
11.99
6 8
0
306
0
2965
24
Andorra
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Armenia
49
0
10.80
X
3
X
0
X
X
Austria
966
29615
137.00
83
0
414
0
2950
35
Azerbaijan
546
0
8.73
X
0
X
0
X
X
Belarus
1249
0
0.07
X
0
X
0
X
X
Belgium
1976
5595
3.67
58
0
429
0
1400
1
Belgium/Luxembourg
X
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
29
0
14.40
X
0
X
0
X
X
Bulgaria
965
12846
6.99
81
0
374
0
3505
320
Croatia
263
0
15.64
X
0
X
0
X
X
Czech Republic
1659
0
5.75
X
0
X
0
X
X
Denmark
762
4871
0 . 1 0
43
0
439
0
1 2 0 0
1
Estonia
214
0
0 . 0 0
65
0
330
0
1630
X
Finland
1014
29803
48.96
60
0
425
0
1040
X
France
9153
101044
244.42
93
0
506
9
4500
133
Geoigja
159
0
23.40
X
2
X
0
X
X
Germany
13724
0
77.27
76
0
503
0
2600
6
Greece
989
13218
9.15
95
2
398
0
4900
742
Hungary
990
23681
0.60
72
0
363
0
2148
38
Iceland
54
0
16.07
1 1
0
316
0
340
1
Ireland
428
489
3.64
25
0
417
0
892
X
Italy
6749
48428
160.14
90
3
490
0
5463
712
Latvia
187
0
10.35
83
0
325
0
1153
X
Liechtenstein
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Lithuania
368
0
1.41
6 8
0
305
0
1 2 0 0
X
Luxembourg
160
196
1.67
X
X
X
X
X
X
Macedonia
139
0
3.24
X
0
X
0
X
X
Moldova
234
0
1.35
6 8
0
270
0
X
X
Monaco
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Netherlands
3306
2298
0.33
55
0
456
0
1170
X
Norway
904
9449
430.24
54
0
453
0
1650
1
Poland
4056
27819
12.87
79
0
421
0
2300
3
Portugal
603
5639
31.45
63
1
441
2
2500
150
Romania
1762
19364
45.96
84
0
368
0
3175
41
Russian Federation
30042
0
630.63
X
X
X
X
X
X
San Marino
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Slovak Republic
672
0
10.89
X
X
X
X
X
X
Slovenia
194
0
1 0 . 8 8
69
0
361
0
X
X
Spain
3359
18420
92.80
82
4
506
5
X
X
Sweden
1660
172254
271.37
60
0
463
0
4916
941
Switzerland
985
14481
131.82
75
0
400
0
1650
1
Ukraine
8058
0
40.45
X
1
X
0
2927
1
United Kingdom
1039
4150
20.47
50
0
590
1
1550
16
Yugoslavia
381
29554
36.05
X
X
X
X
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; shaded cells contain data originally attributed to former country identity (e.g., former 
Yugoslavia) or data for more than one country (e.g., Belgjum/Luxembouig); all plant species includes flowering plants only.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
467
Table D-4: Latin America region
Population and Human Development
Current
Projected
Urban
GDP per
GDP
GDP
Pop.
Pop.
Total
Pop. in
Capita in
from
GDP
GDP
Annual
Total
Density
Density
Urban
Coastal
Constant
Agri­
from
from
Growth
Pop.
(persons/
(persons/
Pop.
Cities
PPP
culture
Industry
Services
Rate
(1 0 0 0 s)
km2)
km2)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(‘85 IN$)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1995
1995
2025
1995
1980
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993
Aigentina
34587
13
17
30463
12273
X
5.99
30.68
63.33
6 . 0 0
Belize
215
9
17
1 0 1
X
4253
19.37
27.80
52.82
4.20
Bolivia
7414
7
1 2
4505
X
1721
X
X
X
4.00
Brazil
161790
19
27
126599
25616
3882
X
X
X
5.00
Chile
14262
19
26
11966
3212
4890
X
X
X
5.80
Colombia
35101
31
43
25526
2926
3380
X
X
X
5.10
Costa Rica
3424
67
1 1 0
1702
1050
3569
15.29
25.78
58.94
6 . 1 0
Fniador
11460
40
63
6698
1529
2830
1 2 . 1 1
37.62
50.27
2 . 1 0
Ы Salvador
5768
274
463
2599
1680
1876
8.57
24.97
66.45
5.10
French Guiana
147
X
X
1 1 2
X
X
X
X
X
X
Guatemala
10621
98
199
4404
780
2247
25.16
19.45
55.40
4.00
Guyana
835
4
5
302
213
X
X
X
X
7.90
Honduras
5654
50
95
2482
583
1385
19.73
30.35
49.91
3.90
Mexico
93674
48
70
70535
6529
6253
8.45
28.38
63.17
0.40
Nicaragua
4433
34
70
2787
1166
X
30.31
20.19
49.50
-1 . 1 0
Panama
2631
35
50
1401
989
3332
10.16
18.28
71.56
5.80
Paraguay
4960
1 2
2 2
2613
X
2178
26.40
20.90
52.70
3.70
Pern
23780
19
29
17175
6975
2092
1 1 . 0 0
43.18
45.82
6.50
Suriname
423
3
4
213
140
X
22.05
24.24
53.71
0 . 0 0
Umguay
3186
18
2 1
2877
1511
5185
9.03
27.27
63.71
1 . 1 0
Venezuela
21844
24
38
20281
5158
7082
5.04
41.91
53.05
-1 . 0 0
Economic Conditions
Land Cover/Use
Country
Total 
Land 
Area 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Arable and 
Permanent 
Cropland 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Permanent 
Pasture 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Forest 
and 
Woodland 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Other 
Land 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Water 
Domestic 
Industry 
Resources 
Annual 
Annual 
per Capita Withdraws Withdraws 
(m3) 
(%) 
(%) 
1995 
1995 
1995
Agriculture
Aimual
Withdraws
(%)
1995
Aigentina
273669
27200
142000
50900
53569
28739
9
18
73
Belize
2280
57
48
2 1 0 0
75
74419
1 0
0
90
Bolivia
108438
2380
26500
58000
21558
40464
1 0
5
85
Brazil
845651
48955
185000
488000
123696
42957
2 2
19
59
Chile
74880
4257
13600
16500
40523
32814
6
5
89
Colombia
103870
5460
40600
50000
7810
30483
41
16
43
Costa Rica
5106
530
2340
1570
6 6 6
27745
4
7
89
Fciiador
27684
3020
2090
15600
6974
27400
7
3
90
El Salvador
2072
730
610
104
628
3285
7
4
89
French Guiana
8815
1 2
9
7300
1494
X
X
X
X
Guatemala
10843
1880
2602
5813
548
10922
9
17
74
Guyana
19685
496
1230
16500
1459
288623
1
0
99
Honduras
11189
2015
1533
6000
1641
11216
4
5
91
Mexico
190869
24730
74499
48700
42940
3815
6
8
8 6
Nicaragua
11875
1270
5500
3200
1905
39477
25
2 1
54
Panama
7443
660
1490
3260
2033
54732
1 2
1 1
77
Paraguay
39730
2270
21700
12850
2910
63306
15
7
78
Pern
128000
3430
27120
84800
12650
1682
19
9
72
Suriname
15600
6 8
2 1
15000
511
472813
6
5
89
Umguay
17481
1304
13520
930
1727
38920
6
3
91
Venezuela
88205
3915
17800
30000
36490
60291
43
1 1
46
Water
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; total water withdrawals may exceed 100% due to groundwater drawdowns or river inflows.
468
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-4: Latin America region (continued).
Country
Agricultural 
Total 
Irrigated 
Labor 
Labor 
Cattle
Land 
Force 
Force 
Stocks
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993 
1993 
1993 
1994
Sheep 
Goat
Stocks 
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994 
1994
Agriculture/Food
Equines
Rg 
(horses/ 
Buffalo 
Camel
Stocks mules/asses) Stocks 
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994 
1994 
1994 
1994
Argentina
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Ecuador
El Salvador
French Guiana
Giratemala
Guyana
Hondirras
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Pern
Suriname
Umguay
Venezuela
1700
2
175
2800
1265
530
120
556
120
2
125
130
74
6100
88
32
67
1280
60
140
190
1166
X
1015
13189
572
2872
251
1006
628
X
1435
66
952
8962
418
219
719
2523
24
160
732
12067
X
2537
58463
4942
11327
1140
3585
1794
X
2901
311
1788
31885
1206
945
1581
7612
157
1230
7440
50000
59
6012
151600
3692
25700
1694
4963
1256
10
2210
190
2286
30702
1650
1437
8000
4000
98
10316
15071
20000
4
7789
20500
4649
2540
3
1728
5
4 
440 
131
14
5905
4
0
386
11600
9
23441
550
3408
2 2 0 0
3634
X
X
1
26
9
X
X
1517
2331
1041
X
X
1 2 2 0 0
30450
9260
1435
X
600
1407
488
X
X
960
2635
3332
X
X
2
252
126
X
X
345
2540
967
X
X
15
325
123
X
X
1
1 0
0
X
X
78
720
165
X
X
79
50
3
X
X
28
603
269
X
X
10450
18000
12611
X
X
6
535
301
X
X
5
295
161
X
X
1 2 2
3300
415
X
X
1713
2405
1414
X
X
9
37
0
1
X
15
230
484
X
X
1850
2250
1007
X
X
Country
Total
Commercial
Energy
Consumption
(PJ)
1993
Energy
Traditional
Fuel
Consumption
(TJ)
1991
Commercial
Hydroelectric
ftoduction
(PJ)
1993
Known
Manrmal
Species
(#)
1990s
Endenric
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Biodiveiaify
Known 
Endemic 
Bird 
Bird 
Species 
Species
(#) 
(#) 
1990s 
1990s
Known
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Endenric
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Argentina
2019
115572
86.93
320
47
976
19
9000
1 1 0 0
Belize
4
3833
0
125
0
533
0
2750
150
Bolivia
8 6
19232
4.95
316
2 0
1274
16
16500
4000
Brazil
3800
2020612
845.13
394
96
1635
177
55000
X
СШе
539
83618
63.45
91
16
448
15
5125
2698
Colombia
829
235405
100.70
359
28
1695
62
50000
1500
Costa Rica
63
35263
14.26
205
6
850
7
1 1 0 0 0
950
Ecuador
245
74195
21.14
302
23
1559
37
18250
4000
El Salvador
72
38894
6.48
135
0
420
0
2500
17
French Guiana
1 2
645
0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Guatemala
72
103649
6.92
250
3
669
1
8000
1171
Guyana
15
4370
0 . 0 2
193
1
737
0
6000
X
Honduras
43
58138
8.15
173
1
684
1
5000
148
Mexico
4941
248036
93.65
450
140
1026
89
25000
12500
Nicaragua
52
38877
1 . 1 1
2 0 0
2
750
0
7000
40
Panama
61
16157
8.26
218
14
929
8
9000
1 2 2 2
Paraguay
51
54999
113.08
305
2
600
0
7500
X
Pern
314
87615
41.09
344
45
1678
109
17121
5356
Suriname
24
1225
4.06
180
0
673
0
4700
X
Umguay
77
28176
26.27
81
1
365
0
2184
40
Venezuela
2083
21878
170.90
305
16
1296
42
2 0 0 0 0
8000
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; all plant species includes flowering plants only.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
469
Table D-5: Middle East/AridAsia region.
Population and Human Development
Economic Conditions
Current
Projected
Uiban
GDP per 
GDP
GDP
Pop.
Pop.
Total
Pop. in
Capita in 
from
GDP
GDP
Annual
Total
Density
Density
Urban 
(Coastal
Constant 
Agri-
from
from
Growth
Pop.
(persons/
(persons/
Pop.
Cities
PPP
culture
Industry
Services
Rate
(1 0 0 0 s)
km2)
km2)
(1 0 0 0 s) 
I(lOOOs)
(‘85IN$) 
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1995
1995
2025
1995
1980
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993
Afghanistan
20141
31
69
4026
X
X
X
X
X
X
Bahrain
564
831
1360
509
279
X
0.94
41.70
57.36
X
Iran
67283
41
75
39716
872
3685
20.75
36.36
42.88
2.80
Iraq
20449
47
97
15258
0
X
X
X
X
X
Israel
5629
267
371
5098
2826
9843
X
X
X
X
Jordan
5439
56
123
3887
70
X
7.96
26.24
65.80
5.80
Kazakstan
17111
6
8
10218
X
X
X
X
X
-12.90
Kuwait
1547
87
157
1501
1190
X
0.49
54.82
44.69
X
Kyrgyz
4745
24
36
1847
X
X
X
X
X
-16.40
Lebanon
3009
289
425
2622
2016
X
X
X
X
X
Oman
2163
1 0
29
285
62
X
X
X
X
7.00
Pakistan
140497
176
358
48742
5215
1432
24.81
25.29
49.90
2.60
Qatar
551
50
73
503
197
X
X
X
X
X
Saudi Arabia
17880
8
2 0
14339
1954
X
X
X
X
X
Syria
14661
79
181
7676
266
X
X
X
X
X
Tajikistan
6101
43
82
1964
X
X
X
X
X
X
Turkey
61945
79
117
42598
9928
3807
15.09
30.39
54.51
X
Turkmenistan
4099
8
14
1839
X
X
X
X
X
X
United Arab Emirates
1904
23
35
1600
824
X
2 . 2 1
57.50
40.29
X
Uzbekistan
22843
51
84
9430
X
X
99 98
35.99
41.03
-2.40
Yemen
14501
27
64
4877
927
X
2 1 . 0 0
24.02
54.98
X
Land Cover/Use
Water
Total
Arable and
Forest
Water
Domestic
Industry
Agriculture
Land
Permanent
Permanent 
and
Other
Resources
Annual
Annual
Annual
Area
Cropland
Pasture
Woodland 
Land
per Capita Withdraws
Withdraws
Withdraws
(lOOOha)
(lOOOha)
(lOOOha)
(lOOOha) 
(lOOOha)
(m3)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1995
1995
1995
1995
Afghanistan
65209
8054
30000
1900
25255
2482
1
0
99
Bahrain
6 8
2
4
X
62
X
X
X
X
Iran
163600
18150
44000
11400
90050
1746
4
9
87
Iraq
43737
5450
4000
192
34095
5340
3
5
92
Israel
2062
435
145
126
1356
382
16
5
79
Jordan
8893
405
791
70
7627
314
29
6
65
Kazakstan
266980
34800
186562
9600
X
9900
4
17
79
Kuwait
1782
5
137
2
1638
103
64
32
4
Kyrgyz
19130
1420
8700
700
X
13003
3
7
90
Lebanon
1023
306
1 0
80
627
1854
1 1
4
85
Oman
21246
63
1 0 0 0
X
20183
892
3
3
94
Pakistan
77088
21250
5000
3480
47358
3331
1
1
98
Qatar
1 1 0 0
7
50
X
1043
X
X
X
X
Saudi Arabia
214969
3740
1 2 0 0 0 0
1800
89429
254
45
8
47
Syria
18378
5775
8060
650
3893
3662
7
1 0
83
Tajikistan
14060
849
3545
537
9129
16604
5
7
8 8
Turkey
76963
27535
12378
20199
16851
3117
24
19
57
Turkmenistan
48810
1480
30800
4000
X
17573
1
8
91
United Arab Emirates
8360
39
2 0 0
3
8118
1047
1 1
9
80
Uzbekistan
42540
4500
20800
1300
X
5674
4
1 2
84
Yemen
52797
1481
16065
2 0 0 0
33251
359
5
2
93
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measuie; X = not avaüable; total water withdrawals may exceed 100% due to groundwater drawdowns or river inflows.
470
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-5: Middle EastlAridAsia region (continued).
Agriculture/Food
Country
Irrigated 
Land 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Labor
Force
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993
Total
Equines
Labor
Cattle
Sheep
Goat
Rg
(horses/
Buffalo
Camel
Force
Stocks
Stocks
Stocks
Stocks
mules/asses)
Stocks
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
Afghanistan 
3000 
3234 
6133 
1500 
14200 
2150 
X 
1483 
X 
265
Bahrain 
1 
3 
207 
16 
29 
17 
X 
0 
X 
1
Iran 
9400 
4325 
17029 
7100 
45400 
23500 
0 
2288 
300 
140
Iraq 
2550 
1041 
5672 
1100 
6320 
1050 
X 
196 
100 
15
Israel 
180 
82 
2134 
362 
330 
100 
100 
11 
X 
10
Jordan 
63 
58 
1190 
42 
2100 
555 
X 
26 
X 
18
Kazakstan 
2200 
X 
X 
9347 
33524 
684 
2445 
1440 
105 
55
Kuwait 
2 
X 
X 
12 
150 
15 
X 
O
X
 
1
Kyrgyz 
900 
X 
X 
1061 
7077 
219 
165 
310 
X 
50
Lebanon 
8 6  
69 
929 
80 
258 
456 
41 
46 
X 
1
Oman 
X 
169 
454 
144 
149 
739 
X 
26 
X 
96
Pakistan 
17110 
18413 
38226 
18146 
28975 
41340 
X 
4335 
18887 
1121
Qatar 
8  
X 
X 
12 
170 
150 
X 
I
X
 
43
Saudi Arabia 
435 
1877 
5126 
203 
7257 
4150 
X 
101 
X 
415
Syria 
906 
768 
3414 
770 
12000 
1200 
1 
225 
1 
3
Tajikistan 
639 
X 
X 
1250 
2000 
845 
40 
85 
X 
50
Turkey 
3674 
11676 
25598 
11910 
37541 
10133 
9 
1463 
316 
2
Turkmenistan 
1300 
X 
X 
1104 
6000 
314 
159 
45 
X 
40
United Arab Emirates 
5 
18 
864 
65 
333 
861 
X 
O
X
 
148
Uzbekistan 
4000 
X 
X 
5291 
8600 
968 
391 
270 
85 
20
Yemen 
360 
1679 
3124 
X 
6947 
3232 
X 
503 
X 
173
Countiy
Total
Commercial
Energy
Consumption
(PJ)
1993
Eneigy
Traditional
Fuel
Consumption
(TJ)
1991
Commercial
Hydroelectric
Production
(PJ)
1993
Known
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Mammal
Species
m
1990s
Biodiversity
Known 
Endemic 
Bird 
Bird 
Species 
Species
(#) 
(#) 
1990s 
1990s
Known
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Afghanistan
2 2
50649
1.71
123
1
460
0
3500
800
Bahrain
276
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Iran
3264
28613
39.60
140
5
502
1
X
X
Iraq
933
1026
2.16
81
1
381
1
X
X
Israel
505
126
0 . 1 1
92
3
500
0
X
X
Jordan
147
79
0.08
71
0
361
0
2 2 0 0
X
Kazakstan
3381
0
27.46
X
4
X
0
X
X
Kuwait
471
0
0 . 0 0
2 1
0
321
0
234
X
Kyrgyz
150
0
32.05
X
X
X
X
X
X
Lebanon
1 2 1
4639
1.30
54
0
329
0
X
X
Oman
162
0
0 . 0 0
56
2
430
0
1018
73
Pakistan
1135
296244
77.44
151
3
671
0
4929
372
Qatar
558
182
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Saudi Arabia
2933
0
0 . 0 0
77
0
413
0
1729
X
Syria
565
117
24.15
X
X
X
X
X
X
Tajikistan
258
0
61.62
X
2
X
0
X
X
Turkey
1979
95689
1 ? ? ? 2
116
1
418
0
8472
2675
Turkmenistan
555
0
0 . 1 0
X
0
X
0
X
X
United Arab Emirates
1039
0
0 . 0 0
25
0
360
0
X
X
Uzbekistan
1903
0
26.49
X
0
X
0
X
X
Yemen
123
3165
0 . 0 0
6 6
2
366
8
X
135
X = itot available; shaded cells contain data originally attributed to Peoples’ Republic of Yemen or Republic of Yemen; ah plant species includes flowering plants only.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-6: North America region.
471
Country
Population and Human Development
Current 
Projected 
Urban
Pop. 
Pop. 
Total 
Pop. in 
Total 
Density 
Density 
Urban 
Coastal
Pop. 
(persons/ 
(persoiW 
Pop. 
Cities
(1 0 0 0 s) 
km2) 
km2) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s)
1995 
1995 
2025 
1995 
1980
Economic Conditions
GDP per 
GDP 
GDP
Capita in 
from 
GDP 
GDP 
Annual
Constant 
Agri- 
from 
from 
Growth
PPP 
culture 
Industry 
Services 
Rate
C85IN$) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%)
1992 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993
Canada
29463
3
4
22593 
3066 
1 
16362 
X
X
X
X
United States
263250
28
35
200695 
60324 
| 
17945 
X
X
X
3
Land Cover/Use
Water
Total
Arable and
Forest
Water
Domestic
Industry
Agriculture
Land
Permanent
Permanent 
and 
Other
Resoirrces
Armual
Armual
Armual
Area
Cropland
Pasture
Woodland 
Land
per Capita Withdraws Withdraws
Withdraws
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
(m3)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1993
1993
1993
1993 
1993
1995
1995
1995
1995
Canada
922097
45500
27900
494000 
354697
98462
18
70
1 2
United States
957311
187776
239172
286200 
244163
9413
13
45
42
Agriculture/Food
Agricultural
Total
Equines
Irrigated
Labor
Labor
Cattle 
Sheep 
Goat
Kg
(horses/
Buffalo
Camel
Land
Force
Force
Stocks 
Stocks 
Stocks
Stocks
mules/asses)
Stocks
Stocks
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
Conntry
1993
1993
1993
1994 
1994 
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
Canada
710
387
13756
12306 
691 
28
1 1 2 0 0
429
X
X
United States
20700
2600 
126205 
100988 
9600 
2009
57904
3944
X
X
Energy
Biodiversity
Total
Commercial
Traditional
Commercial
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Energy
Fuel
Hydroelectric
Mammal
Martrmal
Bird
Bird
Plant
Plant
Consirmption
Consumption
ftoduction
Species
Species
Species
Species
Species
Species
(PJ)
(TJ)
(PJ)
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
m
Country
1993
1991
1993
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
Canada
9198
67018
1165.28
193
7
578
3
2920
147
United States
81751
916422
995.27
428
1 0 1
768
70
16302
4036
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not avaflable; all plant species includes flowering plants only.
472
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-7: Small Island States region.
Total
Pop.
(1 0 0 0 s)
Country 
1995
Population and Human Development
Current 
Projected 
Urban 
Pop. 
Pop. 
Total 
Pop. in 
Density 
Density 
Urban 
Coastal 
(persons/ 
(persons/ 
Pop. 
Cities 
km2) 
kmZ) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1995 
2025 
1995 
1980
GDP per 
Capita in 
Constant 
PPP 
C85IN$) 
1992
Economic Conditions
GDP
from 
GDP 
GDP 
Agri- 
from 
from 
culture 
Industry 
Services
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
1993 
1993 
1993
GDP
Annual
Growth
Rate
(%)
1993
Antigua and Baibuda
6 6
X
X
24
X
X
X
X
X
3.50
Bahamas
276
2 0
27
239
X
X
X
X
X
X
Barbados
262
609
719
124
1 0 0
X
X
X
X
1.50
Cape Verde
392
97
182
213
125
1085
12.85
15.26
71.89
4.00
Comoros
653
292
736
2 0 1
89
527
39.45
1725
48.30
1 . 2 0
Cook Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Cuba
11041
1 0 0
114
8389
6628
X
X
X
X
X
Cyprus
742
80
1 0 0
401
291
9203
5.69
24.85
69.46
X
Dominica
71
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dominican Republic
7823
161
229
5051
2787
2250
15.49
22.96
61.55
2.90
Fed. States of Miaonesia
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Fiji
784
43
64
319
244
X
X
X
X
1.70
Grenada
92
X
X
X
X
X
13.72
19.35
66.92
X
Haiti
7180
259
473
2266
1216
X
38.62
15.52
45.86
X
Jamaica
2447
223
300
1314
1016
X
8.40
40.89
50.72
1 . 2 0
Kiribati
79
X
X
28
X
X
X
X
X
X
Maldives
254
854
1876
6 8
X
X
X
X
X
X
Malta
366
1159
1336
327
303
X
3.17
34.86
61.96
X
Marshall Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Marrritius
1117
547
726
453
410
6167
9.86
33.42
56.73
5.60
Naum
1 1
X
X
1 1
X
X
X
X
X
X
Palau
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Samoa
171
61
108
36
X
X
X
X
X
X
SL Kitts and Nevis
41
X
X
18
X
4799
X
X
X
X
St. Lucia
X
X
X
69
X
X
10.80
2 0 . 8 8
68.32
3.60
SL Vincent/Lhe Grenadines 112
X
X
52
X
X
X
X
X
X
Sao Tome and Principe
133
X
X
62
X
X
X
X
X
X
Seychelles
73
X
X
40
X
X
4.14
18.95
76.91
3.90
Solomon Islands
378
13
29
65
X
X
X
X
X
X
Tonga
98
X
X
40
X
X
X
X
X
X
Trirridad and Tobago
1306
255
353
938
623
X
2.53
42.92
54.55
-2.40
Tuvalu
1 0
X
X
4
X
547
X
X
X
X
Vanuatu
169
14
27
33
X
X
X
X
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available.
Table D-7: Small Island States region (continued).
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
473
I ^nd Cover/Use
Water
Total
Arable and
Forest
Water
Domestic
Industry
Agriculture
Land
Permanent
Permanent
and
Other
Resources
Annual
Annual
Annual
Area
Cropland
Pasture
Woodland
Land
per Capita Withdraws Withdraws
Withdraws
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
( 1 0 0 0  ha)
(m3)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1995
1995
1995
1995
Antigua and Barbuda
44
8
4
X
32
X
X
X
X
Bahamas
1 0 0 1
1 0
2
324
665
X
X
X
X
Barbados
43
16
2
5
2 0
X
X
X
X
Cape Verde
403
45
25
1
332
X
X
X
X
Comoros
223
1 0 0
15
40
6 8
X
X
X
X
Cook Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Cuba
10982
3340
2970
2608
2064
3125
9
2
89
Cyprus
924
158
4
123
639
X
X
X
X
Dominica
75
17
2 0 0
50
-192
X
X
X
X
Dominican Republic
4838
1450
2
600
2786
2557
5
6
89
Fed. States of Micronesia 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Fiji
1827
260
175
1185
207
36416
2 0
2 0
60
Grenada
34
1 1
1
3
19
X
X
X
X
Haiti
2756
910
495
140
1 2 1 1
1532
24
8
6 8
Jamaica
1083
219
257
185
422
3392
7
7
8 6
Kiribati
73
37
X
2
X
X
X
X
X
Maldives
30
3
1
1
25
X
X
X
X
Malta
32
13
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Marshall Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Mauritius
203
106
7
44
46
1979
16
7
77
Naum
2
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Palau
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Samoa
X
X
X
134
X
X
X
X
X
St. Kitts and Nevis
36
14
1
6
15
X
X
X
X
St. Lucia
61
18
3
8
32
X
X
X
X
St. Vmcent/TheGrenadines 
39
1 1
2
14
1 2
X
X
X
X
Sao Tome and Principe
1 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Seychelles
45
7
X
5
X
X
X
X
X
Solomon Islands
2799
57
39
2450
253
118254
40
2 0
40
Tonga
72
48
4
8
1 2
X
X
X
X
Trinidad and Tobago
513
1 2 2
1 1
235
145
3905
27
38
35
Tuvalu
3
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Vanuatu
1219
144
25
914
136
X
X
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; total water withdrawals may exceed 100% due to groundwater drawdowns or river inflows.
474
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-7: Small Island States region (continued).
Irrigated 
Land 
(lOOOha) 
Country 
1993
Agricultural
Labor
Force
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993
Total
Labor
Force
(1 0 0 0 s)
1993
Cattle
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Agriculture/Food
Sheep 
Goat 
Stocks 
Stocks 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1994 
1994
Rg
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Equines
(horses/
mules/asses)
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Buffalo
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Camel
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Antigua and Barbuda
X
X
X
16
1
1 2
4
3
X
X
Bahamas
X
X
X
6
40
19
15
0
X
X
Barbados
X
8
138
25
41
5
30
5
X
X
Cape Verde
3
57
140
18
7
137
1 1 1
15
X
X
Comoros
X
199
257
50
15
128
X
5
X
X
Cook Islands
X
X
X
X
8
X
X
X
X
Cuba
910
850
4727
4500
310
95
1503
617
X
X
Cyprus
39
64
334
61
285
2 0 0
370
8
X
X
Dominica
X
X
X
9
8
1 0
5
0
X
X
Dominican Republic
230
817
2478
2450
134
587
900
616
X
X
Fed. States of Miaonesia
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Fiji
1
95
254
334
6
205
115
44
X
X
Grenada
X
X
X
4
1 2
1 1
3
1
X
X
Haiti
75
1848
2988
800
85
910
2 0 0
690
X
X
Jamaica
35
328
1274
335
2
442
180
37
X
X
Kiribati
X
3
27
X
0
X
9
0
X
X
Maldives
78
X
X
X
0
X
X
0
X
X
Malta
X
5
138
2 0
6
5
1 1 1
2
X
X
Marshah Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Mauritius
17
94
440
34
7
95
17
0
X
X
Naum
X
X
X
X
0
X
3
0
X
X
Palau
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Samoa
X
X
X
X
0
X
X
0
X
X
St. Kitts and Nevis
X
X
X
5
4
1 0
2
0
X
X
St. Luda
1
X
X
1 2
16
1 2
13
3
X
X
St. VmcentyTheGrenadines
1
X
X
6
6
6
9
1
X
X
Sao Tome and Principe
X
X
X
4
0
5
2
0
X
X
Seychelles
X
X
X
2
0
5
18
0
X
X
Solomon Islands
X
X
X
13
0
X
55
0
X
X
Tonga
X
X
X
1 0
0
16
94
1 1
X
X
Trinidad and Tobago
2 2
33
476
55
14
52
48
5
9
X
Tuvalu
X
X
X
X
0
X
13
0
X
X
Vanuatu
X
X
X
132
0
1 1
59
3
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X  = not available.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
475
Table D-7: Small Island States region (continued).
Total
Commercial
Eneigy
Consumption
(PJ)
Country 
1993
Energy
Traditional
Fuel
Consumption
(TJ)
1991
Commercial
Hydroelectric
Production
(PJ)
1993
Known
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Mammal
Species
(#)
1990s
Biodiversity
Known 
Endemic 
Bird 
Bird 
Species 
Species
(#) 
(#) 
1990s 
1990s
Known
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Endemic
Plant
Species
(#)
1990s
Antigua and Barbuda
4
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Bahamas
24
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Barbados
14
1676
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Cape Verde
2
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Comoros
1
0
0 . 0 1
X
X
X
X
X
X
Cook Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Cuba
369
204977
0.38
31
1 2
342
2 2
6004
3229
Cypms
63
240
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dominica
1
0
0.06
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dominican Republic
148
25348
6.35
2 0
0
254
0
5000
1800
Fed. States of Micronesia
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Fiji
1 1
11829
1.39
4
1
109
26
1307
760
Grenada
2
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Haiti
9
56611
0.59
3
0
2 2 0
0
4685
1623
Jamaica
104
6011
0.32
24
3
262
25
2746
923
Kiribati
X
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Maldives
1
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Malta
24
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Marshall Islands
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Mauritius
2 1
16793
0.37
4
2
81
9
700
325
Naum
2
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Palau
X
X
X
214
57
708
80
1 0 0 0 0
X
Samoa
X
736
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
StKitts and Nevis
1
495
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
St. Lucia
2
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
St. Vincent/TheGrenadines
1
0
0.14
X
X
X
X
X
X
Sao Tome and Principe
1
0
0.03
X
X
X
X
X
X
Seychelles
2
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Solomon Islands
2
3224
0 . 0 0
53
19
223
44
2780
30
Tonga
1
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Trinidad and Tobago
267
2825
0 . 0 0
1 0 0
1
433
1
1982
236
Tuvalu
16
0
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Vanuatu
1
235
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; all plant speaes includes flowering plants only.
476
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-8: Temperate Asia region
Current
Projected
Uiban
GDP per
GDP
GDP
Pop.
Pop.
Total
Pop. in
Capita in
from
GDP
GDP
Armual
Total
Density
Density
Urban
Coastal
Constant
Agri­
from
from
Growth
Pop.
(persons/
(persons/
Pop.
Cities
PPP
culture
Industry
Services
Rate
(1 0 0 0 s)
km2)
km2)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(‘851N$)
(%)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1995
1995
2025
1995
1980
1992
1993
1993
1993
1993
China
1221462
127
159
369736
38936
1493
19.48
47.59
32.93
1 2 . 2 0
Hong Kong
5865
5612
5681
5574
4614
16471
X
X
X
X
Japan
125095
331
322
97120
78349
15105
X
X
X
0 . 1 0
MongoUa
2410
2
2
1468
X
X
20.83
46.34
32.83
-1.40
North Korea
44995
454
550
36572
16911
X
7.07
43.38
49.55
5.50
South Korea
23917
198
277
14650
5973
X
X
X
X
X
Economic Conditions
Country
LandCover/Use
Total 
Arable and 
Forest
Land 
Permanent Permanent 
and 
Other
Area 
Cropland 
Pasture 
Woodland 
Land
(lOOOha) 
(lOOOha) 
(lOOOha) 
(lOOOha) 
(lOOOha)
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993 
1993
China
932641
95975
400000
130496
306169
2292
6
7
87
Hong Kong
99
7
1
2 2
69
X
X
X
X
Japan
37652
4463
661
25100
7428
4373
17
33
50
MongoUa
156650
1401
125000
13750
16499
10207
1 1
27
62
North Korea
9873
2055
90
6460
1268
1469
19
35
46
South Korea
12041
2 0 0 0
50
7370
2621
2801
1 1
16
73
Water
Water 
Domestic 
Industry 
Agriculture 
Resources 
Armual 
Annual 
Armual
per Capita Withdraws Withdraws Withdraws 
(m3) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%)
1995 
1995 
1995 
1995
Agriculture/Food
Agricultural
Total
Equines
Irrigated
1 abor
Labor
Cattle
Sheep
Goat
Kg
(horses/
Buffalo
Camel
Land
Force
Force
Stocks
Stocks
Stocks
Stocks
mules/asses)
Stocks
Stocks
(lOOOha)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
(1 0 0 0 s)
Country
1993
1993
1993
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
1994
China
49872
463121
710441
90906
111649
105990
402846
26344
22416
373
Hong Kong
2
32
3066
2
0
0
97
1
0
X
Japan
2782
3508
63817
4989
25
31
10621
28
X
X
MongoUa
80
310
1115
2779
14392
6469
49
2 1 0 0
X
415
North Korea
1335
4387
20228
3200
4
520
6300
6
X
X
South Korea
1460
3782
12223
1330
396
305
3368
52
X
X
Energy
Biodiversity
Total
Commercial
Traditional
Commercial
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Energy
Fuel
Hydroelectric
Mammal
Mammal
Bird
Bird
Plant
Plant
Consumption
Consrrmption
Koduction
Spedes
Species
Species
Spedes
Spedes
Spedes
(PJ)
(TJ)
(PJ)
m
m
(#)
m
(#)
(#)
Country
1993
1991
1993
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
China
29679
2017764
546.48
394
77
1244
67
30000
18000
Hong Kong
386
2374
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Japan
17505
9663
379.69
132
38
583
2 1
4700
2 0 0 0
MongoUa
105
13188
0 . 0 0
134
0
390
0
2272
229
North Korea
4504
25788
21.62
49
0
372
0
2898
224
South Korea
2925
40412
86.40
X
0
390
0
2898
107
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; total water withdrawals may exceed 100% due to groundwater drawdowns or river inflows; all 
plant species includes flowering plants only.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
477
Table D-9: TmpicalAsia region.
Country
Total
Pop.
(lOOOs)
1995
Population and Human Development
Current 
Projected 
Uiban 
Pop. 
Pop. 
Total 
Pop. in 
Density 
Density 
Urban 
Coastal 
(persons/ (persons/ 
Pop. 
Cities 
km2) 
km2) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1995 
2025 
1995 
1980
Economic Conditions
GDP per 
GDP
Capita in 
from 
GDP 
GDP 
Constant 
Agri- 
from 
from 
PPP 
culture 
Industry 
Services 
(‘85IN$) 
(%) 
(%) 
(%) 
1992 
1993 
1993 
1993
GDP
Armual
Growth
Rate
(%)
1993
Bangladesh
120433
836
1362
22034
1809
1510 
30.47
1750
52.03
4.40
Bhutan
1638
35
67
105
X
X 
40.57
29.49
29.94
X
Brunei
285
49
74
165
X
X 
X
X
X
X
Cambodia
10251
57
109
2123
50
X 
47.29
14.46
38.25
X
India
935744
285
423
250681
37317
1282 
31.36
27.33
41.31
3.10
Indonesia
197588
104
145
69992
29166
2102 
18.79
39.42
41.79
6.60
Laos
4882
2 1
41
1060
X
X 
51.34
18.15
3051
5.90
Malaysia
20140
61
96
10814
3997
5746 
X
X
X
8.50
Myanmar
46527
69
1 1 2
12188
3923
X 
63.04
8.55
28.41
X
Nepal
21918
156
289
2996
X
X 
43.14
21.29
3557
2.90
Papua New Guinea
4302
9
16
690
322
1606 
25.96
42.77
31.28
15.40
Philippines
67581
225
348
36614
17736
1689 
21.68
32.92
45.40
1.70
Singapore
2848
4608
5430
2848
2414
12653 
0.19
36.76
63.06
X
Sri Lanka
18354
280
382
4108
2433
2215 
24.64
25.60
49.75
6.90
Thailand
58791
115
143
11787
5698
3942 
9.96
39.24
50.80
7.80
Viet Nam
74545
225
356
15479
5585
X 
29.29
28.41
42.31
X
LandCover/Use
Water
Total
Arable and
Forest
Water
Domestic
Industry
Agriculture
Land
Permanent
Permanent 
and
Other
Resources
Annual
Annual
Annual
Area
Cropland
Pasture
Woodland 
Land
per Capita Withdraws Withdraws
Withdraws
(lOOOha)
(lOOOha)
(lOOOha)
(lOOOha) 
(lOOOha)
(m3)
(%)
(%)
(%)
Country
1993
1993
1993
1993
1993
1995
1995
1995
1995
Bangladesh
13017
9694
600
1900
823
19571
3
1
%
Bhutan
4700
134
273
3100
1193
57998
36
1 0
54
Brunei
527
7
6
450
64
X
X
X
X
Cambodia
17652
2400
2 0 0 0
11600
1652
48590
5
1
94
India
297319
169650
11400
68500
47769
2228
3
4
93
Indonesia
181157
30987
11800
111774
265%
12804
13
1 1
76
Laos
23080
805
800
12500
8975
55305
8
1 0
82
Malaysia
32855
4880
27
22304
5644
22642
23
30
47
Myanmar
65755
10087
359
32408
22901
23255
7
3
90
Nepal
13680
2354
2 0 0 0
5750
3576
7756
4
1
95
Papua New Guinea
45286
415
80
42000
2791
186192
29
2 2
49
Philippines
29817
9190
1280
13600
5747
4779
18
2 1
61
Singapore
61
1
X
3
X
2 1 1
45
51
4
Sri Lanka
6463
1900
440
2 1 0 0
2023
2354
2
2
%
Thailand
51089
20800
800
13500
15989
3045
4
6
90
Viet Nam
32549
6700
330
9650
15869
5044
13
9
78
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; total water withdrawals may exceed 100% due to groundwater drawdowns or river inflows.
478
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
Table D-9: TmpkalAsia region (continued).
Coimlry
Irrigated 
Land 
( 1 0 0 0  ha) 
1993
Agricultural 
Total 
Labor 
Labor 
Force 
Force 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1993 
1993
Cattle
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Agricrrltirre/Food
Sheep 
Goat 
Stocks 
Stocks 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1994 
1994
Equines 
Pig 
(horses/ 
Stocks mules/asses) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
(1 0 0 0 s) 
1994 
1994
Buffalo
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
(Tamel
Stocks
(1 0 0 0 s)
1994
Bangladesh
3100
25041 
37645
24130
1070
28050
X
0
874
X
Bhutan
34
635 
704
435
59
42
75
58
4
X
Brunei
1
X 
X
1
0
0
14
0
1 0
X
Cambodia
92
2532 
3673
2589
X
X
2154
2 1
829
X
India
48000
293898 
341944
192980
44809
118347
11780
2734
78825
1520
Indonesia
4597
35655 
77797
11595
6411
19781
8720
714
3512
X
Laos
125
1460 
2077
1137
X
153
1605
29
1308
X
Malaysia
340
2240 
7592
6 8 6
336
356
3098
5
186
X
Myanmar
1068
8566 
18971
9691
304
1113
2589
130
2130
X
Nepal
850
7748 
8488
6546
914
5525
612
0
3176
X
Papua New Guinea
X
1241 
1941
105
4
2
1033
2
X
X
Philippines
1580
11074 
24415
1825
30
2800
8777
2 1 0
2630
X
Singapore
X
12 
1322
0
0
1
150
0
0
X
SriLanka
550
3400 
6642
1600
19
500
90
2
870
X
Thailand
4400
19057 
30600
7593
98
136
4931
162
4257
X
WetNam
1860
20392 
34887
3438
X
300
15043
134
3009
X
Energy
Biodiversity
Total
Commercial 
Traditional 
Commercial
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Known
Endemic
Energy
Fuel 
Hydroelectric
Mammal
Mammal
Bird
Bird
Plant
Plant
Consumption Consumption 
Production
Species
Species
Species
Species
Species
Spedes
(PJ)
(TJ)
(PJ)
m
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
(#)
Country
1993
1991
1993
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
1990s
Bangladesh
313
276590
2.79
109
0
684
0
5000
X
Bhutan
2
11/23
5.83
99
0
543
0
5446
75
Brunei
1 2 1
771
0 . 0 0
X
X
X
X
X
X
Cambodia
7
53841
0.25
123
0
429
0
X
X
India
9338
2823738 
254.40
316
44
1219
55
15000
5000
Indonesia
2658
1464776
4331
436
198
1531
393
27500
17500
Laos
5
38525
3.09
172
0
651
1
X
X
Malaysia
996
90197
17.73
286
27
736
9
15000
3600
Myanmar
71
192832
5.22
251
6
999
4
7000
1071
Nepal
19
205666
3.15
167
1
824
2
6500
315
Papua New Guinea
33
59799
1 . 6 6
214
57
708
80
1 0 0 0 0
X
Philippines
787
381814
15.35
153
97
556
183
8000
3500
Singapore
745
0
0 . 0 0
45
1
295
0
2 0 0 0
2
SriLanka
78
89415
13.67
8 8
13
428
23
3000
890
Thailand
1628
526385
13.32
265
7
915
3
1 1 0 0 0
X
Viet Nam
316
250800
29.91
213
7
761
1 0
>7000
1260
0 = zero or less than half the unit of measure; X = not available; aU plant species includes flowering plants only.
Socio-Economic Baseline Data
479
References
HDIfiini and HD16104
United Nations Population D ivision, 1993: A n n u a l  P o p u l a t i o n s  (The 1994 
Revision), United Nations, N ew York, on diskette.
HD16405
United Nations Population Division, 1995: U r b a n  a n d  R u r a l  A r e a s ,  1 9 5 0 -  
2 0 2 5  (The 1994 Revision), U.N., New York, on diskette.
НП16419
UN Statistical Office, UN Office for Ocean A ffairs and the Law o f the 
Sea, O ffshore M agazine, and other sources.
EI15124
Summers, R obert e t  a l . , 1994: T h e  P e n n  W o r l d  T a b l e , M ark 5.6, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
EI15105. EI15106. EI15107, EI15122
World Bank, 1994: W o r l d  T a b l e s  1 9 9 4 , W orld Bank, W ashington, D.C.
1.C171Q1. LC17102. LC17104. ЕС171П5. LC17106
United Nations Food and A griculture Organization, 1995: F A O S T A T - P C ,  
FAO, Rome, on diskette.
FA18203. FA18509, FA18508. FA18301, FA18302, FA18303, FA18304,
FA183n.5. FA18306. FA18307
United N ations Food and A griculture O rganization, 1995: F A O S T A T - P C ,  
FAO, Rome, on diskette.
WA22102. WA22109
Compiled by the W orld Resources Institute from  the following sources:
Belyaev, A.V., 1990: Institute of Geography, U.S.S.R. National Academy of 
Sciences, Moscow, personal communication.
Economic C om m ission for Europe, 1992: T h e  E n v i r o n m e n t  i n  E u r o p e  a n d  
N o r t h  A m e r i c a , U nited Nations, New York, pp. 15-23.
European Com m unities Com m ission, 1990: E n v i r o n m e n t  S t a t i s t i c s  1 9 8 9 ,  
Office des Publications Officielles des Communautés Européennes, 
Luxembourg, p. 130.
Forkasiew icz, J and J. M argat, 1980, T a b l e a u  M
o n d i a l  d e  D o n n é e s  
N a t i o n a l e s  d  E c o n o m i e  d e  l  E a u ,  R e s s o u r c e s  e t  U t i l i s a t i o n ,  
D épartem ent Hydrogeologie, Orleans, France.
Gleick, P., 1995: Pacific Institute, Oakland, California, personal communica­
tion.
M argat, J., 1988: Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et M inières, Orleans, 
France, personal communicatio).
O rganisation for Econom ie Cooperation and D evelopm ent (OECD), 
1995: O E C D E n v i r o n m e n t a l  D a t a  C o m p e n d i u m , OECD, Paris.
Solley, W.B., R.R. Pierce, and H.A. Perlm an, 1993: E s t i m a t e d  U s e  o f  W a t e r  
i n  t h e  U n i t e d  S t a t e s  i n  1 9 9 0 , U.S. Geological Survey Circular, No. 
1081, U.S. G eological Survey, Reston, Virginia.
United N ations Econom ic Com m ission for Europe (ECE), 1995: E C E  
E n v i r o n m e n t a l  S t a t i s t i c a l  D a t a b a s e , on diskette. Statistical Division, 
UN/ECE.
United Nations Food and A griculture Organization, 1995: W a t e r
R e s o u r c e s  o f  A f r i c a n  C o u n t r i e s ,  A  R e v i e w , FAO, Rome, pp. 14-15.
United Nations Statistical Division (UNSTAT), 1 995:1 9 9 3  E n e r g y  
S t a t i s t i c s  Y e a r b o o k , UNSTAT, New York.
EM21209
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, unpublished.
Estimates were prepared by the Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations after an assessment of the available consumption 
data. Data were supplied by the answers to questionnaires or come 
from official publications.
BI20401. BI20402. BI2Q501
W orld Conservation Monitoring Centre, 1995: unpublished data, 
Cambridge, U.K.
W orld Conservation M onitoring Centre, 1994: B i o d i v e r s i t y  D a t a  
S o u r c e b o o k , World Conservation Press, Cambridge, U.K.
W orld Conservation M onitoring Centre, 1992: G l o b a l  B i o d i v e r s i t y  S t a t u s  
o f  t h e  E a r t h ’s  L i v i n g  R e s o u r c e s , Chapman and Hall, London.
E
Color Plates
482
Color Plates
Elevation
Below S m 
5 -100 m 
100 - 250 m 
250 - 500 m 
5 00-1000 m 
1000 - 2500 m 
2500 - 5000 m 
Greater than 5000 m
О  Capitals 
Other Major Cities - Pq>. 1995 (’000s)
• 
Less than 1000
•  1000-2000 
•  2000 - 5000
;
 5000-10000 
Greater than 10000
500 
0 
500 
1000 Kilometers
Figure 2-1: The Africa region (courtesy of David Gray/The World Bank).
Color Plates
483
Box 2-10. The Potential Impact of Long-Term Climate Change
on Vector-Borne Diseases: The Case of Malaria
□  0  
E l  0.03 
Ш  0.05 
■ 1 0 .0 8
□
 0.25
□
 0.27
□
 0.30
□
 0.33
□
 0.36
□
 0.38
□  o
■
 0.03
■
 0.05
■
 0.08
■
 0.16 
n
 0.22
m 0.25
□
 0.27 
S
 0.30 
E ]  0.33
Ш  0.38
Degree o f Change: a) 5-month model with 1°C increase, b) 5-month model with 0.5°C increase, c) 5-month model 
with 0.5°C increase at elevation >1,300 m, and d) 5-month model with 1°C increase at elevation >1,300 m.
484
Color Plates
c
oa
cd
О
3*>Л
Q
aо
’5b
СЛ
=!
0^
x:H
Color Plates
485
С
cd
pa
I(U
a
;o
’>
cd
Q
о
СЛ
(U
tiD
С
О
*5b
<u
a.s
Ш
(U
iS
£s
.2 ?
£
486
Color Plates
Figure 6-1: The Latin America region (courtesy of David Gray/The World Bank).
(a)
Color Plates
487
DJF
(b)
JJA
-1
0
Figure 6 -2 : Seasonal change in surface temperature from 1880-1889 to 2040-2049 in simulations with aerosol effects included. 
Contours are at every 1°C (IPCC 1996, WG I, Figure 6.10).
488
Color Plates
• о ;  V,
Ecoregi
w  and ice 
И И  Tropical moist broadleaf forest 
Trc^ical dry broadleaf forest 
H H  Conifer or ten^erate broadleaf forest 
Grassland/Savanna/Shrubland 
H
i  Wetlands and flood-prone grassland 
Montane vegetation 
Xeric and desert vegetation 
Restinga 
Mangrove
400 
0 
400 
800 
1200 1600 KUometers
Figure 6-4: Major biomes in Latin America (courtesy of David Gray/The World Bank).
Color Plates
489
aCS
I
CO
Ьмо
*>
СО
Û
оо
со
‘5Ь
<и
<
•о
ссо
to
со
Щ
JJ
•о
(U
t
а
'£
490
Color Plates
aCd
pq
cd
)-i
О
T3
>
cd
Û
g?
оmD
С
О
p
t:о
2
-CH
£
3d
Color Plates
491
MЙ=3
n
1
U
X
t i
2  
О
3’>
CO
Û
>%
СЛ
ВVn38
СU
тз
со
33a.
оо.
о
ОС
2
S
0£
S
492
Color Plates
Figure 8-3: Ecoregions for North America (courtesy of R.A. Washington-Allen/ORNL), based on data provided by the 
National Geophysical Data Center.
Color Plates
493
с«d
oa
sa
3
Û
Ц-И
О
СЛ
D
■c3ои
о
'5b
и
<ü
л
üa.
a
<U
t
.1to
ît *  ш
‘♦f s
r'
Л  irОЧ.-.ЧТ^ч.'^'--. 
>Чл-< V-j4«* >Л;
1
^ v . i
/* fS3^
'•  Ъ
'C « r
4^: m
m
F
Glossary of Terms
496
Glossary o f Terms
acclimatization
physiological adaptation to climatic variations 
active layer
the top layer of soil in permafrost that is subjected to 
seasonal freezing and thawing
adaptability
the degree to which adjustments are possible in practices, 
processes, or structures of systems to projected or actual 
changes of climate; adaptation can be spontaneous or 
planned, and can be carried out in response to or in 
anticipation of changes in conditions
aHorestation
forest stands established artificially on lands that previously 
have not supported forests for more than 50 years
agroclimatic
climatic conditions as they relate to agricultural production; 
discrete set of zones each of which identifies areas capable 
of like types and levels of agricultural production
albino
the surface reflectivity of the globe 
alevin
a young fish; especially, a newly hatched salmon when still 
attached to the yolk sac
algal blooms
a reproductive explosion of algae in a lake, river, or ocean 
alpine
the biogeographic zone made up of slopes above timber- 
line and characterized by the presence of rosette-forming 
herbaceous plants and low shrubby slow-growing woody 
plants
anadromous species
species of fish, such as salmon, that spawn in fresh water 
and then migrate into the ocean to grow to maturity
anaerobic
living, active, or occurring in the absence of free oxygen 
annual plants
terrestrial plants that complete their life cycle in one 
growing season; plants that die off each year during periods 
of temperature and moisture stress but leave behind seeds to 
germinate during the next favorable climatic season
anoxia
a deficiency of oxygen, especially of such severity as to 
result in permanent damage
anoxic
greatly deficient in oxygen
anthropogenic
caused or produced by humans 
anticyclone system
a system of winds that rotates about a center of high 
atmospheric pressure (clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere 
and counterclockwise in the Southern Hemisphere)
aquifer
permeable water-bearing formation capable of yielding 
exploitable quantities of water
arbovirus
any of various viruses transmitted by arthropods and 
including the causative agents of dengue fever, yellow fever, 
and some encephalitis
arid lands
ecosystems with <250 mm precipitation per year 
autochthonous
indigenous; formed or originating in the place where found 
autonomous adaptation
adaptation that occurs without specific human intervention 
baseline scenario
the set of predicted levels of economic growth, energy 
production and consumption, and greenhouse gas emissions 
assumed as the starting point for an analysis of mitigation 
options
basin
drainage area of a stream, river, or lake
billabong
cut-off meander
biodiversity
the number of different species or functional groups of flora 
and fauna found in an area or ecosystem
biofuels
fuels obtained as a product of biomass conversion (e.g., 
alcohol or gasohol)
biogas
a gas composed principally of a mixture of methane and 
carbon dioxide produced by anaerobic digestion of biomass
biogeography
the study of the geographical distribution of living 
organisms
biomass
the total quantity of living matter in a particular habitat; 
plant and organic waste materials used as fuel and feedstock 
in place of fossil fuels
Glossary o f Terms
497
biome
a grouping of similar plant and animal communities into 
broad landscape units that occur under similar 
environmental conditions
bog
a poorly drained (usually acid) area rich in accumulated 
plant material, frequently surrounding a body of open water, 
and having a characteristic flora (as of sedges, heaths, and 
sphagnum)
bottom-up modeling
a modeling approach that arrives at economic 
conclusions from an analysis of the effect of changes 
in specific parameters on narrow parts of the total 
system
building stock
the residential and/or commercial structures extant in a 
society or a geographic area
Cj plants
plants that produce a three-carbon compound during 
photosynthesis, including most trees and agricultural crops 
such as rice, wheat, soybeans, potatoes, and 
vegetables
C 4  plants
plants that produce a four-carbon compound during 
photosynthesis; mainly of tropical origin, including grasses 
and the agriculturally important crops maize, sugar cane, 
millet, and sorghum
calorie (food)
1 0 0 0  (technical) calories
calving
the breaking away of a mass of ice from a floating glacier, 
ice front, or iceberg
CAM
variant of the C 4  photosynthetic pathway in which most gas 
exchange occurs at night; occurs primarily in succulents 
(e.g., cacti)
carbon intensity
CO 2  emissions per unit of energy or economic output 
carbon seqnestration
the biochemical process through which carbon in the 
atmosphere is absorbed by biomass such as trees, soils, and 
crops
carbon sinks
chemical processes that absorb carbon dioxide 
carbon stocks
the amount of carbon that is stored in carbon sinks
carbon tax
a levy exacted by a government on the use of carbon- 
containing fuels for the purpose of influencing human behavior 
(specifically economic behavior) to use less fossil fuels
carrying capacity
the number of individuals in a population that the resources 
of a habitat can support
catchment
area having a common outlet for its surface runoff 
Chagas’ disease
a parasitic disease caused by the Trypanosoma cruzi and 
transmitted by triatomine bugs in the Americas, with two 
clinical periods: Acute (fever, swelling of the spleen, 
edemas) and chronic (heart disorder that may produce high 
fatality, or digestive syndrome)
CO 2  fertilization
the enhancement of plant growth as a result of elevated 
atmospheric COj concentration
commnnicable disease
infectious disease caused by transmission of an infective 
biological agent (virus, bacterium, protozoan, or 
multicellular macroparasite)
cryosphere
all global snow, ice, and permafrost 
Dengue fever
an infectious viral disease spread by mosquitoes, the first 
infection of which is often called breakbone fever and is 
characterized by severe pain in joints and back, fever, and 
rash; a subsequent infection is usually characterized by 
fever, bleeding from bodily orifices, and sometimes death
desert
an ecosystem with < 1 0 0  mm precipitation per year 
determinate crops
crops characterized by sequential flowering from the central 
or uppermost bud to the lateral or basal buds; also, crops 
characterized by growth in which the main stem ends in an 
inflorescence and stops growing with only branches from 
the main stem having further and similarly restricted growth
diapause
period of suspended growth or development and reduced 
metabolism in the life cycle of many insects, when organism 
is more resistant to unfavorable environmental conditions 
than in other periods
dissolved load
the amount of particles in a stream or other water source 
that arises as a result of erosion diurnal climate a climate 
with uniform amplitudes of temperature throughout the year
498
Glossary o f Terms
econometric
an approach to studying a problem through use of 
mathematical and statistical methods in the field of 
economics to develop and verify theories
economies in transition
national economies that are moving from a period of heavy 
government control toward lessened intervention, increased 
privatization, and greater use of competition
ecotax
a levy exacted by a government for the purpose of 
influencing human behavior (specifically economic 
behavior) to follow an ecologically benign path
ecotone
transition area between adjacent ecological communities 
(e.g., between forests and grasslands), usually involving 
competition between organisms common to both
ecotopic
tendency or involving adjustment to specific habitat conditions 
edaphic
of or relating to the soil; factors inherent in the soil 
El Nino
an irregular variation of ocean current that, from January to 
February, flows off the west coast of South America, carry­
ing warm, low-salinity, nutrient-poor water to the south; 
does not usually extend farther than a few degrees south of 
the Equator, but occasionally it does penetrate beyond 12°S, 
displacing the relatively cold Peruvian current; usually 
short-lived effects, but sometimes last more than a year, 
raising sea-surface temperatures along the coast of Peru and 
in the equatorial eastern Pacific Ocean, having disastrous 
effects on marine life and fishing
epilimnion
the water layer overlying the thermocline of a lake 
euphotic zone
the upper layers of a body of water into which sufficient 
light penetrates to permit photosynthesis
eustatic sea-level rise
worldwide rise in sea level
eutrophication
the process by which a body of water (often shallow) 
becomes (either naturally or by pollution) rich in dissolved 
nutrients with a seasonal deficiency in dissolved oxygen
évapotranspiration
loss of water from the soil both by evaporation from the 
surface and transpiration from the plants growing thereon
exergy
the maximum amount of energy that under given (ambient) 
thermodynamic conditions can be converted into any other 
form or energy; also known as availability or work potential
exergy efficiency
the ratio of (theoretical) minimum exergy input to actual input 
of a process or a system; also known as second-law efficiency
extant
currently or actually existing 
extinction
complete disappearance of an entire species 
extirpation
disappearance of a species from part of its range; local 
extinction
endemic
restricted or peculiar to a locality or region
fallovr
land left unseeded after plowing; uncultivated
endemic infection
a sustained, relatively stable, pattern of infection within a 
specified population
energy efficiency
ratio of energy output of a conversion process or of a system 
to its energy input; also known as first-law efficiency
energy intensity
ratio between the consumption of energy to a given quanti­
ty; usually refers to the amount of primary or final energy 
consumed per unit of gross domestic or national product
fast ice
sea or lake ice that remains tied to the coast (usually > 2  m 
above sea level)
feedback
when one variable in a system triggers changes in a second 
variable that in turn ultimately affects the original; a positive 
feedback intensifies the effect, and a negative reduces the effect
fen
low land covered wholly or partly with water unless artifi­
cially drained
epidemic
appearance of an abnormally high number of cases of infection 
in a given population; can also refer to noninfectious diseases 
(e.g., heart disease) or to acute events such as chemical toxicity
forest
an ecosystem in which the dominant plants are trees; wood­
lands are distinguished from forests by their lower density 
of trees
Glossary o f Terms
499
forestation
generic term for establishing forest stands by reforestation 
and afforestation
forest decline
premature, progressive loss of tree and stand vigor and 
health
frazil ice
fine spicules or plates of ice in suspension in water 
friable soils
soils that are easily crumbled or pulverized 
geomorpbic
of or related to the form of the Earth or its surfaces
bypolimnion
the part of a lake below the thermocline made up of water 
that is stagnant and of essentially uniform temperature 
except during the period of overturn
ice cap
a dome-shaped glacier covering a highland area 
(considerably smaller in extent than ice sheets)
ice jam
an accumulation of broken river or sea ice caught in a 
narrow channel
ice sheet
a mass of snow and ice of considerable thickness and large 
area greater than 50,000 km^
greenhouse gas
any gas that absorbs infrared radiation in the atmosphere 
gross primary production
the amount of carbon fixed in photosynthesis by plants
ice shelf
a floating ice sheet of considerable thickness attached to a 
coast (usually of great horizontal extent with a level or 
gently undulating surface); often a seaward extension of ice 
sheets
ground ice
ice present within rock, sediments, or soil 
groundwater recharge
process by which external water is added to the zone of 
saturation of an aquifer, either directly into a formation or 
indirectly by way of another formation
icmg
a sheet-like mass of layered ice formed by the freezing of 
water as it emerges from the ground or through fractures in 
river or lake ice
immunosuppression
reduced functioning of an individual’s immune system
halocarbons
chemicals containing carbon and members of the halogen 
family
halophyte species
a plant (as saltbush or sea lavender) that grows in salty soil 
and usually has a physiological resemblance to a true 
xerophyte
heath
any of the various low-growing shrubby plants of open 
wastelands, usually growing on acidic, poorly drained soils
heat island
an area within an urban area characterized by ambient 
temperatures higher than those of the surrounding area 
because of the absorption of solar energy by materials like 
asphalt
herbaceous
flowering, non-woody plants 
herbivore
an animal that feeds on plants 
hydroperiod
the depth, frequency, duration, and season of wetland flooding
incidence
the number of cases of a disease commencing, or of persons 
falling ill, during a given period of time within a specified 
population
industrial ecology
the set of relationships of a particular industry with its 
environment; often refers to the conscious planning of 
industrial processes so as to minimize their negative 
interference with the surrounding environment
industrialization
the conversion of a society from one based on manual labor 
to one based on the application of mechanical devices
infiltration
flow of water through the soil surface into a porous medium 
infrastructure
the basic installations and facilities upon which the 
operation and growth of a community depend, such as 
roads; schools; electric, gas, and water utilities; 
transportation and communications systems; and so on
inoculation
the introduction of a pathogen or antigen into a living 
organism to stimulate the production of antibodies
500
Glossary o f Terms
inselberg
an isolated mountain or granite outcropping 
isohyet
a line on a map or chart indicating equal rainfall 
international dollars
values obtained using special conversion factors that 
equalize the purchasing powers of different currencies 
(i.e., the number of units of a country’s currency required 
to buy the same amounts of goods and services in the 
domestic market as $ 1  would buy in the “average” 
country), thus equalizing dollar prices in every country so 
that cross-country comparisons of GDP reflect differences 
in quantities of goods and services free of price-level 
differentials
isotherms
geographic bands of similar temperatures 
keystone species
a species that has a central servicing role affecting many 
other organisms and whose demise is likely to result in the 
loss of a number of species and lead to major changes in 
ecosystem function
land nse
the purpose an area of the Earth is put to (e.g., agriculture, 
forestry, urban dwellings, or transportation corridors) or its 
character (e.g., swamp, grassland, or desert)
lapse rate
the rate of temperature decrease with increase in altitude 
leaching
the removal of soil elements or applied chemicals through 
percolation
legume
plants that through a symbiotic relationship with soil 
bacteria are able to fix nitrogen from the air (e.g., peas, 
beans, alfalfa, clovers)
lichen
symbiotic organisms consisting of an alga and fungus 
important to the weathering and breakdown of rocks
life-cycle cost
the cost of a good or service over its entire lifetime 
littoral zone
a coastal region; the shore zone between high and low 
watermarks
low emissivity
a property of materials that hinders or blocks the 
transmission of a particular band of radiation (e.g., that in 
the infrared)
macroeconomic
pertaining to a study of economics in terms of whole 
systems, especially with reference to general levels of 
output and income and to the interrelations among sectors 
of the economy
malaria
endemic or epidemic parasitic disease caused by species of 
the genus Plasmodium (protozoa) and transmitted by 
mosquitoes of the genus Auopheles; produces high fever 
attacks and systemic disorders, and kills ~ 2  million people 
every year
market equilibrium
the point at which demand for goods and services equals the 
supply; often described in terms of the level of prices, 
determined in a competitive market, that “clears” the market
market penetration
the percentage of all its potential purchasers to which a 
good or service is sold per unit time
miombo
deciduous tropical woodland and dry forest ecosystems 
dominated by trees in the genera Brachystegia, 
Julbernardia, and Isoberlinia of the family Fabaceae, 
subfamily Caesalpinioideae
mitigation
an anthropogenic intervention to reduce the emissions or 
enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases
monsoon
wind in the genereal atmospheric circulation typified by a 
seasonal persistent wind direction and by a pronounced 
change in direction from one season to the next
montane
the biogeographic zone made up of relatively moist, cool 
upland slopes below timberline and characterized by the 
presence of large evergreen trees as a dominant life form
mopane
woodland of Colophospermum mopane— a multi-purpose 
hardwood tree species used for fodder, house building, and 
fuelwood
moraine
an accumulation of Earth and stones carried and finally 
deposited by a glacier
morbidity
the rate of occurrence of disease or other health disorder 
within a population, taking account of the age-specific 
morbidity rates; health outcomes include, for example, 
chronic disease incidence or prevalence, rates of 
hospitalization, primary care consultations, disability-days 
(e.g., of lost work), and prevalence of symptoms
Glossary o f Terms
501
morphology
the form and structure of an organism or any of its parts 
morphometry
measurement of external form 
mortality
the rate of occurrence of death within a population within a 
specified time period; calculation of mortality takes account 
of age-specific death rates, and can thus yield measures of 
life expectancy and the extent of premature death
mycosis
infection with or disease caused by a fungus 
net ecosystem production
the net gain or loss of carbon from an ecosystem or region 
net primary production
the increase in plant biomass or carbon of a unit of a 
landscape; gross primary production (all carbon fixed 
through photosynthesis) minus plant respiration equals 
net primary production
nitrification
the oxidation of ammonium salts to nitrites and the further 
oxidation of nitrites to nitrates
N O ,
any of several oxides of nitrogen 
non-tidal wetlands
areas of land not subject to tidal influences where the water 
table is at or near the surface for some defined period of time, 
leading to unique physiochemical and biological processes 
and conditions characteristic of water-logged systems
northern wetlands
wetlands in the boreal, subarctic, and arctic regions of the 
northern hemisphere
obligate species
species restricted to one particularly characteristic mode of life 
orography
the branch of physical geography that deals with mountains 
and mountain systems
pack ice
any area of sea, river, or lake ice other than fast ice 
paleoecology
the branch of ecology concerned with identifying and 
interpreting the relationships of ancient plants and animals 
to their environment
paludism
malaria
pancake ice
new ice about 0.3 to 3 m in diameter, with raised rims about 
the circumference from striking other pieces
peat
unconsolidated soil material consisting largely of partially 
decomposed organic matter accumulated under conditions 
of excess moisture or other conditions that decrease 
decomposition rates
pelagic
of, relating to, or living or occurring in the open sea 
perennial plants
plants that persist for several years, usually with new 
herbaceous growth from a perennating part
permafrost
perennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the 
temperature remains below 0°C for several years
phenology
the study of natural phenomena that recur periodically (e.g., 
blooming, migrating) and their relation to climate and 
seasonal changes
photochemical smog
a mix of photochemical oxidant air pollutants produced by 
the reaction of sunlight with primary air pollutants
photoperiodic response
response to the lengths of alternating periods of light and 
dark as they affect the timing of development
physiographic
of, relating to, or employing a description of nature or 
natural phenomena
phytophagous insects
insects that feed on plants
potential évapotranspiration
maximum quantity of water capable of being evaporated in 
a given climate from a continuous stretch of vegetation (i.e., 
includes evaporation from the soil and transpiration from 
the vegetation of a specified region in a given time interval, 
expressed as depth)
potential production
estimated production of a crop under conditions when 
nutrients and water are available at optimum levels for 
plant growth and development; other conditions such as 
daylength, temperature, soil characteristics, etc., determined 
by site characteristics
prevalence
the proportion of persons within a population who are 
currently affected by a particular disease
502
Glossary o f Terms
primary energy
the energy that is embodied in resources as they exist in 
nature (e.g., coal, crude oil, natural gas, uranium, or sunlight); 
the energy that has not undergone any sort of conversion
purchasing power parity (PPP)
GDP estimates based on the purchasing power of currencies 
rather than on current exchange rates; such estimates are a 
blend of extrapolated and regression-based numbers, using 
the results of the International Comparison Program (ICP); 
PPP estimates tend to lower per capita GDPs in industrial­
ized countries and raise per capita GDPs in developing 
countries
radiative forcing
a change in average net radiation at the top of the troposphere 
resulting from a change in either solar or infrared radiation 
due to a change in atmospheric greenhouse gases 
concentrations; perturbance in the balance between 
incoming solar radiation and outgoing infrared radiation
rangeland
unimproved grasslands, shrublands, savannas, and tundra 
reference scenario
the set of predicted levels of economic growth, energy 
production and consumption, and greenhouse gas emissions 
(and underlying assumptions) with which other scenarios 
examining various policy options are compared
reforestation
forest stands established artificially on lands that have 
supported forests within the last 50 years
reserves
those occurrences of energy sources or minerals that are 
identified and measured as economically and technically 
recoverable with current technologies and prices
resources
those occurrences of energy sources or minerals with less 
certain geological and/or economic/technical recoverability 
characteristics, but that are considered to become potentially 
recoverable with foreseeable technological and economic 
development
respiration
the metabolic process by which organisms meet their 
internal energy needs and release CO 2
riparian
relating to or living or located on the bank of a natural 
watercourse (as a river) or sometimes of a lake or a tidewater
runoff
water (from precipitation or irrigation) that does not 
evaporate or seep into the soil but flows into rivers, streams, 
or lakes, and may carry sediment
ruderal
pertaining to or inhabiting highly disturbed sites; weedy 
salinization
the accumulation of salts in soils 
saltation
the transportation of particles by currents of water or wind 
in such a manner that they move along in a series of short 
intermittent leaps
seasonal climate
a climate characterized by both warm and cold periods 
through the year
semi-arid lands
ecosystems that have >250 mm precipitation per year, but 
are not highly productive; usually classified as rangelands
senescence
the growth phase in a plant or plant part (as a leaf) from full 
maturity to death
sensitivity
the degree to which a system will respond to a change in 
climatic conditions (e.g., the extent of change in ecosystem 
composition, structure and functioning, including net 
primary productivity, resulting from a given change in 
temperature or precipitation)
sequestration
to separate, isolate or withdraw; usually refers to removal of 
CO 2  from atmosphere by plants or by technological measures
set-aside program
a generic term covering a variety of government programs—  
primarily in the U.S., Canada, and Europe that require farm­
ers to remove a portion of their acreage from production for 
purposes of controlling yield, soil conservation, etc.
shelterbelt
a natural or artificial forest maintained for protection against 
wind or snow
silt
unconsolidated or loose sedimentary material whose 
constituent rock particles are finer than grains of sand and 
larger than clay particles
slake
to cause to heat and crumble by treatment with water 
slip faces
the lee side of a dune where the slope approximates the 
angle of rest of loose sand (usually -33°)
smog
see photochemical
Glossary o f Terms
503
smolt
a young salmon or sea trout about two years old that is at 
the stage of development when it assumes the silvery color 
of the adult and is ready to migrate to the sea
snowpacks
a seasonal accumulation of slow-melting snow 
soil erosion
the process of removal and transport of the soil by water 
and/or wind
southern oscillation
a large-scale atmospheric and hydrospheric fluctuation 
centered in the equatorial Pacific Ocean; exhibits a nearly 
annual pressure anomaly, alternatively high over the Indian 
Ocean and high over the South Pacific; its period is slightly 
variable, averaging 2.33 years; the variation in pressure is 
accompanied by variations in wind strengths, ocean 
currents, sea- surface temperatures, and precipitation in 
the surrounding areas
sphagnum moss
a genus of moss that covers large areas of wetlands in the 
northern hemisphere; sphagnum debris is usually a major 
constituent of the peat in these areas
stakeholders
person or entity holding grants, concessions, or any other 
type of value which would be affected by a particular action 
or policy
stochastic events
events involving a random variable, chance, or probability 
stomata
the minute openings in the epidermis of leaves through 
which gases interchange between the atmosphere and the 
intercellular spaces within leaves
succession
transition in the composition of plant communities following 
disturbance
susceptibility
probability for an individual or population of being affected 
by an external factor
sustainable
a term used to characterize human action that can be 
undertaken in such a manner as to not adversely affect 
environmental conditions (e.g., soil, water quality, climate) 
that are necessary to support those same activities in the 
future
symbionts
organisms that live together to mutual benefit [e.g., 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria that live with a plant (legume)]
synoptic
relating to or displaying atmospheric and weather conditions 
as they exist simultaneously over a broad area
taiga
coniferous forests of northern North America and Eurasia 
talik
a layer of unfrozen ground occurring between permafrost 
and the active layer
technical calorie
the amount of heat needed to raise the temperature of 1  g of 
water 1°C at 15°C
thermohaline circulation
circulation driven by density gradients, which are controlled 
by temperature and salinity
thermokarst
irregular, hummocky topography in frozen ground caused 
by melting of ice
thermophilic species
species growing at high temperatures
timberline
the upper limit of tree growth in mountains or high latitudes 
transpiration
the emission of water vapor from the surfaces of leaves or 
other plant parts
tsunami
a large tidal wave produced by a submarine earthquake, 
landslide, or volcanic eruption
ungulate
a hoofed typically herbivorous quadruped mammal (as a 
ruminant, swine, camel, hippopotamus, horse, tapir, 
rhinoceros, elephant, or hyrax)
upwelling
transport of deeper water to the surface, usually caused by 
horizontal movements of surface water
urbanization
the conversion of land from a natural state or managed 
natural state (such as agriculture) to cities
vector
an organism, such as an insect, that transmits a pathogen 
from one host to another
vernalization
the act or process of hastening the flowering and fruiting of 
plants by treating seeds, bulbs, or seedlings so as to induce a 
shortening of the vegetative period
504
Glossary o f Terms
vulnerability
the extent to which climate change may damage or harm a 
system; it depends not only on a system’s sensitivity, but 
also on its ability to adapt to new climatic conditions
wadi
a water course that is dry except during the rainy season; the 
stream or flush that runs through it
water-use efficiency
carbon gain in photosynthesis per unit water lost in 
évapotranspiration; can be expressed on a short-term basis 
as the ratio of photosynthetic carbon gain per unit 
transpirational water loss, or on a seasonal basis as the ratio 
of net primary production or agricultural yield to the amount 
of available water
winter dormancy
period without biochemical activity in plant tissues 
xeric
requiring only a small amount of moisture 
xerophyte
a plant structurally adapted for life and growth with a 
limited water supply, especially by means of mechanisms 
that limit transpiration or that provide for the storage of 
water
G
Acronyms, Chemical Symbols, and Units
ACRONYM S
506
Acronyms, Chemical Symbols, and Units
3-D
3-dimensionaI
EU
European Union
ACCS
African Climate Change Scenario
EWS
early-warning system
ADB
Asian Development Bank
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization
aET
actual évapotranspiration
FAR
First Assessment Report
AIM
Asian-Pacific Integrated Model
FASOM
Forest and Agricultural Sector
AOGCM
atmosphere-ocean general circulation model
Optimization Model
AUS
Australia
FCCC
Framework Convention on Climate Change
BBS
Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency
BCTE
Bureau of Transport and Communications
(United States)
Economics (Australia)
FSU
former Soviet Union
BMRC
Bureau of Meteorology Research Centre
GCM
general circulation model
(Australia)
GDP
gross domestic product
BNJST
Bangladesh-Nepal Joint Study Team
GEF
Global Environment Facility
BP
before present
GEO
Global Environment Outlook
BRS
Bureau of Resource Sciences
GFDL
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
CAP
Common Agricultural Policy
GHG
greenhouse gas
CAST
Council for Agricultural Science and
GIS
Geographic Information Systems
Technology
GISS
Goddard Institute for Space Studies
CCC
Canadian Climate Centre
GLASOD
Global Assessment of Soil Degradation
CCIRG
Climate Change Impacts Review Group
GLOF
glacial lake outburst flood
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and
GLSLB
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Basin Project
Prevention
GNP
gross national product
CDEA
Commission on Development and
GOB
Government of Bangladesh
Environment for Amazonia
GOI
Government of India
CERES
Clouds and Earth’s Radiant Energy
GTZ
Gesellschaft fiir Technische
System
Zusammenarbeit (Germany)
CNA
Central North America
GVA
Global Vulnerability Analysis
COP
Conference of the Parties
GVM
global vegetation model
CPUE
catch-per-unit-effort
GYC
general yield class
CSIRO
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
HEWS
health early warning systems
Research Organization
HIV
human immunodeficiency virus
CZMP
coastal zone management plan
HMGN
His M ajesty’s Government of Nepal
DENR
Department of Environment and Natural
HSSW
high-salinity shelf water
Resources
ICIMOD
International Centre for Integrated
DEST
Department of Environment, Sport and
Mountain Development
Territories (Australia)
ICLARM
International Center for Living Aquatic
DGVM
dynamic global vegetation model
Resources Management
DHF
dengue hemorrhagic fever
ICST
Ivorian Country Study Team
DH-MWR
Department of Hydrology, Ministry of
ICZM
integrated coastal zone management
Water Resources (China)
IDRC
International Development Research
DJF
winter (December-January-February)—
Centre
Northern Hemisphere
IIASA
International Institute for Applied
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
Systems Analysis
DOC
dissolved organic carbon
IMAGE
Integrated Model to Assess the
DTR
diurnal temperature range
Greenhouse Effect
EAS
East Asia
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
ECHAM
European Centre/Hamburg Model
Change
ECSN
European Climate Support Network
IQQM
Integrated Quantity and Quality Model
EEZ
exclusive economic zone
IRC
Insurance Research Council
EN
El Nino
IRRI
International Rice Research Institute
ENSO
El Nino-Southern Oscillation
ISPAN
Irrigation Support Project for Asia and the
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for
Near-East
Asia and the Pacific
ITCZ
Inter-Tropical Convergence Zone
ESD-CAS
Earth Science Division, Chinese Academy
lUCN
International Union for the Conservation
of Sciences
of Nature and Natural Resources
Acronyms, Chemical Symbols, and Units
507
JJA
summer (June-July-August)— Northern
R
runoff
Hemisphere
RCM
regional climate model
LAI
leaf area index
RMA
Resource Management Act (New Zealand)
LLNL
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
RMSF
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
LPG
liquefied petroleum gas
SAARC
South Asian Association for Regional
MAPSS
Mapped Atmosphere-Plant-Soil System
Cooperation
MARA/ARMA
Mapping Malaria Risk in Africa
SACZ
South Atlantic Convergence Zone
MBIS
Mackenzie Basin Impact Study
SADC
Southern African Development
MERCOSUR
Mercado Comun del Sur/Common Market
Community
of the South
SAH
Sahel
MOPT
Ministerio de Obras Publicas y
SAR
Second Assessment Report
Transportes (Spain)
SARDC
Southern African Research and
MPI
Max-Planck Institut für Météorologie
Documentation Center
(Germany)
SBSTA
Subsidiary Body for Scientific and
MRI
Meteorological Research Institute (Japan)
Technological Advice
NAAQS
National Ambient Air Quality Standard
SEA
South East Asia
(United States)
SEU
Southern Europe
NCAR
National Center for Atmospheric
SO
Southern Oscillation
Research (United States)
SOI
Southern Oscillation Index
NEU
Nothern Europe
SPCZ
South Pacific Convergence Zone
NGO
non-governmental organization
SPREP
South Pacific Regional Environment
NRC
National Research Council (United States)
Programme
NSW
New South Wales
SSA
sub-Saharan Africa
NWR
National Wildlife Refuge
SST
sea-surface temperature
NWT
Northwest Territories
T
temperature
OECD
Organisation for Economic Cooperation
TAR
Third Assessment Report
and Development
T
daily maximum temperature
OIES
Office for Interdisciplinary Earth Studies
TMF
tropical moist forest
ORNL
Oak Ridge National Laboratory
T„i„
daily minimum temperature
(United States)
UKMO
United Kingdom Meteorological Office
OSU
Oregon State University
UN
United Nations
OTA
Office of Technology Assessment
UNEP
UN Environment Programme
(United States)
UNESCO
UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural
P
precipitation
Organization
PAA
Port Autonome d’Abidjan
UNFCCC
UN Framework Convention on Climate
РАНО
Pan American Health Organization
Change
PAN
peroxyacetal nitrate
USCSP
U.S. Country Studies Program
PCCC
Proyecto Centroamericano de Cambios
USDA
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Climaticos
USEPA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
PCSD
The President’s Council on Sustainable
UV-B
ultraviolet-B
Development
VBD
vector-borne disease
PE
potential evaporation
VEMAP
Vegetation/Ecosystem Modeling and
PEI
precipitation effectiveness index
Analysis Project
pET
potential évapotranspiration
WFC
UN World Food Council
PrPET
precipitation:potential évapotranspiration
WG
Working Group
PPP
purchasing power parity
WHO
World Health Organization
Pr
precipitation
WMO
World Meteorological Organization
PV
photovoltaic
WRI
World Resources Institute
PWWS
Philadelphia Hot Weather-Health
WSC
Weddell Scotia Confluence
Watch/Warning System
WUE
water-use efficiency
C H EM IC A L SYM BOLS
С
carbon
N
nitrogen
CH 4
methane
NO,
nitrogen oxide
CO 2
carbon dioxide
NjO
nitrous oxide
Ü2
molecular hydrogen
508
UNITS
Acronyms, Chemical Symbols, and Units
SI (Système Internationale) Units
Physical Quantity
Name of Unit
Symbol
length
meter
m
mass
kilogram
kg
time
second
s
thermodynamic temperature
kelvin
К
amount of substance
mole
mol
Fraction
Prefix
Symbol
Multiple
Prefix
Symbol
1 0 - 1
deci
d
1 0
deca
da
1 0 - 2
centi
с
1 0 2
hecto
h
10-3
milli
m
103
kilo
к
1 0 - 6
micro
В
1 0 ®
mega
M
10-9
nano
n
109
giga
G
1 0 - 1 2
pico
P
1 0 1 2
tera
T
10-15
femto
f
1015
peta
P
10-18
atto
a
1018
exa
E
Special Names and Symbols fo r Certain Si-Derived Units
Physical Quantity
Name of SI Unit
Symbol for SI Unit
Definition of Unit
force
newton
N
kg m s- 2
pressure
pascal
Pa
kg m-i s-2 (= Nm-2)
energy
joule
J
kg m 2 s- 2
power
watt
W
kg m2 s-3 (= Js-i)
frequency
hertz
Hz
s-i (cycle per second)
Decimal Fractions and Multiples o f SI Units H aving Special Names
Physical Quantity
Name of Unit
Symbol for Unit
Definition of Unit
length
ângstrom
Â
1 0 - 1 0  m = 1 0 -8cm
length
micrometer
fim
1
0 ®m = p m
area
hectare
ha
104 m 2
force
dyne
dyn
10-5 N
pressure
bar
bar
105 N m-2
pressure
millibar
mb
IhPa
weight
ton
t
103 kg
Non-SI Units
°C 
degrees Celsius (0°C = -273K); Temperature
differences are also given in °C rather than the 
more correct form of “Celsius degrees”
Btu 
British Thermal Unit
kWh 
kilowatt-hour
MWj 
megawatts of electricity
ppmv 
parts per million ( 1 0 ®) by volume
ppbv 
parts per billion (lO^) by volume
pptv 
parts per trillion (IO 1 2) by volume
tee 
tons of coal equivalent
toe 
tons of oil equivalent
tWh 
terawatt-hour
H
Authors, Contributors,
and Expert Reviewers of the
Regional Impacts Special Report
510
Authors, Contributors, and Expert Reviewers o f the Regional Impacts Special Report
Argentina
Vicente Barros
Marcelo Cabido
Osvaldo F. Canziani
Rodolfo Carcavallo 
Sandra Diaz
Gillermo Funes
Juan Carlos Labraga
Carlos A. Rinaldi 
Walter M. Vargas
Ernesto F. Viglizzo
Austria
Klaus Radunsky 
Shokri Ghanem
Australia
N. Abel 
M.R Austin 
S. Barlow 
M. Barson 
Bryson Bates 
P. Beggs 
D. Bennett 
D. Black
R. Braaf 
R. Braithwaite 
R. Buxton 
J. Carter
J. Conroy 
Elizabeth Curran 
S. Davies 
L. Dobes
Terry Done
M. Finlayson 
Roger M. Gifford 
Angela Gillman 
Habiba Gitay 
Dean Graetz
N. Hall
Kevin Hennessy 
N. Holbrook
University of Buenos Aires, 
Department of Atmospheric Sciences 
Universidad Nacional de Cordoba 
(CONICET), Instituto 
Multidisciplinario de Biologia 
Vegetal
Instituto de Estudios e 
Investigaciones (lEIMA) 
Department of Entomology 
Universidad Nacional de Cordoba 
(CONICET), Instituto 
Multidisciplinario de Biologia 
Vegetal
Universidad Nacional de Cordoba 
(CONICET), Catedra de 
Biogeografia
Universidad Nacional de Cordoba 
(CONICET)
Instiuto Antarctico Argentino 
University of Buenos Aires 
(lEIMA)
Universidad Nacional de 
Cordoba (CONICET)
Austrian Federal Environmental 
Agency
Organization of the Petroleum 
Exporting Countries
CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology 
CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
CSIRO
Macquarie University
Hassall and Associates
NSW Dept, of Land and Water
Conservation
Macquarie University
CSIRO Tourism Research Program
CSIRO Wildlife and Ecology
Queensland Department of Natural
Resources
University of Western Sydney 
Bureau of Meteorology 
University of Adelaide 
Bureau of Transport and 
Communication Economics 
Australian Institute of Marine 
Science
Environmental Research Institute 
CSIRO
Environment Australia 
Australian National University 
CSIRO Office of Space Science and 
Applications
Australian Bureau of Agricultural 
and Resource Economics 
CSIRO Atmospheric Research 
Macquarie University
David Hopley 
Mark Howden
B. Hunt 
W. Kininmonth
Miko Kirschbaum 
T. Koslow 
S. Lake 
S. Li 
J. Lutze 
N. Marshman
Gregory M. McKeon
Roger McLean 
Heather McMaster 
R.E. McMurtrie 
A. Moore 
Neville Nicholls
Ian Noble 
A. Norton 
W. Osborne 
Barrie Pittock 
Neil Plummer 
P. Reyenga 
H. Ross 
H. Schaap 
D. Smith
M. Stafford Smith 
W. Steffen 
R. Suppiah 
Robert Sutherst 
R. Taplin 
Brian H. Walker 
George R. Walker 
Y-P. Wang 
P. Waterman 
Peter Whetton
D. White 
Jann E. Williams 
T. Yonow
Bangladesh
M.Q. Mirza
Barbados
Leonard Nurse
Belgium
Renate Christ
Bolivia
Martin de Zuviria 
Brazil
Carlos C. Cerri 
Cleber Galvao
Canada
F. Andrey 
Mike Apps
James Cook University 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
CSIRO Atmospheric Research 
Bureau of Meteorology National 
Climate Centre
CSIRO Forestry and Forest Products 
CSIRO Division of Fisheries 
Monash University 
Macquarie University 
CSIRO Plant Industry 
Technical Services Australia 
(RTZ/CRA)
Queensland Department of Natural 
Resources
Australian Defence Force Academy
Macquarie University
University of NSW
CSIRQ Plant Industry
Bureau of Meteorology Research
Centre
Australian National University 
Charles Sturt University 
University of Canberra 
CSIRQ Climate Impact Group 
National Climate Centre 
Bureau of Resource Sciences 
Australian National University 
Electricity Supply Association 
Australian National University 
CSIRQ Wildlife and Ecology 
GCTE Core Project Qffice 
CSIRQ Atmospheric Research 
CSIRQ Division of Entomology 
Macquarie University 
CSIRQ Wildlife and Ecology 
Alexander Howden Reinsurance 
CSIRQ Atmospheric Research 
Environmental Management Services 
CSIRQ Division of Atmosphere 
Research
Agro-Ecosystems Consulting
Charles Stuart University
CRC for Tropical Pest Management
University of Waikato
Coastal Conservation Unit
European Commission
Universidade de Sao Paolo
University of Waterloo 
Canadian Forestry Service
Authors, Contributors, and Expert Reviewers o f the Regional Impacts Special Report
511
M. Brklacich
Carleton University
Finland
Ross Brown
Environment Canada
Timothy Carter
Finnish Meteorological Institute
Denis D’Amours
Department of Fisheries and
Kaija Hakala
Agricultural Research Center
Oceans
Timo Kaijaiainen
European Forest Institute
F. Diamond
Environment Canada
Peter Kuhry
Arctic Center
Kirsty Duncan
University of Windsor
Larry Dyke
Natural Resources Canada
France
Anne Gunn
Government Northwest Territories
Richard Delécolle
Unite de Bioclimatologie
Bob Jefferies
University of Toronto
Grace Koshida
Atmospheric Environment Service
Germany
John Legg
NRCan
Wolfgang Cramer
Potsdam Institute for Climate
Abdel R. Maarouf
Environment Canada
Impact Research
Jay Malcolm
University of Toronto
Georg Hermann
Kiel University
Dave Martell
University of Toronto
Venugopalan Ittekkot
University of Hamburg
Barrie Maxwell
Atmospheric Environment Service
Ferenc Toth
Potsdam Institute for Climate
Linda Mortsch
Environment Canada
Impact Research
Terry Root
Environment Canada
Brian Stocks
Canadian Forestry Service
India
Roger B. Street
Atmospheric Environment Service
Amrita Achanta
Climate Change Secretariat
Hague Vaughan
Canada Centre for Inland Waters
(UNFCCC)
Andrew J. Weaver
University of Victoria
Murari Lai
Centre for Atmospheric Sciences
S.K. Sinha
Indian Agricultural Research
Chile
Institute
Patricio Aceituno
University of Chile
Humberto Fuenzalida-Ponce
Universidad de Chile
Indonesia
Terence Lee
Economic Commission for Latin
Aprilani Soegiarto
Indonesian Institute of Sciences
America and the Caribbean
Sri Soewasti Soesanto
Health Ecology Research and
Development
China
Ding Yihui
China Meteorological
Iran
Administration
Bohloul Alijani
Liu Chunzhen
Hydrological Forecasting and
Water Control Center
Israel
Lin Erda
Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Uriel N. Safriel
The Blaustein Institute for Desert
Sciences
Research
Su Jilan
Second Institute of Oceanography
Italy
Costa Rica
R. Welcomme
FAO
Marcos Campos
Comision Centroamericana de
Ambiente y Desarollo
Japan
Hideo Harasawa
Center for Global Environmental
Cote d’Ivoire
Research
Sekou Touré
ENSTP
Nobuo Mimura
Ibaraki University
Tatsushi Tokioka
Japan Meteorological Agency
Cuba
Masatoshi Yoshino
Aichi University
Lino Naranjo Diaz
Ministry of Science, Technology,
and Environment
Kazakhstan
Ada L. Perez
Institute of Physical Planning
Olga Pilifosova
Climate Study Laboratory
Antonio J. Lopez Almiral
Ministry of Science, Technology,
and Environment
Kenya
Luis R. Paz
Ministry of Science, Technology,
K.A. Edwards
UN Environment Programme
and Environment
S.H. Mwandoto
Kenya Meteorological Department
Elias Ramirez Cruz
Ministry of Science, Technology,
Joseph Kagia Njihia
Kenya Meteorological Department
and Environment
Laban J. Ogallo
University of Nairobi
Leda Menendez Carreras
Institute of Ecology and Systematics
H.W.O. Okoth-Ogendo
The National Council for Population
Avelino G. Suarez
Institute of Ecology and Systematics
and Development
Peter Usher
UN Environment Programme
Czech Republic
Ivana Nemesova
Institute of Atmospheric Physics
Korea
Suam Kim
Korea Ocean Research and
Egypt
Development Institute
Mohamed El-Raey
Institute of Graduate Studies
Byong-Lyol Lee
National Institute of Agricultural
and Research
Sciences and Technology
512
Authors, Contributors, and Expert Reviewers o f the Regional Impacts Special Report
Malaysia 
Lim Joo Tick
Maldives
Mohamed Ali
Mexico
Carlos Gay-Garcia 
P. Grace
Ana Rosa Moreno 
Nepal
Sharad P. Adhikary
New Zealand
Reid E. Basher
Bruce D. Campbell
Blair Fitzharris 
J. Gibb 
S. Hales 
John Hay
C. Hickey
R. Ibbit.
Gavin J. Kenny 
R.Kirk 
Dick Martin 
Piers McLaren 
N. Mitchell 
T. Murray
L. Paul
J. Renwick
Richard Warrick
H. Weinstein 
David Whitehead
D. Wilson 
D. Wratt
Alastair Woodward 
Nigeria
Larry F. Awosika
Norway 
Egil Sakshaug
Papua New Guinea
Graham Sem
Peru
Eduardo Calvo
Malaysian Meteorological Service
Ministry of Planning, Natural 
Resources, and Environment
Environment Department 
International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center 
Pan American Health Organization
Water and Energy Commission 
Secretariat
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
AgResearch Grasslands Research 
Centre
University of Otago 
Coastal Management Consultants 
Wellington School of Medicine 
The University of Auckland 
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
University of Waikato 
University of Canterbury 
Crop and Food Research Institute 
Forest Research Institute 
University of Auckland 
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
University of Waikato 
Wellington School of Medicine 
Landcare Research 
Crop and Food Research Institute 
National Institute of Water and 
Atmospheric Research 
Wellington School of Medicine
Nigerian Institute for 
Oceanography and Marine 
Research
University of Trondheim
University of Papua New 
Guinea
Concejo Nacional del Ambiente
Philippines
Rex Victor Cruz
Russia
Kira I. Kobak
Scotland
Andrew D Dlugolecki
Senegal
Amadou Bachirou Diop
Sierra Leone
Ogunlade Davidson
Singapore
Poo Poo Wong
Slovenia
Andrej Kranjc
Zoran Stojic
South Africa
Timm Hoffman 
Alec Joubert 
A.C. Kruger 
Robert Scholes 
David le Sueur 
Colleen Voegel
Spain
Ana Iglesias
Sweden
UlfMolau 
Mats Oquist
I. 
Colin Prentice 
Benjamin Smith
Switzerland
Martin Beniston 
Hartmut Grassl 
John Innes
Thailand
Charit Tingsabadh
The Gambia
Bubu P. fallow
The Netherlands
Richard Klein
Rik Leemans
Pirn Martens 
Richard S.J. Toi
Pier Vellinga
University of Phillipines
State Hydrological Institute
General Accident, Fire, and 
Life Assurance Соф.
Ministère de l’Equipement
University of Sierra Leone
National University of Singapore
Hydrometeorological Institute 
of Slovenia
IBE Consulting Engineers
National Botanical Institute 
University of the Witwaterstrand 
South African Weather Bureau 
CSIRO
University of Natal 
University of the Witwatersrand
Ciudad Universitaria
University of Goteberg 
University of Agricultural Sciences 
University of Lund 
University of Lund
University of Fribourg 
World Meteorological Organization 
Swiss Federal Institute for Forest, 
Snow and Landscape Research
Chulalongkorn University
Department of Water Resources
Vrije Universiteit, Institute for 
Environmental Studies 
National Institute of Public Health 
and Environmental Protection 
Maastricht University 
Vrije Universiteit, Institute for 
Environmental Studies 
Vrije Universiteit, Institute for 
Environmental Studies
Authors, Contributors, and Expert Reviewers o f the Regional Impacts Special Report
513
Uganda
Eric L. Edroma
United Kingdom
Nigel Arnell 
Thomas E. Downing 
David Drewry 
Michael Hulme 
Sari Kovats
Anthony McMichael
John Mitchell 
Robert Nicholls 
Jim Skea 
David Viner 
Eric Wolff
United States
Richard Adams 
Richard Ball 
Susan Bassow 
Heather Benway
Paul Berkman 
Julio Betancourt 
Suzanne Bolton 
Jerry Brown 
David J. Campbell 
Lee De Cola 
Doug Demaster 
Barbara Allen-Diaz 
Paul Desanker 
Robert Dixon 
David Jon Dokken 
Linda Duguay 
Jerry Elwood 
Paul R. Epstein 
John Everett
Paul Filmer 
Penny Firth 
Ann Fisher 
Mary Gant 
Filippo Giorgi
Miquel A. Gonzalez-Meler 
Christy Goodale 
James A. Graham 
David Goodrich
Anne Grambsch 
John F. Griffiths 
Duane Gubler 
Ronald Heilman 
Roger Hewitt 
Harry J Hillaker, Jr. 
William Hunt 
Robert B. Jackson 
Anthony Janetos 
Jennifer Jenkins 
Linda Joyce
Uganda Institute of Ecology
University of Southampton 
University of Oxford 
NERC
University of East Anglia 
London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine 
London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine 
Hadley Center 
Middlesex University 
University of Sussex 
University of East Anglia 
British Antarctic Survey
Oregon State University
Department of Energy
Office of Science and Technology Policy
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Ohio State University
U.S. Geological Survey
National Marine Fisheries Service
International Permafrost Association
Michigan State University
U.S. Geological Survey
National Marine Fisheries Service
University of California, Berkeley
Michigan Technological University
U.S. Country Studies
IPCC Working Group II TSU
National Science Foundation
Department of Energy
Harvard Medical School
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
National Science Foundation
National Science Foundation
Pennsylvania State University
HHS/NIEHS
National Center for Atmospheric
Research
Duke University
University of New Hampshire
USAID/CARPE
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration
Environmental Protection Agency 
Texas A&M University 
Centers for Disease Control 
City University of New York 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Iowa State Climatologist 
Colorado State University 
University of Texas at Austin 
NASA
University of New Hampshire 
Rocky Mountain Forest and Range 
Experiment Station
Sally Kane
Thomas Karl 
Barry D. Keim 
John Kelmelis 
Mary Kidwell 
Timothy Kittel
Kalee Kreider 
Neil Leary
Alice Welsh Leeds 
Frances Li
Michael C. MacCracken
Norman MacDonald 
George Maul 
Herman Mayeux 
Mack McFarland 
Laura VanWie McGrory 
David McGuire 
Steven McNulty 
Gerald Meehl
Robert Mendelsohn 
Richard Moss 
Patrick Mulholland 
Ron Neilson
Richard J. Norby 
Dennis Ojima
Scott Ollinger 
Michael C. Oppenheimer 
Florence Ormond 
Jonathan A. Patz
Charles J. Peckham 
Wayne Polley 
Wilfred Mac Post 
Bradley Reed 
John Reilly 
Alan Robock 
Michael J. Sale 
Joel D. Scheraga
Miranda Schreurs 
Michael Scott
Clive Shiff 
David Smith 
Joel B. Smith 
David Shriner 
Allen Solomon
Christopher C. Spaur 
Eugene Stakhiv 
Ron Stouffer 
Kenneth Strzepek 
Regina Tannon
Melissa Taylor
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration
U.S. Department of Commerce 
University of New Hampshire 
Department of Interior 
University of Arizona 
National Center for Atmospheric 
Research
Greenpeace USA Climate Campaign 
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency
National Science Foundation 
National Science Foundation 
U.S.Global Change Research 
Program
Certified Consulting Meteorologist 
Florida Institute of Technology 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
IPCC Working Group II TSU 
IPCC Working Group II TSU 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
National Center for Atmospheric 
Research 
Yale University 
IPCC Working Group II TSU 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
U.S.Department of Agriculture 
Forest Service
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
Natural Resource Ecology 
Labaratory (NREL)
University of New Hampshire 
Environmental Defense Fund 
IPCC Working Group II TSU 
Johns Hopkins School of Public 
Health 
LMR, Inc.
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
EROS Data Center 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
University of Maryland 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency
University of Maryland 
Battelle Pacific Northwest 
Laboratory
John Hopkins University 
Universtiy Museum 
RCG/Hagler, Bailly, Inc 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
University of Colorado 
University Coфoration Atmospheric 
Research
U.S.Global Change Research 
Program
514
Authors, Contributors, and Expert Reviewers o f the Regional Impacts Special Report
David Theobald
Colorado State University
Venezuela
James Titus
U.S. Environmental Protection
Rigoberto Andressen
University of Merida
Agency
Luis J. Mata
UNFCCC Secretariat
Cynthia Tynan
National Marine Fisheries Service
Martha Perdomo
Ministerio del Ambiente
Anandu D. Vemekar
University of Maryland
Wei-Chyung Wang
State University of New York,
Western Samoa
Albany
James Aston
South Pacific Regional Environment
Elizabeth C. Weatherhead
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Program
Administration
Zimbabwe
Thompson Webb III
Brown University
Chris H.D. Magadza
Universitry of Zimbabwe
Gunter Weller
University of Alaska/Fairbanks
Wish Marume
Department of Meteorological
Wayne M. Wendland
Illinois State Water Survey
Services
Tom Wigley
University Corporation for
Shakespeare Maya
Southern Centre for Energy and
Atmospheric Research
Environment
Gunter Weller
University of Alaska
L.S. Unganai
Department of Meteorological
Mark Weltz
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Services
David Yates
University Coфoration for
Marufu C. Zinyowera
Department of Meteorological
Atmospheric Research
Services
Uruguay
Andrés Saizar
Ministry of Housing, Territorial
Ordering, and Environment
I
List of Major IPCC Reports
516 
List o f M ajor IPCC Reports
Climate Change— The IPCC Scientific Assessment
The 1990 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Climate Change— ^The IPCC Impacts Assessment
The 1990 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Climate Change— The IPCC Response Strategies
The 1990 Report of the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group (also in Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Emissions Scenarios
Prepared for the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group, 1990
Assessment of the Vulnerahility of Coastal Areas to Sea Level R ise-A  Common Methodology
1991 (also in Arabic and French)
Climate Change 1992— The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Scientific Assessment
The 1992 Report of the IPCC Scientific Assessment Working Group
Climate Change 1992— The Supplementary Report to the IPCC Impacts Assessment
The 1992 Report of the IPCC Impacts Assessment Working Group
Climate Change: The IPCC 1990 and 1992 Assessments
IPCC First Assessment Report Overview and Policymaker Summaries, and 1992 IPCC Supplement 
Global Climate Change and the Rising Challenge of the Sea
Coastal Zone Management Subgroup of the IPCC Response Strategies Working Group, 1992
Report of the IPCC Country Studies Workshop
1992
Preliminary Guidelines for Assessing Impacts of Climate Change
1992
IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories
Three volumes, 1994 (also in French, Russian, and Spanish)
IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate Change Impacts and Adaptations
1995 (also in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Climate Change 1994— Radiative Forcing of Climate Change and an Evaluation of the IPCC IS92 Emission Scenarios
1995
Climate Change 1995— The Science of Climate Change -  Contribution of Working Group I 
to the Second Assessment Report
1996
Climate Change 1995— Impacts, Adaptations, and Mitigation of Climate Change: Scientific-Technical Analyses -  
Contribution of Working Group II to the Second Assessment Report
1996
Climate Change 1995— Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change -  Contribution of Working Group III 
to the Second Assessment Report
1996
Climate Change 1995— IPCC Second Assessment Synthesis of Scientific-Technical Information Relevant to Interpreting 
Article 2 of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
1996 (also in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish)
Technologies, Policies, and Measures for Mitigating Climate Change -  IPCC Technical Paper I
1996 (also in French and Spanish)
An Introduction to Simple Climate Models used in the IPCC Second Assessment Report -  IPCC Technical Paper II
1997 (also in French and Spanish)
Stabilization of Atmospheric Greenhouse Gases: Physical, Biological and Socio-economic Implications -  
IPCC Technical Paper III
1997 (also in French and Spanish)
Implications of Proposed CO 2  Emissions Limitations -  IPCC Technical Paper IV
1997 (also in French and Spanish)
E n q u i r i e s : IPCC Secretariat, c/o World Meteorological Organization, P.O. Box 2300, CH1211, Geneva 2, Switzerland.
I
List o f M ajor IPCC Reports 
5 17
The degree to which human conditions and the natural environment are vulnerable to the 
potential effects of climate change is a key concern for governments and the environmental 
science community worldwide. To provide the best available base of scientific information for 
policymakers and public use, governments requested that the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) prepare this assessment of the vulnerability of different regions of the 
world. The Regional Impacts of Climate Change: A n  Assessment of Vulnerability reviews state-of- 
the-art information on potential impacts of climate change for ecological systems, water sup­
ply, food production, coastal infrastructure, human health, and other resources for ten global 
regions:
* Africa
* Australasia
* Latin America
* North America
* Temperate Asia
* The Arctic and the Antarctic
* Europe
* Middle East and Arid Asia
* Small Island States
* Tropical Asia
This assessment reveals that human health, ecological systems, and socioeconomic sectors are 
vulnerable to changes in climate, including the magnitude and rate of climate change, as well 
as to changes in climate variability. It also illustrates that the increasing costs of climate and 
climate variability, in terms of loss of human life and capital due to floods, storms, and 
droughts, are a result of the lack of adjustment and response in society's policies and use of 
resources. This book points to management options that would make many sectors more 
resilient to current variability in climate and thus help these sectors adapt to future changes 
in climate.
The assessment of each region's vulnerability to climate change shares a common structure to 
facilitate comparison of information. The focus is on sensitivity, adaptation options, critical 
zones, and especially vulnerable regions/cormtries or sectors/resources. The regional assess­
ments have been prepared by leading researchers. The report is based on information con­
tained in the IPCC Second Assessment Report and integrates the most recent research on the 
topics affecting these regions.
This book will become the primary source of information on regional aspects 
of climate change for policymakers, the scientific commimity, and students.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was set up jointly by the World 
Meteorological Organization and the United Nations Environment Programme to provide 
an authoritative international statement of scientific opinion on climate change.
Regional Impacts of Climate Change is the first of four Special Reports to be prepared by the 
IPCC at the request of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
