 
 
 
2006 IPCC GUIDELINES FOR 
NATIONAL GREENHOUSE GAS 
INVENTORIES  
OVERVIEW 
Overview 
2 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Authors 
Jim Penman (UK), Michael Gytarsky (Russia), Taka Hiraishi (Japan), William Irving (USA),  
and Thelma Krug (Brazil) 
 
Overview 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
3 
Contents 
Overview 
1 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................ 4 
2 
Coverage of the Guidelines .................................................................................................................... 5 
3 
Approach to developing the Guidelines ................................................................................................. 8 
4 
Structure of the Guidelines ..................................................................................................................... 9 
5 
Specific developments in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines ........................................................................... 10 
 
Figures 
Figure 1  
Main categories of emissions by sources and removals by sinks ........................................... 6 
Figure 2  
Example Decision Tree (for CH4 and N2O from Road Transport) ......................................... 9 
 
Tables 
Table 1   
Contents of 2006 Guidelines .................................................................................................. 5 
Table 2   
Gases for which GWP values are available in the TAR ......................................................... 7 
Table 3   
Additional gases for which GWP values are not available in the TAR .................................. 7 
Table 4   
General structure of sectoral guidance chapters ................................................................... 10 
 
Overview 
4 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2006 IPCC Guidelines) provide 
methodologies for estimating national inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks 
of greenhouse gases. The 2006 IPCC Guidelines were prepared in response to an invitation by the Parties to the 
UNFCCC. They may assist Parties in fulfilling their commitments under the UNFCCC on reporting on 
inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases not controlled by 
the Montreal Protocol, as agreed by the Parties. The 2006 IPCC Guidelines are in five volumes. Volume 1 
describes the basic steps in inventory development and offers the general guidance in greenhouse gas emissions 
and removals estimates based on the authors’ understanding of accumulated experiences of countries over the 
period since the late 1980s, when national greenhouse gas inventories started to appear in significant numbers. 
Volumes 2 to 5 offer the guidance for estimates in different sectors of economy.  
The IPCC has previously developed the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories1 (1996 IPCC Guidelines), together with the Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management 
in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories2 (GPG2000) and the Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-Use 
Change and Forestry3 (GPG-LULUCF). Taken together, they provide internationally agreed4 methodologies that 
countries currently use to estimate greenhouse gas inventories to report to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The three-volume 1996 IPCC Guidelines define the coverage of the 
national inventory in terms of gases and categories of emissions by sources and removals by sinks, and the 
GPG2000 and GPG-LULUCF provide additional guidance on choice of estimation methodology, improvements 
of the methods, as well as advice on cross-cutting issues, including estimation of uncertainties, time series 
consistency and quality assurance and quality control. 
At its seventeenth session, held in New Delhi in 2002, the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological 
Advice (SBSTA) under the UNFCCC invited the IPCC to revise the 1996 IPCC Guidelines, taking into 
consideration the relevant work under the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol5, with the aim of completing the 
work by early 2006.  
In response to the UNFCCC’s invitation, the IPCC, at its 20th session in Paris, in February 2003, initiated a 
process that led to an agreement at its 21st session (in Vienna, November 2003) of Terms of Reference, Table of 
Contents and a Workplan6 for the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. The Workplan aimed to complete the task in time for 
adoption and acceptance at the 25th session of the IPCC, in April 2006. The Terms of Reference specified that 
the revision should be based on, inter alia, the 1996 IPCC Guidelines, GPG2000, GPG-LULUCF, and 
experiences from the UNFCCC technical inventory review process. 
 
 
                                                           
1  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (1997). Houghton J.T., Meira Filho L.G., Lim B., Tréanton K., 
Mamaty I., Bonduki Y., Griggs D.J. and Callander B.A. (Eds). Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse 
Inventories. IPCC/OECD/IEA, Paris, France.  
2  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2000). Penman J., Kruger D., Galbally I., Hiraishi T., Nyenzi B., 
Emmanuel S., Buendia L., Hoppaus R., Martinsen T., Meijer J., Miwa K., and Tanabe K. (Eds). Good Practice Guidance 
and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. IPCC/OECD/IEA/IGES, Hayama, Japan. 
3  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (2003). Penman J., Gytarsky M., Hiraishi T., Krug, T., Kruger D., 
Pipatti R., Buendia L., Miwa K., Ngara T., Tanabe K., and Wagner F (Eds). Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, land-
Use Change and Forestry IPCC/IGES, Hayama, Japan. 
4 See the Report of the Fourth Session of the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice 
(FCCC/SBSTA/1996/20), paragraph 30; decisions 2/CP.3 and 3/CP.5 (UNFCCC reporting guidelines for preparation of 
national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention, part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on 
annual inventories), decision 18/CP.8, revising the guidelines adopted under decisions 3/CP.5, and 17/CP.8 adopting 
improved guidelines for the preparation of national communications from Parties not included in Annex I to the 
Convention, and subsequent decisions 13/CP.9 and Draft Decision /CP.10. 
5  Including, inter alia, work by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice and the Subsidiary Body for 
Implementation, and by the Consultative Group of Experts on National Communications from Parties not included in 
Annex I to the Convention, and the technical review of greenhouse gas inventories of Annex I Parties.  
6  The Terms of Reference, Table of Contents and Work plan can be found at http://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/. 
 
Overview 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
5 
2 COVERAGE OF THE GUIDELINES 
Table 1 shows the contents of the five volumes that make up the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Estimation methods are 
provided for the gases shown in Tables 2 and 3, and cover the categories shown in Figure 1. Reporting is 
described in Chapter 8 of Volume 1. Coverage is complete for all greenhouse gases not covered by the Montreal 
Protocol, for which the IPCC, at the time of writing, provided a global warming potential (GWP)7.  
TABLE 1   
CONTENTS OF 2006 GUIDELINES 
Volumes 
Chapters 
1 -  General Guidance and 
Reporting 
1. Introduction to the 2006 Guidelines 
2. Approaches to Data Collection 
3. Uncertainties 
4. Methodological Choice and Identification of Key Categories 
5. Time Series Consistency  
6. Quality Assurance/Quality Control and Verification 
7. Precursors and Indirect Emissions 
8. Reporting Guidance and Tables 
2 -  Energy 
1. Introduction 
2. Stationary Combustion 
3. Mobile Combustion 
4. Fugitive Emissions 
5. CO2 Transport, Injection and Geological Storage 
6. Reference Approach  
3 -  Industrial Processes and 
Product Use 
1. Introduction 
2. Mineral Industry Emissions 
3. Chemical Industry Emissions 
4. Metal Industry Emissions 
5. Non-Energy Products from Fuels and Solvent Use 
6. Electronics Industry Emissions 
7. Emissions of Fluorinated Substitutes for Ozone Depleting Substances 
8. Other Product Manufacture and Use 
4 -  Agriculture, Forestry and 
Other Land Use 
1. 
Introduction  
2. 
Generic Methodologies Applicable to Multiple Land-use Categories  
3. 
Consistent Representation of Lands 
4. 
Forest Land 
5. 
Cropland  
6. 
Grassland 
7. 
Wetlands 
8. 
Settlements 
9. 
Other Land 
10. 
Emissions from Livestock and Manure Management 
11. 
N2O Emissions from Managed Soils, and CO2 Emissions from Lime 
and Urea Application 
12. 
Harvested Wood Products 
5 -  Waste 
1. Introduction 
2. Waste Generation, Composition and Management Data 
3. Solid Waste Disposal 
4. Biological Treatment of Solid Waste 
5. Incineration and Open Burning of Waste 
6. Wastewater Treatment and Discharge 
 
                                                           
7  Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the IPCC, 
(TAR), (ISBN 0521 80767 6), Section 6.12.2, Direct GWPs. 
Overview 
6 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
1A1  
Energy Industries
5B   Other
National  
Greenhouse 
Gas 
Inventory 
1  
ENERGY 
1A  
Fuel Combustion 
Activities
1A2   Manufacturing Industries and Construction 
1A3   Transport
1A3a   Civil Aviation 
1A3b   Road Transportation 
1A3c   Railways 
1A3d   Water-borne Navigation 
1A3e   Other Transportation 
1A4   Other Sectors
1A5   Non-Specified
1B    Fugitive 
Emissions from 
Fuels
1B1   Solid Fuels
1B2    Oil and Natural Gas
1B3   Other Emissions from Energy Production 
1C   Carbon 
Dioxide 
Transport and 
Storage
1C1   Transport of CO2
1C2   Injections and Storage
1C3   Other
2    INDUSTRIAL  
PROCESSES AND  
PRODUCT USE 
2A    Mineral Industry
2B    Chemical Industry
2C    Metal Industry
2D   Non-Energy Products from Fuels and Solvent 
Use
2E    Electronics Industry
2F   Product Uses as Substitutes for Ozone Depleting Substances 
2G   Other Product Manufacture and Use
2H   Other 
3   AGRICULTURE, 
FORESTRY, AND 
OTHER LAND USE 
3A   Livestock
3A1   Enteric Fermentation
3A2   Manure Management
3B   Land
3B1   Forest Land
3B2   Cropland
3B3    Grassland
3B4   Wetlands
3B5   Settlements
3B6   Other Land
3C   Aggregate Sources and Non-CO2 Emissions Sources on Land 
3D   Other
4   WASTE 
4A   Solid Waste Disposal
4B   Biological Treatment of Solid Waste
4C   Incineration and Open Burning of Waste
4D   Wastewater Treatment and Discharge
4E   Other
5   OTHER 
5A   Indirect N2O Emissions from the Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen  in NOx and NH3
Figure 1  
Main categories of emissions by sources and removals by sinks 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overview 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
7 
Volume 3 of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines also provides estimation methods and/or emission factors for some 
direct greenhouse gases not covered by the Montreal Protocol for which GWP values were not available from the 
IPCC at the time of writing (Table 3). These gases are sometimes used as substitutes for gases included in Table 
2, for industrial and product applications. Until GWP values are made available from the IPCC, countries will be 
unable to incorporate these gases in key category analysis (see Section 3 below) or include them in national total 
GWP weighted emissions. However, optionally, countries may wish to provide estimates of these greenhouse 
gases in mass units, using the methods provided in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines. Reporting tables are provided for 
this purpose.  
 
TABLE 2   
GASES FOR WHICH GWP VALUES ARE AVAILABLE IN THE TAR8 
Name 
Symbol 
Carbon Dioxide 
CO2 
Methane 
CH4 
Nitrous Oxide  
N2O 
Hydrofluorocarbons 
HFCs (e.g., HFC-23 (CHF3), HFC-134a (CH2FCF3), HFC-152a (CH3CHF2)) 
Perfluorocarbons 
PFCs (CF4, C2F6, C3F8, C4F10, c-C4F8, C5F12, C6F14) 
Sulphur Hexafluoride 
SF6 
Nitrogen Trifluoride  
NF3 
Trifluoromethyl Sulphur 
Pentafluoride 
SF5CF3 
Halogenated Ethers 
e.g., C4F9OC2H5, CHF2OCF2OC2F4OCHF2, CHF2OCF2OCHF2 
Other halocarbons 
e.g., CF3I, CH2Br2, CHCl3, CH3Cl, CH2Cl2
9 
 
TABLE 3   
ADDITIONAL GASES FOR WHICH GWP VALUES ARE NOT AVAILABLE IN THE TAR 
 C3F7C(O)C2F5
10 
C7F16 
C4F6 
C5F8 
c-C4F8O 
 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines contain links to information on methods used under other agreements and 
conventions11, for the estimation of emissions of tropospheric precursors which may be used to supplement the 
reporting of emissions and removals of greenhouse gases for which methods are provided here. 
                                                           
8  Third Assessment Report of the IPCC. See also footnote 7.  
9  For these gases, emissions can be estimated following the methods described in Section 3.10.2 of Volume 3 if necessary 
data are available, and then reported under sub-category 2B10 “Other”. 
10 This gas is traded as Novec™612 which is a fluorinated ketone produced by 3M (Milbrath, 2002). 
11 See, for example, Volume 1 Sections 7.1 and 7.2, where inventory developers are referred to the material developed by the 
Task Force on Emission Inventories and Projections of the UNECE’s Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air 
Pollution for the purpose of estimating emissions of sulphur dioxide (SO2); carbon monoxide (CO); oxides of nitrogen 
(NOx); ammonia (NH3) and non-methane volatile organic compounds (NMVOCs).  
Overview 
8 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
3 APPROACH TO DEVELOPING THE 
GUIDELINES  
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines are an evolutionary development starting from the 1996 IPCC Guidelines, GPG2000 
and GPG-LULUCF. A fundamental shift in methodological approach would pose difficulties with time series 
consistency in emissions and removals estimation, and incur additional costs, since countries and the 
international community have made significant investments in inventory systems. An evolutionary approach 
helps ensure continuity, and allows for the incorporation of experiences with the existing guidelines, new 
scientific information, and the results of the UNFCCC review process. The most significant changes occur in 
Volume 4, which consolidates the approach to Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) in GPG-
LULUCF and the Agriculture sector in GPG2000 into a single Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
(AFOLU) Volume. This, and other important developments and changes, are summarised in Section 5 below. 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines retain the definition of good practice that was introduced with GPG2000. This 
definition has gained general acceptance amongst countries as the basis for inventory development. According to 
this definition, national inventories of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions and removals consistent with 
good practice are those, which contain neither over- nor under-estimates so far as can be judged, and in which 
uncertainties are reduced as far as practicable. 
These requirements are intended to ensure that estimates of emissions by sources and removals by sinks, even if 
uncertain, are bona fide estimates, in the sense of not containing any biases that could have been identified and 
eliminated, and that uncertainties have been reduced as far as practicable, given national circumstances. Estimates 
of this type are presumably the best attainable, given current scientific knowledge and available resources.  
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines generally provide advice on estimation methods at three levels of detail, from tier 1 
(the default method) to tier 3 (the most detailed method). The advice consists of mathematical specification of 
the methods, information on emission factors or other parameters to use in generating the estimates, and sources 
of activity data to estimate the overall level of net emissions (emission by sources minus removals by sinks). 
Properly implemented, all tiers are intended to provide unbiased estimates, and accuracy and precision should, in 
general, improve from tier 1 to tier 3. The provision of different tiers enables inventory compilers to use methods 
consistent with their resources and to focus their efforts on those categories of emissions and removals that 
contribute most significantly to national emission totals and trends. 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines apply the tiered approach by means of decision trees (see the example in Figure 2). 
A decision tree guides selection of the tier to use for estimating the category under consideration, given national 
circumstances. National circumstances include the availability of required data, and contribution made by the 
category to total national emissions and removals and to their trend over time. The most important categories, in 
terms of total national emissions and the trend, are called key categories12. Decision trees generally require tier 2 
or tier 3 methods for key categories. The 2006 IPCC Guidelines provide for exceptions to this, where evidence 
demonstrates that the expense of data collection would significantly jeopardize the resources available for 
estimating other key categories. 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines also provide advice on; i) ensuring data collection is representative and time series 
are consistent, ii) estimation of uncertainties at the category level, and for the inventory as a whole, iii) guidance 
on quality assurance and quality control procedures to provide cross-checks during inventory compilation, and iv) 
information to be documented, archived and reported to facilitate review and assessment of inventory estimates. 
Reporting tables and worksheets for tier 1 methods are provided. The use of tiered methodologies and decision 
trees and the cross cutting advice ensure that the finite resources available for inventory development and 
updating are deployed most effectively, and that the inventory is checked and reported in a transparent manner. 
 
                                                           
12 In the GPG2000 and GPG-LULUCF these were called key sources, or key categories where there could be removals.  
 
Overview 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
9 
Figure 2  
Example Decision Tree (for CH4 and N2O from Road Transport) 
Start
VKT by
fuel and technology
type available?
Is this a key
category?
Use vehicle activity 
based model and 
country-specific
factors e.g. COPERT.
Yes
Yes
No
No
Use default factors 
and disaggregation
by technology.
Use fuel-based
emission factors.
Box 2: Tier 2
Box 1: Tier 3
Box 3: Tier 1
Collect data to 
allocate fuel to
technology types.
Can
you allocate
fuel data to vehicle
technology
types?
Are
Country-specific
technology based emission 
factors available?
Yes
No
Yes
No
 
4 STRUCTURE OF THE GUIDELINES 
The structure of the 2006 IPCC Guidelines improves upon the structure of the 1996 IPCC Guidelines, GPG2000 
and GPG-LULUCF in two respects.  
Firstly, whereas a user of the 1996 IPCC Guidelines, GPG2000 and GPG-LULUCF may need to cross reference 
between four or five volumes13 to make an emission or removal estimate, the 2006 IPCC Guidelines may require 
cross referencing between two volumes: Volume 1 (General Guidance and Reporting), and the relevant sectoral 
volume (one of Volume 2 (Energy), Volume 3 (Industrial Processes and Product Use), Volume 4 (Agriculture, 
Forestry and Other Land Use), and Volume 5 (Waste)). This represents a considerable simplification. 
Secondly, the 2006 IPCC Guidelines present Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use in a single volume, rather 
than two volumes comprising Agriculture, on the one hand, and Land-use Change and Forestry on the other. 
This allows for better integration of information on the pattern of land use and should facilitate more consistent 
use of activity data (for example, fertilizer application), that affects both agriculture and other land uses, thus 
reducing or avoiding the possibilities for double counting or omission. 
                                                           
13 That is, three volumes of the IPCC 1996 Guidelines plus at least one of GPG2000 or GPG-LULUCF.  
Overview 
10 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines retain the standardised layout of methodological advice at the category level that was 
introduced in GPG2000 and was maintained in GPG-LULUCF. Table 4 shows the general structure used for 
each category. Any user familiar with GPG2000 and GPG-LULUCF should be able to shift to the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines without difficulty. 
TABLE 4   
GENERAL STRUCTURE OF SECTORAL GUIDANCE CHAPTERS 
• Methodological Issues 
o 
Choice of Method, including decision trees and definition of tiers. 
o 
Choice of Emission Factor 
o 
Choice of Activity Data 
o 
Completeness 
o 
Developing a Consistent Time Series 
• Uncertainty Assessment 
o 
Emission Factor Uncertainties 
o 
Activity Data Uncertainties 
• Quality Assurance/Quality Control, Reporting and Documentation 
• Worksheets 
 
The previous IPCC inventory guidance has been reviewed and, where needed, clarified and expanded to improve 
its user friendliness. Across all the volumes, some additional categories have been identified and included. The 
guidance focuses on inventory methodologies rather than on scientific discussions of the background material, 
for which references are provided. 
5 SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENTS IN THE 2006 
IPCC GUIDELINES 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines are based on a thorough scientific review and a structural enhancement of the IPCC’s 
inventory methodology across all categories, including the following specific developments: 
Volume 1 (General Guidance and Reporting) 
• 
Introductory advice: A new section has been included, providing for an overview of greenhouse gas 
inventories and the steps needed to prepare an inventory for the first time. 
• 
Extended advice on data collection: The 2006 IPCC Guidelines introduce systematic cross-cutting advice 
on data collection from existing sources and by new activities, including design of measurement 
programmes.  
• 
Key category analysis: General principles and guidance are provided. In the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, the 
integration of Agriculture and LULUCF into the AFOLU volume has been addressed, and key category 
analysis is better integrated across emission and removal categories.  
Volume 2 (Energy)  
• 
Treatment of CO2 capture and storage: These emissions are covered comprehensively, including fugitive 
losses from CO2 capture and transport stages (which are estimated using conventional inventory approaches) 
plus any losses from carbon dioxide stored underground (estimated by a combination of modelling and 
measurement techniques, given the amounts injected - which would also be monitored for management 
purposes). The inventory methods reflect the estimated actual emissions in the year in which they occur. The 
inventory methods for geological CO2 capture, transport and storage (CCS) provided in Volume 2 are 
consistent with the IPCC Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage (2005). Amounts of CO2 
captured from combustion of biofuel, and subsequently injected into underground storage are included in the 
inventory as a negative emission. No distinction is made between any subsequent leakage of this CO2 and 
that of CO2 from fossil sources.  
• 
Methane from abandoned coal mines: A methodology for estimating these emissions is included in the 2006 
IPCC Guidelines for the first time. 
 
Overview 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
11 
Volume 3 (Industrial Processes and Product Use) 
• 
New categories and new gases: The 2006 IPCC Guidelines have been expanded to include more 
manufacturing sectors and product uses identified as sources of greenhouse gases. These include production 
of lead, zinc, titanium dioxide, petrochemicals, and liquid crystal display (LCD) manufacturing. Additional 
greenhouse gases identified in the IPCC Third Assessment Report are also included where anthropogenic 
sources have been identified. These gases include nitrogen trifluoride (NF3), trifluoromethyl sulphur 
pentafluoride (SF5CF3), and halogenated ethers. 
• 
Non-Energy Uses of Fossil Fuels: Guidance on demarcation with the energy sector has been improved, and 
emissions from non-energy uses of fossil fuels are now reported under Industrial Processes and Product Use, 
rather than in Energy. A method has been introduced for checking the completeness of carbon dioxide 
emission estimates from the non-energy uses.  
• 
Actual emissions of fluorinated compounds: The potential emissions approach used as a tier 1 method in the 
1996 IPCC Guidelines is no longer considered appropriate, as it does not provide estimates of true 
emissions, and is not compatible with higher tiers. The Tier 1 methods proposed in this volume are therefore 
actual emission estimation methods, although these are often based on default activity data where better data 
are not available. Simplified mass balance approaches have also been proposed in appropriate sectors, such 
as refrigeration. 
Volume 4 (Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use) 
• 
Integration between agriculture and land use, land-use change and forestry: This integration removes the 
somewhat arbitrary distinction between these categories in the previous guidance, and promotes consistent 
use of data between them, especially for more detailed methods. 
• 
Managed land is used in these guidelines as a proxy for identifying anthropogenic emissions by sources and 
removals by sinks. In most AFOLU sectors anthropogenic GHG emissions by source and removals by sinks 
are defined as those occurring on managed land. The use of managed land as a proxy for anthropogenic 
effects was adopted in the GPG-LULUCF. The preponderance of anthropogenic effects occurs on managed 
lands and, from a practical standpoint, the information needed for inventory estimation is largely confined to 
managed lands.  
• 
Consolidation of previously optional categories: Emissions by sources and removals by sinks associated 
with all fires on managed land are now estimated, removing the previous optional distinction between 
wildfires and prescribed burning. This is consistent with the concept of managed land as a proxy for 
identifying anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks, as discussed above. Wildfires and 
other disturbances on unmanaged land cannot, in general, be associated to an anthropogenic or natural cause, 
and hence are not included in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, unless the disturbance is followed by a land-use 
change. In this case, the land affected by disturbance is considered to be managed, and all the greenhouse 
gas emissions by sources and removals by sinks associated to the fire and other events are now estimated, 
irrespective of whether of a natural origin or not. Carbon dioxide emissions and removals associated with 
terrestrial carbon stocks in settlements and managed wetlands, which were previously optional, have been 
incorporated into the main guidance. 
• 
Harvested wood products (HWP): The 2006 IPCC Guidelines provide detailed methods that can be used to 
include HWP in greenhouse gas inventories using any of the approaches that are currently under discussion 
within the UNFCCC process.  
• 
Emissions from managed wetlands: The 2006 IPCC Guidelines now contain methods to estimate CO2 
emissions due to land use change in wetlands. However, due to limited availability of scientific information, 
methods for CH4 emissions are contained in an Appendix – Basis for future methodological development. 
Volume 5 (Waste) 
• 
Revised methodology for methane from landfills: The previous Tier 1 method, based on the maximum 
potential release of methane in the year of placement, has been replaced by a simple first order decay model 
that provides the option to use data available from the UN and other sources. This approach includes 
regional and country-specific defaults on waste generation, composition and management, and provides a 
consistent basis for estimating greenhouse gas emissions across all tiers. This gives a more accurate time 
series for estimated emissions and should avoid the situation in which usage of landfill gas apparently 
exceeds the amount generated in a particular year. 
• 
Carbon accumulation in landfills: This is provided as an output from the decay models, and can be relevant 
for the estimation of HWP in AFOLU.  
Overview 
12 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
• 
Biological treatment and open burning of waste: Guidance on estimation of emissions from composting and 
biogas facilities has been included to ensure a more complete coverage of sources.  
Relevant to all volumes 
• 
CO2 resulting from the emissions of other gases: The 2006 IPCC Guidelines estimate carbon emissions in 
terms of the species which are emitted. Most of the carbon emitted as these non-CO2 species eventually 
oxidises to CO2 in the atmosphere; and this amount can be estimated from the emissions estimates of the 
non-CO2 gases. In some cases the emissions of these non-CO2 gases contain very small amounts of carbon 
compared to the CO2 estimate and it may be more accurate to base the CO2 estimate on the total carbon. See 
Volume 1 Section 7.2.1.5 for an approach to estimating these inputs of CO2 to the atmosphere. Examples are 
fossil fuel combustion (where the emission factor is derived from the carbon content of the fuel) and a few 
IPPU sectors where the carbon mass balance can be estimated much better than individual gases. 
• 
Treatment of nitrogen (N) deposition: The GPG2000 lists sources of anthropogenic nitrogen deposition that 
subsequently give rise to anthropogenic emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), but provides estimation methods 
only for a subset of these, associated with agricultural sources of ammonia (NH3) and nitrogen oxides (NOx). 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines extend this approach to all significant sources of N deposition, including 
agriculture, industrial and combustion sources, with the ultimate N2O emission attributed to the country 
responsible for the nitrogen originally emitted. 
• 
Relationship to entity- or project level estimates: The Guidelines are intended to help prepare national 
inventories of emissions by sources and removals by sinks. Nonetheless, the Guidelines can also be relevant 
for estimating actual emissions or removals at the entity or project level. 
