 
 
GLOSSARY 
Glossary 
 
G.2 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Accuracy 
Accuracy is a relative measure of the exactness of an emission or removal estimate. Estimates should be accurate 
in the sense that they are systematically neither over nor under true emissions or removals, so far as can be 
judged, and that uncertainties are reduced so far as is practicable. Appropriate methodologies conforming to 
guidance on good practices should be used to promote accuracy in inventories. Accuracy should be 
distinguished from precision as illustrated below.  
Illustration of Accuracy and Precision: (a) inaccurate but precise; (b) inaccurate and imprecise; (c) accurate 
but imprecise; and (d) precise and accurate. 
       
 
 
 
 
                        (a)                                       (b)                                       (c)                                      (d) 
 
Activity 
A practice or ensemble of practices that take place on a delineated area over a given period of time. 
Activity data 
Data on the magnitude of a human activity resulting in emissions or removals taking place during a given period 
of time. Data on energy use, metal production, land areas, management systems, lime and fertilizer use and 
waste arisings are examples of activity data.  
Anaerobic 
Conditions in which oxygen is not readily available. These conditions are important for the production of 
methane emissions. Whenever organic material decomposes in anaerobic conditions (in landfills, flooded rice 
fields, etc.) methane is likely to be formed. 
Andosol 
A soil developed in volcanic ash. Generally andosols have good drainage and are prone to fertility problems. 
Arithmetic mean 
The sum of the values divided by the number of values. 
 
Auto producer 
An enterprise which generates electricity or heat for its own use and/or sells it as a secondary activity i.e., not as 
its main business. 
Back-casting 
The opposite of forecasting. Predicting conditions in the past from current conditions. 
Backflows 
By-product oils from petrochemical processing of refinery products which are generally returned to the refinery 
for further processing into petroleum products. 
Base year 
The starting year for the inventory. Currently this is typically 1990.  
Bias  
A systematic error of the observation method, whose magnitude in most cases is unknown. It can be introduced 
by using measuring equipment that is improperly calibrated, by selecting items from a wrong population or by 
favouring certain elements of a population, etc. For example: Estimating the total fugitive emission from gas 
transport and distribution using only measurements of leakage from high/medium pressure pipelines can lead to 
bias if the leakage in the lower pressure distribution network (which is significantly more difficult to measure) is 
neglected. 
 
 
 
Glossary 
 
 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
G.3
Biofuels  
Any fuels derived from biomass, either deliberately grown or from waste products. Peat is not considered a 
biofuel in these guidelines due to the length of time required for peat to re-accumulate after harvest. 
Biogenic carbon  
 
Carbon derived from biogenic (plant or animal) sources excluding fossil carbon. Note that peat is treated as a 
fossil carbon in these guidelines as it takes so long to replace harvested peat. 
Biological treatment of waste 
Composting and anaerobic digestion of organic wastes, such as food waste, garden/park waste and sludge, to 
reduce volume in the waste material, stabilisation of waste, and destruction of pathogens in the waste material. 
This includes mechanical-biological treatment. 
Biomass  
(1) The total mass of living organisms in a given area or of a given species usually expressed as dry weight. 
(2) Organic matter consisting of or recently derived from living organisms (espically regarded as fuel) 
excluding peat. Includes products, by-products and waste derived from such material. 
Blowing agent (for foam production) 
A gas, volatile liquid, or chemical that generates gas during the foaming process. The gas creates bubbles or cells 
in the plastic structure of a foam. 
Bootstrap technique 
Bootstrap technique is a type of computationally intensive statistical methods which typically uses repeated 
resampling from a set of data to assess variability of parameter estimates.  
Boreal 
See polar/boreal. 
Calcium carbide 
Calcium carbide is used in the production of acetylene, in the manufacture of cyanamide (a minor historical use), 
and as a reductant in electric arc steel furnaces. It is made from calcium carbonate (limestone) and carbon-
containing reductant (e.g., petroleum coke). 
Carbon budget 
The balance of the exchanges of carbon between carbon pools or within one specific loop (e.g., atmosphere – 
biosphere) of the carbon cycle.  
Carbon dioxide equivalent  
A measure used to compare different greenhouse gases based on their contribution to radiative forcing. The 
UNFCCC currently (2005) uses global warming potentials (GWPs) as factors to calculate carbon dioxide 
equivalent (see below).  
Category 
Categories are subdivisions of the four main sectors Energy; Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU); 
Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU); and waste. Categories may be further divided into sub-
categories. 
Census 
Data collected by interrogation or count of an entire population. 
Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) 
Halocarbons containing only chlorine, fluorine, and carbon atoms. CFCs are both ozone-depleting substances 
(ODSs) and greenhouse gases. 
Chronosequence 
Chronosequences consist of measurements taken from similar but separate locations that represent a temporal 
sequence in land use or management, for example, years since deforestation. Efforts are made to control all other 
between-site differences (e.g., by selecting areas with similar soil type, topography, previous vegetation). 
Chronosequences are often used as a surrogate for experimental studies or measurements repeated over time at 
the same location. 
Glossary 
 
G.4 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Coefficient of variation 
Statistical definition: The coefficient of variation, vx is the ratio of the population standard deviation, σx, and 
mean, μx, where vx = σx /µx. It also frequently refers to the sample coefficient of variation, which is the ratio of 
the sample standard deviation and sample mean.1 
Cogeneration 
See: Combined Heat and Power (CHP) generation. 
Combined heat and power (CHP) 
Combined heat and power (CHP), also known as cogeneration, is the simultaneous production of both electricity 
and useful heat for application by the producer or to be sold to other users with the aim of better utilisation of the 
energy used. Public utilities may utilise part of the heat produced in power plants and sell it for public heating 
purposes. Industries as auto-producers may sell part of the excess electricity produced to other industries or to 
electric utilities. 
Comparability 
Comparability means that estimates of emissions and removals reported by countries in inventories should be 
comparable among countries. For this purpose, countries should use agreed methodologies and formats for 
estimating and reporting inventories.  
Completeness 
Completeness means that an inventory covers all sources and sinks and gases included in the IPCC Guidelines 
for the full geographic coverage in addition to other existing relevant source/sink categories which are specific to 
individual countries (and therefore may not be included in the IPCC Guidelines).  
Confidence 
The term ‘confidence’ is used to represent trust in a measurement or estimate. Having confidence in inventory 
estimates does not make those estimates more accurate or precise; however, it will eventually help to establish a 
consensus regarding whether the data can be applied to solve a problem. This usage of confidence differs 
substantially from the statistical usage in the term confidence interval. 
Confidence interval 
The value of the quantity for which the interval is to be estimated is a fixed but unknown constant, such as the 
annual total emissions in a given year for a given country. The confidence interval is a range that encloses the 
true value of a unknown fixed quantity with a specified confidence (probability). Typically, a 95 percent 
confidence interval is assumed. From a traditional statistical perspective, the 95 percent confidence interval has a 
95 percent probability of enclosing the true but unknown value of the quantity. An alternative interpretation is 
that the confidence interval is a range that may safely be declared to be consistent with observed data or 
information. The 95 percent confidence interval is enclosed by the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles of the PDF. 
Consistency 
Consistency means that an inventory should be internally consistent in all its elements over a period of years. An 
inventory is consistent if the same methodologies are used for the base year and all subsequent years and if 
consistent data sets are used to estimate emissions or removals from sources or sinks. An inventory using 
different methodologies for different years can be considered to be consistent if it has been estimated in a 
transparent manner taking into account the guidance in Volume 1 on good practice in time series consistency. 
Correlation 
Mutual dependence between two quantities. See correlation coefficient. 
Correlation coefficient 
A number lying between –1 and +1, which measures the mutual dependence between two variables that are 
observed together. A value of +1 means that the variables have a perfect linear relationship; a value of –1 means 
that there is a perfect inverse linear relation; and a value of 0 means that there is no straight line relation. It is 
defined as the covariance of the two variables divided by the product of their standard deviations.  
Country-specific data 
Data for either activities or emissions that are based on research carried out on sites either in that country or 
otherwise representative of that country.  
                                                           
1  ‘Coefficient of variation’ is the term, which is frequently replaced by ‘error’ in a statement like ‘the error is 5%’.  
 
Glossary 
 
 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
G.5
Cruise 
(When applied to aircraft) All aircraft activities that take place at altitudes above 914 metres (3000 feet) 
including any additional climb or descent operations above this altitude. There is no upper limit. 
Decision tree 
A decision tree is a flow chart describing the specific ordered steps which need to be followed to develop an 
inventory or an inventory component in accordance with the principles of good practice. 
Distribution function 
A distribution function or cumulative distribution function F(x) for a random variable X specifies the probability 
P(X ≤ x) that X is less than or equal to x.  
Emission factor 
A coefficient that quantifies the emissions or removals of a gas per unit activity. Emission factors are often based 
on a sample of measurement data, averaged to develop a representative rate of emission for a given activity level 
under a given set of operating conditions.  
Emissions 
The release of greenhouse gases and/or their precursors into the atmosphere over a specified area and period of 
time. (UNFCCC Article 1.4) 
Energy recovery 
A form of resource recovery in which the organic fraction of waste is converted to some form of usable energy. 
Recovery may be achieved through the combustion of processed or raw refuse to produce steam through the 
pyrolysis of refuse to produce oil or gas; and through the anaerobic digestion of organic wastes to produce 
methane gas.  
Enhanced coal bed methane (recovery) 
Increased CH4 recovery produced by the injection of CO2 into coal seams.  
Estimation 
The process of calculating emissions and/or removals. 
Evaporative emissions 
Evaporative emissions fall within the class of fugitive emissions and are released from area (rather than point) 
sources. These are often emissions of Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOCs), and are produced 
when the product is exposed to the air – for example in the use of paints or solvents. 
Excluded carbon 
Carbon in non-energy uses of fossil fuels (feed stocks, reductant and non-energy products) excluded from fuel 
combustion. 
Expert judgement 
A carefully considered, well-documented qualitative or quantitative judgement made in the absence of 
unequivocal observational evidence by a person or persons who have a demonstrable expertise in the given field. 
Feedstock 
Fossil fuels used as raw materials in chemical conversion processes to produce primarily organic chemicals and, 
to a lesser extent, inorganic chemicals. 
First use 
Distinguishes first uses (and related emissions) from later non-energy uses of fossil fuels. For example, first-use 
emissions from lubricants are those which take place as a result of oxidation during use as a lubricant. Used 
lubricants may be used subsequently for heat raising as waste oils.  
Flaring 
Deliberate burning of natural gas and waste gas/vapour streams, without energy recovery.  
Fluorocarbons 
Halocarbons containing fluorine atoms, including chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons 
(HCFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). 
Glossary 
 
G.6 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Flux 
(1) Raw materials, such as limestone, dolomite, lime, and silica sand, which are used to reduce the heat or other 
energy requirements of thermal processing of minerals (such as the smelting of metals). Fluxes also may 
serve a dual function as a slagging agent.  
(2) The rate of flow of any liquid or gas, across a given area; the amount of this crossing a given area in a given 
time. E.g., "Flux of CO2 absorbed by forests". 
Fossil carbon 
 
 
Carbon derived from fossil fuel or other fossil source. 
Fuel 
Any substance burned as a source of energy such as heat or electricity. See also Primary Fuels and Secondary 
Fuels. 
Fuel combustion 
Within the Guidelines fuel combustion is the intentional oxidation of materials within an apparatus that is 
designed to provide heat or mechanical work to a process, or for use away from the apparatus. 
Fuel wood 
Wood used directly as fuel.  
Fugitive Emissions 
Emissions that are not emitted through an intentional release through stack or vent. This can include leaks from 
industrial plant and pipelines. 
Global warming potential 
Global Warming Potentials (GWP) are calculated as the ratio of the radiative forcing of one kilogramme 
greenhouse gas emitted to the atmosphere to that from one kilogramme CO2 over a period of time (e.g., 100 
years).  
Good Practice 
Good Practice is a set of procedures intended to ensure that greenhouse gas inventories are accurate in the sense 
that they are systematically neither over- nor underestimates so far as can be judged, and that uncertainties are 
reduced so far as possible. 
Good Practice covers choice of estimation methods appropriate to national circumstances, quality assurance and 
quality control at the national level, quantification of uncertainties and data archiving and reporting to promote 
transparency. 
Ground truth 
A term used for data obtained by measurements on the ground, usually as validation for remote sensing, e.g., 
satellite data.  
Hydrocarbon 
Strictly defined as molecules containing only hydrogen and carbon. The term is often used more broadly to 
include any molecules in petroleum which also contains molecules with S, N, or O An unsaturated hydrocarbon 
is any hydrocarbon containing olefinic or aromatic structures. 
Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) 
Halocarbons containing only hydrogen, chlorine, fluorine and carbon atoms. Because HCFCs contain chlorine, 
they contribute to ozone depletion. They are also greenhouse gases. 
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
Halocarbons containing only hydrogen, fluorine and carbon atoms. Because HFCs contain no chlorine, bromine, 
or iodine, they do not deplete the ozone layer. Like other halocarbons, they are potent greenhouse gases. 
Hydrofluoroethers (HFEs) 
Chemicals composed of hydrogen, fluorine and carbon atoms, with ether structure. Because HFES contain no 
chlorine, bromine, or iodine, they do not deplete the ozone layer. Like other halocarbons, they are potent 
greenhouse gases. 
 
 
Glossary 
 
 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
G.7
Independence 
Two random variables are independent if there is a complete absence of association between how their sample 
values vary. The most commonly used measure of the lack of independence between two random variables is the 
correlation coefficient. 
Key category  
A key category is one that is prioritised within the national inventory system because its estimate has a 
significant influence on a country's total inventory of greenhouse gases in terms of the absolute level of 
emissions and removals, the trend in emissions and removals, or uncertainty in emissions or removals. Whenever 
the term key category is used, it includes both source and sink categories. 
Key source 
See key category. 
Kilns 
A tubular heating apparatus used in the manufacture of cement, lime and other materials. The calcination 
reaction may take place in the kiln itself, or, where so-equipped, it may partly or completely take place in a 
preheater and/or precalciner apparatus ahead of the kiln.  
Land cover 
The type of vegetation , rock, water etc. covering the earth’s surface.  
Land use 
The type of activity being carried out on a unit of land. 
Note: in Volume 4 (AFOLU), broad land-use categories are defined in Chapter 2. It is recognized that these 
categories are a mixture of land cover (e.g., Forest, Grassland, Wetlands) and land use (e.g., Cropland, 
Settlements) classes.  
Landfill gas 
Municipal solid waste contains significant portions of organic materials that produce a variety of gaseous 
products when deposited, compacted, and covered in landfills. Anaerobic bacteria thrive in the oxygen-free 
environment, resulting in the decomposition of the organic materials and the production of primarily carbon 
dioxide and methane. Carbon dioxide is likely to leach out of the landfill because it is soluble in water. Methane, 
on the other hand, which is less soluble in water and lighter than air, is likely to migrate directly to the 
atmosphere.  
LTO (landing and take-off) cycle 
All aircraft activities that occur under 914 metres (3 000 feet) including idling aircraft engines, taxi-out, take-off, 
climb up to 914 metres, descend, approach and taxi-in. Note: some gatherers of statistics count either single take-
off or landing as one cycle; however, it is both one take-off and one landing that together define the LTO cycle. 
Lubricants 
Lubricants are hydrocarbons produced from distillate or residue, and they are mainly used to reduce friction 
between bearing surfaces. This category includes all finished grades of lubricating oil, from spindle oil to 
cylinder oil, and those used in greases, including motor oils and all grades of lubricating oil base stocks. 
Manure 
Waste materials produced by domestic livestock which can be managed for agricultural purposes. When manure 
is managed in a way that involves anaerobic decomposition, significant emissions of methane can result. 
Mean 
The mean is a value around which values sampled from a probability distribution tend to lie. The sample mean 
or arithmetic average is an estimator for the mean. It is an unbiased and consistent estimator of the population 
mean (expected value) and is itself a random variable with its own variance value. The sample mean is the sum 
of values divided by the number of values:  
∑
=
n
i
ix
n
x
1
 (xi, where i = 1,…., n are items of a sample). 
 
 
Glossary 
 
G.8 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Median 
The median or population median is a value which divides the integral of a probability density function (PDF) 
into two halves. For symmetric PDFs, it equals the mean. The median is the 50th population percentile.  
The sample median is an estimator of the population median. It is the value that divides an ordered sample into 
two equal halves. If there are 2n + 1 observations, the median is taken as the (n + 1)th member of the ordered 
sample. If there are 2n, it is taken as being halfway between the nth and (n + 1)th . 
Mode 
The mode of a distribution is the value which has the highest probability of occurrence. Distributions can have one or 
more modes. In practice, we usually encounter distributions with only one mode. In this case, the mode or population 
mode of a PDF is the measure of a value around which values sampled from a probability distribution tend to lie.  
The sample mode is an estimator for the population mode calculated by subdividing the sample range into equal 
subclasses, counting how many observations fall into each class and selecting the centre point of the class (or 
classes) with the greatest number of observations.  
Model 
A model is a quantitatively-based abstraction of a real-world situation which may simplify or neglect certain 
features to better focus on its more important elements. 
Example: the relationship that emissions equal an emission factor times an activity level is a simple model. The 
term ‘model’ is also often used in the sense of a computer software realisation of a model abstraction.  
Monte Carlo method 
In these guidelines a Monte Carlo method is recommended to analyse the uncertainty of the inventory. The 
principle of Monte Carlo analysis is to perform the inventory calculation many times by computer, each time 
with the uncertain emission factors or model parameters and activity data chosen randomly (by the computer) 
within the distribution on uncertainties specified initially by the user. Uncertainties in emission factors and/or 
activity data are often large and may not have normal distributions. In this case the conventional statistical rules 
for combining uncertainties become very approximate. Monte Carlo analysis can deal with this situation by 
generating an uncertainty distribution for the inventory estimate that is consistent with the input uncertainty 
distributions on the emission factors, model parameters and activity data. 
Non-energy products 
Primary or secondary fossil fuels which are used directly for their physical or diluent properties. Examples are: 
lubricants, paraffin waxes, bitumen, and white spirits and mineral turpentine (as solvent). 
Non-energy use 
Within the Guidelines this term refers to the use of fossil fuels as Feedstock, Reductant or Non-energy products. 
However, the use of this term differs between countries and sources of energy statistics. In most energy statistics, 
e.g., of the International Energy Agency (IEA), fuel inputs of reductants to blast furnaces are not included but 
accounted for as inputs to a fuel conversion activity transforming coke and other inputs to blast furnace gas. 
Non-marketed lime production 
Lime production occurring at facilities where the primary purpose is the production of lime as an intermediate 
input: such as plants that produce steel, synthetic soda ash, calcium carbide, magnesia and magnesium metal, as 
well as copper smelter and sugar mills. The lime produced by these facilities is often used on site and thus is 
often not reported in national statistics. Also referred to as in-house lime production. 
Non-Methane Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOCs) 
A class of emissions which includes a wide range of specific organic chemical substances. Non-Methane 
Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOCs) play a major role in the formation of ozone in the troposphere (lower 
atmosphere). Ozone in the troposphere is a greenhouse gas. It is also a major local and regional air pollutant, 
causing significant health and environmental damage. Because they contribute to ozone formation, NMVOCs are 
considered "precursor" greenhouse gases. NMVOCs, once oxidized in the atmosphere, produce carbon dioxide. 
Normal distribution 
The normal (or Gaussian) distribution has the PDF given in the following equation and is defined by two 
parameters (the mean μ and the standard σ deviation).   
∞≤ ≤∞
=
−
−
x
e
x
f
x
-
  , for  
2
1
)
(
2
2
2
  )
(
σ
μ
π
σ
. 
 
Glossary 
 
 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
G.9
Observational data 
Observational data is empirical data from instrumental (usually monitoring equipment) or manual methods 
(through counts in a survey or census). 
Off-gas 
The exhaust gas from a chemical process (combustion or non-combustion). The off gas may be vented to the 
atmosphere, burned for energy recovery or flared (without energy recovery), or used as a feedstock for another 
chemical process. Secondary products may also be recovered from the off gas. 
Open burning of waste 
The combustion of unwanted combustible materials such as paper, wood, plastics, textiles, rubber, and other 
debris in the open or at an open dump site, where smoke and other emissions are released directly into the air 
without passing through a chimney or stack. Open burning can also include incineration devices that do not 
control the combustion air to maintain an adequate temperature and do not provide sufficient residence time for 
complete combustion.  
Oxidation  
Chemically transform of a substance by combining it with oxygen. 
Ozone-depleting substances (ODS) 
A compound that contributes to stratospheric ozone depletion. Ozone-depleting substances (ODS) include CFCs, 
HCFCs, halons, methyl bromide, carbon tetrachloride, and methyl chloroform. ODS are generally very stable in 
the troposphere and only degrade under intense ultraviolet light in the stratosphere. When they break down, they 
release chlorine or bromine atoms, which then deplete ozone.  
PDF  
See Probability density function. 
Percentile 
The kth percentile or population percentile is a value which separates the lowest kth part of the integral of the 
probability density function (PDF) – i.e., an integral of a PDF tail from the kth percentile towards lower 
probability densities. 
The kth population percentile (0 ≤ k ≤ 100) of a population with a distribution function F(x) equals to z where z 
satisfies F(z) = k/100  
Sample kth percentile is an approximation for the population percentile which is derived from a sample. It is the 
value below which k percent of the observations lie.  
Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
Synthetically produced halocarbons containing only carbon and fluorine atoms. They are characterized by 
extreme stability, non-flammability, low toxicity, zero ozone depleting potential, and high global warming 
potential.  
Polar/boreal 
Regions where mean annual temperature (MAT) is less than 0 oC. 
Pool/carbon pool 
A reservoir. A component or components of the climate system where a greenhouse gas or a precursor of a 
greenhouse gas is stored. Examples of carbon pools are forest biomass, wood products, soils and the atmosphere. 
The units are mass.  
Population 
The population is the totality of items under consideration. In the case of a random variable, the probability 
distribution is considered to define the population of that variable. 
Primary fuels 
Fuels which are extracted directly from natural resources. Examples are: crude oil, natural gas, coals, etc. 
Precision 
Precision is the inverse of uncertainty in the sense that the more precise something is, the less uncertain it is. 
Closeness of agreement between independent results of measurements obtained under stipulated conditions (see 
also accuracy). 
Glossary 
 
G.10 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Probability 
A probability is a real number in the scale 0 to 1 attached to a random event. There are different ways in which 
probability can be interpreted. One interpretation considers a probability as having the nature of a relative 
frequency (i.e., the proportion of all outcomes corresponding to an event), whilst another interpretation regards a 
probability as being a measure of degree of belief.  
Probability density function 
The Probability Density Function (PDF) describes the range and relative likelihood of possible values. The PDF 
can be used to describe uncertainty in the estimate of a quantity that is a fixed constant whose value is not 
exactly known, or it can be used to describe inherent variability. The purpose of the uncertainty analysis for the 
emission inventory is to quantify uncertainty in the unknown fixed value of total emissions as well as emissions 
and activity pertaining to specific categories. Thus, throughout these guidelines it is presumed that the PDF is 
used to estimate uncertainty, and not variability, unless otherwise stated. 
Probability distribution 
Statistical definition: A function giving the probability that a random variable takes any given value or belongs 
to a given set of values. The probability on the whole set of values of the random variable equals 1.  
Process emissions 
Emissions from industrial processes involving chemical transformations other than combustion. 
Quality Assurance 
Quality Assurance (QA) activities include a planned system of review procedures conducted by personnel not 
directly involved in the inventory compilation/development process to verify that data quality objectives were 
met, ensure that the inventory represents the best possible estimate of emissions and sinks given the current state 
of scientific knowledge and data available, and support the effectiveness of the quality control (QC) programme. 
Quality Control  
Quality Control (QC) is a system of routine technical activities, to measure and control the quality of the 
inventory as it is being developed. The QC system is designed to:  
(i) 
Provide routine and consistent checks to ensure data integrity, correctness, and completeness; 
(ii) 
Identify and address errors and omissions; 
(iii) 
Document and archive inventory material and record all QC activities. 
QC activities include general methods such as accuracy checks on data acquisition and calculations and the use 
of approved standardised procedures for emission calculations, measurements, estimating uncertainties, 
archiving information and reporting. More detailed QC activities include technical reviews of source categories, 
activity and emission factor data, and methods. 
Removals 
Removal of greenhouse gases and/or their precursors from the atmosphere by a sink. 
Reporting 
The process of providing results of the inventory as described in volume 1 chapter 8. 
Reservoir 
(1) A component or components of the climate system where a greenhouse gas or a precursor of a greenhouse 
gas is stored. (UNFCCC Article 1.7) 
(2) Water bodies regulated for human activities (energy production, irrigation, navigation, recreation etc.) where 
substantial changes in water area due to water level regulation may occur. 
Secondary fuels 
Fuels manufactured from primary fuels. Examples are: cokes, motor gasoline and coke oven gas, blast furnace 
gas. 
Sequestration 
The process of storing carbon in a carbon pool.  
Sink 
Any process, activity or mechanism which removes a greenhouse gas, an aerosol, or a precursor of a greenhouse 
gas from the atmosphere. (UNFCCC Article 1.8) Notation in the final stages of reporting is the negative (-) sign.  
 
Glossary 
 
 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
 
G.11
Source 
Any process or activity which releases a greenhouse gas, an aerosol or a precursor of a greenhouse gas into the 
atmosphere. (UNFCCC Article 1.9) Notation in the final stages of reporting is the positive (+) sign. 
Standard deviation 
The population standard deviation is the positive square root of the variance. It is estimated by the sample 
standard deviation that is the positive square root of the sample variance. 
Surrogate data 
Surrogate data is data that is used in place of the actual data, where the specific data needed is unobtainable. 
Often surrogate data is needed to describe changes in an emission source over time, for example population 
change may be used to approximate change in waste arisings. 
Survey data 
Survey data is derived from random sampling of a population and does not include real data for the whole 
population, e.g., the number of animals in a country or region by surveying a discrete selection of farms and 
groups of farms in a country or region, or using more general surrogate data and assumptions. 
Systematic and random errors 
Systematic error (i.e., bias) is the difference between the true, but usually unknown, value of a quantity being 
estimated, and the mean observed value as would be estimated by the sample mean of an infinite set of 
observations. The random error of an individual measurement is the difference between an individual 
measurement and the above limiting value of the sample mean. 
Systematic error 
See systematic and random errors. 
Temperate, cold 
Areas where mean annual temperature (MAT) is between 0 – 10 oC. 
Temperate, warm 
Areas where mean annual temperature (MAT) is between 10 – 20 oC. 
Time series 
A time series is series of values which are affected by random processes and which are observed at successive 
(usually equidistant) points in time. 
Transparency 
Transparency means that the assumptions and methodologies used for an inventory should be clearly explained 
to facilitate replication and assessment of the inventory by users of the reported information. The transparency of 
inventories is fundamental to the success of the process for the communication and consideration of information. 
Trend 
The trend of a quantity measures its change over a time period, with a positive trend value indicating growth in 
the quantity, and a negative value indicating a decrease. It is defined as the ratio of the change in the quantity 
over the time period, divided by the initial value of the quantity, and is usually expressed either as a percentage 
or a fraction.  
Tropical 
Areas where mean annual temperature (MAT) is more than 20 oC. 
Unbiased estimator 
An unbiased estimator is a statistic whose expected value equals the value of the parameter being estimated. 
Note that this term has a specific statistical meaning and that an estimate of a quantity calculated from an 
unbiased estimator may lack bias in the statistical sense, but may be biased in the more general sense of the word 
if the sample has been affected by unknown systematic error. Thus, in statistical usage, a biased estimator can be 
understood as a deficiency in the statistical evaluation of the collected data, and not in the data themselves or in 
the method of their measurement or collection. For example, the arithmetic mean (average) x  is an unbiased 
estimator of the expected value (mean). 
 
Glossary 
 
G.12 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Uncertainty 
Lack of knowledge of the true value of a variable that can be described as a probability density function 
characterizing the range and likelihood of possible values. Uncertainty depends on the analyst’s state of 
knowledge, which in turn depends on the quality and quantity of applicable data as well as knowledge of 
underlying processes and inference methods. (See Volume 1 Chapter 3.) 
Uncertainty analysis 
An uncertainty analysis of a model aims to provide quantitative measures of the uncertainty of output values 
caused by uncertainties in the model itself and in its input values, and to examine the relative importance of these 
factors. 
Validation 
Validation is the establishment of sound approach and foundation. In the context of emission inventories, 
validation involves checking to ensure that the inventory has been compiled correctly in line with reporting 
instructions and guidelines. It checks the internal consistency of the inventory. The legal use of validation is to 
give an official confirmation or approval of an act or product.  
Variability 
This refers to observed differences attributable to true heterogeneity or diversity in a population. Variability 
derives from processes which are either inherently random or whose nature and effects are influential but 
unknown. Variability is not usually reducible by further measurement or study, but can be characterised by 
quantities such as the sample variance. 
Verification 
Verification refers to the collection of activities and procedures that can be followed during the planning and 
development, or after completion of an inventory that can help to establish its reliability for the intended 
applications of that inventory.  
Typically, methods external to the inventory are used to check the truth of the inventory, including comparisons 
with estimates made by other bodies or with emission and uptake measurements determined from atmospheric 
concentrations or concentration gradients of these gases. 
 
