Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.1 
ANNEX 4 
GLOSSARY FOR INDUSTRIAL 
PROCESSES AND PRODUCT USE 
SECTOR 
 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.2 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
ANNEX 4 GLOSSARY FOR INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND 
PRODUCT USE SECTOR 
This annex provides definitions and abbreviations for terms used in this volume on Industrial Processes and 
Product Use (IPPU) Sector. This annex should be used in conjunction with the general ‘Glossary’ in Volume 1 
of these Guidelines which provides definitions for terms used not only in this volume but also in the other 
volumes.  
 
Glossary 
ACETYLENE BLACK PROCESS 
Thermal decomposition process to produce carbon black from acetylene. 
ADIPIC ACID (HEXANEDIOIC ACID) 
A carboxylic acid primarily used in the chemical industry as an intermediate step in the production of nylon 6.6. 
It is commercially produced from cyclohexane by oxidation processes. The process of producing adipic acid 
produces nitrous oxide (N2O) as a by-product. 
AMMOXIDATION  
Process of conversion of olefin, paraffin, etc. to nitrile (R-CN) in the presence of ammonia (NH3) and oxygen 
(O2). A typical example is reaction of propylene (C3H6), ammonia and oxygen to produce acrylonitrile. 
ASPHALT 
Asphalt is the mixed product of bitumen and aggregates (coarse or fine including sand), used for paving roads 
and pavements (i.e., sidewalks), also known as macadam, for roofing and industrial uses. Main asphalt types are: 
Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA), liquefied asphalt, cutback asphalt, slow-cure asphalts (synonym: road oil), emulsified 
asphalt and mastic asphalt. Cutbacks and emulsions are typically used as prime coats and tack coats; mastic 
asphalt for roofing. The mixture of aggregates (coarse or fine including sand) and hot bitumen when placed on 
the road, compacted and subsequently cooled, becomes the familiar asphalt. Aggregates make up approximately 
90-96 percent of the asphalt mixture (asphalt binder makes up the other 4-10 percent). The term ‘asphalt’ in the 
USA is informally applied both to the bitumen (crude asphalt) that is a residue of the petroleum refining process 
and also to the ‘asphalt binder’ that is produced from bitumen and the ‘asphaltic concrete’ that   is used for road 
paving and other applications.   
ASPHALT BINDER 
Bitumen (crude asphalt) that has been prepared for use as a binder in Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete and other 
paving applications. Asphalt binder is also sometimes referred to informally in the USA as ‘asphalt cement’. 
ASPHALTIC CONCRETE 
Asphaltic concrete consists of asphalt binder (bitumen, asphalt cement) and mineral aggregate mixed together, 
laid down in layers and compacted. Hot Mix Asphaltic Concrete (also referred to as Hot Mix Asphalt) is a 
combination of approximately 95 percent mineral aggregate bound together by asphalt binder that is heated prior 
to mixing. Asphaltic concrete is informally referred to in the USA as ‘asphalt’ or ‘asphalt concrete’. 
BANK (FOR PURPOSES OF CHAPTERS 7 AND 8) 
Banks are the total amount of substances contained in existing equipment, chemical stockpiles, foams and other 
products not yet released to the atmosphere. This terminology is traditionally used for substitutes for Ozone 
Depleting Substances and other fluorinated compounds. 
BASIC OXYGEN FURNACE (BOF) 
Basic oxygen furnaces are the primary means of steel manufacture from pig iron and scrap steel. Oxygen is 
blown into the molten charge and oxidises the carbon present in the iron (about 4 percent) reducing it to the 
levels required for steel (about 0.5 percent). The carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide produced are carried away 
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.3 
by the gas and dust collection system.  The oxidation process heats the molten charge and helps melt the steel 
scrap added.  Basic oxygen furnaces are also referred to as ‘LD-converter’ (or ‘Linz-Donawitz converter’) after 
the ‘Linz-Donawitz’ steelmaking process first developed in Austria. 
BITUMEN 
Bitumen is a solid, semi-solid or viscous hydrocarbon with a colloidal structure, being brown to black in colour, 
occurring naturally or obtained as a residue in the distillation of crude oil, by vacuum distillation of oil residues 
from atmospheric distillation. It is a component of asphaltic concrete (typically 4 to 10 percent of the mixture) 
and serves to hold the aggregates (mineral matter that makes up the other part) together, generally used for 
construction of roads and for roofing material and in spray seal applications. Most (typically 80 to 90 percent) is 
used for paving of roads, typically 80 to 90 percent. Bitumen is usually stored at approximately 150°C to 
maintain it in a liquid form. In the USA bitumen is more commonly referred to as ‘asphalt’ or ‘asphalt binder’. 
BLAST FURNACE 
A furnace used in the iron and steel industry in which combustion is intensified by a blast of air, especially a 
furnace for smelting iron by blowing air through a hot mixture of ore, coke, and flux. 
BLOWN ASPHALT 
Synonym for oxidised bitumen. Asphalt that has been treated by blowing hot air through it to produce physical 
properties required for the industrial use of the final product. Oxidised asphalts are typically used in roofing 
operations, pipe coating and hydraulic applications. Also known as ‘air-blown asphalt’ or ‘air-refined asphalt’.  
BUSHING 
A device that enables one or several electrical conductors to pass through a partition such as a wall or a tank and 
that insulates the conductors from it.  The means of attachment (flange or fixing device) to the partition forms 
part of the bushing. 
CALCINATION 
Chemical process in the manufacture of cement or lime in which the raw materials, primarily carbonates, are 
heated in kilns to produce a metallic oxide and carbon dioxide; e.g., CaCO3 + heat = CaO + CO2. More generally, 
calcination is a process of heat-induced driving off of structurally-bound volatiles other than water. 
CAPROLACTAM 
Caprolactam (NH(CH2)5CO) is the monomer for nylon-6 fibres and plastics, with a substantial proportion of the 
fibre used in carpet manufacturing. Commercial processes for the manufacture of caprolactam are based on 
either toluene or benzene. 
CARBON BLACK FEEDSTOCK 
A heavy aromatic oil that may be derived either as a by-product of the petroleum refining process or the 
metallurgical (coal) coke production process. 
CARBON MASS BALANCE CALCULATION (FOR PURPOSES OF SECTION 
3.9) 
A method of estimating total carbon emissions from a chemical process by identifying the mass flow rate and 
carbon content of each process stream flowing into the process and out of the process. The process streams to be 
considered include raw materials (i.e., feedstocks), supplemental fuels, primary products, secondary products, 
solid and liquid waste products, and exhaust gas streams (e.g., purge gas, off gas.) 
CARBONATES 
Compounds containing the radical CO3
-2.  Upon calcination, the carbonate radical decomposes to evolve carbon 
dioxide (CO2). Common carbonates consumed in the mineral industry include calcium carbonate (CaCO3) or 
calcite; magnesium carbonate (MgCO3) or magnesite; and calcium-magnesium carbonate (CaMg(CO3)2) or 
dolomite. 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.4 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
CATALYST 
A substance that accelerates the rate of a chemical reaction, but is not consumed as raw material and does not 
become a chemical product of the reaction. 
CATALYST SELECTIVITY 
The percentage of the primary feedstock to the catalytic reaction process that is converted into the primary 
product of the process.  
CATALYTIC INCINERATION 
Oxidation of organic compounds to CO2 and H2O using a metal catalyst in a low temperature reaction.  Catalytic 
incineration occurs at a lower temperature than thermal incineration. 
CATALYTIC OXIDATION 
Generally referred to oxidation of feedstock (e.g., natural gas) to CO2 and H2O using a catalyst. 
CEMENT KILN DUST (CKD) 
Non-calcined to fully calcined dust produced in the kiln or pyroprocessing line. CKD may be partly or 
completely recycled to the kiln.  
CENTERLINE PROCESS 
Centerline process refers to the nominal values of process variables that govern the performance specifications of 
commercial-ready manufacturing equipment. These are the nominal values for gas flows, chamber pressure, 
plasma power, etc. It is common for semiconductor device manufacturers to modify these conditions to optimize 
for particular requirements. 
CIRCUIT BREAKER 
A mechanical switching device, capable of making, carrying and breaking current under normal circuit 
conditions and also making, carrying for a specified time and breaking current specified abnormal circuit 
conditions such as those of a short circuit. 
CLINKER 
An intermediate product created at high temperature in a kiln during the manufacture of cement. In the kiln, 
calcium carbonate is calcined to lime (CaO) and carbon dioxide (CO2). The CaO then reacts with silicon dioxide 
(SiO2) and other oxides to form hydraulically reactive minerals (primarily calcium silicates) within semivitrified 
nodules called clinker. The clinker is then finely ground (typically with a small quantity of gypsum) to form 
cement. The CO2 (both from calcination and from the combustion of kiln fuels) from clinker manufacture is 
normally released to the atmosphere as a waste product and is a significant global source of CO2 emissions. 
CLOSED-PRESSURE SYSTEM 
Electrical equipment that requires periodic refilling (topping up) with gas during its lifetime. This type of 
equipment generally contains between five and several hundred kilograms per functional unit.   Transmission 
equipment normally falls into this category.  In the latest IEC standards, the tightness of new closed pressure 
systems is specified by the relative leak rate of each compartment; standardized values for SF6 are 0.5 percent 
and 1 percent per year.  However, older closed pressure systems in the field may have significantly higher leak 
rates. 
COAL TAR 
Liquid by-product formed from the distillation of bituminous coal to make coke. It is a viscous black liquid 
containing numerous organic compounds. Coal tar can be further distilled to give various aromatic compounds 
(distillates) and coal tar pitch (carbon pitch). Coal tar products are used as roofing, waterproofing, and insulating 
compounds and as raw materials for many dyes, drugs, and paints. 
COKE OVEN GAS 
Obtained as a by-product of solid fuel carbonisation and gasification operations carried out by coke producers 
and iron and steel plants which are not connected with gasworks and municipal gas plants. 
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.5 
COMBINED REFORMING 
A combination of the conventional reforming process and catalytic oxidation reaction to produce methanol. 
CONVENTIONAL REFORMING 
A combination of the steam reforming reaction to produce synthesis gas and the methanol-synthesis gas reaction 
to produce methanol.  
DESTRUCTION 
In the case of a fluorinated greenhouse gas, ‘destruction’ means the process by which all or most of the 
compound is permanently transformed or decomposed into one or more stable substances which are not 
fluorinated greenhouse gases.  
DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL EFFICIENCY (DRE) 
Destruction or Removal Efficiency (DRE) means the efficiency, expressed as a decimal fraction (on a carbon or 
CO2 equivalent basis), of a control device to destroy or remove all relevant contaminants. The DRE is equal to 
one minus the ratio of the amount of all relevant contaminants exiting the emission control device to the amount 
of all relevant contaminants entering the emission control device. Relevant contaminants mean any greenhouse 
gases covered by these Guidelines (see Volume 1, Chapter 8), including those formed during the destruction 
process.   
DIRECT CHLORINATION 
Direct reaction of a compound to produce substituted chlorinated compounds, e.g., ethylene (C2H4) with chlorine 
(Cl2) to produce ethylene dichloride. 
DIRECT REDUCED IRON 
Also referred to as ‘sponge iron’; a metallic iron product obtained upon direct reduction of high grade iron ore 
pellets below the melting point of iron.  The iron is reduced in the solid state without being converted into liquid 
form, as in a blast furnace. 
DISPOSAL EMISSIONS (FOR PURPOSES OF CHAPTER 8) 
The emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases that occur during the disposal or decommissioning of equipment.  
For the Tier 2 method (Equation 8.2), Disposal Emissions are defined to include emissions associated with the 
recovery of the gas, the recycling of the gas, and the destruction of the gas that is not recycled.  For the Tier 3 
method (Equations 8.7A and 8.7B), Disposal Emissions are defined to include emissions associated with the 
recovery of the gas.  (Emissions associated with recycling and destruction are accounted for in separate Tier 3 
equations.)  Disposal emissions as defined for both Tiers are sensitive to the fraction of retiring equipment whose 
charge is recovered (Recovery Frequency) and to the fraction of the remaining charge that is recovered when 
recovery is performed (Recovery Efficiency).  
ELECTRIC ARC FURNACES (EAF) 
The principal batch furnace type for the electric production of steel. The primary application of the EAF is for 
the remelting of steel scrap. However, EAFs can be charged with limited amounts of iron scrap, pig iron, and 
direct reduced iron. Heat is supplied from electricity that arcs from the graphite electrodes to the metal bath. The 
electrodes are usually made from graphite or from Soderberg (carbon) paste. EAFs are also used for other 
metallurgical applications, such as the production of ferroalloys and similar (silicon carbide). 
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT 
Any item used for such purposes as generation, conversion, transmission, distribution or utilisation of electric 
energy, such as machines, transformers, apparatus, measuring instruments, protective devices and wiring systems.  
Most of the sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) used in electrical equipment is used in gas-insulated switchgear and 
substations (GIS) and in gas circuit breakers (GCB), though some SF6 is used in high voltage gas-insulated lines 
(GIL), outdoor gas-insulated instrument transformers and other equipment.  In addition, perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
are used in power transformers in some regions. 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.6 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT FAILURE 
A major or catastrophic failure of electrical equipment (in any function but gas containment itself) that results in 
the cracking or burning of one or more holes in a gas compartment and that therefore leads to the release of the 
charge in that compartment.   
EMISSION RATE  
The emissions during a process, lifecycle stage, and/or defined period of time (usually a year), divided by the 
relevant activity data for that process or lifecycle stage, such as the total consumption of chemical for 
manufacturing or the Nameplate Capacity of the equipment for use.  The preferred unit is percent per year. 
EQUIPMENT COUNT 
An inventory of individual plant equipment (e.g., valves, flanges) that is used in implementing a leak detection 
program. 
ETHANE 
A naturally occurring saturated hydrocarbon (C2H6) extracted from natural gas and refinery gas streams. It is 
mainly used in the production of ethylene by steam cracking. 
EXOTHERMIC 
Chemical reaction where the energy content of the products is less than that of the reactants; heat is given out 
from the system. 
FACTORY FILLING EMISSIONS   
Initial Charging Emissions that occur at the factory.   
FERROALLOY 
Ferroalloy is the term used to describe concentrated alloys of iron and one or more metals such as silicon, 
manganese, chromium, molybdenum, vanadium and tungsten. Silicon metal production is usually included in the 
ferroalloy group because the silicon metal production process is similar to the ferrosilicon process. These alloys 
are used for deoxidising and altering the material properties of steel. 
FINAL USE EMISSIONS 
The emissions that occur between the last refill of the equipment and its disposal.  These may be a significant 
share of total emissions, particularly if the equipment has a low leak rate and is refilled infrequently.  
FLARE 
Device to combust volatile organic compounds in exhaust gas streams without energy recovery. 
FLUORINATED COMPOUNDS (FCs) 
Fluorinated compounds (FCs) is a term used in Chapter 6, ‘Electronics Industry Emissions’, to account for the 
broad range of high- and low (or zero)-GWP fluorinated gases and liquids used during electronics manufacturing. 
FCs include certain perfluorocarbons (PFCs), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) as well as sulphur hexafluoride (SF6). 
Low (or zero)-GWP chemicals, such as CH2F2, COF2 and F2, are included when their use leads to the formation 
of high-GWP products such as CF4. 
FURNACE BLACK 
 A type of carbon that is produced industrially in a furnace by incomplete combustion in an adjustable and 
controllable process that yields a wide variety of properties within the product (IUPAC). 
FURNACE BLACK PROCESS 
Pyrolysis process to produce carbon black from carbon black feedstock and natural gas. 
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.7 
GAS-INSULATED LINES 
Metal-enclosed lines for electricity transmission and distribution in which the insulation is obtained, at least 
partly, by an insulating gas other than air at atmospheric pressure, with the external enclosure intended to be 
electrically grounded. 
HOT BRIQUETTED IRON 
Direct reduced iron converted into briquettes, generally to facilitate the transportation of the material. 
HYBRID LIFE-CYCLE APPROACH 
The Tier 3 method for estimating emissions from electrical equipment.  This method estimates emissions by 
lifecycle stage using an emission-factor approach, a mass-balance approach, or a combination of the two, as 
appropriate given data availability and country- and process-specific circumstances.   
INCOMPLETE COMBUSTION. 
Combustion of organic compounds in which the combustion results in less than 100 percent conversion of the 
organic compounds to CO2 and H2O. This may be due to a lack of oxygen or low temperature, preventing the 
complete chemical reaction. Carbon monoxide is produced as a by-product due to incomplete combustion. 
INITIAL CHARGING OR FILLING EMISSIONS  
The emissions that occur during the initial filling of the equipment either in the factory or at the site where the 
equipment is to be used, as applicable.  
INSTALLATION EMISSIONS 
Initial Charging Emissions that occur at the site where the equipment is to be used before the equipment is 
commissioned for operation.    
INSTRUMENT TRANSFORMER 
A transformer intended to supply measuring instruments, meters, relays and other similar apparatus by  
converting the original system values for voltage and current into a replica suitable for data processing. 
LEAKAGE  
The emissions from a piece or type of equipment during operation under normal operating conditions, excluding 
emissions from maintenance, service and electrical equipment failures. 
LEAK DETECTION PROGRAM 
A program to directly measure emissions from fugitive emissions sources (e.g., valves, flanges) by measuring 
emissions from individual plant equipment. 
LEAK RATE 
The Leakage from a piece or type of equipment over a given period of time, usually a year, divided by the 
Nameplate Capacity of the equipment.  The preferred unit is percent per year. 
LIME KILN DUST (LKD) 
Non-calcined to fully calcined dust produced in a lime kiln line. It is analogous to CKD, although LKD is only 
rarely recycled to the lime kiln. LKD can be used as a raw material in a cement kiln.  
LOSS RATE  
Emission Rate. 
MANUFACTURING EMISSIONS 
Emissions occurring on the premises and under the responsibility of the equipment manufacturer, including 
emissions from research and development, testing, and filling of equipment with operating or holding charges. 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.8 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
MASS-BALANCE APPROACH (FOR PURPOSES OF CHAPTERS 7 AND 8) 
A method for estimating emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases from use in equipment that can be applied to 
individual units and to aggregates of units (for example by country, application or facility). In this approach, 
annual emissions are the difference between the quantity of gas consumed in the year and the quantity of gas 
used to fill the net increase in equipment capacity or to replace destroyed gas. 
METALLURGICAL COKE 
Synonym for coke-oven coke. Coke, a high carbon fuel and/or reductant made by high temperature 
devolatilisation (carbonisation) of certain grades of bituminous coal, is a porous fuel with few impurities and 
high carbon content, mainly used in metallurgical processes such as in the blast furnace to make iron and in the 
manufacture of ferro-alloys, lead, and zinc. Semi-coke, the solid product obtained from carbonisation of coal at 
low temperature, is included with coke-oven coke and is used mainly as a domestic fuel. Not to be confused with 
petroleum coke. 
METERED DOSE INHALERS (MDIs) (MEDICAL AEROSOLS) 
A method of dispensing inhaled pulmonary drugs. 
METHANOL 
Also known as methyl alcohol, used especially as solvent, antifreeze, or denaturant. It is also used in the 
synthesis of other chemicals. Methanol produced from natural gas should be included with refinery feedstock 
figures. 
MINERAL PITCH 
Residue of petroleum distillation. See ‘Asphalt’. 
NAMEPLATE CAPACITY  
The full and proper charge of fluid/gas specified by the equipment manufacturer to achieve the equipment’s 
specified performance. The nameplate capacity is typically indicated on the equipment’s nameplate; it is not 
necessarily the actual charge, which may be influenced by leakage and other emissions. This definition is 
relevant to chapters 1, 6, 7 and 8 of this volume.  
NITRIC ACID 
A strong acid used mainly as feedstock in fertiliser production and in the production of adipic acid. The 
production of nitric acid produces nitrous oxide (N2O) as an unintended by-product. 
OLEFINS 
Synonym for alkenes. Class of hydrocarbons with an open chain containing one or more double bonds. This 
group of hydrocarbons has the general formula CnH2n. Olefins are named after the corresponding paraffins by the 
addition of 'ene' or 'ylene' to the stem (e.g., polyethylene and polypropylene). The simplest olefin is ethylene, 
C2H4.  
OPEN HEARTH FURNACE 
The open hearth furnace, also known as the reverberatory furnace, consists of a wide, saucer-shaped refractory-
lined hearth with a low roof.  Pig iron, limestone, and scrap are charged into the hearth and heated by overhead 
burners using preheated air, after which the furnace is charged with molten pig iron, which is further heated to 
produce steel.  The burners are generally gas-fired. 
OXIDISED DURING USE FACTOR (ODU FACTOR) 
A factor that represents the fraction of fossil fuel carbon that is oxidised during the use of non-energy products of 
fossil fuels.  
OXYCHLORINATION 
Reaction of ethylene (C2H4) with hydrochloric acid (HCl) and oxygen (O2) to produce ethylene dichloride and 
water (H2O). 
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.9 
OXYGEN STEEL FURNACE GAS 
Obtained as a by-product of the production of steel in an oxygen furnace (or basic oxygen furnace): it is 
recovered on leaving the furnace. The gas is also known as converter gas or LD gas. Data should correspond to 
the quantity of gas used for the production of electricity or in cases where waste heat is recovered from the gas 
and sold to third parties. Quantities of this gas should be included with Blast Furnace Gas. 
OZONE-DEPLETING SUBSTANCES (ODS) 
Substances known to deplete the stratospheric ozone layer. The ODSs controlled under the Montreal Protocol 
and its amendments are chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), halons, methyl 
bromide (CH3Br), carbon tetrachloride (CCl4), methyl chloroform (CH3CCl3), hydrobromofluorocarbons 
(HBFCs), and bromochloromethane.  
PARAFFINS 
Synonym for alkanes. The name paraffin often refers specifically to alkane molecules (isomers) having long 
straight chains. See also ‘Paraffin waxes’. 
PARAFFIN WAXES 
Synonym for alkanes and paraffins. The name paraffin often refers specifically to alkane molecules (isomers) 
having long straight chains. These are saturated aliphatic hydrocarbons. These waxes are residues extracted 
when dewaxing lubricant oils. They have a crystalline structure which is more-or-less fine according to the grade. 
Their main characteristics are as follows: they are colourless, odourless and translucent, with a melting point 
above 45°C. 
PETROLEUM COKE (PETCOKE) 
A shiny, black solid residue that is the final product of the condensation process in oil cracking and carbonisation 
in furnaces. It consists mainly of carbon (90 to 95 percent) and generally burns without leaving any ash. It is 
used mainly in metallurgical processes and as a fuel in cement manufacture. The term excludes those solid 
residues (metallurgical coke) obtained from carbonisation of coal. Sometimes one distinguishes between 
marketable coke or catalyst coke. Marketable coke is those grades of petroleum coke produced in delayed or 
fluid cokers that may be converted as relatively pure carbon. This ‘green’ coke may be sold as is or further 
purified by calcining. Catalyst coke is generated in many catalytic operations (e.g. catalytic cracking), where 
carbon is deposited on the catalyst, thus deactivating the catalyst. The catalyst is reactivated by burning off the 
carbon, which is used as a fuel in the refining process. This carbon or coke is not recoverable in a concentrated 
form. 
PITCH 
Any of various dark heavy viscid substances obtained as a residue. Coal tar pitch is a component of the coal tar 
derived from metallurgical [coal] coke production in coke ovens, and is used in roofing, anode production, and 
other industrial applications. Mineral pitch is derived as a residue of petroleum distillation.  The term ‘pitch’ is 
sometimes incorrectly used to describe bitumen or asphalt.  Note that with respect to ‘coal tar’ the terms ‘coal 
tar’ and ‘coal tar pitch’ [carbon pitch] are not synonymous.   
See: http://www.koppers.com/htm/PandS_Proc_Main.html 
PLASMA ENHANCED CHEMICAL VAPOR DEPOSITION (PECVD) 
Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) refers to chemical vapor deposition in which a radio 
frequency plasma is coupled to a low-pressure gaseous reaction mixture to facilitate the formation of the desired 
deposit (thin film) on a substrate located in the reaction chamber. Film formation occurs at lower temperatures 
with plasma versus without plasma. PECVD is used to deposit silicon dioxide, silicon nitride and silicon 
oxynitride films. During fabrication of a 16 Mbit DRAM device PECVD is used to deposit more than 20 layers. 
In addition to formation of volatile by-products, which are removed by gas flow through the reaction chamber, 
film deposition inexpediently forms on the reaction-chamber walls, which if not routinely cleaned will diminish 
process performance. Chamber cleaning is accomplished with FCs, using either an in-situ or a remote plasma 
cleaning step. Cleaning is accomplished by F-atoms (which are produced through plasma-induced dissociation of 
the FC) reacting with the inexpeediently deposited silicon to form the gas SiF4, which is pumped from the 
chamber. Cleaning is complete when SiF4 is no longer present in the chamber effluent.  
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.10 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
PLASMA ETCHING 
Plasma etching refers to a method for the carefully controlled (isotropic or anisotropic) removal of material 
(typically silicon and aluminum) during the fabrication of very (or ultra) large scale integrated circuits. Either 
radio or microwave frequency radiation is coupled into a low pressure gas-mixture to ionise (plasma formation) 
and dissociate the gas molecules into more reactive constituents. The gas-mixture typically contains halogens 
such as fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br) or iodine (I). Through photolithography and appropriate plasma 
chemistries, plasma-formed etchants directly and selectively transfer intricate patterns onto an underlying 
substrate. Isotropic etching is used to planarize metal layers of aluminum. To create a trench capacitor structure 
in a memory cell requires more than 20 different etching steps. Of the 400 or so process steps to fabricate a 16 
MBit DRAM device, more than 50 are plasma etching steps (of course not all will use an FC).  
PLUME 
The flow of pollutants from a process stack or vent into the atmosphere. 
POWER TRANSFORMER 
A static piece of apparatus with two or more windings which, by electromagnetic induction, transforms a system 
of alternating voltage and current into another system of voltage and current usually of different values and at the 
same frequency for the purpose of transmitting electrical power. 
POZZOLANS 
A siliceous material that in itself is not cementitious, but which develops hydraulic cement properties when it 
reacts with free lime (CaO) and water. Common examples of pozzolans include natural pozzolans (e.g., certain 
volcanic ashes or tuffs, certain diatomaceous earths, burned clays and shales) and synthetic pozzolans (e.g., silica 
fume, fly ash). 
PURGE GAS 
A gas stream separated from a chemical process stream to remove impurities from the process, including volatile 
organic compounds, carbon monoxide, hydrogen, or other compounds. The purge gas may be burned for energy 
recovery or flared, or secondary products may be recovered from the purge gas. 
RECLOSERS 
A self-controlled device for automatically interrupting and reclosing an alternating current circuit, with a 
predetermined sequence of opening and reclosing followed by resetting, hold-closed, or lock-out operation. 
RECOVERY 
The collection and storage of fluorinated greenhouse gases from equipment and containers.   
RECOVERY AND DESTRUCTION EFFICIENCY (RDE) 
This term is used primarily in the context of foams as a method of defining the overall efficiency of recovery and 
destruction of fluorinated gases as a percentage of the fluorinated gases that were in the foam or other product 
immediately prior to the commencement of the recovery process. Accordingly, this measure takes into 
consideration all losses associated with the recovery process as well as the destruction process and is thus 
distinguished from Destruction Efficiency (DE) and Destruction & Removal Efficiency (DRE) which are both 
limited to the activity of the destruction facility only. More information on the term is contained in the UNEP 
Task Force Report on Foam End-of-Life issues (2005).    
RECOVERY EFFICIENCY 
The quantity of fluorinated greenhouse gas recovered from equipment divided by the quantity of fluorinated 
greenhouse gas remaining in the equipment at service or decommissioning (end of life).  
RECOVERY FREQUENCY 
The fraction of equipment whose charge is recovered before the equipment is opened for service or is disposed 
of at end of life.  
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.11 
REDUCTANT 
Within the Guidelines the term relates to the use of carbon as reducing agent for the reduction of metal oxides to 
metals, e.g. iron and aluminium, in furnaces or electrolytic processes and to the use of carbon in the production 
of specific inorganic products, e.g., carbides and soda ash.  
REFRIGERANT (REFRIGERATION) 
A heat transfer agent, usually a liquid, used in equipment such as refrigerators, freezers and air conditioners. 
RING MAIN UNIT 
A term describing a standard piece of switchgear for secondary distribution purposes in medium voltage systems. 
A Ring Main Unit is typically composed of switches/Load break switches for switching power cable rings and of 
switches/load break switches in series with fuses for protection of distribution transformers (transformers from 
medium to low voltage). 
ROAD OIL 
Any heavy petroleum oil, including residual asphaltic oil, that is used as a dust suppressant or surface treatment 
on roads and highways. It is generally produced in six grades from 0, the most liquid, to 5, the most viscous.  
Road oil was applied to gravel roads as a dust suppressant for many years. It was most commonly used in rural 
areas which often had a high proportion of unpaved roads and used oil markets (burning and re-refining) were 
located some distance away. The use of road oil for dust suppression has declined in recent years because of 
reductions in the proportion of unpaved roadways, the presence of highly toxic contaminants in used oils, 
competition from other used oil end uses (re-refining), and new environmental regulations. Synonym for slow-
cure liquid asphalt.  
SEALED-FOR-LIFE EQUIPMENT 
Sealed-Pressure Systems. 
SEALED-PRESSURE SYSTEM 
Electrical equipment that does not require any refilling (topping up) with gas during its lifetime and which 
generally contains less than 5 kg of gas per functional unit.   Distribution equipment normally falls into this 
category.  To ensure that no refills are required during the approximately 40-year lifetime of the equipment, the 
Leak Rate for Sealed-Pressure Systems is generally less than 0.1 percent per year. 
SECONDARY PRODUCT 
A saleable product that is produced by a chemical process in addition to the primary product produced by the 
process.  For example, steam cracking for ethylene production produces ethylene as its primary product, but also 
produces saleable propylene, butadiene, and other secondary products. 
SHIFT REACTION 
The reaction of carbon monoxide (CO) and steam (H2O) to produce carbon dioxide (CO2) and hydrogen (H2) 
SITE ERECTION EMISSIONS 
Installation Emissions. 
SLAG 
A silicate byproduct or co-product of metal smelting; the largest source of slag is the iron and steel industry. Slag 
is formed through the interaction of slagging (and/or fluxing) agents (commonly silica plus limestone and/or 
dolomite and/or lime) and the metallic ores.  
SLAGGING AGENT 
A material, such as limestone, dolomite, lime, and silica sand, which serves, through the formation of a slag, to 
strip impurities from ores, during the smelting of metallic ores. Slagging agents commonly perform a dual 
function as a flux.  
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.12 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
SLAKED LIME 
Common name for calcium hydroxide (CaOH) that results from the hydration of high calcium or dolomitic lime. 
SODA ASH (SODIUM CARBONATE, Na2CO3) 
Soda ash is a white crystalline solid that is used as a raw material in a large number of industries including glass 
manufacture, soap and detergents, pulp and paper production and water treatment. Four different processes may 
be used commercially to produce soda ash. Three of these processes, monohydrate, sodium sesquicarbonate 
(trona) and direct carbonation, are referred to as natural processes. The fourth, the Solvay process, is classified as 
a synthetic process. 
SOLVENT 
The component of a solution that is present in the greatest amount. It is the substance in which the one or more 
substances – the so-called solutes – are dissolved forming a homogenous mixture. An example of a solid 
dissolving into a liquid, is salt or sugar dissolving in water; but also gases may dissolve into liquids, like carbon 
dioxide or oxygen in water, and liquids and gases into themselves. Fossil fuels used as solvent are notably white 
spirit and kerosene (paraffin oil). White spirit is used as an extraction solvent, as a cleaning solvent, as a 
degreasing solvent and as a solvent in aerosols, paints, wood preservatives, lacquers, varnishes and asphalt 
products. White spirit is used in paints, lacquers and varnishes; it is the most widely used solvent in the paint 
industry.  
STATE-OF THE ART HANDLING EQUIPMENT 
Equipment that handles SF6 at any stage of the equipment’s life cycle in a manner that minimizes emissions of 
SF6.  Such equipment typically includes a compressor, a vacuum pump, filtering units, a storage container, an 
evaporator, hoses and connections, piping and junctions, control instruments and (self-closing) safety valves.  
Most important with regard to recovery emissions is the technical capability of the vacuum pump, which should 
be designed for evacuation down to 1 mbar.  This capability, properly used, will keep handling losses below 2 
percent of the equipment’s nameplate capacity.  
STEAM CRACKING 
The reaction of saturated hydrocarbons (e.g., ethane) with steam (H2O) in a furnace to produce unsaturated 
hydrocarbons (e.g., ethylene.). 
STEAM REFORMING 
The process of reaction of a hydrocarbon or alcohol fuel, such as natural gas or methanol, with steam to form 
hydrogen as a product. This is the commonly preferred method of bulk hydrogen generation. At high 
temperatures (700-1100 °C), steam reacts with methane (CH4) to yield synthesis gas (carbon monoxide (CO) and 
hydrogen (H2)). 
STOICHIOMETRIC RATIO 
Stoichiometry refers to the quantitative relationship between reactants and products in a chemical reaction. In the 
Minerals industry, the stoichiometric ratio is used to determine the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) released per 
unit of carbonate input, and can be expressed as the molecular weight of CO2 divided by the molecular weight of 
carbonate (e.g., 44.01g CO2 / 100.09 g CaCO3).    
SUPPLEMENTAL FUEL 
Fuel provided to a chemical process, in addition to the primary feedstock to the process, to provide additional 
heat to the process. 
SWITCH 
A mechanical switching device, capable of making, carrying, and breaking current under normal circuit 
conditions, i.e., carrying the nominal load current.  A switch is also called a load break switch to distinguish it 
from a circuit breaker. Typically switches or load break switches are used also in combination with fuses in one 
or more poles in series in an composite unit such as ring main units for secondary distribution purposes. 
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.13 
SWITCHGEAR 
A general term covering switching devices and their combination with associated control, measuring, protective 
and regulating equipment, also assemblies of such devices and equipment with associated interconnections, 
accessories, enclosures and supporting structures, intended in principle for use in connection with generation, 
transmission, distribution and conversion of electric energy. 
SYNTHESIS GAS 
A mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide, used to produce methanol and other chemicals. 
TAIL GAS 
The exhaust gas from a chemical process. 
TAR 
A viscous black liquid derived from the destructive distillation or pyrolysis of organic matter. Most tar is 
produced from coal as a by-product of metallurgical coke production in coke ovens, but it can also be produced 
from oil, peat or wood. See also ‘Coal tar’.   
THERMAL BLACK PROCESS 
Thermal decomposition process to produce carbon black from carbon black feedstock and natural gas. 
THERMAL TREATMENT 
Combustion of organic compounds to CO2 and H2O using a flame in a high temperature reaction. Thermal 
treatment may occur with or without energy recovery. 
THIN-FILM TRANSISTOR (TFT) 
Thin-film transistor (TFT) is the circuit element that enables frequent refreshing of flat panel displays, the circuit 
element that controls each pixel (or picture element) in the most common type of active matrix display. TFTs, 
which can be manufactured using both amorphous silicon technology on glass, plastic or thin-metal substrates 
and low-temperature polysilicon (LTPS) technology on glass or plastic substrates, are used in liquid crystal 
displays (LCDs) and increasingly in organic light emitting diode (OLED) and polymer organic light emitting 
diode (POLED) displays.  
TITANIUM DIOXIDE (TIO2) 
Titanium dioxide is the most important white pigment. The main use is in paint manufacture followed by paper, 
plastics, rubber, ceramics, fabrics, floor covering, printing ink, and other miscellaneous uses. 
USE EMISSIONS (FOR PURPOSES OF CHAPTER 8) 
The emissions from a piece or type of equipment between its installation and disposal or between its installation 
and final refill, depending on the context. Use Emissions include emissions during operation, maintenance, and 
service of the equipment, as well as emissions associated with equipment failures.  Use Emissions include and 
are generally significantly larger than Leakage, particularly when State-of the Art Handling Equipment is not 
used.  In these Guidelines, Use Emissions associated with the Emission Factor Approach (Tiers 1, 2, and the 
Emission-Factor variant of Tier 3) include Final Use Emissions, while Use Emissions associated with the Mass-
Balance Approach (the Mass-Balance variant of Tier 3) exclude Final Use Emissions.  
USE EMISSION RATE (FOR PURPOSES OF CHAPTER 8) 
The Use Emissions over a given period of time, usually a year, divided by the Nameplate Capacity of the 
equipment.  The Use Emission Rate includes emissions during operation, maintenance, and service of the 
equipment, as well as emissions associated with equipment failures.  In general, the Use Emission Rate is 
significantly higher than the Leak Rate.  In these Guidelines, the Use Emission Rate associated with the 
Emission Factor Approach (Tiers 1, 2, and the Emission-Factor variant of Tier 3) includes Final Use Emissions.   
VENTING 
Controlled release of natural gas and waste gas/vapour streams. 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.14 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
WHITE SPIRIT 
Refined distillate intermediates with a distillation in the naphtha/kerosene range between 135°C to 200°C. In 
contrast, industrial spirits (specific boiling point, SBP) are light oils distilling between 30°C and 200°C. There 
are 7 or 8 grades of industrial spirit, depending on the position of the cut in the distillation range. The grades are 
defined according to the temperature difference between the 5 percent volume and 90 percent volume distillation 
points (which is not more than 60°C). White spirit is an industrial spirit with a flash point above 30°C.  
Annex 4: Glossary for Industrial Processes and Product Use Sector 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A4.15 
Abbreviation 
 
AGO 
Australian Greenhouse Gas Office  
APME 
Association of Plastics Manufacturers Europe 
AWACS 
Airborne Warning and Control System 
BAT 
Best Available Techniques 
BFC 
Blast Furnace Gas 
BOF 
Basic Oxygen Furnace (steelmaking) 
BREF 
Best Available Techniques Reference Documents (under European Integrated 
Pollution Prevention and Control Bureau.)  http://eippcb.jrc.es/pages/FActivities.htm 
C4 + 
By-product hydrocarbons containing more four or more carbon atoms (e.g., butanes, 
pentanes, hexanes, heptanes) 
CaCO3 
Calcium carbonate  
CaO 
High calcium lime  
Ca(OH)2  
Slaked high-calcium lime  
Ca(OH)2• Mg(OH)2   
Slaked dolomitic lime   
CaO·MgO 
 
Dolomitic lime 
CKD 
 
 
Cement Kiln Dust  
CIGRE 
International Council on Large Electric Systems 
COG 
Coke Oven Gas 
DOE 
United States Department of Energy 
DRE 
Destruction or Removal Efficiency 
DRI 
Direct Reduced Iron 
EAF 
Electric Arc Furnace (steelmaking) 
EDC 
Ethylene Dichloride 
EG 
Ethylene Glycol 
EO 
Ethylene Oxide 
FEPC 
 
 
The (Japanese) Federation of Electric Power Companies 
FGD  
 
 
Flue Gas Desulphurisation  
FgH-ISI 
Fraunhofer-Institut für Systemtechnik und Innovationsforschung 
GCB 
Gas Circuit Breakers 
GIL 
Gas Insulated Lines 
GIS 
Gas Insulated Switchgear and Substations 
GIT 
Gas Insulated power Transformers 
HBI 
Hot Briquetted Iron 
HMA 
Hot Mix Asphalt 
HV (Switchgear) 
High Voltage (Switchgear) for rated operating voltages above 52 000 Volts 
IEC 
International Electro-technical Commission 
ITs 
Instrument Transformers 
JEMA  
 
The Japan Electrical Manufacturer’s Association   
LKD 
 
 
Lime Kiln Dust 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A4.16 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
LVOC 
Large Volume Organic Chemical 
LVIC 
Large Volume Inorganic Chemical 
MgCO3  
Magnesium carbonate  
MV (Switchgear) 
Medium Voltage (Switchgear) for rated operating voltages above 1 000 Volts and up 
to 52 000 Volts 
OHF 
 
 
Open Hearth Furnace (steelmaking) 
PC  
 
 
Portland cement 
PECVD  
 
Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition 
RDE 
 
 
Recovery and Destruction Efficiency 
TFT 
Thin-Film Transistor 
VCM 
Vinyl Chloride Monomer 
 
