Annex 3: Improvements since 1996 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A3.1 
ANNEX 3 
IMPROVEMENTS SINCE 1996 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A3.2 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
Authors 
Jochen Harnisch (Germany) and William Kojo Agyeman-Bonsu (Ghana) 
Paul Ashford (UK), Scott Bartos (USA), Lisa Hanle (USA), Charles Jubb (Australia), Jerry Marks (USA), 
Archie McCulloch (UK), Robert Lanza (USA), Jos G. J. Olivier (Netherlands), Deborah Ottinger Schaefer (USA) 
and Timothy Simmons (UK) 
Annex 3: Improvements since 1996 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A3.3 
Contents 
Annex 3 
Improvements since 1996 ................................................................................................................A3.4 
A3.1 
Mineral industry emissions...........................................................................................................A3.4 
A3.2 
Chemical industry emissions........................................................................................................A3.4 
A3.3 
Metal industry emissions..............................................................................................................A3.5 
A3.4 
Non-energy products from fuels and solvent use .........................................................................A3.5 
A3.5 
Electronics industry emissions .....................................................................................................A3.5 
A3.6 
Emissions of fluorinated substitutes for ozone depleting substances ...........................................A3.6 
A3.7 
Other product manufacture and use..............................................................................................A3.6 
A3.8 
Completeness and allocation of CO2 from non-energy uses of fuels............................................A3.7 
 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A3.4 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
ANNEX 3: IMPROVEMENTS SINCE 1996 
This volume contains major changes and improvements to the section covering ‘Industrial Processes’ and 
‘Solvent and Other Product Use’ in the Revised 1996 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
(1996 IPCC Guidelines). First, these Guidelines (2006 IPCC Guidelines) introduce practical guidance on 
allocation of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions released from combustion of fuel in the Energy Sector and 
Industrial Processes Sector, which was not clear in the 1996 IPCC Guidelines. Second, these Guidelines are 
based on the principle that emissions should be reported in the industries where these emissions occur. 
Accordingly, there has been a shift in the categories in which some emissions are reported, particular those from 
the use of limestone, dolomite and other carbonates. 
Other major changes and/or improvements listed below are associated to each Chapter of this volume. 
A3.1 
MINERAL INDUSTRY EMISSIONS 
There are three key changes to the Mineral Chapter in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines, as compared to the earlier 
guidance documents. Firstly, a new input-based method has been introduced for all source categories that 
estimates emissions based on the quantity, type and composition of carbonate inputs to the production processes. 
For example, in addition to the Tier 2 method based on clinker output during cement production, an alternate 
method is elaborated based on estimating emissions from the carbonate input to the kiln.  
Secondly, clear guidance has been developed to specify where emissions from the use of limestone, dolomite 
and other carbonates should be reported. As noted above, these Guidelines are based on the principle that 
emissions should be reported in the industries where they occur.  For example, where limestone is used as a flux 
for iron and steel production, emissions from the use of the limestone should be reported under Iron and Steel 
Production. Only emissions from limestone and dolomite used in the mineral industry should be reported in the 
Mineral Industry Chapter.  Inventory compilers are encouraged to assess carefully how this change may impact, 
in particular, emission estimates for the Mineral Industry, the Chemical Industry, and Metal Production.   
In addition while earlier guidance highlighted only limestone and dolomite use, these Guidelines also outline 
methods for estimating emissions from use of other carbonates, including magnesia and sodium carbonate. These 
Guidelines also establish three approaches for estimating emissions from glass production. Acid-induced release 
of CO2 from acidification of carbonate-containing materials (e.g., phosphate ores) is also considered, although 
specific estimation methods are not provided. 
A3.2 
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY EMISSIONS 
New sources of emissions have been introduced: nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from Production of Caprolactam, 
Glyoxal, and Glyoxylic acid, and CO2 emissions from Titanium Dioxide Production. Soda Ash production was 
reallocated from Mineral Industry to Chemical Industry. In the Soda Ash Production section the methodology for 
synthetic (Solvay) soda ash production process, which was lacking in the 1996 IPCC Guidelines and the Good 
Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (GPG2000), has been 
introduced.  
CO2 emission factors have been added for Petrochemical Production processes, including emission factors for 
methanol, ethylene, ethylene dichloride/vinyl chloride, ethylene oxide, acrylonitrile, and carbon black production.  
Methane emission factors have been updated for these petrochemical production processes.  Styrene production 
is no longer included in the guidance document. A systematic description of Tier 1, 2 and 3 methodologies for all 
source categories is provided in the text.  
The descriptions of emission-related processes have been enlarged giving more information about their 
chemistry and technology aspects.  
More systematic guidance is also given to avoid double counting fuel products used as a feedstock or reductant 
(cross-cutting issue with Energy Sector). This issue is discussed in regard to ammonia production, carbide 
production, and titanium dioxide, and petrochemical production (Sections 3.2, 3.6, 3.7, and 3.9). 
A discussion of utilisation of CO2 in Urea Production is included in the section on Ammonia Production. 
Emissions from urea use that were previously accounted for in the Industrial Processes Sector have been 
reallocated according to the sectors where urea is used (Energy Sector and Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land 
Use (AFOLU) Sector) to take proper account of exports urea produced in ammonia plants. Emissions from other 
Annex 3: Improvements since 1996 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A3.5 
chemical products manufactured using CO2 recovered in the ammonia production process are accounted together 
with emissions from ammonia production, as before.  
The methodology for calculation of HFC-23 emissions from HCFC-22 production has incorporated the principal 
methods used within the industry, including continuous direct, proxy and in-process measurements in Tier 3 and 
efficiency-based material balance methods in Tier 2. In addition, explicit guidance has been added on fugitive 
and by-product emissions from the production of other fluorinated compounds including hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and uranium hexafluoride (UF6). 
A3.3 
METAL INDUSTRY EMISSIONS 
The Metal Industry Section of 2006 IPCC Guidelines incorporates a number of changes. Where carbon and 
carbon-containing materials, including carbonate containing minerals, are used in the metal production process 
for purposes other than the direct production of energy within the process, the CO2 emissions are now counted 
within the metals guidance.  For example, the CO2 emissions from carbon-based electrodes for aluminium 
production are now included within the guidance for aluminium, and the CO2 emissions from the use of 
limestone and dolomite used in iron and steel making are included within the guidance for iron and steel 
production.  
The Metal Industry Section now includes guidance for estimating emissions of CO2 and CH4 from metallurgical 
(coal) coke production; however the CO2 and CH4 emissions from metallurgical coke production are to be 
reported under Energy Sector, not Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) Sector. Emission factors for 
production of direct reduced iron (DRI), pellets, and sinter from iron ore and other iron-containing raw materials 
are now included under iron and steel production. Separate CO2 emission factors are provided for blast furnace 
iron making and for steel making using the basic oxygen furnace (BOF), electric arc furnace (EAF) and open 
hearth furnace (OHF) processes. 
CO2 emissions from primary magnesium production based on dolomite and magnesite raw materials are also 
included in this section. In addition, new guidance has been developed and is available for calculation of CO2 
emissions resulting from production of zinc and lead. Separate CO2 emission factors are provided for primary 
and secondary lead and zinc production processes. More comprehensive guidance is also included for ferroalloys 
production processes. Revised guidance is offered in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for magnesium for new gases 
reflecting efforts to replace sulphur hexafluoride as a cover gas. Finally, calculation factors have been updated to 
reflect the most recent experience for measured emission factors, typical compositions of process materials 
impacting calculations, and, in some instances new equations are included.   
A3.4 
NON-ENERGY PRODUCTS FROM FUELS AND 
SOLVENT USE 
Almost this entire source category, which is described in Chapter 5, is new within the IPPU Sector. The 1996 
IPCC Guidelines did cover emissions from asphalt and road paving, but in much less detail. The products 
covered here comprise: lubricants, paraffin waxes, bitumen/asphalt, and solvents. 
Emissions from lubricants were previously covered under fuel combustion without any discrimination between 
emissions arising during lubricants use and any emissions from waste lubricants used for heat raising. The same 
is true for paraffin waxes. Asphalt emissions refer to production and use of asphalt for road paving, asphalt 
roofing and other applications. Asphalt emissions also include emissions from asphalt blowing. The subcategory 
‘2D3 Solvent Use’ refers to the subcategories 3A and 3B in the 1996 IPCC Guidelines. Although asphalt and 
solvents are not significant sources of direct greenhouse gas emissions, they are included in this chapter to 
provide a description of them since they are sources of ozone precursors (non-methane volatile organic 
compounds (NMVOC), and in the case of asphalt also carbon monoxide (CO)). In particular, solvent use is a 
very substantial source of NMVOC.  
A3.5 
ELECTRONICS INDUSTRY EMISSIONS 
The 1996 IPCC Guidelines and the GPG2000, described methods for estimating emissions from semiconductor 
manufacturing alone for seven fluorinated carbon compounds: CF4, C2F6, CHF3, C3F8, c-C4F8, NF3 and SF6. The 
2006 IPCC Guidelines expands that scope to include additional manufacturing sectors and more gases, updates 
the Tier 1 methodology and emission factors, and provides explicit estimates of uncertainties for emissions 
factors and activity data. The 2006 IPCC Guidelines incorporates emissions from liquid crystal display (LCD) 
manufacturing, photovoltaic (PV) cell manufacturing and the use of heat transfer fluids in semiconductor 
Volume 3: Industrial Processes and Product Use 
A3.6 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
manufacturing. In addition, the number of greenhouse gases in the 2006 IPCC Guidelines has been expanded to 
include 
difluoromethane 
(CH2F2), 
octofluorocyclopentene 
(C5F8), 
hexafluorbutadiene 
(C4F6) 
and 
octafluorotetrahydrofuran (C4F8O); F2 and COF2 have also been added because, even though they are not 
greenhouse gases, CF4 may be formed during their use. A new Tier 1 methodology is adopted that includes new 
default emissions factors and activity data for all sectors. 
A3.6 
EMISSIONS OF FLUORINATED SUBSTITUTES 
FOR OZONE DEPLETING SUBSTANCES  
The emissions in a number of the source categories (applications) covered by this chapter have been the subject 
of considerable study since the 1996 IPCC Guidelines were written. This has been particularly the case for 
sectors with delayed emissions (e.g. refrigeration, foam and fire protection) where the earlier emission factor 
estimates proposed by Gamlen and others have been further developed to reflect the varying emission rates from 
a variety of sub-applications. Much of this was included in the GPG2000.  
One of the consequences of this improved understanding has been recognition that the potential emissions 
approach used as Tier 1 in the 1996 IPCC Guidelines is no longer appropriate. The potential emissions approach 
is still described in Annex 1 of this volume as a verification tool for completeness of sources and as a QC check 
of the sum of activity data per compound, which should be equal to the sum of apparent domestic consumption 
as calculated in the potential emissions approach. The Tier 1 approaches now proposed in these Guidelines are 
therefore actual emission estimation methods, although often based on default emission factors and with the 
potential to use global/regional activity databases where better information is not available. Chapter 7 of this 
volume contains examples of these new Tier 1 approaches and guidance on how to implement them. Simplified 
mass balance approaches have also been maintained in appropriate sectors, most typically where pressurised 
equipment is used and serviced (refrigeration & fire protection).  Attention has also been addressed to the 
treatment of solvents contained in aerosols. Now emissions from all aerosol based products, irrespective of their 
purpose, will be reported within the aerosol application.  
Activity information continues to be the biggest challenge in the ODS substitutes area, particularly at country-
level, for two reasons. The first is that trade in products containing HFCs and/or perfluorocarbons (PFCs) can not 
easily be monitored and the second is that confidentiality of activity data for specific chemicals may need to be 
protected. Global/regional activity data from reputable sources may therefore provide significant help to some 
reporting countries and it is proposed that the IPCC Emission Factor Database (EFDB) act as the focal point for 
such data. However, while inclusion in the EFDB will provide a level of assurance that due process has been 
followed inventory compilers will remain responsible for assessing the appropriateness of such data for their 
purposes. 
A3.7 
OTHER PRODUCT MANUFACTURE AND USE 
The 1996 IPCC Guidelines contained just two methods for estimating emissions of SF6 from electrical 
equipment: (1) a potential approach that equated emissions to chemical consumption, and (2) a simple emission-
factor-based approach that applied country-specific or global default emission factors to the quantities of SF6 in 
operating and retiring equipment respectively. The GPG2000 introduced three Tier 3 mass-balance methods and 
a more detailed Tier 2 emission-factor based approach that provided emission factors for each life cycle stage. In 
addition, the GPG2000 provided regional default emission factors for the latter. 
The 2006 IPCC Guidelines simplify the GPG2000 by (1) replacing two of the Tier 3 mass-balance methods with 
a single, flexible Tier 3 method that contains both mass-balance and emission-factor-based components. (2) 
moving the country-level mass-balance method to the QA/QC section, (3) moving the method for estimating 
potential emissions from the Methodological Choice discussion and into a separate section where it can be used 
for QA/QC, and (4) replacing the potential emissions approach with the default emission-factor-based approach, 
which has been moved from Tier 2 to Tier 1. These changes leave one Tier 3 method, one Tier 2 method, and 
one Tier 1 method.  These Guidelines also update the regional emission factors provided in the GPG2000, 
providing values for additional types of equipment and for additional regions. Finally, these Guidelines 
incorporate new guidance on selecting and using alternative activity data when the preferred data are not 
available for all facilities.  These updates incorporate the experience acquired over the past several years of 
reporting. 
Specific methods for estimating emissions from research and industrial accelerators and from radar 
reconnaissance planes (e.g., AWACS) have been added to the ‘Use of SF6 and PFCs in Other Products’ section. 
An indicative list of potential additional sources of SF6 and PFCs has been added to guide the inventory preparer. 
Annex 3: Improvements since 1996 
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories 
A3.7 
Also, Guidance on N2O emissions from product use such as medical application has been improved. 
A3.8 
COMPLETENESS AND ALLOCATION OF CO2 
FROM NON-ENERGY USES OF FUELS  
Two Quality Control (QC) approaches – a CO2 completeness check and a feedstock balance check – have been 
introduced for checking the completeness of accounting CO2 emissions from feedstock/reductant use of fossil 
fuels. Guidance is provided to facilitate the organisation and completion of this task: (a) checking that total 
reported bottom-up calculated CO2 emissions from non-energy use sources (including uses as feedstock and 
reductant) at different subcategory levels are complete and consistent; and b) checking that feedstock/reductant 
requirements of processes included in the inventory are in balance with the non-energy use/feedstock supply as 
recorded in national energy statistics. Moreover, guidance is provided on documenting and reporting how these 
emissions are allocated in the inventory and how the completeness was checked (Section 1.4). 
Section 1.3 provides an explanation of the principles which have guided the estimation and reporting of CO2 
emissions from the non-energy uses of fossil fuels, and describes the data issues related to the estimation 
methods. 
